A study on the mechanism for the interaction of light with noble metal-metal oxide semiconductor nanostructures for various photophysical applications ...  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS60043B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS60043B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8467-8493Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA study on the mechanism for the interaction of light with noble metal-metal oxide semiconductor nanostructures for various photophysical applications
Saji Thomas Kochuveedu

, 
Yoon Hee Jang

 and 
Dong Ha Kim

*
Department of Chemistry and Nano Science, Global Top 5 Program, Division of Molecular and Life Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Ewha Womans University, 52, Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, Korea. E-mail: dhkim@ewha.ac.kr;  Fax: +82-2-3277-3419;   Tel: +82-2-3277-4124
Received 
3rd February 2013
First published on 8th August 2013AbstractMetal oxide semiconductors hold great promise for applications in energy conversion and storage, environmental remediation, optoelectronics, memory, light emission and other areas, but critical factors such as the high rate of charge-carrier recombination and limited light absorption have restricted more practical and viable applications. The remarkable ability of plasmonic noble metals to concentrate and scatter visible light has found a versatile potential in harvesting and converting solar energy. Plasmonic nanostructures of noble metals in combination with semiconductors offer a promising future for the next generation of energy needs. The overlap of the spectral range of the incident photon with absorbance wavelength of the semiconductor and the surface plasmon bands of the plasmonic metal provides a useful tool to predict the enhancement in optical and electrical properties of hybrid semiconductor-noble metal nanostructures. Here we make an attempt to comprehensively review the role of plasmonic noble metals in the enhanced functions for photocatalytic activity, photoenergy conversion in DSSCs, enhanced light emission and photochromatism. We mainly focus on the improvement of performance in TiO2 or ZnO in combination with noble metals on representative photophysical applications. The mechanism behind their interaction with light is discussed in detail in each section.Saji Thomas KochuveeduSaji Thomas Kochuveedu received her BS and MS degrees from Calicut University and Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, respectively, and subsequently worked as project assistant in Indian Institute of Chemical Technology. She is currently pursuing her PhD at Ewha Womans University under the guidance of Professor Dong Ha Kim. Her main research interests include enhanced photocatalytic and light emission properties of multifunctional nanostructures mediated by surface plasmon and carbon hybridization.Yoon Hee JangYoon Hee Jang received her BS degree in the Department of Bio and Nano Chemistry at Kookmin University (2008) and MS degree in Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University (2010) in Korea. She is currently pursuing her PhD in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University under the supervision of Prof. Dong Ha Kim. Her main research activity focuses on the fabrication of self-assembled hybrid organic–inorganic and tailored plasmonic nanostructures for applications in photovoltaics, photocatalysis and optical sensing.Dong Ha KimProf. Dong Ha Kim received his PhD degree in the Department of Fiber and Polymer Science at Seoul National University (2000). He worked as a postdoc at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. Then, he assumed a faculty position in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University (2006). His research interests include development of hybrid nanostructures for energy storage and conversion, environmental remediation, memory devices, display devices, and optical biosensing. He has authored 94 SCI publications, and holds 30 issued Korean (17 registered) and 3 PCT patents.
1. Introduction
Plasmonic noble metal nanostructures have been attracting significant attention for their ability to interact with light in the visible to near IR range through the creation of resonant surface plasmons. They can also act as electron traps and active reaction sites, which are considered as essential components for various photophysical applications. In recent years, numerous efforts have been devoted to understanding and exploiting the plasmonic properties, and their interaction with other classes of materials and functional applications. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is defined as the resonance energy produced when the frequency of photons of the incident light matches with the frequency of the coherent oscillation of conduction electrons confined at the surface volume of the metal nanoparticles (NPs) (Scheme 1). The resonant wavelength is a complicated function of the type of metal, size, shape, surrounding dielectric medium, distance between neighboring objects, and configuration of their ensemble. By manipulating these variables, metal nanostructures of potential interest can be designed to exploit the entire solar spectrum.1–5 Plasmonic nanostructures can act primarily as antenna to concentrate the light energy surrounding it, which leads to the enhancement in the intensity of the coupled electric field and intensified fields between plasmonic NPs known as ‘hot spots’ are generated.6 The exceptional property of these plasmonic metals to absorb visible light, scatter light, concentrate electromagnetic field, convert the light energy to heat and act as an electron sink enables them to function as ideal candidates for photocatalysis,7–9 photovoltaics,10–12 biosensors,13–15 surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy16–18 and other subject areas. These applications make use of the interaction of plasmonic metals with light, based on multiple plasmonic metal components or metal-semiconductor hybrids. For instance, the mechanism of the interaction of light with semiconductor-metal nanostructures varies with the nature of the incident light, size and shape of metal NPs and distance between metal NPs and semiconductor. Therefore, a detailed investigation dealing with the various mechanisms has been made to explore these properties.
 Scheme 1  Schematic of plasmon oscillation for a sphere, showing the displacement of the conduction electron charge cloud relative to the nuclei. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. 
Semiconductor-based nanostructures with remarkable optoelectronic and physicochemical properties have found wide applications in areas such as photocatalysis,19–21 photovoltaics,22–24 photoluminescence,25,26 and photochromics.27–29 Representatively, semiconductors can act as sensitizers for photocatalytic reactions due to their filled valence band and empty conduction band in the ground state. Photocatalysis takes place when semiconductor photocatalysts are excited by energy not less than the band gap of the catalyst, resulting in the formation of excitons, i.e., electrons at the conduction band (CB) and holes at the valence band (VB), respectively. However, the efficiency of photocatalysis has always been a question due to two critical issues: (i) the low quantum yield due to faster recombination of electron–hole (e−–h+) pairs; (ii) the wide band gaps of semiconductors which limit absorption to the UV region.19,21 Various efforts have been devoted to improving the efficiency of photocatalysis, and coupling semiconductor photocatalysts with noble metals constitutes one of the promising strategies employed to overcome the above-mentioned obstacles. When semiconductor-noble metal hybrid systems are exposed to UV light, the electrons at the VB of the semiconductor are elevated to the CB and then transferred to the Fermi level (EF) of noble metals, leading to the separation of e−–h+ pairs.30,31 In contrast, when they are exposed to visible light, charge carriers in noble metals, formed by the absorption of visible light, are directly injected from excited plasmonic-metal nanostructures into the semiconductor.32,33 In addition to the electron injection mechanism, near-field enhancement and scattering mechanisms can also be involved in photocatalysis.34–36 These three mechanisms will be discussed in detail in the following section.
Photovoltaics are another upcoming technology to generate electrical power at the cost of easily available solar energy and it can be a substitute to meet our growing energy needs. Recently, TiO2/ZnO–noble metal nanocomposites have been applied in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). The incorporation of metal NPs into DSSCs has been reported to enhance light absorption, light scattering and photocurrent generation.10–12,35,37 In general, depending on the size of the metal NPs, radiative quenching or enhancement phenomenon was observed. When the size of the NP is small, the absorption component dominates the extinction spectra, leading to radiative quenching through energy transfer from the dye to the metal. Transfer of luminescent energy from the dye to the metal NPs leads to quenching of the luminescence intensity of the dye and the rate of energy loss will reflect the coherence of the nanoparticle oscillation by influencing the ability of the plasmon to radiate transferred energy. This whole process is addressed as radiative quenching. When the size of the NPs is increased, the contribution from the scattering term becomes larger, resulting in the enhancement. In addition, it overcomes issues such as charge recombination within the metal and radiative quenching between the dye and metal NPs.37
The application of solid emitters utilizing luminescent semiconductors, e.g., ZnO, is inevitable nowadays, and ranges from light-emitting diodes,25,26 and laser diodes,38,39 to optical switching.40–42 However, it is an important issue to resolve how to make highly efficient solid emitters with high quantum efficiency without energy losses arising from the defects, which are inevitably present in solid state materials.43 Therefore, the control of defects is the most important task for the improvement of emission efficiency. ZnO has been widely applied in optics due to its wide band gap (3.37 eV) and large exciton binding energy (60 meV). Generally, the photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of ZnO is mainly composed of two bands. The one at the UV region arises from the near-band emission and the other is due to structural defects and impurities.44,45 Recently, a few seminal works have reported on SPR-mediated improvement of the UV emission of ZnO, where either the defect emission or band gap emission of ZnO falls in the range of the SP energy of plasmonic metals.46–52 The detailed mechanism of electron transfer from noble metal to ZnO will be discussed later.
Another exquisite phenomenon observed from a combination of semiconductor and metal, e.g., with TiO2–Ag nanocomposites, is multicolor photochromism, which can be exploited in applications like colorimetric sensors, non-linear optical materials and photovoltaic devices. The initial color of the film, i.e., brownish-gray, changes under a monochromatic visible light to almost the same color as the incident light under a monochromatic visible light and regains its original color by irradiation with UV light.27–29,53–57
In this review, we make an attempt to comprehensively overview the state-of-the-art accomplishments in the development of advanced hybrid systems composed of semiconductor nanostructures coupled with noble metals and discuss the underlying mechanisms of the interaction between the constituents with a special focus on TiO2- and ZnO-based composite nanostructures along with their representative applications; topics including photocatalysis, DSSCs, photoluminescence and photochromism.
2. Preparation and fabrication of various metal-semiconductor hybrid nanostructures
The applications of metal-semiconductor based nanostructures are greatly influenced by the configurations, such as the size or dispersion of noble metal NPs on the semiconductor and the organization of metal/semiconductor. All the influencing parameters are strongly dependent on the preparation techniques. Therefore development of well-controlled and efficient preparation procedures is necessary for the effective exploitation of the properties of metal NPs in combination with semiconductors. A few general and conventional methods for the preparation TiO2 and ZnO nanostructures, the incorporation of noble metal NPs into semiconductor, and the fabrication of metal/TiO2 photoanodes in plasmonic dye sensitized solar cell are discussed in this section.
2.1. Preparation of TiO2 and ZnO nanostructures
2.1.1. Sol–gel process. Sol–gel process is a widely used methodology to prepare TiO2, in which titanium alkoxide species are prehydrolysed in acidic water–alcohol solution under vigorous stirring.58 During hydrolysis, highly acidic condition is required to prevent immediate precipitation of TiO2. The gelling solution obtained was then thermally treated to get TiO2 NPs.59,60 Karunakaran et al.61 reported a sol–gel method to prepare nanocrystalline ZnO, where the gel was prepared by adding zinc acetate solution in water. The gel was aged for overnight and then calcined. Lu et al.62 prepared chain-like ZnO NP aggregates using ZnO gel. Zinc acetate was added to ethanol followed by the addition of oxalic acid. The thick gel obtained was washed, dried and calcined.
2.1.2. Hydrothermal and solvothermal process. In hydrothermal process TiO2 precursor is mixed with aqueous solution of acid in a Teflon lined autoclave. Hydrothermal treatment of this solution leads to the formation of a TiO2 precipitate, which can be recovered by centrifugation.63–65 In the case of ZnO, the ZnO precursor is dissolved in water or alcohol followed by the addition of base. This solution is then transferred to an autoclave and treated by hydrothermal reaction. Various ZnO nanostructures can be prepared by controlling the pH and temperature of the reaction. Nanostructures can be grown on substrates by dipping suitable substrates in the solution during the thermal process. In solvothermal process aqueous medium and acid are replaced by organic solvent and other suitable organic reagents, respectively.66 (These two processes are again discussed in Section 2.2.2.)
2.1.3. Deposition methods. There are a few methods for depositing semiconductors on suitable substrates, such as electrodeposition, co-electrodeposition,67,68 vapor deposition46,52,69,70 and sputtering techniques.71,72 In the case of electrodeposition, the conducting substrate is used as the cathode, a platinum sheet as the anode and an aqueous solution of metal precursor as the electrolyte, whereas in co-electrodeposition the metal precursor is also mixed with metal oxide precursor solution. By controlling the current density, temperature, or deposition time, the morphology and thickness of the film can be changed. Deposition of pure metal oxide and metal can be obtained by this method. Vapor deposition technique is mainly used for the growth of ZnO nanostructures on a substrate. Highly pure Zn or ZnO powder in an alumina or quartz boat along with an Au coated sapphire or Si substrate is kept in the furnace. Ar gas is passed as carrier gas followed by the passing of O2 gas at 900–1000 °C. Crystalline ZnO nanostructures are produced by this method.46,52,73 In the case of sputtering methods, the chamber is equipped with ZnO targets and substrates and sputtering is carried out in the ambience of O2 and Ar. Sputtering methods usually lead to the formation nano islands of ZnO on substrates.51,71,72
2.2. Incorporation metal NPs onto semiconductor
2.2.1. Chemical methods. This is the simplest methodology, comprising the adsorption of metal precursors on the surface of a metal oxide semiconductor followed by chemical reduction in solution medium. In the case of Au NPs, there are different reliable methods to prepare colloidal suspensions in suitable solvents. Among them, citrate reduction method (Turkevich method),36 Brust method74 and reduction by NaBH4 are the most convenient and well-recognized protocols to obtain Au NPs on the surface of semiconductors. Or these pre-synthesized Au NPs can be adsorbed on the surface of the support by simply mixing an Au colloidal solution with the semiconductor dispersion.49,75–77 One of the commonly observed disadvantages of this method is the aggregation of NPs during the adsorption stage, thus reducing the efficiency of the desired application. Anchoring of Au NPs onto the chemically modified surface of semiconductors using linker molecules was reported by a few groups; thereby aggregation or coalescence of Au NPs was reduced.78–80Polyol process is considered as the most convincing method to prepare Ag NPs, where ethylene glycol (EG) is used as both solvent and reducing agent and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is used as the stabilizer. In a typical procedure, EG is added into a round-bottom flask and heated to 160 °C in an oil bath. Then, PVP solution in EG is injected into the flask under stirring followed by the addition of AgNO3 in EG drop by drop under stirring. The colloidal solution thus-obtained was centrifuged and used for the process.81–84 Sonochemical method is another method to obtain Ag NPs deposited on semiconductor surface. ZnO oxide precursor or combined ZnO and metal precursors are dispersed in the proper solvent. After sonicating the dispersion for an appropriate amount of time, NaOH is added. The product is recovered by centrifugation.85–87

2.2.2. Thermal methods. Hydrothermal and solvothermal processes are the two common wet chemical methods that fall in this category. In the hydrothermal process metal oxide or metal oxide precursor was mixed with metal precursor and base in water. The thermal treatment of the mixture was carried out in an autoclave at above the boiling temperature of water. During this process metal precursors adsorbed on the surface of semiconductors are reduced.66,88–90 The same protocol is applied for the solvothermal process except that the aqueous medium is replaced with appropriate solvents. Although these methods are simple and cost effective methods, they often suffer from the problem of aggregation of metal NPs. Thermal evaporation is one of the physical methods to deposit metal NPs on semiconductor surface, where highly pure metal is evaporated at very high temperatures and the metal vapors are allowed to deposit on the surface of a semiconductor.91
2.2.3. Deposition–precipitation method. It is reported that this method renders very small metal NPs that are catalytically very active. For instance, a semiconductor support is added to aqueous solution of HAuCl4 and the required pH is maintained using NaOH or urea. The resulting solution is stirred for a relatively long time. Then, the solid product is reduced by any of the typical reduction methods such as thermal treatment under hydrogen gas or other reducing atmosphere, by suspending the solid in alcohols and by other reducing media. However, the pH range used in the deposition–precipitation method reduces the surface hydroxyl groups, which exerts considerable influence on the photocatalytic activity of the metal-semiconductor system.59,92,93
2.2.4. Photodeposition method. In this methodology, electrons and holes are produced first upon irradiation of TiO2 or ZnO with light. These electrons are then used for the reduction of metal precursor to metal, which is simultaneously deposited on the surface of the semiconductor. The presence of a hole scavenger such as alcohol is important to avoid the accumulation of positive charge during the photodeposition. Usually the TiO2 or ZnO nanostructures are dispersed in metal precursor for the required time to allow the complete adsorption of metal ions on the surface of the support. The product is then exposed to light with appropriate intensity, resulting in the deposition of metal NPs on the semiconductor. The important parameter in this method is the intensity of the light since the average particle size decreases as the intensity of light increases.94–96
2.2.5. Sputtering method. Here, the metal atoms are ejected from the solid target material due to the bombardment of the target by energetic particles. Sputtered atoms ejected to the gas phase are not in a thermodynamic equilibrium state, so they are easily deposited on the substrate. This whole process is usually performed using argon plasma in a vacuum chamber. A thin film with a uniform thickness of metal layer can be deposited. This method is particularly useful when metal-semiconductor hybrid system has to be prepared on substrates.46,50,70–73,97,98
2.2.6. Core–shell nanostructures. Enclosing metal NPs in a semiconductor shell is an apt method to reduce aggregation and deterioration of metal NPs due to their contact with harsh chemicals. Bian et al.99 reported on the preparation of Au–TiO2 core–shell structures by consecutive solvothermal and hydrothermal process. TiO2 and Au precursors were dissolved in a mixture of glycerol and ethyl ether in an autoclave and subjected to solvothermal process. The solid product was then dispersed in water and treated hydrothermally. The TiO2 shell inhibits the agglomeration and leaching of Au NPs. Zhang et al.75 prepared a sandwich-like structure composed of a SiO2 core, a layer of Au NPs and a doped TiO2 shell by sol–gel process. Compared to a traditional TiO2–Au core–shell structure, in which Au NPs are loosely bound to the surface of TiO2 such that they are unstable during thermal treatment and photocatalysis, the sandwich structures offer extra stability to the Au NPs.
2.3. Block copolymer self-assembly induced fabrication of highly ordered metal–metal oxide nanostructures
Utilizing block copolymer (BCP) self-assembly as a structure directing tool is a facile approach to produce highly ordered NPs without any aggregation. For instance, diblock copolymers comprised of two chemically different polymer blocks, i.e., polar and non-polar blocks, can form nanometer-sized micelles consisting of a soluble corona and an insoluble core in a selective solvent for the core block. Highly ordered self-assembled nanostructures can be readily produced by spin coating the inorganic moiety included in the polymer solution on a suitable substrate. The hydrophilic blocks of the BCP can accommodate TiO2 and noble metal NPs, and their synergetic effect in enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency could be studied.100–103 Various nanostructures prepared using BCP self-assembly by our group together with their photocatalytic activity are discussed in Section (3.1.1).
2.4. Fabrication of plasmonic dye sensitized solar cells
Recently, there are increasing efforts to combine noble metal nanostructures with TiO2 photoanodes to induce a synergistic effect between the metal and semiconductor. A typical procedure to fabricate a cell containing plasmonic nanostructures in the TiO2 photoanode can be described as follows. TiO2 or ZnO paste is prepared from mixture of TiO2 or ZnO NPs and ideal binders such as ethyl cellulose, acetic acid and α-terpineol. The resulting paste is then mixed with an optimal amount of plasmonic NPs, which is then coated onto a cleaned FTO surface using a doctor-blade method, followed by sintering in air at 500 °C. The prepared photoanode incorporated with plasmonic NPs is immersed into N719 dye solution at room temperature for the required time. The electrodes are washed with acetonitrile to remove the nonadsorbed dye molecules. Pt-coated FTO is typically used as the counter electrode. The dye sensitized electrode and counter electrode are assembled with thermoplastic sealing foil face to face. A drop of iodide-based liquid electrolyte is injected into the gap between the two electrodes. The I–V response of the solar cell is usually measured under illumination generated by an AM 1.5 solar simulator.104–106
Although liquid electrolyte-based DSSCs have been shown to achieve high energy conversion efficiency, the stability of incorporated metal NPs, i.e., mainly corrosion of metal NPs by the I−/I3− electrolyte, is still a challenging factor. To overcome this issue, the development of solid-state plasmonic DSSCs has been widely studied. Typically, solid-state DSSCs (ss-DSSCs) are fabricated using a quasi-solid electrolyte, a solid polymer electrolyte, and solid state hole conductors such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine) 9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) and CsSnI3 perovskite.
3. Photocatalysis
3.1. TiO2–noble metal photocatalysts
TiO2 has been commonly regarded as the benchmark material for photocatalysis based on metal oxide semiconductors and its role in the relevant area has been substantially studied for decades.19,20 However, the relatively wide band gap of TiO2 restricts its absorption to only UV light, while its faster recombination rate of e−–h+ pairs reduces its catalytic efficiency. Compared to pristine TiO2, charge separation efficiency can be improved in TiO2-based heterostructures and the absorption can be extended to the visible region, which constitutes the major part of the solar spectrum. Incorporation of noble metals, doping with metals or non-metals and dye sensitization are a few well-known strategies to improve the photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2. The loading of noble metal on the surface of TiO2 can enhance the photocatalytic property in two ways. First, the incorporated metal NPs can act as electron traps, leading to facile electron–hole separation, which is utilized mainly under the exposure of UV light. Second, the SPR effect induced by visible light irradiation can be used to enhance the activity of photocatalysts.
3.1.1. Photocatalysis of TiO2–noble metal under UV light. Deposition of noble metal on the surface of TiO2 enhances the photocatalytic efficiency under UV light by trapping the excitons, which can lead to the interfacial charge transfer and the decrease in the recombination rate. This is attributed to the lower EF of noble metals, which can serve as a reservoir for photoinduced charge carriers and extend the lifetime of the e−–h+ pair.30,31 When metal NPs come into contact with TiO2, they retain charge and lead the net Fermi level to shift to a more negative potential. The photogenerated electrons in TiO2 are transferred to metal and this continues until they attain equilibrium.31,107 The accumulation of electrons increases the negative potential of Au, resulting in an upward shift of the resultant EF to the CB of TiO2. This negative shift in EF leads to better charge separation and more reductive power for the catalyst system.30,31,108,109 The overall process and charge transfer mechanism is illustrated in Scheme 2.
 Scheme 2  Equilibration of semiconductor-metal nanocomposites with the redox couple before and after UV Irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
The above mechanism was experimentally proved by the Kamat group.30 Initially TiO2 colloids were irradiated with UV light to attain a saturated blue color. The formation of blue color reflects the electron accumulation within TiO2. The broad absorption in the red-infrared region in spectrum is due to the electrons stored within the TiO2 nanoparticles. A known amount Au suspension was added to TiO2 colloids and the absorption spectra were recorded after adding each batch of Au suspension. It was observed that the red region of absorption spectra was decreased, indicative of the loss of electrons in TiO2 (Fig. 1). The absorption in the visible region is due to the SPR of Au NPs.30 It is convincing that under UV irradiation, the excited electrons can be transferred from the CB of TiO2 to Au, leading to a decrease in the electron density in TiO2. Therefore, the intensity of the absorption spectrum is decreased.
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of a 0.023 M solution of TiO2 nanoparticles in a deaerated solution of 50:50 (v/v%) ethanol–toluene (a) before irradiation and (b) after UV irradiation for 90 min. Spectra c–g were recorded following the addition of deaerated Au solution to the UV-irradiated TiO2 suspension. The concentrations of gold colloids in the suspension were (c) 0.22, (d) 0.44, (e) 0.55, (f) 0.68, and (g) 0.82 mM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society. 
Many research groups exploited the advantages of the incorporation of a noble metal in TiO2 in photocatalysis. Liu et al. reported the enhanced photocatalytic effect of TiO2 nanoflakes modified with Au NPs using the degradation of X-3B azo dye.110 Xiao utilized the additional advantage of the conductivity of the Ti substrate by anodization of a Ti sheet followed by the deposition of Au NPs. The photoinduced electrons are transferred from the nanotube matrix to the Au NPs and the Ti substrate beneath the nanotube possesses excellent electron conductivity which further reduces the recombination rate.111 Su et al. studied the effect of calcination temperature on the synthesis of TiO2@Au for the photodecomposition of phenol. The photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2@Au was increased after calcination at 400 °C, which might be due to improved contact between the metal and semiconductor NPs established during annealing at high temperature.112 Though the maximum catalytic efficiency is obtained for the catalysts calcined at 400 °C compared to the samples calcined at lower temperature, calcination at temperatures above 400 °C was not demonstrated to optimize the calcination condition. Sometimes a higher calcination temperature may cause negative effect because metal NPs can be detached from the TiO2 surface. The effect of the size of Au NPs on the photocatalytic property of TiO2 was exploited by Wu et al. by demonstrating H2 production via photocatalytic reforming of methanol, where it was reported that smaller Au NPs induce a more negative Fermi level shift than bigger particles, leading to better charge separation.113 A similar observation was already discussed by the Kamat group.31
In addition to Au- or Ag-based composites, more efficient photocatalytic degradation or conversion of organic compounds was studied on TiO2–Pt photocatalysts by several groups.114–124 Photocatalytic conversion of benzene to phenol was studied by Park et al. by photodepositing Pt NPs on TiO2 and obtained 4.4% conversion of benzene.123 Young et al. compared the photocatalytic efficiency between TiO2–Pt and TiO2–Ag nanocomposites by studying the photocatalytic oxidation of toluene and trichloroethylene, where TiO2–Pt showed better catalytic efficiency than TiO2–Ag. The better performance of TiO2–Pt over TiO2–Ag was attributed to the relative work function (Pt = 5.36–6.63 eV, Ag = 4.26–4.29 eV) with respect to TiO2 (4.6–4.7 eV). The larger difference in work function between Pt and TiO2 gives better electron trapping chances, resulting in improved e−–h+ separation, whereas the smaller difference in work functions between TiO2 and Ag is not considered enough for efficient electron trapping.119 Moonsiri et al. also compared the effect of Pt and Ag on the photocatalytic degradation and this study showed that the photocatalytic performance of TiO2–Ag was better than that of TiO2–Pt owing to the ability of Ag to produce more superoxide radicals and to the increased rate of direct hole oxidation.121 Although the catalytic results reported by Young et al.119 and Moonsiri et al.121 are contrary to each other, the mechanisms proposed to support their results are plausible. Chen et al. reported the upward movement of the EF of TiO2 after the equilibration of TiO2 and Pt. TiO2–Pt coaxial nanotubes were prepared by depositing TiO2 on pre-synthesized Pt nanotubes using chemical vapor deposition method. When Pt and TiO2 are in contact, the EF of Pt is moved upwards until the two Fermi levels become equal since Pt has a higher work function than TiO2. When TiO2–Pt is photoexcited, the EF of TiO2 is moved upward to a new quasi-Fermi level due to the photogenerated electrons, resulting in the formation of a Schottky barrier. Thus the electrons are transferred from TiO2 to Pt, thereby suppressing the recombination of excitons.122 Photodegradation of sulforhodamine-B (SRB) on platinized titania dispersion under visible light was demonstrated by Zhao et al. Pt NPs were photocatalytically deposited onto TiO2. SRB molecules adsorbed on the surface of TiO2 are excited under visible light exposure and the excited electrons are then transferred sequentially from the dye to TiO2 and to Pt, yielding a relatively high density of electrons on Pt. The electrons react with adsorbed O2 to produce superoxide radicals (Scheme 3).125
 Scheme 3  Proposed mechanism of the photodegradation of SRB on TiO2–Pt particles under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
The synergistic advantage of including TiO2 and metal NPs together in the hydrophilic part of a amphiphilic diblock copolymer and the improved photocatalytic properties were demonstrated by our group.126–128 TiO2 sol solutions were prepared using titanium isopropoxide as a TiO2 precursor, which was then mixed with poly (styrene-block-ethylene oxide) (PS-b-PEO) in appropriate solvents. In order to prepare a TiO2–Ag nanodot array, AgNO3 was sequentially mixed with TiO2 precursors and PS-b-PEO solutions. This was then spin coated on a suitable substrate to induce nanodot arrays. The sample was exposed to UV light in order to reduce AgNO3 to Ag. The photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2 was enhanced by 30%, after the incorporation of Ag.126 Mesoporous TiO2–Ag was also prepared by mixing TiO2 sol–gel and PS-b-PEO solution with a volume ratio of 50:50, followed by the addition of AgNO3. Thin films were prepared by spin coating the solution onto solid substrates. Subsequent UV exposure led to the reduction of AgNO3 to Ag and the partial removal of polymer, resulting in the formation of a mesoporous TiO2–Ag hybrid film.127 Similarly, TiO2–Pt nanohybrid films were fabricated by first mixing PS-b-PEO and Pt precursor and then TiO2 precursors were added. A series of samples were prepared by varying the relative amount of TiO2 sol–gel in polymer solution, where a morphology transformation from a nanodot array to a mesoporous structure was obtained. Degradation of para-nitrophenol (p-NP) was demonstrated using the TiO2–Pt thin film obtained. A plausible mechanism for the enhanced photocatalytic efficiency of TiO2–Pt was proposed (Scheme 4).128
 Scheme 4  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic decomposition of p-NP by Pt–TiO2 nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Zhang et al. synthesized M@TiO2 (M = Au, Pd, Pt) via hydrothermal method with metals being located at the core. In contrast to the previous reports, the photocatalytic activity of M@TiO2 was reported to be lower than that of bare TiO2 and the reason was attributed to the reduced light absorption intensity in the UV region. It was further argued that bare P25 showed a stronger intensity of ˙OH, which is the active species involved in the degradation of dye, compared with M@TiO2, leading to higher photocatalytic activity.129

3.1.2. Photocatalysis of TiO2–noble metal under visible light. In addition to the enhanced UV light active photocatalysis, semiconductor-plasmonic metal nanostructures have a unique characteristic to interact with visible light through excitation of SPR. TiO2 photocatalyst incorporated with Au or Ag NPs can act as inorganic photosensitizer, leading to enhanced visible light absorption. The intensity and wavelength of the SPR band can be modulated by tuning the size, shape and configuration of the plasmonic NPs. There are plenty of configurations reported on TiO2–Au and TiO2–Ag nanocomposites. For example, Au NPs deposited onto TiO2 spheres,75,130 coating over SiO2 spheres,66,78 NPs,59,77,92–95,131–134 nanotubes,135,136 nanosheets,65,98 films,32,60,137,138 mesoporous TiO2,139,140 photonic crystal,88 inverse opal,97 layered titanate,8 titanate nanobelt141 and Janus Au–TiO2.9 It was reported that Au NPs are protected from deterioration when they are encapsulated with a TiO2 shell, which in turn increases the overall stability of the catalysts.76,99 Similarly, various configurations are available for TiO2–Ag composites.81,82,89,90,142–146 Tian and Tatsuma32 reported the photocatalytic application of plasmon-induced charge separation at a TiO2–Au nanocomposite. Li et al.139 fabricated homogeneously embedded Au NPs in a mesoporous titania framework using P-123 as a template and exploited the visible light-active photocatalytic activity. The photocatalytic activity mainly depends on metal particle size, degree of distribution and preparation methods. Larger metal NPs are found to be less efficient due to the reduction in available metal-support sites, where both metal and TiO2 are needed for the photocatalysis to take place.74 A uniform distribution of metal NPs over TiO2 is another required criterion for improved catalysis because the aggregation of metal NPs can cause an accumulation of electrons on the metal, which leads to charge recombination and lower quantum efficiency.146 Various methods to incorporate Au/Ag NPs into TiO2 are reported, including chemical, thermal or hydrothermal reduction,65,66,76,88,89,99,130–132,135,136,139,144 photoreduction,32,94,95,134,137,140 deposition–precipitation method59,92,93,133 of HAuCl4 on TiO2, sputtering of Au NPs,60,97,98,145 and incorporation of pre-synthesized Au/Ag NPs on TiO2.9,75,78,111,140,141 The preparation methods of various TiO2–Au/Ag nanostructures and their photocatalytic applications are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Visible light-active TiO2–noble metal photocatalysts based on their electron transfer mechanism




Configurationa
Preparation method
Application
Ref. (year)




a NC: nanocomposite, N: nitrogen, NP: nanoparticle, NT: nanotube, NR: nanorod, NS: nanosheet, NB: nanobelt, NPi: nanopillar PC: photonic crystal, IO: inverse opal, M: Au–Ag–Pt.




SPR induced electron transfer mechanism


TiO2 film-Au
TiO2 film: spin coating of TiO2 sol on ITO and calcination
Photovoltaic fuel cell
(2005)32


Au: photoreduction of HAuCl4


TiO2 sphere-M
TiO2 sphere: alcohothermal method
Photooxidation benzene into phenol
(2011)130


M: chemical reduction


Au@TiO2 sphere@SiO2sphere
SiO2 sphere: Stöber method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2011)75


TiO2 sphere: hydrolyzing tetrabutyl orthotitanate (TBOT)


Au: pre-synthesized by citrate reduction method


Meso TiO2 –Au NC sphere
TiO2 NC: solvothermal treatment of TBOT
Photodegradation of acid orange 7
(2012)66


Au: hydrothermal method


SiO2 sphere@TiO2sphere-Au
SiO2 sphere: Stöber method
Photodegradation of methylene blue, methyl orange, p-nitrophenol
(2012)78


TiO2 sphere: hydrolyzing titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP)


Au: pre-synthesized by citrate reduction method


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2: commercial product
Photoelectrochemical measurement
(2009)92


Au: deposition–precipitation method


N-TiO2 NP-Au
N-TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium sulfate by ammonia followed by the addition of urea
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2009)131


Au: chemical reduction of HauCl4


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2 NP: commercial product
Photooxidation of acetone and 2-propanol
(2009)94


Au: photodeposition


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2 NP: commercial product
Photocatalysed reduction of nitrobenzene, photooxidation of alcohols
(2012)93


Au: deposition–precipitation method


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2: sol–gel method
Photodegradation of MTBE
(2008)59


Au: deposition–precipitation method


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium tetraisopropoxide
Photocatalytic reduction of nitrite to ammonia
(2012)132


Au: chemical reduction


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2 NP: commercial product
Photooxidation of 2-propanol
(2012)95


Au: photodeposition


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2 NP: commercial product
H2 and O2 evolution
(2011)133


Au: deposition–precipitation method


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2 NP: commercial product
Oxidation of acetone and 2-propanol
(2010)134


Au: impregnation-reduction method


TiO2 NT-Au
TiO2 NT: post-treatment of hydrogen titanate
Oxidation of formaldehyde
(2010)135


Au: chemical reduction


TiO2 NS-Au
TiO2 NS: hydrothermal treatment of tetrabutyl titanate
Photodegradation of RhB
(2012)65


Au: chemical reduction of H2AuCl4


Mesoporous TiO2: Au
TiO2: hydrolysis of TiCl4, Ti(OBu)4
Oxidation of phenol
(2007)139


Au: chemical reduction


Mesoporous TiO2–Au
Mesoporous TiO2: hydrolysis of tetrabutyl titanate
Photodegradation of RhB
(2012)140


Au: citrate reduction


TiO2 PC-Au
TiO2 PC: polystyrene sphere template was replicated with TiO2 following a reported liquid-phase deposition (LPD) method using titanium isopropoxide as TiO2 seed layer.
Photodegradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol
(2012)88


Au: hydrothermal reduction


TiO2 IO-Au
TiO2: 50 nm thick amorphous titania layer was deposited on polystyrene spheres
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2009)97


Au: sputtering


TiO2 NB-Au
TiO2 NB: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2012)141


Au: Brust method


Mesoporous TiO2@Au
TiO2: sol–gel method
Photodegradation of p-chlorophenol
(2009)99


Au core: chemical method


TiO2@Au
TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide
Photodegradation of malathion
(2011)76


Au: citrate reduction method


TiO2-NPi-Ag
TiO2 NPi-Ag: thermal method
Photodegradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol
(2012)142


TiO2 film-Ag
TiO2 film-Ag: pulsed laser deposition
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2011)143


TiO2 NW-Ag
TiO2 NW-Ag: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of RhB
(2012)89


TiO2 film-Ag
TiO2 film-Ag: photo and thermal method
Antibacterial test
(2009)144


TiO2 film-Ag
TiO2 film-Ag: magnetron sputtering
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2010)145


Titanate NT-Ag
Titanate NT-Ag: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2012)90


Near field enhancement mechanism


Janus Au–TiO2
TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide
Hydrogen generation
(2012)9


Au: citrate reduction method


TiO2 NP-Au
TiO2: Degussa P25
Photodegradation methylene blue Water splitting
(2011)77


Au: citrate reduction method


TiO2 NS-Au
TiO2 NS: hydrothermal method
Photoelectrochemical measurement
(2012)98


Au: sputtering


TiO2 film-Au
TiO2 film: sol–gel process
Reduction of CO2
(2011)60


Au: evaporation


TiO2 film-Au
TiO2 film: electrochemical oxidation of titanium
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2011)137


Au: thermal evaporation


TiO2 film-Au
TiO2 film: electrochemical oxidation Ti foil
Photocurrent measurement
(2011)138


Au: thermal evaporation


N-TiO2 NP-Ag
N-TiO2: thermal treatment of TiO2 particles with NH3
Photoelectrochemical measurement
(2011)81


Ag: polyol process


N-TiO2 NP-Ag
N-TiO2: thermal treatment of P25 particles with NH3
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2011)82


Ag: polyol process


Scattering mechanism


N-TiO2–Ag
N-TiO2: thermal treatment of P25 particles with NH3
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2011)82


Ag: polyol process


TiO2–Ag
TiO2: Degussa P25
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2010)83


Ag: polyol process




The underlying mechanism for the improved visible light active photocatalysis of TiO2–Au/Ag can be mainly classified into three categories which will be discussed in the following section: SPR induced electron transfer from metal to TiO2, enhancement in the near electromagnetic field, and scattering.
3.1.2.1. SPR induced electron transfer from metal to TiO2. This mechanism is analogous to dye sensitization, where the dye molecules anchored to TiO2 absorb visible light and the excited electrons are transferred to the CB of TiO2. Surface plasmons are composed of a charge density wave on the surface of the metal, which are not comparable with the VB and CB of the semiconductor or the HOMO–LUMO energy levels of the dye. Plasmonic metal NPs absorb resonant photons and the energetic electrons formed by the SPR excitation are transferred to the semiconductor (Scheme 5).32–34,36,59,65,66,75,76,78,88–90,92–95,97,99,130,131,133–135,140–145 Plasmonic metal nanostructures have a high mobility of charge carriers and high absorption cross-sections, which are, under resonant conditions, around 105 times larger than the absorption cross section of conventional dye sensitizers. Moreover, the SPR band position can be tuned by changing the size and shape of the NPs, thereby allowing the exploitation of the entire solar spectrum.34
 Scheme 5  Schematic diagram of a gold nanodot attaching to a TiO2 nanoparticle, also indicating the revealed electron injection process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
A plasmon band is generated due to the collective oscillation of EF electrons induced by the electric field of the incident light. The interband transition in a semiconductor, i.e., the excitation of electrons in the d orbital to electronic states above the Fermi level in the sp CB, overlaps with the plasmon band. The photon energies shared by numerous electrons are expected to be enough to cross the Schottky barrier between metal and TiO2, which is formed by the large work function of Au.33,147,148 The formation of a Schottky junction is not a plasmonic effect. It is a natural result caused by the contact of noble metal NPs with the semiconductor photocatalyst, but this can be part of the features of plasmonic photocatalysis. Schottky barrier formation can enhance the separation of electrons and holes, which in turn can reduce the recombination rate and increase the lifetime of charge carriers.149
The detailed mechanism of electron injection from metal to semiconductor proposed by Xuming et al. is as follows.149 Since the metal NPs are small, the electron states in the metal NPs follow Fermi–Dirac distribution. Upon plasmon excitation, many electrons have energies higher than that of the CB of TiO2, which leads to the facile transport of electrons to the CB of TiO2, provided that the semiconductor and metal NPs have direct electrical contact (Fig. 2a). The energy states of the electron can be changed back to the Fermi–Dirac distribution through electron–electron relaxation, but at a higher Fermi level (EF) (Fig. 2b). Electrons from the tail part of the electron distribution having energy > EF are transported to the CB of TiO2. Once the surface plasmon energy is fully dissipated, the electrons in the metal NPs return to the Fermi–Dirac distribution (Fig. 2c). The authors give a further explanation for the electron transfer from metal to semiconductor with the help of electronic energy levels of Au NPs and TiO2. Before contact, the CB of TiO2 and work function of Au are considered at −0.3 eV vs. SHE and 5.1 eV, respectively. Once the metal and semiconductor come into electronic contact, the EF of Au is equalized to the work function and band bending of CB of TiO2 is induced. The gap between the top of the CB and the Fermi level was calculated as 0.96 eV, whereas the plasmon absorption energy of Au NPs is around 2 eV. Therefore, the photoexcited electrons have sufficient energy to flow to the CB of TiO2. It is to be noted that unlike in the case of photocatalysis of TiO2–noble metal under UV-light, electron–hole pairs are not generated in TiO2 during visible light exposure. Under visible light irradiation, TiO2 is not excited because of the wide band gap, whereas SPs of Au NPs are excited and the energetic electrons are transferred to the empty CB of TiO2. These electrons are then used for photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants.
 Fig. 2  LSPR sensitization effect (a) excitation of the electrons from the thermal equilibrium to a high energy state upon absorbing the photons, which feeds the electrons to the conduction band of the semiconductor. (b) In the metal nanoparticle, the collision induced a redistribution of electron energy, forming a Fermi–Dirac distribution at a high-temperature Fermi level. (c) In the metal nanoparticle, the electrons go back to the standard distribution and in the semiconductor electrons and holes flow to different regions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2013 Institute of Physics Publishing Ltd. 
The overall mechanism of photocatalysis under visible light can be described as follows: the electrons generated by the excitation of SP are injected into the CB of TiO2, which reduces the dissolved oxygen on the surface of TiO2, forming ˙OH radicals. The ˙OH radicals are highly reactive species and responsible for the degradation of pollutants. The oxidized Au NPs capture electrons from H2O to neutralize the positive charge. This mechanism of charge injection from metal to TiO2 is applicable when the NPs and TiO2 are in close contact with each other, allowing for the facile electron transfer.139
The SPR induced interfacial electron transfer (IET) from Au to TiO2 was experimentally proved by Kimura et al. using photochronoamperometry, where Au–TiO2 and a solution containing Na2S and Na2SO3 are employed as electrode and electrolyte, respectively.93 Fig. 3 shows photocurrent profiles for the Au–TiO2 (anatase and rutile) electrodes. In both cases, anodic photocurrent (Jph) is increased when the light is on and decayed to zero when the light is turned off. The reproducible photocurrent is generated by repeatedly turning the light on and off. The higher photocurrent of the Au–TiO2 (rutile) system is ascribed to the lower CB edge of rutile than anatase, leading to a more efficient IET from Au to rutile TiO2. Zheng et al. carried out spectroscopic measurements to study the electron transfer from Au to TiO2. Au@TiO2 microspheres suspended in water without dissolved O2 showed a strong absorption around 570 nm, which overlaps with the SPR band position of the Au NPs. This absorption is decreased when the suspension is irradiated by visible light, strongly evidencing the transfer of electrons from Au to TiO2.130
 Fig. 3  Photochronoamperometry profiles of Au/mp-anatase and Au/mp-rutile electrodes in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution containing 0.1 M Na2S and 0.05 M Na2SO3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.2. Enhancement in the near field electromagnetic mechanism. Enhancement in the photocatalytic activity was also observed in the case when TiO2 and noble metals were separated from each other by non-conductive spacers that hinder direct charge transfer. The electromagnetic field of incident light couples with the oscillation of electrons in plasmonic metals and results in the strong enhancement in the local electromagnetic field near the surface of plasmonic metal NPs, which is stronger than the field of photons used to excite the nanostructure. The intensity of this field is largest at the surface and decreases away from the surface within 20–30 nm.9,35,60,77,81,82,98,137,138 The SPR-induced electric field can interact with TiO2 when the semiconductor is brought to the close proximity of the photoexcited plasmonic nanostructure. This interaction may increase the rate of exciton formation in local TiO2 regions, since it is proportional to the local intensity of the electric field.34,36,150 Excited plasmonic NPs act as concentrators and increase the local light intensity. The rate of e−–h+ pair formation is highest where TiO2 is in close proximity with the plasmonic metal NPs and the near field plasmonic enhancement decreases as the thickness of the insulator layer increases. The selective formation of charge carriers near the semiconductor surface system has an advantage in photocatalysis, i.e., they have shorter distance to travel to reach the semiconductor–liquid interface in the photocatalytic system. Thus, the probability of a photocatalytic reaction is high compared to that of e−–h+ recombination.34Another factor which can influence the enhancement in near field is the distance between the plasmonic metal NPs. Two NPs in close proximity form a region called a ‘hot spot’ due to plasmon coupling, where the magnitude of the intensity of the near field is several orders larger than that in the metal NP-semiconductor interface. The frequency of hot spots is enhanced when the surface density of metal NPs is increased.34,149 In such spots the coupling of the oscillating electron cloud is the consequence of resonant excitation of plasmon excitation. The formation of charge carriers in the semiconductor near the hot spots is better induced compared with non-hot spot areas. Moreover it has been reported that in the vicinity of hot spots, charge carriers can easily couple with chemisorbed molecules of the photocatalytic system, leading to an efficient charge transfer. The influence of the hot spot is decreased when the distance between the metal NPs is increased.151
Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulation is considered as one of the best tools to study theoretically the near field enhancement in TiO2/plasmonic metal nanostructures. Hou et al. performed FDTD numerical simulations of electromagnetic response to study the enhanced electric field intensities at the interface of Au–TiO2.137 The enhanced electric fields are observed as hot spots which are dominantly seen in the proximity of nearly touching Au NPs (Fig. 4). This enhances the electric field intensity at the TiO2 surface which in turn leads to the enhancement in the rate of e−–h+ pair formation in the near surface region. Wang et al. studied the same phenomenon in an Au–TiO2–Au nanostructure, where Au was sputtered on TiO2 films. The maximum electric field intensity enhancement obtained through an FDTD simulation model is 38-fold.98 Meanwhile, Chen et al. reported the maximum electric field intensity enhancement as 4.19 and 1.88-fold for full spherical and half spherical Au NPs on TiO2, respectively.77 A detailed discussion on near field enhancement was not reported. Although the magnitudes of the electric field enhancement and catalytic efficiency for full spherical Au NPs were observed to be higher, half spherical Au NPs have better contact area with TiO2 than that of full spherical Au NPs and an enhanced electric field can be more efficient in the case of half spherical Au NPs. Seh et al. synthesized core–shell and Janus Au–TiO2 nanostructures (Fig. 5) and compared the enhancement in the intensity of the electric near-field between core–shell and Janus Au–TiO2 nanostructures.9 Janus nanostructures showed strong non-centrosymmetric localization of the plasmonic near-fields on one side of the Au NPs unlike the symmetric near-field enhancement of the electric field in core–shell nanostructures. Since the plasmonic near-field was strongly localized close to the Janus Au–TiO2 interface, maximum optical absorption and corresponding e−–h+ pair generation occurred near the TiO2 surface (Fig. 6) so that electrons can migrate effectively to the surface of the catalyst without recombination. The catalytic efficiency of the Janus nanostructure was 4–7 times higher than that of the core–shell nanostructures.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of a 5 nm-thick Au island film deposited on anodic TiO2. (b–d) Electric field intensity at the interface of Au–TiO2 calculated using FDTD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 5  TEM images of Janus (a) and core–shell (b) Au50nm–TiO2 nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 6  Optical-absorption maps (cross-section view at z = 0) of Janus Au50nm–TiO2 nanostructures, simulated using the optical properties of amorphous TiO2 (a) and bulk anatase (b). The maps show the power absorbed at the LSPR wavelength, with incident polarization along the x-axis and an incident intensity of 0.5 W cm−2. (c) Proposed photocatalytic process for efficient hydrogen generation using the Janus Au–TiO2 nanostructures, based on excitation of the LSPR under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.1.2.3. Scattering mechanism. Plasmonic structures of size larger than 50 nm are efficient in scattering the resonant photons,34,82,83,152 which increases the path length of photons in TiO2/plasmonic metal nanostructures (Scheme 6).34 This increase in path length in the surface region of the semiconductor by scattering enhances the optical absorption. Here plasmonic particles act as a mirror, so the photons are concentrated on the surface of the particle and scattered in the vicinity of the particle without being degraded into heat. Therefore, the resonant photons which are not absorbed by TiO2 could be scattered by the bigger plasmonic metal particles, ultimately increasing the path length of photons and the number of e−–h+ pairs. Christopher et al. compared the scattering of Ag nanospheres with Ag nanocubes at a wavelength of 365 nm and found that nanocubes scatter more efficiently than nanospheres of similar size, which is attributed to the higher volume possessed by nanocubes compared to nanospheres.83 In addition to the size and shape of the metal NPs, the efficiency of scattering is also influenced by the loading level of the metal NPs. When the loading is too low, the influence of scattering is negligible. Very high loading of metal NPs causes the absorption of many photons in the first interaction with metal NPs, leaving only a few for multiple scattering.149
 Scheme 6  Schematic illustration of the scattering mechanism. The addition of optically excited plasmonic nanoparticles increases the average path length of photons in the composite structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
3.1.2.4. Mechanism overview. It is important to note that the above-mentioned three mechanisms are governed by the metal-semiconductor configurations and their arrangements in the hybrid system. SPR-induced electron transfer from metal to TiO2 takes place when the electrons in Au are elevated above the CB of TiO2. Moreover a close contact between metal and semiconductor is very essential for the flow of electrons. When they are separated from each other by non-conductive spacers, the near-field enhancement and scattering mechanism are functional. A strong scattering effect is observed in hybrid systems, which are configured to allow multiple passes of resonant photons through the semiconductor matrix. The magnitude of e−–h+ pair formation induced by near-field enhancement is dependent on the arrangement of metal and semiconductor in the composite system. The field intensity is strongly influenced by relative arrangements of plasmonic metal NPs and the spacing between the plasmonic metal and absorber. Therefore, in order to exploit the maximum benefits of the three mechanisms, a careful study is required for the design of a metal-semiconductor hybrid system.

3.1.3. Photocatalysis of TiO2–noble metal under UV-vis light. The ability of a plasmonic metal to increase e−–h+ pair separation by capturing photogenerated electrons and to induce visible-light-induced SPR effect can be utilized to study photocatalysis under the total solar spectrum. The UV spectrum of light is utilized to excite TiO2 and the excited electrons are transferred from the CB of TiO2 to the metal, and thereby photogenerated electrons and holes are effectively separated. Meanwhile, the visible spectrum is used to excite the SP of noble metals; the highly energetic electrons are then injected into the CB of TiO2 (Scheme 7).76,77,92,129,131,133,141
 Scheme 7  Mechanism of the photocatalysis of Au–TiO2 under UV light excitation (a) and under visible light (b). EDTA acts as sacrificial electron donor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Zhang et al. explored the dual effect of plasmonic metals by preparing Au@TiO2 core–shell NPs. Citrate-capped Au NPs were prepared and a TiO2 shell was coated by hydrothermal method using TiF4 as the TiO2 precursor. The photocatalytic activity of the catalyst was studied under UV and visible light using rhodamine B (RhB) and it was found that the underlying mechanism of dye degradation is not the same in both cases. Under UV light, the signal of a hydroxyl (˙OH) radical was apparent, which considerably assists the photodegradation of dye; while under visible light irradiation the presence of ˙OH radicals were not detected. Further experiments proved that holes played a more important role than ˙OH radicals toward the degradation of RhB under visible light.129 Wu et al. demonstrated the dual role of Au by monitoring the degradation of methyl orange (MO) using composites of Au and N-doped TiO2 (N-TiO2). N-TiO2 was added to a solution containing HAuCl4 and urea molecules, and the mixed solution was stirred for 4 h in the dark. The solid was then centrifuged and dried. MO was degraded after 5 h irradiation under visible and UV light. In addition to the charge transfer mechanism, they discussed another positive effect of Au NPs, i.e., the energetic electrons of Au resulting from the surface plasmons may be injected onto the TiO2, leading to facile separation of electrons and holes. These separated e−–h+ pairs then undergo a photocatalytic reaction.131 Photodegradation of malathion under both light sources was studied by Fouad and Mohamed.76 Au–TiO2 core–shell NPs were prepared using citrate-capped Au as seeds to grow TiO2. A higher photodegradation rate was obtained under irradiation with UV light than under irradiation with sunlight. This was attributed to the high intensity of the UV light, which is suitable for the excitation of many electrons from the VB of the metal oxide semiconductor because the band gap energy of TiO2 lies in the UV region.

3.2. ZnO–noble metal photocatalysts
Although TiO2 is the most widely studied semiconductor photocatalyst, ZnO has also attracted much attention due to its high catalytic efficiency, low cost and ease to make various nanostructures. ZnO has been reported to be more effective than TiO2 in processes such as photooxidation of phenol153 and photocatalysed oxidation of 2-phenyl phenol.154 However, rapid recombination of excited electrons and holes reduces its photocatalytic efficiency, as in the case of TiO2. Combining ZnO with noble metals is a solution to decrease the recombination rate and to enhance the photocatalytic activity because the metal can act as an electron sink for photoinduced charge carriers. When such metal NPs are in contact with a charged semiconductor, they undergo equilibration of Fermi energy levels and an interfacial charge-transfer process, as discussed in the earlier section.
3.2.1. Photocatalysis of ZnO–noble metal under UV light. In recent years, various nanostructures of ZnO–noble metal have been successfully prepared using different methods. Noble metal NPs deposited on ZnO NPs,61,79,80,86,87,155–164 nanorods,62,69,91,96,165–170 films,67,171,172 spheres,173–175 flowers68,85,176–178 and other configurations were widely reported.84,179–181 Metal–ZnO nanocomposites are fabricated by depositing, growing or attaching metal NPs onto the surface of prefabricated ZnO nanostructures. For this purpose, several methods, such as hydrothermal or solvothermal,91,158,167,169,174,177,181 sonochemical,85–87,165,179 chemical reduction,61,155,156,167,170,175 photoreduction,69,96,160,161,178 electrodeposition,67,68,160 microwave irradiation168 and flame spray pyrolysis,157 have been utilized. As a typical drawback, these conventional methods may lead to the aggregation of NPs on ZnO surfaces. In order to overcome this, attachment of pre-synthesized metal NPs onto the modified surface of ZnO was adopted by a few research groups.79,80,84,169 Chen et al.85 decorated ZnO nanoflowers with pre-synthesized Au NPs and studied the photocatalytic degradation of Orange II. Lee and coworkers80 attached glutathione-protected Au NPs onto commercial ZnO NPs and reported that photogenerated electron transfer occurs. The resulting catalytic activity of the composites can be controlled by the size of the mediating Au capacitors. The catalytic activity was increased with increasing Au NP size, indicating that large Au NPs extract electrons more efficiently than small Au NPs, and, as a result, more electrons are separated in the composite. Spherical hollow structures, especially those with small sizes, are characterized by a remarkably high surface-volume ratio and a low density. Zeng et al.173 synthesized metal–ZnO core–shell hollow spheres by laser ablation in liquid. The obtained colloidal solutions were etched by chloroauric acid solutions to obtain hollow spheres embedded with ultrafine noble metal particles in the shell layer. The enhanced photocatalytic performance was attributed to the improved photostability and more effective electron–hole separation induced by the reconstructed abundant metal-semiconductor interfaces. The same configuration of ZnO hollow spheres incorporated with Ag NPs was prepared by Lu et al.174 Unlike the previous cases, this work proposed a one-pot synthesis protocol where ZnO and Ag precursors were mixed together and directed to hydrothermal treatment. The efficiency of the catalyst was tested by studying the degradation of Orange G. Tian et al.175 synthesized ZnO microspheres first, followed by the addition of an Ag precursor, by using ethylene glycol as a the medium to induce spheres and to reduce the Ag precursor. Rhodamine B was used as a target dye to study the enhanced photocatalytic efficiency of ZnO–Ag hybrids. We recently investigated the photocatalytic study of a hierarchical metal NP/ZnO film nanostructure assisted by a BCP nanotemplate. ZnO thin film was fabricated on an Si wafer by a sol–gel process followed by annealing. BCP containing an Au or Ag NP precursor was then spin coated over a ZnO film and the precursor was then reduced to metal under O2 plasma treatment or UV light exposure (Scheme 8). Comparison of the bare ZnO film and the ZnO–Au or ZnO–Ag film was demonstrated in terms of the degradation of methylene blue.179 Detailed preparation methods of various ZnO–Au–Ag–Pt nanostructures and their photocatalytic applications are summarized in Table 2.
 Scheme 8  Schematic representation of the overall process used to prepare metal–ZnO hierarchical nanostructures. Si substrates were coated with ZnO sol–gel solution by using a spin-coating method. The coated substrates were then thermally annealed to induce crystallization of ZnO. Subsequently, SxVP micellar solution loaded with metal precursors was spin-coated onto ZnO thin films. Finally, the metal–ZnO samples were subjected to post-treatments, such as O2 plasma or UV exposure to remove polymer and reduce metal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
Table 2 ZnO–noble metal photocatalysts based on their configuration and application




Configurationa
Preparation method
Application
Ref. (year)




a NP: nanoparticle, NR: nanorod, NW: nanowire h-sphere: hollow sphere, NF: nanoflower.




ZnO–Au photocatalysis


ZnO NP-Au
ZnO NP: commercial product
Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G
(2011)80


Au: glutathione-protected Au NPs by chemical reduction


ZnO NP-Au
ZnO NP: oxidation of zinc acetate
Photodegradation of malathion
(2012)155


Au: citrate reduction method


ZnO NP-Au
ZnO: oxidation of zinc acetate
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2011)156


Au: chemical reduction method


ZnO NP-Au
ZnO: commercial product
Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G
(2011)79


Au: glutathione-protected Au NPs by chemical reduction


ZnO NP-Au
ZnO NP-Au: one-step spray pyrolysis
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2009)157


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2012)165


Au: sonochemical


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2009)166


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: chemical vapor deposition
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2006)69


Au: photoreduction


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: thermal growth method
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2011)167


Au: chemical reduction method


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR-Au: microwave assisted synthesis
Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G
(2012)168


ZnO film-Au
ZnO film-Au: co-electrodeposition
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2008)67


ZnO h-sphere@Au
ZnO h-sphere: laser ablation in liquid method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2008)173


Au core: chemical etching


ZnO NF-Au
ZnO NF: hydrothermal method
Degradation of orange II
(2011)85


Au: sonochemical


ZnO NF-Au
ZnO NF: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2011)68


Au: electro-deposition method


ZnO film-Au
ZnO film: sol–gel method
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2010)180


Au: BCP induced Au NPs array by photoreduction of HAuCl4


 


ZnO–Ag photocatalysis


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO NP-Ag: deposition–precipitation method, solvothermal method, coprecipitation method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2008)158


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO NP-Ag: sonochemical method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B, methylene orange, methylene blue
(2010)86


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO NP: arc discharge between a pair of zinc electrodes
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2012)159


Ag: arc discharge between a pair of Ag electrodes


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO: oxidation of zinc acetate
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2010)160


Ag: photoreduction method


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO NP-Ag: sol–gel process
Photodegradation of methylene blue, methyl orange, rhodamine B
(2011)61


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO NP: laser ablation
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2012)87


Ag: sonochemical method


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO: commercial product
Photodegradation of crystal violet
(2010)161


Ag: photoreduction method


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO–Ag: co-precipitation method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2007)162


ZnO NP-Ag
ZnO–Ag: chemical oxidation method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2011)164


ZnO NR-Ag
ZnO NR-Ag: solvothermal method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2007)91


ZnO NR-Ag
ZnO NR: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation methyl orange
(2012)169


Ag: polyol process


ZnO NR-Ag
ZnO–Ag: sol–gel method
Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G
(2011)62


ZnO NR-Ag
ZnO NR: chemical solution deposition
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2010)96


Ag: photodeposition


ZnO–Ag NW
ZnO: thermal decomposition of ZnII amino complex
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2009)170


Ag NW: polyol process


ZnO h-sphere-Ag
ZnO h-sphere-Au: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of orange G
(2008)174


ZnO sphere-Ag
ZnO sph-Ag: one-pot process in ethylene glycol medium.
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2010)175


ZnO NF-Ag
ZnO NF: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2010)176


Ag: thermal method


ZnO NF-Ag
ZnO NF: seed mediated method
Degradation of rhodamine B
(2012)178


Ag: photoreduction


Worm like ZnO-Ag NR core–shell
Ag NR: polyol synthesis method
Photodegradation of rhodamine B
(2012)84


ZnO: sonochemical method


ZnO–Ag
ZnO–Ag: hydrothermal method
Photodegradation of orange G
(2008)181


 


ZnO–Pt photocatalysis


ZnO NP-Pt
ZnO NP-Pt: one-step spray pyrolysis
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2009)157


ZnO film-Pt
ZnO film: facing-target sputtering method
Decomposition of methanol
(2010)171


Pt: auto fine coating
Degradation of azo dyes


ZnO film-Pt
ZnO film-Pt: sol–gel method
Degradation of azo dyes
(2010)172


ZnO film-Pt
ZnO film-Au: co-electrodeposition
Photodegradation of methylene blue
(2008)67


Pt–ZnO NF
ZnO NF: refluxion method
Photodegradation of ethyl violet
(2010)177


Pt: seed mediated synthesis


Pt–ZnO porous nanocage
ZnO: laser ablation in liquid method
Photodegradation of methyl orange
(2008)179


Pt: etching method




The positive effect of the inclusion of noble metal into ZnO nanostructures is mainly due to the fact that noble metals can act as an electron sink. The electron transfer between the ZnO and metal NPs takes place when they are in direct contact. The direction of electron transfer depends on the band structure between them. The work function of ZnO (5.4 eV) is larger than that of Au (5.1 eV), i.e., the EF of ZnO lies below that of Au, and the electron transfer from ZnO to Au can cause band bending. After irradiation of the samples, the free electrons of Au NPs are excited to a higher level and transferred to the CB of ZnO, which are then transferred back to the EF of Au. In addition to this event, the excited electrons in the CB of ZnO can also be transferred to Au NPs (Scheme 9). Both of these processes promote the separation of electrons and holes, and the enhancement of photocatalytic efficiency can be achieved.168 The transfer of excited electrons from Au NPs to the CB of ZnO is more applicable for visible light active photocatalysis, which was not explored by the same group. Wang et al.166 and Kamat’s group163 reported that the electrons could transfer from ZnO to Au, driven by the energy difference. Au NPs act as a sink for the photoexcited electrons and cause the EF to shift to a more negative potential. The flow of electrons from ZnO to Au continues until the EF of Au comes closer to the CB of ZnO, thereby the recombination of e−–h+ pairs is reduced. This is one of the well-studied mechanisms to date. Another reason for the enhanced photocatalysis is considered to be the decrease in the work function of ZnO after the incorporation of Au NPs onto ZnO.166 The rate determining step of the photocatalytic reaction is considered to be the electron transfer from the ZnO surface to adsorbed O2 at the interface between Au and ZnO. This lowering of the work function of ZnO results in an increase in the rate of electron transfer to O2 to yield active oxidizing species, which are responsible for photodegradation. Measurement of the PL property of the ZnO can be utilized as a probe to study the charge separation and Fermi level equilibration at the ZnO–Au interface. Lee et al.80 studied the electron transfer process in ZnO–Au composites using a time-resolved PL study of ZnO. The life time of ZnO became shorter in the presence of Au NPs, suggesting that electrons were transferred from ZnO to Au. They studied further the effect of the size of Au NPs on charge separation and reported that the electron-receiving power of Au NPs increased with increasing size. They compared catalytic efficiencies of Au NPs of three different sizes, i.e., 1.1, 1.6 and 2.8 nm, and reported a maximum catalytic efficiency for Au NPs of 2.8 nm size. It is convincing that charge separation is more effective in the bigger NPs, but Au NPs having size larger than 2.8 nm were not studied by this group. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude the optimum size of Au NPs showing a maximum charge separation.
 Scheme 9  Schematic band diagram of a ZnO–Au heterostructure (representative of Au–ZnO nanocomposite), showing the charge distribution and PL emission processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The mechanism of electron transfer between Ag and ZnO is reported to be almost the same as that observed from ZnO–Au composites. The EF of ZnO is lower than that of Ag because of the larger work function of ZnO. This leads to electron transfer from Ag to ZnO until the two systems attain equilibrium and form a new energy level. Under UV illumination, the photoexcited electrons move from ZnO to Ag because the bottom energy level of the CB of ZnO is higher than the newly formed Fermi energy level of Ag–ZnO (Scheme 10).91 This is attributed to the formation of a Schottky barrier at the metal-semiconductor interface, which can effectively trap the photo-induced electrons and holes and thus inhibit the recombination of e−–h+ pairs.62,96,160,174,181 Zheng et al.158 proposed two different pathways to transfer the photogenerated electrons from the ZnO semiconductor to the dye in Ag–ZnO photocatalysts: when the catalyst is irradiated by UV light, the photogenerated electrons can be transferred to the dye through the Ag–ZnO interface (pathway I) and through the oxygen vacancy defects on the surface of the ZnO semiconductor (pathway II). Therefore it is found that Ag NPs and oxygen vacancy defects on the surface of the ZnO nanocrystals facilitate the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Even though oxygen vacancy defects can reduce charge recombination by trapping the excited electrons, it reduces the electrons available for dye degradation causing a negative effect on photocatalytic efficiency. As in the case of ZnO–Au composites, the intensity corresponding to the defect emission or band emission of ZnO–Ag composites was also found to be smaller when compared with that of bare ZnO, which was attributed to the separation of the e−–h+ pair induced by Ag NPs on the surface of ZnO.84,96,160,161,175,181 The photoinduced holes may react with surface bound OH or H2O to form hydroxyl radicals, which is a reactive oxidant that degrades organic molecules. The photoexcited electrons are taken by the O2 adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst to generate superoxide radicals, which are also active radicals that assist the photocatalytic oxidation too.170 Although the incorporation of noble metal NPs onto the ZnO surface increases its photocatalytic efficiency, an excessive presence of Au–Ag can either act as a recombination centre96 or shield the UV light absorption, which may in turn decrease the photocatalytic activity of the catalyst.164
 Scheme 10  Proposed band structure and photocatalytic mechanism of the as-synthesized Ag–ZnO heterostructure nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
There are several reports on the enhanced photocatalytic efficiency of ZnO in combination with Pt.157,171,172,177,179 A Schottky barrier is formed between ZnO and Pt due to the larger work function of Pt than that of ZnO, which facilitates the electron transfer from ZnO to Pt. Yuan et al. reported the growth of ZnO nanoflowers on various Pt nanocrystals and the mechanism of electron transfer from ZnO to Pt during UV light irradiation. The electrons are transferred from the CB of ZnO to the EF of Pt, thus slowing down the recombination rate.177 The same mechanism was reported by Zeng et al. on ZnO–Pt porous nanocages.179 In contrast to the above reports, Pawinrat et al. suggested the formation of ohmic contact between ZnO and Pt,157 which was earlier proposed by Kamat et al.,163 followed by Wood et al.182 Therefore Pt deposited on ZnO neither induces a shift of EF towards a more negative potential nor stores the photogenerated electrons in the Pt NPs. Instead it merely facilitates the discharge of photoexcited electrons into the electrolyte.163,182

3.2.2. Photocatalysis of ZnO–noble metal under visible light. There are limited reports on the SPR-induced visible light-driven photocatalysis of ZnO–metal nanostructures.178,183,184 Han et al. prepared ZnO nanoflowers on an ITO substrate and Ag was loaded on ZnO by a photoreduction method. The visible light activity of the catalyst was explored by studying the degradation of rhodamine B on the catalyst. The photocatalytic mechanism reported is similar to electron injection from metal NPs to the semiconductor as in the case of TiO2–metal visible light active photocatalysts, which is discussed in detail in Section 3.1.2.1. Under visible light irradiation, photoinduced e−–h+ pairs are generated in Au NPs due to SPR. The photoinduced electrons are then transferred from Au NPs to the CB of ZnO because the photogenerated electrons in Au have more negative potential compared to the CB of ZnO. These electrons are taken by adsorbed oxygen molecules to produce superoxide radical anions. The radical anions combine with holes to form ˙OOH radicals, and ˙OOH radicals combine with trapped electrons to form H2O2, finally forming ˙OH radicals. Photodegradation takes place through ˙OH radicals by degrading the dye.178,184
3.2.3. Mechanism overview. Though there are different mechanisms proposed by different groups on the electron transfer from ZnO to metal NPs, the most plausible mechanism causing the reduction of recombination rate of e−–h+ pairs can be described as follows. The EF of Au or Ag or ZnO–Au/Ag heterostructures lies below the bottom of the CB of ZnO. Therefore, upon excitation, electrons are transferred from ZnO to Au or Ag, and the shift of EF to a more negative potential results in equilibration of the EF. The flow of electrons continues until the EF reaches a value close to the CB edge of ZnO, thereby reducing the recombination rate of e−–h+ pairs. There are controversial reports stating whether the electronic contact between ZnO and Pt is ohmic or Schottky, but the most convincing mechanism is the formation of Schottky junction. When Pt comes into contact with ZnO, a Schottky barrier is formed between ZnO and Pt due to the larger work function of Pt than that of ZnO, which facilitates the electron transfer from ZnO to Pt.
4. Photovoltaics
4.1. TiO2–noble metal in DSSCs
DSSCs are one of the most popular emerging platforms to convert sunlight to electrical energy. The efficiency of DSSCs is mainly decided by the collection of incident light and charge separation efficiency in the cell. The anode is constituted by TiO2 or other semiconductors, which is sensitized by a dye. The electrons are injected from the excited dye into TiO2 during the absorption of light. The holes in the dye are then neutralized by a redox-based mediator such as I−/I3−.35,185–192
Although there are intense efforts to maximize the performance, the highest efficiency reported so far is only 11% and there is no marked improvement in the efficiency which was achieved in the 1990s. Even though there are enough scopes for improving the photocurrent and fill factor as well, the parameter which consumes the major part of the research activity is the photovoltage.10 The enhancement in photovoltage can be achieved by decreasing the cell dark current, which can be obtained by the incorporation of dyes with a larger absorption cross section or by coupling dyes to plasmonic metal NPs, since they are considered as the two complimentary approaches to achieve high photovoltage.10,11,190,191 Therefore, plasmon-enhanced dye absorption became one of the recent topics that researchers have been working on to enhance the light absorption and photocurrent generation in DSSCs. Noble metal NPs enhance the efficiency of DSSCs by the following mechanisms. (1) Light scattering by incorporated NPs: effective scattering of light is a very important factor in increasing the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs, since it can increase the path length of photons by multiple scattering and can concentrate the incoming light by effective trapping. (2) Near field enhancement by plasmonic antenna: the near field enhancement by the excitation of LSPR of plasmonic NPs can increase the charge carrier generation, resulting in enhancement of the photocurrent. (3) Surface plasmon polariton (SPP) mode at the interface of metal/semiconductor. The propagated electromagnetic waves along the metal surface can intensify the field of light and thus light penetration depth can be increased.11
Extension of the optical path length by scattering enhances the light utility and scattering intensity, and scattering rate can be increased by increasing particle volume.193 The path length enhancement depends on multiple scattering events and the fraction of light lost in the air at each scattering is considered very small. Enhanced multiple scattering of the particles prevents the transmission of incoming light and increases the chances of dye molecules to convert the photons to the electronic carriers,194 which in turn increases the short circuit current.195 When surface plasmons are excited, the scattering cross-section exceeds the geometrical cross-section of the particle. In such cases, a substrate covered with 10% areal density of particles can fully absorb and scatter the incident light. A scattering term is more helpful than absorption for the effective trapping of light, which is fulfilled by larger metal NPs.196 The remarkable ability of plasmonics to concentrate and scatter light was effectively exploited to trap light inside the semiconductor layer of a solar cell, thus leading to an enhancement in power conversion efficiency. Moreover, this can outweigh the losses due to absorption within the metal NPs and internal dissipation in the metal NPs. The SP absorption by plasmonic nanostructures can be tuned from UV to the near-infrared region of the solar spectrum by altering their size and shape. Energy transfer between such particles and the photosensitive region of the solar cell is induced by a near field enhancement and charge transfer mechanism.11,12 This perception has enabled a broad improvement in the photocurrent across the total solar spectrum.
When localized surface plasmons (LSPs) are excited by light at shorter wavelengths, an interband transition from d-bands to an sp-conduction band is promoted, leading to the formation of an e−–h+ pair around the interface between Au and TiO2. It was reported that the density of states in the d-bands of Au decrease by around 1.8 eV from the Fermi level. Therefore, the probability of an interband transition is lower,197 but the near field enhancement by surface plasmon excitation can enhance the charge carrier generation, which in turn can increase the photocurrent in DSSCs. Reineck et al. proposed a plasmon-induced charge separation process in a solid-state plasmonic solar cell, which has a plasmonic photoanode consisting of Au or Ag NPs self-assembled on a TiO2 surface via electrostatic interactions. The hot electrons generated by excitation of the SPR can be transferred to the TiO2 CB, while the hole can be injected into the hole transport material. Consequently, a plasmonic photocurrent is generated and the spectral photocurrent behavior corresponds closely with the characteristic LSPR band of metal NPs.198
In addition, the localized electric field in the vicinity of Au NPs can excite dyes more effectively than the incident far-field light.105,199,200 The same observation was reported on Ag NPs by Tian et al.201 The light illumination on Ag NPs of dielectric surfaces absorbs the resonating light wavelength induced by electron plasma frequency and creates an enhanced electromagnetic field in the vicinity of Ag NPs. The localized electromagnetic field around the Ag NPs can enhance the optical absorption efficiency of the dye molecules, which are relatively closer to the Ag NPs.201,202 The intensity of the localized field decreases as the interparticle spacing increases, and the decay length of the localized electric field increases as the size of the NPs increases. When the interparticle spacing is less than the particle diameter, the localized electric field around the NPs is much stronger than that for a single NP. The intensity at the inside of the NPs was observed as same as that of single NP, when the spacing between the Au NPs is 30 nm.193 Kawawaki et al. reported the highest electric field observed for 40–150 nm Au NPs, when the spacing between particles is 2–10 nm. Moreover, at higher particle densities, a greater number of NPs are electromagnetically coupled to adjacent NPs. Therefore, bigger NPs exhibit a stronger coupling effect, which can result in the generation of a higher photocurrent.193
While light scattering is the dominant factor compared to light absorption in the case of larger plasmonic metal NPs, Nahm et al.190 obtained larger extinction and lower reflectance for an Au–TiO2 film with Au NPs of ∼100 nm size, than a TiO2 film (Scheme 11). Consequently, the observed higher absorption overrules the possibility of a scattering effect. The dependence of distance between the Ag NPs and dye molecules on DSSC performance was studied by Standridge et al.10 An amorphous TiO2 layer of 2.0–4.9 nm thickness was deposited between Ag NPs and N3 dye. The cell with 2 nm-thick TiO2 showed the best efficiency and the photocurrent decreased as the thickness of TiO2 was increased, which was attributed to a stronger electromagnetic field and better spectral overlap between the absorption of the dye and the SP band of Ag NPs when the thickness of the TiO2 is 2 nm. Ding et al. demonstrated both the SPP and light scattering effects in ss-DSSCs. 2D arrays of Ag nanodoms are utilized as a plasmonic back reflector, which leads to an enhancement of the light concentration in the active layer through the light scattering and coupled SPP waveguide.203
 Scheme 11  Schematic figure representing the enhancement of Au–TiO2-DSSC. Field enhancement near the Au nanoparticles is depicted as light grey (orange-color online) regions. A, R, and T are absorbance, diffused reflectance, and transmittance, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics. 
While inclusion of Au or Ag NPs into the DSSCs can improve the cell efficiency, incorporation of bare metal NPs into the bulk of DSSCs can cause metal corrosion by electrolyte. In order to overcome this problem, Brown et al.11 prepared Au NPs coated with a thin shell of silica to resist corrosion in the electrolyte and the Au–SiO2 NPs were incorporated into a TiO2 paste. The silica shell offers a few beneficial effects to the solar cell: (1) insulation of the metal from the semiconductor; (2) prevention of direct contact of the electrolyte with the metal, thus inhibiting corrosion; (3) optical enhancement in dye chromophores in close proximity to metal NPs; (4) providing thermal and structural stability to the metal NPs. The overall incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) is increased considerably in the presence of Au–SiO2 NPs, compared to bare Au NPs.11 However, it is reported that molecular dyes cannot inject charges to SiO2, thus reducing the effectiveness of plasmonic NPs.106,204 Sheehan et al.204 utilized the advantage of an insulating SiO2 coating with a photoconductive TiO2 shell. They argued that if the TiO2 shell is not used, then the dye molecules influenced by the plasmonic enhancement are physisorbed rather than chemisorbed on the SiO2 shell, and its band gap is too large to allow electron injection. When a TiO2 shell is grown on top of the SiO2 shell, electrons can be injected directly into the TiO2 shell that incorporates the NPs into the photoanode. Choi et al.205 reported a few additional advantages offered by Au@SiO2@TiO2 core–shell nanostructures such as increased absorption due to surface plasmon and light-trapping effects, improved charge separation as a result of localized electromagnetic field, promotion of electron transfer to adsorbed species and electron storage effects that can drive the Fermi level to more negative potentials. Shifting of the Fermi level to a more negative potential increases the open circuit voltage, whereas SPR effects increase the photocurrent of the DSSC.
4.2. Mechanism overview
As is the case with SPR-induced visible light active photocatalysis, the most important mechanisms involved in plasmonic DSSCs are scattering and near field enhancement. Effective scattering of light is a very important factor in increasing the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs, since it can increase the path length of photons by multiple scattering and can concentrate the incoming light by effective trapping. The near field enhancement by SPR can increase the charge carrier generation, resulting in enhancement of the photocurrent. When the efficiency of scattering is controlled by the size of NPs, the efficiency of near field enhancement is influenced by the size of the NPs and the interparticle space between them. Larger particles can effectively scatter the incoming light compared to smaller particles and can increase the decay length of the localized field. An optimum interparticle spacing between the NPs is essential, because when the interparticle spacing is less than the particle diameter, the intensity of the localized field observed around the NPs is stronger. Considering all the factors related to plasmonics and their influence on the power conversion efficiency, a careful consideration of composition, size, shape and spacing between the NPs is required before designing a predictive DSSC model for practical applications.
4.3. ZnO–noble metal in DSSC
Although the CB minima of ZnO and TiO2 are aligned at nearly the same level, the electron mobility of ZnO is greater than that of TiO2.206,207 Another advantage of ZnO over TiO2 is that various shapes of ZnO nanostructures can be easily prepared on suitable substrates. The efficiency of DSSCs is partially affected by the recombination of the electrons at various interfaces present in the cell. Recently, the incorporation of Au or Ag is recognized as an effective approach to reduce the recombination. Chen et al.208 prepared ZnO nanorods coated with Au NPs and found the efficiency of the DSSC was increased from 0.7% to 1.2% after the incorporation of Au NPs. The presence of Au NPs enhanced the optical absorption in the visible range due to the SPR effect. The excited electrons in Au can be transferred to the CB of ZnO and drop to the bottom of the ITO substrate. The reverse flow of electrons from ZnO to Au was restricted by the Schottky barrier between the ZnO and Au interface. The positive charge in Au was compensated by the redox species in the electrolyte (Scheme 12). Another electron transfer mechanism between ZnO and Au was studied by Bora et al.209 ZnO nanorods were grown onto FTO substrate and Au NPs were loaded onto the surface of ZnO nanorods. The cell was fabricated using thus-obtained ZnO–Au nanostructures. Under irradiation, the electrons from the excited dye were injected to the Au NPs, resulting in accumulations of electrons in Au. As a result, the EF of Au NPs was elevated to the CB of ZnO to establish a charge equilibrium at the interface of ZnO and Au, and the reverse transfer of electrons from CB of ZnO to Au was restricted by the Schottky barrier between them, thus resulting in an improvement in the photocurrent. Dhas et al.210 reported that the efficiency of a ZnO nanoflower-based DSSC was increased from 1.6% to 2.5% after decorating the ZnO nanoflowers with Au NPs. They proposed that the addition of Au reduced the recombination centers, which are generally caused by the oxygen vacancies on ZnO surfaces, and further argued that the overlapping of the Au plasmon band with dye absorption possibly generated charges into ZnO.
 Scheme 12  Energy level diagram and mechanism of photocurrent generation in the photoelectrochemical cell with ITO/ZnO/Au/Dye as the photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
5. Photoluminescence
5.1. ZnO–noble metal photoluminescence
The visible emission of ZnO induced by defects is considered as one of the major obstacles for the use of ZnO in various applications. Incorporation of noble metals into ZnO can significantly improve the near band edge emission (NBE) significantly and decrease or almost eliminate defect emission.46–48,51,52,70–73,211–219 Various methods such as sputtering46,50,52,70–73 spray pyrolysis,216 addition of a metal precursor followed by reduction,211–213,215,217,218 and attachment of pre-synthesized metal NPs are employed for the inclusion of metal NPs onto various ZnO nanostructures.48,49,219 Although the enhancement of the UV emission of ZnO–noble metal composite is attributed to the SPR effect of plasmonic metals, it is understood that the mechanism involved is different for different metals.
When ZnO is combined with Au, the defect emission energy of ZnO can excite the surface plasmons of Au, since the wavelength of the defect emission and the absorption wavelength of Au NPs are in the same range. Lin et al.46 discussed this mechanism in detail by comparing the positions of the CB and the defect band of ZnO with the SPR band of Au. Au NPs were sputtered onto ZnO nanorods, which were prepared by solid–liquid–vapor process. The CB and defect band of ZnO lie above the Fermi level of Au. It is clearly seen in the schematic diagram that the defect emission from ZnO can be utilized to excite the surface plasmon of Au NPs. Upon resonance with light, plasmons in Au can be excited and many electrons in Au have energies higher than those of CB electrons of ZnO. Therefore the excited electrons of Au can be transferred to the CB of ZnO and recombine with the holes in the VB. As a result, the defect emission is suppressed and the band gap emission is significantly enhanced (Scheme 13). This mechanism was also utilized by our group for ZnO nanoflowers decorated with citrate-capped Au NPs. We studied the efficiency of the electron transfer from Au to ZnO by varying the density of Au NPs on the surface of the ZnO nanoflowers (Fig. 7).49 A few other groups also exploited the same mechanism.48,70,73,213 Geng et al.214 proposed another mechanism in addition to the one proposed by Lin et al. for the enhancement of the band gap emission of ZnO. The numbers of single ionized oxygen vacancies, which are considered as the main cause of defect emission, are decreased by capturing electrons when more electrons are transferred from Au to ZnO. The surface defects of ZnO became reduced by increasing the number of Au NPs on the surface of ZnO and so the intensity of the defect emission became weaker. Shan et al.211 reported that the intensity of the defect emission was decreased as the concentration of Au NPs increased. This was attributed to the mechanism by which the nucleation and growth of Au NPs might passivate the oxygen vacancies and defects on the surface of ZnO, which decreased the intensity of defect emission. Zhang et al.213 reported simultaneous enhancement in defect emission and band gap emission after the incorporation of Au NPs on ZnO. They proposed another mechanism to support their results. Considering the above-mentioned results, a careful deposition of Au NPs on ZnO is required for the effective passivation of surface defects of ZnO. The work function of ZnO is in between 5.2 and 5.3 eV, which is higher than that of Au; thus the EF of ZnO is lower than that of Au. This can allow the flow of electrons from Au to ZnO in order to equilibrate the EF between ZnO and Au. These transferred electrons accumulate on the equilibrated new EF near the bottom of the CB of ZnO and can recombine with the holes, so more photons are radiated. Therefore, the intensities of the defect emission and band gap emission increased simultaneously. In contrast with the above results, the quenching of the NBE of ZnO was reported by Brewster et al.47 A single nanowire of ZnO, catalyzed by Au NPs, was grown on appropriate substrates. The excited electrons are transferred from the CB of ZnO to Au because of the smaller Schottky barrier at the interface between ZnO and Au, which leads to the quenching of the NBE of ZnO. Ruiz Peralta et al.168 observed quenching of the NBE and defect emission in Au-decorated ZnO nanorods. This quenching was attributed to the difference in work function between ZnO and Au. The EF of ZnO lies lower than the EF of Au, and the electron transfer between Au and ZnO causes band bending. During the irradiation of the sample, the surface plasmon of Au NPs is excited. Though these excited electrons of Au can be transferred to the CB of ZnO, they are easily transferred back to the EF of Au, which lies below the CB of ZnO, thereby the NBE of ZnO is quenched. Since the work function of Au is high enough, its EF is below the defect levels of ZnO, which is also argued by Lin et al. (Scheme 13).46 Therefore, the electrons from the defect level can be transferred to the EF of Au, leading to the quenching of the defect emission. Hou217 also reported the quenching of both the defect and band gap emissions. They put forward two reasons to support their results: one is the functional group (3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane) present on the surface of ZnO, which can passivate the surface defects of ZnO. The other is due to the absorption of the visible emission of ZnO by the Au NPs.
 Scheme 13  Schematics of the effect of surface plasmon resonance on suppression and enhancement of defect and excitonic emissions, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2006 Optical Society of America. 
 Fig. 7  SEM images of ZnO NFs that were decorated with different densities of Au NPs by changing the stirring time of ZnO NFs in a solution of Au NPs. (a) ZnO NF-Au (1) after being stirred for 4 h; (b) ZnO NF-Au (2); (c) ZnO NF-Au (3) after being stirred for 8 h and 12 h, respectively and (d) room-temperature photoluminescence spectra of as-prepared ZnO NFs, ZnO NF-Au (2), and ZnO NF-Au (3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Different mechanisms have been proposed by different groups to support the change in the optical properties of ZnO after the incorporation of Ag NPs. You et al.72 attributed the enhancement in the NBE of ZnO–Ag composites to surface-plasmon-mediated emission. The photoexcited electrons within ZnO couple with the surface plasmon modes at the Ag/ZnO interface since the UV the emission energy of ZnO (3.27 eV) and SPR wavelength of Ag (3.09 eV) are in the similar range. In such cases exciton recombination produces surface plasmons instead of photons, resulting in an increase in the recombination rate. Abiyasa et al.50 studied the effect of the thickness of the Ag film and observed that the UV emission of ZnO was enhanced ten-fold for the sample with Ag coating of thickness 120 nm. Since a thick coating of Ag adjusts the SPR energy close to the bandgap emission of ZnO, the Purcell enhancement factor can be enhanced.220 Zhang et al.215 studied the doping effect of Ag on ZnO. A significant increase in the intensity of the UV emission was observed for Ag-doped ZnO as compared to the undoped ZnO. In the Ag-doped ZnO, Ag atoms can occupy Zn atom sites in the lattice of ZnO. As the incident light excites the carriers in the sample, the photocarriers may escape more easily from Ag ions than from Zn ions, which results in a faster diffusion of excitons in ZnO and more e−–h+ pairs. This leads to increased exciton recombination, and thus the intensity of the UV emission is increased. A similar mechanism was proposed by Jin et al.,212 where they argued that Ag doping causes the migration of Ag atoms to the Zn vacancies, which in turn decreases the intensity of the defect emission. Zhou et al.51 brought forward another mechanism to support UV emission enhancement and quenching in the ZnO–Ag film. During excitation, the local field enhancement of Ag by surface plasmons can increase the incident excitation field and increase the recombination rate. Moreover, the local field enhancement can also improve the optical absorption intensities of ZnO. These two factors can lead to the enhancement of UV emission of ZnO, but still an experimental study to support the local filed enhancement is not provided here. While the electrons can be transferred to the CB of ZnO if the surface plasmon of Ag NPs is excited by the incident light, these electrons can be easily transferred to the EF of the Ag NPs since the CB of ZnO is higher than the EF of Ag. Therefore, intensity of the bandgap emission of ZnO is decreased.
Enhanced band emission of ZnO nanorods by the presence of Pt NPs was reported by Lin et al.52 ZnO nanorods were grown by vapor–liquid–solid process followed by sputtering of Pt onto ZnO nanorods. A huge enhancement in the band emission of ZnO was observed after the incorporation of Pt. The mechanism of electron transfer between ZnO and Pt was depicted through an energy band diagram (Scheme 14). The CB of ZnO is located at −4.19 eV and the EF of Pt is at −5.1 eV. Since the defect level lies very close to the EF of Pt, the electrons from the defect level can be easily transferred to the EF of Pt. With the strong resonant surface plasmon coupling, an enhanced interband transition occurred, i.e., electrons from the CB of ZnO combined with holes in VB. This resulted in a huge enhancement in the band emission and subsequent reduction in the defect emission was also observed.
 Scheme 14  The schematic diagram for the coupling between bandgap and surface plasmon resonance, and carriers transfer between the defect level and the Pt Fermi level. It results in enhanced bandgap emission and suppressed defect emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2006 Institute of Physics Publishing Ltd. 
5.2. Mechanism overview
Based on the different results reported by various groups we conclude that after the incorporation of Au NPs onto ZnO, mainly three kinds of changes in the photoluminescence of ZnO are observed, i.e., (i) simultaneous enhancement of the NBE emission and decrease in the defect emission, (ii) simultaneous enhancement of the NBE emission and in defect emission, and (iii) simultaneous quenching of the NBE emission and defect emission. First, the defect emission energy of ZnO can be utilized to excite the plasmons in Au owing to the close match between defect emission energy of ZnO and SPR absorption energy of the Au NPs. The excited electrons in Au NPs can be shifted to above the CB band of ZnO and the electrons are then transferred to the CB of ZnO, resulting in the enhancement of the NBE emission and the quenching of the defect emission. Second, simultaneous enhancement of the NBE emission and defect emission is attributed to the difference in the work function of ZnO and Au. The work function of ZnO is higher than that of Au, allowing the flow of electrons from Au to ZnO until the Fermi level of the system attains equilibrium. These accumulated electrons near the CB edge of ZnO can recombine with the holes producing more photons, resulting in an enhancement of the NBE emission and defect emission. Third, the difference in work function can even cause quenching of the NBE and defect emission. The excited electrons of Au are transferred to the CB of ZnO, which are then moved to the EF of ZnO causing the quenching of the NBE. In the meantime, the electrons at the defect level can be moved to the EF of Au NPs, which lies below the defect level of ZnO, leading to the quenching of the defect emission.
There are three possible mechanisms which may play a role in the enhancement of NBE in ZnO–Ag nanocomposites. Coupling of the surface plasmon absorption of Ag and ZnO may lead to the formation of plasmons instead of photons, which results in an increase in the recombination rate and enhancement of the NBE emission. In the Ag-doped or Ag-decorated ZnO, the defect sites can be passivated by Ag ions. This leads to an increase in recombination and then enhancement of the NBE emission. The third mechanism for the enhancement of NBE emission is the local field enhancement by surface plasmons of Ag, which increase the incident excitation field, the recombination rate and the optical absorption of ZnO.
For a simplified view, various ZnO–noble metal nanostructures and their optical properties are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 ZnO–noble metal nanocomposites based on their photoluminescence properties




Configurationa
Preparation method
Optical property
Ref. (year)




a NP: nanoparticle, NR: nanorod, NW: nanowire, NC: nanocrystal, NF: nanoflower, DE: defect emission.




ZnO–noble metal photoluminescence


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: solid–liquid–vapor process
Enhancement of NBE
(2006)46


Au: sputtering
Quenching of DE


ZnO NW-Au
ZnO NW: vapor transport and condensation method
Quenching of NBE
(2011)47


Au: evaporation


ZnO NW-Au
ZnO NW: vapor transport method
Enhancement of NBE
(2008)48


Au: citrate reduction method


ZnO NF-Au
ZnO NF: hydrothermal method
Enhancement of NBE
(2012)49


Au: citrate reduction method
Quenching of DE


ZnO NC-Au
ZnO NC: oxidation of zinc acetate
Quenching of DE
(2008)211


Au: citrate reduction method


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: oxidation of zinc acetate
Enhancement of NBE
(2008)213


Au: citrate reduction method
Quenching of DE


ZnO doughnut-Au
ZnO doughnut-Au: microwave assisted synthesis
Enhancement of NBE
(2012)214


Quenching of DE


ZnO film-Au
ZnO film: chemical vapor deposition method
Enhancement of NBE
(2012)70


Au: sputtering
Quenching of DE


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR: hydrothermal method
Quenching of NBE
(2012)217


Au: chemical reduction
Quenching of DE


ZnO NP-Au
ZnO–Au: zinc nitrate solution was oxidized by ethanol
Quenching of DE
(2008)218


ZnO NP-Ag
Au–Ag: chemical reduction


ZnO NW-Au
ZnO: vapor–liquid–solid deposition method
Enhancement of NBE
(2011)73


Au: sputtering
Quenching of DE


ZnO NR-Au
ZnO NR-Au: chemical method
Enhancement of NBE
(2011)219


Quenching of DE


ZnO film-Ag
ZnO Film: cathodic vacuum arc technique
Enhancement of NBE
(2007)50


Ag: sputtering


ZnO film-Ag
ZnO film: RF magnetron sputtering
Enhancement of NBE
(2011)51


Ag: ion implantation
Quenching of DE


ZnO film-Ag
ZnO Film: spin coating zinc acetate and silver nitrate mixture on substrate and thermal treatment
Enhancement of NBE
(2005)212


Quenching of DE


ZnO–Ag film
ZnO–Ag film: sol–gel process
Enhancement of NBE
(2005)215


ZnO–Ag film
ZnO–Ag film: deposition of zinc acetate and silver nitrate on substrate by spray pyrolysis and thermal treatment
Enhancement of NBE
(2012)216


ZnO–Ag film
ZnO–Ag film: DC reaction sputtering
Enhancement of NBE
(2006)71


ZnO film-Ag
ZnO film: magnetron sputtering
Enhancement of NBE
(2007)72


Ag: magnetron sputtering
Quenching of DE


ZnO NR-Pt
ZnO NR: solid–liquid–vapor deposition process
Enhancement of NBE
(2006)52


Pt: sputtering
Quenching of DE




6. Photochromism
6.1. TiO2–noble metal photochromism
It is well known that the color of the metal NPs is decided by the absorption and scattering of light based on SPR in the visible region. These resonance-induced colors provide a good platform for various applications such as drawing materials,28,221 colorimetric sensors222 and stable optical storage media.54,223 The SPR absorption band ranging from visible to near infrared spectral regions depending on the size and shape of the Ag NPs allows it to exhibit visible-IR photochromism when noble metals are incorporated into the TiO2 film. The color of the film changes under a monochromatic visible light from the initial brownish-gray to almost the same color as the incident light, and it regains its original color by irradiation with UV light. When the brownish film is irradiated with a colored light, the absorption around the excitation wavelength decreases, creating an ‘absorption hole’. This can be due to the fact that electrons of Ag NPs are excited only when they absorb light at their resonant wavelength. The excited electrons transfer to oxygen in the air, leading to the formation of an Ag+ ion. Thus, only the light of the excitation wavelength is transmitted and light at other wavelengths is absorbed, resulting in the appearance of the color corresponding to the excitation wavelength.27–29
Naoi et al. introduced nonvolatilization and solvatochromism along with a molding effect by introducing Ag NPs into the nanopores of the TiO2 film. Nanopores of various sizes and shapes are introduced into the prepared TiO2 film and these pores can act as molds for Ag NPs with various sizes and shapes, which is termed the ‘molding effect’. When the NPs are irradiated with green light, the Ag NPs are excited. The excited electrons are transferred to oxygen, and the NPs are oxidized to Ag+ ions, turning the Ag–TiO2 film green since the green light is not absorbed but reflected. To study the nonvolatilization effect, the brownish-gray Ag–TiO2 film was irradiated with 450 nm light in pure water. It was observed that the absorption around the excitation wavelength is decreased, which is called an ‘absorption hole’. The sample was then left under weak white light for 1 h, and it became almost colorless (bleaching). The colorless sample was irradiated with UV light, and the absorption hole was almost reproduced. Solvatochromism was explained by irradiating the Ag–TiO2 film with blue light followed by impregnation of the film with ethanol. This caused a red shift of the absorption hole by 30 nm due to the higher refractive index of ethanol. The absorption hole regained its original wavelength as ethanol was evaporated (Scheme 15).28 The morphological changes of Ag NPs during the irradiation of light were studied by Matsubara et al.27 The monochromatic excitation induces changes in the particle size distribution, which in turn leads to the spectral changes. Ag NPs were photocatalytically deposited on the TiO2 surface. In the beginning of the photodeposition, the plasmon resonance wavelength of Ag NPs was observed at ∼480 nm. As the photodeposition time was increased, the size of the Ag NPs was also increased. The growth of the Ag NPs may cause a decrease in the interparticle spacing and an increase in the contact with TiO2, resulting in a red shift of the resonance wavelength. When the Ag–TiO2 sample was irradiated with monochromatic light, the initial brownish color became purplish or reddish by exposure to 480 nm or 600 nm light, respectively. The spectral changes were found to be reversible when the sample was irradiated with 480 nm and 600 nm light alternately. When incident light with a specific wavelength resonates with free electrons on the Ag NPs with a specific morphology, some of the excited electrons are transferred to ambient oxygen or to the CB of TiO2. As a result, Ag NPs form Ag+ and lose their volume. These Ag+ ions may recombine with the electrons in the CB of TiO2, generating smaller Ag NPs, whereas recombination occurring on the non-resonant Ag NPs results in growth. The ionic dissociation of an OH group at the surface of TiO2 allows Ag+ ions to move onto the surface and get deposited (Scheme 16).
 Scheme 15  Proposed model for the molding effect of a porous TiO2 thin film (a–c) and the mechanism of nonvolatilization of a color image (d and e). (a) Ag+-adsorbed porous TiO2 film (film looks colorless). (b) Ag nanoparticles deposited by UV light (film looks brownish-gray). (c) Ag particles absorbing green light are photoelectrochemically oxidized to Ag+ by green light (film looks green) (the blue, green, or red particle symbol represents a nanoparticle absorbing only blue, green, or red light, respectively). (d) Ag+ generated in panel c is removed (film looks green). (e) Ag particles left in panel d are also photoelectrochemically oxidized to Ag+ (film looks colorless). Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
 Scheme 16  Schematic illustrations for the photoelectrochemically induced morphological changes of the Ag NPs on the single-crystalline TiO2 surface. The label colors for NPs represent the resonance colors (e.g., a green NP absorbs green light). Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Naoi et al. further studied the deactivation of the photochromism by modifying an Ag–TiO2 film with octadecanethiol (ODT). The bleaching was almost suppressed when the ODT-modified Ag–TiO2 film was irradiated with light. The photochromism was reactivated by irradiating the film with UV light using black fluorescent lamps so as to decompose ODT, and subsequently the UV irradiated film could be bleached by irradiation with UV light.53 Kazuma and Tatsuma studied reversible photochromism induced by multi-wavelengths and the dual polarization of Ag nanorods on TiO2. The longitudinal mode of Ag NRs was excited by irradiating with IR light first. The longitudinal plasmon-induced charge separation occurred preferably at the tips of the NRs, where the plasmonic near fields are localized. Reversible morphological and spectral changes were observed for the Ag NRs on TiO2 and the concept can be applied to versatile visible-IR photochromism.29
7. Conclusions and outlook
The investigations done so far explain that plasmonic NPs in combination with typical semiconductors, e.g., TiO2, represent a promising class of functional hybrid system which can effectively convert solar energy into other useful energies. The ability of a plasmonic metal to act as an electron sink by trapping the electrons from the CB of excited TiO2–ZnO and to act as a sensitizer absorbing visible light induced by SPR enables them to be the most useful building blocks in photocatalysis. Three mechanisms behind the enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light, i.e., charge transfer from Au to TiO2, enhancement in electric field and scattering, proposed by various research groups, were described in detail. The mechanism behind the enhanced photocatalytic efficiency of ZnO in combination with Au, Ag and Pt was discussed separately. We further extended our discussion to enhancement in the efficiency of DSSCs induced by plasmonic noble metals. It is attributed to the remarkable ability of plasmonics to concentrate and scatter light, which helps to trap light inside the semiconductor layer of a solar cell and to act as an electron sink, thus leading to an enhancement in the power conversion efficiency. The various mechanisms proposed by different groups to support the enhancement or quenching of the photoluminescence of ZnO by Au, Ag and Pt were discussed in detail. The enhanced UV emission of ZnO–Au nanostructures is caused by the resonance effect between the surface plasmons of Au and the defect emission of ZnO, where the defect emission of ZnO can be utilized to excite the surface plasmons of Au. The quenching of the UV emission of ZnO is attributed to the transfer of electrons from the CB of ZnO to the EF of Au. The enhancement of photoluminescence in the ZnO–Ag nanostructure arises by the coupling of surface plasmons of Ag with optical absorbance of ZnO, whereas the presence of a Schottky barrier between the ZnO and Ag is considered as the reason for the quenching of the UV emission of ZnO. Resonant surface plasmon coupling is considered as the reason behind the enhancement of band emission and the subsequent decrease in the defect emission in ZnO–Pt nanostructures. In the last session we tried to shed some light on the underlying mechanism for the photochromatic effect of TiO2–Ag nanostructures by discussing a few published works. The photochromatic behavior of TiO2–Ag can be controlled by tuning the thickness of the Ag film, the size of the Ag NPs and a few other factors.
Owing to the wide possibilities of exploitation of noble metals in combination with semiconductors, we believe it is reasonable to hope that in the coming years, remarkable advances and achievements can be accomplished in a wide range of nanotechnological applications using noble metal-semiconductor nanostructures.
AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean Government (2011–0029409; 2011–0030255).
ReferencesM. E. Stewart, C. R. Anderton, L. B. Thompson, J. Maria, S. K. Gray, J. A. Rogers and R. G. Nuzzo, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 494 CrossRef CAS .W. A. Murray and W. L. Barnes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3771 CrossRef CAS .W. L. Barnes, A. Dereux and T. W. Ebbesen, Nature, 2003, 424, 824 CrossRef CAS .S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209 RSC .K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, Z. Sun, W. Ni, K. C. Woo, H. Q. Lin, L. Sun, C. Yan and J. Wang, Small, 2009, 5, 2111 CrossRef CAS .D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ide, M. Matsuoka and M. Ogawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16762 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Seh, S. Liu, M. Low, S. Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2310 CrossRef CAS .S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D’Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438 CrossRef CAS .H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578 CrossRef CAS .W. C. Law, K. T. Yong, A. Baev and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4858 CrossRef CAS .N. Prabhakar, K. Arora, S. K. Arya, P. R. Solanki, M. Iwamoto, H. Singh and B. Malhotra, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1587 RSC .J. P. Camden, J. A. Dieringer, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1653 CrossRef CAS .L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742 CrossRef CAS .X. Li, H. Hu, D. Li, Z. Shen, Q. Xiong, S. Li and H. J. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2180 CAS .M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .A. Wold, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 280 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Kumar and L. G. Devi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13211 CrossRef CAS .J. N. Clifford, E. Martínez-Ferrero, A. Viterisi and E. Palomares, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1635 RSC .B. C. O’Regan and J. R. Durrant, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1799 CrossRef .J. Gong, J. Liang and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5848 CrossRef CAS .D. V. Talapin, J. S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Lim, C. K. Kang, K. K. Kim, I. K. Park, D. K. Hwang and S. J. Park, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2720 CrossRef CAS .K. Matsubara and T. Tatsuma, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2802 CrossRef CAS .K. Naoi, Y. Ohko and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3664 CrossRef CAS .E. Kazuma and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1733 RSC .M. Jakob, H. Levanon and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353 CrossRef CAS .V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632 CrossRef CAS .A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852 CrossRef CAS .S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193 CrossRef CAS .J. Turkevich, P. C. Stevenson and J. Hillier, J. Phys. Chem., 1953, 57, 670 CrossRef CAS .M. P. Singh and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9383 CrossRef CAS .A. B. Djurišić and Y. H. Leung, Small, 2006, 2, 944 CrossRef .K. Ozga, T. Kawaharamura, A. A. Umar, M. Oyama, K. Nouneh, A. Slezak, S. Fujita, M. Piasecki, A. H. Reshak and I. V. Kityk, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 185709 CrossRef CAS .F. J. Sheini, M. A. More, S. R. Jadkar, K. Patil, V. K. Pillai and D. S. Joag, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3843 CAS .Y. Zhu, H. I. Elim, Y. L. Foo, T. Yu, Y. Liu, W. Ji, J. Y. Lee, Z. Shen, A. T. S. Wee and J. T. L. Thong, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 587 CrossRef CAS .L. Mu, W. Shi, T. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, G. She, Y. Gao, P. Wang, J. Chang and S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 163101 CrossRef .W. L. Barnes, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 588 CrossRef CAS .K. Vanheusden, W. Warren, C. Seager, D. Tallant, J. Voigt and B. Gnade, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7983 CrossRef CAS .A. F. Kohan, G. Ceder, D. Morgan and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 61, 15019 CrossRef CAS .H. Lin, C. Cheng, Y. Chou, L. Huang, Y. Chen and K. Tsen, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 2372 CrossRef CAS .M. M. Brewster, X. Zhou, S. K. Lim and S. Gradečak, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 586 CrossRef CAS .T. Chen, G. Xing, Z. Zhang, H. Chen and T. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 435711 CrossRef CAS .S. T. Kochuveedu, J. H. Oh, Y. R. Do and D. H. Kim, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7467 CAS .A. Abiyasa, S. Yu, S. Lau, E. S. P. Leong and H. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 231106 CrossRef .X. Zhou, X. Xiao, J. Xu, G. Cai, F. Ren and C. Jiang, Europhys. Lett., 2011, 93, 57009 CrossRef .J. M. Lin, H. Y. Lin, C. L. Cheng and Y. F. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4391 CrossRef .K. Naoi, Y. Ohko and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1288 RSC .R. Han, X. Zhang, L. Wang, R. Dai and Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 221905 CrossRef .K. Kawahara, K. Suzuki, Y. Ohko and T. Tatsuma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 3851 RSC .T. Jiang, L. Miao, S. Tanemura, M. Tanemura, G. Xu and R. Wang, Superlattices Microstruct., 2009, 46, 159 CrossRef CAS .L. Nadar, R. Sayah, F. Vocanson, N. Crespo-Monteiro, A. Boukenter, S. Sao Joao and N. Destouches, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 1810 CAS .L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 33 CrossRef CAS .V. Rodríguez-González, R. Zanella, G. del Angel and R. Gómez, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2008, 281, 93 CrossRef .W. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929 CrossRef CAS .C. Karunakaran, V. Rajeswari and P. Gomathisankar, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2011, 14, 133 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, Y. Lin, D. Wang, L. Wang, T. Xie and T. Jiang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 315502 CrossRef .A. Sōmiya, K. Hishinuma and T. Akiba, Bull. Mater. Sci., 1995, 18, 811 CrossRef .M. Yoshimura and K. Byrappa, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 43, 2085 CrossRef .S. Zhu, S. Liang, Q. Gu, L. Xie, J. Wang, Z. Ding and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119, 146 CrossRef .G. Wang, X. Wang, J. Liu and X. Sun, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 5361 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Lee and H. F. Tu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, D758 CrossRef CAS .M. Ahmad, S. Yingying, A. Nisar, H. Sun, W. Shen, M. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723 RSC .J. J. Wu and C. H. Tseng, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 51 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yang, L. Xue-Hong and P. Cheng-Xiao, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2012, 29, 107803 CrossRef .L. Duan, B. Lin, W. Zhang, S. Zhong and Z. Fu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 232110 CrossRef .J. You, X. Zhang, Y. Fan, S. Qu and N. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 231907 CrossRef .S. Dhara and P. Giri, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 124317 CrossRef .M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801 RSC .Q. Zhang, D. Q. Lima, I. Lee, F. Zaera, M. Chi and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7088 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Fouad and M. B. Mohamed, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 455705 CrossRef .J. J. Chen, J. C. S. Wu, P. C. Wu and D. P. Tsai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 210 CAS .S. T. Kochuveedu, D. P. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2500 CAS .N. Udawatte, M. Lee, J. Kim and D. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4531 CAS .J. Lee, H. S. Shim, M. Lee, J. K. Song and D. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2840 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441 CrossRef CAS .P. Christopher, D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9173 CAS .H. Liu, G. Shao, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Liang, X. Liu, H. Jia and B. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16182 CAS .P. K. Chen, G. J. Lee, S. Anandan and J. J. Wu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2012, 177, 190 CrossRef CAS .C. Karunakaran, V. Rajeswari and P. Gomathisankar, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 508, 587 CrossRef CAS .T. J. Whang, M. T. Hsieh and H. H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 2796 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724 CrossRef CAS .M. Li, R. Wang, P. Zhong, X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2012, 80, 138 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tang, Z. Jiang, Q. Tay, J. Deng, Y. Lai, D. Gong, Z. Dong and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 9406 RSC .Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng and K. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6980 CrossRef CAS .T. Kiyonaga, Q. Jin, H. Kobayashi and H. Tada, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2935 CrossRef CAS .K. Kimura, S. Naya, Y. Jin-nouchi and H. Tada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7111 CAS .E. Kowalska, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Chem. Commun., 2009, 241 RSC .E. Kowalska, S. Rau and B. Ohtani, J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 2012, 11 Search PubMed .C. Ren, B. Yang, M. Wu, J. Xu, Z. Fu, T. Guo, Y. Zhao and C. Zhu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 182, 123 CrossRef CAS .I. Alessandri and M. Ferroni, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7990 RSC .H. Wang, T. You, W. Shi, J. Li and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6490 CAS .Z. Bian, J. Zhu, F. Cao, Y. Lu and H. Li, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3789 RSC .F. S. Bates and G. H. Fredrickson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 525 CrossRef CAS .S. Förster and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 195 CrossRef .B.-H. Sohn, J.-M. Choi, S. I. Yoo, S.-H. Yun, W.-C. Zin, J. C. Jung, M. Kanehara, T. Hirata and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6368 CrossRef CAS .M. Boncheva and G. M. Whitesides, MRS Bull., 2011, 30, 736 CrossRef .H. Li, W. Hong, F. Cai, Q. Tang, Y. Yan, X. Hu, B. Zhao, D. Zhang and Z. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24734 RSC .Y. Liu, H. Zhai, F. Guo, N. Huang, W. Sun, C. Bu, T. Peng, J. Yuan and X. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6863 RSC .J. Qi, X. Dang, P. T. Hammond and A. M. Belcher, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7108 CrossRef CAS .S. Chen and R. W. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9996 CrossRef CAS .V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 469 CrossRef CAS .P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, L. Chen, J. Hu, J. Li and R. Richards, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1641 CAS .F. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7819 RSC .R. Su, R. Tiruvalam, Q. He, N. Dimitratos, L. Kesavan, C. Hammond, J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, R. Bechstein, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6284 CrossRef CAS .G. Wu, T. Chen, W. Su, G. Zhou, X. Zong, Z. Lei and C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1243 CrossRef CAS .J. Kim, J. Lee and W. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2008, 756 RSC .X. F. Wu, Y. F. Chen, J. M. Yoon and Y. T. Yu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2208 CrossRef CAS .S. Kim and S. K. Lee, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 203, 145 CrossRef CAS .V. Keller, P. Bernhardt and F. Garin, J. Catal., 2003, 215, 129 CrossRef CAS .H. Park and W. Choi, Catal. Today, 2005, 101, 291 CrossRef CAS .C. Young, T. M. Lim, K. Chiang, J. Scott and R. Amal, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 78, 1 CrossRef CAS .J. Lee and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7399 CrossRef CAS .M. Moonsiri, P. Rangsunvigit, S. Chavadej and E. Gulari, Chem. Eng. J., 2004, 97, 241 CrossRef CAS .H. Chen, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu, H. Zhao and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9285 CAS .H. Park, J. Lee and W. Choi, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 259 CrossRef CAS .F. Li and X. Li, Chemosphere, 2002, 48, 1103 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhao, C. Chen, X. Li, J. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5022 CrossRef CAS .D. Kannaiyan, M. A. Cha, Y. H. Jang, B. H. Sohn, J. Huh, C. Park and D. H. Kim, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 2431 RSC .M. A. Cha, C. Shin, D. Kannaiyan, Y. H. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7245 RSC .Y. J. Jang and D. H. Kim, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 540 CrossRef CAS .N. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Fu and Y. J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9136 CAS .Z. Zheng, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9079 RSC .Y. Wu, H. Liu, J. Zhang and F. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14689 CAS .A. Pandikumar, S. Manonmani and R. Ramaraj, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 345 CAS .C. G. Silva, R. Juárez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595 CrossRef .E. Kowalska, O. O. P. Mahaney, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2344 RSC .Z. Zheng, J. Teo, X. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Yuan, E. R. Waclawik, Z. Zhong and H. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1202 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Elmoula, E. Panaitescu, M. Phan, D. Yin, C. Richter, L. H. Lewis and L. Menon, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4483 RSC .W. Hou, Z. Liu, P. Pavaskar, W. H. Hung and S. B. Cronin, J. Catal., 2011, 277, 149 CrossRef CAS .Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111 CrossRef CAS .H. Li, Z. Bian, J. Zhu, Y. Huo, H. Li and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4538 CrossRef CAS .M. Zhou, J. Zhang, B. Cheng and H. Yu, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 10 Search PubMed .Y. Liu, W. Shu, Z. Peng, K. Chen and W. Chen, Catal. Today, 2013, 208, 28 CrossRef CAS .L. Jiang, G. Zhou, J. Mi and Z. Wu, Catal. Commun., 2012, 24, 48 CrossRef CAS .G. Sauthier, A. Pérez del Pino, A. Figueras and E. György, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 3780 CrossRef CAS .O. Akhavan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 336, 117 CrossRef CAS .P. Sangpour, F. Hashemi and A. Z. Moshfegh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13955 CAS .X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Yu and W. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21337 RSC .J. Tang, M. White, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 497 CrossRef CAS .J. Lee, T. Javed, T. Skeini, A. O. Govorov, G. W. Bryant and N. A. Kotov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4819 CrossRef CAS .Z. Xuming, C. Yu Lim, L. Ru-Shi and T. Din Ping, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef .P. Anger, P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 113002 CrossRef .P. Christopher, H. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1044 CAS .D. D. Evanoff Jr and G. Chumanov, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1221 CrossRef .A. A. Khodja, T. Sehili, J. F. Pilichowski and P. Boule, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 141, 231 CrossRef CAS .N. Serpone, P. Maruthamuthu, P. Pichat, E. Pelizzetti and H. Hidaka, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 85, 247 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Fouad and M. B. Mohamed, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 8 CrossRef .S. Sarkar, A. Makhal, T. Bora, S. Baruah and J. Dutta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 12488 RSC .P. Pawinrat, O. Mekasuwandumrong and J. Panpranot, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1380 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zheng, C. Chen, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10773 CAS .A. Ashkarran, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2012, 107, 401 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhang and F. Zeng, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2010, 36, 1055 CrossRef CAS .W. Xie, Y. Li, W. Sun, J. Huang, H. Xie and X. Zhao, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 149 CrossRef CAS .G. Zhou and J. Deng, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2007, 10, 90 CrossRef CAS .V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7479 CrossRef CAS .C. Tian, Q. Zhang, B. Jiang, G. Tian and H. Fu, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 6935 CrossRef CAS .J. Kim and K. Yong, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1 Search PubMed .Q. Wang, B. Geng and S. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 8968 CrossRef CAS .L. Sun, D. Zhao, Z. Song, C. Shan, Z. Zhang, B. Li and D. Shen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 363, 175 CrossRef CAS .M. D. L. Ruiz Peralta, U. Pal and R. Sanchez Zeferino, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4807 CAS .X. Yin, W. Que, D. Fei, F. Shen and Q. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 524, 13 CrossRef CAS .C. Gu, C. Cheng, H. Huang, T. Wong, N. Wang and T. Y. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3278 CAS .Z. Zhang, M. F. Hossain, T. Arakawa and T. Takahashi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 176, 973 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Habibi, Int. J. Environ. Stud., 2010, 67, 393 CrossRef CAS .H. Zeng, W. Cai, P. Liu, X. Xu, H. Zhou, C. Klingshirn and H. Kalt, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1661 CrossRef CAS .W. Lu, S. Gao and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16792 CAS .C. Tian, W. Li, K. Pan, Q. Zhang, G. Tian, W. Zhou and H. Fu, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 2720 CrossRef CAS .C. Song, Y. Lin, D. Wang and Z. Hu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1595 CrossRef CAS .J. Yuan, E. S. G. Choo, X. Tang, Y. Sheng, J. Ding and J. Xue, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 185606 CrossRef .Z. Han, L. Ren, Z. Cui, C. Chen, H. Pan and J. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 298 CrossRef CAS .H. Zeng, P. Liu, W. Cai, S. Yang and X. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19620 CAS .Y. H. Jang, S. T. Kochuveedu, M. A. Cha, Y. J. Jang, J. Y. Lee, J. Lee, J. Lee, J. Kim, D. Y. Ryu and D. H. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 345, 125 CrossRef CAS .W. Lu, G. Liu, S. Gao, S. Xing and J. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445711 CrossRef .A. Wood, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810 CrossRef CAS .Q. Deng, X. Duan, D. H. Ng, H. Tang, Y. Yang, M. Kong, Z. Wu, W. Cai and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6030 CAS .Z. Han, L. Wei, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Pan and J. Chen, Plasmonics, 2013, 8, 1193 CrossRef CAS .T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66 CAS .A. Y. Anderson, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant and B. C. O’Regan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2439 CAS .J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357 RSC .M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .J. Du, J. Qi, D. Wang and Z. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6914 CAS .C. Nahm, H. Choi, J. Kim, D. R. Jung, C. Kim, J. Moon, B. Lee and B. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 253107 CrossRef .S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2596 CrossRef CAS .C. Hagglund, M. Zach and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113 CrossRef .T. Kawawaki, Y. Takahashi and T. Tatsuma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5901 CAS .B. Ding, B. J. Lee, M. Yang, H. S. Jung and J. K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 415 CrossRef CAS .M. Ihara, M. Kanno and S. Inoue, Phys. E., 2010, 42, 2867 CrossRef CAS .K. Catchpole and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793 CrossRef CAS .Y. Nishijima, K. Ueno, Y. Yokota, K. Murakoshi and H. Misawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2031 CrossRef CAS .P. Reineck, G. P. Lee, D. Brick, M. Karg, P. Mulvaney and U. Bach, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4750 CrossRef CAS .S. Chang, Q. Li, X. Xiao, K. Y. Wong and T. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9444 CAS .W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, Z. Liu, J. Theiss, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4650 CAS .Z. Tian, L. Wang, L. Jia, Q. Li, Q. Song, S. Su and H. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6369 RSC .K. Ishikawa, C.-J. Wen, K. Yamada and T. Okubo, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 2004, 37, 645 CrossRef CAS .I. Ding, J. Zhu, W. Cai, S. J. Moon, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, M. L. Brongersma and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 52 CrossRef CAS .S. W. Sheehan, H. Noh, G. W. Brudvig, H. Cao and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 927 CAS .H. Choi, W. T. Chen and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4418 CrossRef CAS .R. Ramaneti, J. Lodder and R. Jansen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 195207 CrossRef .M. Quintana, T. Edvinsson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1035 CAS .Z. Chen, Y. Tang, C. Liu, Y. Leung, G. Yuan, L. Chen, Y. Wang, I. Bello, J. Zapien and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13433 CAS .T. Bora, H. H. Kyaw, S. Sarkar, S. K. Pal and J. Dutta, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 681 CrossRef CAS .V. Dhas, S. Muduli, W. Lee, S. H. Han and S. Ogale, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 243108 CrossRef .G. Shan, M. Zhong, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 326, 392 CrossRef CAS .X. Jin, Z. Zi-Yu, Z. Yang, L. Bi-Xia and F. Zhu-Xi, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2005, 22, 2031 CrossRef .W. Q. Zhang, Y. Lu, T. K. Zhang, W. Xu, M. Zhang and S. H. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19872 CAS .J. Geng, G. H. Song, X. D. Jia, F. F. Cheng and J. J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4517 CAS .Y. Zhang, Z. Zhang, B. Lin, Z. Fu and J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19200 CrossRef CAS .R. T. Sapkal, S. S. Shinde, A. R. Babar, A. V. Moholkar, K. Y. Rajpure and C. H. Bhosale, Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 64 CrossRef CAS .X. Hou, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5158 RSC .M. K. Lee, T. G. Kim, W. Kim and Y. M. Sung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10079 CAS .J. Im, J. Singh, J. W. Soares, D. M. Steeves and J. E. Whitten, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10518 CAS .H. H. Abu-Safe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 231105 CrossRef .Y. Ohko, T. Tatsuma, T. Fujii, K. Naoi, C. Niwa, Y. Kubota and A. Fujishima, Nat. Mater., 2002, 2, 29 CrossRef .J. J. Storhoff, R. Elghanian, R. C. Mucic, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 1959 CrossRef CAS .Q. Qiao, X. Zhang, Z. Lu, L. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Zhu and J. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 074104 CrossRef .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Saji Thomas Kochuveedu	Saji Thomas Kochuveedu received her BS and MS degrees from Calicut University and Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, respectively, and subsequently worked as project assistant in Indian Institute of Chemical Technology. She is currently pursuing her PhD at Ewha Womans University under the guidance of Professor Dong Ha Kim. Her main research interests include enhanced photocatalytic and light emission properties of multifunctional nanostructures mediated by surface plasmon and carbon hybridization.
Yoon Hee Jang	Yoon Hee Jang received her BS degree in the Department of Bio and Nano Chemistry at Kookmin University (2008) and MS degree in Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University (2010) in Korea. She is currently pursuing her PhD in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University under the supervision of Prof. Dong Ha Kim. Her main research activity focuses on the fabrication of self-assembled hybrid organic–inorganic and tailored plasmonic nanostructures for applications in photovoltaics, photocatalysis and optical sensing.
Dong Ha Kim	Prof. Dong Ha Kim received his PhD degree in the Department of Fiber and Polymer Science at Seoul National University (2000). He worked as a postdoc at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. Then, he assumed a faculty position in the Department of Chemistry and Nano Science at Ewha Womans University (2006). His research interests include development of hybrid nanostructures for energy storage and conversion, environmental remediation, memory devices, display devices, and optical biosensing. He has authored 94 SCI publications, and holds 30 issued Korean (17 registered) and 3 PCT patents.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of plasmon oscillation for a sphere, showing the displacement of the conduction electron charge cloud relative to the nuclei. Reprinted with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Equilibration of semiconductor-metal nanocomposites with the redox couple before and after UV Irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of a 0.023 M solution of TiO2 nanoparticles in a deaerated solution of 50:50 (v/v%) ethanol–toluene (a) before irradiation and (b) after UV irradiation for 90 min. Spectra c–g were recorded following the addition of deaerated Au solution to the UV-irradiated TiO2 suspension. The concentrations of gold colloids in the suspension were (c) 0.22, (d) 0.44, (e) 0.55, (f) 0.68, and (g) 0.82 mM. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 3  Proposed mechanism of the photodegradation of SRB on TiO2–Pt particles under visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 4  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic decomposition of p-NP by Pt–TiO2 nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


SPR induced electron transfer mechanism
TiO2 film-Au	TiO2 film: spin coating of TiO2 sol on ITO and calcination	Photovoltaic fuel cell	(2005)32
Au: photoreduction of HAuCl4
TiO2 sphere-M	TiO2 sphere: alcohothermal method	Photooxidation benzene into phenol	(2011)130
M: chemical reduction
Au@TiO2 sphere@SiO2sphere	SiO2 sphere: Stöber method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2011)75
TiO2 sphere: hydrolyzing tetrabutyl orthotitanate (TBOT)
Au: pre-synthesized by citrate reduction method
Meso TiO2 –Au NC sphere	TiO2 NC: solvothermal treatment of TBOT	Photodegradation of acid orange 7	(2012)66
Au: hydrothermal method
SiO2 sphere@TiO2sphere-Au	SiO2 sphere: Stöber method	Photodegradation of methylene blue, methyl orange, p-nitrophenol	(2012)78
TiO2 sphere: hydrolyzing titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP)
Au: pre-synthesized by citrate reduction method
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2: commercial product	Photoelectrochemical measurement	(2009)92
Au: deposition–precipitation method
N-TiO2 NP-Au	N-TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium sulfate by ammonia followed by the addition of urea	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2009)131
Au: chemical reduction of HauCl4
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2 NP: commercial product	Photooxidation of acetone and 2-propanol	(2009)94
Au: photodeposition
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2 NP: commercial product	Photocatalysed reduction of nitrobenzene, photooxidation of alcohols	(2012)93
Au: deposition–precipitation method
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2: sol–gel method	Photodegradation of MTBE	(2008)59
Au: deposition–precipitation method
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium tetraisopropoxide	Photocatalytic reduction of nitrite to ammonia	(2012)132
Au: chemical reduction
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2 NP: commercial product	Photooxidation of 2-propanol	(2012)95
Au: photodeposition
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2 NP: commercial product	H2 and O2 evolution	(2011)133
Au: deposition–precipitation method
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2 NP: commercial product	Oxidation of acetone and 2-propanol	(2010)134
Au: impregnation-reduction method
TiO2 NT-Au	TiO2 NT: post-treatment of hydrogen titanate	Oxidation of formaldehyde	(2010)135
Au: chemical reduction
TiO2 NS-Au	TiO2 NS: hydrothermal treatment of tetrabutyl titanate	Photodegradation of RhB	(2012)65
Au: chemical reduction of H2AuCl4
Mesoporous TiO2: Au	TiO2: hydrolysis of TiCl4, Ti(OBu)4	Oxidation of phenol	(2007)139
Au: chemical reduction
Mesoporous TiO2–Au	Mesoporous TiO2: hydrolysis of tetrabutyl titanate	Photodegradation of RhB	(2012)140
Au: citrate reduction
TiO2 PC-Au	TiO2 PC: polystyrene sphere template was replicated with TiO2 following a reported liquid-phase deposition (LPD) method using titanium isopropoxide as TiO2 seed layer.	Photodegradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol	(2012)88
Au: hydrothermal reduction
TiO2 IO-Au	TiO2: 50 nm thick amorphous titania layer was deposited on polystyrene spheres	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2009)97
Au: sputtering
TiO2 NB-Au	TiO2 NB: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2012)141
Au: Brust method
Mesoporous TiO2@Au	TiO2: sol–gel method	Photodegradation of p-chlorophenol	(2009)99
Au core: chemical method
TiO2@Au	TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide	Photodegradation of malathion	(2011)76
Au: citrate reduction method
TiO2-NPi-Ag	TiO2 NPi-Ag: thermal method	Photodegradation of 2,4-dichlorophenol	(2012)142
TiO2 film-Ag	TiO2 film-Ag: pulsed laser deposition	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2011)143
TiO2 NW-Ag	TiO2 NW-Ag: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of RhB	(2012)89
TiO2 film-Ag	TiO2 film-Ag: photo and thermal method	Antibacterial test	(2009)144
TiO2 film-Ag	TiO2 film-Ag: magnetron sputtering	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2010)145
Titanate NT-Ag	Titanate NT-Ag: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2012)90
Near field enhancement mechanism
Janus Au–TiO2	TiO2: hydrolysis of titanium isopropoxide	Hydrogen generation	(2012)9
Au: citrate reduction method
TiO2 NP-Au	TiO2: Degussa P25	Photodegradation methylene blue Water splitting	(2011)77
Au: citrate reduction method
TiO2 NS-Au	TiO2 NS: hydrothermal method	Photoelectrochemical measurement	(2012)98
Au: sputtering
TiO2 film-Au	TiO2 film: sol–gel process	Reduction of CO2	(2011)60
Au: evaporation
TiO2 film-Au	TiO2 film: electrochemical oxidation of titanium	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2011)137
Au: thermal evaporation
TiO2 film-Au	TiO2 film: electrochemical oxidation Ti foil	Photocurrent measurement	(2011)138
Au: thermal evaporation
N-TiO2 NP-Ag	N-TiO2: thermal treatment of TiO2 particles with NH3	Photoelectrochemical measurement	(2011)81
Ag: polyol process
N-TiO2 NP-Ag	N-TiO2: thermal treatment of P25 particles with NH3	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2011)82
Ag: polyol process
Scattering mechanism
N-TiO2–Ag	N-TiO2: thermal treatment of P25 particles with NH3	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2011)82
Ag: polyol process
TiO2–Ag	TiO2: Degussa P25	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2010)83
Ag: polyol process

 	Scheme 5  Schematic diagram of a gold nanodot attaching to a TiO2 nanoparticle, also indicating the revealed electron injection process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  LSPR sensitization effect (a) excitation of the electrons from the thermal equilibrium to a high energy state upon absorbing the photons, which feeds the electrons to the conduction band of the semiconductor. (b) In the metal nanoparticle, the collision induced a redistribution of electron energy, forming a Fermi–Dirac distribution at a high-temperature Fermi level. (c) In the metal nanoparticle, the electrons go back to the standard distribution and in the semiconductor electrons and holes flow to different regions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 149 Copyright 2013 Institute of Physics Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photochronoamperometry profiles of Au/mp-anatase and Au/mp-rutile electrodes in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution containing 0.1 M Na2S and 0.05 M Na2SO3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM image of a 5 nm-thick Au island film deposited on anodic TiO2. (b–d) Electric field intensity at the interface of Au–TiO2 calculated using FDTD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of Janus (a) and core–shell (b) Au50nm–TiO2 nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical-absorption maps (cross-section view at z = 0) of Janus Au50nm–TiO2 nanostructures, simulated using the optical properties of amorphous TiO2 (a) and bulk anatase (b). The maps show the power absorbed at the LSPR wavelength, with incident polarization along the x-axis and an incident intensity of 0.5 W cm−2. (c) Proposed photocatalytic process for efficient hydrogen generation using the Janus Au–TiO2 nanostructures, based on excitation of the LSPR under visible-light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Scheme 6  Schematic illustration of the scattering mechanism. The addition of optically excited plasmonic nanoparticles increases the average path length of photons in the composite structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Scheme 7  Mechanism of the photocatalysis of Au–TiO2 under UV light excitation (a) and under visible light (b). EDTA acts as sacrificial electron donor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 8  Schematic representation of the overall process used to prepare metal–ZnO hierarchical nanostructures. Si substrates were coated with ZnO sol–gel solution by using a spin-coating method. The coated substrates were then thermally annealed to induce crystallization of ZnO. Subsequently, SxVP micellar solution loaded with metal precursors was spin-coated onto ZnO thin films. Finally, the metal–ZnO samples were subjected to post-treatments, such as O2 plasma or UV exposure to remove polymer and reduce metal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 


ZnO–Au photocatalysis
ZnO NP-Au	ZnO NP: commercial product	Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G	(2011)80
Au: glutathione-protected Au NPs by chemical reduction
ZnO NP-Au	ZnO NP: oxidation of zinc acetate	Photodegradation of malathion	(2012)155
Au: citrate reduction method
ZnO NP-Au	ZnO: oxidation of zinc acetate	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2011)156
Au: chemical reduction method
ZnO NP-Au	ZnO: commercial product	Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G	(2011)79
Au: glutathione-protected Au NPs by chemical reduction
ZnO NP-Au	ZnO NP-Au: one-step spray pyrolysis	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2009)157
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2012)165
Au: sonochemical
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2009)166
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: chemical vapor deposition	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2006)69
Au: photoreduction
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: thermal growth method	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2011)167
Au: chemical reduction method
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR-Au: microwave assisted synthesis	Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G	(2012)168
ZnO film-Au	ZnO film-Au: co-electrodeposition	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2008)67
ZnO h-sphere@Au	ZnO h-sphere: laser ablation in liquid method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2008)173
Au core: chemical etching
ZnO NF-Au	ZnO NF: hydrothermal method	Degradation of orange II	(2011)85
Au: sonochemical
ZnO NF-Au	ZnO NF: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2011)68
Au: electro-deposition method
ZnO film-Au	ZnO film: sol–gel method	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2010)180
Au: BCP induced Au NPs array by photoreduction of HAuCl4
 
ZnO–Ag photocatalysis
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO NP-Ag: deposition–precipitation method, solvothermal method, coprecipitation method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2008)158
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO NP-Ag: sonochemical method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B, methylene orange, methylene blue	(2010)86
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO NP: arc discharge between a pair of zinc electrodes	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2012)159
Ag: arc discharge between a pair of Ag electrodes
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO: oxidation of zinc acetate	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2010)160
Ag: photoreduction method
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO NP-Ag: sol–gel process	Photodegradation of methylene blue, methyl orange, rhodamine B	(2011)61
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO NP: laser ablation	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2012)87
Ag: sonochemical method
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO: commercial product	Photodegradation of crystal violet	(2010)161
Ag: photoreduction method
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO–Ag: co-precipitation method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2007)162
ZnO NP-Ag	ZnO–Ag: chemical oxidation method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2011)164
ZnO NR-Ag	ZnO NR-Ag: solvothermal method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2007)91
ZnO NR-Ag	ZnO NR: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation methyl orange	(2012)169
Ag: polyol process
ZnO NR-Ag	ZnO–Ag: sol–gel method	Photodegradation of rhodamine 6G	(2011)62
ZnO NR-Ag	ZnO NR: chemical solution deposition	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2010)96
Ag: photodeposition
ZnO–Ag NW	ZnO: thermal decomposition of ZnII amino complex	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2009)170
Ag NW: polyol process
ZnO h-sphere-Ag	ZnO h-sphere-Au: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of orange G	(2008)174
ZnO sphere-Ag	ZnO sph-Ag: one-pot process in ethylene glycol medium.	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2010)175
ZnO NF-Ag	ZnO NF: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2010)176
Ag: thermal method
ZnO NF-Ag	ZnO NF: seed mediated method	Degradation of rhodamine B	(2012)178
Ag: photoreduction
Worm like ZnO-Ag NR core–shell	Ag NR: polyol synthesis method	Photodegradation of rhodamine B	(2012)84
ZnO: sonochemical method
ZnO–Ag	ZnO–Ag: hydrothermal method	Photodegradation of orange G	(2008)181
 
ZnO–Pt photocatalysis
ZnO NP-Pt	ZnO NP-Pt: one-step spray pyrolysis	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2009)157
ZnO film-Pt	ZnO film: facing-target sputtering method	Decomposition of methanol	(2010)171
Pt: auto fine coating	Degradation of azo dyes
ZnO film-Pt	ZnO film-Pt: sol–gel method	Degradation of azo dyes	(2010)172
ZnO film-Pt	ZnO film-Au: co-electrodeposition	Photodegradation of methylene blue	(2008)67
Pt–ZnO NF	ZnO NF: refluxion method	Photodegradation of ethyl violet	(2010)177
Pt: seed mediated synthesis
Pt–ZnO porous nanocage	ZnO: laser ablation in liquid method	Photodegradation of methyl orange	(2008)179
Pt: etching method

 	Scheme 9  Schematic band diagram of a ZnO–Au heterostructure (representative of Au–ZnO nanocomposite), showing the charge distribution and PL emission processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 10  Proposed band structure and photocatalytic mechanism of the as-synthesized Ag–ZnO heterostructure nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 11  Schematic figure representing the enhancement of Au–TiO2-DSSC. Field enhancement near the Au nanoparticles is depicted as light grey (orange-color online) regions. A, R, and T are absorbance, diffused reflectance, and transmittance, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2011 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Scheme 12  Energy level diagram and mechanism of photocurrent generation in the photoelectrochemical cell with ITO/ZnO/Au/Dye as the photoanode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 13  Schematics of the effect of surface plasmon resonance on suppression and enhancement of defect and excitonic emissions, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2006 Optical Society of America.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of ZnO NFs that were decorated with different densities of Au NPs by changing the stirring time of ZnO NFs in a solution of Au NPs. (a) ZnO NF-Au (1) after being stirred for 4 h; (b) ZnO NF-Au (2); (c) ZnO NF-Au (3) after being stirred for 8 h and 12 h, respectively and (d) room-temperature photoluminescence spectra of as-prepared ZnO NFs, ZnO NF-Au (2), and ZnO NF-Au (3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Scheme 14  The schematic diagram for the coupling between bandgap and surface plasmon resonance, and carriers transfer between the defect level and the Pt Fermi level. It results in enhanced bandgap emission and suppressed defect emission. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2006 Institute of Physics Publishing Ltd.	 


ZnO–noble metal photoluminescence
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: solid–liquid–vapor process	Enhancement of NBE	(2006)46
Au: sputtering	Quenching of DE
ZnO NW-Au	ZnO NW: vapor transport and condensation method	Quenching of NBE	(2011)47
Au: evaporation
ZnO NW-Au	ZnO NW: vapor transport method	Enhancement of NBE	(2008)48
Au: citrate reduction method
ZnO NF-Au	ZnO NF: hydrothermal method	Enhancement of NBE	(2012)49
Au: citrate reduction method	Quenching of DE
ZnO NC-Au	ZnO NC: oxidation of zinc acetate	Quenching of DE	(2008)211
Au: citrate reduction method
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: oxidation of zinc acetate	Enhancement of NBE	(2008)213
Au: citrate reduction method	Quenching of DE
ZnO doughnut-Au	ZnO doughnut-Au: microwave assisted synthesis	Enhancement of NBE	(2012)214
Quenching of DE
ZnO film-Au	ZnO film: chemical vapor deposition method	Enhancement of NBE	(2012)70
Au: sputtering	Quenching of DE
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR: hydrothermal method	Quenching of NBE	(2012)217
Au: chemical reduction	Quenching of DE
ZnO NP-Au	ZnO–Au: zinc nitrate solution was oxidized by ethanol	Quenching of DE	(2008)218
ZnO NP-Ag	Au–Ag: chemical reduction
ZnO NW-Au	ZnO: vapor–liquid–solid deposition method	Enhancement of NBE	(2011)73
Au: sputtering	Quenching of DE
ZnO NR-Au	ZnO NR-Au: chemical method	Enhancement of NBE	(2011)219
Quenching of DE
ZnO film-Ag	ZnO Film: cathodic vacuum arc technique	Enhancement of NBE	(2007)50
Ag: sputtering
ZnO film-Ag	ZnO film: RF magnetron sputtering	Enhancement of NBE	(2011)51
Ag: ion implantation	Quenching of DE
ZnO film-Ag	ZnO Film: spin coating zinc acetate and silver nitrate mixture on substrate and thermal treatment	Enhancement of NBE	(2005)212
Quenching of DE
ZnO–Ag film	ZnO–Ag film: sol–gel process	Enhancement of NBE	(2005)215
ZnO–Ag film	ZnO–Ag film: deposition of zinc acetate and silver nitrate on substrate by spray pyrolysis and thermal treatment	Enhancement of NBE	(2012)216
ZnO–Ag film	ZnO–Ag film: DC reaction sputtering	Enhancement of NBE	(2006)71
ZnO film-Ag	ZnO film: magnetron sputtering	Enhancement of NBE	(2007)72
Ag: magnetron sputtering	Quenching of DE
ZnO NR-Pt	ZnO NR: solid–liquid–vapor deposition process	Enhancement of NBE	(2006)52
Pt: sputtering	Quenching of DE

 	Scheme 15  Proposed model for the molding effect of a porous TiO2 thin film (a–c) and the mechanism of nonvolatilization of a color image (d and e). (a) Ag+-adsorbed porous TiO2 film (film looks colorless). (b) Ag nanoparticles deposited by UV light (film looks brownish-gray). (c) Ag particles absorbing green light are photoelectrochemically oxidized to Ag+ by green light (film looks green) (the blue, green, or red particle symbol represents a nanoparticle absorbing only blue, green, or red light, respectively). (d) Ag+ generated in panel c is removed (film looks green). (e) Ag particles left in panel d are also photoelectrochemically oxidized to Ag+ (film looks colorless). Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 16  Schematic illustrations for the photoelectrochemically induced morphological changes of the Ag NPs on the single-crystalline TiO2 surface. The label colors for NPs represent the resonance colors (e.g., a green NP absorbs green light). Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
