Organo-sulfur molecules enable iron-based battery electrodes to meet the challenges of large-scale electrical energy storage   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE01454E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE01454E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2753-2763Organo-sulfur molecules enable iron-based battery electrodes to meet the challenges of large-scale electrical energy storage†

        
          
            Bo 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Souradip 
            Malkhandi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Aswin K. 
            Manohar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            G. K. 
            Surya Prakash
          
        
       and 

        
          
            S. R. 
            Narayanan
          
        
      *
      Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute, Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. E-mail: sri.narayan@usc.edu
Received 
      10th May 2014
    , Accepted 18th June 2014First published on 18th June 2014AbstractRechargeable iron–air and nickel–iron batteries are attractive as sustainable and inexpensive solutions for large-scale electrical energy storage because of the global abundance and eco-friendliness of iron, and the robustness of iron-based batteries to extended cycling. Despite these advantages, the commercial use of iron-based batteries has been limited by their low charging efficiency. This limitation arises from the iron electrodes evolving hydrogen extensively during charging. The total suppression of hydrogen evolution has been a significant challenge. We have found that organo-sulfur compounds with various structural motifs (linear and cyclic thiols, dithiols, thioethers and aromatic thiols) when added in milli-molar concentration to the aqueous alkaline electrolyte, reduce the hydrogen evolution rate by 90%. These organo-sulfur compounds form strongly adsorbed layers on the iron electrode and block the electrochemical process of hydrogen evolution. The charge-transfer resistance and double-layer capacitance of the iron/electrolyte interface confirm that the extent of suppression of hydrogen evolution depends on the degree of surface coverage and the molecular structure of the organo-sulfur compound. An unanticipated electrochemical effect of the adsorption of organo-sulfur molecules is “de-passivation” that allows the iron electrode to be discharged at high current values. The strongly adsorbed organo-sulfur compounds were also found to resist electro-oxidation even at the positive electrode potentials at which oxygen evolution can occur. Through testing on practical rechargeable battery electrodes we have verified the substantial improvements to the efficiency during charging and the increased capability to discharge at high rates. We expect these performance advances to enable the design of efficient, inexpensive and eco-friendly iron-based batteries for large-scale electrical energy storage.

Broader context
The integration of renewable energy into the electricity grid requires large-scale electrical energy storage systems. Battery-based energy storage systems are particularly attractive because of their scalability and efficiency. However, today's battery technologies are expensive and do not have the required long-term durability. In this paper, we demonstrate a new and inexpensive iron-based rechargeable electrode that can be charged and discharged at a high efficiency and a high rate. An iron electrode consisting of carbonyl iron powder and small amounts of organo-sulfur molecules suppresses the wasteful evolution of hydrogen during charging of the battery and allows high rates of discharge to be achieved. The organo-sulfur additives adsorb on the surface of iron and inhibit the hydrogen evolution process. This electrode can be charged and discharged repeatedly without significant loss in performance. Such a high-performance rechargeable iron battery electrode can be incorporated into a nickel–iron battery or an iron–air battery to realize an energy storage system that is affordable, efficient and durable. The global abundance, eco-friendliness, and low-cost of iron are particularly attractive for scale-up to a “mega-scale” and meeting the capital cost targets of $100–200 (kWh)−1 for battery-based energy storage systems.

Introduction
Battery-based energy storage systems are needed globally for integrating intermittent sources of electricity such as solar photovoltaic and wind-based energy generation systems into the electricity grid.1,2 While many battery systems such as lithium-ion and lead–acid batteries are widely used, the simultaneous demands on cost and durability for the grid-scale application presents a tremendous challenge to the deployment of these commercially available systems. Iron-based rechargeable batteries are particularly attractive for such large-scale battery-based electrical energy storage because iron is relatively inexpensive, globally-abundant, and eco-friendly compared to other battery materials.3 Therefore, of specific interest are rechargeable iron–air and nickel–iron batteries that use aqueous alkaline electrolyte. The rechargeable iron electrode (the negative electrode in these batteries), is renowned for its robustness to repeated charge-discharge cycling; over 3000 charge–discharge cycles have been realized in practical batteries.4–7 The lead–acid battery does not provide even 300 cycles when subjected to deep-discharge. While some lithium-ion batteries can be cycled to about 1000 cycles, the cost of these batteries is at least five to seven times higher than the target cost for grid-scale applications. Consequently, the extraordinary durability combined with the relatively low cost of iron renders iron-based batteries highly desirable for the grid-scale application. However, one of the principal limitations of such iron-based batteries is the poor charging efficiency of the rechargeable iron electrode. When iron–air or nickel–iron batteries are charged, hydrogen evolves at the iron electrode. Consequently, 30–45% of the electrical energy is unrecoverable and wasted.4,8–12 Mitigating the process of hydrogen evolution is therefore the principal challenge for realizing efficient and viable iron-based alkaline batteries for large-scale electrical energy storage.3
The evolution of hydrogen occurs on the iron electrode during charging of the battery because the standard reduction potential for the hydrogen evolution reaction is positive to that of the iron electrode (eqn (1) and (2)):
Iron electrode reaction:  Fe(OH)2 + 2e−  Fe + 2OH−Eo = −0.877 V(1)
Hydrogen evolution reaction: 2H2O + 2e−  H2 + 2OH−Eo = −0.827 V(2)
Hydrogen evolution, in addition to lowering the charging efficiency, also results in rapid loss of water from the electrolyte (eqn (2) and (3)) necessitating frequent addition of water to maintain the electrolyte level in the battery. Fe + 2H2O → Fe(OH)2 + H2(3)
Also because of the reduced charging efficiency, the batteries must use additional iron active material in the cell to achieve the required capacity. This additional material results in increased battery weight and cost. Some commercial batteries use as much as five times the amount of the required battery material to compensate for the low charging efficiency. Thus, suppressing hydrogen evolution at the iron electrode is an essential and enabling improvement for the large-scale commercial deployment of iron-based aqueous alkaline batteries.
Approaches to suppress hydrogen evolution
A few promising approaches to inhibit the wasteful evolution of hydrogen during charging of the iron electrode have been explored by us and others: (1) using additives that distribute on the surface of the iron electrode and raise the overpotential for the electron-transfer step in hydrogen evolution, (2) using additives in the electrolyte that form adsorbed layers at the iron electrode/electrolyte interface, blocking the sites for electron transfer. An example of the first approach is the use of elemental bismuth that reduces the electrocatalytic activity of iron for hydrogen evolution by an order of magnitude, and (3) improving the conductivity of the iron electrode through the use of carbon nanostructures.13–21
The first approach is exemplified by the use of bismuth, lead or mercury sulfides. As an example of the second approach we have shown that n-alkanethiols with eight or more carbon atoms formed compact self-assembled monolayers on iron and suppressed the hydrogen evolution current.22 In the preliminary testing of iron electrodes with bismuth and alkanethiol additives the suppression of hydrogen evolution was over 90% and this remarkable benefit was retained over at least twenty cycles of charge and discharge.14,15 In a third approach using nanostructured materials such as graphene in conjunction with iron very high coulombic efficiencies have been reported. We believe that the interconnectivity of the iron particles in such an electrode is most likely to be better than in simple pressed powder electrode. Consequently, for a given charging current, the effective current densities at the electrode will be reduced, leading to lower hydrogen evolution rates at the electrodes. Therefore, the above three approaches were deemed to have practical significance for achieving high-performance rechargeable iron batteries.
With bismuth-based additives, we have found that about 5 wt% of the additive was required to substantially reduce hydrogen evolution rate.14,15 However, with the long-chain n-alkanethiol compounds just a monolayer of self-assembled molecules was sufficient to block the process of hydrogen evolution.22 Thus, the latter approach of using organo-sulfur additives that form blocking layers presents a significant advantage from a cost and recycling standpoint. Consequently, we have focused the present study on exploring the basis of using organo-sulfur additives for the suppression of hydrogen evolution during charging of the iron electrode.
For an organo-sulfur additive to exhibit sustained effectiveness not only must the adsorption be strong enough to block the surface reactions, but the additive must also be chemically stable over multiple cycles of charge and discharge of the battery. For example, the organo-sulfur additives must be stable against electro-oxidation at the positive electrode and not undergo side reactions that will impact the performance of the battery in undesirable ways. Thus, we can anticipate the effectiveness and durability of the organo-sulfur molecules to be sensitive to their molecular structure. The chemistry of organo-sulfur additives relevant to aqueous alkaline media and the interactions with reactive metals such as iron is not available in the literature. Therefore, in this study we have pursued the scientific basis for the design and selection of the most effective additive molecules for the iron electrode. Specifically, we have studied the adsorption and oxidative stability of organo-sulfur compounds with different structural motifs at the iron electrode/electrolyte interface.
Our investigation covers a range of molecular classes of organo-sulfur compounds comprising linear thiols, dithiols, aromatic thiols, linear thioethers and cyclic thioethers. We have measured the surface coverage by the adsorbed molecules, the rate of hydrogen evolution, and the susceptibility of the additives to electro-oxidation. We can now rationalize the performance of the various organo-sulfur compounds based on their adsorption characteristics and molecular structure. The understanding that emerges from this study provides a firm rationale for the selection of the optimally-effective additive. Further, to validate the conclusions from these fundamental studies, we have verified the effectiveness of the additives in practical rechargeable iron battery electrodes. We anticipate that these findings will be of fundamental interest and practical value for selectively modulating interfacial electrochemical properties using self-assembled monolayers and suppressing corrosion in alkaline media, in addition to finding sustainable solutions for battery-based large-scale energy storage.
Experimental
Nine organo-sulfur additives with five different molecular motifs were studied in this work (Table 1).
Table 1 List of organo-sulfur additives studied




Molecular class
Additive designation
Chemical name




Linear alkanethiol
#1
1-Dodecanethiol


#2
1-Octanethiol


#3
1-Propanethiol


Linear dithiols
#4
3,6-Dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol


#5
1,2-Ethanedithiol


Cyclic thioether
#6
1,4-Dithiane


Linear thioether
#7
Bismethyldithiomethane


Aromatic thiol
#8
Benzenethiol


#9
2-Methylbenzenethiol




Four types of electrochemical measurements were conducted to study the effect of the organo-sulfur additives: (1) steady-state potentiostatic polarization on iron electrodes, (2) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy of iron electrodes, (3) cyclic voltammetry on platinum and iron electrodes to measure the stability against oxidation, and (4) measurement of the charging efficiency and discharge rate-capability of practical iron battery electrodes prepared in-house. The steady-state potentiostatic polarization and impedance measurements were conducted on a high-purity iron disk (99.999%, 5 mm diameter, Alfa-Aesar) mounted on a rotating-disk electrode (Pine Instruments, Change-Disk Electrode AFE5TQ050). The disks were polished with alumina (particle size, 0.05 micron) and cleaned with isopropanol and acetone prior to each experiment. Experiments were conducted in an electrochemical cell made of polyfluoroethylene that contained the following: potassium hydroxide solution (1 M, purged with argon gas) as the electrolyte, a platinum-wire counter electrode, and a mercury-mercuric oxide (MMO) reference electrode (20% potassium hydroxide, Eo = +0.092 V, Koslow Inc.). Unless otherwise noted, all values of electrode potentials reported here are versus the MMO reference electrode. The electrochemical cell was cleaned thoroughly prior to the experiment to avoid cross-contamination by the organo-sulfur compounds.
The cyclic voltammetry experiments were carried out on a polished iron disk electrode and also separately on a polished platinum disk electrode. In all cases, the electrodes were equilibrated in the electrolyte containing the organo-sulfur additive for 60 minutes under argon atmosphere prior to the electrochemical measurements. The period of 60 minutes was adequate to achieve equilibration as indicated by the steady-state currents.22 Steady-state polarization measurements in the potential range of −0.85 to −1.3 V vs. MMO reference electrode were conducted by stepping the electrode potential in 50 mV steps and holding the potential for 300 seconds before recording the steady-state current (Ametek-PAR-VMC-4 Potentiostat/Galvanostat/Frequency Response Analyzer).
The impedance of the iron-disk electrodes was measured as a function of electrode potential with a sinusoidal excitation signal of 2 mV (peak-to-peak) over the frequency range of 50 mHz to 100 kHz. The impedance measurements were performed just after the completion of each steady-state potential step experiment. For the cyclic voltammetry study the electrode was swept from −0.9 V to +0.7 V vs. MMO at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1.
To verify the benefits of the selected organo-sulfur compounds for practical use, we tested battery electrodes prepared in-house from high-purity carbonyl iron powder. These electrodes were immersed in a 20 mM ethanolic solution of the organo-sulfur compound followed by drying in a stream of argon, careful to avoid oxidation of the compound. The iron electrodes coated thus were immersed in the electrolyte and charged and discharged several times until a stable capacity was achieved (a process referred to as “formation”).17 Then the iron electrode was subjected to further charge–discharge cycling for at least 10 more cycles during which we measured the rate of evolution of hydrogen during the charging process by the capacity output during discharge at various rates. The ratio of the capacity realized in the discharge step to the charge added in the charging step was used to calculate the charging efficiency.
Results and discussion
Steady state polarization studies on iron disk electrode-suppression of hydrogen evolution
The steady state polarization measurements at the iron disk electrode indicated a significant reduction in the current for hydrogen evolution with the addition of organo-sulfur compounds to the electrolyte (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  (a) Steady-state potentiostatic polarization data for iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide with and without 10 mM of 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol (shown here as an example of the list of organo-sulfur compounds studied), (b) reduction in hydrogen evolution (HE) current at −1.20 V for the various additives listed in Table 1. The dotted lines enclose the data for structurally similar groups of compounds. 
Linear polarization measurement at the equilibrium potential was not chosen for this assessment because we sought the polarization resistance for hydrogen evolution at the potential of charging of the iron electrode (−1.2 V vs. MMO) that is quite removed from the equilibrium potential for hydrogen evolution (−0.91 V vs. MMO). The ratio of the steady-state currents on the iron disk electrode, with and without the organo-sulfur additive, at −1.2 V was used to calculate the percent reduction of the hydrogen evolution current. The electrode potential value of −1.2 V was chosen because it corresponded to the potential of the iron electrode during charging in a rechargeable iron-based battery.14 The data suggested that although substantial reduction in hydrogen evolution current was achievable with most of the additives, the degree of suppression depended on the molecular class. With the long-chain alkanethiols the hydrogen evolution current was reduced by 90 to 99% (Fig. 1b). The short-chain alkanethiol(1-propanethiol) had the least reduction value of about 55%. The dithiols, aromatic thiols and the thioethers showed a modest reduction in the range of 77–91%. Further understanding of the differences in effectiveness of these additives was obtained from impedance spectroscopy measurements and studies of oxidative stability.
Impedance spectroscopy and the properties of adsorbed layers of organo-sulfur compounds
Impedance spectroscopy measurements on the iron disk electrode, in the absence and presence of the additive, provided confirmation for the formation of adsorbed layers by self-assembly (Fig. 2a). The results of impedance measurements were fitted to a simple electrical equivalent circuit (Fig. 2b) consisting of the capacitance associated with the double layer at the electrode/electrolyte interface, Cdl, the charge-transfer resistance associated with the hydrogen evolution reaction, Rct, and a series resistance associated with the Ohmic resistance of the electrode and electrolyte, RΩ. We have validated previously the use of such an equivalent circuit model to represent the iron/electrolyte interface in the presence of alkanethiols.22
 Fig. 2  (a) Impedance data for iron electrode with 10 mM 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol shown here as an example, (b) equivalent circuit used for analysis of impedance data. 
The impedance of the iron electrode was first measured in the electrolyte without the additive and then in the electrolyte containing 10 mM of the organo-sulfur compound. For every additive tested, a separate measurement was made in the blank electrolyte. The raw impedance data for all the additives has been included as supplementary material. The presence of the organo-sulfur additives, lowered the double layer capacitance in the potential region −0.9 V to −1.3 V vs. MMO (Fig. 3a). The charge-transfer resistance for hydrogen evolution (at −1.2 V) increased in the presence of the additive (Fig. 3b).
 Fig. 3  (a) Example of the effect of 10 mM of 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol on the double layer capacitance of iron electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide, (b) effect of 10 mM of 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol on the charge-transfer resistance of iron electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide. 
The ratios of the equivalent circuit parameters for the iron electrode, with and without the additive, at −1.2 V, were compared separately for each additive (Table 2).
Table 2 Ratio of the equivalent circuit parameters and steady state current at −1.2 V vs. MMO for iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide, with and without 10 mM of organo-sulfur additive. Subscript “w” refers to with additive and “wo” to without additive




Additive

R
w/Rwo

C
w/Cwo

I
w/Iwo

θ





1
1.75 × 104
1.79 × 10−4
3.28 × 10−4
0.99


2
1.59 × 101
9.78 × 10−2
7.62 × 10−4
0.99


3
0.23 × 101
7.40 × 10−1
4.49 × 10−1
0.55


4
0.51 × 101
4.86 × 10−1
2.22 × 10−1
0.78


5
1.18 × 101
3.50 × 10−1
1.46 × 10−1
0.85


6
0.91 × 101
4.03 × 10−1
1.05 × 10−1
0.89


7
0.54 × 101
4.81 × 10−1
1.48 × 10−1
0.85


8
1.17 × 101
5.58 × 10−1
1.35 × 10−1
0.86


9
1.18 × 101
3.52 × 10−1
9.49 × 10−2
0.90




The increase in charge-transfer resistance was consistent with the decrease in the steady state current for hydrogen evolution (Fig. 4) and confirmed the formation of a blocking layer of molecules at the interface that inhibited the parasitic reaction.
 Fig. 4  Correlation of the ratio of the charge-transfer resistance, with and without organo-sulfur additive, with the ratios of double layer capacitance and steady current at −1.2 V on iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide (data same as in Table 2). Subscript “w” refers to with additive and “wo” to without additive. 
The coverage of the iron surface by the adsorption of organo-sulfur molecules resulted in a decrease in the available area for electrochemical reaction and consequently an increase in the charge-transfer resistance. The surface coverage is governed by the free energy of interaction with the iron surface and the free energy of intermolecular interactions.22 The double layer capacitance was found to decrease when the charge-transfer resistance increased confirming that the adsorption of the molecules was indeed cause for the reduction in current for hydrogen evolution.23–26 Unlike the charge-transfer resistance, the value of double layer capacitance is governed not only by the surface coverage, but also by the thickness of the adsorbed layer, the dielectric constant of the adsorbed layer, and the orientation of the organo-sulfur molecules on the surface. Consequently, the values of double layer capacitance are sensitive to the geometry of the molecule in addition to the binding interactions with the surface. The surface coverage θ, was estimated from the fraction of area available for electrochemical reaction by, θ = (1 − Iw/Iwo)(4)where Iw and Iwo are the steady state current values at −1.2 V in the presence and absence of the additive, respectively. In our previous study of alkanethiols, we found that besides the interaction of the sulfur atoms in the head group with the iron surface, the inter-chain interactions resulting from van der Waals forces and non-bond interactions made a significant contribution to the stabilization of the adsorbed layers.22,27–30 Also, with the various molecular classes studied here, the geometric factors were also significant (Table 3).31
Table 3 Surface coverage θ on iron (from eqn (4)) and the type of interactions that govern self-assembly for the various organo-sulfur molecules studied here




Molecule

θ

Stabilizing interaction besides Fe–S binding




1-Dodecanethiol
0.99
Strong inter-chain interaction, compact geometric packing


1-Octanethiol
0.99
Strong inter-chain interaction, compact geometric packing


1-Propanethiol
0.55
Weak inter-chain interaction


3,6-Dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol
0.78
Moderate inter-chain interaction, poor packing efficiency due to the two oxygen atoms


1,2-Ethanedithiol
0.85
Two sulfur anchoring groups and packing facilitated by geometry


1,4-Dithiane
0.89
Two sulfur anchoring groups and packing facilitated by geometry


Bismethyldithio-methane
0.85
Two sulfur anchoring groups and packing facilitated by geometry


Benzenethiol
0.86
Strong π–π interaction and efficient stacking parallel to the plane of the ring


2-Methylbenzene-thiol
0.90
Strong π–π interaction and efficient stacking parallel to the plane of the ring




Substantial changes in charge-transfer resistance resulted with the addition of long-chain alkanethiols (dodecanethiol and octanethiol), the aromatic thiols (benzenethiol and 2-methylbenzenethiol), the short-chain dithiol (1,2-diethanethiol) and the small cyclic ether (1,4-dithiane). With the long-chain linear alkanethiols the strong interaction with the iron surface combined with the inter-chain interactions due to the large number of carbon atoms led to a compact adsorption layer.22 Thus, expectedly, this class of organo-sulfur molecules suppressed the hydrogen evolution current the most. With the aromatic thiol, the strong π–π electron interactions between the benzenethiol molecules led to a well-ordered assembly and also extensive surface coverage. The adsorption coverage for benzenethiol was similar to that observed on gold.32,33 With the 2-methylbenzenethiol, despite the presence of a bulky methyl substituent in the “ortho” position the coverage was similar to that of benzenethiol; the steady state current and charge-transfer resistance were comparable for both the benzenethiol and 2-methylbenzenethiol suggesting that the π–π electron interactions dominate the stabilization of these layers. The cyclic thioether, 1,4-dithiane, very likely formed a compact layer by stacking in trans- (chair) conformation explaining the high degree of coverage observed; on gold electrodes the adsorption of 1,4-dithiane and such stacking of the molecules is known to produce up to 10 times reduction in electrochemically active surface area, similar to our present observations on iron.32,34 However, the linear ether, bismethyldithiomethane, with bulky methyl groups is not expected to have the same geometric advantage as 1,2-dithiane to facilitate inter-molecular interactions. Although, 1,2-diethanethiol did not have the advantage of inter-chain interactions, the bi-dentate attachment through the sulfur atoms to the iron surface, similar to 1,2-dithiane most likely stabilized the compact stacking. For the short-chain alkanethiol such as 1-propanethiol, the inter-chain interactions are inadequate to form a compact layer and this is consistent with our earlier studies on the effect of chain length on adsorption of alkanethiols.22
The capacitance data (Fig. 3a) also indicated that the organo-sulfur compounds adsorbed on the iron surface did not desorb even at cathodic electrode potentials of −1.3 V vs. MMO (−1.4 V vs. NHE) in 1 M potassium hydroxide. Such negative electrode potentials for desorption was unlike that observed on gold surfaces where desorption occurred at a considerably more positive potential of −0.8 V vs. NHE. The retention of a stable adsorbed layer even at the extreme cathodic potentials suggested a strong interaction of the thiols with the iron surface. Since the iron electrode is operated in a battery at potentials close to between −1.0 and −1.2 V vs. MMO, the strong adsorption of the organo-sulfur molecules on iron is a necessary condition to achieve suppression of hydrogen evolution during battery charging.32
“De-passivation” of the iron electrode
Cyclic voltammograms of the iron surface indicated that the adsorption of organo-sulfur compounds increased the currents for iron electrode reaction (Fig. 5). The oxidation peak in the voltammogram at −0.60 V was associated with the conversion of iron to iron(II) hydroxide, while the reduction peak at −0.8 V was associated with the conversion of iron(II) hydroxide to iron. Specifically, the oxidation peak at −0.60 V arose from the formation of a passivation layer of iron(II) hydroxide that is electrically insulating and limited the current. With the addition of the 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol, the peak current at −0.60 V increased by three times and a new peak appeared at −0.75 V. This enhancement suggested a “de-passivation” of the surface by the organo-sulfur compound. It is known that the incorporation of sulfides into the insulating layer of iron(II) hydroxide layer results in the formation of electrically conductive iron sulfides that leads to “de-passivation” and formation of iron(II) hydroxide that is more reversible.14–17
 Fig. 5  Cyclic voltammograms of iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide over the potential range of +0.6 to −1 V (scan direction indicated by arrow) at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 without additive (dashed line) and with 10 mM 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol (solid line). 
It has been known for some time that iron sulfide is effective in mitigating the passivation of a rechargeable iron electrode.4 Our observation of de-passivation with the organo-sulfur additives suggested that the adsorptive interaction of the organo-sulfur compound with iron was strong enough to incorporate some sulfide into the iron electrode as for example by the following reaction.Fe + RS− + OH− → FeS + ROH + 2e−
We have confirmed the “de-passivating” effect of organo-sulfur additives in large-area porous iron battery electrodes. Such electrodes were first subjected to repeated charge–discharge cycling for about 30 to 40 times (a process called “formation” cycling) after which the electrodes achieved a stable capacity.14 Potentiodynamic polarization of such “formed” iron electrodes in the absence of any organo-sulfur additive showed a reduction in current at potentials of about −0.87 V that corresponded to the passivation of the iron surface (Fig. 6). However when the electrolyte contained any of the strongly-adsorbing organo-sulfur additives, the electrode did not exhibit passivation and the current continued to increase even up to potentials as high as −0.75 V.
 Fig. 6  Potentiodynamic polarization of porous iron battery electrodes with and without organo-sulfur additives (3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol) in 30% potassium hydroxide battery electrolyte. “C-rate” is defined as the current in amperes divided by the capacity of the electrode in ampere-hours. The potential was scanned at a rate of 0.17 mV per second. 
De-passivation enhances the capability of the electrodes to be discharged at high rates. In tests of discharge rate capability, the “formed” electrodes without the additive could not be discharged at rates higher than 0.2C amperes (where C is the numerical value of capacity of the electrode in ampere-hours) and the discharge capacity was about 0.1 Ah g−1. Furthermore, such electrodes without the additive could not simply sustain rates higher than 0.5C due to the phenomenon of passivation (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Discharge capacity of “formed” iron electrodes measured at various rates of discharge with and without organo-sulfur additives (3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol). The X-axis refers to the normalized discharge rate calculated as discharge current in Amperes divided by capacity, C. 
However, when the iron electrodes were treated with either of the two strongly adsorbing organo-sulfur additives (e.g., 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol or 1,2-ethanedithiol), the electrodes could be discharged at 1C to yield a discharge capacity of at least 0.1 Ah g−1. This capability of sustaining high discharge rates with organo-sulfur additives far exceeds that of commercial electrodes and is comparable to electrodes prepared in-house with bismuth sulfide additive (Fig. 7). Thus, the results with practical battery electrodes at high discharge rates confirmed the de-passivating action of organo-sulfur additives. The ability of these electrodes to discharge at the high rates of 0.5 to 1C allow the iron-based batteries to reach power densities for rapid delivery of entire energy content of the iron-based battery in one to two hours. Commercial electrodes are considerably limited in their ability to discharge fast; a five-hour rate is recommended with higher rates resulting in poor capacity output.35
Oxidative stability of organo-sulfur compounds
Organo-sulfur compounds can be oxidized to sulfoxides, sulfones and sulfonic acids.36 Therefore, for organo-sulfur additives to be practically viable for extended cycling of the iron electrode, the adsorbed layers on the iron electrode must be stable against electro-oxidation. We found from the cyclic voltammetry results on the iron disk electrode (Fig. 5) that no oxidation current was observed even at +0.6 V vs. MMO, although the oxidation of the organo-sulfur compound could be expected to occur at these values of electrode potential. However, as discussed here earlier, the iron electrode formed a passive layer when polarized to such a positive electrode potential where iron(II) hydroxide was formed. Consequently, the propensity of the organo-sulfur compounds to undergo electrochemical oxidation at positive electrode potentials could not be studied due to the formation of the passive layer of iron(II) hydroxide. Therefore, we found it necessary to conduct the voltammetry studies on a platinum electrode that did not form a passive layer at positive electrode potentials (Fig. 8 and 9).
 Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammograms of platinum disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, without any additive (dashed line) and with 10 mM of the organo-sulfur additives (solid line): (a) 1-dodecanethiol, (b) 1-octanethiol, (c) 1,2-diethanethiol and (d) 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol. Scan direction has been indicated by arrows. 
 Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms of platinum disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, without any additive (dashed line) and with additive (solid line) (a) 10 mM benzenethiol, (b) 10 mM of 2-methylbenzenethiol. 
The cyclic voltammograms observed with the platinum disk electrode in potassium hydroxide without any additive indicate the well-known electro-sorption and electro-desorption of hydrogen (peaks in the potential range of −0.80 V to −0.45 V) and the start of hydrogen evolution (at potentials negative to −0.8 V). Hydroxide adsorption and oxide formation occur positive to −0.2 V, followed by oxygen evolution at +0.6 V. Upon reversing the scan, the reduction of the surface oxides of platinum was observed from +0.1 to −0.4 V. Upon addition of 10 mM of 1-dodecanethiol, 1-octanethiol, 1,2-diethanethiol or 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol, the electro-sorption and electro-desorption of hydrogen, hydrogen evolution, and the formation of the oxides on platinum were suppressed completely (Fig. 8a–d). The complete suppression of all these familiar surface processes on platinum electrodes was consistent with the decrease in the steady-state current for hydrogen evolution on iron electrodes (results in Fig. 3 and 4) and the formation of compact self-assembled adsorbed layers. Further, the oxidation current on platinum was not significant until +0.6 V vs. MMO, similar to the voltammogram without any additive.
The absence of an oxidation current even at an electrode potential of +0.6 V vs. MMO, which is about 0.3 V positive to standard reduction potential for the oxygen electrode reaction suggested that these organo-sulfur additives were quite stable towards oxidation and are viable for practical applications in a rechargeable battery. These results of oxidative stability and the blocking effect of self-assembled thiol layers on iron were similar to that observed by other researchers on copper, silver and gold where the layer remained stable even after exposure to air for tens of hours.37,38
With the addition of benzenethiol, the electrosorption and electro-desorption of hydrogen and the formation of oxide were completely suppressed. However, unlike the linear thiols and dithiols, a significant oxidation current was observed at 0.3 V. Also, in the case of 2-methylbenzenethiol to the electrolyte, despite the suppression of the electrosorption and electro-desorption of hydrogen and the formation of the oxide (Fig. 9), a significant oxidation current was observed at +0.15 V vs. MMO. These results suggested that although the adsorption of the benzenethiol and 2-methylbenzenethiol was strong enough to suppress hydrogen evolution these thiol molecules themselves was not stable to oxidation.
The benefit of adding aromatic thiols to suppress corrosion of metals has been the subject of many patent disclosures.39,40 However, the oxidative stability of these molecules has not been an important consideration for corrosion applications. The lower stability of the benzenethiol and the 2-methylbenzenethiol to oxidation compared to the long-chain alkanethiols is ascribed to the electron-rich benzene ring and the presence of a strong electron-donating substituent such as the methyl group. Also, the formation of a sulfonate group by the oxidation of the thiol group offers further stabilization by the delocalization of the electron density on the benzene ring.
With 1-propanethiol the surface processes on platinum were suppressed only to a moderate extent including the formation of oxide and the evolution of hydrogen. Also, a significant oxidation current was observed at +0.2 V vs. MMO (Fig. 10). The lower oxidative stability of the layers formed with 1-propanethiol is consistent with the expectation that a short-chain alkanethiol would be less strongly adsorbed compared to a long-chain alkanethiol; a long-chain thiol such as 1-dodecanethiol has significantly more stabilizing inter-chain interactions than the short-chain thiols.22
 Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms of platinum disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, without any additive (dashed line) and with 10 mM of (a) 1-propanethiol, (b) 1,4-dithiane and (c) bismethyldithiomethane (solid lines). Scan direction indicated by arrow. 
With 1,4-dithiane, and bismethylthiomethane, there was only a partial suppression of the hydrogen adsorption–desorption peaks, but other surface processes appeared to be unaffected and a significant oxidation current was observed even at 0.0 V vs. MMO. While the charge under the hydrogen electro-sorption/desorption on platinum was reduced by approximately 50% with the addition of 1,4-dithiane or bismethylthiomethane, and these additives did not affect the oxide reduction peaks. It appeared that 1,4-dithiane, and bismethylthiomethane were very weakly adsorbed on the surface of platinum and therefore, their stability to oxidation cannot be expected.
Thus, in assessing the adsorption and oxidative stability of the various molecular classes of organosulfur additives on platinum, it became clear that suppression of the surface reactions of hydrogen adsorption and desorption was greater when the organo-sulfur compounds adsorbed strongly, consistent with the capacitance and steady state polarization results on iron. We also found that for all the seven aliphatic and alicyclic organo-sulfur additives studied here, the more strongly they were adsorbed on platinum the less easily were they oxidized. We estimated the strength of the adsorption from the extent of reduction in charge associated with the electrosorption of hydrogen (often termed the under-potential deposition of hydrogen ions, or “H-upd”) in the potential range of −0.48 V to −0.87 V. Thus, the ratio of the charge required for electro-sorption/desorption of hydrogen with and without the additive was inversely related to the surface coverage by the organosulfur compound; extensive adsorption of the additive would result in a low value of charge for electro-sorption of hydrogen. The oxidation current at +0.4 V was found to correlate with the ratio of the charge for electro-sorption of hydrogen with and without the additive (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Oxidation current at 0.4 V vs. MMO on the platinum electrode plotted against the ratio of the charge for the electrosorption of hydrogen between −0.48 V and −0.87 V with and without organo-sulfur additives. Labels correspond to the organo-sulfur additives in Table 1. 
Thus, it seemed that those additives that are strongly adsorbed can provide the maximum benefit of both hydrogen suppression and oxidative stability. For benzenethiol and 2-methylbenzenethiol (compounds labeled 8 and 9 in Fig. 11) there is some departure from this correlation. Despite the relative compactness of the adsorbed layer facilitated by the π–π interactions, the aromatic thiols were oxidized readily at a lower potential than the aliphatic compounds. The electron-rich nature of aromatic molecules, and the relatively weaker C–H bond in the ortho-methyl groups rendered the aromatic thiols susceptible to oxidation at lower electrode potentials.
Verification of performance in battery cycling studies
Two of the additives namely 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol were tested for their suppression of hydrogen evolution in a practical iron electrode suitable for nickel–iron and iron–air batteries. The charge–discharge behavior of the iron electrode is shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Typical potential–capacity curves during charge and discharge of iron electrodes treated with and without 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol. Charging was conducted at C/2 rate, and discharge was conducted at C/20 rate. 
The charging of the iron electrode is characterized by a plateau corresponding to the conversion of iron(II) hydroxide to iron, followed by a rise in potential signifying the onset of hydrogen evolution. The discharge curve represents the conversion of iron to iron(II) hydroxide. The electrode with the organo-sulfur additive had a significantly higher utilization and a slightly higher overpotential during charge, compared to the electrode without the additive.
The charging efficiency was measured by taking the ratio of the charge input to the discharge capacity output. Any difference between the charge input and the discharge capacity was ascribed to the hydrogen evolution process. We found that when the 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanediol were used with the iron electrode, the charging efficiency was 90–92% whereas for the commercial electrodes without additives it was 60–70%. This improvement in charging efficiency with the organo-sulfur additive is a five-fold reduction in hydrogen evolution rate compared to the commercial electrodes (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Comparison of the charging efficiency of in-house prepared iron electrodes containing 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol with commercial electrodes, (b) discharge capacity of iron electrodes following about 50 cycles of formation. Cells were cycled at C/2 rate on charge and C/20 rate on discharge. 
Further, the iron electrodes cycled with these organo-sulfur additives continued to show a stable capacity in the range of 0.22 to 0.28 Ah g−1 even after 10 cycles following formation, indicating that the additives were stable during the normal operation of the iron electrode (Fig. 13b). These results on practical electrodes verified the potential utility of these additives in nickel–iron and iron–air rechargeable batteries.
Conclusions
Our studies demonstrate that the challenge of low charging efficiency of the rechargeable iron electrode can be met using organo-sulfur additives that adsorb at the iron/electrolyte interface. Several molecular classes of organo-sulfur compounds were found to reduce the rate of hydrogen evolution significantly even at the concentration of 10 mM. Some of the additives reduced the hydrogen evolution rate to one-tenth of the value observed with commercial electrodes. This reduction in hydrogen evolution rate raised the charging efficiency of the rechargeable iron electrode from 60 to 92%. The effectiveness of organo-sulfur additives in improving the charging efficiency was highly dependent on their molecular structure. Specifically, long-chain alkanethiols formed compact self-assembled layers that led to almost complete suppression of the parasitic hydrogen evolution reaction. The adsorption of dithiols, thioethers, and aromatic thiols also led to a substantial improvement in efficiency but to a lesser extent than the linear long-chain thiols. The adsorption of organosulfur compounds also led to a five times improvement in rate-capability over the commercial electrodes. Such an improvement in rate capability resulted from the “de-passivation” of the iron electrode plausibly by the incorporation of sulfur in the iron(II) hydroxide products to produce conductive iron sulfides. The strongly adsorbed organo-sulfur compounds were found to be resistant to electro-oxidation under the potential conditions prevailing in the battery, and thus these additives are expected to be stable over repeated cycling. With the aromatic thiols, while the hydrogen evolution was suppressed to a significant extent, the oxidative stability was poor due to the intrinsic electron-rich nature of this class of molecules. The improvements in charging efficiency and rate capability with organo-sulfur compounds were demonstrated in practical iron battery electrodes over multiple cycles of charge and discharge. There was no noticeable change in the electrolyte that could be correlated with the release of the additives even after ten cycles. The performance advances resulting from the adsorption of organo-sulfur compounds will enable the utilization of inexpensive iron-based rechargeable batteries for large-scale electrical energy storage applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support received from the ARPA-E GRIDS Program (Contract DE-AR0000136), the University of Southern California and the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute.
Notes and references
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Narayanan, G. K. S. Prakash, A. Manohar, B. Yang, S. Malkhandi and A. Kindler, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 216, 105–109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. U. Falk and A. J. Salkind, Alkaline Storage Batteries, John Wiley, New York,  1969 Search PubMed .
L. Ojefors and L. Carlsson, J. Power Sources, 1977, 2, 287 CrossRef .
L. Ojefors, Electrochim. Acta, 1976, 21, 263 CrossRef .

          E. S. Buzzelli, C. T. Liu and W. A. Bryant, presented in part at the Proceedings of Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, 13th, SAE 789284,  1978, p. 745 Search PubMed .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries, McGraw-Hill, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
K. Vijayamohanan, A. K. Shukla and S. Sathyanarayana, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 289, 55–68 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vijayamohanan, A. K. Shukla and S. Sathyanarayana, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1990, 295, 59–70 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vijayamohanan, T. S. Balasubramanian and A. K. Shukla, J. Power Sources, 1991, 34, 269–285 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Balasubramanian, K. Vijayamohanan and A. K. Shukla, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1993, 23, 947–950 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Balasubramanian and A. K. Shukla, J. Power Sources, 1993, 41, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Manohar, S. Malkhandi, B. Yang, C. Yang, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1209–A1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Manohar, C. Yang, S. Malkhandi, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A2078–A2084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Rajan, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1110–1116 CAS .
A. K. Manohar, C. Yang, S. Malkhandi, B. Yang, G. K. Surya Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A2148–A2155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Liang, M. Gong, Y. Li, W. Chang, T. Mefford, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 917 CrossRef PubMed .
B. T. Hang, S.-H. Yoon, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 522–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Hang, T. Watanabe, M. Egashira, I. Watanabe, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 461–469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Hang, D. H. Thang, N. T. Nga, P. T. L. Minh and E. Kobayashi, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2013, 160, A1442–A1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Malkhandi, B. Yang, A. K. Manohar, G. K. S. Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 347–353 CrossRef PubMed .
H. O. Finklea, S. Avery, M. Lynch and T. Furtsch, Langmuir, 1987, 3, 409–413 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Porter, T. B. Bright, D. L. Allara and C. E. D. Chidsey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 3559–3568 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Widrig, C. Chung and M. D. Porter, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1991, 310, 335–359 CrossRef CAS .
A. Świetlow, M. Skoog and G. Johansson, Electroanalysis, 1992, 4, 921–928 CrossRef .
Q. Jin, J. A. Rodriguez, C. Z. Li, Y. Darici and N. J. Tao, Surf. Sci., 1999, 425, 101–111 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Kim, R. L. McCarley and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 7416–7421 CrossRef CAS .
E. Delamarche, B. Michel, H. A. Biebuyck and C. Gerber, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Poirier, E. D. Pylant and J. M. White, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 2089–2092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533–1554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-J. Wan, M. Terashima, H. Noda and M. Osawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3563–3569 CrossRef CAS .
R.-F. Dou, X.-C. Ma, L. Xi, H. L. Yip, K. Y. Wong, W. M. Lau, J.-F. Jia, Q.-K. Xue, W.-S. Yang, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3049–3056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Isse, M. G. Ferlin and A. Gennaro, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 541, 93–101 CrossRef CAS .
Nickel–iron battery product data, http://www.beutilityfree.com/Electric/Ni-Fe, accessed October 01, 2013.

          H. Lund and O. Hammerich, Organic Electrochemistry, Marcel Dekker AG, New York,  2001, chapter 17, p. 622 Search PubMed .
M. H. Schoenfisch and J. E. Pemberton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 4502–4513 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Laibinis and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 9022–9028 CrossRef CAS .

          J. A. Abys, S. Sun and T. Antonellis, U.S. Pat., Application Pat., No. 13/176,411, July 12,  2012 .

          K. Y. Wong, M. M. Fai Yuen and B. Xu, U.S. Pat., Application Pat., No 12/662,487, April 20,  2010 .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See%20DOI:%2010.1039/c4ee01454eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
The integration of renewable energy into the electricity grid requires large-scale electrical energy storage systems. Battery-based energy storage systems are particularly attractive because of their scalability and efficiency. However, today's battery technologies are expensive and do not have the required long-term durability. In this paper, we demonstrate a new and inexpensive iron-based rechargeable electrode that can be charged and discharged at a high efficiency and a high rate. An iron electrode consisting of carbonyl iron powder and small amounts of organo-sulfur molecules suppresses the wasteful evolution of hydrogen during charging of the battery and allows high rates of discharge to be achieved. The organo-sulfur additives adsorb on the surface of iron and inhibit the hydrogen evolution process. This electrode can be charged and discharged repeatedly without significant loss in performance. Such a high-performance rechargeable iron battery electrode can be incorporated into a nickel–iron battery or an iron–air battery to realize an energy storage system that is affordable, efficient and durable. The global abundance, eco-friendliness, and low-cost of iron are particularly attractive for scale-up to a “mega-scale” and meeting the capital cost targets of $100–200 (kWh)−1 for battery-based energy storage systems.

Fe(OH)2 + 2e−  Fe + 2OH−Eo = −0.877 V	(1)
2H2O + 2e−  H2 + 2OH−Eo = −0.827 V	(2)
Fe + 2H2O → Fe(OH)2 + H2	(3)

Linear alkanethiol	#1	1-Dodecanethiol
#2	1-Octanethiol
#3	1-Propanethiol
Linear dithiols	#4	3,6-Dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol
#5	1,2-Ethanedithiol
Cyclic thioether	#6	1,4-Dithiane
Linear thioether	#7	Bismethyldithiomethane
Aromatic thiol	#8	Benzenethiol
#9	2-Methylbenzenethiol

 	Fig. 1  (a) Steady-state potentiostatic polarization data for iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide with and without 10 mM of 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol (shown here as an example of the list of organo-sulfur compounds studied), (b) reduction in hydrogen evolution (HE) current at −1.20 V for the various additives listed in Table 1. The dotted lines enclose the data for structurally similar groups of compounds.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Impedance data for iron electrode with 10 mM 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol shown here as an example, (b) equivalent circuit used for analysis of impedance data.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Example of the effect of 10 mM of 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol on the double layer capacitance of iron electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide, (b) effect of 10 mM of 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol on the charge-transfer resistance of iron electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide.	 

1	1.75 × 104	1.79 × 10−4	3.28 × 10−4	0.99
2	1.59 × 101	9.78 × 10−2	7.62 × 10−4	0.99
3	0.23 × 101	7.40 × 10−1	4.49 × 10−1	0.55
4	0.51 × 101	4.86 × 10−1	2.22 × 10−1	0.78
5	1.18 × 101	3.50 × 10−1	1.46 × 10−1	0.85
6	0.91 × 101	4.03 × 10−1	1.05 × 10−1	0.89
7	0.54 × 101	4.81 × 10−1	1.48 × 10−1	0.85
8	1.17 × 101	5.58 × 10−1	1.35 × 10−1	0.86
9	1.18 × 101	3.52 × 10−1	9.49 × 10−2	0.90

 	Fig. 4  Correlation of the ratio of the charge-transfer resistance, with and without organo-sulfur additive, with the ratios of double layer capacitance and steady current at −1.2 V on iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide (data same as in Table 2). Subscript “w” refers to with additive and “wo” to without additive.	 
θ = (1 − Iw/Iwo)	(4)

1-Dodecanethiol	0.99	Strong inter-chain interaction, compact geometric packing
1-Octanethiol	0.99	Strong inter-chain interaction, compact geometric packing
1-Propanethiol	0.55	Weak inter-chain interaction
3,6-Dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol	0.78	Moderate inter-chain interaction, poor packing efficiency due to the two oxygen atoms
1,2-Ethanedithiol	0.85	Two sulfur anchoring groups and packing facilitated by geometry
1,4-Dithiane	0.89	Two sulfur anchoring groups and packing facilitated by geometry
Bismethyldithio-methane	0.85	Two sulfur anchoring groups and packing facilitated by geometry
Benzenethiol	0.86	Strong π–π interaction and efficient stacking parallel to the plane of the ring
2-Methylbenzene-thiol	0.90	Strong π–π interaction and efficient stacking parallel to the plane of the ring

 	Fig. 5  Cyclic voltammograms of iron disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide over the potential range of +0.6 to −1 V (scan direction indicated by arrow) at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 without additive (dashed line) and with 10 mM 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol (solid line).	 
Fe + RS− + OH− → FeS + ROH + 2e−

 	Fig. 6  Potentiodynamic polarization of porous iron battery electrodes with and without organo-sulfur additives (3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol) in 30% potassium hydroxide battery electrolyte. “C-rate” is defined as the current in amperes divided by the capacity of the electrode in ampere-hours. The potential was scanned at a rate of 0.17 mV per second.	 

 	Fig. 7  Discharge capacity of “formed” iron electrodes measured at various rates of discharge with and without organo-sulfur additives (3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol). The X-axis refers to the normalized discharge rate calculated as discharge current in Amperes divided by capacity, C.	 

 	Fig. 8  Cyclic voltammograms of platinum disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, without any additive (dashed line) and with 10 mM of the organo-sulfur additives (solid line): (a) 1-dodecanethiol, (b) 1-octanethiol, (c) 1,2-diethanethiol and (d) 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol. Scan direction has been indicated by arrows.	 

 	Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms of platinum disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, without any additive (dashed line) and with additive (solid line) (a) 10 mM benzenethiol, (b) 10 mM of 2-methylbenzenethiol.	 

 	Fig. 10  Cyclic voltammograms of platinum disk electrode in 1 M potassium hydroxide at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, without any additive (dashed line) and with 10 mM of (a) 1-propanethiol, (b) 1,4-dithiane and (c) bismethyldithiomethane (solid lines). Scan direction indicated by arrow.	 

 	Fig. 11  Oxidation current at 0.4 V vs. MMO on the platinum electrode plotted against the ratio of the charge for the electrosorption of hydrogen between −0.48 V and −0.87 V with and without organo-sulfur additives. Labels correspond to the organo-sulfur additives in Table 1.	 

 	Fig. 12  Typical potential–capacity curves during charge and discharge of iron electrodes treated with and without 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol. Charging was conducted at C/2 rate, and discharge was conducted at C/20 rate.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Comparison of the charging efficiency of in-house prepared iron electrodes containing 3,6-dioxa-1,8-octanedithiol and 1,2-ethanedithiol with commercial electrodes, (b) discharge capacity of iron electrodes following about 50 cycles of formation. Cells were cycled at C/2 rate on charge and C/20 rate on discharge.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See%20DOI:%2010.1039/c4ee01454e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
