Synthesis design strategies to anisotropic chalcogenide  nanostructures  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B918794B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B918794B
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 641-659Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSynthesis design strategies to anisotropic chalcogenide nanostructures

        
          
            Weidong 
            Shi†
, 
      
        
          
            Robert W. 
            Hughes
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Saleem J. 
            Denholme
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Duncan H. 
            Gregory
          
          
        
      *
      WestCHEM, Department of Chemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK G12 8QQ. E-mail: d.gregory@chem.gla.ac.uk
Received 
      9th September 2009
    , Accepted 8th October 2009First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      29th October 2009
    AbstractThe array of low dimensional nanostructured chalcogenides now known is substantial, both in terms of the number of different compounds formed and in terms of the diversity of nano- and microstructures that these compounds adopt. Size, shape, structure (and composition) can each have profound effects on the physical properties of chalcogenide nanostructures and in turn controllable, well-understood synthetic routes are absolutely vital to their growth and subsequent characterisation and exploitation. This Highlight assesses the options open to the inorganic synthetic nanomaterials chemist in producing “made to measure” solids at the nanoscale and examines the commonality in these approaches towards rational nanostructural design.Weidong ShiWeidong Shi obtained his PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. He was awarded a Royal Society Visiting Fellowship to conduct postdoctoral research at the University of Glasgow in 2007. His research focuses on the synthesis and characterisation of inorganic functional nanomaterials and their applications as devices.Robert W. HughesRobert W. Hughes graduated in Chemistry at University College London in 1999. He then moved to the University of Southampton where he obtained a PhD in solid state chemistry in 2004 and remained as a postdoctoral research assistant until 2007. He is currently a WestCHEM Research Fellow at the University of Glasgow. His research interests include microwave-assisted nanomaterials synthesis and structural investigations using neutron diffraction.Saleem J. DenholmeSaleem J. Denholme obtained an honours degree in Chemistry in 2007 at the University of Glasgow where he is currently studying for a PhD under the supervision of Prof. Duncan H. Gregory. His research interests focuses on the synthesis, properties and applications of many transition metal chalcogenide systems.Duncan H. GregoryProf. Duncan H. Gregory studied at the University of Southampton completing his PhD in 1993 under Prof. Mark Weller. He moved to the University of Nottingham first as a postdoctoral research fellow, then EPSRC Advanced Fellow, Lecturer and Reader in Materials Chemistry. He was appointed to the WestCHEM Chair in Inorganic Materials at the University of Glasgow in 2006 and is Head of Inorganic Chemistry. His research interests centre on non-oxides and nanomaterials with potential applications in areas including sustainable energy and electronics.
1. Introduction
Low-dimensional nanostructures including nanotubes, nanowires, nanobelts and nanorods (1D nanostructures) and nanoplates and nanoflakes (2D) have attracted considerable attention from materials scientists and engineers since the discovery of carbon nanotubes in 1991.1–4 This is owing mainly to unique chemical and physical properties that vary significantly from their bulk counterparts and the opportunity to engineer unique and transformable shapes for application in the development of advanced functional nanodevices. As a consequence, anisotropic nanostructures using various materials, such as carbon, silicon, metals, oxides, chalcogenides, carbides, nitrides and other complex compounds have been fabricated successfully through a variety of methods.5–10 Over the last decade, the potential applications of anisotropic inorganic nanostructures in particular have been demonstrated, with properties that find applicability to electronics (conducting wires, transistors, electromechanical devices),11,12 chemical reactivity (catalysis, gas storage),13,14 energy conversion and storage (lithium ion batteries, solar cells, thermoelectrics)15 and optics (lasers, light-emitting diodes, photodetectors);11,16 these in addition to applications as structural materials17 and many proposed uses at the physical science–life science interface.18
This Highlight presents neither a comprehensive review of the rapidly growing mass of different systems of inorganic nanomaterials nor a survey of the many intriguing and often enhanced physical and chemical properties that suggest that the exciting potential of such materials is on the verge of being tapped. Moreover, the focus of this review is to take one select—but nevertheless expansive—grouping of anisotropic inorganic nanostructures and demonstrate how, as a materials chemist, one can stimulate and shape their chemical design. The following sections discuss the varying strands of the ethos of inorganic nanomaterials design as applied to the chalcogenides. The approaches are broken down into solid–gas and solution phase strategies and within each of these sections, subdivided into passages on both the tools and the understanding that impact on these strategies.
The emphasis of the highlight on chalcogenides is apposite; not only was this the family of compounds at the source of the discovery of low dimensional inorganic nanostructures,2 but also the chalcogenides continue to attract and sustain huge interest as structure-property relationships are elucidated and novel nanoscale devices are developed. The particular and distinctive properties of nanostructured chalcogenides (vs. other inorganic nanomaterials) have been reviewed elsewhere, but notable has been the recent emergence of these materials in the context of sustainable energy conversion and storage. For example, 2nd generation solar cells based on CdTe and Cu(In,Ga)Se2 nanostructures have exhibited similar lab-scale device quantum efficiencies (QE) to 1st generation solar cells based on crystalline silicon, but with the considerable advantage that the cost of the former is below half that of the latter.19 Device QE increases with the increasing aspect ratio of the nanostructures.20 Specially constructed Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 superlattices were reported to exhibit the highest room temperature thermoelectric figure-of-merit (ZT) for any known material (2.4).21 Further, Pt-PdS/CdS complex nanostructures have achieved the highest recorded QE for visible light (420 nm) photocatalytic H2 production (93%) using sulfide and sulfite as sacrificial reagents; this performance is close to the QE of natural photosynthesis.22 These are but a few of a number of exciting examples demonstrating how these nanomaterials might make a significant impact on society. The link between synthetic design and crystal design is at the heart of this potential revolution.
2. Solid–gas (vapour) phase synthesis
The combinations of solids or solids with gases are ones that are readily investigated as strategies for the synthesis of chalcogenide nanostructures. In the great majority of cases, reactions involving solids yield anisotropic structures such as nanotubes, nanowires or nanoribbons.11,23,24 There are examples nevertheless of solid (-gas) phase methods producing more complex crystal structures such as is the case for the transition metals triselenides TaSe3 and NbSe3.25–27 Such cases are instances of simple chemical vapour transport (CVT) reactions between elemental metal and chalcogen powders, which require reaction in the vapour phase or between a vapour phase and a substrate often followed by deposition. These processes have the capacity to produce not only nanowires but also alternative morphologies, which could be “secondary structures” formed from anisotropic, filamentous components (Fig. 1). These procedures, exemplar systems and mechanisms for growth are considered more fully in the subsections below.
 Fig. 1  SEM image showing formation of TaSe3 rings.27 
2.1 Chemical vapour transport (CVT) techniques
The intriguing morphology of TaSe3 and NbSe3 is a facet not only of the high crystalline anisotropy that is associated with many transition metal 1D (M–Q chain containing; Q = S, Se, Te) trichalcogenides28 but also of the method of the reaction of the chalcogen(ide), which plays a major role by acting as an in situ template within the CVT process. Generally, the CVT process is reported to proceed via three steps:29 (1) the evaporation of the solid reactants, (2) transport of the reactants from one end of the reaction vessel to the other whilst in the vapour phase and (3) condensation of the vapour on a surface from which it grows. The reaction is thus conducted within a closed system and the vapour pressure induced within the vessel is dependant upon factors such as temperature and the stoichiometric ratios of the reactants. A CVT reaction proceeds best under non-stoichiometric conditions although too far a departure from stoichiometric conditions will decrease the growth rate as a result of the increased pressure from the vapour.30 In the case of TaSe3 and NbSe3 the vapour produced solely consists of selenium not only because this reactant is in excess but also because the reaction temperatures are not enough to heat the metal sufficiently to melt it. This richness in selenium is essential to the reaction as it is thought that the selenium acts as a carrier gas and transports particles of the metal along the tube where they condense on the surface of the ampoule and nucleate into nanowires. SEM and focused ion beam (FIB) experiments were at the heart of rationalising the formation of the unusual and extraordinary “secondary structures” in these triselenide systems.25,26 Preformed nanocrystals (nanoribbons) of MSe3 condense onto suspended droplets of selenium vapour during the reaction and grow around the spheres to create rings and a whole host of unusual structures including Möbius strips (1π twist as the ribbons wraps around the Se droplet core) and figures of eight (2 π twist on wrapping) (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3).
 Fig. 2  Above (a–c), schematic showing the proposed mechanism for the growth of NbSe3 nanorings, Möbius strips and figures of eight and below (d and e) experimental in situ SEM images of the growth process. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, 417, 397, copyright (2002). 
 Fig. 3  SEM image micrograph illustrating a “secondary” micron-scale structure formed in situ from crystallisation of TaSe3 nanoribbons around a selenium core (which subsequently vaporises).27 
In 2005 a CVT route was developed to produce nanowires of the telluride Nb3Te4.31,32 Again in this process the solid reactants, elemental Nb and Te, were sealed in an evacuated reaction tube. The initial reaction of the elemental powders forms NbTe2 crystallites, which are then converted to Nb3Te4 nanowires and nanoparticles at elevated temperature (1160 °C). The wires were straight with diameters of 50 nm−1 μm. Selected Area Electron Diffraction (SAED) confirmed the nanowires to crystallise in hexagonal space group P63/m, growing along the [0001] direction. It should be noted that tellurium has a melting point of 449.5 °C and therefore elemental Te should be molten during the initial reaction with Nb powder to form NbTe2 crystals. It is considered that a vapour transport process subsequently occurs under the elevated annealing temperature and reduced pressure, with the result that Nb3Te4 nanowires are formed from the gas phase growing outward from an initial core of material (transformed from NbTe2 to Nb3Te4). This synthetic route has the potential to be used to obtain other low dimensional semi-metallic and semiconducting telluride nanostructures at elevated temperature.
2.2 Surface assisted CVT (SACVT) and chemical vapour deposition (CVD)
Transition metal dichalcogenides are an extensively investigated area among nanostructured chalcogenide systems and notably provided the first examples of inorganic fullerene-like structures with nanostructured WS2 discovered in 1992.2 These nanomaterials were produced simply by the heating of a tungsten film deposited onto on a quartz support at a temperature of 1000 °C under an atmosphere of H2S gas. This synthesis process is effectively one variation of chemical vapour deposition (CVD). Classically, CVD involves the heating of a starting material to produce a vapour, which is condensed further along the cooler part of a reaction vessel onto a surface from which the growth of the product occurs. This source material can be simply the elemental reactants partaking in a CVT process such as in the synthesis of TaS2 nanowires.33 Here stoichiometric ratios of tantalum and sulfur are heated in an inert atmosphere with or without the presence of a spatially separated tantalum metal substrate; the latter is described as surface assisted CVT (SACVT). In the SACVT reaction, the vapour condenses onto the metal foil substrate, nanowires nucleate and subsequently propagation occurs via a cooperative growth mechanism in a preferred crystallographic direction. Bundles of nanowires obtained had lengths of around 1 mm and diameters of up to 2.5 μm while individual fibres were of the order of 50–200 nm in diameter. Careful analysis with TEM, SAED and nanodiffraction techniques demonstrated that the nanowires were rectangular in cross-section (nanotapes), and with structures identified as the 2H polytype of TaS2 (Fig. 4).34 The TaS2 nanowires superconduct at 3.8 K, four times higher than the equivalent bulk material.33
 Fig. 4  (a) Bright field TEM image of single-crystalline TaS2 nanowires with the corresponding SAED pattern in the [0001] projection (b) Bright field TEM image of a bundle of nanowires. Reproduced with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 45, 7060. Copyright 2006. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
The use of a non-elemental precursor, e.g. a halide salt, as a source of either the metal or chalcogen however is perhaps a more widespread approach. The recent synthesis of hyperbranched crystalline clusters of PbS and PbSe, for example, used a precursor of PbCl2.35 The crystals display epitaxial growth (secondary growth of nanowires upon existing nanowires) when reacted with the powdered chalcogen under a flow of hydrogen gas. The growth is mediated by the gas itself. Short bursts of hydrogen produce complex crystalline structures, whereas longer exposure times can eventually produce nanocubes (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  (a) Epitaxial growth of hyperbranched clusters of PbSe and (b) nanocubes of PbSe grown under short and prolonged exposures to hydrogen, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 7, 2907. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
There are a number of examples of similar methods used to prepare nanostructured tellurides. The CVD fabrication of GeTe nanowires grown via a vapour liquid solid (VLS) mechanism (see section 2.3) was reported for the first time in 2006.36 An independent study also reported a similar route for the growth of GeTe and Sb2Te3 nanowires.37 The use of gold nanoparticles as a catalyst is a key factor in the formation of these nanowires and this relates to the melting points (724 and 630 °C, respectively) and amorphous phase-crystallization temperatures (145 and 77 °C, respectively) of GeTe and Sb2Te3. Inspection of the relevant phase diagrams demonstrates the possibility of VLS growth with Au as the catalyst; GeTe and Sb2Te3 have a relatively simple bulk quasi-binary phase diagram with Au (Fig. 6). The eutectic temperatures for the respective tellurides are 480 and 454 °C, hence the selection of a reaction temperature at 450 °C for the synthesis of the telluride nanowires. A further development of this growth route was used to obtain more complex nanowires of the ternary phase, Ge2Sb2Te5.38 The chemical composition of the Ge–Sb–Te nanowires could be controlled by varying the location of the precursors with respect to the heating zone and external carrier gas (Ar) flow and the also the growth temperature itself. More recently, it was also found that the growth temperature and the flow rate of Ar carrier gas have a strong influence on the morphology of Sb2Te3 nanostructures, with variation of these conditions producing Sb2Te3 nanowires, nanobelts or nanotubes.39 In similarly designed experiments, the CVD synthesis of pure or Cu doped ZnTe nanowires, using Au nanoparticles as a catalyst has also been reported.40 Besides the use of Au nanoparticles in this context, Bi thin films or Bi2Te3 nanoparticles have also been exploited as catalysts in the fabrication of telluride nanorods, most notably those of CdTe.41,42
 Fig. 6  (a) Quasi-binary phase diagram of Au with GeTe (or Sb2Te3); (b) SEM image of as-grown nanowires from GeTe evaporation; scale bar represents 2 μm; (c) HRSEM image of helical GeTe nanowires with an inset SEM image of a straight-helical nanowire junction; scale bar represents 500 nm; (d) SEM image of thin and curved nanowires from GeTe evaporation; scale bar represents 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 6, 1514. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
2.3 The vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth mechanism
Solid–gas reaction methodologies such as (SA)CVT and CVD frequently take the concept of VLS growth as a central precept. The mechanism was first proposed by R. S. Wagner et al. in 1964 in the case where an element foreign to the reaction under consideration, in this case gold, was utilised to act as a catalyst in the growth of whiskers of Si from a silicon substrate.43 The VLS mechanism functions through the formation of the catalyst as a liquid droplet in situ—often nucleating crystal growth at one end of 1D (nano)crystals and mediating their propagation. Thus, there are essentially three stages to the process: (1) creation/introduction of the participating metal or alloy droplets, (2) subsequent sorption of the vapour phase on and diffusion into the droplet, (3) the supersaturation of the metal (alloy) droplet and the nucleation at the liquid–solid interface leading to consequent anisotropic growth. Many factors influence the VLS mechanism; factors directly related to the catalyst itself such as the growth of the liquid droplet, its composition or rate of decomposition and also the interaction between the catalyst and the reactive elements, which in turn are controlled by aspects such as surface tension and electronegativity.44 For example, in the synthesis of PbS and PbSe nanostructures (see section 2.2), it is proposed that growth is mediated through a self-catalysed VLS mechanism.35 The low melting point of the lead (328 °C) which is produced by the reduction of a PbCl2 precursor by hydrogen gas provides a nucleation point and a source of Pb feedstock for subsequent growth of PbS(Se) nanowires. The wires then continue to grow until the lead is either consumed by the reactants, evaporated or diffused away; resulting in tapering at the ends of wires and also providing a means of hyperbranching (“cross-linking”) as further reduced Pb is deposited on existing networks of wires (Fig. 7 and 8).
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the self-catalytic role that lead is proposed to play during the reaction to form PbS and PbSe hyperbranched nanowire structures. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 7, 2907. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 8  SEM image providing experimental evidence of lead present at the ends of PbQ (Q = S, Se) nanowires. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 7, 2907. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, in addition to PbS(Se) examples, PbTe (Fig. 9) nanostructures have been produced using the same lead halide precursor, PbCl2.45 Although no proposed mechanism was discussed, the parallels in the precursor choice, reaction set up and the close similarity of the structures of the products obtained (which also grow in the <100> directions) suggest that an analogous VLS mechanism was responsible for the PbQ structures in this case as compared to the previous examples (ref. 35). Significantly, the PbQ nanostructures so-formed exhibit thermal conductivity values many times lower than the equivalent bulk materials (e.g. 10–1000 times less for PbSe below 100 K), with important implications for the construction of thermoelectric nanodevices.
 Fig. 9  SEM image of PbTe hyperbranched nanowire arrays synthesised using a PbCl2 precursor. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Mater., 19, 3047. Copyright 2007. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
A direct example of how the VLS mechanism can be exploited to alter the outcome of a reaction and control the morphology of the products can be seen in the formation of ZnS nanostructures.46 ZnS nanobelts and wires are grown by reacting ZnS powder with Si substrates coated with a 5 nm layer of gold. As with a classical VLS mechanism, the reaction has been understood by breaking it down into several stages: (1) the reactant vaporises and condenses upon the surface of the gold and the sides of already forming nanostructures, (2) the reactive species form a solution with the droplets of gold catalyst, (3) diffusion of the reactive species within the droplets occurs, (4) the wires grow by incorporation of the vaporised reactants and subsequent precipitation as well defined product crystals at the liquid–solid interface. It is hypothesised that competing diffusion processes—i.e. growth from the catalyst droplet vs. growth at the side surface planes of the emerging nanowire—determine the resultant nanostructure morphology and crystallography (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  SEM images of ZnS nanostructures formed from competing VLS mechanisms showing (a) periodically twinned zinc blende nanowires and (b) asymmetric polytypic wurtzite nanobelts. Zinc droplets are observed at the ends of both types of material. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 6, 1650. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
Therefore the growth of these ZnS nanostructures is determined not only by the catalyst droplet itself but also by the nature of the side planes of the propagating nanocrystal. If a steady supply of vapour from the reactants is maintained then either the crystal growth at the liquid–solid interface (at low temperatures) or diffusion within the catalyst (at high temperatures) can become rate determining. The competitive diffusion processes discussed above become relevant at step (2) of the growth process when atoms in the vapour phase can alternatively diffuse through the side surfaces of the forming wire (Fig.11). In the asymmetric polytypic wurtzite nanobelts, these exposed surfaces are of higher energy and more chemically active. It remains uncertain, however, as to reasons why one phase of ZnS nanostructure over the other occurs at the initial growth stages.
 Fig. 11  Schematics of the growth processes of (a) periodically twinned zinc blende nanobelts and (b) asymmetric polytypic wurtzite nanobelts, respectively. (“CZB” and “HWZ” in the figure refer to cubic zinc blende and hexagonal wurtzite, respectively.) Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 6, 1650. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
2.4 The vapour–solid (VS) growth mechanism
The vapour–solid (VS) mechanism by contrast to the VLS process requires no catalyst. Such mechanisms were originally proposed for growth of SiC whiskers several decades ago and frequently occur in CVD processing.47 The mechanism is the most likely means by which uncatalysed CVT reactions such as those to nanowires of Nb3Te4 and TaS2 proceed.31–34 Similarly, the mechanism has been proposed for the synthesis of ZnS nanobelts on a graphite substrate where it is proposed that the ZnS phase (sublimation temperature 1180 °C) itself is transported from a powder source in the vapour phase to the substrate under a flowing N2 atmosphere.48 In fact, compared to the much studied VLS mechanism, relatively little is documented regarding the detail of the VS formulism with respect to chalcogenide nanostructures. More generally, the most widely accepted means of VS growth in anisotropic nanostructures are by self-catalytic growth or via defect-induced growth. The latter commonly occurs by a process of screw dislocations at the kink sites of a surface step.49 For chalcogenides, in some cases, a proposed mechanism can be almost intermediate between VS and VLS as is illustrated by the synthesis of multilayer superstructures of single-crystalline ZnTe nanowire films.50 In the growth process, Te powder is placed upstream and Zn powder on a silicon wafer placed downstream in a tube furnace with an Ar carrier gas at a temperature of 700 °C. In 1 h, many layers of aligned ZnTe nanowire superstructures are produced in a discontinuous manner. The proposed growth model follows a multiple nucleation growth scheme and can be split into several stages (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of the multiple nucleation growth model for ZnTe layered nanowires. Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 112, 20307. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
The zinc powder softens to form semi-molten droplets upon the surface of the silicon (Fig. 12a). The top surface of this droplet however is in direct contact with the flow of argon gas, which, it is suggested, cools it sufficiently to form a solid interface. The bottom half is in direct contact with the Si wafer is not cooled and therefore remains molten (Fig. 12b). The tellurium powder evaporates and is absorbed by the zinc droplet. This forms a zinc–tellurium alloy, which in turn is precipitated out as a solid layer of ZnTe at the bottom of the “droplet” (Fig. 12c). This process continues (Fig. 12d and e) until the droplet is eventually consumed and multiple nucleations and stacked nanowire layer formations are complete (Fig. 12f).
2.5 Precursors, gaseous chalcogen sources and reduction methods
CVT and CVD methods conducted under vacuum or using an inert carrier gas are two of the most chemically controllable solid–vapour techniques available to afford anisotropic—predominantly axially grown—chalcogenide nanostructures. An alternative methodology related to CVD employs reactive gas streams that hence both participate in chemical reactions and act as carriers (physical transport agents). Such techniques were employed famously to produce the first chalcogenide nanostructures; nanotubes and inorganic fullerides of the group 6 and group 5 (and later group 4) transition metal dichalcogenides, MQ2 (M = Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Mo, W; Q = S, Se).3,51 For example, the synthesis of MoS2 nanotubes can be achieved via the sulfiding of a MoO3 precursor.52 Two versions of reactor were used in these syntheses, the first (Fig. 13a) a simple deposition arrangement in which the substrate was located downstream of the precursor under a reactive gas mixture in a tube furnace, the second a modification in which two separate gas streams were introduced (Fig. 13b). In either case, the principle behind the experiment design is that a volatile oxide precursor (MoO3; sublimes at 650 °C) is reduced in situ (by H2/N2 to MoO2via MoO3−x) and reacts with the gaseous chalcogen source (H2S) to form inorganic fullerides and nanotubes. The suitability of the precursor is illustrated by reference to the Mo–S–O phase diagram (Fig. 14) and the evolution of oxide to sulfide is proposed to occur through a core-shell type mechanism in which a disulfide shell grows initially around a reduced oxide core.
 Fig. 13  Schematic representations of alternative reaction setups for synthesis of MoS2 nanotubes with (a) one and (b) two feed gas streams. From Science, 1995, 267, 222. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
 Fig. 14  Ternary phase diagram of Mo–S–O illustrating the different reaction pathways influential in the formation of molybdenum sulfides; (1) partial reduction of MoO3, (2) sulfidation of the reduced oxide to MoS2, (3) complete reduction of MoO3, (4) partial reduction/sulfidation of MoO3, (5) sulfidation of the reduced oxide to MoS3, (6) reduction of MoS3 to MoS2. From Science, 1995, 267, 222. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. 
Investigations of the processing conditions reveal that at low temperature and with excess sulfur, the dominant resulting phase is amorphous MoS3 but at higher temperatures material crystallising as the 2H polytype of MoS2 predominates. In fact, the lower temperature route via MoS3 is the preferable one since a steady loss of sulfur allows the gradual change of amorphous MoS3 into nanocrystallites (nested shells) of MoS2.53
Production of MQ2 nanostructures via a direct reduction route was first achieved using MoS3 and WS3 as precursors to the respective disulfides.54 In fact, the amorphous trisulfides were produced from the decomposition of ammonium thiomolybdate or thiotungstate, respectively, under flowing Ar, which were in turn reduced under a flow of hydrogen at temperatures of 1200–1300 °C. This was later proven effective to produce NbS2 and TaS2 under similar reaction conditions and can be represented by the following eqn (1):55 MS3 + H2 → MS2 + H2S (M = Mo, W, Nb, Ta).(1)
Similarly, TaS3 nanobelts were reacted under vacuum at 850 °C to prepare nanobelts of TaS2.56 The nanostructured TaS3 precursor was previously synthesised from Ta plates and S powder using an I2 transport agent in a sealed evacuated tube. TEM studies showed that the TaS3 nanobelts had a width of 40–900 nm, a thickness of 20–50 nm and lengths of several centimetres and at high resolution demonstrated lattice fringe spacings of 0.308 and 1.521 nm corresponding to the (1200) and (010) spacings of orthorhombic TaS3. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) showed that the trisulfide nanobelts grew along the [031] direction (Fig. 15). The same analysis of the as-synthesised TaS2 nanobelts showed that the belt morphology of the TaS3 is maintained but that the crystallography is markedly different, as would be expected. The disulfide nanobelts grow along the [110] direction and possess lattice fringes of 0.289, 0.298 and 0.217 nm, which correspond to the (101), (0012) and (0111) spacings of hexagonal TaS2.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern of a single TaS3 nanobelt, (c) TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of a single TaS2 nanobelt. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 201. X. Wu et al., Tantalum disulfide nanobelts: preparation, superconductivity and field emission, with permission from IOP Publishing. 
2.7 Template assisted growth and other methods
Although the employment of an inert nanoscale template is an increasingly common way to synthesise inorganic nanostructures (and particularly nanowires), in most cases these methods are used in solution, for example as is the case in the synthesis of Ag2Se and Ag2S compounds.57,58 Template-assisted synthesis provides a convenient and reproducible method for the preparation of uniform nanowires of various lengths and diameters. These methods are thus a versatile route for preparing 1D chalcogenide nanostructures of prescribed dimensions (set by the template). Vapour transport (effectively modified SACVT or CVD) is one route by which nanomaterials can be crystallised within the template, which for chalcogenide growth is commonly porous anodic alumina (PAA). Highly ordered PAA membranes are fabricated by the anodization of aluminium foils, either in H3PO4, (COOH)2 or in H2SO4 electrolytes. For electrodeposition a metallic layer, in general an Au thin film, is sputtered on one side of the membrane to serve as a working electrode in a standard three-electrode electrochemical cell.59
A typical example of templated growth from the vapour phase is that of ZnS nanotubes synthesised using a PAA membrane.60 The preparation involves the heating of a volatile precursor, dialkyldithiocarbamate, Zn(S2CNEt2)2 in a horizontal tube furnace under a flow of N2 gas at a temperature of 200 °C. The template itself is heated at 400 °C further upstream from the reactants. The deposition reaction occurs in 30 min and the filled template was annealed for a further 5 h at 400 °C subsequently (converting amorphous nanotubes to ones with a crystalline wurtzite structure). This resulted in the production of high density well aligned ZnS nanotubes (Fig. 16) from a method that could be used on a larger scale.
 Fig. 16  SEM images of ZnS nanotubes (a) in plan view illustrating the open ends and at high magnification in the inset image, (b) as a cross-sectional view of the aligned nanowire array. Reproduced with permission from Chem. Vap. Deposition, 11, 205. Copyright 2005. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
There are a number of other mainly unrelated routes proposed to produce nanostructured chalcogenides from one or more solid reactants. One such approach is mechanochemical processing, which has been employed very effectively to produce nanostructured oxides61 but there are also a cluster of studies on the production of chalcogenide nanomaterials. An example is the creation of FeS2 (pyrite) and FeS (troilite) nanoparticles via the mechanical high energy milling of bulk powders of Fe and S (or bulk FeS2 and Fe to produce FeS) using NaCl as a dispersion medium.62 The process to produce FeS2 from its bulk counterpart is, in essence, a physical one, but the creation of nanoparticles of the iron sulfides from the elements is a genuine mechanochemical one. NaCl takes no formal part in a chemical reaction and although its use undeniably provides a means to reduce the particle size (to < 10 nm) there appears little opportunity to manipulate the morphology of the nanostructured products.
3. Liquid phase routes
There are many variables in the liquid phase that offer a huge parameter space in which to work. Choice of reagents, solvents, concentrations, additives, temperature, pressure, heating and cooling rates, are just some of the factors that can have a bearing on (a) the identity of the product and (b) the morphology that the material adopts. In certain cases it is possible to identify the growth mechanisms of the materials, relate these back to the reaction parameters and hence be presented with the possibility of nanomaterial design. In other cases however it is not fully understood yet how certain choices of reaction parameter can give rise to certain morphologies and further investigations will be needed to be able to exploit designable materials.
3.1 Growing nanostructures from solution
Perhaps the simplest examples of liquid phase reactions are carried out with conventional solution methods. A source of metal and a source of chalcogen are reacted together in a solvent and a nanomaterial is precipitated. In some cases these reactions will even proceed at room temperature. For example, HgQ (Q = S, Se, Te) nano-crystals are synthesised by reaction of the elemental chalcogen with HgO in ethylenediamine (en), with stirring for 6–16 h.63
The introduction of structure directing agents (SDA) will impact on the product morphology and provides a very powerful means of controlling crystallisation in solution. In the example of the reaction of lead(II) acetate trihydrate (Pb(Ac)2·3H2O) and thioacetamide at room temperature, use of an SDA can switch the product morphology from an anisotropic morphology to an isotropic one.64 Without the SDA fern-like microcrystals of PbS are produced. In the presence of poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) the reaction can generate nano-cubes of PbS. PVP molecules interact selectively with different facets of the nanocrystals. In this system, growth in the <111> directions is enhanced and in the <100> directions is reduced by the presence of PVP. With or without PVP, at the initial nucleation stage the {110}, {111} and {100} faces co-exist. However, in the case of PVP-directed growth, as the reaction proceeds only the {100} faces remain and cubic PbS is formed (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  SEM of PbS nanocubes synthesised in the presence of PVP. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 125301. Y. Dong et al., Two minute synthesis of PbS nanocubes with high yield and good dispersibility at room temperature, with permission from IOP Publishing. 
The majority of solution reactions are however carried out at higher temperatures, and often in solvents that themselves have a structure directing effect. The reactions are often quite rapid. Reactions are usually accomplished by injecting the reagents directly into a solvent that has been pre-heated to the reaction temperature. Tin sulfide (SnS) nano-pyramids (Fig. 18) can be synthesised from oleylamine (OLA) that is pre-heated to 170 °C.65 SnCl2 and elemental sulfur are dissolved initially in a separate volume of warm OLA and injected into the hot solvent. The reaction mixture changes from clear orange to cloudy black with time and the reaction is complete after 3 h. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXD) revealed the nanopyramids to form with the zinc blende structure. The same reaction proceeds within several minutes at 230 °C but, by contrast, results in products with a plate morphology and at this higher temperature, orthorhombic SnS is the product. The variations in morphology are therefore reflective of the different crystal structures favoured at the different synthesis temperatures (170 vs. 230 °C).
 Fig. 18  (a) SAED of a single tetrahedron of SnS. The dashed circle indicates the area on the particle contributing to the diffraction. (b) TEM image indicating the 3D structure of a tetrahedron. A model is overlaid to guide the eye. Reproduced with permission from Small, 2, 368. Copyright 2006. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
Pyramidal nano-crystals of PbSe can be synthesised through the use of n-trioctylphosphine (TOP) as an SDA.66 Lead acetate in TOP is heated to 100–120 °C, and then a solution of trioctylphosphine selenide (TOPSe) is injected. Stirring at temperature for 1–3 h yields a black suspension. Temperature is again an important variable in driving morphology. At lower temperatures, large flake-like particles are produced whereas at higher temperatures (>130 °C) nanopyramids and nanospheres are the products. PXRD of the low temperature product reveals poor crystallinity and it is suggested that the flakes are formed as part of a constant layer by layer nucleation process. At higher temperature the kinetics favour the capping with TOP, and hence uniform generation of PbSe with a smaller particle size occurs.
Combinations of higher reaction temperature and use of multiple SDAs can be applied to produce nanocrystallites of very small dimensions. For example, nano-crystalline Ni3S4 with a particle size of approximately 10 nm (Fig. 19) can be prepared from NiCl2 dissolved in an OLA/TOP mixture.67 The solution is heated initially to 110 °C and then added to a 120 °C solution of sulfur in OLA. After raising the temperature to 220 °C for an hour, the product is quenched by withdrawing a portion of the solution at temperature and collecting it in a glass vial. If the reaction is carried out at lower temperature (180 °C) only a very small yield of nanocrystals is observed. The reaction proceeds in two steps with the Ni(II) precursor first reduced by OLA to nickel metal nanoparticles which are then sulfided to Ni3S4. It would seem to be this reduction step which does not proceed at lower temperature, since no Ni crystals are seen in the product.
 Fig. 19  TEM image of Ni3S4 nanocrystals grown from an OLA/TOP solvent. Reprinted with permission from Langmuir, 21, 9451. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
The source of chalcogen plays an important role in the employment of solution routes to nanomaterials. Notable, for example, is the use of organoselenium sources to yield nanostructured selenides. β-Ag2Se nano-powders can be synthesised simply from mixing solutions of cyclohepteno-1,2,3-selenadiazole in DMF and aqueous AgNO3, refluxing at 110–140 °C for 5 h, and heating overnight at 80 °C.68 The synthesis route capitalises on the known decomposition of selenadiazoles to selenium (and, in this case, cycloheptyne) when heated in an inert atmosphere. It is proposed that the silver nitrate is reduced to silver metal by hydrogen from a DMF–H2O interaction and so the reaction to form the product is between elemental silver and selenium.
Similar reactions can be carried out with cycloocteno-1,2,3-selenadiazole which decomposes to Se and cyclooctyne. The cycloocteno-1,2,3-selenadiazole reacts with lead acetate in oleic acid and diphenyl ether at 120–150 °C to produce shiny black nano-cubes of PbSe.69 A similar reaction with Hg(OAc)2 in DMF–H2O at 120–130 °C for 8 h yields irregular nanoparticles of HgSe.70 In these cases it is possible that minor differences in crystal structure have a bearing on the different morphologies. Both are cubic but PbSe is a rock salt structure, whilst HgSe forms as a zinc blende phase.
Whilst the general trend with the solution routes described above is to form nanostructures that tend to isotropy, such as approximate cubes and pyramids, there are conversely some syntheses that lead to the preferential formation of nanowires. In some cases anisotropic nanostructures are only produced within a very small part of the parameter space of a given reaction system. For example, in the synthesis of Ag2S from AgNO3 and elemental sulfur in octadecylamine (ODA), nanowires are only formed within a narrow band of temperature and composition.71 The reaction will form nanostructured Ag2S between 90–160 °C, but nanowires only form at ca. 120 °C (Fig. 20). These nanowires are 10–30 nm in diameter with lengths up to several hundreds of microns. At higher temperatures, monodisperse nanospheres are formed, with sizes ranging from 13–45 nm dependent on the reaction temperature. Concentration of sulfur was also found to have an effect and if it is reduced by half, wires will not form at 120 °C and spheres are the favoured products (conversely if the initial sulfur concentration is doubled, the aspect ratio of the wires increases dramatically). These effects on nanowire formation are rationalised by the rate at which sulfur can react with silver to produce Ag2S. At lower temperatures, the viscosity of the solvent means that most Ag2S particles formed will be capped before they encounter further sulfur resulting in small spheres. At higher temperatures the ODA capping efficiency is reduced as the molecule has too much energy and as additionally the sulfur has a higher rate of homogenous diffusion leading to bigger nanospheres. Only at 120 °C is there an ideal equilibrium of adsorption and desorption between the ODA and Ag which creates the right environment of sulfur for orientational adsorption and reaction with Ag to form nanowires.
 Fig. 20  Ag2S nanostructures grown from AgNO3 and S in ODA at varying temperature and S concentration; (a) SEM image of high aspect ratio Ag2S nanowires and (b) TEM image of almost monodisperse Ag2S nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Mater., 20, 2628. Copyright 2008. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
Other reactions performed using the long chain amine ODA as the solvent have resulted in high aspect ratio nanowires such as the ultranarrow nanowires produced in the Zn–Se system.72 In this example, zinc acetate is first dissolved in ODA at 140 °C. Selenourea dissolved in a volume of hot ODA/DMF is then added to the zinc acetate solution. At reaction times of ca. 25 min, nanorods of ZnSe are formed, but if the reaction is allowed to proceed for an hour then nanowires of ZnSe predominate. TEM shows the rods to be an average of 1.3 nm diameter with typical lengths of 4.5 nm. The wires produced at longer durations have the same diameter, but extend up to 200 nm in length. The nanowires assemble further into micron sized bundles of uniformly parallel wires. The viscosity and capping ability of ODA would be appear to be crucial in these and other examples in driving from isotropic to anisotropic chalcogenide nanostructures.
3.2 Elevated pressures; hydrothermal and solvothermal methods
Solvothermal methods (of which hydrothermal methods form a subsection) can be seen as a natural extension to solution based routes. The methodology adds a further variable into the equation since reactions run in autoclaves will develop different autogenous pressures dependent on the reaction temperature. Other than this, the overriding synthetic strategy is very similar—the combination of a source of metal and chalcogen, a suitable solvent and possibly the addition of SDAs.
SDAs would not always appear to be essential to generate anisotropic morphologies under typical solvothermal synthesis conditions, however. As is sometimes encountered in ambient pressure solution approaches, the inherent crystal structure of a material will initiate the formation of a specific morphology on the nanoscale. For instance, in a reaction between SbCl3 and K2TeO3 in the presence of tartaric acid, ammonium hydroxide and hydrazine, carried out at 180 °C for 5 h, hexagonal nanoplates of Sb2Te3 are formed.73 The plates have edge lengths of 500–800 nm, with a thickness of 80 nm. The crystal structure of Sb2Te3 is rhombohedral (space group Rm) and composed of alternating Te and Sb layers that stack along the c direction, Te(1)–Sb–Te(2)–Sb–Te(1). These are separated by van der Waals interactions between adjacent Te(1) layers. In the ab plane of the layer, bonding is covalent. Thermodynamically there is more free energy in a broken covalent bond than in disrupted van der Waals interactions so growth in the ab plane is much faster. It is argued that the crystal structure of the material is therefore the driving force for the highly anisotropic growth.
Equally the solvent itself can play an important role in the morphology of the final product. In a series of reactions between copper acetate, complexed by citric acid, with thiourea, a variety of product morphologies of CuS were produced dependent on solvent.74 Reagent concentrations were kept identical, and all reactions were run at 160 °C for 24 h. The most unusual morphology synthesised was that of flowers constructed of flakes using ethanol as a solvent. The key to this growth is that ethanol is non-coordinating to the copper ion. Co-ordinating solvents, such as ethylenediamine and ethylene glycol formed smaller, less regular shapes (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  SEM images of as-prepared copper sulfide products at 160 °C for 24 h in different solvents: (a) water, (b) ethanol–water (1:1), (c) ethanol, (d) ethylenediamine, (e) ethylene glycol–ether, (f) benzene. Reprinted from Mater. Lett., 61, 5029. J. Zou et al., Low-temperature synthesis of copper sulfide nano-crystals of novel morphologies by hydrothermal process. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. 
Nevertheless, in other systems the use of SDAs, which strongly co-ordinate to the metal centre, can lead to unusual and especially complex architectures. The hydrothermal reaction of manganese chloride and thiourea with ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid for 48 h at 180 °C, for example, yields flower-like hierarchical architectures, comprised of uniform sheets.75 The sheets are ∼600 nm long, 150–300 nm wide and 10–20 nm thick, resulting in a secondary structure of flowers on the 1–2 μm scale. PXD studies reveal that the crystal structure of the microflowers is that of the cubic α-polymorph of MnS.
The use of a capping agent as an SDA will inevitably prevent aggregation and reduce the size of the product. However, judicious choice of capping agent can also influence preferential directional growth and encourage low dimensionality in the ensuing morphology of products. In the synthesis of CuS, reacting copper acetate with CS2 in toluene, nano-platelets are the result when hexadecylamine (HDA) is added as a capping agent.76 The hexagonal plates are 26 ± 1.5 nm in diameter and 8 ± 1.2 nm thick. Preferential growth in the {110} planes combined with HDA binding to the {006} facet (and hence inhibiting growth in the <001> direction) both contribute to the morphology observed. The plates, in turn, self-assemble into stacks, where the plates are held together by face-to-face van der Waals interactions, which are greater than for an edge-to-edge arrangement.
In an increasing number of cases, the inhibition of isotropic growth can be achieved by the use of biomolecules as SDAs in solvothermal reactions. Cysteine, C3H7NO2S, for example, is an ideal choice in the preparation of sulfide materials since it can act both as a reagent and an SDA. This is illustrated beautifully in the hydrothermal reaction of cadmium acetate and L-cysteine in the presence of ethylenediamine which produces a variety of different rod-based architectures of CdS, dependent on the ratio of H2O to en.77 At higher en levels, nanowires are the product. As the water ratio is increased, these become shorter, and aggregate into urchins or spheres (Fig. 22). The implication is that both the ethylenediamine and the L-cysteine are intimately (and perhaps cooperatively) involved in the structure directing mechanism since reactions carried out with other sulfur sources such as thiourea or thioacetamide did not yield these interesting architectures.
 Fig. 22  Field emission SEM (FESEM) images of CdS samples prepared under different water/en volume ratios: (a and b) 1:2; (c and d)1:4; (e and f) 1:9. Molar ratio of Cd(Ac)2/L-cysteine = 1:2, reaction for 24 h at 180 °C. Reproduced with permission from Chem.–Eur. J., 13, 3076. Copyright 2007. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
Equally, biomolecules such as amino acids can be exploited solely as SDAs. Highly branched architectures of PbS are the result when PbCl2 and thiourea are reacted hydrothermally in the presence of aspartic acid, histidine or serine.78 Under identical conditions (150 °C, 15 h) the architecture observed depends on which amino acid SDA was present. Aspartic acid was observed to afford fern-like assemblies of nano-rods 100–200 nm in diameter and with lengths of ∼2 μm (Fig. 23). When serine is the additive, similar ‘leaves’ are joined together into bipyramids with an approximate apical length of 8 μm (although the rods comprising them are still of similar size to those previously observed). Histidine gives even larger multi-pyramid assemblies, but with a loss of the finer branch structure on individual lobes. The approach can be extended to other amino acids and small peptides. Glutathione for example produces bipyramids similar to those from the serine reaction. The functional groups in the different acids have an effect on the structure directing properties, and some rationale for this is proposed to be based on their co-ordinating ability, acidity/basicity and space filling (steric effects). The carbonyl group in aspartic acid reduces the acidity of the molecule, and it will therefore be less co-ordinating to the metal. The hydroxyl group of serine is a stronger co-ordinating group and aids the formation of the bipyramids. The bipyramid structures are also formed using cysteine, where hydroxyl is replaced by sulfhydryl (–SH). However, if the amino acid used is methionine, where the functional group is now a bulkier –SCH3, then no assembly into larger secondary architectures such as the micron-sized pyramids is observed. Finally histidine, which showed the largest assemblies, has a conjugated double bond in the imidazole group, which will give it good proton acceptor ability and aid the co-ordination to the metal.
 Fig. 23  SEM image of the fern-like assembly of PbS nanowires synthesised with aspartic acid as an SDA. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2574. Q. Lu et al., Multi-level assemblies of lead sulfide nanorods, with permission from IOP Publishing. 
Increasing the molecular complexity (size) of additives still further, polymers offer another group of SDAs that can be employed in the synthesis of chalcogenide nanomaterials. Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with an average polymerization degree of 2400–2500 was used to control the morphology of nanostructured Sb2Se3.79 This hydrothermal reaction was carried out between SbCl3 and Na2SeSO3 in a 1 M tartaric acid solution at 200 °C for 16 h. The PVA was used as a 4.8% solution. The resulting product morphology was nano-belts with a width of 200–400 nm and lengths up to 20 μm. An independent study using a higher concentration of PVA (9.1%) and heating in an autoclave at 180 °C for 20 h produced ribbons of Sb2Se3.80 The lengths of these ribbons are comparable to those obtained at lower PVA concentration, but the widths are typically ca. 85 nm with thicknesses of ca. 20 nm. As with smaller molecular capping agents, it was proposed that the action of the PVA may be to bind to certain faces of the crystal, inhibiting growth in those directions. Therefore at lower concentrations of polymeric capping agent, lateral growth is not so constrained and hence thicker belts are produced.
As with solution routes employed at ambient pressure, the chalcogen source itself can be vital. It is even possible with some materials to employ single-source precursors. This approach is prevalent in the synthesis of stibnite (Sb2S3) and, for example, hydrothermal treatment of antimony benzylxanthate (Sb(S2COC7H7)3) (performed at 120 °C in H2O with HCl to control pH) produces what is described as a ‘peanut’ architecture formed from rods of approximately 1 μm × 100 nm.81 The pH in this reaction is crucial. If HCl is not added the reaction does not proceed since the decomposition of the xanthate becomes favourable only in acidic conditions.82 The choice of the type of xanthate reagent employed is also pivotal in the outcome of the reaction. When antimony benzylxanthate is replaced by the isopropylxanthate in the reaction, the resulting Sb2S3 retains the rod-like morphology of the primary structure but the rods are widely dispersed. The assembly of the rods into larger architectures in the benzyl example is proposed to be due to the more hydrophobic nature of the benzene ring.
A further possibility for solvothermal synthesis approaches is to employ a two-step strategy in which the chalcogen source also acts as a template. An initial step synthesises pure chalcogen nanostructures, which then act as sacrificial templates when further reacted with metal sources in the second step. An example is the synthesis of PbTe.83 Tellurium nanowires are first prepared by the hydrothermal treatment of Na2TeO3 and PVP, with hydrazine hydrate and aqueous ammonia added, at 180 °C for 24 h. Pb(NO3)2 is then added to the solution followed by a further hydrothermal treatment at 100 °C for 12 h. The process results in PbTe nanowires 20–40 nm in diameter and with lengths of ∼100 nm. The proposed growth mechanism involves the interaction of the PVP-encapsulated Te nanowire template with Pb2+. The PVP traps the Pb2+ at the surface of the Te nanowires and residual hydrazine reduces Pb2+ to Pb(0) in situ. The resulting diffusion of Pb into the Te nanowires leads to the formation of PbTe in a non-topotactic (hexagonal-cubic) reaction.
3.3 Ionic liquids; alternative solvents for directed synthesis
Ionic liquids are currently attracting a great deal of attention in materials synthesis. They can have multiple roles in the synthesis of nano-materials. For example, in the synthesis of CuS nanoparticles, an ionic liquid is used as a co-solvent.84 CuCl2·2H2O and 1-n-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([BMIM]BF4) are dissolved in water. To this is added a solution of thioacetamide (TAA). This mixture is a water-rich system with the ionic liquid at ∼5% of the overall volume. A yellow precipitate forms quickly, and the mixture is left at room temperature for 24 h. Over this period the precipitate changes colour from yellow to black. Electron microscopy reveals the product to form spheroid architectures, formed from nano-flakes. The reaction pathway and role of the [BMIM]+ has been investigated. PXD of the initial yellow precipitate shows it to be Cu3(TAA)3Cl3, and SEM images show that at this stage of the process the yellow powder adopts a spherical morphology. A repeat experiment without the [BMIM]+ gives the same product after 30 min, but the powder is formed with a hexagonal rod morphology. Equivalent aging of these rods does not yield CuS; the precursor is still intact after 24 h. The authors propose a dual role for the ionic liquid. First, the [BMIM]+ alters the morphology of the precursor from hexagonal rods to spheres perhaps due to the low interfacial tension of the ionic liquid. Second the ionic liquid promotes the decomposition of the precursor to the final CuS product by accelerating electron transfer in the Cu(I) to Cu(II) step.
By contrast to the above, in the synthesis of Bi2S3 the ionic liquid is used as the main component of the reaction solvent.85 Again [BMIM]BF4 is used and in a typical synthesis, 0.8 mL of 0.2 M TAA and 0.4 mL of 0.2 M BiCl3 in aqueous solution are mixed together with 3 mL of BMIM. The mixture undergoes ultrasonic treatment for about 5 min to mix the reagents, which are then heated at 120 °C for 20 h. The observed architecture of the product is one of flower-like assemblies of nanowires (Fig. 24). Each individual nanowire has a diameter of the order 50 nm and a length of ∼2 μm. PXRD and SEM data collected ex situ at various synthesis times show that an intermediate BiOCl nanoflake phase is formed after 1 h together with poorly crystalline Bi2S3. Within 3–6 h only the sulfide is present and this is well crystallised by 20 h. Further reactions revealed that pH can play an important role. The original reaction had an initial pH of 4. If this is reduced to 2, the flowers form more rapidly with no BiOCl phase as the increased acidity prevents hydrolysis of the bismuth chloride to oxychloride. Flowers continue to form even after 30 min at pH = 2. These complex secondary flower-like architectures are hollow, and a mechanism is proposed whereby the Bi2S3 forms around vesicles of the ionic liquid. The hydrophobic [BMIM]+ is directed to the inside and the hydrophilic [BF4]− to the outside of each vesicle. The BiCl3 and TAA form a complex [Bi-TAA] which associates with the [BF4]−. The Bi2S3 then begins to crystallise on the surface of the vesicle. The vesicles themselves can be observed in TEM images taken at intermediate times ex situ from the ionic liquid and each is approximately 200 nm in diameter. This value correlates well with the size of the observed final product.
 Fig. 24  SEM of flower structures formed from nanowires of Bi2S3 in the synthesis from BiCl3 and TAA in [BMIM]BF4/water. Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mater., 17, 6094. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
3.4 Nanostructure growth in electric fields; microwave synthesis
Replacing conventional heating sources by a microwave field for performing reactions in solution can not only result in dramatic reductions in reaction time but also lead to very different outcomes in terms of nanomaterials design. Reactions can be carried out in a very simple manner, from heating in a domestic microwave oven (DMO), through to more complex syntheses under pressure in purpose built microwave reactors. Many microwave reactions are ostensibly similar to the conventionally heated reactions already described. The most simple can consist of mixing two solutions (at ambient pressure) and applying microwave radiation. Whilst specialised reactors are available, a vast amount of these experiments are carried out in DMOs. For example, the reaction of silver nitrate and thioglycolic acid (TGA) performed in this way generated Ag2S nanowires in as little as 3 min (Fig. 25).86 Applied power unsurprisingly plays a significant role in course of the reaction and the final morphology of the product. At a low power (136 W) when applied for 3 min, high aspect ratio wires are produced (typically >10 μm × 100 nm). As power is increased to 320 W the wires become shorter and broader. At still higher powers (528 W) the morphology changes completely to a sheet structure. This might be understood in terms of the low melting point of α-Ag2S; under longer irradiation times the reaction will likely reach higher temperatures. Longer duration experiments (5 min) conducted at lower powers still generated nanowires. In these experiments no additional reagent was employed as an SDA although the authors suggest that the TGA acts as a complexing agent as well as the sulfur source, in a similar manner to that seen in the sonochemical growth of Ag2S nanowires (see also below).87 The mechanism is proposed to involve the initial formation of (AgSCH2COOH) clusters. As SCH2COOH− dissociates, Ag+ is formed at specific sites, and further reacts with S2− to form Ag2S along specific directions.
 Fig. 25  Typical TEM image of Ag2S nanowires formed by microwave irradiation of silver nitrate and TGA at 136 W for 3 min. The corresponding SAED pattern (inset) demonstrates the amorphous nature of the wires. Reprinted from J. Non-crystal. Solids, 354, 5559. S. Yan et al.,. A simple route to large-scale synthesis of silver sulfide nanowires. Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier. 
As with conventionally heated solution methods, product morphology can be influenced by the use of SDAs. In many cases, metal sulfides and selenides can be synthesised by analogous routes. For sulfides, a single source precursor of metal xanthate can be used, whereas for the selenides, metal acetate and selenourea are commonly employed as reagents. For example, in the synthesis of zinc and cadmium chalcogenides these reagents were dissolved in a mixture of either hexyl or octadecylamine with DMF.88 The mixtures were heated in a DMO operating at 60% of 650 W. Power was applied cyclically, on for 10 s then off for 20 s for up to 3 min. Generally, for irradiation times of up to 1 min, small irregular particles were formed. From 1–2 min the morphology was rod-like, and for the zinc materials, heating for 3 min gave nanowires (with no morphological change observed for cadmium materials). In the case of ZnS, the rods formed after 2 min were approximately 1 nm wide and around 5 nm in length, although the tendency was for them to aggregate in larger 2D arrays. At 3 min nanowires are formed in micron long arrays of uniformly parallel wires. The lateral distance between wires is the same as that between the rods and is determined by which amine capping agent is used.
Another advantage to the use of a DMO is that as an item of laboratory equipment it is relatively inexpensive and can be easily modified for different experimental configurations. A hole and wave guide can be easily installed at the top of the DMO chamber to allow a condenser to be fitted to a reaction vessel. Reactions can then be performed easily under reflux conditions while applying microwave heating. Bi2S3 nanorods were obtained in this way via the microwave reflux of Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and thiourea in an aqueous 40% solution of formaldehyde.89 The field was applied cyclically with a power of 800 W pulsed for 9 s with intervals of 21 s (hence applied for approximately 30% of the reaction time). After 20 min of reflux the product was precipitated from solution. In another case, when an aqueous solution of zinc chloride and thiourea were refluxed with ethylenediamine at various powers and durations, the product was always nanorods of cubic zinc blende ZnS.90 These were all of high aspect ratio, with lengths of ∼1 μm and radii in the range 50–70 nm. UV-vis absorption spectroscopy was used by the authors to study the products and gain insight into the role of irradiation power and duration (Fig. 26). The absorption of all the products is blue shifted compared to the bulk (∼345 nm) due to quantum confinement effects. The quantum confinement in these 1D materials is a radial effect. The increase in absorption wavelength from 307–319 nm as reaction duration is increased from 10 to 40 min is characteristic of an increase in the radius of the wire, attributed to Ostwald ripening. Variation of irradiation power had no effect on the position of the absorption peak, showing that, in this instance, the reaction duration is the important factor in the size of rod produced.
 Fig. 26  UV-vis spectra of ZnS nanorods (a) at various microwave irradiation times and (b) at different microwave powers. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 415302. M. V. Limaye et al., Template-free ZnS nanorod synthesis by microwave irradiation, with permission from IOP Publishing. 
Microwave reactors purpose-built for carrying out scientific research offer additional features, and more importantly permit additional control of reaction parameters compared to DMOs. One advantage is that single mode furnaces generate reproducible, well–mapped fields and a common feature is the ability to set and monitor a target reaction temperature. The power is then continually adjusted to maintain the temperature. An example of synthesis using such techniques is that of Sb2Se3 nanorods, which were prepared in a Sino MSZ-1 reactor from sodium antimony tartrate and Se powder.91 Glycerol was chosen as the solvent considering its microwave susceptibility as a prerequisite. The mixture was refluxed under nitrogen for 30 min at 120 °C. PXRD showed the reaction to be complete after this time with no impurity phases. The nanorods range in diameter from 40–70 nm with lengths from 400–1200 nm. HRTEM studies show that the rods grow longitudinally in the [001] direction (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  (a) TEM image of an individual Sb2Se3 nanorod grown from sodium antimony tartrate and Se by microwave heating in glycerol. (b) SAED pattern and (c) HRTEM image of the same nanorod. Reprinted from Mater. Lett., 61, 5083. C. Zhao et al., Microwave-enhanced rapid and green synthesis of well crystalline Sb2Se3 nanorods with a flat cross section. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. 
Similarly hollow spheres of Bi2Te3 were synthesised using a CEM Discover single mode microwave reactor.92 TeO2 was dissolved in a mixture of ethylene glycol and 5 M HNO3 at room temperature and microwave heated to 150 °C. A solution of Bi(NO3)3 in ethylene glycol was then added rapidly at this temperature. The resulting solution was maintained in the microwave field at 150 °C for 30 min before cooling to room temperature. The hollow spheres produced had diameters in the range 50–100 nm (Fig. 28). TEM measurements showed the average wall thickness to be 10–20 nm although the exact mechanism of sphere formation is not well understood. Reactions repeated with cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) as an additional surfactant or with the ionic liquid [BMIM][BF4] resulted in irregular nanoparticles, or “nanosaws”, respectively.
 Fig. 28  TEM images of Bi2Te3 hollow nanospheres prepared by microwave heating in solution in a single mode microwave reactor. Reprinted from J. Cryst. Growth, 306, 351. Y. Jiang et al., Bi2Te3 nanostructures prepared by microwave heating. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier. 
Appropriate microwave reactors also allow reactions to be carried out under pressure analogous to solvothermal techniques performed with conventional heating. A flower-like architecture of In2S3 was synthesised using an MLS-1200 MEGA reactor.93 Indium metal pieces dissolved in HNO3 and thiourea were reacted in methanol or aqueous media. The power was varied up to 400 W to maintain a constant 10 bar pressure. Reactions were complete within 15 min. Solvent choice influences the observed product phase. When methanol is used, tetragonal β-In2S3, a vacancy-ordered spinel, is the product. In aqueous solution however, the product is the cubic form of In2S3 (usually denoted as the α-phase) with disordered vacancies. The β-In2S3 phase is stable up to 420 °C where a transformation to α-In2S3 occurs. The authors propose that the reaction reaches at least 420 °C, and that differences in the cooling rate of the two solvents favour the two different phases. In methanol the cooling is slower, allowing the vacancies to order. In aqueous solution the cooling is more rapid, ‘freezing’ the disordered vacancy phase.
3.5 Alternative energy sources; sonochemical techniques
A further alternative method for transferring energy to a reaction system is the use of ultrasonics. The driving force of the reactions is a phenomenon known as acoustic cavitation;94 the formation growth and implosive collapse of bubbles in the irradiated media. The temperature and pressure of these bubbles can be colossal, up to 5000 K and 500 bar but the timescale of the high energy state is incredibly short. Cooling rates of up to 109 K s−1 are possible. These factors all contribute to the synthesis and can allow access to metastable phases not accessible through conventional means.
Nanoparticles of HgQ (Q = S, Se, Te) can be synthesised by ultrasonic treatment of solutions of the elemental chalcogen with mercury nitrate, although there is a tendency to form isotropic nanostructures.95 In each case the chalcogen is dissolved in NaOH and irradiated at 20 kHz while a solution of Hg(NO3)2·H2O in EDTA is slowly added. The reactions were carried out at either room temperature or 80 °C, over times from 30 min to 3 h. Each of the mercury chalcogenides produced is formed as nanoparticles with average diameters of 15–20 nm for the sulfide and selenide. The telluride formed by the same route, however, formed particles that were almost an order of magnitude larger (typically ca. 65 nm in diameter).
An important development in exploiting sonochemical methods towards anisotropic nanomaterials was realised for metal selenide preparation employing a two-step reactive template method with similarities to the techniques used in solvothermal synthesis (see section 3.2).83 Initially, nanowires of elemental selenium are made, which can then be further reacted with metal salts to prepare metal chalcogenide nanowires. In a typical reaction, initially a colloidal solution of amorphous selenium nanospheres is made by the addition of selenious acid to a hydrazine solution.96 The spheres are then separated and dispersed in a solvent such as ethanol. This suspension is then sonicated for up to 30 s at 42 kHz. The solution is then stored in the dark. Selenium nanowires begin to form in as little as an hour. Complete conversion time depends on solvent, but in ethanol requires only three hours. These wires vary in diameter from ∼40 to 100 nm dependent on the selenium concentration, and all are microns in length (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  SEM images taken at various stages of Se nanowire formation by sonochemical methods: (a) amorphous Se spheres, (b) colloidal Se particles immediately after sonication, (c) initial stage of Se nanowire growth, (d) final product. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Mater., 14, 1749. Copyright 2002. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK. 
In the second step of the process, these selenium nanowires are then further reacted with metal salts to create nanostructured selenides. Reaction of Se-nanowires with either ruthenium acetylacetate or palladium acetylacetate in a 1:2 ratio, refluxed in ethanol at 80 °C for 3 d yields nanotubes, templated around the selenium.97 As the selenium has a low melting point of ∼217 °C, the unreacted template can be removed simply by heating the products to 230 °C for a few minutes, giving tubes of either RuSe2 or Pd17Se15. TEM reveals that in both cases the nanotubes are polycrystalline, with crystallite sizes estimated at 2–4 nm from Scherrer analysis of PXRD peak broadening. In the ruthenium case, reaction duration was investigated also. Increasing the duration from 3–5 days resulted in nanotubes where the wall thickness increases from 6 to 10 nm.
It is worth noting that similar ultrasonic driven reactions have been successful in making nanostructures of tellurium, both rods98 and whiskers,99 although to date these elemental nanostructures have not been further reacted to form metal telluride nanomaterials. The mechanisms and driving forces behind the sonochemical-assisted growth of Se and Te elemental nanostructures remain rather undetermined, but arguments are proposed that the sonochemical treatment (a) encourages rapid and simultaneous nucleation of nanowires on amorphous chalcogen particles and (b) induces local fluctuations in chalcogen solubility and preferential growth of anisotropic ordered structures vs. amorphous particles in a process related to Ostwald ripening.
3.6 Sonoelectrochemical methods
A modification—and effectively a small subset—of sonochemical techniques is sonoelectrochemical synthesis—the application of electrochemical methods under ultrasonic irradiation. Isotropic nanostructures are often favoured by these methods, but modifications to the techniques have presented opportunities to control and limit the direction of growth.
An example of this methodology to produce isotopic structures is the preparation of PbS nanoparticles through the use of a sacrificial lead anode in a solution containing KNO3, Na2S and the capping agent PVA.100 An electrochemical cell was placed in an ultrasonic bath (25 kHz), and electrolysis carried out under N2 gas. After 15 min a black colloidal solution was formed, and the solid collected via centrifuging. Reactions were performed at potentials of 0.8, 1.0 and 1.2 V, but H2S was evolved at the higher potentials, and so 0.8 V was selected as the optimum value. PbS nanoparticles of around 9 nm in diameter were the result. The UV-vis absorption is shifted from the bulk to 370 nm due to quantum confinement effects. The sonication is essential to the formation of nanoparticles. Without irradiation, the PbS forms on the surface of the anode. Sonication removes the PbS particles from the electrode and disperse them into solution as they are formed, leaving a clean surface for the reaction to continue. The PVP capping agent prevents agglomeration of the particles in solution.
The size of the applied potential can influence the product composition as is demonstrated by the synthesis of nanocrystals of various copper sulfides from solutions of cupric sulfate, sodium thiosulfate and citric acid.101 Potentials of 0, −0.6 and −1.2 volts produced CuS, Cu1.8S and Cu1.97S respectively from reactants irradiated at 20 kHz. At intermediate potentials, mixtures were produced. Nanoparticles were the result in each case, although the size distributions varied. CuS and Cu1.8S particles were mostly in the range of 10–25 nm in diameter, whereas Cu1.97S particles were on average smaller (5–20 nm diameter).
Sonoelectrochemical methods can be tuned to yield 1D morphologies by the use of SDAs, but it is evident that both the SDA and the sonication are essential for the growth of such structures. Nanotubes of CdSe (Fig. 30) can be made from constant current electrodeposition accompanied by continuous sonication of an aqueous solution that contains CdCl2·2.5H2O, sodium nitrilotriacetate (N(CH2COONa)3), Na2SeO3 and PVP.102 Further investigation at various stages of the process provides evidence of a “roll-up” formation mechanism. At short reaction times, nanosheets are observed, and at intermediate times these appear to transform into ‘nanoscrolls’ (a half-tube morphology). Control reactions show that without sonication, aggregates of particles are formed. If the reaction is carried out without the PVP, lower yields of much coarser tubes are observed.
 Fig. 30  TEM image of CdSe nanotubes grown by sonoelectrochemical methods.102 
4. Conclusions and outlook
Undeniably, there exist a number of challenges that need to be addressed as chalcogenide nanomaterials design grows and flourishes. For example: (1) the control and predictability of structure (e.g. size, shape, dimensionality and crystal structure) can be elusive, particularly in compositionally complex systems attained via certain synthetic routes; (2) the growth and formation mechanisms of many nanostructures remain essentially hypothetical and subject to interpretation; (3) although a substantial array of chalcogenide nanostructures with different morphologies have been accessed, materials from whole areas of the periodic table are yet to be discovered and (4) the design and development of periodically heterogenous chalcogenide nanostructures has proven so far to be a difficult task.
Nevertheless, it is readily apparent that there exists a wide range of techniques and variables available to the synthetic materials chemist with which to fashion one- and two-dimensional nanostructures of the chalcogenides. Further, there exists a dazzling array of architectures that can be constructed; both “primary” structures such as nanowires, rods, platelets etc. and also “secondary” structures such as nano- and microscale spheres, flowers, rings and others. Although the synthetic tool kit and the examples of new nanomaterials continues to expand, our understanding of the growth of such materials and the connectivity between synthesis, growth and structure on multiple length scales is also developing significantly. There are many common semi-quantitative and empirical patterns, trends and models that can be applied across seemingly quite different systems and synthesis scenarios. Thus it becomes increasingly clear from the examples presented here and from those elsewhere, that one can impact on, anticipate and begin to chemically design anisotropic nanostructures of inorganic compounds and those of the chalcogenides, in particular. With this possibility the prospects of compiling synthesis-structure-property relationships at the nanoscale and producing nanodevices to order become ever-closer and more attainable.
5.Acknowledgements
DHG thanks the EPSRC and WestCHEM for funding aspects of work associated with this Highlight and for the funding of RWH (WestCHEM Fellowship) and SJD (WestCHEM/EPSRC DTA). WS and DHG thank the Royal Society for the provision of a Visiting Fellowship for WS.
6.References
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tenne, L. Margulis, M. Genut and G. Hodes, Nature, 1992, 360, 444 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435 CrossRef CAS .
M. Remškar, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1497 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, F. L. Deepark, G. Gundiah and A. Govindaraj, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2003, 31, 5 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Cai and R. Q. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 60, 1 CrossRef .
K. W. Kolasinski, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2006, 10, 182 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7522 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kline, M. Tian, J. Wang, A. Sen, M. W. H. Chan and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7555 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Stender, P. Sekar and T. W. Odom, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1621 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, F. Qian, J. Xiang and C. M. Lieber, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 18 CrossRef CAS .
See for example:  R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12663 Search PubMed .
See for example:  A. M. Seayad and D. M. Antonelli, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 765 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, G. Z. Cao, Z. G. Yang, D. H. Wang, D. Dubois, X. D. Zhou, G. L. Graff, L. R. Pederson and J. G. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 676 CrossRef CAS .
R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 85, 209 CrossRef .
See for example:  M. Sternitzke, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 17, 1061 Search PubMed .
See for example:  L. A. Bauer, N. S. Birenbaum and G. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 517 Search PubMed .
H. W. Hillhouse and M. C. Beard, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 245 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venkatasubramaniam, E. Siivola, T. Colpitts and B. O. Quinn, Nature, 2001, 413, 597 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Yan, J. H. Yang, G. J. Ma, G. P. Wu, X. Zong, Z. B. Lei, J. Y. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 165 CrossRef CAS .
H. Moon, C. Nam, C. Kim and B. Kim, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, X. Liu, X. Cao, S. Feng and M. E. Fleet, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanda, T. Tsuneta, Y. Okajima, K. Inagaki, K. Yamaya and N. Hatakenaka, Nature, 2002, 417, 397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuura, S. Tanda, K. Asada, Y. Sakai, T. Tsuneta, K. Inagaki and K. Yamaya, Phys. B, 2003, 329–333, 1550 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Denholme, J. McKinnon and D. H. Gregory, Manuscript in preparation.
S. Kikkawa, N. Ogawa and M. Koizumi, J. Solid State Chem., 1982, 41, 315 CrossRef CAS .
M. Toyama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1966, 12, 1204 CrossRef .
D. W. G. Ballentyne, S. Wetwatana and E. A. D. White, J. Cryst. Growth, 1970, 7, 79 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Edwards, P. A. Salyer, M. J. Roe, G. S. Walker, P. D. Brown and D. H. Gregory, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3555 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Edwards, P. A. Salyer, M. J. Roe, G. S. Walker, P. D. Brown and D. H. Gregory, Cryst. Growth Des., 2005, 5, 1633 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Dunnill, H. K. Edwards, P. D. Brown and D. H. Gregory, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7060 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Dunnill, I. McLaren and D. H. Gregory, Nanoscale, 2009 10.1039/b9nr00224c .
M. J. Bierman, Y. K. A. Lau and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2907 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, J. Q. Wu, Q. Gu and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meister, H. L. Peng, K. McIlwrath, K. Jarausch, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jung, S. H. Lee, D. K. Ko and R. Agarwel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14026 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. Brittman, D. Yu and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6252 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Huo, L. Dai, C. Liu, L. P. You, W. Q. Yang, R. M. Ma, G. Z. Ran and G. G. Qin, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5912 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neretina, R. A. Hughes, J. F. Britten, N. V. Sochinskii, J. S. Preston and P. Mascher, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 275301 CrossRef .
S. Neretina, R. A. Hughes, G. A. Devenyi, N. V. Sochinskii, J. S. Preston and P. Mascher, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 185601 CrossRef .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89 CAS .
S. N. Mohammad, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1532 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fardy, A. I. Hochbaum, J. Goldberger, M. M. Zhang and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3047 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, G. Meng, Z. L. Wang, C. Ye and L. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1650 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nutt, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1984, 67, 428 CAS .
Y. C. Zhu, Y. Bando and D. F. Xue, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 1769 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Burton, N. Cabrera and F. C. Frank, Nature, 1949, 163, 398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, B. Geng, L. Zhang, F. Zhan and J. You, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20307 CrossRef CAS .
See for example:  R. Tenne, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 5296 Search PubMed ; M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 74, 1545 CrossRef CAS ; H. A. Therese, F. Rocker, A. Reiber, J. Li, M. Stepputat, G. Glasser, U. Kolb and W. Tremel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feldman, E. Wasserman, D. J. Srolovitz and R. Tenne, Science, 1995, 267, 222 CAS .
L. Margulis, G. Salitra, R. Tenne and M. Talianker, Nature, 1993, 365, 113 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 283 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4841 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Tao, Y. Hu, Y. Song, Z. Hu, J. Zhu and L. Dong, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 201 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gates, B. Mayers, Y. Wu, Y. Sun, B. Cattle, P. Yang and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 679 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and L. Qui, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1249 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Xu, D. P. Chen and Y. J. Xu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 127 CAS .
X. P. Shen, M. Han, J. M. Hong, Z. Xue and Z. Xu, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2005, 11, 250 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. McCormick, T. Tsuzuki, J. S. Robinson and J. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1008 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Chin, J. Ding, J. B. Yi and B. H. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 390, 255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Ding, H. Liao and Y. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1999, 60, 965 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, Y. Chu, Y. Zhuo and W. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 125301 CrossRef .
E. C. Greyson, J. E. Barton and T. W. Odom, Small, 2006, 2, 368 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Khanna, K. W. Jun, A. Gokarna, J. O. Baeg and S. I. Seok, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 96, 154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghezelbash and B. A. Korgel, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9451 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Khanna, N. Singh, S. Charan and K. R. Patil, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 2080 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Khanna, N. Singh, S. Charan, A. K. Viswanath and K. R. Patil, Mater. Res. Bull., 2007, 42, 1414 CrossRef CAS .
N. Singh, K. R. Patil and P. K. Khanna, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2007, 142, 31 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, C. Hao, W. Zheng, Q. Peng, T. Wang, Z. Liao, D. Yu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2628 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Panda, S. Acharya and S. Efrima, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2471 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Shi, L. Zhou, S. Y. Song, J. H. Yang and H. J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1892 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zou, J. Zhang, B. Zhang, P. Zhao and K. X. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 5029 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tao, Z. Wang, L. Yao, W. Cai and X. Li, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4973 CrossRef CAS .
W. Du, X. Qian, X. Ma, Q. Gong, H. Cao and Jie Yin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3241 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiong, B. Xi, C. Wang, G. Zou, L. Fei, W. Wang and Y. Qian, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 3076 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, F. Gao and S. Komarneni, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2574 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, J. Chen, J. Lu, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 2050 CrossRef .
Q. Xie, Z. Liu, M. Shao, L. Kong, W. Yu and Y. Qian, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 252, 570 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, L. Chen, W. Zhu, M. Wang, X. Wang, X. Yang and L. Lu, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1030 CrossRef CAS .
I. Iwasaki and S. R. B. Cook, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 285 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tai, B. Zhou and W. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11314 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, L. Wang, D. Zou and T. Ying, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, S. H. Yu, W. T. Yao, H. Ge and G. Z. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(24), 6094 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Li and Z. Xiao, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 5559 CrossRef CAS .
N. Du, H. Zhang, H. Sun and D. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 235 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Panda, G. Glaspell and M. S. El-Shall, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2790 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Liao, H. Wang, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2001, 36, 2339 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Limaye, S. Gokhale, S. A. Acharya and S. K. Kulkarni, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 415602 CrossRef .
C. Zhao, X. Cao and X. Lan, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 5083 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and Y. J. Zhu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 306, 351 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Naik, T. C. Jagadale, S. K. Apte, R. S. Sonawane, M. V. Kulkarni, S. I. Patil, S. B. Ogale and B. B. Kale, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 452, 301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Didenko, W. B. McNamara III and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5817 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kristl and M. Drofenik, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2008, 15, 695 CAS .
B. Gates, B. Mayers, A. Grossman and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1749 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, B. Mayers, Y. Wang, B. Cattle and Y. Xia, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 385, 472 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, W. Wang, H. Xu, L. Zhou, L. Zhang and J. Shi, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 295, 69 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, J. R. Zhang, L. Zhao, J. M. Zhu and J. J. Zhu, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2006, 13, 352 CAS .
Y. J. Yang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 131, 200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Pan, Y. Lou, X. Qiu, J. J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, L. Jiang, J. Miao, W. Hou and J. J. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1683 RSC .

Footnote† Present address: State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Rd, 430070 Wuhan, China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Weidong Shi	Weidong Shi obtained his PhD degree from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. He was awarded a Royal Society Visiting Fellowship to conduct postdoctoral research at the University of Glasgow in 2007. His research focuses on the synthesis and characterisation of inorganic functional nanomaterials and their applications as devices.
Robert W. Hughes	Robert W. Hughes graduated in Chemistry at University College London in 1999. He then moved to the University of Southampton where he obtained a PhD in solid state chemistry in 2004 and remained as a postdoctoral research assistant until 2007. He is currently a WestCHEM Research Fellow at the University of Glasgow. His research interests include microwave-assisted nanomaterials synthesis and structural investigations using neutron diffraction.
Saleem J. Denholme	Saleem J. Denholme obtained an honours degree in Chemistry in 2007 at the University of Glasgow where he is currently studying for a PhD under the supervision of Prof. Duncan H. Gregory. His research interests focuses on the synthesis, properties and applications of many transition metal chalcogenide systems.
Duncan H. Gregory	Prof. Duncan H. Gregory studied at the University of Southampton completing his PhD in 1993 under Prof. Mark Weller. He moved to the University of Nottingham first as a postdoctoral research fellow, then EPSRC Advanced Fellow, Lecturer and Reader in Materials Chemistry. He was appointed to the WestCHEM Chair in Inorganic Materials at the University of Glasgow in 2006 and is Head of Inorganic Chemistry. His research interests centre on non-oxides and nanomaterials with potential applications in areas including sustainable energy and electronics.

 	Fig. 1  SEM image showing formation of TaSe3 rings.27	 

 	Fig. 2  Above (a–c), schematic showing the proposed mechanism for the growth of NbSe3 nanorings, Möbius strips and figures of eight and below (d and e) experimental in situ SEM images of the growth process. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature, 417, 397, copyright (2002).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM image micrograph illustrating a “secondary” micron-scale structure formed in situ from crystallisation of TaSe3 nanoribbons around a selenium core (which subsequently vaporises).27	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Bright field TEM image of single-crystalline TaS2 nanowires with the corresponding SAED pattern in the [0001] projection (b) Bright field TEM image of a bundle of nanowires. Reproduced with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 45, 7060. Copyright 2006. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Epitaxial growth of hyperbranched clusters of PbSe and (b) nanocubes of PbSe grown under short and prolonged exposures to hydrogen, respectively. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 7, 2907. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Quasi-binary phase diagram of Au with GeTe (or Sb2Te3); (b) SEM image of as-grown nanowires from GeTe evaporation; scale bar represents 2 μm; (c) HRSEM image of helical GeTe nanowires with an inset SEM image of a straight-helical nanowire junction; scale bar represents 500 nm; (d) SEM image of thin and curved nanowires from GeTe evaporation; scale bar represents 2 μm. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 6, 1514. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the self-catalytic role that lead is proposed to play during the reaction to form PbS and PbSe hyperbranched nanowire structures. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 7, 2907. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM image providing experimental evidence of lead present at the ends of PbQ (Q = S, Se) nanowires. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 7, 2907. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM image of PbTe hyperbranched nanowire arrays synthesised using a PbCl2 precursor. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Mater., 19, 3047. Copyright 2007. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of ZnS nanostructures formed from competing VLS mechanisms showing (a) periodically twinned zinc blende nanowires and (b) asymmetric polytypic wurtzite nanobelts. Zinc droplets are observed at the ends of both types of material. Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 6, 1650. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematics of the growth processes of (a) periodically twinned zinc blende nanobelts and (b) asymmetric polytypic wurtzite nanobelts, respectively. (“CZB” and “HWZ” in the figure refer to cubic zinc blende and hexagonal wurtzite, respectively.) Reprinted with permission from Nano Lett., 6, 1650. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of the multiple nucleation growth model for ZnTe layered nanowires. Reprinted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 112, 20307. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representations of alternative reaction setups for synthesis of MoS2 nanotubes with (a) one and (b) two feed gas streams. From Science, 1995, 267, 222. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 14  Ternary phase diagram of Mo–S–O illustrating the different reaction pathways influential in the formation of molybdenum sulfides; (1) partial reduction of MoO3, (2) sulfidation of the reduced oxide to MoS2, (3) complete reduction of MoO3, (4) partial reduction/sulfidation of MoO3, (5) sulfidation of the reduced oxide to MoS3, (6) reduction of MoS3 to MoS2. From Science, 1995, 267, 222. Reprinted with permission from AAAS.	 
MS3 + H2 → MS2 + H2S (M = Mo, W, Nb, Ta).	(1)

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern of a single TaS3 nanobelt, (c) TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of a single TaS2 nanobelt. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 201. X. Wu et al., Tantalum disulfide nanobelts: preparation, superconductivity and field emission, with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM images of ZnS nanotubes (a) in plan view illustrating the open ends and at high magnification in the inset image, (b) as a cross-sectional view of the aligned nanowire array. Reproduced with permission from Chem. Vap. Deposition, 11, 205. Copyright 2005. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM of PbS nanocubes synthesised in the presence of PVP. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 125301. Y. Dong et al., Two minute synthesis of PbS nanocubes with high yield and good dispersibility at room temperature, with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SAED of a single tetrahedron of SnS. The dashed circle indicates the area on the particle contributing to the diffraction. (b) TEM image indicating the 3D structure of a tetrahedron. A model is overlaid to guide the eye. Reproduced with permission from Small, 2, 368. Copyright 2006. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 19  TEM image of Ni3S4 nanocrystals grown from an OLA/TOP solvent. Reprinted with permission from Langmuir, 21, 9451. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Ag2S nanostructures grown from AgNO3 and S in ODA at varying temperature and S concentration; (a) SEM image of high aspect ratio Ag2S nanowires and (b) TEM image of almost monodisperse Ag2S nanospheres. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Mater., 20, 2628. Copyright 2008. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 21  SEM images of as-prepared copper sulfide products at 160 °C for 24 h in different solvents: (a) water, (b) ethanol–water (1:1), (c) ethanol, (d) ethylenediamine, (e) ethylene glycol–ether, (f) benzene. Reprinted from Mater. Lett., 61, 5029. J. Zou et al., Low-temperature synthesis of copper sulfide nano-crystals of novel morphologies by hydrothermal process. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Field emission SEM (FESEM) images of CdS samples prepared under different water/en volume ratios: (a and b) 1:2; (c and d)1:4; (e and f) 1:9. Molar ratio of Cd(Ac)2/L-cysteine = 1:2, reaction for 24 h at 180 °C. Reproduced with permission from Chem.–Eur. J., 13, 3076. Copyright 2007. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 23  SEM image of the fern-like assembly of PbS nanowires synthesised with aspartic acid as an SDA. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2574. Q. Lu et al., Multi-level assemblies of lead sulfide nanorods, with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 24  SEM of flower structures formed from nanowires of Bi2S3 in the synthesis from BiCl3 and TAA in [BMIM]BF4/water. Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mater., 17, 6094. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Typical TEM image of Ag2S nanowires formed by microwave irradiation of silver nitrate and TGA at 136 W for 3 min. The corresponding SAED pattern (inset) demonstrates the amorphous nature of the wires. Reprinted from J. Non-crystal. Solids, 354, 5559. S. Yan et al.,. A simple route to large-scale synthesis of silver sulfide nanowires. Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  UV-vis spectra of ZnS nanorods (a) at various microwave irradiation times and (b) at different microwave powers. Reprinted from Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 415302. M. V. Limaye et al., Template-free ZnS nanorod synthesis by microwave irradiation, with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) TEM image of an individual Sb2Se3 nanorod grown from sodium antimony tartrate and Se by microwave heating in glycerol. (b) SAED pattern and (c) HRTEM image of the same nanorod. Reprinted from Mater. Lett., 61, 5083. C. Zhao et al., Microwave-enhanced rapid and green synthesis of well crystalline Sb2Se3 nanorods with a flat cross section. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  TEM images of Bi2Te3 hollow nanospheres prepared by microwave heating in solution in a single mode microwave reactor. Reprinted from J. Cryst. Growth, 306, 351. Y. Jiang et al., Bi2Te3 nanostructures prepared by microwave heating. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 29  SEM images taken at various stages of Se nanowire formation by sonochemical methods: (a) amorphous Se spheres, (b) colloidal Se particles immediately after sonication, (c) initial stage of Se nanowire growth, (d) final product. Reproduced with permission from Adv. Mater., 14, 1749. Copyright 2002. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaK.	 

 	Fig. 30  TEM image of CdSe nanotubes grown by sonoelectrochemical methods.102	 
Footnote
† Present address: State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan University of Technology, 122 Luoshi Rd, 430070 Wuhan, China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
