Organic single-crystal light-emitting field-effect transistors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC31998A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC31998A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 965-980Organic single-crystal light-emitting field-effect transistors

        
          
            Shu 
            Hotta
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Takeshi 
            Yamao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Satria Zulkarnaen 
            Bisri
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Taishi 
            Takenobu
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yoshihiro 
            Iwasa
          
          
        
      de
aDepartment of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Matsugasaki, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8585, Japan. E-mail: hotta@kit.ac.jp;  Fax: +81 75 724 7780;   Tel: +81 75 724 7793
bZernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, Groningen 9747AG, The Netherlands. E-mail: s.z.bisri@rug.nl;  Fax: +31 50 363 8751;   Tel: +31 50 363 5521
cDepartment of Applied Physics, Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Ohkubo 3-4-1, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. E-mail: Takenobu@waseda.jp;  Fax: +81 3 5286 2981;   Tel: +81 3 5286 2981
dDepartment of Applied Physics and Quantum-Phase Electronics Centre, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
eRIKEN Centre for Emergent Matter Science, Wako 351-0198, Japan. E-mail: iwasa@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp;  Fax: +81 3 5841 6822;   Tel: +81 3 5841 6828
Received 
      10th October 2013
    , Accepted 18th November 2013First published on 19th November 2013AbstractGrowth and characterisation of single crystals constitute a major field of materials science. In this feature article we overview the characteristics of organic single-crystal light-emitting field-effect transistors (OSCLEFETs). The contents include the single crystal growth of organic semiconductors and their application to transistor devices. First, we describe various single crystal growth methods that produce different morphologies and geometries of crystals. Using these single crystals we highlight construction and performance of the devices. The single crystal approach not only allows us to study the device performance that reflects the intrinsic nature of the organic semiconductors but also is advantageous to enhancement in the steady device operation. A current-injected laser oscillation in an electronic device configuration remains as a big challenge to be achieved. In this context we briefly mention the spectrally narrowed emissions as well as the possibility of light amplification in the OSCLEFETs.Shu HottaShu Hotta received his Doctor of Engineering degree at Kyoto University in 1988, while he was employed by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd. (currently, Panasonic Corporation). Since 2003, he has been a Professor of the Laboratory of Polymer Physics, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering (currently, Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering), Kyoto Institute of Technology (KIT). His research interests cover development of novel organic semiconductors and their optoelectronic device applications.Takeshi YamaoTakeshi Yamao received his Doctor of Engineering degree at the Kyoto Institute of Technology (KIT) in 1999, and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at KIT and Kyoto University. In 2004, he joined Prof. Hotta's research group as a Research Associate in KIT, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include organic crystal growth and the application of the crystals to optical and electronic devices.Satria Zulkarnaen BisriSatria Zulkarnaen Bisri obtained his B.Sc./S.Si. in Physics in 2006 from Institut Teknologi Bandung (Indonesia). He received his Ph.D. in Physics from Tohoku University (Japan) in 2011 under the guidance of Professor Yoshihiro Iwasa. He was also affiliated with the Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University. Since then, he has been a postdoctoral researcher at the Photophysics and OptoElectronics group of the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen (The Netherlands). His research focuses on optoelectronic devices based on emerging materials, including organic single crystals, carbon nanotubes, and colloidal quantum dots.Taishi TakenobuTaishi Takenobu received his Ph.D. (materials science) from the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST) in 2001 under the direction of Professor Yoshihiro Iwasa. Since 2013, he has been a professor of the Department of Applied Physics, Waseda University. His current research interests include (1) novel functionalities in two-dimensional materials, (2) realisation of electrically driven organic laser devices based on single-crystal ambipolar transistors, and (3) flexible and ink-jet printable electronics based on single-walled carbon nanotube film transistors.Yoshihiro IwasaYoshihiro Iwasa received his Ph. D. at The University of Tokyo in 1986. He became a research associate (1986) and lecturer (1991) at The University of Tokyo, and then moved to the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST) as an associate professor (1994). He was appointed as a professor at the Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University (2001). Since 2010 he has been a professor at The University of Tokyo. His research interests are functional interfaces and devices with new materials, including light emitting transistors and electric field induced superconductivity.
1. Introduction and historical background
Organic transistors have about a thirty-year history. Amorphous organic semiconductor thin films were investigated as active materials at the beginning of the early research stage of these devices. Examples include merocyanine dye, polythiophene, polyacetylene, oligothiophene, etc. Pioneering work was conducted by Kudo et al., followed by Koezuka and co-workers, Friend and co-workers, Madru et al., Horowitz et al. and Hotta and co-workers.1–6 Most of those studies were carried out after a new class of organic semiconductors (both polymers and oligomers) had been developed and synthesised in the 1970's and 1980's. These materials were processed into amorphous thin films via e.g. vacuum deposition and solution casting. Since many of polymeric semiconductors are insoluble in organic solvents, thin film preparation on the device substrate can be done through e.g. electrochemical polymerization2 and by using soluble precursor polymers.3 In the second half of the 1980's researchers developed soluble conducting polymers based on e.g. polythiophenes by attaching long alkyl chains to a polymer backbone.7,8 Transistor devices using these materials naturally followed. Thus various transistor devices were developed using a variety of materials and on the basis of varying methods.9–11 Readers are referred to an excellent review article by Horowitz12 regarding research and development of organic transistors at the earlier stage.
Before the device application charge injection was extensively studied with various organic semiconductors. The charge injection can be done via chemical doping, i.e. addition of a small amount of impurities to the material. Friend and co-workers13 studied the charge injection in an electronic device configuration, or a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) structure14 using poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and found out that the charge was stored in P3HT as polarons. In this context the field-effect transistor (FET) is useful in investigating the charge injection (or storage) and subsequent charge transport in the material. Meanwhile, electroluminescent (EL) devices based on organic materials have a longer history than the organic transistors. EL was first observed by Pope et al.15 in 1963 with anthracene single crystals and anthracene crystals doped with tetracene. In 1987 Tang and Van Slyke16 developed an organic thin-film EL device using low molecular-weight materials. In 1990, furthermore, Friend and co-workers17 proposed a polymer light-emitting diode (LED). These devices were prototypes of those commercially available in these days. From a standpoint of basic science, in turn, light emission can be viewed as a major semiconductor property along with charge transport.
In 2003 Hepp et al.18 developed a new architecture of the light-emitting field-effect transistor (LEFET) that combined a transistor and a light-emitting device. This type of device has been developed first in the field of organic optoelectronics. They used tetracene for a light-emitting material that yielded an emission centred at 540 nm. Although they used Au for both the source and drain electrodes of their transistor, the device exhibited ambipolar operation. Hepp et al. attributed the ambipolar mode to a strong electric field generated at the drain electrode (that defined the electron injection). They assumed that the strong electric field resulted from the imperfections at the drain electrode caused by the underetching during the lithographic processes. After this work, various related device structures were proposed and developed, as in the case of the transistor and EL devices.
Although the transistor devices developed at an earlier stage were mostly based upon the disordered (or amorphous) thin films, organic semiconductor crystals were immediately applied with an expectation of improved device performance.19 This is particularly the case with the transistor devices having a MIS or metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) configuration. In this configuration carriers are transported along an interface between the semiconductor layer and the gate insulator layer and, hence, we can readily examine the effect of the high order molecular alignment on the carrier transport. Besides the improvement in the device performance, practical interest lies in that a rigid crystal lattice prevents deterioration and disordering of the material.
Under these circumstances we summarise this article to describe the characteristics of organic single-crystal light-emitting field-effect transistors (OSCLEFETs). The description includes growth of the organic semiconductor single crystals and the device fabrication and performance of the single-crystal based LEFETs. The emission properties of the single crystals are highlighted in this connection.
2. Organic semiconductor materials and crystals toward light-emitting device applications
2.1. Emission characteristics of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers (TPCOs)
So as to be applied to light-emitting devices, the semiconductor materials must combine good carrier transport characteristics and high emission efficiency. Organic semiconductor single crystals satisfy the former requirement, as exemplified by rubrene whose single crystals have been recorded to show a maximum mobility of up to ∼43 cm2 V−1 s−1 in an FET device configuration.20 However, high emission efficiency is hard to achieve in practice, because the emission efficiency drops significantly at high concentrations of luminescent chromophores.21 In this respect a recently developed class of materials of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers22–25 (TPCOs) fill a special niche in the LEFET architecture. These materials exhibit an exceedingly high luminescent quantum efficiency in the form of a crystal.26,27 As an example Kanazawa et al.27 estimated the fluorescent quantum efficiency of crystals of BP3T (one of TPCOs; see Fig. 1) to be 80% at 300 K. This value should be compared to the corresponding number <1% observed for single crystals of rubrene and tetracene.26 The organic semiconductors usually possess a relatively long π-conjugated system. These are classified into high molecular-weight materials (polymers) and low molecular-weight materials. The TPCO family fall into the latter category. Owing to the strong π–π interaction among molecules, TPCO materials are hard to vaporise or dissolve in a solvent. Their single crystal growth needs special techniques accordingly. In this article we focus on the crystal growth and device applications of the TPCOs. Fig. 1 depicts examples of TPCOs of various types. Since we find a strong correlation between the molecular shape and the crystal structure for TPCO materials, their studies provide us with a unique opportunity to investigate the structure–property relationship. Polymer single crystal formation would be even more attractive. Readers are referred to relevant leading research studies.28,29
 Fig. 1  Various thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers (TPCOs). 
A further advantage of TPCOs lies in the ease in their molecular design. A wide variety of materials can easily be synthesised by simply changing the total number and arrangements of thiophenes and phenylenes (benzenes) at the molecular level (Fig. 1). Correspondingly these materials exhibit various emission colours in both crystals and thin films.30 Like oligothiophenes and oligophenylenes, TPCOs are typical molecules that have a benzenoid HOMO and qunoid LUMO structures. In this case, molecules possess a large transition dipole moment along the molecular long axis. This causes the strongest light to be emitted in the direction perpendicular to the molecular long axis. In TPCO crystals, this direction is parallel to the wide crystal plane, because the molecules are aligned nearly upright against that plane.31–35 In consequence edge emission dominates. This situation makes the FET device configuration based on the planar device architecture particularly suited for the single-crystal light-emitting devices. Moreover, the edge emission prompts spectrally narrowed emissions, typically laser oscillation.36,37 This is because the regular molecular alignment produces a large optical gain in the direction parallel to the wide crystal plane. As a consequence, the amplification of propagated self-waveguided light is readily attained.32,36 From a point of view of display applications, the spectrally narrowed emissions are associated with brilliant emission colours with pure chromaticity.38 Thus single crystals of a series of TPCOs are expected to exhibit controlled multicolour emissions with a broad spectral range.
Organic semiconductors are divided into p-type and n-type materials in which the hole conduction and electron conduction prevail, respectively, as in the case of inorganic semiconductors. If the material combines the two conductions, it is referred to as an ambipolar material. Historically, most of the organic semiconductors were of p-type.5 This is because of the inherently electron-donating nature of π-electrons on the molecular backbone. Pretty recently, however, researchers developed n-type molecular semiconductors of various kinds.39–50 Those materials are characterised by the presence of electron-withdrawing groups (e.g. fluorine, trifluoromethyl groups, cyano groups, imide groups, etc.) attached on the molecular periphery, while retaining the same backbone structure as the p-type material. These n-type materials are indispensable constituents of the semiconductor devices together with p-type semiconductors for making various junction devices and complementary inverter circuits.51,52 It is often desired to use a junction structure (e.g. a p–n junction) in LEFETs. The fact that TPCO materials can readily be formed into p-type and n-type semiconductors by substituting molecular terminals with suitable chemical groups provides a major advantage accordingly. Moreover, if the TPCO molecules contain both electron-donating groups and electron-withdrawing groups, these materials show the ambipolar nature. This is actually the case with AC5-1CF3-12OMe.53 These features render the TPCO materials even more attractive in their light-emitting device applications.
2.2. Single crystal growth and crystal structure of TPCOs
Another practical advantage of TPCOs is that these materials are robust and environmentally stable, particularly in the form of single crystals. This feature not only enables one to carry out top-down semiconductor processing on the crystals, but the single-crystal devices maintain steady performance for a long time (vide infra).
The single crystal growth of organic semiconductors has a key role in development of high performance devices. The methods include the growth in a vapour phase and in a liquid phase. A straightforward way to make a device is to use a monolithic single crystal. When the monolithic crystal is obtained as a free-standing thin film, it can be laminated on a device substrate. Alternatively the monolithic crystal can be formed in situ on top of the device substrate. The crystal growth broadly includes the vapour phase growth and liquid phase growth. In the vapour phase case the growth method can further be sorted into those in an open system or in a closed system. With the former case Laudise et al.54 designed handy growth apparatus that enabled reproducible growth of organic semiconductor crystals. That apparatus made the most of physical vapour growth based on the buoyancy driven convection. Following their work researchers attempted to apply this technique to the crystal growth of a variety of organic semiconductors such as pentacene and rubrene. We refer readers to excellent review articles that describe growth and transistor device applications of organic semiconductor single crystals of various kinds.55–59 Among those attempts Hotta and co-workers60 constructed homemade apparatus as shown in Fig. 2a. Its main body consists of a glass test tube inside of which several glass cylinders are placed. A powder sample is fed inside the rightmost cylinder that is heated with a source heater. The apparatus is equipped with another heater (i.e. a growth heater), the two heaters being heated up independently at a desired controlled temperature. Normally the growth heater is set at a temperature lower than that of the source heater. Crystals are grown around the growth heater (Fig. 2a). Carrier gas is allowed to move back so that the crystal growth zone may not be exposed to the direct flow of the carrier gas. In this way defect-free large crystals are readily available.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of crystal growth apparatus (bottom) and crystals (top) produced by them: (a) vapour-phase growth. Reprinted from T. Yamao, S. Ota, T. Miki, S. Hotta and R. Azumi, Improved sublimation growth of single crystals of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers, Thin Solid Films, 516(9), 2527–2531, Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier. Also adapted with permission from T. Yamao, Y. Okuda, Y. Makino and S. Hotta, Dispersion of the refractive indices of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer single crystals, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110(5), 053113. Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics. (b) Proximity vapour-phase growth. Reprinted from T. Yamao, K. Juri, A. Kamoi and S. Hotta, Field-effect transistors based on organic single crystals grown by an improved vapor phase method, Org. Electron., 10(7), 1241–1247, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. (c) Liquid-phase growth. Reprinted with permission from T. Yamao, T. Miki, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Ota and S. Hotta, Direct Formation of Thin Single Crystals of Organic Semiconductors onto a Substrate, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(15), 3748–3753. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
The vapour-phase growth method has further been elaborated by Yamao et al.61 in such a way that the crystal growth can be carried out nearly at the thermodynamic equilibrium within a narrow space surrounded with two heaters separated by thin spacers (proximity vapour-phase growth: Fig. 2b). The crystal growth is performed in an inert environment. Both the heaters are composed of a copper block equipped with a sheath heater. Of these, the bottom heater is used for the purpose of subliming the source material. The materials are crystallized on the upper heater. As an advantage this apparatus needs no vacuum system. The resulting crystals are well-defined polygons whose individual sides reflect specific crystal orientations.61 In this growth apparatus, the temperature of the lower heater is set by 5–10 °C higher than that of the upper heater so that the crystals can grow onto the substrate. The source organic material is placed on the lower plate to face the substrate attached to the upper heater. If one uses a suitable substrate such as a silicon wafer whose surface is covered with insulating silicon oxide, it can directly be used for a transistor device after the crystal growth. This vapour-phase in situ crystal growth is particularly suited for forming a clean interface between the crystal and the substrate. This is because during the crystal growth contaminants are prevented from intervening between the crystal and the substrate.
Optionally the substrate can be treated with various species of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) e.g. 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS), phenyltrichlorosilane (PTS) and octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) with the dual aims mentioned below. One of them is for the purpose of preparing a high-quality single crystal. Without the SAMs the grown crystal had many cracks due to a pretty high heat needed for the crystal growth. These cracks are likely to be generated during the crystal growth process because of the difference in thermal expansion coefficients between the organic semiconductor crystal and the substrate (e.g. Si and SiO2). Another purpose is for the passivation of the device substrate.
It is often the case that organic semiconductors having a long π-conjugated system are hard to completely dissolve in a solvent. Yamao et al.62 improved a crystal growth method in such a way that well-defined polygon crystals can be produced from only a small quantity (a few milligrams) of an organic semiconductor. The method is based on the in situ liquid-phase recrystallization of a solute on a substrate. Fig. 2c indicates schematic drawings of the growth apparatus. In this apparatus the substrate is connected to a thermal radiator (consisting of e.g. a metal plate), allowing the substrate to be cooled locally in the liquid. This causes the organic semiconductor to be directly deposited onto the substrate through recrystallization. Both in the vapour and liquid phases, the in situ slow crystal growth yields thin single crystals of high quality in firm contact with the substrate. In Fig. 2 we display and compare the crystals obtained by the above-mentioned individual methods. Once such a crystal growth has been combined with a careful device fabrication, it will provide us an ideal method to examine the intrinsic properties of the organic semiconductor material in a device configuration.
Organic semiconductor crystals comprising aromatic rings usually possess high melting points and high environmental stability.63 Those crystals are therefore durable and robust against rigorous semiconductor processes. Sun and co-workers64 applied top-down approaches based on photolithography to the organic semiconductor crystals of BP1T and BP2T. First their thin-film crystal grown with the physical vapor transport (PVT) was transferred onto the substrate. Then the crystal was spin coated with poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) and the SU-8 photoresist, followed by UV-exposure and development of the SU-8 photoresist. An optimized micro-sized pattern was then formed by reactive-ion etching (RIE). Finally, the PVA and SU-8 resist layers were removed to complete the pattern. The micro-sized patterns can thus be formed as various geometries such as a disk and a polygon (see Fig. 3). The photoresist covering the micro-sized disk and polygon acts as an etch mask during the etching process. The aforementioned bottom-up and top-down techniques are potentially applicable to the integrated device fabrication.
 Fig. 3  Patterned crystalline array. Fluorescence photographs of (a) BP2T and (b) BP1T microdisk array. (c and d) Enlarged photographs. (e) Fluorescence photograph of the patterned BP2T polygon array, including triangular, square, pentagonal, hexagonal and star. (f) Enlarged photographs. (g) Scanning electron microscopy images of individual polygon BP2T microdisks. H.-H. Fang, R. Ding, S.-Y. Lu, Y.-D. Yang, Q.-D. Chen, J. Feng, Y.-Z. Huang and H.-B. Sun, Whispering-gallery mode lasing from the patterned molecular single-crystalline microcavity array, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7(2), 281–288, DOI: 10.1002/lpor.201370027. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
Many of the organic semiconductors comprise straight and direction-defined molecules. Examples include oligophenylene, oligothiophene, oligoacene, etc. These materials are characterised by that in the crystals molecules form a layered structure where the molecules are packed in a face-to-face fashion into a two-dimensionally spreading herring-bone array. As in the case of TPCOs a strong intermolecular π–π interaction exerted through the herring-bone array makes a monolithic single crystal take the form of a free-standing thin slab, where the molecular long axes are vertical to the wide slab plane.65–70 This configuration is particularly suited to the transistor device where the carrier transport predominantly takes place face-to-face through the herring-bone array; see Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Crystal structure of (a) BP3T (see Ref. 32) and (b) BP1T-OMe (see Ref. 35). (b) Adapted with permission from S. Hotta, M. Goto and R. Azumi, Peculiar Crystal Structure of a Thiophene/Phenylene Co-oligomer of 2,5-Bis(4′-methoxybiphenyl-4-yl)thiophene, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36(2), 270–271. Copyright 2007 The Chemical Society of Japan. 
Amongst various organic semiconductors the TPCO crystals have a special feature. As examples Fig. 4 depicts different crystal structures of BP3T32 and BP1T-OMe.35 Both the molecules belong to the C2v symmetry.71 The upper half and bottom half of the molecules are tilted oppositely and the two tilts cancel each other. This results in the sharply vertical configuration of the molecular long axes relative to the bottom crystal plane of the crystal. It is worth noting as well that BP3T crystallises in the monoclinic system,32 whereas BP1T-OMe crystallises in the orthorhombic system.35 From the symmetric requirement the molecular long axes of BP1T-OMe stand exactly upright against the bottom crystal plane. It is reported that the terminal substituent groups such as methoxy and methyl often cause the resulting crystals to take an orthorhombic system.72 Other examples fall into this category.66,73
3. Organic single-crystal transistors (OSCTs)
3.1. Device construction
Device construction processes include growth or lamination of the organic semiconductor single crystal and subsequent deposition of electrodes onto the crystal. The first step can be carried out by laminating the grown crystal on the substrate or directly growing the single crystal on the substrate. To examine operating characteristics of a discrete device, one often uses a conducting substrate the top of which is covered with a thin insulator. A typical example is a silicon wafer having a silicon oxide on top. In that case the wafer main body and silicon oxide constitute the gate electrode and gate insulator, respectively. The electrodes deposited on the single crystal form the source and drain contacts. Fig. 5 shows a typical device construction where the source and drain contacts are deposited on top of the organic semiconductor layer (a top-contact device). Alternatively both the contacts are situated underneath the organic semiconductor layer (bottom-contact). A simple way to make a bottom-contact device is the drop casting of a solution containing an organic semiconductor.74 Also devices can be classified according to the location of the gate contact, i.e. a top-gate device and a bottom-gate device.
 Fig. 5  Schematic structure of a single-crystal transistor (SCT). Adapted from T. Yamao, S. Ota, T. Miki, S. Hotta and R. Azumi, Improved sublimation growth of single crystals of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers, Thin Solid Films, 516(9), 2527–2531, Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier. 
We have made various OSCT devices to study their device characteristics. To this end we specify device names according to the following different fabrication conditions: (i) Condition I: the devices are constructed by laminating a thin slab crystal onto the device substrate. In that case the slab crystal is made in the apparatus shown in Fig. 2a. (ii) Condition II: the crystal is grown in situ in the liquid phase using the apparatus shown in Fig. 2c. Optionally the SiO2 layer is covered with an ultrathin layer of friction-transferred poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE).75,76 In that case the Au source and drain electrodes are deposited on top of the PTFE layer before the crystal growth (bottom-contact). A crystal is then grown on the PTFE layer. The resulting single crystal fills the space surrounded by the source and drain electrodes and the gate insulator (i.e. PTFE in this case). This process is thereby effective for producing good electrical contacts. (iii) Condition III: the crystal is grown in the vapour phase using the apparatus shown in Fig. 2b.61 The silicon oxide layer is treated with a SAM after being cleansed with organic solvents. The SAM compounds are chosen from among HMDS, PTS and OTS. The Au electrodes are obliquely deposited on the crystal to attach Au on the crystal edges and corners so that the good electrical contacts can be secured. Regarding Conditions II and III the use of SAMs and PTFE is partly for the purpose of improving the device performance by passivating the SiO2 surface and thereby minimising the carrier trap sites or defects (vide infra). Table 1 lists the device specifications including the growth phase, crystal morphology, crystal mounting method and gate insulator species.
Table 1 Device specifications




Entry
Device fabrication condition


Condition I
Condition II
Condition III




Growth phase
Vapour
Liquid
Vapour


Crystal morphology
Thin slab
Thin slab
Thin slab


Crystal mounting
Lamination

In situ


In situ



Gate insulator
SiO2
SiO2, PTFE/SiO2
SAM/SiO2




For instance, a device I-AC5/SiO2 means the device made under Condition I using the AC5 crystal laminated on the SiO2 layer. A gate insulator species is also specified in the case where SAM or a polymer film is used for a combined gate insulator together with SiO2. The polymer film can be e.g. spin-cast from a solution onto the SiO2/Si substrate. If such a material has been used, the device is termed e.g. II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2, III-P5T/HMDS-SiO2, I-AC5-CF3/PVP-SiO2 [where PVP denotes poly(vinyl phenol)], etc. according to the material. In that case the HMDS (or PVP) layer defines an interface with the P5T (or AC5-CF3) layer. Moreover, if the current direction is defined relative to the crystallographic axis, this is noted as well such as I-BP3T(//a)/SiO2, denoting that the current measurements were carried out parallel to the crystal a-axis.
3.2. Device operation
The FET operation characteristic is usually described by the drain current that is changed as a function of the drain–source voltages with varying gate voltages as a parameter. If the drain current is substantially pinched off, it can be expressed as the saturated drain current Isat by the following basic equation:14 (1)where W is the channel width, L is the channel length, μ is the mobility, Ci is the capacitance of the gate insulator per unit area, VG is the gate voltage, and Vth is the threshold voltage. In earlier studies of the thin film organic FETs Vth was often large and the above current–voltage characteristic indicated a nonlinear behaviour near the origin. Kumaki et al.77 related Vth to the presence of carrier trap sites at the grain boundaries inside the organic semiconductor thin films and at the interface between the organic semiconductor and the gate insulator. Akimichi et al.6 pointed out that the nonlinear behaviour near the origin may well result either from nonohmic contact between the organic semiconductor thin film and the source (or drain) Au electrode or from nonlinear characteristics of the thin film. Single crystals are free from the grain boundaries, and so the OSCTs allow us to probe the intrinsic nature of semiconductors and their boundary with other materials e.g. gate insulators and to examine how the configuration of the organic semiconductors is associated with Vth.
To address the aforementioned issues, Hotta and co-workers fabricated various TPCO SCTs and compared their device performance by examining detailed electrical data of those devices. Fig. 6a shows the top view of an SCT of II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2 and Fig. 6b represents its output characteristics. Although this specific device indicated the nonlinear behaviour near the origin, the Vth was comparatively small (−8.6 V);62 see Table 2. Similarly Fig. 6c and d indicate another TPCO-based SCT, II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2 and its output characteristics. The Vth of this device was very small (−0.56 V).75 Above all the nonlinear behaviour near the origin has completely been suppressed. This device also exhibited good saturation of the drain current (pinch-off) in the region of large drain–source voltages. The devices III-AC5/HMDS-SiO2 and III-P5T/HMDS-SiO2 recorded a low Vth of −0.72 V and −1.2 V, respectively.61 These Vth numbers should be compared with I-AC5/SiO2 which gave −58.8 V of Vth.60 All these devices exhibited moderately high mobilities.
 Fig. 6  BP3T SCTs and their device performance. Enlarged micrographs near the channel of (a) II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2 and (c) II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2. Output characteristics of (b) II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2 and (d) II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2. With the device notation, see the text. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from T. Yamao, T. Miki, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Ota and S. Hotta, Direct Formation of Thin Single Crystals of Organic Semiconductors onto a Substrate, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(15), 3748–3753. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (c and d) Fig. 6 from Takeshi Yamao, Hiroshi Akagami, Yoshihiro Nishimoto, Shu Hotta and Yuji Yoshida, Improved Device Performance of Organic Crystal Field-Effect Transistors Fabricated on Friction-Transferred Substrates, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9(11), 6271–6276. Copyright 2009, American Scientific Publishers. Reproduced with permission. 
Table 2 Device performance of TPCO SCTs




Device
Initial performance
Storage performance [day]


Mobility/cm2 V−1 s−1

V
th/V
Mobility/cm2 V−1 s−1

V
th/V





a 
Ref. 60.
b 
Ref. 62.
c 
Ref. 75.
d 
Ref. 61.





I-AC5/SiO2a
2.1 × 10−2
−58.8






II-BP3T(//a)/SiO2b
1.6 × 10−1
−12.7






II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2b
1.3 × 10−1
−8.6






II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2c
2.6 × 10−1
−0.56






III-AC5/HMDS-SiO2d
4.0 × 10−2
−0.72






III-P5T/HMDS-SiO2d
1.0 × 10−1
−1.2
1.0 × 10−1 [15]
−0.27 [15]


III-P5T/OTS-SiO2d
1.7 × 10−2
4.9
4.9 × 10−2 [86]
6.5 [86]




Regarding the devices having the SAM- and PTFE-passivated gate insulator, the small Vth is expected to reflect that the trap sites are minimised at the grain boundaries within the organic semiconductor crystal and at its interface with the gate insulator surface. The absence of the nonlinearity has resulted from the secured ohmic contact between the semiconductor crystal and electrodes. In terms of the threshold voltages, the above results can be categorised as follows: (i) simple lamination of a single crystal causes a large absolute value of |Vth|. (ii) The in situ liquid-phase growth considerably reduces |Vth|. (iii) Both the in situ vapour- and liquid-phase growth processes on a SAM or PTFE ultrathin film produce a very small |Vth|.
Hotta and co-workers examined the environmental stability of the devices as well. The device performance was examined in air during the storage in a vacuum desiccator. For example, the device III-P5T/HMDS-SiO2 after being stored under vacuum for 15 days indicated a smaller Vth of −0.27 V than the initial value, with the hole mobility being ∼0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1. Table 2 collects the device characteristics of various FETs, including the storage performance. To summarise all the above data, it is essential and indispensable to fabricate the organic single-crystal FETs such that the organic layer can make good electrical contacts with the electrodes and that the defects can be minimised between the organic layer and the gate insulator. Such OSCTs exhibit both high device performance and environmental stability.
Tokito and co-workers45–47 developed a series of n-type materials, including perfluoropentacene, trifluoromethylphenyl-substituted bithiazole compounds, etc. Takimiya and co-workers48,49 developed thiophene- and selenophene-based fused ring compounds. It should be emphasised that among these n-type materials, those having trifluoromethylphenyl groups at the molecular terminals exhibited a high electron mobility of up to 1.83 cm2 V−1 s−1.47 A device of a single crystal AC5-CF3 (I-AC5-CF3/PVP-SiO2) exhibited an electron mobility of 1.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 in spite of a large Vth of 42 V.50 Interestingly enough, this mobility is larger than the hole mobility of 0.04 cm2 V−1 s−1 that was recorded for a crystal of the parent molecule AC5 (III-AC5/HMDS-SiO2);61 see Table 2. This Vth contrasted with a low number Vth of 4.1 V which was measured on I-AC5-CF3/PMMA-SiO2 [where PMMA denotes poly(methyl methacrylate)] whose electron mobility was 0.20 cm2 V−1 s−1.50
Whenever a functional material is applied to an electronic device, we have to consider the energetic relationship between the said material and the electrode material. We usually take into account the highest-occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) for an organic semiconductor as well as the Fermi level of a metal used for an electrode and choose their suitable combination. This is because the HOMO (LUMO) level defines the hole (electron) injection contact. In case we deal with a p-type organic semiconductor, the HOMO level is normally close to the Fermi level of e.g. Au (−5.10 eV), and so Au can be chosen for hole injection contact. In turn, if the LUMO level of the organic semiconductor is sufficiently deep, a stable metal such as Au can also be used for the electron injection contact. In this case the n-type conduction is expected.51 If the LUMO level is not deep enough, one can use e.g. Al (work function of 4.28 eV) and Ag (4.26 eV) accordingly. In Fig. 7 we represent a diagram showing HOMO and LUMO levels of several organic semiconductor materials along with Fermi levels of metals to easily visualise their magnitude relationship. The relevant values in Fig. 7 can be found in ref. 53 and 78–82.
 Fig. 7  Energy level diagram of organic semiconductors and metals. The diagram represents the HOMO and LUMO levels of the organic semiconductors and Fermi levels of the metals. 
From a chemical point of view, the polarity is determined by mutual extent of the redox ability of the two interacting materials in question. Therefore, if a suitable metal(s) is chosen for an electrode, even a “p-type” material could be rendered n-type or ambipolar. This is the case with any (organic) semiconductor. Takenobu et al.81,83,84 studied the effects of source and drain electrode metals on the polarity of the OSCT devices. Using a rubrene single crystal and Ca electrodes they achieved a pretty high electron mobility of up to 0.81 cm2 V−1 s−1.83 On the other hand, they did not observe a good electron transport property on a device with Au source and drain electrodes. Takenobu et al. attributed this difference to the difference in the work function of Ca and Au. In other words, since the rubrene LUMO level (−3.15 eV) is closer to the Ca Fermi level (−2.87 eV) than the Au Fermi level (−5.10 eV), electrons can more easily be injected into the rubrene crystal by using the Ca electrode rather than the Au electrode. They further found out that by using Mg and Au heterogeneous electrodes for drain and source contacts a tetracene single crystal indicated ambipolar conduction on an FET device.84 In that case, Mg and Au functioned as the electron and hole injection contacts, respectively. Thus, regarding the ambipolar organic semiconductors the electrode materials have to be optimised. These features will be important to the application of an organic semiconductor to a light-emitting device.
4. Organic single-crystal light-emitting field-effect transistors (OSCLEFETs)
Organic LEFETs (OLEFETs) are currently under intensive investigation owing to their multifunctionality, including current modulation and light emission.79 This multifunctionality is associated with their potential applicability to display technology, lightings, and optoelectronic interconnecting devices. The conventional organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), which started to be widely used in displays, constitute another class of organic light emitting devices that require transistors to control their luminance. In OLEFETs, on the other hand, the luminance can be modulated by changing only gate voltages, without any additional devices. Accordingly, display panels using OLEFETs have the great advantage of largely reducing both the number of devices and the circuit complexity. Thus OLEFETs are inherently compatible with display technology. Therefore, once these devices are combined with TPCO single crystals, clear multicolor displays can be constructed.
The LEFET device performance is based upon the simultaneous carrier injection of both holes and electrons into an organic semiconductor layer and their subsequent recombination. Nonetheless, there is plenty of room for improvement with the organic single-crystal LEFETs (OSCLEFETs). Unlike amorphous thin-film LEFETs, for instance, OSCLEFETs often need an unstable metal of a small work function such as Ca and Mg to inject electrons effectively. Also it was often the case that the emission region was narrow and limited to the frontier between the electron-rich region and the hole-rich region or nearby areas.85,86 In such a case the emitting location can be altered within the channel depending upon the magnitude relationship among the source, drain and gate voltages.26,85,86 Yet, this could be a drawback when one tries to achieve surface emission from the whole channel zone. To overcome such a drawback Yamao et al.87 have developed an effective device operation technique termed an alternating-current gate voltage (ACGV) method. This method enabled one to use a stable metal e.g. Au for the carrier injection contact.
If organic semiconductor crystals are applied to the light-emitting devices, their fundamental parameters such as optical constants (i.e. refractive indices) and their wavelength dependence (dispersion) should be determined precisely. This is especially the case with the laser applications (both photo-excited and electrically excited). Yamao et al.88 developed a powerful method to determine the refractive indices of the organic crystals and their dispersion. In this section we describe emission characteristics of the organic semiconductors and the device constitution and performance of OLEFETs.
4.1. Refractive index measurements of organic single crystals
Organic crystals usually have strongly anisotropic structures and properties, and their refractive indices are highly anisotropic as well. This is especially true for crystals of direction-defined molecules. In many organic semiconductors the transition dipole moment is large along the molecular long axis, and so emissions are intense in the direction perpendicular to that axis. If the crystals possess a pair of facets of a high reflectivity, these facets can act as Fabry–Pérot resonators in which the photoluminescence (PL) resonates within the crystal, reflected by the parallel edge facets. Interference between multiple reflections therefore gives rise to fringes in the emission spectrum whose spacing depends on the group refractive index. The broadband nature of the PL spectrum allows one to determine the group refractive index as a function of wavelengths by careful analysis of the fringe spacing. Since one can readily make use of the broadband emissions occurring in a weak excitation regime, one is able to decide the refractive indices covering a wide wavelength range. The advantage of using a single crystal rests on this optical high-quality.
On the basis of the above measuring principle, Yamao et al.88 determined the group and phase refractive indices89 and their dispersion with various TPCO crystals. As an example, Fig. 8a and b represent the emission spectra of an AC'7 crystal obtained from both weak and strong excitation regimes that yield broadband spectra and multimode laser oscillation spectra, respectively. Optical fringes are clearly noted in both the cases. Notice that this measuring method can in principle be applied to any luminescent material both organic and inorganic.
 Fig. 8  Emission spectra and refractive index dispersions. Emission spectra of an AC'7 crystal obtained from (a) weak and (b) strong excitation regimes that yield broadband spectra and laser oscillation spectra, respectively. Optical fringes are clearly noted in both the cases. (c) Group refractive indices of crystals of AC'7, BP1T and AC5. The data plotted by filled circles (BP1T), filled triangles (AC5) and filled diamonds (AC'7) are determined from broadband spectra obtained by the weak excitation with a mercury lamp. An open circle, an open triangle and open diamonds are determined from multimode laser oscillation spectra obtained by the strong excitation with a laser beam. (d) Phase refractive indices of crystals of AC'7, BP1T and AC5. Reprinted with permission from T. Yamao, Y. Okuda, Y. Makino and S. Hotta, Dispersion of the refractive indices of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer single crystals, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110(5), 053113. Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics. 

Fig. 8c and d show a comparison of group refractive indices and (phase) refractive indices of crystals of AC'7, BP1T and AC5. It may well be natural to think that the two indices determined by the weak and strong excitation regimes differ considerably. The optical measurements, however, have confirmed that the two indices are virtually the same aside from a minor difference due possibly to the (thermal) expansion of the crystal and/or its refractive index increment during the laser beam irradiation.88 These crystals exhibit unusually large refractive indices among organic compounds,88,90 these indices being comparable to those of inorganic semiconductors such as GaAs and InP.91 This makes the organic semiconductors attractive as sophisticated optical materials. In particular, a large refractive index produces a high reflectance,92 leading to the ease in light amplification. This renders such crystals good candidates for a laser medium. In fact, several TPCO materials such as BP1T, BP2T, BP3T, AC5, AC'7 and P6T (see Fig. 1) along with their derivatives cause laser oscillation in the form of crystals by strong photopumping. The resulting emissions encompass a wide visible wavelength range (from ∼466 to 688 nm).37,73,88,90,93–98
4.2. Device constitution and performance
In the previous section we have noted that an appropriate combination of the organic semiconductor and the electrode material enables the ambipolar conduction in the FET device. Once this can be done, both the electrons and holes are injected into the device at once. This leads to the possibility of light emissions in an FET device that result from the carrier recombination. This is true in what was achieved by Rost et al.99 since then various improved LEFET devices have been proposed and fabricated. Of these, a device developed by Muccini and co-workers100 showed a high external quantum efficiency (EQE) of ∼5% using a trilayer heterostructure LEFET. As in the case of the FET device development, earlier studies on LEFETs rested upon amorphous thin films of organic semiconductors. Later single-crystal devices followed. Many of them possess heterogeneous electrodes to inject the two types of carriers (i.e. holes and electrons).84,101 Since the ACGV method plays a key role in the OSCLEFET operation, we describe its operation principle and device applications. This is because unlike the conventional operation method based on a direct-current gate voltage the said method enables a steady device operation using a stable metal. The ACGV method is important not only from an application point of view but also in fundamental research dealing with the charge injection and transport. Another topic is relevant to the spectrally narrowed emissions from the OSCLEFET devices. In this context we deal with the incorporation of diffraction gratings into the device. Since a current-injected laser oscillation in an electronic device configuration remains to be achieved, the implications of the SNEs are briefly discussed.

Fig. 9a shows an equivalent circuit regarding the ACGV method.87 The operation principle is simple. The conventional direct-current gate voltage has been replaced by an alternating-current gate voltage. As an example with a p-type semiconductor, Fig. 9b schematically represents the carrier distribution in the channel, which is altered according to different phases within the negative gate-bias region. The varying vG is depicted in the uppermost diagram relative to the drain voltage VD and the source voltage VS, and the coordinates labeled P1 and P2 correspond to the carrier distributions represented in Fig. 9b-1 and b-2, respectively. (Note here that VD and VS only nominally denote the voltages of hole and electron contact, respectively. Since we are dealing with the ACGV, the terminology of “source” and “drain” is less clear in a strict sense.) When vG becomes equal to VS, the hole density close to the interface between the source electrode and the organic semiconductor layer would be zero (pinch-off). In the next stage (Fig. 9b-2) electrons start being injected from the source contact into the organic semiconductor layer, and the pinch-off point (for holes) shifts toward the drain electrode with the holes concomitantly depleted. The time-resolved spectra clearly indicated that the emission is strongest at that moment. At the same time, holes start being depleted through either radiative recombination, nonradiative recombination or by a drift from the organic semiconductor layer to the source electrode. The latter two processes do not produce emissions. A high frequency gate bias can effectively be used to prevent the holes from drifting off without emission. This effect has been confirmed experimentally.
 Fig. 9  Alternating-current gate voltage (ACGV) operation of OLEFET. (a) Schematic diagram of the electrical circuit. The drain and source electrodes are connected to DC power supplies. The gate electrode is connected to an AC power supply. The vG denotes a varying gate voltage with its amplitude VG and frequency f. (b) Schematic diagrams of the carrier distribution within the channel at two different phases represented by P1 and P2. The coordinate P1 is located in the negative gate bias region where no pinch-off (for holes) occurs. Although P2 is also positioned in the negative gate bias region, the pinch-off sets in and electrons start being injected from the source contact. T. Yamao, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki and S. Hotta, Organic Light-Emitting Field-Effect Transistors Operated by Alternating-Current Gate Voltages, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(21), 4109–4112, DOI: 10.1002/adma.200800942. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
The above situation may be altered according to the polarity of the organic semiconductor and source/drain electrode materials. If an n-type material is chosen instead, an electron current will dominate. For an ambipolar material the behavior would be “symmetric” relative to the source and drain electrodes. The ACGV method is a strong tool of inspecting detailed processes of the carrier injection and transportation. This feature can clearly be recognised when we compare the time-resolved emission spectra. Fig. 10 shows the comparison between the emission spectra of two devices made of BP1T and AC5-1CF3-12OMe.53,102 For the BP1T device we only notice the emission once during the 2π phase change, when the gate bias is made positive (that is, electrons are injected). With AC5-1CF3-12OMe, on the other hand, the emission takes place twice during the same period. Thus Fig. 10b clearly demonstrates that both electrons and holes are injected for each cycle according to the positive and negative gate voltage, respectively, reflecting the ambipolar nature of AC5-1CF3-12OMe. This illustration demonstrates the usefulness of the ACGV method for the fundamental device physics.
 Fig. 10  Emission intensities of the device as a function of gate-voltage phase. (a) BP1T SCLEFET. Fig. 4 from Takeshi Yamao, Kohei Terasaki, Yasuhiro Shimizu and Shu Hotta, Organic-Crystal Light-Emitting Field-Effect Transistors Driven by Square-Wave Gate Voltages, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10(2), 1017–1020. Copyright 2010, American Scientific Publishers. Reproduced with permission. (b) AC5-1CF3-12OMe SCLEFET. Reprinted from T. Katagiri, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Light-emitting field-effect transistors made of single crystals of an ambipolar thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer, Org. Electron., 12(1), 8–14, Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier. 
In this specific application the electronic feature of AC5-1CF3-12OMe is worth mentioning. As pointed out earlier even a “p-type” material exhibits the ambipolar conduction by appropriately choosing electrode materials, especially by the use of heterogeneous source/drain electrodes. The AC5-1CF3-12OMe crystal, on the other hand, showed the ambipolarity even using homogeneous Au electrodes, although Katagiri et al.53 adopted the heterogeneous electrodes (i.e. Au and Mg/Ag for the hole and electron injection, respectively) in the above experiment. The effects of the substitutions with electron-donating methoxy and electron-withdrawing trifluoromethyl groups on the electronic levels cancel each other. As a result both the HOMO and LUMO levels of AC5-1CF3-12OMe are close to those of unsubstituted AC5 (Fig. 7). Nonetheless, on the FET device AC5-1CF3-12OMe shows the ambipolar conduction, whereas AC5 indicates the p-type conduction. These observations imply that the local electronic states in the close vicinity of the substituent groups play a role.
4.3. Spectrally narrowed emission and light amplification
In the last part of this article we briefly state the possibility of current-injected laser oscillation. An optical device is often equipped with a resonator grating to enhance emission characteristics, lower the laser threshold energy, and especially to cause laser oscillation. As in the case of organic semiconductor devices, researchers have made various attempts to incorporate the 1-dimensional (1-D) or 2-dimensional (2-D) resonator gratings into the organic devices. Sirringhaus and co-workers103 integrated a 1-D waveguide distributed feedback (DFB) structure into a polymer LEFET for the emitted light to be coupled efficiently with the resonant mode of the waveguide DFB when the recombination zone of the LEFET was placed directly above the waveguide ridge. To enhance the light confinement, they used a dielectric with a high refractive index such as Ta2O5. They observed the narrowed emission spectra on the above structure, even though the narrowing seemed incomplete.
Okada et al.104 made an OSCLEFET device with a 2-D diffraction grating. The 2-D grating was nanoimprinted on a Micro-Chem SU-8 2002 photoresist polymer film (200 nm in thickness) beforehand spin-cast onto the SiO2 layer (300 nm in thickness) of an Si wafer. The resulting film was exposed to ultraviolet light for cross-linking and was further baked to ensure it. The UV-cured film is durable even at high temperatures and in highly resolvable solvents such as 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene. This enabled them to grow TPCO crystals directly on the resin grating in the liquid phase.104 The SU-8 layer and SiO2 comprised a combined gate insulator. The 2-D grating consists of circular air holes forming a triangular lattice [Fig. 11a]. Fig. 11b shows an enlarged SEM image of the device at and near the BP2T crystal edge, where a nanoimprinted 2-D hole array is clearly visible. Fig. 11c represents the cross-sectional device structure. Using this device Okada et al.104 achieved the current-injected SNEs with the full width at half maximum (FWHM) being down to 3.0 nm (Fig. 11e). The spectra are compared with optically excited spectra (Fig. 11f). The resemblance between the two is evident, indicating strong mode selection by the 2-D grating. With that OSCLEFET device, however, light amplification did not take place.
 Fig. 11  2-D diffraction grating device and its emission spectra. (a) Atomic force micrograph of the 2-D grating. The hole pitch (diameter) is indicated by p (d). The inset shows the Brillouin zone of the 2-D grating and high-symmetry points (Γ, M, K) in the reciprocal lattice. (b) SEM image of the BP2T crystal grown on the grating. This image was obliquely taken to view the circled part of the device shown in (d). (c) Schematic structure of the TPCO crystal LEFET. (d) Top view micrograph of the BP2T SCLEFET. The white arrows marked with a and b indicate the directions of the crystal axes. (e) Current-injected spectrally narrowed emissions from the BP2T SCLEFET obtained with several source (VS), drain (VD) and gate (VG) voltages. (f) Optically excited SNEs of the BP2T crystal in the LEFET device configuration. The spectra were taken parallel to the substrate plane with varying rotation angles (from +8 to −8°) relative to the channel long axis. The sign of the rotation angle was defined positive when the rotation was clockwise. A. Okada, Y. Makino, S. Hotta and T. Yamao, Current injected narrow linewidth emissions from organic-crystal light-emitting transistors having a diffraction grating, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2012, 9(12), 2545–2548. DOI: 10.1002/pssc.201200286. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
In spite of the incorporation of diffraction gratings into OSCLEFETs, manifestation of the light amplification in an electronic device configuration has been unclear until now. Current-dependent narrowing of the electroluminescence spectra is among the indications of possible amplification, besides the similarity of the gain behaviour at the OSCLEFET by both electrically driven operation and optical pumping. In order to achieve that the OSCLEFET should be able to surpass the estimated threshold current density required for light amplification, while maintaining the luminescence efficiency. The BP3T single crystal is unique in this respect, since the luminescence efficiency is identified to be high in the single crystal form and the ambipolar transistors of this material demonstrated high carrier mobility for both holes and electrons.26
From another viewpoint, the high refractive index at the perpendicular axis of this crystal, together with the well-defined crystal facets, made it ideal for confinement of the light and the amplification process. Vague current-driven spectral narrowing was observed from the edge emission of the simple architecture of the ambipolar OSCLEFET.26 Also in the device of this single crystal, the operational current density has achieved value in the order of 10 kA cm−2 through improvements and modifications of the ambipolar OSCLEFETs.105,106Fig. 12a displays an example. The obtained values were close to the estimated threshold current density for amplification in several notable organic semiconductor laser materials,107 including the lowest possible for BP3T single crystals.93
 Fig. 12  (a) Structure of an ambipolar LEFET of the patterned BP3T single crystal. High current density was achieved by patterning the single crystal channel to form a tapering structure. In combination with an improvement of electron injection, an ambipolar current density as high as 15 kA cm−2 was achieved. Kosuke Sawabe, Masaki Imakawa, Masaki Nakano, Takeshi Yamao, Shu Hotta, Yoshihiro Iwasa and Taishi Takenobu, Current-Confinement Structure and Extremely High Current Density in Organic Light-Emitting Transistors, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(46), 6141–6146. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201202252. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. (b) LEFET device using a couple of parent and child crystals. The laser threshold energy was significantly reduced through the utilisation of the waveguiding properties of BP3T that forms an optical directional coupler. The small single crystal with its parallel facets acts as a resonator. Ambipolar LEFET using this optically directional coupler demonstrated much intense emission with some indication of spectral narrowing. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd S. Z. Bisri, K. Sawabe, M. Imakawa, K. Maruyama, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 985, Copyright 2012. 
The existence of an optical resonator is crucial for light amplification. As mentioned above, efforts have been made to integrate and/or fabricate different types of resonators on organic single crystals to reduce the laser threshold energy. Nevertheless, those existing sophistications are still affecting the electronic transport in the OSCLEFETs, hampering the achievement of high current density. A strategy, by solely relying on a simple resonator structure made from the parallel facets of the single crystals, was recently developed by Bisri et al.108 The structure is characterised by a couple of parent and child crystals in which the child (small) crystal is coupled to the parent (large) single crystal (see Fig. 12b). In the device the child crystal acts as a feedback resonator due to the parallel facets and the parent crystal works as the LEFET channel where the recombination occurs. This coupling was made possible via the optical directional coupler mechanism due to the perfect waveguide characteristic of the BP3T single crystals. They fabricated that structure by simply laminating the two crystals. This simple structure drastically lowers the threshold energy for the spectral narrowing and nonlinear emission intensity increment. This was evident from the photopumped laser measurement as well as the current-driven spectral narrowing with a clear threshold behaviour from the ambipolar OSCLEFET. Nevertheless, the gain from the device in addition to the spectral narrowing was yet incomplete, but the observed optical feature of the device might well be associated with the true light amplification. In this connection a dramatic spectral narrowing (FWHM ∼1.1 nm)102 achieved with a hexagon BP1T single crystal through the ACGV method is particularly noteworthy, showing the importance of the separation of the recombination and the amplification zone.
Finally, we mention the potential usefulness of the multi-layered structures including the p–n junction. Following the work of Muccini and co-workers,100 Kajiwara et al.109 made a bilayer-crystal OLEFET, where a p-type TPCO and an n-type TPCO comprised the channel. Using this structure they achieved by far stronger emission intensities than the single-layer device. The layering technique has further been extended to organic/inorganic p–n junction structures. Using ZnO for the inorganic layer, Hotta and co-workers110 have very recently succeeded in producing an intense light emission at low operating voltages. They referred this finding to an abundance of electrons in the ZnO (more generally a metal oxide) layer. The relevant device is characterized by a metal oxide semiconductor layer inserted between the organic layer and the gate insulator. The metal oxide semiconductor layer strides across the whole channel zone, from which the intense emissions take place (see Fig. 13). The metal oxide semiconductor layer somewhat resembles the “floating gate” of a floating-gate metal-oxide-semiconductor FET (FGMOSFET) in which the floating gate is sandwiched between a couple of insulating layers.111,112 In their device, on the other hand, the metal oxide is indirectly connected with an electric power source (i.e. source and drain electrodes) through the medium of the organic layer. We note that this type of device was based on a BP3T thin film.110 Single crystals can be used in place of thin films. Related pioneering work that combined organic and inorganic semiconductors can be seen in the literature.113–116
 Fig. 13  LEFET having a metal oxide semiconductor [aluminium-doped ZnO (AZO)] layer. (a) Schematic cross-sectional view. Innermost parts of the Au and MgAg electrodes define the injection contacts and channel edge locations. This device has a Si gate electrode underneath the SiO2 gate insulator on top of which the AZO layer is located. It is entirely covered with the BP3T thin film layer. (b) Emission micrograph of the device at the applying voltage of +20 V (−20 V) to the Au (MgAg) electrode. (c) Highlighted micrograph of (b). (d) Enlarged photograph of (b) around the channel zone. K. Yamada, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Light-Emitting Field-Effect Transistors Having Combined Organic Semiconductor and Metal Oxide Layers, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(20), 2860–2866. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201300456. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. 
5. Conclusion and future prospects
We have outlined the characteristics of OSCLEFETs. The contents are related to the single crystal growth of organic semiconductors and their application to transistor devices with particular emphasis upon TPCOs. The crystal growth methods include the growth of monolithic single crystals and the patterned crystals. The methods can be categorised as the bottom-up approach and the top-down approach. We described the device construction and performance of organic FETs based on the single crystals. The use of the single crystals not only allows one to study the device performance that reflects the intrinsic nature of the organic semiconductors but also is advantageous to enhancement in the steady device operation. On the basis of the features described in the present article, OSCLEFETs are expected to be integrated into state-of-the-art optical devices and systems. Those devices become good candidates for organic current-injected laser devices as well. Furthermore, the OSCLEFETs will be a platform to investigate the fundamental properties of the organic single crystals themselves.83,117
The single crystal approach will supply other sophisticated devices with further high performance. Examples include solar cell devices. There are several articles that report that the high crystallinity of the solar cell materials produces high power conversion efficiencies.118–120 In the future, crystal engineering of organic semiconductors will further yield promising outcomes in the research field of organic devices more widely.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Science Research B (nos 15350115, 22350082), by Grant-in-Aid for Science Research in a Priority Area “Super-Hierarchical Structures” (no. 17067009), by Grant-in-Aid for Exploratory Research (no. 24655173) and by Grant-in-Aid for Specially Promoted Research (no. 25000003) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan. Y. I. was partly supported by JST through the SICORP project (LEMSUPER) and by JSPS through the ‘Funding Program for World-Leading Innovative R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST Program).’ Thanks are also due to Dr H.-H. Fang, Dr M. Ichikawa, Dr F. Sasaki, Professor H. Yanagi and Professor H.-B. Sun for their helpful discussions and suggestions.
Notes and references
K. Kudo, M. Yamashina and T. Moriizumi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 23, 130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tsumura, H. Koezuka and T. Ando, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 49, 1210–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, C. A. Jones and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1988, 335, 137–141 CrossRef .
M. Madru, G. Guillaud, M. Al Sadoun, M. Maitrot, C. Clarisse, M. Le Contellec, J.-J. André and J. Simon, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1987, 142, 103–105 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, D. Fichou, X. Peng, Z. Xu and F. Garnier, Solid State Commun., 1989, 72, 381–384 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akimichi, K. Waragai, S. Hotta, H. Kano and H. Sakaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 1500–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Elsenbaumer, K. Y. Jen and R. Oboodi, Synth. Met., 1986, 15, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta, S. D. D. V. Rughooputh, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 1987, 20, 212–215 CrossRef CAS .
A. Assadi, C. Svensson, M. Willander and O. Inganäs, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53, 195–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Paloheimo, P. Kuivalainen, H. Stubb, E. Vuorimaa and P. Yli-Lahti, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 56, 1157–1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, T. J. Shin, L. Yang, K. Cho, C. Y. Ryu and Z. Bao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 671–676 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 365–377 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Ziemelis, A. T. Hussain, D. D. C. Bradley, R. H. Friend, J. Rühe and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 2231–2234 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York, USA, 2nd edn,  1981, pp. 431–445 Search PubMed .
M. Pope, H. P. Kallmann and P. Magnante, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 2042–2043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hepp, H. Heil, W. Weise, M. Ahles, R. Schmechel and H. von Seggern, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 157406 CrossRef .
V. Y. Butko, X. Chi, D. V. Lang and A. P. Ramirez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4773–4775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamagishi, J. Takeya, Y. Tominari, Y. Nakazawa, T. Kuroda, S. Ikehata, M. Uno, T. Nishikawa and T. Kawase, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 182117 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. McGehee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1655–1668 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta, S. A. Lee and T. Tamaki, J. Heterocycl. Chem., 2000, 37, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta, H. Kimura, S. A. Lee and T. Tamaki, J. Heterocycl. Chem., 2000, 37, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta, J. Heterocycl. Chem., 2001, 38, 923–927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta and T. Katagiri, J. Heterocycl. Chem., 2003, 40, 845–850 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu, Y. Yomogida, H. Shimotani, T. Yamao, S. Hotta and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1728–1735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kanazawa, M. Ichikawa, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1881–1884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Zhang, D. K. Goswami, J. S. Okasinski, K. Salaita, P. Sun, M. J. Bedzyk and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2005, 307, 1763–1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Ma, W. Hu, M. Rehahn and G. Reiter, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 348–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sengoku, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 2525–2529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hotta and M. Goto, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 498–501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta, M. Goto, R. Azumi, M. Inoue, M. Ichikawa and Y. Taniguchi, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, Y. Taniguchi, K. Yamamoto, T. Miki, S. Ota, S. Hotta, M. Goto and R. Azumi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2007, 46, 7478–7482 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, Y. Nishimoto, K. Terasaki, H. Akagami, T. Katagiri, S. Hotta, M. Goto, R. Azumi, M. Inoue, M. Ichikawa and Y. Taniguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 04DK20 Search PubMed .
S. Hotta, M. Goto and R. Azumi, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 270–271 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu, D. Hoshino and S. Hotta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4494–4496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ichikawa, R. Hibino, M. Inoue, T. Haritani, S. Hotta, K. Araki, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2073–2077 CrossRef CAS .

          B. A. Wandell and L. D. Silverstein, in The Science of Color, ed. S. K. Schevell, Optical Society of America, Washington, 2nd edn,  2003, ch. 8, pp. 281–316 Search PubMed .
G. Horowitz, F. Kouki, P. Spearman, D. Fichou, C. Nogues, X. Pan and F. Garnier, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 242–245 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, A. J. Lovinger and J. Brown, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 207–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Heidenhain, Y. Sakamoto, T. Suzuki, A. Miura, H. Fujikawa, T. Mori, S. Tokito and Y. Taga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 10240–10241 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakamoto, S. Komatsu and T. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4643–4644 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Yoon, A. Facchetti, C. E. Stern and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5792–5801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Medina, D. Beljonne, H.-J. Egelhaaf and J. Gierschner, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 111101 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sakamoto, T. Suzuki, M. Kobayashi, Y. Gao, Y. Fukai, Y. Inoue, F. Sato and S. Tokito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8138–8140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ando, J. Nishida, H. Tada, Y. Inoue, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5336–5337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ando, R. Murakami, J. Nishida, H. Tada, Y. Inoue, S. Tokito and Y. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14996–14997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takimiya, Y. Kunugi, H. Ebata and T. Otsubo, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 1200–1201 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takimiya, Y. Kunugi and T. Otsubo, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 578–583 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, Y. Shimizu, H. Kuriki, T. Katagiri and S. Hotta, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 49, 01AB01 Search PubMed .
Y. Inoue, Y. Sakamoto, T. Suzuki, M. Kobayashi, Y. Gao and S. Tokito, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 3663–3668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Caironi, C. Newman, J. R. Moore, D. Natali, H. Yan, A. Facchetti and H. Sirringhaus, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183303 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Katagiri, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 8–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Laudise, Ch. Kloc, P. G. Simpkins and T. Siegrist, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 187, 449–454 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. I. de Boer, M. E. Gershenson, A. F. Morpurgo and V. Podzorov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2004, 201, 1302–1331 CrossRef CAS .
C. Reese and Z. Bao, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasegawa and J. Takeya, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2009, 10, 024314 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, H. Dong and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4994–5007 RSC .
J. S. Brooks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2667–2694 CAS .
T. Yamao, S. Ota, T. Miki, S. Hotta and R. Azumi, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 2527–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamao, K. Juri, A. Kamoi and S. Hotta, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamao, T. Miki, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Ota and S. Hotta, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3748–3753 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nozaki, M. Tamura, Y. Harada and K. Saito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1960, 33, 1329–1332 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. Fang, R. Ding, S.-Y. Lu, Y.-D. Yang, Q.-D. Chen, J. Feng, Y.-Z. Huang and H.-B. Sun, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7, 281–288 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Baker, A. V. Fratini, T. Resch, H. C. Knachel, W. W. Adams, E. P. Socci and B. L. Farmer, Polymer, 1993, 34, 1571–1587 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hotta and K. Waragai, J. Mater. Chem., 1991, 1, 835–842 RSC .
S. Hotta and K. Waragai, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 896–908 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, B. Bachet, A. Yassar, P. Lang, F. Demanze, J.-L. Fave and F. Garnier, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1337–1341 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Mattheus, A. B. Dros, J. Baas, A. Meetsma, J. L. de Boer and T. T. M. Palstra, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 2001, 57, 939–941 CAS .
R. G. D. Valle, E. Venuti, A. Brillante and A. Girlando, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 10858–10862 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. A. Cotton, Chemical Applications of Group Theory, Wiley, New York, USA, 3rd edn,  1990, p. 429 Search PubMed .
J. Bernstein, J. A. R. P. Sarma and A. Gavezzotti, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1990, 174, 361–368 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizuno, U. Haku, Y. Marutani, A. Ishizumi, H. Yanagi, F. Sasaki and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5744–5749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mas-Torrent, M. Durkut, P. Hadley, X. Ribas and C. Rovira, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 984–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamao, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Hotta and Y. Yoshida, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 6271–6276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Wittmann and P. Smith, Nature, 1991, 352, 414–417 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumaki, T. Umeda and S. Tokito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093309 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dong, C. Wang and W. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5211–5222 RSC .
F. Cicoira and C. Santato, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3421–3434 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, Mol. Sci., 2012, 6, A0052 Search PubMed .
T. Takenobu, T. Takahashi, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 013507 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 4729–4733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu, T. Takahashi and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183304 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Takahashi, T. Takenobu, J. Takeya and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1623–1628 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zaumseil, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamane, H. Yanagi, A. Sawamoto and S. Hotta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 162108 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yamao, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4109–4112 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamao, Y. Okuda, Y. Makino and S. Hotta, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 053113 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. G. Smith, T. A. King and D. Wilkins, Optics and Photonics, Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2nd edn,  2007, pp. 408–410 Search PubMed .
T. Yamao, K. Yamamoto, Y. Taniguchi, T. Miki and S. Hotta, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 093115 CrossRef PubMed .
B. R. Bennett, R. A. Soref and J. A. Del Alamo, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1990, 26, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser Radiation, Wiley, Hoboken, USA,  2003, p. 219 Search PubMed .
M. Ichikawa, K. Nakamura, M. Inoue, H. Mishima, T. Haritani, R. Hibino, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 221113 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shimizu, Y. Mori and S. Hotta, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 99, 063505 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yamao, K. Yamamoto, T. Inoue, Y. Okuda, Y. Taniguchi and S. Hotta, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 04C174 CrossRef .
S. Hotta, Y. Sakurai, Y. Okuda, T. Miki, K. Matsunaga, F. Hirato, T. Yamao and H. Jinnai, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 440–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mizuno, I. Ohnishi, H. Yanagi, F. Sasaki and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2404–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hotta and T. Yamao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1295–1304 RSC .
C. Rost, S. Karg, W. Riess, M. A. Loi, M. Murgia and M. Muccini, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1613–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Capelli, S. Toffanin, G. Generali, H. Usta, A. Facchetti and M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 496–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takenobu, S. Z. Bisri, T. Takahashi, M. Yahiro, C. Adachi and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 066601 CrossRef .
T. Yamao, K. Terasaki, Y. Shimizu and S. Hotta, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 1017–1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Gwinner, S. Khodabakhsh, M. H. Song, H. Schweizer, H. Giessen and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1360–1370 CrossRef CAS .
A. Okada, Y. Makino, S. Hotta and T. Yamao, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2012, 9, 2545–2548 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sawabe, T. Takenobu, S. Z. Bisri, T. Yamao, S. Hotta and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 043307 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sawabe, M. Imakawa, M. Nakano, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6141–6146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. D. W. Samuel and G. A. Turnbull, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1272–1295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Bisri, K. Sawabe, M. Imakawa, K. Maruyama, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 985 Search PubMed .
K. Kajiwara, K. Terasaki, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2854–2860 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamada, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2860–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kahng and S. M. Sze, Bell Syst. Tech. J., 1967, 46, 1288–1295 CrossRef .
G. Li, P. Feng and N. Wu, J. Semicond., 2011, 32, 105008 CrossRef .
H. Nakanotani, M. Yahiro, C. Adachi and K. Yano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 262104 CrossRef PubMed .
B. N. Pal, P. Trottman, J. Sun and H. E. Katz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1832–1839 CrossRef CAS .
J. Smith, A. Bashir, G. Adamopoulos, J. E. Anthony, D. D. C. Bradley, R. Hamilton, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3598–3602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Aleshin, I. P. Shcherbakov, V. N. Petrov and A. N. Titkov, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 1285–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Bisri, T. Takenobu, K. Sawabe, S. Tsuda, Y. Yomogidao, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, C. Adachi and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2753–2758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yu, L. Huang, H. Wang and D. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1017–1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kaji, M. Zhang, S. Nakao, K. Iketaki, K. Yokoyama, C. W. Tang and M. Hiramoto, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3320–3325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, X. Qiao, J. Yang, B. Yu and D. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 133302 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Shu Hotta	Shu Hotta received his Doctor of Engineering degree at Kyoto University in 1988, while he was employed by Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd. (currently, Panasonic Corporation). Since 2003, he has been a Professor of the Laboratory of Polymer Physics, Department of Polymer Science and Engineering (currently, Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering), Kyoto Institute of Technology (KIT). His research interests cover development of novel organic semiconductors and their optoelectronic device applications.
Takeshi Yamao	Takeshi Yamao received his Doctor of Engineering degree at the Kyoto Institute of Technology (KIT) in 1999, and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at KIT and Kyoto University. In 2004, he joined Prof. Hotta's research group as a Research Associate in KIT, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include organic crystal growth and the application of the crystals to optical and electronic devices.
Satria Zulkarnaen Bisri	Satria Zulkarnaen Bisri obtained his B.Sc./S.Si. in Physics in 2006 from Institut Teknologi Bandung (Indonesia). He received his Ph.D. in Physics from Tohoku University (Japan) in 2011 under the guidance of Professor Yoshihiro Iwasa. He was also affiliated with the Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University. Since then, he has been a postdoctoral researcher at the Photophysics and OptoElectronics group of the Zernike Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Groningen (The Netherlands). His research focuses on optoelectronic devices based on emerging materials, including organic single crystals, carbon nanotubes, and colloidal quantum dots.
Taishi Takenobu	Taishi Takenobu received his Ph.D. (materials science) from the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST) in 2001 under the direction of Professor Yoshihiro Iwasa. Since 2013, he has been a professor of the Department of Applied Physics, Waseda University. His current research interests include (1) novel functionalities in two-dimensional materials, (2) realisation of electrically driven organic laser devices based on single-crystal ambipolar transistors, and (3) flexible and ink-jet printable electronics based on single-walled carbon nanotube film transistors.
Yoshihiro Iwasa	Yoshihiro Iwasa received his Ph. D. at The University of Tokyo in 1986. He became a research associate (1986) and lecturer (1991) at The University of Tokyo, and then moved to the Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST) as an associate professor (1994). He was appointed as a professor at the Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University (2001). Since 2010 he has been a professor at The University of Tokyo. His research interests are functional interfaces and devices with new materials, including light emitting transistors and electric field induced superconductivity.

 	Fig. 1  Various thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers (TPCOs).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of crystal growth apparatus (bottom) and crystals (top) produced by them: (a) vapour-phase growth. Reprinted from T. Yamao, S. Ota, T. Miki, S. Hotta and R. Azumi, Improved sublimation growth of single crystals of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers, Thin Solid Films, 516(9), 2527–2531, Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier. Also adapted with permission from T. Yamao, Y. Okuda, Y. Makino and S. Hotta, Dispersion of the refractive indices of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer single crystals, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110(5), 053113. Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics. (b) Proximity vapour-phase growth. Reprinted from T. Yamao, K. Juri, A. Kamoi and S. Hotta, Field-effect transistors based on organic single crystals grown by an improved vapor phase method, Org. Electron., 10(7), 1241–1247, Copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier. (c) Liquid-phase growth. Reprinted with permission from T. Yamao, T. Miki, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Ota and S. Hotta, Direct Formation of Thin Single Crystals of Organic Semiconductors onto a Substrate, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(15), 3748–3753. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Patterned crystalline array. Fluorescence photographs of (a) BP2T and (b) BP1T microdisk array. (c and d) Enlarged photographs. (e) Fluorescence photograph of the patterned BP2T polygon array, including triangular, square, pentagonal, hexagonal and star. (f) Enlarged photographs. (g) Scanning electron microscopy images of individual polygon BP2T microdisks. H.-H. Fang, R. Ding, S.-Y. Lu, Y.-D. Yang, Q.-D. Chen, J. Feng, Y.-Z. Huang and H.-B. Sun, Whispering-gallery mode lasing from the patterned molecular single-crystalline microcavity array, Laser Photonics Rev., 2013, 7(2), 281–288, DOI: 10.1002/lpor.201370027. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 4  Crystal structure of (a) BP3T (see Ref. 32) and (b) BP1T-OMe (see Ref. 35). (b) Adapted with permission from S. Hotta, M. Goto and R. Azumi, Peculiar Crystal Structure of a Thiophene/Phenylene Co-oligomer of 2,5-Bis(4′-methoxybiphenyl-4-yl)thiophene, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36(2), 270–271. Copyright 2007 The Chemical Society of Japan.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic structure of a single-crystal transistor (SCT). Adapted from T. Yamao, S. Ota, T. Miki, S. Hotta and R. Azumi, Improved sublimation growth of single crystals of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomers, Thin Solid Films, 516(9), 2527–2531, Copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier.	 


Growth phase	Vapour	Liquid	Vapour
Crystal morphology	Thin slab	Thin slab	Thin slab
Crystal mounting	Lamination	
In situ
	
In situ

Gate insulator	SiO2	SiO2, PTFE/SiO2	SAM/SiO2
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  BP3T SCTs and their device performance. Enlarged micrographs near the channel of (a) II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2 and (c) II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2. Output characteristics of (b) II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2 and (d) II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2. With the device notation, see the text. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from T. Yamao, T. Miki, H. Akagami, Y. Nishimoto, S. Ota and S. Hotta, Direct Formation of Thin Single Crystals of Organic Semiconductors onto a Substrate, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(15), 3748–3753. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. (c and d) Fig. 6 from Takeshi Yamao, Hiroshi Akagami, Yoshihiro Nishimoto, Shu Hotta and Yuji Yoshida, Improved Device Performance of Organic Crystal Field-Effect Transistors Fabricated on Friction-Transferred Substrates, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9(11), 6271–6276. Copyright 2009, American Scientific Publishers. Reproduced with permission.	 



I-AC5/SiO2a	2.1 × 10−2	−58.8	
	

II-BP3T(//a)/SiO2b	1.6 × 10−1	−12.7	
	

II-BP3T(//b)/SiO2b	1.3 × 10−1	−8.6	
	

II-BP3T/PTFE-SiO2c	2.6 × 10−1	−0.56	
	

III-AC5/HMDS-SiO2d	4.0 × 10−2	−0.72	
	

III-P5T/HMDS-SiO2d	1.0 × 10−1	−1.2	1.0 × 10−1 [15]	−0.27 [15]
III-P5T/OTS-SiO2d	1.7 × 10−2	4.9	4.9 × 10−2 [86]	6.5 [86]

 	Fig. 7  Energy level diagram of organic semiconductors and metals. The diagram represents the HOMO and LUMO levels of the organic semiconductors and Fermi levels of the metals.	 

 	Fig. 8  Emission spectra and refractive index dispersions. Emission spectra of an AC'7 crystal obtained from (a) weak and (b) strong excitation regimes that yield broadband spectra and laser oscillation spectra, respectively. Optical fringes are clearly noted in both the cases. (c) Group refractive indices of crystals of AC'7, BP1T and AC5. The data plotted by filled circles (BP1T), filled triangles (AC5) and filled diamonds (AC'7) are determined from broadband spectra obtained by the weak excitation with a mercury lamp. An open circle, an open triangle and open diamonds are determined from multimode laser oscillation spectra obtained by the strong excitation with a laser beam. (d) Phase refractive indices of crystals of AC'7, BP1T and AC5. Reprinted with permission from T. Yamao, Y. Okuda, Y. Makino and S. Hotta, Dispersion of the refractive indices of thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer single crystals, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110(5), 053113. Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 9  Alternating-current gate voltage (ACGV) operation of OLEFET. (a) Schematic diagram of the electrical circuit. The drain and source electrodes are connected to DC power supplies. The gate electrode is connected to an AC power supply. The vG denotes a varying gate voltage with its amplitude VG and frequency f. (b) Schematic diagrams of the carrier distribution within the channel at two different phases represented by P1 and P2. The coordinate P1 is located in the negative gate bias region where no pinch-off (for holes) occurs. Although P2 is also positioned in the negative gate bias region, the pinch-off sets in and electrons start being injected from the source contact. T. Yamao, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki and S. Hotta, Organic Light-Emitting Field-Effect Transistors Operated by Alternating-Current Gate Voltages, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20(21), 4109–4112, DOI: 10.1002/adma.200800942. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 10  Emission intensities of the device as a function of gate-voltage phase. (a) BP1T SCLEFET. Fig. 4 from Takeshi Yamao, Kohei Terasaki, Yasuhiro Shimizu and Shu Hotta, Organic-Crystal Light-Emitting Field-Effect Transistors Driven by Square-Wave Gate Voltages, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10(2), 1017–1020. Copyright 2010, American Scientific Publishers. Reproduced with permission. (b) AC5-1CF3-12OMe SCLEFET. Reprinted from T. Katagiri, Y. Shimizu, K. Terasaki, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Light-emitting field-effect transistors made of single crystals of an ambipolar thiophene/phenylene co-oligomer, Org. Electron., 12(1), 8–14, Copyright 2011, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  2-D diffraction grating device and its emission spectra. (a) Atomic force micrograph of the 2-D grating. The hole pitch (diameter) is indicated by p (d). The inset shows the Brillouin zone of the 2-D grating and high-symmetry points (Γ, M, K) in the reciprocal lattice. (b) SEM image of the BP2T crystal grown on the grating. This image was obliquely taken to view the circled part of the device shown in (d). (c) Schematic structure of the TPCO crystal LEFET. (d) Top view micrograph of the BP2T SCLEFET. The white arrows marked with a and b indicate the directions of the crystal axes. (e) Current-injected spectrally narrowed emissions from the BP2T SCLEFET obtained with several source (VS), drain (VD) and gate (VG) voltages. (f) Optically excited SNEs of the BP2T crystal in the LEFET device configuration. The spectra were taken parallel to the substrate plane with varying rotation angles (from +8 to −8°) relative to the channel long axis. The sign of the rotation angle was defined positive when the rotation was clockwise. A. Okada, Y. Makino, S. Hotta and T. Yamao, Current injected narrow linewidth emissions from organic-crystal light-emitting transistors having a diffraction grating, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2012, 9(12), 2545–2548. DOI: 10.1002/pssc.201200286. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Structure of an ambipolar LEFET of the patterned BP3T single crystal. High current density was achieved by patterning the single crystal channel to form a tapering structure. In combination with an improvement of electron injection, an ambipolar current density as high as 15 kA cm−2 was achieved. Kosuke Sawabe, Masaki Imakawa, Masaki Nakano, Takeshi Yamao, Shu Hotta, Yoshihiro Iwasa and Taishi Takenobu, Current-Confinement Structure and Extremely High Current Density in Organic Light-Emitting Transistors, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(46), 6141–6146. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201202252. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission. (b) LEFET device using a couple of parent and child crystals. The laser threshold energy was significantly reduced through the utilisation of the waveguiding properties of BP3T that forms an optical directional coupler. The small single crystal with its parallel facets acts as a resonator. Ambipolar LEFET using this optically directional coupler demonstrated much intense emission with some indication of spectral narrowing. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd S. Z. Bisri, K. Sawabe, M. Imakawa, K. Maruyama, T. Yamao, S. Hotta, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 985, Copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 13  LEFET having a metal oxide semiconductor [aluminium-doped ZnO (AZO)] layer. (a) Schematic cross-sectional view. Innermost parts of the Au and MgAg electrodes define the injection contacts and channel edge locations. This device has a Si gate electrode underneath the SiO2 gate insulator on top of which the AZO layer is located. It is entirely covered with the BP3T thin film layer. (b) Emission micrograph of the device at the applying voltage of +20 V (−20 V) to the Au (MgAg) electrode. (c) Highlighted micrograph of (b). (d) Enlarged photograph of (b) around the channel zone. K. Yamada, T. Yamao and S. Hotta, Light-Emitting Field-Effect Transistors Having Combined Organic Semiconductor and Metal Oxide Layers, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25(20), 2860–2866. DOI: 10.1002/adma.201300456. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
