Self-assembled tetrapyrrole – fullerene and tetrapyrrole – carbon nanotube donor–acceptor hybrids for light induced electron transfer applications    - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B717502G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B717502G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1440-1471Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSelf-assembled tetrapyrrole–fullerene and tetrapyrrole–carbon nanotube donor–acceptor hybrids for light induced electron transfer applications†‡

Raghu Chitta


 and 

Francis D'Souza


*
Department of Chemistry, Wichita State University, 1845 Fairmount, Wichita, Kansas 67260-0051, USA. E-mail: Francis.DSouza@wichita.edu;  Fax: +1-(316)-978-3431;   Tel: +1-(316)-978-7380
Received 
12th November 2007
, Accepted 21st December 2007First published on               
5th February 2008
AbstractThis review article highlights the recent progress made in the design and study of self-assembled supramolecular architectures based on tetrapyrrole macrocycles as donors, and fullerene and carbon nanotubes as electron acceptors for electron and energy transfer applications in solution. The remarkable features of the utilized biomimetic organization principles viz., hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking, metal-mediated complexation, and electrostatic attraction in governing the stability and geometry of the nanohybrids, and their significance in controlling the structure and electron transfer properties are discussed.Raghu ChittaRaghu Chitta was born in Mahadevpur, Andra Pradesh, India, in 1980. He received a B.Sc. degree from the Kakatiya University, Warangal in 2000, and a M.Sc. from University of Hyderbad, Hyderbad, India in 2002. In 2007, he received his Ph.D. from Wichita State University under the supervision of Prof. Francis D’Souza. Currently, he is a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Minnesota with Prof. W. L. Gladfelter, Prof. K. R. Mann and Prof. D. A. Blank. His research interests involve organic synthesis, supramolecular chemistry and developing chemosensors.Francis D'SouzaFrancis D’Souza was born in Sagar, Karnataka, India. He received B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the Mysore University, Mysore, India and a Ph.D. degree in 1992 from the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, under the direction of Prof. V. Krishnan. Following post-doctoral fellowships with Prof. Karl M. Kadish at the University of Houston, Texas and Prof. Roger Guilard at Universitè de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, he joined the Faculty of Wichita State University in 1994 and became a Professor in 2003. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis, electrochemical and photochemical applications relevant to sensing and light energy harvesting using macrocyclic compounds, such as porphyrin, phthalocyanine, fullerene and carbon nanotubes. Currently he is serving as Chairman of the Fullerenes, Nanotubes, and Nanostructures Division of the Electrochemical Society.
1 Introduction
Photoinduced electron transfer in donor–acceptor assemblies is one of the widely studied processes owing to its importance in solar energy harvesting and building optoelectronic devices.1 In nature, this process occurring in the reaction center of photosynthetic pigments involves rapid charge separation with quantitative quantum yield, with spatially and electronically well-isolated radical ion pair while eliminating the energy wasting back electron transfer.2 The small overall reorganization energy (λ ∼ 0.2 eV) exhibited by the photosynthetic reaction center and the well-balanced electronic coupling between the electron donor and acceptor entities have been attributed to the high efficiency of charge separation.3 Several electron donors—viz., porphyrins, phthalocyanines, tetrathiafulvalenes, ferrocene, amines, and π-conjugated oligomers connected to electron accepting fullerenes and carbon nanotubes have been studied with the intension of optimizing charge-separation processes.3,4 These studies have provided us with a wealth of information with regard to the nature of the photo- and electro-active units, solvent, donor–acceptor distance, molecular topology in which donor and acceptor are connected and arranged in space, and the nature of the space connecting them. Several reviews and monographs have been published summarizing the key findings of this fascinating area of research.3,4
In recent years, utilization of biomimetic supramolecular principles1,3–4 to self-assemble donor–acceptor entities, especially acceptors involving fullerenes,5a–c has received considerable attention. The control of weak forces, on a molecular basis, to define the size and shape in relation to function of the resulting supramolecular ensembles is often targeted. For these purposes, the different types of weak forces, namely hydrogen-bonding, π–π stacking, metal-mediated complexation, complementary base-pairing and electrostatic interactions, have been used to construct new non-covalently bonded architectures.3 In contrast to covalently bonded structures, the advantages of the assemblies constructed using these biomimetic motifs are reversible and their binding energies can be tuned by means of the chemical environment and temperature. Additionally, the highly selective and directional hydrogen bonding has afforded a wide variety of new architectures in which electron transfer processes between different donor units and the electron acceptor is shown to take place as efficiently as in the related covalently connected dyads. In this context, the all-carbon fullerene5a–c and carbon nanotubes,5d–f with the three-dimensional structures and their remarkable electronic properties, represent exceptional scaffolds for the development of distinctive 3D architectures.
Several reviews and monographs have been published summarizing the key findings of this fascinating area of research involving donor-fullerene or donor-nanotube hybrids.3–4 The present review will summarize the recent progress made in self-assembled donor–acceptor supramolecular structures developed using tetrapyrrole (porphyrin, phthalocyanine, and molecules alike) macrocycles as donors, and fullerene and carbon nanotubes as electron acceptors, and the electron transfer originating in them.
2 Self-assembled porphyrin–fullerene based donor–acceptor systems
2.1 Hydrogen bonding motif
Complementary base-paired hydrogen bonding. Recent efforts have been devoted to the use of the Watson–Crick type hydrogen bonding paradigm—specifically the three point guanosine–cytodine couple—as a scaffold to assemble donor–acceptor dyads.6 Sessler et al. utilized Watson–Crick type hydrogen bonding to study the photo-induced electron transfer between porphyrin and fullerene entities. In particular, a cytodine appended porphyrin (ZnP-C) and fullerene containing guanosine (G-C60) were synthesized and a new self-assembled donor–acceptor ensemble, 1, was established via Watson–Crick base pairing in non-polar organic solvents, such as dichloromethane.6  Cyclic voltammetry was performed to determine the energetics of photoinduced electron transfer in this supramolecular assembly. The first one electron oxidation potential for ZnP-C (E1/2 ZnP/ZnP•+) and the first one electron reduction potential for G-C60 (E1/2 C60/C60•−) were found to be 0.32 V and −1.08 V versus Fc/Fc+ reference, respectively. From these values, the driving force for the charge separation (ΔGCS = −0.81 eV) and the subsequent charge recombination (ΔGCR = −1.4 eV) processes were estimated.
Evidence for the formation of self-assembled ZnP-C:G-C60via complementary base pairing was obtained from the steady state and time resolved emission studies. The decrease in the fluorescence emission intensity of ZnP-C upon increasing additions of G-C60 revealed the formation of donor–nucleoside–nucleoside–acceptor complex with a binding constant of 5.1 ± 0.5 × 104 M−1. Time resolved fluorescence measurements were undertaken to support the conclusion of dyad formation and intra-ensemble quenching obtained from the steady state experiments. From the derived lifetimes, the rate constant for the forward electron transfer was estimated to be kCS = 1.2 × 109 s−1. Transient absorption studies were employed to gain additional support for the photo-induced electron transfer in this self assembled dyad. The observation of weak bands for the formation of zinc porphyrin cation radical (ZnP•+) around 600–800 nm and fullerene radical anion (C60•−) at around 1000 nm, confirmed the long lived charge separated state with a lifetime of 2.02 μs.
Further extension of this concept of Watson–Crick base pairing in building non-covalent supramolecular systems employing porphyrin like systems, phthalocyanines, as donors and fullerenes as acceptors has also been achieved.7 In particular, studies on a tethered zinc phthalocyanine–cytidine–guanosine–C60 (ZnPc-C:G-C60) hybrid highlight the fact that base pairing provides a useful means for constructing self-assembled systems. The putative formation of the ensemble 2 was clearly monitored by UV-visible and steady-sate fluorescence studies. Increasing additions of the G-C60 subunit to a dichloromethane solution of cytidine functionalized phthalocyanine lead to a non-linear decrease in the fluorescence intensity of the latter chromophore, corresponding to the formation of the dyad with a formation constant of (2.6 ± 2) × 106 M−1. The magnitude of the formation constant was several orders of magnitude higher than that of ZnP-C:G-C60 dyad. A possible rationalization for the strength of the interaction was that the base-pair bonding is further augmented by π–π and charge transfer interactions.  
Evidence for the ground state interactions within this dyad was obtained from the electrochemical studies. The cyclic voltammograms of the dyad revealed that the C60-based reduction potentials are negatively shifted with respect to the reference compound, G-C60, by about −20, −60 and −70 mV for the first, second and third reduction processes, respectively. Likewise, the first and second anodic ZnPc-based potentials are less positive than those of the reference, ZnP-C, by about 20 and 10 mV, respectively. The driving force for the photoinduced electron transfer events within this dyad was estimated to be 0.42 eV. To elucidate the nature of the photoexcited state deactivation, transient absorption measurements were performed. In a toluene–dichloromethane solvent mixture, transient maxima at 430, 550 and 800 nm, corresponding to ZnPc singlet excited states and around 1000 nm for C60•− were observed. The lifetime for the charge separated state was estimated to be 3 ns, which is three orders of magnitude shorter than the ZnP-C:G-C60 dyad (2 μs). This was mainly attributed to the pronounced coupling between the ZnPc and C60 in the studied dyad.
A uracil functionalized fullerene derivative was synthesized to build donor–acceptor systems to probe photoinduced electron transfer. Initial studies revealed that the C60-uracil was capable of hydrogen bonding, via complementary base pairing, of adenine, adenosine, and adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP).8 Accordingly, stable “expanded liquid” Langmuir films of the C60-uracil:adenine, C60-uracil:adenosine and C60-uracil:ATP complexes were prepared and characterized by isotherms of surface pressure versus area per molecule, as well as the Brewster angle microscopy imaging. An extension of this work has been achieved in constructing a donor–acceptor dyad comprising of 2-aminopurine, a fluorescent donor, and uracil-C60 as an electron acceptor.9a Steady state fluorescence emission studies revealed the formation of a stable non-covalent donor–acceptor pair with a binding constant of 3.3 × 104 M−1, and quenching of the 2-aminopurine emission intensity over 80% of the original intensity confirming an efficient photoinduced electron transfer from 2-aminopurine entity to uracil-C60. DFT molecular orbital calculations at the B3LYP/3-21 G(*) level confirmed a low energy Watson–Crick type base-paired structure for the conjugate with HOMO being localized on the 2-aminopurine and LUMO on fullerene entity. It may be noted here that the HOMO of earlier investigated adenine:uracil-C60 was largely localized on the uracil moiety,8 suggesting better electron donor property of 2-amino purine than adenine toward uracil-C60. Time-resolved emission and transient absorption studies were performed to evaluate the rates of charge separation and charge recombination and to characterize the fate of charge separated products. From the decay of the 1020 nm band in nanosecond transient absorption spectra, the charge recombination rate (kCR) was evaluated to be 6 × 106 s−1, which was three orders of magnitude smaller than kCS. Such slow kCR value can be rationalized by the large ΔGCR (−1.3 eV) and small reorganization energy characteristics of the spherical C60 moiety. The time-resolved transient absorption studies also confirmed (2-aminopurine)•+: uracil-C60)•− as the charge-separated state upon photoexcitation, as predicted by the computational frontier orbitals. Recently, a Langmuir study of 2-amino purine-uracil-C60 formation has been reported.9b
Further, using diacetylamidopyridine:uracil complimentary hydrogen bonding motif, a novel bis zinc porphyrin-fullerene supramolecular triad, 3:4 was constructed and characterized.10 The geometry of the triad deduced from the B3LYP/3-21 G(*) method revealed the presence of the ‘three-point’ hydrogen bonding, and one of the porphyrin units of the dimer to be closer to the fullerene entity.  
Pico-second time-resolved emission and nanosecond transient absorption techniques were employed, respectively, to evaluate the kinetics of electron transfer and to characterize the electron transfer products. The charge separation rate constants (kCS) via the 1ZnP* moiety in the complex were evaluated to be 1.4 × 1010 s−1 and 2.8 × 109 s−1 corresponding to the near-side and far-side located ZnP units with respect to the C60 entity of the supramolecular triad. Similarly, the kCR values evaluated by monitoring the decay of the C60•− peak at 1020 nm gave two rates of 2.2 × 107 s−1 and 5.8 × 106 s−1 corresponding to charge recombination from the near-side and far-side positioned ZnP•+ entities with respect to C60. This resulted in the lifetimes for CS species to be 45 ns and 172 ns, respectively. The kCR values were two orders of magnitude smaller than the respective kCS values, suggesting stabilization of the charge separation state due to the small re-organization energy of the fullerene, affording possible application to an artificial photosynthetic model. The positioning of the porphyrin entity with respect to the fullerene entity (near or far) seems to influence the kinetics of charge separation and charge recombination events, thus delineating the structural importance of the studied supramolecular triad in governing the electron transfer rates.
Although the complementary base pairs perform a major role in generating functional supramolecular systems, the structure and topology of the dyads or triads are far from optimum. In particular, through space interactions must be assumed to control the charge separation and charge recombination dynamics. This argument points to the need of a truly linear arrangement in hydrogen bonding electron donor–acceptor hybrids.

Ion paired hydrogen bonding interactions. The significance of strong and highly directional hydrogen bonding in governing the electron transfer reactions in photosynthetic reaction center inspired various research groups in designing efficient photovoltaic devices. Among these, a set of non-covalently associated C60-porphyrin ensembles interfaced by a two-point amidinium-carboxylate ion paired hydrogen bonding stand as a good example. In particular, a porphyrin functionalized with an amidinium group and a fullerene with a carboxylate group were synthesized and a stable noncovalent porphyrin-C60 dyad 5 was formed via two-point amidinium–carboxylate ion pairing.11 This binding motif diminished the other possible bonding modes and favored the linear interfaced donor–acceptor pair reinforcing the strength of the hydrogen bonding network and ensured an optimal pathway for the motion of charges between both electroactive units.  Evidence for the formation of hydrogen bonded donor–acceptor complex 5 was obtained by 1H NMR spectroscopy. Increasing additions of carboxylate appended C60 to the amidinium functionalized porphyrin resulted in a dramatic shift (Δδ = 0.35 ppm) in the aryl protons ortho to the amidine functionality. Importantly, no further changes were observed upon addition of more than one equivalent of the fullerene derivative, thus confirming the exclusive formation of 1 : 1 complex. Further details on the formation of complex 5 was obtained from UV-visible and fluorescence spectroscopic studies. Significant bathochromic shifts in the Soret and Q-bands of absorption spectra followed by an appreciable quenching of the porphyrin fluorescence emission upon addition of fullerene derivative confirmed the formation of the stable non-covalent hydrogen bonded porphyrin-fullerene ion pair with association constants as high as 2.1 × 107 M−1 and 1.3 × 105 M−1 in toluene and THF solvents, respectively.
The ground state interactions within the dyad were further confirmed by cyclic voltammetric studies performed in THF at room temperature. The observed slight shifts in the redox potentials of the donor–acceptor complex 5 was accounted for by the pronounced ground state electronic coupling between both electroactive components. Evidence for the formation of the photo-excited species was obtained from transient absorption studies. The transient maxima at 600–800 nm, corresponding to ZnP, and the fingerprint of C60•− around 1000 nm, supported the formation of long-lived charge separated species within this dyad with a lifetime of ∼10 μs.

2.2 Electrostatic attraction
Complementary electrostatics binding. In line of developing non-covalently linked linear donor–acceptor systems, a coulombic complex 6 comprising a dendritic C60 oligocarboxylate (C608−) and an octapyridinium ZnP salt (ZnP8+) was reported.12 The ground state interactions within this dyad were characterized by using optical absorption and fluorescence techniques. A Job's plot constructed by monitoring the Soret absorption of ZnP salt upon addition of the dendritic C60 oligocarboxylate in a pH buffer (pH =7.2, ionic strength = 0.012) revealed the formation of 1 : 1 complex, ZnP-electrostatic-C60, with an association constant of 3.5 ± 1.0 × 108 M−1. Parallel fluorescence titrations revealed that the ZnP8+ emission is strongly quenched with varying concentrations of C608−, indicating the formation of ZnP8+/C608− electrostatic hybrid with an association constant of 1.1 ± 0.1 × 108 M−1 at pH 7.2. Stability investigations showed the weaker association of the complex at higher ionic strengths with little dependence on the nature of the anions. Electron transfer quenching was further confirmed by transient absorption spectroscopy, which showed the fingerprint absorptions of the zinc porphyrin8+ radical cation and the fullerene8− radical anion with a lifetime of 1.1 μs for the charge separated state.  
2.3 π–π interactions
In recent years, designing donor–acceptor systems via supramolecular assembly routes has attracted a lot of attention because of its versatility and simplicity. Among these, the porphyrin–fullerene based host–guest complexes are of major importance because of the affinity of fullerenes towards the π-network of porphyrin and, thereby, leading to closest donor–acceptor systems.
Aida and co-workers reported a highly stable host–guest complex 7 comprised of porphyrin and fullerene assembled through π–π interactions.13 This face-to-face cyclic dimer formed a stable 1 : 1 inclusion complex with C60via donor–acceptor interactions in non-polar benzene solution. The complex formation was characterized by UV-visible, NMR, ESI-MS, and chromatographic techniques. Increasing additions of C60 to a benzene solution of the porphyrin dimer resulted in a 7 nm bathochromic shift of the intense Soret band of porphyrin with clear isosbestic point around 418 nm. The Job's plot obtained by monitoring the Soret absorption of ZnP dimer at 410.5 nm revealed the formation of 1 : 1 complex with a binding constant of 6.7 × 105 M−1. 13C NMR spectrum of the inclusion complex 7 in C6D6 showed a single signal due to the included C60, which is upfield-shifted from that of free C60. This is mainly attributed to the shielding effect or electronic effect of the zinc porphyrin π-cloud. Cyclic voltammetry studies revealed that fullerene becomes less subject to reduction upon complexation with the zinc porphyrin dimer. The electrospray mass spectrometry of a THF solution of porphyrin dimer and C60 clearly showed the two isotopic distributions corresponding to the mono and dication of 1 : 1 complex.  
X-ray crystallographic studies were also performed by these authors to understand the fullerene–metalloporphyrin interactions.14 The hexamethylene linkers were folded to adjust the porphyrin–porphyrin distance, and the porphyrin macrocyles are slightly distorted from planarity in order to accommodate C60. Rather shorter distances between zinc atoms and two carbon atoms of the 5:6 ring juncture C–C bonds of C60 (2.765–2.918 Å) and also between the pyrrole α-C atoms of the porphyrin moieties and three proximal carbon atoms of C60 (3.320–3.346 Å) provided direct evidence for the presence of π-interactions between zinc porphyrin moieties and the included fullerene in the solid state.
The high binding constant of the inclusion complex prompted the authors to investigate the role of central metal ions in the porphyrin core in controlling the supramolecular donor–acceptor interactions in these inclusion complexes.14 In order to achieve this, various experiments concerning the study of the interaction of fullerenes, C60 and C70, with a series of metalloporphyrin cyclic dimers (M = 2 H, Co, RhMe, Ni, Cu, Ag and Zn) were carried out. Spectroscopic titrations of the metalloporphyrin cyclic dimers with fullerenes, C60 and C70 revealed red shift of the Soret band with a decrease in absorbance. The association constants for the RhMe porphyrin dimer with C60 and C70 were calculated to be 2.4 × 107 M−1 and ∼ 108 M−1 which demonstrated the extremely high affinity of RhMe porphyrin dimer toward fullerenes. NMR studies were also performed to probe the interactions in these inclusion complexes. Variable-temperature (VT) 13C NMR provided valuable information regarding the dynamics of the complexation indicating that the RhMe porphyrin dimer/fullerenes dissociate much less frequently than the zinc porphyrin dimer/fullerenes.
The above concept of generating inclusion complexes of porphyrins and fullerenes via π–π interactions was utilized in selective extraction of higher fullerenes from a combustion-based industrial production source.15 An asymmetrically distorted π-electronic component, a C1-symmetric N-methylporphyrin coupled with rhodium porphyrin in a cyclic dimer has been utilized to discriminate the enantiomers of higher fullerenes, C76.16 More recently, an iridium porphyrin cyclic dimer, an analogue of rhodium cyclic dimer, has been synthesized and systematically utilized for hosting fullerenes, C60 and C70, via dynamic bond formation.17 This bond formation caused an ellipsoidal deformation of C60 and an end-on orientation of C70 relative to the metalloporphyrins.
The extremely high affinity of cyclic RhMe porphyrin dimers towards fullerenes has also been utilized to host higher fullerenes, such as C120.18 The so formed inclusion complex comprising cyclic rhodium(III) porphyrin dimer bearing C6 linkers and C120 served as the supramolecular oscillator i.e., the included C120 oscillates back and forth with the π-electronic cavity of RhMe porphyrin dimer/fullerene, which in turn visualized the solvation/desolvation dynamics of the included carbon host molecules.
A short-spaced metalloporphyrin cyclic dimer bearing C4 alkylene spacers was synthesized and utilized to form 1 : 1 and 2 : 1 complexes with fullerenes, such as C60, C70, and C76. In these inclusion complexes, two metalloporphyrin subunits of the host adopted a non-parallel, tilted geometry with respect to one another to accommodate the fullerene guests.19 However, when relatively small fullerenes, such as C60 and C70, were complexed, the resulting 1 : 1 complex displayed a unique dynamic motion i.e., fullerene guest slipped, rather disassembling, through the small cavity of the porphyrin dimer and oscillated with an inversion of the tilted geometry of the metalloporphyrin dimer.19 This dynamic motion was substantially restricted when the second host molecule capped the 1 : 1 complex to form a capsule-type 2 : 1 inclusion complex. This organorhodium cyclic porphyrin dimer stands as a good example for a self-regulatory host that can operate according to the oscillatory guest motion.
In another study, Shinkai and co-workers synthesized a porphyrin tetramer comprised of p-terphenyl axis and systematically utilized to construct a supramolecular cooperative fullerene binding system, 8.20 In particular, binding of one equivalent of C60 to a pair of distal porphyrins in toluene facilitated the binding of second C60 by suppressing the rotational freedom of p-terphenyl axis and thus promoting the molecular recognition process of 2 equivalents of C60. Hence the porphyrin tweezer coupled with the concept of “allosterism” exhibited a larger affinity toward C60 with association constants of 5800 M−1 (K1) and 2000 M−1 (K2), respectively.  
This concept of guest-induced cooperative binding of fullerenes with porphyrins was extended to complex higher equivalents of C60 in a dendritic porphyrin receptor.21 In particular, a porphyrin dendrimer containing three rotational axes that affect the spatial arrangement of porphyrins, and the shape of three clefts, each of which containing two porphyrin planes was synthesized and utilized in binding the three equivalents of C60 in an allosteric manner. The binding of the first C60 suppressed the rotation of two complexing porphyrin rings, which in turn, hinders the rotation of two other neighboring porphyrin rings in the same axes. Further, the binding of the second C60 suppresses the rotation of residual two free porphyrin rings. This phenomenon was clearly observed using UV-vis and NMR techiniques, which demonstrated that the dendritic receptor binding of the three C60 guests in the positive allosteric manner with a high Hill coefficient of 2.8.
In the line of developing π-conjugated hosts for accommodating fullerenes, Aida and co-workers have designed and synthesized a host molecule having π-electronically coupled binding sites by cyclodimerization of a fused zinc porphyrin complex.22
The fused zinc porphyrin host in toluene at 20 °C accommodated two molecules of 4,4′-bipyridine (bpy) with the Kassoc value for the binding of second bpy being 12 times smaller than that for the first bpy.22a This is because bpy is an electron-donating guest and the binding of first bpy induced a negative cooperativity due to electron donation from bpy transmitted through a π-electronic conjugation over the fused porphyrin array to the other binding site and disfavoured the complexation of the second bpy. A similar situation was also envisioned in case of an electron-accepting guest, such as C60i.e., inclusion of C60 into the cavity of host decreased the electron-donating capability of fused zinc porphyrin cyclic host, thereby disfavoured the binding of a second C60 molecule. However, as the electronic effects of bpy and C60 toward the metalloporphyrin moieties of the host are opposite to one another, host 9 accommodated both bpy and C60 simultaneously in its cavity.22 Initial inclusion of bpy resulted in enhancing the affinity of the host toward C60 by a factor of 8.5 due to positive heterotropic cooperativity. On the other hand, the C60-containing host 9 was 6.1 times more active than the guest-free host for the complexation with a base, such as N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylhexane-1,6-diamine. In these cases, the electronic effect of the first-bound guest is always favorable for the second guest, since the electronic effects of these guests are complementary to one another.
  
Hybridization of fullerenes has been a topic of current interest for the preparation of redox active plastic materials.23 However, the poor compatibility of fullerenes with commodity polymers posses a problem. In order to solve this, various covalent and non-covalent approaches have been reported. Even though the covalent approach is promising, it results in the partial destruction of the electronic conjugation of fullerenes.24 Hence, Aida and co-workers synthesized a poly(benzyl ether) dendrimer containing a cyclic dimer of porphyrin at its centre, 9.25 This dendritic host was found to accommodate fullerenes, such as C60 and C70, in its cavity and solubilize them in a variety of solvents, depending on the solubility of the dendritic wedges. Further, the dendritic host allowed a highly stable, molecular dispersion of fullerenes in a commodity polymer, poly(methyl methacrylate), affording a homogeneous composite film.
Another type of dendritic host containing an acyclic zinc porphyrin dimer bearing six carboxylic acid functionalities at its focal core was synthesized.26 Due to the presence of these carboxylic acid groups, this dendritic molecule, upon interaction with fullerenes, C60 and C70, revealed guest-directed cyclodimerization via intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions. The fullerene-included supramolecular dimer, thus formed, was further assembled bilaterally via hydrogen-bonding interactions of the residual carboxylic acid groups, to form a ‘supramolecular peapod’ structure, 10.  
Meijer et al. reported novel non-covalently assembled porphyrin-fullerene aggregates, 11 in water which displayed sequential energy transfer followed by electron transfer.27 In particular, free base and zinc tetrakis [oligo(p-phenylenevinylene)] porphyrins were synthesized and π-conjugate assemblies comprising these were constructed in water. Selective excitation of oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) (OPV4) moieties at 326 nm within these aggregates resulted in a decrease in the emission of OPV and zinc porphyrin followed by an increase in the fluorescence of free base porphyrin, indicating the occurrence of cascade energy transfer from OPV4 via zinc porphyrin to free base porphyrin. Incorporation of fullerene into these aggregates resulted in redox-active assemblies, yielding sequential electron transfer to C60. This was confirmed by the characteristic fullerene anion radical at 1070 nm in transient absorption studies.  
Boyd et al. reported “jaw shaped” porphyrin dimers that served as effective hosts for fullerene guests, 12, 13 and 14.28 X-ray structures of the Cu complex with C60 and free-base complexes with higher fullerenes like C70 and pyrrolidine derivatized C60 were obtained. The electron-rich 6:6 ring juncture bonds of C60 showed unusually close approach to the porphyrin or metalloporphyrin plane. Binding constants in toluene solution increase in the order Fe(II) < Pd(II) < Zn(II) < Mn(II) < Co(II) < Cu(II) < 2 H within a range of 490–5200 cm−1. The association constant of C60 with free base porphyrin was estimated to be higher than the metalated porphyrins. This was mainly attributed to the electrostatic forces, enhancing the van der Waals forces of the π–π interaction.  
Calixarenes have a well developed derivatization chemistry on both the “upper” and “lower” rims, allowing easy synthesis of bisporphyrin hosts.29 Boyd and co-workers have designed a calix[4]arene scaffold comprising of bisporphyrins moieties attached to the lower rim, 15, which allowed the systematic variation in the nature of the linkage (-X-), type of porphyrin, its solubility properties and more importantly, lead to an understanding of the solvation energies, structural constraints, and electronic influences involving the appearance of charge transfer (CT) band upon complexation with fullerenes. This calix[4]arene appended bisporphyrin (“jaw porphyrin”) host has been synthesized and utilized for the supramolecular binding of fullerenes, C60 and C70. Fullerene affinities were optimized by varying the nature of the covalent linkage of the porphyrins to the calixarenes and found that the host containing porphyrins attached to calix[4]arene moiety via an amide linker with a single methylene spacer was proven to be most suited for the complexation of fullerenes. Binding constants for C60 and C70 in toluene were explored as a function of substituents at the periphery of the porphyrin, and 3,5-di-tert-butylphenyl groups gave rise to the highest fullerene affinities (26,000 M−1 for C60). The origin of this high fullerene affinity has been observed to be more dependent on the solvation effects, rather than on the electronic effects. In particular, higher binding constants for the complexation of fullerenes (toluene < benzonitrile < dichloromethane << cyclohexane) were observed in the solvents in which fullerenes exhibit weaker solubility, thus indicating that desolvation of the fullerene is a major factor determining the magnitude of binding constants. The energetics of fullerene binding were determined in terms of ΔH and ΔS and were consistent with an enthalpy-driven, solvation-dependent process. A direct relationship between supramolecular binding of a fullerene guest to a bisporphyrin host and the appearance of a broad near-IR absorption band were also established. The energy of this band moved in a predictable manner as a function of the electronic structure of the porphyrin, thereby establishing its origin in porphyrin-to-fullerene charge transfer.  
Li and co-workers have demonstrated the self-assembly of a new class of foldamer-based molecular tweezers, 16, whose rigid folded conformations are stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonding.30 Two zinc porphyrin units were introduced to the ends of molecular tweezers, Zn216a and Zn216b, while three zinc porphyrin units are incorporated to the Zn316c, which may be regarded as a combination of two Zn216a molecules. Due to the pre-organized U-shaped feature of Zn216a and Zn216b, they were able to complex C60, C70, and C60 derivative in chloroform or toluene in a 1 : 1 binding stoichiometry, whereas Zn316c, which possesses two tweezer units, complexes the guests in a 1 : 2 stoichiometry.  
2.4 Interlocked systems—rotaxanes and catenanes
Rotaxanes and catenanes emerged as one of the important multi-component biomimics that can harvest solar energy, mainly due to their close resemblance to the topology of the natural photosynthetic reaction center.31 One of the most striking features of these interlocked systems is that the constituting components are rigidly arranged spacially within a certain distance, without any strong linkages like covalent bonds. Rotaxanes possess a macrocyclic ring, which is threaded on a rod with stoppers that prevent dissociation, while catenanes possess two (or more) non-bonded interlocking systems.
Watanabe et al. attempted to mimic the bacterial photosynthetic reaction center by employing a rotaxane based donor–acceptor system comprising a necklace pended C60 moiety and zinc porphyrin dimer with varying axle lengths, 17.32 This methodology resulted in three different porphyrin–fullerene based donor–acceptor rotaxanes with varying interlocked structures and axle lengths. The intra-rotaxane photo-induced electron transfer processes between the spatially positioned C60 and ZnP in rotaxanes were investigated. Charge separated states (ZnP•+-C60•−)rotaxane were formed via the excited singlet state of ZnP (1ZnP*) to the C60 moiety in solvents, such as benzonitrile, THF, and toluene. The rate constants and quantum yields of charge separation via1ZnP* decreased with axle length. Increase in the axle length resulted in the occurrence of the charge separated state via excited triplet state of ZnP. The lifetime of the charge separated state increased with axle length from 180 to 650 ns at room temperature. Based on estimates of the rates of through space and through-bond electron transfer, it was concluded that back electron transfer takes place through space by a super exchange mechanism. The lifetimes of the above discussed rotaxanes were quite short i.e., nanoseconds, because the ZnP-rotaxane-C60 hybrid was loosely held together by hydrogen bonds.  
To enhance the rigidity of the donor–acceptor rotaxane system and thereby to increase the charge separated lifetimes, Schuster and co-workers33 reported two sets of ZnP-rotaxane-C60 hybrids, ZnP-stoppered hybrids and C60 stoppered hybrids, synthesized by using Sauvage's methodology,31i.e., threading through a Cu(I)phenanthraline complex, [Cu(phen)2]+, 18. The electron donor (ZnP) and electron acceptor (C60) were separated by a tetrahedral arrangement of the phenanthralene ligands around the Cu(I) center. This new assembly of the donor–acceptor systems prevented the close approach of the ZnP and C60 moieties, which in turn, inhibited the through-space charge separation and charge recombination processes suggesting the occurrence of intramolecular electronic interactions following excitation through the [Cu(phen)2]+ complex.  
In the first set i.e., ZnP-stoppered hydrids, C60 was linked to the macrocycle, while ZnP functioned as stoppers.33a,c The photophysical processes in these systems were monitored by UV-vis, fluorescence and transient absorption studies. Careful analysis of these processes indicated that a sequence of energy and electron transfer processes occur along an energy gradient, involving intramolecular energy transfer from the initially generated porphyrin singlet excited state to the [Cu(phen)2]+ MLCT state followed by the electron transfer from the excited MLCT state to the C60 moiety. Finally, a secondary reversible electron transfer from the porphyrin to the oxidized Cu complex yielded a long distance charge separated state, (ZnP•+)2-[Cu(phen)2]+-C60•−, with radical pair lifetimes of 0.49 and 1.17 μs at room temperature, for systems 18a and 18b, respectively. The enhanced lifetimes of these nanosized radical ion pair states was attributed to the unique topology of the system.
In the second set, i.e., C60-stoppered hybrids, the arrangement of the ZnP and C60 moieties were reversed from that described above, that is, the ZnP was appended to the macrocycle and C60 moieties were the stoppers on the thread around the central [Cu(phen)2]+ core.33b,c This modified topology results in enhanced charge separated lifetimes of about 0.73 and 29 μs for 18c and 18d, respectively. The longer lifetime of the charge separated state in 18c compared to 18d was attributed to the relatively small increase in the distance between the ZnP and C60 moieties, which diminished the electron coupling between the centers of positive and negative charges and was, thereby, responsible for the slower electron tunneling in the system.
Liu and co-workers reported a nanometre-sized interlocked bis(polyrotaxane) structure comprised of cyclodextrin-porphyrin conjugates as backbones and C60 as linkers, 19.34 The formation of the cyclodextrin–porphyrin conjugate was clearly observed by NMR studies. A comparison of the area of the peaks corresponding to the phenylene protons and cyclodextrin C–H protons indicated that the cyclodextrin–porphyrin conjugate had a structure with one β-cyclodextrin cavity for each phenylene unit. These results also revealed that the aromatic ring of p-phthaldehyde molecule must be located in the interior of cyclcodextrin cavity, and the cyclcodextrin units are threaded on the polymer backbone. The FT-IR spectrum of the conjugate showed a characteristic vibration at 1652 cm−1, assigned to the C=N stretching vibration, and the elemental analysis data confirmed the 1 : 1 condensation stoichiometry between p-phthaldehyde included cyclodextrin and p-diaminoporphyrin. A further reaction of C60 with the cyclodextrin-porphyrin conjugate was confirmed by UV-vis, fluorescence, elemental analysis and computer modeling studies. Inclusion of C60 moiety within the cyclodextrin-porphyrin aggregate resulted in the blue shift of the UV-vis peaks corresponding to the individual porphyrin and cyclodextrin moieties. Elemental analysis indicated that the cyclodextrin : porphyrin : C60 molar ratio in the final complex was 2 : 2 : 1. Fluorescence studies revealed the formation of the complex with an association constant of 7800 M−1. The thermal stability of the complexes was investigated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) which indicated that the aggregate decomposes at 285 °C. The morphology of the aggregate was studied by TEM and SEM experiments. Cyclic voltammetry studies showed that, upon complexation with the cyclodextrin–porphyrin conjugate, C60 becomes less accessible for reduction due to the presence of π-interactions between porphyrin and C60. Circular dichroism studies showed moderate and strong Cotton effect peaks in the range 270–500 nm, which indicated the presence of significant chirality behavior of the final complex.  
Stoddart and co-workers have designed a multicomponent [2]rotaxane that can operate as a light driven molecular shuttle.35 The system consists of a light-fueled power station which can utilize photon energy to create a charge-separated state, and a mechanical switch, capable of utilizing such a photochemically generated driving force to bring about controllable molecular shuttling motions. The light-fueled power station was, in turn, comprised of a light-harvesting porphyrin (P) unit, which acted as an electron donor and a π-electron acceptor, such as fullerene. The mechanical switch was a redox-active bistable [2]rotaxane moiety that consists of (i) a tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) unit as an efficient π-electron-donor station, (ii) a dioxynaphthalene (DNP) unit as a second π-electron-rich station, and (iii) a tetracationic cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) (CBPQT4+) π-electron-acceptor cyclophane, which encapsulated the better π-electron-donating TTF station. Diethylene glycol spacers were conveniently introduced between the electroactive components in the dumbbell-shaped thread to facilitate the template-directed synthesis of the [2]rotaxane. The structure of the rotaxane was characterized by 1H NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry, as well as by UV-vis-NIR absorption spectroscopy and voltammetry. The experimental results showed that the remarkable electronic interactions occurred among various units located on the dumbbell-shaped component suggesting the presence of folded structure in solution. The redox-driven shuttling process of the CBPQT4+ ring between the two competitive electron-rich recognition units, namely, TTF and DNP, was investigated by electrochemistry and spectroelectrochemistry as a means to verify its operational behavior prior to the photophysical studies related to light-driven operation. The oxidation process of the TTF unit was dramatically hampered in the rotaxane, thereby reducing the efficiency of the shuttling motion. These results confirm that, as the structural complexity increases, the overall function of the system no longer depends simply on its “primary” structure but also on higher-level effects, which were reminiscent of the secondary and tertiary structures of biomolecules.
Prato and co-workers have reported supramolecular rotaxanes of the types 20–21 comprised of phthalocyanine(s) appended with dibenzo-24-crown-8 unit and fullerene moiety with quaternary ammonium cation that can assemble with dibenzo-24-crown-8 through hydrogen bonding. The binding constants, calculated using steady-state fluorescence, for the dyad and triad were 1.4 × 10−4 M−1 and 1.9 × 10−4 M−1, respectively, for 20 and 21. The zinc phthalocyanine derivative exhibited an excited state lifetime of approximately 3.1 ns. The fast decay of the excited state of 1ZnPc* upon complexation with the fullerene ammonium cation suggested that intramolecular electron transfer from 1ZnPc* as the predominant quenching mechanism.36    
Takata and co-workers have reported a rotaxane in which C60 moiety was the axle of the supramolecular structure, 22.37 In particular, the Diels–Alder reaction of various dienophiles, such as C60 with a pseudorotaxane bearing sultine moiety, were carried out to afford corresponding [2]-rotaxanes in moderate yields. However, the introduction of a porphyrin moiety on the wheel component resulted in an attractive interaction with C60, and thus enhanced the efficiency of the end-capping reaction with C60.  
The extension of the above work of developing rotaxanes was successfully achieved by developing a mechanically linked triad rotaxanes, which contain a porphyrin (MP) unit as a pendant and fullerene (C60) and triphenylamine (TPA) moieties as stoppers at the axle ends, 23.38 The photophysical properties were investigated by means of time-resolved and transient absorption studies in solvents of varying polarity. These experiments results revealed multi-step electron transfer, combination of through-space and through bond, within this donor–acceptor complex. For (MP;C60-TPA)rot+, through-space charge-separated state (CS) (MP•+;C60•−-TPA)rot+ was generated via singly excited 1MP* in polar solvent, in addition to through-bond charge separation via the 1C60* moiety generating (MP;C60•−-TPA•+)rot+ and through-space CS generating (MP•+;C60•−-TPA)rot+.. Hole-shift also occurred from TPA•+ to MP via through-space producing more stable (MP•+;C60•−-TPA)rot+ in polar solvents. The lifetime of the charge separation state of (ZnP;C60-TPA)rot+ was similar to that of dyad (C60-TPA)rot+ (140 ns in dimethylformamide), whereas that of (H2P;C60-TPA)rot+ was as long as 230 ns, suggesting two final charge separation states, such as (MP;C60•−-TPA•+)rot+ and (MP•+;C60•−-TPA)rot+ depending on the type of porphyrin.  
Catenanes. Molecular modeling studies of ZnP-stoppered ZnP-rotaxane-C60 hybrids suggested that the two ZnP linked to the [Cu(phen)2]+ core provide a molecular scaffold capable of binding a variety of bidentate ligands and result in various catenanic based donor–acceptor systems, 24.39 Selective complexation of diazabicylcooctane (DABCO) or 4,4′bipyridyl to the axial positions (dz2 orbitals) of ZnP opened a wide window of opportunity to form novel photo- and redox-active catenanic architectures. Upon photoexcitation, these systems revealed a sequence of energy and electron transfer events to yield long-lived charge separated states with lifetimes of (500 ± 50 ns).  
2.5 Axial coordination
Supramolecular metalloporphyrin–fullerene dyads via metal ligand axial coordination. Over the years, a number of studies have reported porphyrins with covalently attached ligating groups as model compounds to understand the mechanism of various biological reactions, viz., hemoxygenation, cytochrome oxidase and peroxidase, etc.40 Various spectroscopic studies have revealed the existence of stable five- and six-coordinate metalloporphyrins,41 thus mimicking the active sites of various heme proteins in which axial ligands are provided to the heme by side chains of the protein entity. This concept of penta- or hexa coordination of porphyrins has been extended in designing donor–acceptor systems that can mimic natural photosynthesis.The first attempt was presented in the form of zinc porphyrin coordinated to either pyridine or imidazole appended C60, 25a and 25b.42 In these complexes, the reversible coordination of either pyridine or imidazole appended fullerene ligand to the square planar zinc center of the porphyrin constituted a labile but measurable binding motif. Increasing additions of fullerene derivatives resulted in appreciable hypochromic and bathochromic shifts in the Soret and visible bands in the UV-visible spectrum, followed by efficient quenching of porphyrin emission bands, revealing the complex formation with binding constants of ∼7000 M−1 and ∼11000 M−1 in the case of C60-pyridine (C60py) and C60-imidazole (C60Im), respectively. Time-resolved fluorescence studies and transient absorption studies were also employed to understand the fate of the photoexcited species. More recently, a zinc naphthalocyanine appended imidazole-fulleropyrrolidine dyad was constructed and similar results as discussed above were obtained.43  
Inspired by the importance and ease of axial ligation in forming donor–acceptor dyads, our groups attempted a new approach of probing proximity effects in porphyrin–fullerene dyads by using an axial ligand coordination controlled “tail-on” and “tail-off” binding mechanism, 26.44 In the reported porphyrin–fullerene dyads the donor–acceptor proximity is controlled either by temperature variation or by an axial ligand replacement method. Steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence techniques were employed to understand the proximity effects on the photoinduced charge separation and charge recombination. It was observed that in the “tail-off” form, the charge-separation efficiency changes to some extent in comparison with the results obtained for the “tail-on” form, suggesting the presence of some through-space interactions between the singlet excited zinc porphyrin and the C60 moiety in the “tail-off” form. Picosecond time-resolved and nanosecond transient absorption studies were employed to deduce the charge separation and charge recombination rates. A long-lived charge separated state with a lifetime of about 1000 ns was also observed in the investigated zinc porphyrin-C60 dyads.  
A recent example of this class of dyads involved a structural isomer of porphyrin, namely, N-confused porphyrin.45 Donor–acceptor dyad 27 was constructed using zinc N-confused porphyrin (ZnNCP), as donor, and fullerene as an electron acceptor. Two derivatives, pyridine coordinated zinc N-confused porphyrin (Py:ZnNCP) and the zinc N-confused porphyrin dimer (ZnNCP-dimer) were utilized to form the dyads with an imidazole appended fulleropyrrolidine. These porphyrin isomers formed well-defined 1 : 1 supramolecular dyad 27via axial coordination. The dyads were characterized by optical absorption and emission, ESI-mass, 1H NMR, and electrochemical methods. The binding constant, K, was found to be 2.8 × 104 M−1 for 27.  
The electrochemical properties of 27 was probed using cyclic voltammetry in o-dichlorobenzene, 0.1 n-Bu4NClO4. The py:ZnNCP was found to be easier to oxidize by over 340 mV compared to the parent Py:ZnTPP. Upon dyad formation via axial coordination, the first oxidation revealed an anodic shift of nearly 90 mV. Evidence of photoinduced charge separation from the singlet excited ZnNCP to the appended fullerene was established from time-resolved emission and the nanosecond transient absorption studies. The calculated kCS and Φcs were found to be 1.1 × 1010 s−1 and 0.97 respectively, indicating the occurrence of efficient charge separation within the supramolecular dyad.

Self-assembled bis porphyrin-fullerene and bis naphthalocyanine-fullerene triads via metal–ligand coordination. A supramolecular complex with a large association constant was assembled from a fulleropyrrolidine bearing two axially coordinating pyridine entities, 28, and a covalently linked zinc porphyrin dimer, 29.46 Efficient intramolecular photoinduced electron transfer from the singlet excited zinc porphyrin to the fullerene was observed. The rate and quantum yield of charge separation were found to be better than that observed in the triad formed by self-assembling two equivalents of zinc porphyrins.47  The geometry and the electronic structure of the supramolecular complex, 28:29 were visualized by DFT calculations at the B3LYP/3-21 G(*) level. In the optimized structure, the two ZnP rings were aligned in a V-shape with an angle of 70°. No steric hindrance was observed. The distance between the center of the C60 to the nearest zinc atom was found to be 10.3 Å while the Zn–Zn distance was found to be 13.8 Å. The HOMOs formed two sets of degenerate orbitals and were alternately located exclusively on the ZnP entities, while the LUMO was located on the C60 entity.46 The lack of delocalization of the HOMOs on both the ZnP entities was suggestive of little or an absence of intramolecular interactions between the two ZnP entities of the dimer.
The above approach of utilizing bis pyridine functionalized fullerene, 28 to form supramolecular triads was extended by utilizing zinc naphthalocyanine, ZnNc.48 The B3LYP/3-21 G(*) optimized structure of the triad revealed a shape resembling the Star Wars Tie War Ship, in which the two naphthalocyanine wings almost coplanar with a small tilt angle and separation of about 16 Å, and the fullerene occupying the center position via axial coordination. Little or no π–π interactions were observed both experimentally or via computation. The main quenching pathway involved charge-separation from the singlet excited ZnNc to the 28, with a rate constant, kCS, of 5.7 × 109 s−1, indicating an efficient photochemical electron transfer process.
Solladie and co-workers have reported a supramolecular complex comprised of a bis-Zn(II)-porphyrin receptor and a fullerene bearing two pyridine substituents, 30.49 The substrate was clicked onto the ditopic receptor, thus leading to the formation of a stable non-covalent macrocyclic 1 : 1 complex. The formation of the complex was initially monitored by 1H-NMR studies performed at 298 K in CDCl3. Dramatic upfield shifts seen for the pyridine protons indicated that the pyridine moieties were coordinated to the Zn(II) metal centers and located above the porphyrin cores i.e., in the ring current zone of the porphyrin macrocycles. The changes in the chemical shifts were also evidenced for the protons of the spacer moiety between the pyridine units of the fullerene ligand. This observation suggested that all the protons were located in the π-current of the porphyrin moieties, which in turn, supported the formation of macrocyclic 1 : 1 supramolecular complex. Evidence for the interactions within this complex was also obtained from the UV-vis and fluorescence studies. UV-vis complexation studies showed that, upon addition of the fullerene ligand to bis-Zn(II)-porphyrin receptor, the Soret and the Q-bands were bathochromically shifted with isosbestic points leading to the formation of a stable supramolecular complex with the association constant of the single complex being log K1 = 5.09 ± 0.07. Steady-state fluorescence studies showed strong quenching of the porphyrin emission upon addition of the C60-pyridine derivative, thus revealing the photoinduced electron transfer from singly excited porphyrin to fullerene.  

Axial coordination of fullerene to covalently linked zinc porphyrin-ferrocene and zinc porphyrin-boron dipyrrin dyads. Supramolecular triads have been constructed using covalently linked zinc porphyrin-ferrocene dyads of the type 31 self-assembled via axial coordination to pyridine- or imidazole-appended fulleropyrrolidines.50 The triads were constructed to visualize charge separation via sequential electron transfer during photoinduced electron transfer. These triads were characterized by optical absorption, computational, and electrochemical methods. The calculated binding constants revealed stable complexation and suggested the existence of intermolecular interactions between the ferrocene and fullerene entities. Accordingly, the optimized geometry obtained by the B3LYP/3-21 G(*) methods revealed closely spaced ferrocene and fullerene entities in the studied triads.  Geometric parameters that are helpful to understand the spectral and photochemical properties (kinetics of charge separation and charge-recombination), were obtained from the B3LYP/3-21 G(*) optimized structures. For triad, 31:C60Im, the metal-metal distances between Zn and Fe were found to be about 10.7 Å for the directly linked zinc porphyrin–ferrocene dyads in the closed conformation. Importantly, intermolecular-type interactions between the C60 and ferrocene units were observed corresponding to the close edge-to-edge distances between the ferrocene and C60 entities computed to lie around 3 Å, well within the van der Waals interacting distances. Such interactions between the ferrocene and C60 entities are expected to modulate the photochemical properties; that is, because of the close proximity of these entities, efficient charge recombination of the ferrocene cation and C60 anion radical during photochemical electron transfer is expected to occur. The ordering of the HOMOs were found to be inverted so that the porphyrin-like orbitals were higher than the ferrocene-like orbitals - presumably due to B3LYP/3-21 G(*) predicting both ferrocene orbital energies too low and porphyrin orbital energies too high.
This concept of axial ligation was extended to construct a working model of the photosynthetic antenna-reaction center complex. In particular, a supramolecular triad, 32, comprising of fullerene-porphyrin-boron dipyrrin was assembled by axially coordinating imidazole appended fulleropyrrolidine to the zinc center of a covalently linked zinc porphyrin-boron dipyrrin, ZnP-BDP, dyad.51 In this triad, BDP acted as an energy funneling antenna and ZnP and fullerene acted as electron donor and electron acceptor entities, respectively. Selective excitation of the BDP moiety resulted in efficient intramolecular energy transfer (kENTsinglet = 9.2 × 109 s−1), creating singlet excited ZnP with quantum yield of ∼0.83. Upon forming the supramolecular triad, the excited ZnP participated in efficient electron transfer to the coordinated fullerene, resulting in a charge separated state with a lifetime of ∼5 ns.  
Supramolecular triads composed of free-base porphyrin, fullerene, and ferric porphyrin were constructed by using “covalent-coordinate” binding strategy. For this, a free-base porphyrin was covalently linked to a fullerene entity bearing a pyridine ligand, and was subsequently utilized to coordinate ferric porphyrins bearing different peripheral substituents, 33.52 The newly formed triads were characterized by spectral methods and the structures were deduced from DFT B3LYP/3-21 G(*) methods. Free-energy calculations performed with use of the redox potential and emission data suggested the occurrence of sequential electron transfer from singlet excited free base porphyrin to the covalently linked fullerene, followed by an electron transfer from fullerene anion radical to ferric porphyrin, ultimately generating free-base porphyrin cation radical and ferrous porphyrin as the electron-transfer products, anticipating the generation of long-lived charge-separated species as a consequence of distant separation of the oxidized and reduced species. Time-resolved emission and nanosecond transient absorption techniques were used to obtain kinetic and spectral evidence of electron transfer. Attempts were made to obtain the lifetime of the final charge separated species by monitoring the decay of H2P•+ at 620 nm. Lifetimes of the order of 20 μs were obtained; however, they were found to be overlapped with the long-living triplet states of porphyrin of similar lifetimes at the monitoring wavelength.  

Two-point bound porphyrin–fullerene conjugates via axial-coordination and π–π interactions. Kim and co-workers have reported a fullerene–porphyrin–fullerene traid linked via axial coordination of Sn(IV) porphyrin.53 The reported triad exhibited strong π–π interactions between Sn(IV) porphyrin and fullerene moieties owing to their close proximity. The formation of the complex was characterized by using 1H NMR, X-ray and spectroscopic studies. In the 1H NMR of the complex, a singlet resonance attributed to the proton of the bridge head in fullerene was significantly shifted to the higher field compared to that of free fullerene acetic acid. This observation implied the formation of Sn-carboxylate coordination between porphyrin and fullerene moieties. The significant shift of C=O absorption from 1700 cm−1 to 1667 cm−1 in IR spectrum provided the additional evidence for the formation of Sn-carboxylate bond. X-ray structural analysis of the complex revealed the formation of expected axially coordinated structure with 1 : 2 stoichiometry of porphyrin and fullerene moieties arranged in anti orientation with respect to the other. The structural analysis showed close distances between porphyrin mean plane and fullerene moiety, which in turn, indicated the presence of strong π-interaction within these chromophores. UV-vis studies showed the bathochromic shift of the Soret and Q-bands of the porphyrin, thus confirming the presence of π-interaction due to close proximity in this donor–acceptor complex. Steady state and time resolved fluorescence studies revealed efficient quenching of the emission of porphyrin. Transient absorption studies showed the rise of porphyrin cation radical is due to photoinduced energy transfer from Sn(IV) porphyrin in non-polar solvents, such as toluene, and due to photoinduced electron transfer in polar solvents such as benzonitrile.Li and co-workers have reported the design and synthesis of a new series of hydrogen bonding-mediated foldamer-derived tweezer receptors that were used for efficient complexation of zinc porphyrin guest, 34a–c.54 One end of the rigidified aromatic amide backbone was incorporated with one fullerene unit, while another end was connected to one pyridine or imidazole unit. The 1H NMR, UV-vis, and fluorescent investigations in chloroform revealed that, due to the new rigidified molecules efficiently complex zinc porphyrin as a result of ‘two-point’ binding methodology comprising of axial coordination and π–π interactions. In contrast, the imidazole-incorporated receptor displays a weakened binding affinity, possibly due to structural mismatching and large steric hindrance. The association constants of the complexes 34a, 34b and 34c binding to zinc porphyrin were determined to be 7.6 × 103 M−1, 1.2 × 104 M−1 and 1.4 × 102 M−1, respectively.  
The extension of the idea of constructing donor–acceptor systems adopting axial coordination coupled with intramolecular hydrogen bonding and π–π interactions has been achieved by synthesizing the porphyrins 34d–j and complexing with fullerene derivatives, 35h–j.55 Compounds 35d–g contain repeating oligoamide skeletons that can adopt rigid, planar folding conformations due to intramolecular three-centered hydrogen bonding. The appended zinc porphyrin units adopted a conformation that is on average perpendicular to the folding skeleton. Such an arrangement facilitated the cooperative and “domino” interactions with structurally matching C60-ligand adducts. For this purpose, guests 34h–j were synthesized. Upon addition of 34h–j, the UV-vis spectra of 34d–g exhibited red-shifted Soret and Q-bands with remarkable isosbestic points. For a given guest, the Ka value increases with elongation of the foldamer. This increased affinity was attributed to the increased π–π stacking between zinc porphyrin and C60. This increased π–π interaction in the longer oligomers was attributed to the enhanced special matching between C60 and porphyrin units due to wrapping of porphyrin in one direction. The stoichiometry of the complexes were estimated from 1H NMR and UV-vis studies. Job's plots revealed a 1 : 6 stoichiometry for the complexes of 35g with 34h and 34i due to increased binding affinity.
Fluorescence studies revealed efficient quenching of the porphyrin emission by the fullerene guests. Quenching efficiency increased with elongation of the oligomers which supported the presence of cooperativity for the complexation of the oligomers with the guests. Circular dichroism (CD) studies were carried out to investigate the chirality amplification of these porphyrin appended foldamers. When (R)-34j or (S)-34j was added to the solutions of 34e–g, mirror image Cotton effects were observed.

Two-point bound porphyrin-fullerene conjugates via axial-coordination and hydrogen bonding. A “two-point” binding strategy was developed to produce stable self-assembled supramolecular triads with defined distance and orientation, composed of either –COOH or –CONH2 functionalized zinc porphyrins, 35–36, binding to either ferrocene, N,N-dimethylaminophenyl or N,N-diphenylaminophenyl functionalized fullerene–pyridine conjugates, 37–39.56–57 For this, zinc porphyrin was derivatized to bear “hydrogen-bonding” functionalities, carboxylic acid or amide groups, and C60 was functionalized to bear a ligating group, pyridine, and a second electron donor group. The supramolecular triads were characterized by spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques and were modeled using B3LYP/3-21G(*). Evidence was obtained for axial coordination of the pyridine entity to the zinc metal center, with Zn-N distance as short as in the four porphyrin bonds, and H-bonding between the pyrrolidine ring nitrogen and the pendant carboxylic acid or amide groups, with N–O distance comparable, but slightly longer, than a smaller comparison system, pyrrolidine : acetic acid. For all systems, B3LYP/3-21G(*) predicted a pseudo six-member ring involving two H-bonds between the pyrrolidine N–H and the carboxyl O–H or amide N–H bonds.  The HOMO of the supramolecular triads formed by treating either 35 or 36 with either of 37, 38, or 39 revealed porphyrin π (Gouterman) orbitals. The close spacing between the first oxidation of zinc porphyrin and the dimethylaminophenyl entities suggested the possibility of the occurrence of a hole migration or hole exchange between ZnP+. and the dimethylaminophenyl entity formed during the photoinduced electron-transfer process. As predicted, the LUMO was located on the C60.
The redox behavior of the different components was studied using cyclic voltammetry in o-dichlorobenzene containing 0.1 M (n-C4H9)4ClO4. The donor ability evaluated from oxidation potentials of the electron donors followed the trend: 35 < 37 (Fc entity) < 38 (DMA entity). Upon coordination of the pyridine entities of 37 or 38 to 35, the main quenching pathway involved charge-separation from the singlet excited 35 to the fullerene moiety. The measured charge-separation rate, kCS, and quantum yield, ΦCS, of the triads were evaluated in the range of (2.0–2.4) × 109 s−1 and 0.80–0.83, respectively, indicating an efficient charge separation process within the supramolecular triad. The lifetimes of the radical ion-pair were found to be 10–15 ns, depending upon the type of the second donor moiety. The fact that the charge recombination was too quick to observe in case of 35:C60py compared to slower cases for 35:37 and 35:38 (and similar complexes resulting from 36) suggested the indirect effects of the second electron donor on prolonging the lifetime of the charge separated state.
Recently, supramolecular triads, via axial coordination of zinc naphthalocyanine, ZnNc and compounds 37 and 38 were constructed and studied.58 Here, ZnNc served as an electron donor while pyridylfullerenes as primary electron acceptor. The substituent on the fulleropyrrolidine, ferrocene (Fc) on 37 or N,N-dimethylaminophenyl (DMA) on 38 acted as a second electron donor. The formation of the supramolecular triads were monitored using optical absorption methods and the measured binding constants revealed moderately stable complex formation. The B3LYP/3-21G(*) optimized structures revealed disposition of the three entities of the triads in a linear fashion. This was unlike the triads discussed in the previous section utilizing ‘two-point’ binding approach involving axial coordination and hydrogen bonding, the three entities were arranged in a triangular fashion.57–58
In the second studied example, by adopting a ‘covalent-coordinate’ bonding approach, the novel supramolecular triad, 40 and pentad, 41 composed of zinc porphyrin(s), fullerene(s), and oxoporphyrinogen redox-/photo-active entities were constructed, and characterized by spectral and electrochemical techniques.59 Here the oxoporphyrinogen due to the presence of four hemi-quinonoids on the macrocycle periphery acted as an electron acceptor.60–61  
The geometry and electronic structures of the triad, 40, and the pentad, 41, were deduced from B3LYP/3-21G(*) calculations. In agreement with the X-ray and computational analyses of bis N-alkyl substituted oxoporphyrinogens,60–61 the oxoporphyrinogen in the optimized (C60Im:ZnP)n-OxP revealed a highly ruffled structure, in which the β-pyrrole carbon displacement is as much as 1.7 Å. Also, based on the 1H NMR spectral data, the two zinc porphyrin units of 41 were assumed in the cis-isomer form, that is, pointing in the same direction with respect to the plane of OxP macrocycle. In the optimized structure of 41, the Zn-Zn distance between two ZnP moieties was found to be ∼19 Å, while the distance between the Zn and the center of OxP was found to be ∼12 Å. The two fullerene entities were separated by a distance as great as 29 Å while the closet center-to-center distance between the ZnP and C60 was ∼13 Å. In the case of 40, the center-to-center distance between ZnP and C60 was ∼13.7 Å, while the distance between OxP and C60 was about 15 Å. Thus, no apparent association between the different entities was observed in the case of both triad and pentad in agreement with the optical absorption data discussed earlier.
Free-energy calculations suggested that the photoinduced electron/energy transfer from singlet excited zinc porphyrin (ZnP) to the acceptors, fullerene (ImC60) and oxoporphyrinogen (OxP) was feasible for both the triad and pentad. The charge-separation rates (kCS) determined from picosecond time-resolved emission studies were higher for the pentad, 41, than for the corresponding triad, 40. A comparison of the reported kCS values for the covalently linked bis zinc porphyrin-oxoporphyrinogen (ZnP)2-OxP suggested that employing fullerene as an electron acceptor improves the electron transfer rates. Nanosecond transient absorption studies provided evidence for the occurrence of the electron transfer processes. Lifetimes of the radical ion-pairs (τRIP) were found to be hundreds of nanoseconds indicating charge stabilization in the supramolecular systems studied.

2.6 Crown ether–ammonium binding
Since Pederson's invention of crown ethers,62 they have been treated as one of the effective groups for selective binding to cationic, anionic and also neutral analytes.63 Among these, benzo 18-crown-6 is of major importance because of its ease to form hydrogen bonding complexes with quaternary alkyl ammonium cations.64 Owing to its importance, recently, various research groups have utilized this mode of binding in designing non-covalently linked donor–acceptor systems that can systematically mimic the natural photosynthetic reaction center.
Nierengarten et al., reported the first porphyrin-fullerene based donor–acceptor systems where porphyrins are functionalized with benzo-18-crown-6 moieties and fullerenes with quaternary ammonium ions.65 The modified porphyrin and fullerene self assemble in solution via intermolecular crown ether-ammonium interactions to yield a stable cup-and-ball H2P-crown-C60 dyad, 42. The evidence for the complex formation was obtained from the NMR binding studies performed in CDCl3 at room temperature. Systematic analysis of the spectra revealed a mixture of two conformers, 42a and 42b, on the NMR time scale, with 42a being the weak conformer formed mainly due to the crown ether-ammonium ion complexation, while relatively stronger isomer 42b is formed via crown ether ammonium ion complexation and π–π interactions.  
Further evidence for C60-porphyrin interactions was obtained from the 7 nm bathochromic shift of the Soret band of the porphyrin in UV-visible measurements. Parallel fluorescence studies yielded a significant quenching of the porphyrin emission with concentrations of C60 revealing the complex formation with an association constant of 3.75 × 105 M−1. This extremely strong binding constant was attributed to the presence of π–π stacking interactions between the porphyrin macrocycle and C60 units in addition to hydrogen bonding. Finally, the formation of supramolecular complex 42 was also evidenced in the gas phase by electrospray mass spectrometry (ESI-MS). The spectra obtained from an equimolar mixture of benzo-18-crown-6 appended porphyrin and ammonium ion functionalized fullerene displayed only one peak corresponding to the 1 : 1 complex.
Further extension of the above mode of binding has facilitated in building more complex supramolecular systems containing more than one acceptor.66 In particular, cis- and trans- free base bis (benzo 18-crown-6) porphyrins were synthesized and stable 1 : 1 and 1 : 2 supramolecular complexes of these porphyrins with fullerene containing ammonium cation, were formed in solvents such as chloroform. The evidence for the complex formation via crown ether-ammonium cation complexation and π–π interactions was obtained from 1H NMR, UV-visible, fluorescence and ESI-MS techniques.
Two-point bound porphyrin–fullerene conjugates via axial-coordination and cation–crown ether complexation, or cation–crown ether complexation and π–π type interactions. Highly stable porphyrin–fullerene conjugates with defined distance and orientation were formed using a newly developed ‘two-point’ binding strategy involving axial-coordination and cation–crown ether complexation.67–68 Towards this, zinc porphyrin was functionalized to bear one to four numbers of 18-crown-6 entites the meso-phenyl rings, 43–46, while fullerene was functionalized to bear an alkyl ammonium cation, 48 or pyridine and alkyl ammonium entities, 49. Crown-ether binding to ammonium cation, and axial coordination of pyridine to zinc was observed in dyads formed by porphyrins 43 or 44 with fullerene, 49. When porphyrins 43 or 44 were complexed with 48, π–π type interactions between porphyrin and fullerene along with crown ether-cation complexation was observed thus fulfilling the two-point binding strategy.68 Photochemical studies performed in benzonitrile revealed efficient charge separation and slow charge recombination in the supramolecular complex.DFT studies using B3LYP/3-21 G(*) revealed the presence of both the zinc-pyridine coordinate bond and a remarkably stable (computationally) ammonium cation-crown ether complex for 43 or 44 interacting with 49. The apparently strained requirements for the two-point binding was, however, noticed in case of 44:49, such that the dissociation energy was within 2 kcal mol−1 of the expected more favorable arrangement of the 44:49 complex. The resulting geometry of 44:49 showed the crown ether conformation bowed to maintain both the strong cation-ether bond and the axial coordinate bond. Two sets of N–O bond distances were found for the ammonium cation-crown ether complex, 2.80 and 3.00 Å, the former representing N–H---O type H-bonding. The ‘gas phase’ dissociation energy for the complex, calculated as the energy difference between the dyad and the sum of the energies of the individual porphyrin and fullerene moieties, was about 137 kcal mol−1 unrelaxed and 117 kcal mol−1 relaxed, an energy nearly four times that calculated by B3LYP/3-21 G(*) for a similar conjugate bound only by the coordinate bond, indicating substantial bonding through the ammonium ion–crown ether, as expected, and substantial reorganization upon relaxation. As predicted, the HOMO and LUMO were found to be located entirely on the porphyrin and fullerene moieties, respectively, indicating that the ammonium cation-crown ether complex did not perturb the electronic structure of the donor and acceptor entities of the conjugate.  
“Two-point” bound supramolecular conjugates having cation-crown ether bonding and π–π type interactions were reported in the case of porphyrins 43 or 44 interacting with 48.68 The B3LYP/3-21 G(*) optimized geometries showed that the fullerene hovers nearly centered over the zinc porphyrin with a spacing of about 2.6 Å (note that the zinc atom is pulled toward the C60) by some 0.3 Å. The association energy is −107.3 kcal mol−1 (unrelaxed), some 30 kcal mol−1 less than the axial coordinated pyridine compound discussed above. The B3LYP/6-31 G* association energy is −72.8 kcal mol−1 (unrelaxed), presumably much closer to the correct result. Importantly, in support of the optical absorbance results, evidence for the π–π interaction was obtained from computational studies. That is, the computed HOMO revealed partial delocalization of the frontier orbitals on the fullerene, while the LUMO revealed partial delocalization on the porphyrin entity. Addition of pyridine to these supramolecular dyads broke the π–π interactions and gave an opportunity to explore their effect on charge separation and charge recombination.68
Photoinduced electron-transfer processes in cis and trans functionalized bis 18-crown-6 porphyrins, 45 and 46, self-assembled with fullerene functionalized with pyridine and/or alkyl ammonium cation entities, 48–49, were reported.69 The structural integrity of the newly formed supramolecular conjugates was accomplished by optical absorption and emission, electron spray ionization mass, electrochemistry, and semi-empirical PM3 calculations. A 1 : 2 stoichiometry of the supramolecular porphyrin : fullerene conjugates was deduced from these studies. The conjugates revealed stable ‘two-point’ binding involving metal–ligand coordination and alkyl ammonium cation-crown ether binding or only the latter type of binding depending up on the functionality of the fullerene and metal ion in the porphyrin cavity. The effect of the variation on free-energy changes of charge separation and the charge recombination was achieved by varying the metal ion in the porphyrin cavity. The charge separation rates (kCS) determined from the picosecond time-resolved emission studies were generally higher for the cis bis crown functionalized porphyrins than those of the corresponding trans ones. A comparison of the kCS values reported earlier for 1 : 1 porphyrin-fullerene conjugates using similar self-assembly mechanism suggested that employing higher number of acceptor entities improves the electron transfer rates. The calculated charge-recombination rates (kCR) were 2–3 orders of magnitude smaller than the kCS suggesting the occurrence of the charge recombination process in the Marcus inverted region. The lifetimes of the radical ion-pair (τRIP) ranged between 46 and 233 ns, indicating charge stabilization in the studied conjugates.
Recently, supramolecular ferrocene-porphyrin-fullerene constructs, in which covalently linked ferrocene-porphyrin-crown ether compounds, 50–52 were self-assembled with alkyl ammonium cation functionalized fullerenes, 53, 48, and 54, were designed to achieve step-wise electron transfer and hole shift to generate long-lived charge separated states.70 The adopted crown ether-alkyl ammonium cation binding strategy resulted in stable conjugates as revealed by computational studies performed by the DFT B3LYP/3-21 G(*) method, in addition to the binding constants obtained from fluorescence quenching studies.  
The free-energy change for charge-separation and charge-recombination were varied by the choice of different metal ions in the porphyrin cavity. Free-energy calculations suggested that the light induced electron transfer processes from the singlet excited state of porphyrins to be exothermic in all of the investigated supramolecular dyads and triads. Photoinduced charge-separation and charge-recombination processes have been confirmed by the combination of the time-resolved fluorescence and nanosecond transient absorption spectral measurements. In case of the triads, the charge-recombination processes of the radical anion of the fullerene moiety occurred in two steps, viz., a direct charge-recombination from the porphyrin cation radical and a slower step involving distant charge-recombination from the ferrocene cation moiety. The rates of charge recombination for the second route were found to be an order of magnitude slower than the former route, thus fulfilling the condition of charge migration to generate long-lived charge-separated states in supramolecular systems.
A systematic control over the electron/energy transfer pathways in donor–acceptor systems is necessary to understand the mechanistic details of complex biological electron-transfer processes. In order to achieve the control over the mechanism of electron/energy-transfer processes, utilization of supramolecular approach to assemble donor–acceptor systems is treated as a viable methodology. Towards this, complexes of crown ether appended free-base or zinc porphyrins with C60, 55–56 were obtained.71 The binding constants of these complexes were strongly dependent on the location and number of crown ether entities on the porphyrin ring, and the utilized solvent media. The stability of these complexes was increased by employing ammonium cation functionalized fullerene 48 and new complexes such as 57 were formed.72 The increased solubility of this fullerene derivative in polar solvents enabled us to perform the photochemical experiments in polar benzonitrile solvent. On the other hand, increasing the number of crown ether entities increased the binding constant of the resulting dyads. For C60 complexed dyads, molecular modeling using B3LYP/3-21 G(*) method revealed stable structures from which the deduced geometric parameters revealed intramolecular interactions involving both porphyrin π-ring and crown ether entity(ies) with the fullerene in a cooperative fashion. Steady-state fluorescence emission studies revealed efficient quenching in all these dyads mainly due to the electron transfer from singlet excited porphyrin to C60. This was further supported by the free-energy change for electron transfer (ΔGCS) calculated from electrochemical studies. Furthermore, evidence for the charge separation due to intra-supramolecular light induced electron transfer within these dyads was also obtained from the picosecond time-resolved emission and nanosecond transient absorption techniques. In case of C60-complexed dyads, the measured kCS values tracked the polarity of the solvents. In general, the calculated kCS and ΦCS revealed efficient charge separation and the kCR revealed charge stabilization to some extent in these dyads.
Shifting of the electron-transfer pathway from the intra- to intermolecular route was achieved by complexing potassium ions to the crown ether moiety(ies) of porphyrins.71,72 This cation complexation mainly weakened the intramolecular type interactions between fullerene and crown ether appended porphyrins and thus facilitated the intermolecular type interactions. Interestingly, reversible switching of inter- to intramolecular electron transfer path was also achieved by extracting the complexed potassium ions by external addition of 18-crown-6 to the solution. Thus, this study demonstrated the utilization of the supramolecular approach to build stable donor–acceptor systems and provided the viable approach to control the excited state electron transfer pathways in these dyads.  

Complex supramolecular architectures. An example of biomimetic bacterial photosynthetic reaction center complex constructed using well-defined self-assembled supramolecular approaches has been reported.73 Here, the ‘special pair’ donor, a cofacial porphyrin dimer, 58b, was formed via potassium ion induced dimerization of meso-(benzo-15-crown-5)porphyrinatozinc, 58a. The dimer 58b was subsequently self-assembled with functionalized fullerene, 49, via axial coordination and crown ether-alkyl ammonium cation complexation to form the donor–acceptor pairs, mimicking the non-covalently bound entities of the photosynthetic reaction center. The adopted self-assembly methodology yielded supramolecular triad, 58c, and tetrad, 58d, of higher stability, with defined geometry and orientation. Efficient forward electron transfer from the singlet excited zinc porphyrin dimer to the fullerene entity and relatively slow reverse electron transfer, important steps in the photosynthetic light energy conversion have been achieved in these novel biomimetic model systems.73  
3.0 Non-covalent porphyrin–carbon nanotube based donor–acceptor systems
Development of nanomaterials and their utilization in building composites and photovoltaics are the topics of current interest in the field of nanotechnology because these materials provide a systematic platform to understand the basic concepts of the dimensionality and confinement in the materials of diminished size.74 Out of the many nano-sized materials available to date, carbon nanotubes stand out as unique materials due to their remarkable mechanical and electronic properties.75,76
Carbon nanotubes are (CNTs) are essentially the sheet of the carbon atoms arranged in a hexagon that wrap into a tube.5d–f They exhibit quasi-ballistic conductance, high tensile strength and field-effect transistor properties.74–76 The unique strength of these tubes is due to the sp2 framework that they are comprised of. They also act as elegant electron acceptors. They are semiconducting, conducting or metallic. The proper justification for the electrical conductance of these carbon nanotubes has been explained by molecular orbital theory.75c,d Each isolated C2 fragment containing a π and π* orbital is brought together to form two degenerate sets of π and π* orbitals. The low-lying end of π* orbital is very stable and readily accepts electrons. Upon receiving the charge, the charge transport along the axis of the nanometres-long carbon structure can contribute to a reduced probability of back electron transfer to the oxidized donor. This phenomenon is largest in metallic nanotubes.
Among the surfeit of applications that have been envisioned for CNTs, polymer composites, field-effect transistors, field–emission displays, and hydrogen storage appear to be more promising areas. The extraordinary structural and mechanical properties of CNTs make them promising candidates for preparing new classes of composite materials. The excellent field-emission behavior of the CNTs makes them viable electron sources to build flat panel displays and X-rays to microwave generators. Finally, storage of hydrogen on CNTs could represent a great development in fuel cells and a milestone towards energy-clean systems.
Based on the structural perfection, carbon nanotubes are basically divided into (a) single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) and (b) multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWNTs). Single wall carbon nanotubes are one dimensional nanostructures consisting of a single graphene sheet, seamlessly wrapped into a cylindrical tube along a chiral vector, while multi-wall carbon nanotubes are comprised of concentric cylinders.
SWNTs and MWNTs are usually produced by arc-discharge,76a laser ablation,76b chemical vapor deposition (CVD),76c or gas-phase catalytic process (HiPco) methods.76d The diameter of the carbon nanotubes developed by these methods varies approximately between 0.4 nm and 3 nm for SWNTs and from 1.4 nm to 100 nm for MWNTs.
Even though MWNTs are regarded as better electron donors77 than SWNTs, due to their multiple electron conducting concentric cylindrical graphitic tubes, most of the current research concentrates on SWNTs because of the well-understood and characteristic fingerprints in several analytical and spectroscopic techniques.
3.1 Solubilization of carbon nanotubes via chemical functionalization
Even though carbon nanotubes exhibit remarkable mechanical and electrical properties; solubilization and thereby, application in building various composite materials and photo-voltaic devices pose a problem. Due to the strong attractive interactions, CNTs aggregate to form bundles or ropes of up to tens of nanometres. These ropes are tangled together and very hard to disrupt. As a result of this, they exhibit very poor solubility in various organic solvents. However, this limitation can be overcome by systematically introducting various organic functional groups on the CNT surface via chemical functionalization that can facilitate the solubilization of nanotubes in a variety of solvents through dispersion.
The chemical functionalization of CNTs can be achieved mainly through two general strategies: (a) covalent functionalization and (b) non-covalent functionalization. Both of them can be carried out with organic molecules or polymers. Eventually, the two approaches lead to similar results, but they differ in the mode of the interaction of the organic functionalities and also in the degree of involvement of the carbon skeleton in the formation of chemical bonds.
Covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes. Covalent functionalization of CNTs results in a change of hybridization from sp2 to sp3 leading to a partial loss of conjugation with undesirable effects on electron-transport properties. Among the various approaches employed in this methodology, the most general include: (i) esterification or amidation of oxidized nanotubes, (ii) covalent side-wall functionalization.
Covalently linked porphyrin–carbon nanotube donor–acceptor nanoconjugates. As mentioned earlier, SWNTs are one-dimensional nanowires that are either metallic or semi-conducting. They readily accept charges, which can then be transported efficiently along the tubular SWNT axis. On the other hand, porphyrins are visible light harvesting chromophores that exhibit unique physical, chemical and biological features similar to that of natural chlorophylls. They act as efficient electron donors in various photoinduced electron transfer processes. Hence, incorporation of porphyrins or porphyrin like (i.e., napthalocyanines) light absorbing antenna chromophores through a covalent linkage with the extended π electrons of a carbon nanotube would constitute an ideal supramolecular assembly that can harvest solar energy with high quantum yield and convert it to chemical energy with maximum efficiency.
Functionalization of oxidized nanotubes via ester linkage. One of the purification methods of raw carbon nanotubes involves oxidation of the corresponding materials in the acidic media.78 Under these conditions, the end caps of the CNT are opened, and acidic functionalities are obtained at these defect sites and also side walls, which can be utilized for the further derivatization. Direct condensation of oxidized CNTs with amines (or alcohols) or activation of the carboxylic groups using reagents like thionyl chloride followed by the condensation with amines (or alcohols) yielded various soluble functionalized CNT materials.79 As a result of this, carbon nanotubes with shorter length and slightly modified electronic properties are obtained.The efficient covalent tethering of SWNT with porphyrins was achieved by esterification of hydroxyl group appended porphyrins with carbon nanotubes containing carboxylic acid groups using various activating reagents. In particular, Sun et al., utilized two different porphyrins bearing hydroxyl groups connected with varying linkages and covalently appended to SWNT through esterification of surface-bound carboxylic acid groups.80a In the corresponding donor–acceptor nanoconjugates, a photoinduced energy transfer was envisioned from the singlet excited porphyrin to the carbon nanotube framework. The length of the linker utilized to join the porphyrins and carbon nanotubes played a significant role in controlling the photodynamics i.e., the rates and efficiencies of electron transfer. The systems with short linker showed least fluorescence quenching.
Subsequently, functionalization at the terminal carboxylic acid groups has proven to be the convenient route for introducing photoactive molecules, such as porphyrins, onto SWNT/MWNTs. Baskaran et al., reported a donor–acceptor nanoconjugate, 59, obtained by reacting 5-p-hydroxyphenyl-10,15,20-tritolylporphyrin (Por-OH) with SWNT or MWNT containing carboxylic acid groups via esterfication.80b The FTIR spectrum of the porphyrin-attached nanotubes showed characteristic vibrations of pyrrole, methyl, and aromatic groups centered at 1200, 2922, and 3010 cm−1, respectively. The quantity of porphyrin attached to the surface was determined from thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), which showed that the amount of porphyrin grafted is about 8-22%, depending on the concentration Por-OH used for the reaction.  
UV-visible and parallel fluorescence studies proved the ground state interactions and the excited state photodynamics within these donor–acceptor conjugates. Upon excitation at 550 nm, efficient quenching (>95%) of the porphyrin emission bands at 650 and 725 nm was observed. This photophysical behavior was mainly attributed to the intraconjugate electron transfer from singlet excited porphyrins to carbon nanotubes via ester linkage.

Covalent side-wall functionalization via 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition. Systematic application of a series of organic reactions, which yielded stable derivatives in case of fullerene, to SWNTs resulted in a successful side-wall functionalization with the highest degree of purity and solubilization.81 Some of these reactions include (i) addition of nitrenes, (ii) addition of carbenes, (iii) addition of radicals, (iv) aryl diazonium functionalization, (v) electrophilic addition of chloroform, (vi) fluorination and (vii) 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition.Even though various synthetic routes provided stable carbon nanotube materials soluble in various solvents, 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides, a reaction that is widely used in fullerene field, is of particular importance because of the convenient and easy attachment of pyrrolidine rings with various functional groups to the side-walls of the CNT.
Prato and co-workers reported a porphyrin-SWNT based donor–acceptor system, 60, comprising of SWCNT functionalized with polyamidoamine dendrimers containing porphyrin groups as the terminal moieties via 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition.82 The adopted divergent synthetic methodology allowed the number of functional groups on the nanotubes to be increased without causing significant damage to the conjugated π-system of the SWNTs. The photophysical properties of the resulting nanoconjugates have been investigated using UV-visible, Raman, steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence studies. The fluorescence kinetics provided evidence for two transient decays, one very short-lived (i.e., 0.04 ± 0.01 ns) and one long-lived (i.e., 8.6 ± 1.2 ns). The possible rationale implies that some of the porphyrins, due to dendritic structure, do not interact with the SWNTs and thus exhibit fluorescence lifetime similar to the free porphyrin. Transient absorption studies supported the fast decay of the photoexcited porphyrin and confirmed that the intraconjugate charge separation is mainly due to electron transfer from the excited porphyrin to the SWNTs.
Even though the covalent functionalization provides a convenient synthetic route to build donor–acceptor nanoconjugates, high degrees of functionalization alter appreciably the π electronic structure of the carbon framework. This in turn affects the long-range conjugation and band gaps associated with it. With an eye on keeping the electronic properties of SWNT intact, alternative synthetic strategies are needed to develop donor–acceptor nanohybrids.  

Non-covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes. Non-covalent functionalization of carbon nanotubes is particularly attractive because of the possibility of attaching various functional groups without disturbing the π system of the graphene sheets. This was achieved by adsorbing carbon nanotubes with pyrene moieties, conjugate polymers, cyclodextrins, and biomolecules such as polysaccharides.83Non-covalent functionalization of aromatic molecules to the side-walls of SWNTs has been achieved by incorporating a molecule containing a planar pyrene moiety that could adsorb to the surface of CNTs as an anchor in the employed reaction medium. The interaction of pyrene molecules partially exfoliates the SWNT bundles and brings individual tubes into solution. This chemical approach does not form any covalent bonds but only π–π interactions and perturbs weakly the nanotube π conjugated system. The pyrene moiety can be specifically designed in such a way that a variety of molecules with intriguing properties could be tethered via different linkages. Thus, for example, proteins, DNA and other biomolecules are immobilized on pyrene adsorbed SWNTs by forming an amide linkage at the terminal alkyl group of the pyrene moiety.

3.3 Non-covalently linked porphyrin–carbon nanotube donor–acceptor nanoconjugates
From the above discussion, it can be inferred that although the covalent approach of functionalizing SWNTs is very versatile, non-covalent supramolecular approach appears practically promising, due to the simplicity of the method to bring various moieties of interest together, while preserving the π electronic structure. Owing to the importance of this approach, several carbon nanotube based non-covalent supramolecular donor–acceptor systems assembled via various binding modes are reported in the literature. Some of them containing porphyrins, as donors, and SWNTs, as acceptors, are discussed in this section.
Polymer wrapped donor–acceptor conjugates. A new electron-donor–acceptor nanobydrid formed by solubilizing SWNTs through polymer wrapping with redox-inert poly(methylmethacrylate) or PMMA containing surface immobilized porphyrins (poly(H2P)), 61, is reported by Guldi et al.84a These supramolecular SWNT associates are dispersable in most organic solvents.  The evidence for the poly(H2P)/SWNT interactions is obtained from absorption spectroscopy. The fingerprints of SWNT and poly(H2P) are clearly seen throughout the UV-visible and NIR regions of the spectrum. The proof for the de-bundling of nanotubes due to these interactions is obtained from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Excited state interactions within these associates were studied by using steady-state and time resolved fluorescence. These studies revealed that the excited state quenching involves intracomplex charge separation, i.e., oxidation of H2P and reduction of SWNT. Complementary transient absorption studies provided a spectroscopic proof for intracomplex electron transfer with a lifetime of 2.1 ± 0.1 μs.
Stable porphyrin/SWNT composites were also formed by condensation of tetraformylporphyrins and diaminopyrenes on SWNTs.84b The degree of interaction between SWNT and porphyrin was evaluated by UV-visible and fluorescence spectra and the amount of porphyrin stripped off from the components. Substituents at the meso positions of the porphyrins controlled the amount of the porphyrin bound to the SWNT. In these composites, Soret and Q-bands of porphyrin are significantly broadened and the fluorescence was almost completely quenched. The apparent extinction coefficients at the Soret bands of the porphyrin moiety in the composites were reduced to ∼20%.

Donor–acceptor nanohybrids via π–π interactions. An appreciable solubility of SWNT has been achieved upon treatment with zinc protoporphyrin IX (ZnPP) in DMF.85a TEM and AFM investigations revealed the existence of individually dissolved SWNTs with diameters ranging from 0.9–1.5 nm. UV-visible-NIR spectra of the solubilized solutions showed the characteristic absorption bands for ZnPP and SWNTs in the visible and NIR regions, respectively. From systematic control experiments, the amount of SWNTs dissolved/dispersed in DMF is estimated to be ∼10–20 μg ml−1. The direct evidence for the ZnPP/SWNTs interactions was obtained from the fluorescence studies. The porphyrin emission intensity in ZnPP-SWNTs solution is significantly quenched compared with that of the ZnPP alone. This quenching has been attributed to the energy transfer from the photoexcited porphyrin to SWNT.Sun et al., also attempted to produce SWNT suspensions in the presence of H2-5,10,15,20-tetrakis(hexadecyloxyphenyl)-21H,23H-porphyrin (THPP) in various organic solvents.85b Unreacted THPP was separated from the insoluble and recovered SWNTs by treatment with acetic acid followed by vigorous centrifugation. In subsequent experiments, heating the free and recovered SWNTs at 800 °C for 14 h in a nitrogen atmosphere showed that they are enriched with metallic and semiconducting SWNTs, respectively. The evidence for this behavior was obtained from Raman experiments. Under ambient conditions the bulk conductivity for metallic and semiconducting SWNTs was calculated to be 1.1 Scm−1 and 0.007 Scm−1, respectively. Thus, selective interactions between THPP and semiconducting SWNT are successfully employed to separate metallic and semiconducting nanotubes.
Water-soluble H2P [meso-(tetrakis-4-sulfanatophenyl) porphyrin dihydrochloride] has also been utilized to produce aqueous solutions of SWNTs that are stable for several weeks.85c These nanohybrids are characterized by absorption, fluorescence and surface techniques.
Stable solutions of SWNT, 62, are also obtained by treating free (H2TPP) or zinc tetraphenyl porphyrin (ZnTPP) in DMF.85d TEM studies revealed that ZnTPP is not able to fully exfoliate and/or stabilize individual SWNT in DMF solutions, compared to H2TPP. This could be due to the zinc metal located at the center of the porphyrin that is responsible for weaker interactions between nanotube and porphyrin π system. The donor–acceptor interactions within these nanohybrids are characterized by UV-visible, fluorescence and transient absorption studies. The lifetime of the radical ion pair for SWNT/H2TPP nanoconjugate, formed due to charge transfer interactions, was calculated to be 110 ns.  
Recently, Sessler and co-workers have reported a sapphyrin-carbon nanotube based donor acceptor ensemble in which SWNTs are strongly bound to pentapyrrolic expanded porphyrin macrocyles, such as sapphyrins via π–π interactions.86 The formation of the non-covalent donor–acceptor ensemble in water and also in ionic liquid, was characterized by using UV-vis, fluorescence and cyclic voltammetric studies. UV-vis studies of the aqueous solutions of sapphyrin and SWNTs showed a red shift of Soret band indicating the presence of donor–acceptor interactions within the ensemble. The same pattern was also observed for ionic liquids. Photoirradiation of the sample resulted in the photoinduced electron transfer from the SWNTs to the sapphyrin.

Peptide wrapped donor–acceptor nanoconjugates. Fukuzumi and co-workers reported a non destructive formation of supramolecular nanohybrids of SWNT with flexible porphyrinic polypeptides.87 In this approach, a flexible porphyrinic polypeptide bearing 16 porphyrin units P(H2P)16, 63, was synthesized via oligomerization of a porphyrin functionalized enantipure L-lysine derivative bearing a free-base chromophore. A mixture of synthesized porphyrin polypeptide and SWNTs was sonicated and refluxed at 100 °C in DMF, followed by centrifugaton to yield a dispersed solution of nanohybrid [P(H2P)16]/SWNT, which is stable at room temperature. Supramolecular formation occurred through the wrapping of the peptide backbone in P(H2P)16 and π–π interaction between porphyrins and nanotubes. The adopted non-covalent methodology resulted in a stable supramolecular nanohybrid which facilitated to extract the large-diameter nanotubes of about 1.3 nm which was confirmed by UV-vis-near IR and Raman spectroscopy, as well as high-resolution transmission electron microscopy.  The photodynamics of the supramolecular complex [P(H2P)16]/SWNT was examined by using time-resolved and nanosecond transient absorption studies. Laser photoexcitation of [P(H2P)16]/SWNT in DMF resulted in the photoinduced electron transfer from the singlet and triplet excited states of P(H2P)16 to SWNTs. The lifetime for the charge separated state was determined to be 0.37 ± 0.03 ms.

Complementary electrostatics. Stable donor–acceptor ensembles, 64, assembled via electrostatic interactions of SWNTs and porphyrin bearing positive or negative charges have been reported.88 In this approach, poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) grafted SWNTs (SWNT-PSSn−) were prepared initially by in situ free radical polymerization of PSS in an aqueous dispersion of HiPco SWNT. As a result, stable water dispersable SWNTs were obtained.88a The functionalized PSS also provided the advantage to exfoliate the individual SWNT-PSSn− from the larger bundles and stabilizing them. AFM and TEM measurements revealed the presence of individual SWNT ropes of several micrometres length with diameters around 1.2 nm. The donor–acceptor coulombic complex was achieved by adding equivalent amounts of H2P8+ to SWNT-PSSn− solution.88b  The evidence for the formation of the Coulombic complex (SWNT-PSSn−/H2P8+) and presence of donor–acceptor interactions were monitored by absorption and fluorescence techniques. Upon increasing additions of SWNT-PSSn−, the Soret and Q-bands of H2P8+ were red shifted with a clear isosbestic point at 424 nm. In fluorescence studies, photoexcitation of the H2P8+ in the newly formed nanohybrid resulted in efficient intrahybrid charge separation, which eventually resulted in radical ion pair formation. Transient absorption studies revealed the formation of radical ion pairs with a remarkably long lifetime of 14 μs under anaerobic conditions.

Complementary electrostatics and π–π interactions. In order to incorporate the CNTs in biological systems and thereby utilize them in biophysical processing, unlimited solubility of CNTs in aqueous media is required. In this regard, SWNTs and MWNTs were treated with aqueous solutions of various pyrene derivatives i.e., 1-(trimethylammonium acetyl) pyrene (pyrene+), 1-pyrenecarboxylic acid, 1-pyrene butyric acid, 8-hydroxy-1,3,6-pyrenetrisulfonic acid (pyrene−) and stable water soluble nanotube solutions are obtained via π–π interactions.89 The excess pyrene is removed by vigorous centrifugation and the resulted CNT-(π–π-interaction)-pyrene+ or CNT-(π–π-interaction)-pyrene− solids were re-suspended in water. The solubility of CNT in the resulting suspensions was as high as 0.2 mg mL−1 and the solutions were stable for weeks under ambient conditions. TEM and AFM images revealed the coexistence of individual and bundles of CNT in solutions.With the CNT surface being covered with positively or negatively charged ionic head groups, van der Waals and electrostatic interactions were utilized to complex oppositely charged electron donors. Water soluble porphyrins (i.e., octapyridinium ZnP/H2P salts or octacarboxylate ZnP/H2P salts) have been used to form SWNT-(π–π-interaction)-pyrene+-electrostatic-ZnP/H2P, 65 or SWNT-(π–π-interaction)-pyrene−-electrostatic-ZnP/H2P electron-donor acceptor nanohybrids. CNT-(π–π-interaction)-pyrene+-electrostatic-ZnP or CNT-(π–π-interaction)-pyrene+-electrostatic-H2P were characterized by absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy and also by TEM and AFM techniques. In absorption experiments, the successful complex formation between CNT and ZnP8− was confirmed by red-shifted Soret- and Q-bands followed by the development of isosbestic points. Photo-excitation of all the resulting electron donor–acceptor nanohybrids with visible light, resulted in the reduction of the electron acceptor, CNT, and oxidation of electron donor, ZnP or H2P. Parallel transient absorption studies revealed the formation of long-lived radical ion pairs with lifetimes that were in the range of microseconds. The better delocalization of electrons in MWNT enhanced the stability of radical ion pairs (5.8 ± 0.2 μs) compared to the analogous SWNT (0.4 ± 0.05 μs).  

Metal–ligand coordination. Guldi and co-workers have utilized the covalent and non-covalent approaches to provide a route towards versatile donor–acceptor hybrid structures, 66.90a In this regard, single-walled carbon nanotubes were grafted with poly(4-vinyl pyridine), SWNT-PVP, via free radical polymerization in a dispersion of pristine high-pressure carbon dioxide. The resulting polymers were characterized by spectroscopic and surface techniques. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) of SWNT-PVP gave a SWNT-to-PVP weight ratio of 61/39 with less than 1% residual catalyst. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and TEM studies showed the formation of individual SWNT with lengths ranging from nanometres to micrometres. The exfoliation of the nanotube bundles resulting from the functionalization was clearly observed. UV-visible studies showed the characteristic peaks corresponding to the polymer and SWNT, while the fluorescence studies showed the quenched PVP emission resulted due to the functionalization on the carbon nanotube framework.  In the following experiments, donor–acceptor coordination assays, 66, were generated by titrating increased concentrations of SWNT-PVP with electron donors, such as zinc tetraphenylporphyrin (ZnP). The complex formation was monitored by fluorescence and absorption experiments. In particular, with increasing additions of SWNT-PVP, the ZnP absorption features (Soret and Q-bands) revealed bathochromic shifts, up to around 2 nm, followed by clear isosbestic points at around 422 and 429 nm confirming the formation of SWNT-PVP-ZnP complex via axial coordination even in polar coordinating solvents, such as dimethyl formamide (DMF). Parallel fluorescence experiments revealed the efficient quenching of ZnP emission bands. This is mainly assigned to the electron transfer quenching within a SWNT-PVP-ZnP complex. Transient absorption studies were performed to confirm the nature of the fluorescence quenching and monitor the fate of the photoexcited species. Analysis of the time-absorption profiles revealed the formation of a charge separated radical-ion-pair with lifetime of 3.8 ± 0.2 μs.
Langa et al., reported the synthesis of a pyridine moiety covalently appended to SWNT (Py-SWNT) and its metal complexes with zinc porphyrin via axial ligation, 67.90b In particular, pyridine moiety was functionalized via 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of a nitrile oxide on the SWNT surface and characterized by solution 1H, 13C, FT-Raman,and electron microscopy. This synthetic methodology is similar to the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition seen in the case of fullerene functionalization.
The resulting Py-SWNT formed a complex, 67, at the zinc center of zinc porphyrin (ZnP) through axial ligation, in a way similar to that of pyridyl functionalized [60]-fullerenes, as discussed earlier. The formation of the metal–ligand complex was confirmed by electrochemical, 1H NMR, absorption and fluorescence studies. The large cathodic shifts in the oxidation and reduction potentials of ZnP, upon increasing additions of Py-SWNT, supported the ground state interactions of the Py-SWNT with ZnP via axial ligation of pyridyl units to the metal center. The evidence for the supramolecular complex formation was obtained from the 1H NMR studies, which showed the upfield shift in the protons corresponding to the pyridyl groups for the ZnP/Py-SWNT complex compared to the same protons in Py-SWNT. The UV-vis spectra showed that the addition of Py-SWNT to a solution of ZnP in CH2Cl2 results in spectral changes characteristic of the presence of pentacoordinated ZnP. Steady-state fluorescence and nanosecond transient absorption studies indicated an energy transfer quenching of the ZnP singlet excited state by Py-SWNT and no evidence for the occurrence of electron transfer.  

π–π interactions and axial coordination. Self-assembling of SWNT-porphyrin based donor–acceptor systems via axial ligation seemed to be relatively easy because of the simplicity involved in the synthesis of employed tetrapyrroles, followed by the inherent selectivity of the nitrogenous bases to bind the zinc center of porphyrins. As seen in the preceding section, axial coordination methodology was successfully utilized to build SWNT-porphyrin based donor–acceptor systems. However, tethering axial coordinating ligands such as pyridines to SWNT via covalent functionalization might result in loss of desirable electronic properties of carbon nanotubes.Hence, from the above discussion it can be inferred that non-covalent functionalization of SWNT using pyrene bearing nitrogenous bases through π–π interactions followed by assembling the electron/energy donor molecules, such as zinc tetraphenylporphyrin via axial coordination, might result in stable donor–acceptor systems with maximum retainment of electronic and mechanical properties of CNT, which in turn, might provide better charge separated states with efficient lifetimes.
Keeping the above requirements in mind, self-assembled zinc porphyrin or zinc napthalocyanine and single wall carbon nanotube based donor–acceptor nanohybrids have been constructed, 68.91 To achieve this, SWNTs were primarily treated with pyrene functionalized imidazole moiety (ImPyr) and stable nanotube solutions, ImPyr-SWNT, were obtained due to π–π stacking between SWNT and pyrene. UV-vis-near IR spectra of the dispersed solutions revealed the characteristic peaks of the SWNT from 700–1100 nm, which provided the further evidence for the preservation of the π-conjugated framework of SWNT. Using the imidazole ligand of the soluble ImPyr-SWNT, donor entities, such as zinc tetraphenylporphyrin (ZnP) and zinc naphthalocyanine (ZnNc), were axially coordinated to yield ZnNc-ImPyr-SWNT, 68, and ZnP-ImPyr-SWNT donor–acceptor nanohybrids. The structure and photophysical behavior of these nanohybrids were characterized by using TEM, UV-visible-NIR, and electrochemical methods. Steady-state and time-resolved emission studies revealed efficient fluorescence quenching of the donor, ZnP and ZnNc entities in the nanohybrids. Nanosecond transient absorption spectra revealed that the photoexcitation of the ZnNc or ZnP moiety resulted in the one-electron oxidation of the donor unit with a simultaneous one-electron reduction of SWNT thus generating a charge separated state with a lifetime of 100–120 ns. Utilization of ZnNc as the electron donor enabled us to observe the donor cation radical (ZnNc•+) which acts as a direct evidence for the photo-induced electron transfer within these systems.  
The charge separation yielding ZnNc•+-ImPyr-SWNT•− and ZnP•+-ImPyr-SWNT•− was further confirmed with the aid of an electron mediator, hexyl-viologen dication (HV2+) and an electron-hole shifter, 1-benzyl-1,4-dihydronicotinamide. As a result of the photoinduced processes, accumulation of the radical cation of HV•+ was observed with nearly 70–90% yields, thus demonstrating the importance of the present donor–acceptor nanohybrids in photo-generation of redox products.

Crown ether–alkyl ammonium ion interactions. As mentioned earlier, even though covalent functionalization of CNTs provides convenient and versatile routes for building donor–acceptor nanohybrids, non-covalent functionalization is particularly promising because it causes minimal alteration in the conjugated π-network of the carbon framework. This methodology retains most of the inherent properties of the CNTs which facilitated probing their acceptor ability in various donor–acceptor nanohybrids.Among various non-covalent methodologies reported to date, self-assembly by using an ammonium ion-crown ether interaction is regarded as one of the powerful methods because it offers a high degree of directionality with binding energies of up to 50–200 kJmol−1. The efficient selectivity of the 18-crown-6 moiety towards ammonium cations and ease of formation of the size-fit model complex even in polar solvents, such as methylene chloride or benzonitrile, enabled various research groups to build several porphyrin and fullerene based donor–acceptor supramolecular systems involving crown ether-ammonium interactions for probing photo-induced electron processes.66–73
This approach of crown ether-alkyl ammonium complexation has also been extended to build porphyrin-carbon nanotube donor–acceptor nanohybrids and occurrence of photo-induced charge separation processes is clearly demonstrated.92 The nanohybrids were constructed by solubilizing carbon nanotubes by π–π stacking of pyrene functionalized with an alkyl ammonium cation, PyrNH3+-SWNT. The alkyl ammonium cations of the soluble PyrNH3+-SWNT are self-assembled with donor porphyrins that contain one or four 18-crown-6 moieties via alkyl ammonium ion-crown ether interactions. The resulting porphyrin-SWNT hybrids PyrNH3+-SWNT-ZnTCP, 69, were stable and soluble in DMF. These nanohybrids were systematically characterized by spectroscopic, TEM and electrochemical techniques. Both steady-state and time-resolved emission studies revealed efficient quenching of the singlet excited state of the porphyrins and free-energy calculations suggested that electron-transfer quenching occurred. Nanosecond transient absorption spectral results supported the charge-separation quenching process. Charge-stabilization was also observed for the nanohybrids in which the lifetime of the radical ion pairs was around 100 ns. The present nanohybrids were also used to reduce the hexyl viologen dication (HV2+) and to oxidize 1-benzyl-1,4-dihydronicotinamide in solution in an electron-pooling experiment. Accumulation of the radical cation (HV•+) was observed in high yields, which provided an additional proof for the occurrence of photoinduced charge separation. This study demonstrated hydrogen-bonding motif as a successful self-assembly method to build SWNTs bearing donor–acceptor nanohybrids, which are useful for light-energy harvesting and photovoltaic applications.  
This approach of nanohybrid formation utilizing the concept of crown ether-ammonium cation binding interaction has also been extended to another photo- and redox-active entity, fullerene, 70.93 The nanohybrids were isolated and characterized by TEM, UV-visible-near IR and electrochemical methods. Free-energy calculations suggested the possibility of electron transfer from the carbon nanotube to the singlet excited fullerene in the SWNT/Pyr-NH3+/crown-C60 nanohybrids resulting into the formation of SWNT•+/Pyr-NH3+/crown-C60•− charge separated state. Accordingly, steady-state and time-resolved fluorescence studies revealed efficient quenching of the singlet excited state of C60 in the nanohybrids. Further studies involving nanosecond transient absorption studies confirmed electron transfer to be the quenching mechanism, in which the electron transfer product, fullerene anion radical, was possible to spectrally characterize. The rates of charge separation, kCS and charge recombination, kCR were found to be 3.46 × 109 s−1 and 1.04 × 107 s−1, respectively. The calculated lifetime of the radical ion-pair was found to be over 100 ns, suggesting charge stabilization in the novel supramolecular nanohybrids.  

4 Summary
In summary, the recent progress in the design, construction and electron transfer applications of self-assembled tetrapyrrole–fullerene and tetrapyrrle–carbon nanotubes have been reviewed here. Implementing the chemistry of tetrapyrroles, fullerene and carbon nanotubes into supramolecular chemistry has led to novel examples of molecular organization with promising photochemical energy harvesting and switching applications. Supramolecular chemistry of these novel systems using weak to fairly strong binding motifs is emerging and should furnish future avenues for integration into nanoscience and nanotechnology developments.
5 Acknowledgements The authors are thankful to the National Science Foundation (Grant 0453464) and the Petroleum Research Funds administered by the American Chemical Society for financial support.
6 References 
  (a)  Supramolecular Chemistry: Concepts and Perspectives,             J.-M. Lehn, VCH, Weinheim,  1995 Search PubMed ; 
  (b)  Comprehensive Supramolecular Chemistry, ed. J. L. Atwood, J. E. D. Davies, D. D. MacNicol, F. Vögtle, Pergamon, Oxford,  1996 Search PubMed ; 
  (c)  Electron Transfer in Chemistry, ed. V. Balzani, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed ; 
  (d)  Introduction of Molecular Electronics, ed. M. C. Petty, M. R. Bryce, D. Bloor, Oxford University Press, New York,  1995 Search PubMed ; 
  (e)  Molecular Switches, ed. B. L. Feringa,Wiley-VCH GmbH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed . 
  (a) J. Deisenhofer, O. Epp, K. Miki, R. Huber and H. Michel, Nature, 1985, 318, 618 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. Deisenhofer and H. Michel, Science, 1989, 245, 1463 CrossRef ; 
  (c) P. Allen, G. Feher, T. O. Yeates, D. C. Rees, J. Deisenhofer, H. Michel and R. Huber, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1986, 83, 8589 CAS ; 
  (d) J. Deisenhofer, O. Epp, I. Sinning and H. Michel, J. Mol. Biol., 1995, 246, 429 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) P. Jordan, P. Fromme, H.-T. Witt, O. Klukas, W. Saenger and N. Krauss, Nature, 2001, 411, 909 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a)              J. S. Connolly and J. R. Bolton, in Photoinduced Electron Transfer, ed. M. A. Fox and M. Chanon, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1988, Part D, pp 303–393 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Kurreck and M. Huber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 849 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265 CAS ; 
  (e) M. N. Paddon-Row, Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 18 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. W. Verhoeven, Adv. Chem. Phys., 1999, 106, 603 CAS ; 
  (g) K. Maruyama, A. Osuka and N. Mataga, Pure Appl. Chem., 1994, 66, 867 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) A. Osuka, N. Mataga and T. Okada, Pure Appl. Chem., 1997, 69, 797 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) T. Hayashi and H. Ogoshi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 355 RSC ; 
  (j) M. W. Ward, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 365 RSC ; 
  (k) D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2000, 321 RSC ; 
  (l)              D. Gust and T. A. Moore, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, Burlington, MA, USA,  2000, vol. 8, pp 153–190 Search PubMed ; 
  (m) M. E. El-Khouly, O. Ito, P. M. Smith and F. D'Souza, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2004, 5, 79 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (n) F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1410 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (o) H. Imahori and S. Fukuzmi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 525 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (p) L. Sanchez, N. Martin and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5374 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (q)              F. D'Souza, and O. Ito, in Handbook of Organic Electronics and Photonics, ed. H. S. Nalwa, ch. 13, vol. 1, pp 485–521, American Scientific Publishers, Los Angeles, CA, USA,  2008 Search PubMed . 
  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Zerbetto and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 871 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, H. Taieb, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 871 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Kratschmer, L. D. Lamb, F. Fostiropoulos and D. R. Huffman, Nature, 1990, 347, 345 CrossRef ; 
  (c)  Fullerene and Related Structures, ed. A. Hirsch, Springer, Berlin, vol. 199,  1999 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) D. S. Bethune, C. H. Kiang, M. S. De Varies, G. Gorman, R. Savoy, J. Vazquez and R. Bevers, Nature, 1993, 363, 605 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) J. L. Sessler, J. Jayawickramarajah, A. Gouloumis, T. Torres, D. M. Guldi, S. Maldonado and K. J. Stevenson, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1892 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Sanchez, N. Martin and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5374 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. L. Sessler, J. Jayawickramarajah, A. Gouloumis, G. D. Pantos, T. Torres and D. M. Guldi, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 2123 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. L. Sessler, C. M. Lawrence and J. Jayawickramarajah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 314 RSC . T. Torres, A. Gouloumis, D. S. Garcia, J. Jayawickramarajah, W. Seitz, D. M. Guldi and J. L. Sessler, Chem. Commun., 2007, 292 RSC . R. Marczak, V. T. Hoang, K. Nowaoryta, M. E. Zandler, W. Kutner and F. D'Souza, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2123 RSC . 
  (a) F. D'Souza, S. Gadde, D.-M. S. Islam, S. Pang, A. L. Schumacher, M. E. Zandler, R. Horie, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2007, 480 RSC ; 
  (b) I. Obraztov, K. Noworyta, W. Kutner, S. Gadde and F. D'Souza, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2007, 244, 3861 CrossRef . S. Gadde, D. M. S. Islam, C. A. Wijesinghe, N. K. Subbaiyan, M. E. Zandler, Y. Araki, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12400 . L. Sanchez, M. Sierra, N. Martin, A. J. Myles, T. J. Dale, J. Rebek, W. Seitz and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4637 CrossRef . 
  (a) D. Balbinot, S. Atalick, D. M. Guldi, M. Hatzimarinaki, A. Hirsch and N. Jux, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13273 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Zilbermann, A. Lin, M. Hatzimarinaki, A. Hirsch and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2004, 96 RSC . 
  (a) K. Tashira, T. Aida, J.-Y. Zheng, K. Kinbara, K. Saigo, S. Sakamoto and K. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9477 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Tashiro and T. Aida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 189 RSC . J.-Y. Zheng, K. Tashiro, Y. Hirabayashi, K. Kinbara, K. Saigo, T. Aida, S. Sakamoto and K. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1857 CrossRef CAS . Y. Shoji, K. Tashiro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6570 CrossRef CAS . Y. Shoji, K. Tashiro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10690 CrossRef CAS . M. Yanagisawa, K. Tashiro, M. Yamasaki and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11912 CrossRef CAS . K. Tashiro, Y. Hirabayashi, T. Aida, K. Saigo, K. Fujiwara, K. Komatsu, S. Sakamato and K. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12086 CrossRef CAS . A. Ouchi, K. Tashiro, K. Yamaguchi, T. Tsichiya, T. Akasaka and T. Aida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3542 CrossRef CAS . Y. Kubo, A. Sugasaki, M. Ikeda, K. Sugiyasu, K. Sonoda, A. Ikeda, M. Takeuchi and S. Shinkai, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 925 CrossRef CAS . M. Ayabe, A. Ikeda, Y. Kubo, M. Takeuchi and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2790 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) H. Sato, K. Tashiro, H. Shinmori, A. Osuka and T. Aida, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2324 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Sato, K. Tashiro, H. Shinmori, A. Osuka, Y. Murata, K. Komatsu and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 125, 13086 CrossRef . N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) K. Hirahara, K. Suenaga, S. Bandow, H. Kato, T. Okazaki, H. Shinohara and S. Iijima, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 5384 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Lee, H. Kim, S.-J. Kahng, Y.-W. Son, J. Ihm, H. Kato, Z. W. Wang, T. Okazaki, H. Shinohara and Y. Kuk, Nature, 2002, 415, 1005 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. J. Hornbacker, S. J. Kagng, S. Misra, B. W. Smith, A. T. Johnson, E. J. Mele, D. E. Luzzi and A. Yazdani, Science, 2002, 295, 828 CrossRef CAS . T. Nishioka, K. Tashiro, T. Aida, J.-Y. Zheng, K. Kinbara, K. Saigo, S. Sakamoto and K. Yamaguchi, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 9182 CrossRef CAS . T. Yamaguchi, N. Ishii, K. Tashiro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13934 CrossRef CAS . M. Wolffs, F. J. M. Hoeben, E. H. A. Beckers, A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13484 CrossRef CAS . D. Sun, F. K. Tham, C. A. Reed, L. Chaker and P. D. W. Boyd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6604 CrossRef CAS . A. Hosseini, S. Taylor, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, C. A. Reed and P. D. W. Boyd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15903 CrossRef CAS . Z.-Q. Wu, X.-B. Shao, C. Li, J.-L. Hou, K. Wang, X.-K. Jiang and Z.-T. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17460 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a)              J.–P. Sauvage and C. O.-D. Buchecker, Molecular Catenanes, Rotaxanes and Knots, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. O. D. Buchecker and J. P. Sauvage, Chem. Rev., 1987, 87, 795 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. B. Amabilino and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2725 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. Jager and F. Vogtle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 930 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) N. Watanabe, N. Kihara, Y. Furusho, T. Takata, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 681 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. Watanabe, K. I. Ikeshita, Y. Araki, N. Kihara, Y. Furusho, O. Ito and T. Takata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2516 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) K. Li, D. I. Schuster, D. M. Guldi, A. Herranz and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3388 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Li, P. J. Bracher, D. M. Guldi, A. Herranz, L. Echegoyen and D. I. Schuster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9156 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. I. Schuster, K. Li and D. M. Guldi, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 892 CrossRef CAS . Y. Liu, P. Liang, Y. Chen, Y.-M. Zhang, J.-Y. Zheng and H. Yae, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 9095 CrossRef CAS . S. Saha, A. H. Flood, J. F. Stoddart, S. Impellizzeri, S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12159 CrossRef CAS . D. M. Guldi, J. Ramey, V. Martinez-Diaz, A. Escosura, T. Torres, T. Da Ros and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2774 RSC . H. Sasabe, N. Kihara, Y. Forusho, K. Mizuno, A. Ogawa and T. Takata, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 3957 CrossRef CAS . H. Sasabe, Y. Furusho, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki, N. Kihara, K. Mizuno, A. Ogawa, T. Takata and O. Ito, J. Porphyrins phthalocyanines, 2006, 10, 1346 CrossRef CAS . D. I. Schuster, K. Li, D. M. Guldi and J. Ramsey, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 1919 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) B. Morgan and D. Dolphin, Struct. Bonding, 1987, 64, 115 CAS ; 
  (b) W. R. Scheidt and C. A. Reed, Chem. Rev., 1981, 81, 543 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. G. Traylor, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 102 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) D. R. Benson, B. R. Hart, X. Zhu and M. B. Doughty, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 8502 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Momenteau, B. Loock, E. Bisagni and M. Rougee, Can. J. Chem., 1979, 57, 1804 CAS ; 
  (c) F. A. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 3254 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. P. Collman, J. I. Brauman, T. J. Collins, B. L. Iverson and J. L. Sessler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 2450 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. Momenteau, B. Loock, C. Huel and J.-J. Lhoste, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1988, 283 RSC . F. D'Souza, G. R. Deviprasad, M. E. Zandler, V. T. Hoang, A. Klykov, M. J. van Stipdonk, A. Perera, M. E. El-Khouly, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 3243 CrossRef CAS . M. E. El-Khouly, L. M. Rogers, M. E. Zandler, S. Gadde, S. M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 474 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) F. D'Souza, G. R. Deviprasad, M. E. El-Khouly, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5277 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. D'Souza, Y.-Y. Hsieh and G. R. Deviprasad, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 5747 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, P. M. Smith, L. Rogers, M. E. Zandler, S D. M. Islam, Y.Araki and O. Ito, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5057 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler, M. Itou, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2276 RSC . M. E. El-Khouly, S. Gadde, G. R. Deviprasad, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, J. Porphyrins phthalocyanines, 2003, 7, 1 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, S. Gadde, M. E. El-Khouly, M. E. Zandler, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Porphyrins phthalocyanines, 2005, 9, 698 CrossRef CAS . A. Trabolsi, M. Elhabiri, M. Urbani, J. L. D. de la Cruz, F. Ajamaa, N. Solladie, A.-M. Albrecht-Gary and J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5736 RSC . F. D'Souza, P. M. Smith, S. Gadde, A. L. McCarty, M. Kullman, M. E. Zandler, M. Itou, A. Yasuyaki and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 11333 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, P. M. Smith, M. E. Zandler, A. L. Mccarty, M. Itou, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7898 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, S. Gadde, A. L. Schumacher, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11123 CrossRef CAS . H. J. Kim, K.–M. Park, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. Kim and H.–J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2594 RSC . Z.–Q. Wu, C.–Z. Li, D.–J. Feng, X.–K. Jiang and Z.–T. Li, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 11054 CrossRef CAS . J.–L. Hou, H.–P. Yi, X.–B. Shao, C. Li, Z.–Q. Wu, X.–K. Jiang, L.–Z. Wu, C.–H. Tung and Z.–T. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 796 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, G. R. Deviprasad, M. E. Zandler, M. E. El-Khouly, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 4801 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, M. E. El-Khouly, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler, A. L. McCarty, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 1967 CrossRef CAS . M. E. El-Khouly, Y. Araki, O. Ito, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler and F. D'Souza, J. Porphyrins phthalocyanines, 2006, 10, 1156 CrossRef CAS . A. L. Schumacher, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, P. A. Karr, Y. Araki, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4628 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) J. P. Hill, I. J. Hewitt, C. E. Anson, A. K. Powell, A. L. McCarty, P. A. Karr, M. E. Zandler and F. D'Souza, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5861 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. P. Hill, W. Schmitt, A. L. McCarty, K. Ariga and F. D'Souza, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 2893 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) J. P. Hill, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, A. L. McCarty, P. A. Karr, M. E. Zandler, R. Charvet, K. Ariga, Y. Araki, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 595 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. P. Hill, K. Ariga, A. L. Schumacher, P. A. Karr and F. D'Souza, J. Porphyrins phthalocyanines, 2007, 11, 390 CrossRef CAS . C. J. Pederson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 7017 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) M. Mazik, M. Kuschel and W. Sicking, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 855 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. J. Deetz, M. Shang and B. D. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 6201 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. Datta, M. Banerjee, A. K. Mukherjee and S. K. Nayak, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16100 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Saha, S. K. Nayak, S. Chattopadhyay and A. K. Mukherjee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11889 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) F. Lara, R. Cruz, M. Martinez, R. Martinez, B. Villaneda, A. Ramirez, E. Moreno, I. Martinez and E. Angeles, Supramol. Chem., 1999, 10, 185 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S. Bhattacharya, A. Sharma, S. K. Nayak, S. Chattopadhyay and A. K. Mukherjee, J. Phys. Chem., 2003, 107, 4213 Search PubMed . R. M. Izzat, J. S. Bradshaw, S. A. Nielson, J. D. Lamb, J. J. Christensen and D. Sen, Chem. Rev., 1985, 85, 271 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) N. Solladie, M. E. Walther, M. Gross, M. F. Duarte, C. Bourgogne and J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2412 RSC ; 
  (b) J.-F. Nierengarten, U. Hahn, T. M. F. Duarte, F. Cardinali, N. Solladie, M. E. Walther, A. V. Dorsselaer, H. Herschbach, E. Leize, A.-M. A. Gary, A. Trabolsi and M. C. R. Elhabiri, C. R. Chem., 2006, 9, 1022 Search PubMed . N. Solladie, M. E. Walther, H. Harschbach, E. Leize, V. Dorsslaer, M. F. Duarte and J-F. Nierengarten, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 1979 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1279 RSC . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler, A. L. McCarty, A. S. D. Atula, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 4416 CrossRef . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, A. L. McCarty, P. A. Karr, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5905 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, D.-M. S. Islam, A. L. Schumacher, M. E. Zandler, Melvin, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25240 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, M. E. Zandler, A. L. McCarty, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 4338 CrossRef CAS . A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki, O. Ito, R. Chitta, S. Gadde and F. D'Souza, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4327 RSC . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, S. Gadde, L. M. Rogers, P. A. Karr, M. E. Zandler, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 916 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a)  Introduction to Nanotechnology, ed. C. P. Poole and F. J. Owens,Wiley-Interscience, Weinheim, Germany,  2003 Search PubMed ; 
  (b)  An Introduction to Modern Concepts in Nanoscience, ed. E. L. Wolf, John Wiley and Sons, New York,  2004 Search PubMed . 
  (a)              M. S. Dresselhaus, and G. Dresselhaus, Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, Structure, Properties, and Applications, ed. P. Avouris, Springer, Berlin, Germany,  2001 Search PubMed ; 
  (b)              S. Reich, C. Thonsen and J. Maultzsch, Carbon Nanotubes: Basic Concepts and Physical Properties, VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) P. W. Fowler and A. Ceulemans, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 508 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. W. Fowler, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1990, 86, 2073 RSC ; 
  (e) Special issue on carbon nanotubes, Acc. Chem. Res.,  2002, 35, 997 Search PubMed . 
  (a) C. Journet, W. K. Maser, P. Bernier, A. Loiseau, M. Lamy de la Chapelle, A. Lefrant, P. Denard, R. Lee and J. E. Fischer, Nature, 1997, 388, 756 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. G. Rinzler, J. Liu, H. Dai, P. Nikolaev, C. B. Huffman, F. J. Rodriguez-Macias, P. J. Boul, A. H. Lu, D. Heymann, D. T. Colbert, R. S. Lee, J. E. Fischer, A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund and R. E. Smalley, Appl. Phys. A, 1998, 67, 29 CrossRef ; 
  (c) M. Endo, K. Takeuchi, K. Kobori, K. Takahashi, H. W. Kroto and A. Sarkar, Carbon, 1995, 33, 873 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. Nikolaev, M. Bronikowski, R. Bradley, F. Rohmund, D. T. Colbert, K. Smith and R. E. Smalley, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 313, 91 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) X. L. Liang, L.-M. Peng, Q. Chen, R. C. Che, Y. Xia, Q. Xue and Q. D. Wu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 073403/1 CAS ; 
  (b) P. G. Colins, M. S. Arnold and P. Avouris, Science, 2001, 292, 706 CrossRef . J. Liu, A. G. Rinzler, H. Dai, J. H. Hafner, R. K. Bradley, P. J. Boul, A. Lu, T. Iverson, K. Shelimov, C. Huffman, F. Rodriguez-Macias, Y.-S. Shon, T. R. Lee, D. T. Colbert and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1998, 280, 1253 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) S. Niyogi, M. A. Hamon, A. Hu, B. Zhao, P. Browmik, R. Sen, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Chen, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, Y. Chen, A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund and R. C. Haddon, Science, 1998, 282, 95 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. A. Hamon, J. Chen, H. Hu, Y. Chen, A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund and R. C. Haddon, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 834 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. Chen, A. M. Rao, S. Lyuksyutov, M. E. Itkis, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, R. W. Cohn, P. C. Eklund, D. T. Colbert, R. E. Smalley and R. E. Haddon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2525 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) H. Li, R. B. Martin, B. A. Harruff, R. A. Carino, L. F. Allard and Y.-P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 896 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Baskaran, J. W. Ways, X. P. Zhang and M. S. Bratcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6916 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) M. Holzinger, O. Vostrovsky, A. Hirsh, F. Hennrich, M. Kappes, R. Weiss and F. Jellen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4002 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. L. Bahr, J. Yang, D. V. Kosynkin, M. J. Bronikowski, R. E. Smalley and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6536 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. L. Bahr and L. M. Tour, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3823 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. A. Mitchell, J. L. Bahr, S. Arepalli, J. M. Tour and R. Krishnamoorti, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 8825 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. E. Kooi, U. Schlecht, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1353 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Tagmatarchis, V. Georgakilas, M. Prato and H. Shinohara, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2010 RSC ; 
  (g) V. Georgakilas, K. Kordatos, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, M. Holzinger and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 760 CrossRef CAS . S. Campidelli, C. Sooambar, E. L. Diz, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and M. Parto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12544 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) A. Star, J. F. Stoddart, D. Steuerman, M. Diehl, A. Boukai, E. W. Wong, X. Yang, S.-W. Chung, H. Choi and J. R Heath, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1721 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Nakashima, Y. Tomnari and H. Mutakami, Chem. Lett., 2002, 638 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. W. Steuerman, A. Star, R. Narizzano, H. Choi, R. S. Ries, C. Nicolini, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3124 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Star and J. F. Stoddart, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 7516 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) M. J. O'Connell, P. Boul, L. M. Ericson, C. Huffman, Y. Wang, E. Haroz, C. Kuper, J. Tour, K. D. Ausman and R. E. Smalley, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 342, 265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. Chen, H. Liu, W. A. Weimar, M. D. Halls, D. H. Waldeck and G. C. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9034 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) H. Dodziuk, A. Ejchart, W. Anczewski, H. Ueda, E. Krinichnaya, G. Dolgonos and W. Kutner, Chem. Commun., 2003, 986 RSC ; 
  (h) A. Star, D. Sterwerman, J. R. Heath and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2508 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) D. M. Guldi, H. Taieb, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 871 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Satake, Y. Miyajima and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 716 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) H. Murakami, T. Nomura and T. Nakashima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 378, 481 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Li, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, L. Gu, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, S. Kumar, L. F. Allard and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1014 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Chen and C. P. Collier, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7605 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) G. M. A. Rahman, D. M. Guldi, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 10, 62 Search PubMed . P. J. Boul, D. -G. Cho, G. M. A. Rahman, M. Marquez, Z. Ou, K. M. Kadish, D. M. Guldi and J. L. Sessler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5683 CrossRef CAS . K. Saito, V. Troiani, H. Qiu, N. Solladie, T. Sakata, H. Mori, M. Ohama and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1194 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) S. Qin, D. Qin, W. T. Ford, J. E. Herrera, D. E. Resasco, S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, Macromoelcules, 2004, 35, 3965 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, J. Ramey, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Qin, W. T. Ford, D. Balbinot, N. Jux, N. Tagmmatarchis and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2034 RSC . 
  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2038 RSC ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2517 RSC ; 
  (c) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, U. Hartnagel, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9830 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, V. Sgobba, S. Campidelli, M. Prato and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2315 CrossRef CAS . 
  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, S. Qin, M. Tchoul, W. Ford, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2152 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Aivaro, P. Atienzer, P. Cruz de la, J. L. Delgado, V. Troiani, H. Garcia, F. Langa, A. Palkar and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6626 CrossRef CAS . R. Chitta, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, A. L. Schumacher, L. D'Souza, Y. Araki, O. Ito and F. D'Souza, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6947 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, L. D'Souza, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8277 CrossRef CAS . F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, L. D'Souza, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15865 CrossRef CAS . 
Footnotes† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on carbon nanostructures.‡ Schemes 6–8, 10–16, 19, 22, 24, and 59–65 were reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society. Schemes 9, 17, and 34 were reproduced with permission from Wiley–VCH.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Raghu Chitta	Raghu Chitta was born in Mahadevpur, Andra Pradesh, India, in 1980. He received a B.Sc. degree from the Kakatiya University, Warangal in 2000, and a M.Sc. from University of Hyderbad, Hyderbad, India in 2002. In 2007, he received his Ph.D. from Wichita State University under the supervision of Prof. Francis D’Souza. Currently, he is a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Minnesota with Prof. W. L. Gladfelter, Prof. K. R. Mann and Prof. D. A. Blank. His research interests involve organic synthesis, supramolecular chemistry and developing chemosensors.
Francis D'Souza	Francis D’Souza was born in Sagar, Karnataka, India. He received B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the Mysore University, Mysore, India and a Ph.D. degree in 1992 from the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, under the direction of Prof. V. Krishnan. Following post-doctoral fellowships with Prof. Karl M. Kadish at the University of Houston, Texas and Prof. Roger Guilard at Universitè de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, he joined the Faculty of Wichita State University in 1994 and became a Professor in 2003. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis, electrochemical and photochemical applications relevant to sensing and light energy harvesting using macrocyclic compounds, such as porphyrin, phthalocyanine, fullerene and carbon nanotubes. Currently he is serving as Chairman of the Fullerenes, Nanotubes, and Nanostructures Division of the Electrochemical Society.

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
Footnotes
† This paper is part of a Journal of Materials Chemistry theme issue on carbon nanostructures.
‡ Schemes 6–8, 10–16, 19, 22, 24, and 59–65 were reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society. Schemes 9, 17, and 34 were reproduced with permission from Wiley–VCH.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
