Do grain boundaries dominate non-radiative recombination in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 perovskite thin films?   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP08770A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP08770A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5043-5050Do grain boundaries dominate non-radiative recombination in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite thin films?†

        
          
            Mengjin 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yining 
            Zeng
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dong Hoe 
            Kim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Sheng 
            Jiang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jao 
            van de Lagemaat
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
        
      *a
aChemistry and Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Parkway, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: Jao.vandeLagemaat@nrel.gov; Kai.Zhu@nrel.gov
bBiosciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Parkway, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: Yining.Zeng@nrel.gov
cMaterial Science Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Parkway, Golden, CO 80401, USA
Received 
      23rd December 2016
    , Accepted 13th January 2017First published on 13th January 2017AbstractHere, we examine grain boundaries (GBs) with respect to non-GB regions (grain surfaces (GSs) and grain interiors (GIs)) in high-quality micrometer-sized perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 (or MAPbI3) thin films using high-resolution confocal fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy in conjunction with kinetic modeling of charge-transport and recombination processes. We show that, contrary to previous studies, GBs in our perovskite MAPbI3 thin films do not lead to increased recombination but that recombination in these films happens primarily in the non-GB regions (i.e., GSs or GIs). We also find that GBs in these films are not transparent to photogenerated carriers, which is likely associated with a potential barrier at GBs. Even though GBs generally display lower luminescence intensities than GSs/GIs, the lifetimes at GBs are no worse than those at GSs/GIs, further suggesting that GBs do not dominate non-radiative recombination in MAPbI3 thin films.
Introduction
During the past several years, the world has witnessed a rapid development of a new solar cell technology based on lead halide perovskites (e.g., CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3).1–8 Advancements in materials synthesis, device fabrication and modeling, and fundamental structural/photophysical properties have been summarized in several recent reviews.9–11 Several groups have demonstrated perovskite solar cells (PSCs) of about 20% power conversion efficiency. A key factor to this unprecedented success is the development of solution chemistry and engineering approaches for controlling the morphology and composition of hybrid perovskites. Recent efforts have been centered on increasing the grain size while maintaining compact film morphology.12–16 We found that using a non-stoichiometric precursor with a slight (∼20%) excess of MAI can compensate for the rapid loss of MAI (and delays the formation of the PbI2 phase) during annealing, facilitating the growth of MAPbI3 with larger, more-textured micrometer-sized grains.17 Interestingly, a higher device performance is often observed with a larger grain size in these studies, which has led to the common belief that grain boundaries (GBs) in polycrystalline perovskite thin films dominate non-radiative recombination (NRR) over the non-GB regions (including both grain surfaces (GSs) and grain interiors (GIs)) and thus should be minimized.18 Consistent with this notion, a recent study using confocal fluorescence microscopy found that the photoluminescence (PL) intensity at a GB was weaker than that at a GS/GI, and attributed this weaker PL to a higher degree of NRR at GBs.19 However, the carrier diffusion away from the confocal spot—which affects the PL decay kinetics and intensity—was not considered in this early PL imaging study. Similarly, other studies also attributed the lower PL intensity to faster recombination associated with additional NRR channels,20,21 although in these studies the difference between the GB and non-GB regions was not resolved. Recently, certain molecular treatments (e.g., guanidinium and pyridine) were shown to be effective for improving the carrier lifetime and device performance, and this improvement was often attributed to the potential passivation of defects at GBs.13,19,22 However, such treatments also affect the grain surface and film morphology (e.g., larger grain size and reduced pinholes), and could just as well affect the bulk of the grains (e.g., bulk crystallinity and defect density). Thus, the exact role of these treatments with respect to GBs remains unclear. The implications of these studies about perovskite GBs seem to be in contrast with an early first-principles study that suggests that GBs in polycrystalline perovskites are, in general, benign due to the lack of deep-level trap states.23 However, a recent theoretical study found that while GBs may be major recombination sites in a pure iodide material, they could become passivated.24
It is noteworthy that perovskite films prepared by various groups without any special treatments have also led to highly efficient (∼17–20%) PSCs,17,25,26 further implying that GBs may not be dominant NRR centers in polycrystalline perovskites. Moreover, in a clear contrast with the assumption that GBs are problematic, our recent time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) studies of films with varying grain sizes suggest that GBs do not act as recombination centers, but do limit lateral diffusion of carriers.27 Developing strategies to passivate GBs has been considered as the determining factor for the success of high-efficiency polycrystalline copper indium gallium diselenide (CIGS) and CdTe thin-film solar cells.28,29 It is expected that a timely fundamental understanding of the exact role(s) of GBs with respect to the non-GB regions in polycrystalline perovskite films will be critical to continue the rapid development of PSCs as well as other applications.
Here, we directly probe perovskite GBs with respect to their interiors/surfaces using spatially resolved confocal fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) in conjunction with theoretical modeling. Perovskite MAPbI3 thin films were prepared by following our previously published procedures17 using a non-stoichiometric precursor to ensure that the grain size is sufficiently large for the spatially resolved imaging studies. An analysis of our FLIM results, coupled with modeling and surface-potential mapping, revealed several important observations regarding the roles of GBs and grain sizes on charge transport and recombination in perovskite MAPbI3 thin films. We show that weaker luminescence intensities do not generally correspond to shorter lifetimes and therefore higher recombination, which is frequently assumed in this field. We also find that GBs in these perovskite MAPbI3 films are impervious to photogenerated carriers, which is likely associated with a potential barrier at GBs. In comparison to the non-GB regions, GBs display similar or longer luminescence lifetimes despite lower luminescence intensities, suggesting that GBs do not dominate recombination in these perovskite MAPbI3 films.
Experimental
Sample preparation
Either a cover glass or fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) was used as the substrate. The FTO substrate (TEC 15, Hartford Glass Co) was patterned by wet-etching. Pre-patterned FTO was cleaned in a base bath overnight and then deposited with a thin compact TiO2 layer by spray pyrolysis using 0.2 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in a 1-butanol solution at 450 °C. The substrate was further annealed at 450 °C for 1 h. The perovskite MAPbI3 films were deposited by using a non-stoichiometric precursor with an excess of organic salt as detailed in our previous report.17 For FLIM measurement, the perovskite film was deposited directly on a cover glass substrate. For solar cells, the perovskite films were deposited on the TiO2-coated FTO substrate followed by spin-coating a hole transport layer (HTL) at 4000 rpm for 35 s. The HTL solution was made of 80 mg 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-dip-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-MeOTAD; Merck), 30 μL bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt stock solution (500 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile), 30 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), and 1 mL chlorobenzene solvent. Finally, a metal contact was formed by thermal evaporated 150 nm Ag.
Film and device characterization
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite thin films were characterized using an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku D/Max 2200) with Cu Kα radiation. Absorption spectra were measured by using a UV/vis spectrometer (Cary-6000i). A Quanta 600 Field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) was used to characterize the morphology of the perovskite thin films. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the cells were measured out using a 2400 Sourcemeter (Keithley) under simulated one-sun AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (Oriel Sol3A Class AAA Solar Simulator, Newport Corporation). External quantum efficiency (EQE) was measured using a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (QEX10, PV Measurements). To determine the actual power output, stabilized power output was measured by using a potentiostat (VersaSTAT MC, Princeton Applied Research) near the maximum power-output point.
FLIM characterization
The FLIM measurement was carried out on a PicoQuant MicroTime 200 FLIM system installed on an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope. A 405 nm laser excitation source (PicoQuant LDH-P-C-405B) was operated at 2.5 MHz. The excitation fluence was about 3 μJ cm−2 per pulse, which corresponds to an excitation intensity of about 6 × 1017 cm−3 at the confocal spot after the initial laser excitation. The laser beam was focused on the sample through a high numerical-aperture objective lens (Olympus PlanApo 100×/1.45 oil). The sample was mounted on a P733 stage (Physik Instrumente) for raster scanning. The epi-fluorescence emission from the sample was collected through the same objective lens, filtered by a 430 nm long-pass filter (Chroma HQ430LP) and a 50 μm pinhole before being detected by a SPAD module (Micro Photon Devices) and processed by a time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) system PicoHarp 300 (PicoQuant). FLIM images were analyzed by PicoQuant SymPhoTime (V5.3.2.2).
KPFM characterization
Based on the noncontact mode of atomic force microscopy (AFM), KPFM measures the contact potential difference (CPD) between the AFM probe and a sample by probing the Coulomb force. Because the electrostatic potential of the probe stays constant during scanning, the CPD mapping gives the electrostatic potential of the sample with ∼30 nm resolution. During scanning, the work function of the probe stays unchanged and the relative scale of the electrostatic potential of the sample is mapped. The AFM platform (Veeco D5000 and Nanoscope V) is set up in an Ar glove box with both O2 and H2O concentrations <0.1 ppm. The first resonant oscillation frequency (50–70 kHz) of the cantilever (Nanosensors, PPP-EFM) was used for the AFM topographic imaging, and the second resonant frequency (300–400 kHz) was used for the KPFM potential imaging, which enhanced the voltage noise level to ∼10 mV at atmospheric pressure. The AC voltage used for oscillating the cantilever was 1 V. The Kelvin probe voltage (DC) was generated by a negative feedback analog circuit, using the cantilever oscillation signal as the feedback source. The AC + DC voltage was applied to the probe and the sample was grounded. There is no observable effect of the AFM laser on potential imaging.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the typical FLIM image of a perovskite MAPbI3 thin film deposited on a glass slide. The different colors correspond to different FLIM lifetimes calculated from the FLIM setup following a fast barycenter average method.30 The brightness of the image corresponds to the total counts (or intensity) of the luminescence events at each pixel. The respective intensity and lifetime images are shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The apparent grain sizes and shapes are consistent with the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the perovskite film (Fig. S2, ESI†). Both the ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectrum (Fig. S3, ESI†) and X-ray diffraction pattern (Fig. S4, ESI†) indicate good optical and structural quality of the perovskite thin films used in the FLIM study. It is also noteworthy that planar PSCs using a standard cell configuration (i.e., a perovskite sandwiched between a compact TiO2 layer for electron collection and a hole transport layer based on spiro-MeOTAD) exhibit >18% stabilized efficiency output for layers produced in the same way as those studied here (Fig. S5, ESI†). The good structure and device properties further ensure that the FLIM results are not affected by simple structural defects resulting from poor perovskite processing. Three observations can readily be made by examining this FLIM image. (1) The grain boundaries have a weaker (darker) confocal luminescence intensity than the corresponding grains. (2) Each grain has approximately a single homogeneous luminescence lifetime and intensity. (3) There is a wide distribution of both the intensity and lifetime values among grains. These observations suggest that GBs are impervious to charge carriers; otherwise, no contrast in either lifetime or intensity could be observed. This is consistent with the Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) measurement of the potential distribution of the perovskite film. It shows a potential barrier at GBs in our MAPbI3 perovskite films (Fig. S6 and Supplementary Note 1, ESI†); this barrier could hinder carrier transport across the GBs. It is noteworthy that multiple samples were studied over about a 6 month time period. Some representative images are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†) and they are consistent with the image shown in Fig. 1a. Moreover, we have verified that the film does not degrade during the FLIM measurement (Fig. S8, ESI†). To further illustrate the wide grain-to-grain variations of the luminescence lifetime and intensity, Fig. 1b–g show several typical line-scans of FLIM intensity and lifetime profiles across three neighboring grains with different intensity and lifetime characteristics. These line profiles are labeled as L1–6 in the FLIM image with arrows indicating the scan direction. In comparison to the two neighboring grains, the middle grain could have a shorter, similar, or longer lifetime, regardless of their relative luminescence intensities. This does not imply that the intensity and lifetime are uncorrelated, just that there is no simple explanation based on previous literature reports. It was noted previously that there could be a very small (<2–3 nm) spectral shift among grains,31 which is insignificant compared to these observed FLIM variations and has no influence on the measurements presented here.
 Fig. 1  Typical FLIM imaging results. (a) FLIM image of a perovskite MAPbI3 thin film deposited on a glass slide. The imaging area is 20 × 20 μm2 with 512 × 512 pixels. Typical FLIM intensity and lifetime line scans across three neighboring grains with different intensity and lifetime characteristics: similar lifetime with (b) stronger or (c) weaker intensity in the middle grain; longer lifetime with (d) stronger or (e) weaker intensity in the middle grain; and shorter lifetime with (f) stronger or (g) weaker intensity in the middle grain. The corresponding line profiles (L1–6) are labeled in the FLIM image with arrows indicating the scan direction. 
Because each grain has near uniform luminescence lifetime and intensity and has a clear boundary with weaker (darker) luminescence intensities, we were able to choose each grain as a region of interest to determine the PL lifetime and intensity for each grain. This allowed us to perform a statistical analysis of the grain-to-grain variations of the PL lifetime and intensity, which further enabled us to evaluate the correlation between the grain lifetime and intensity, as well as their possible dependence on the grain size.

Fig. 2a and b show, respectively, the calculated average grain PL lifetime (details in Fig. S9, ESI†) and PL intensity (normalized by grain area) as a function of the grain area. There were about 300 individual grains in the FLIM image analyzed to generate these plots. The open squares show the same data bin-averaged with respect to the grain size for 8 grains. Performing the same analysis on other samples and images gives the same results. The grain area varies from about 0.05 to 3.6 μm2, corresponding to an average grain size from about 0.25 to 2.1 μm. Although there is a significant spread in the data points for both PL lifetime and intensity as a function of the grain area, a clear overall trend can be observed for both plots: the grain PL lifetime increases with grain area, whereas the grain PL intensity (per area) decreases slightly with grain area. To interpret this apparent trend, it is essential to have a good understanding of the charge-carrier dynamics during the confocal PL decay measurement.
 Fig. 2  Kinetic modeling of the FLIM results. The solid circles represent the calculated (a) average grain PL lifetime and (b) PL intensity (normalized by the grain area) as a function of the grain area. The open squares represent the bin-average of grain PL lifetime/intensity with respected to grain sizes. In both (a) and (b), the solid line represents a global fitting to the grain PL lifetime/intensity (solid circles) based on a surface recombination model (i.e., negligible GB recombination), whereas the dashed lines assume that non-radiative recombination at GBs dominates the recombination kinetics. The fits are performed on the full data set instead of the bin-averaged data. The details of these fittings are given in the text. About 300 individual grains from the FLIM image (Fig. 1a) were analyzed. 
Immediately after excitation, carriers start diffusing away from the initial excitation spot. Assuming an infinitely large grain (i.e. the carriers never reach a GB within the timeframe of the experiment), the confocally detected PL intensity is determined by a function that describes the carrier density inside the confocal spot: (1)in which σ0 is the standard deviation of the focused beam profile, which is about 100 nm in our setup (Fig. S10, ESI†), and D is the average diffusion coefficient of both types of carriers. The details of the derivation and discussion of eqn (1) are given in Supplementary Note 2 (ESI†). We find that eqn (1) fits to the results well but only for the very largest grains (Fig. S11 and S12, ESI†), yielding an effective carrier diffusion coefficient of 0.095 ± 0.010 cm2 s−1. This value means that the average time to diffuse all the way across (and therefore equilibrate) a 1 μm2 grain is about 8 ns. In the ESI,† this is further proven by a Multiphysics (COMSOL) model considering a full drift/diffusion model for charge carriers that considers surface and grain boundary recombination as well as photon recycling (Fig. S13, ESI†). This fully 3D model shows that photon recycling has no considerable influence on the confocal PL experiment (Fig. S14, ESI†). It also explains that eqn (1) only describes the experimental data for the very largest grains and not for the majority of the grains because the GBs are not transparent to carriers and as soon as the carriers reach the GBs, the grain has equilibrated. This is consistent with the FLIM image in Fig. 1a, where it is clear that the confocal PL intensity varies between grains, as does the effective PL lifetime (Fig. 1b–g). Therefore, one can assume that after a few ns, the photogenerated carrier (electron) density n is given by a simple relation that links the initial concentration in the beam area n0 to the area of the beam Ab and the area of the grain Ag: as in n = fn0, where f is given by , where d0 is the average film thickness that n0 is referenced to, and d is the thickness of the grain under study. For an initial analysis, we assume that d = d0. An analogous relation applies to the photogenerated hole concentration p. Also, for carrier concentrations homogeneous in the grains after the initial diffusion, one can write eqn (2) for the time derivative of the electron concentration taking into account Auger recombination, radiative (band-to-band) recombination, and non-radiative monomolecular recombination, and assuming that p ≈ n,32 which is true for moderately high excitation densities where the photogenerated carrier density overwhelms the background as well as saturates any carrier traps and for situations where carrier diffusion to the grain boundaries is much faster than any of the recombination mechanisms: (2)The non-radiative recombination term C can be described as the sum of bulk (knrb), top and bottom surfaces, and grain-boundary recombination (3)in which Ag is the top area of the grain, V is its volume, Rs is the surface recombination constant (in cm s−1) for top and bottom surfaces, Agb is the area of the grain boundaries, Rgb is the surface recombination rate of carriers at the grain boundaries, and d is the grain thickness. The right-hand side of eqn (3) assumes circular grains and that the top and bottom surfaces have equal recombination rates. The equation for different shapes of grains does not differ more than 10% from the expression in eqn (3). It is clear from these equations, that the confocal FLIM measurement cannot separate bulk (knrb) and surface recombination owing to the rapid equilibration of carriers throughout the thickness of the film (normally a few hundred nanometers); however GB recombination is easily separated from the bulk and surface as only GB recombination depends on the grain size. In the rest of this paper, we will neglect the contribution of bulk monomolecular recombination, but it is important to realize that we cannot distinguish between bulk and surface recombination in this experiment.
To find the apparent quantum yield and lifetime, we can assume that immediately after the initial carrier equilibration throughout the grain, the carrier concentration is given by fn0. We also assume a pseudo-first order behavior for simplicity. The amount of fluorescence detected in the confocal setup can then be derived from eqn (2): (4)where β is a constant related to the detection efficiency of the microscope and the light out coupling efficiency of the film, and O is an offset that describes scattered or background light being detected in the setup. The fraction fBn0/(Af2n02 + fBn0 + C) can be interpreted as the apparent quantum yield for confocal PL.
We can also derive from eqn (2) the observed pseudo first-order radiative lifetime: (5)Fig. 2a and b show simultaneous (global) fits of eqn (4) and (5) (with C given by eqn (3)) to the experimental results for the situation where both surface and GB recombination can occur (solid lines) and for the situation where only GB recombination occurs (dashed lines). The parameter f varies with grain areas ranging over two orders of magnitude, resulting in two orders of magnitude change in the effective carrier density in the grains. The fits also assume that the trimolecular and bimolecular recombination rates are given by A = 7 × 10−29 cm6 s−1 and B = 10−10 cm3 s−1 in accordance with previous results.32,33 The values of rates A and B were held constant because they are well-established intrinsic material properties. It is clear that GB recombination by itself cannot explain the observations accurately. While the fits were performed to the full set of data, it is clear that they very closely follow the bin-averaged data making it even more clear that GB recombination cannot explain the data. By including surface recombination in analysis, we can estimate the surface and grain boundary recombination velocities from the fits to be 152.1 ± 1.2 cm s−1 and 6.8 ± 2.7 cm s−1, indicating that recombination at the GBs is more than an order of magnitude slower. From these values and eqn (3), it is estimated that the two processes, respectively, contribute 1.2 × 107 s−1 and 3.4 × 106 s−1 to C for a 0.5 μm2 grain, less for larger grains. Only for the very smallest grains the GB contribution can be large enough to be of importance but no grains in the studied set have a GB contribution larger than the surface contribution. Secondly, the kinetic model shown above cannot discriminate between carriers recombining at the GBs and carriers crossing the GBs to the neighboring grains so even this small contribution to C might not represent any actual recombination.
The complex dependence of the luminescence intensity and lifetime on the grain size seen in Fig. 2a and b can be explained from this model by realizing that at small grain sizes, the carrier density after equilibration across the grains stays high and carriers are lost to trimolecular recombination, leading to an initial increase in luminescence intensity and a relatively short lifetime because larger grains mean less trimolecular recombination. When further increasing the grain size (or decreasing carrier density due to carriers equilibrating across the grain), Auger recombination becomes negligible and the confocal PL intensity decreases because the effective carrier density decreases and monomolecular recombination starts taking over. At the same time, the PL lifetime levels off because it is no longer shortened by Auger recombination and becomes determined by the non-radiative recombination rate. At some point for very large sizes, the carrier density after equilibration becomes so small that a regime not explicitly considered here will take over where one needs to consider the continuity equations for electrons, holes, and trapped electrons and holes separately. In this case, it is expected that the PL intensity scales with the excitation intensity n03/2 instead of the linear dependence predicted by eqn (4).31 At our largest grain size, fn0 = 6.5 × 1015 cm−3, which is in a regime where this could be the case. This does however not affect the analysis of the PL lifetime but might affect the data at the very largest grain sizes. A thorough investigation of the FLIM intensity as a function of excitation intensity would be required to further investigate this possibility. In our setup, it is not currently possible to perform this experiment but we are planning modifications to do this.
Another way to assess the monomolecular recombination rate is to transform the lifetime data according to eqn (5). Since A, B, and n0 are known, we can transform these data to values for C, as shown in Fig. 3. This shows an almost symmetrical distribution of C with an average value of C = 1.62 × 107 s−1 in line with previous results for the latter.32,33 The variation in C is likely due to variations in the surface recombination velocity due to variations in the film thickness (eqn (3)). The continuous line in Fig. 3 shows that the variation in thickness as seen in the AFM plot (Fig. S6, ESI†) results in a distribution of possible C values. Another possible source of spread in C is the variations in the number of interface traps that each grain has due to simple Poisson statistics and limited area per grain. For an interfacial density of 1010 cm−2, a number typical for passivated Si wafers, there are only on average 30 traps on the surface of a 0.3 μm2 grain, meaning that for a simple stochastic distribution of defects, one expects a distribution of actual number of defects for the same grain size. We have calculated the distribution of carrier lifetimes by using eqn (3) and (5) using lognormal distributions for both grain size and film thickness, and the results suggest that the variations of grain size and film thickness provide a good account for the observed variation in lifetimes (Fig. S15, S16 and Supplementary Note 3, ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Distribution of the monomolecular recombination rate constant C. The distribution of C is centered at around C = 1.62 × 107 s−1. The continuous line shows the expected distribution if the variation in C was due to a variation in the film thickness. 
Similarly to our current observations, there have been reports in the literature on the variations in confocal luminescence intensity throughout perovskite thin films.31 These variations were ascribed to the variations in local trap density which causes the critical excitation density where the recombination turns over from being dominated by trapping to being dominated by bimolecular recombination to change. These studies were not able to resolve the individual grains and did not consider that carriers rapidly diffuse from the initial excitation spot throughout grains. Furthermore, it is clear from the current analysis that the rapid diffusion and the variations in grain size and film thickness cause the effective local light intensity to vary over orders of magnitude even if the excitation intensity does not change. This will cause the apparent turnover light intensity between trap-limited and bimolecular regimes to vary spatially simply because the grain size in the confocal spot varies spatially. Therefore, the variation in confocal PL intensity can simply be accounted for by the variations in grain size and film thickness.
The modeling of the luminescence lifetime as a function of the grain area (discussed above) indicates that the GBs play a minor role in determining recombination kinetics in our MAPbI3 perovskite thin films. This result is different from the general belief that, in comparison to the non-GB regions (GIs and GSs), GBs consist of more non-radiative recombination sites that should generally be reduced. To further examine the difference between GB and non-GB regions with respect to their luminescence properties, we examined the luminescence lifetime and intensity distribution across two adjacent grains. These two neighboring grains were purposely selected to have similar FLIM lifetimes and intensities to facilitate the comparison. Fig. 4 shows three typical line profiles and each line consists of five consecutive regions with the middle one centered at the GBs. Consistent with the FLIM image, all three GB regions exhibit lower (by 30–50%) luminescence intensities than the non-GB areas, which agrees with a recent study by deQuilettes et al.19 However, in contrast to this previous study, we find that the luminescence lifetimes of these GB regions are either similar to or slightly longer than those from the adjacent grain areas, suggesting that GBs are at least not significant NRR centers and, to some degree, can even suppress recombination. This is consistent with our modeling results, which cannot reproduce the FLIM results if there was significant NRR at GBs. Fig. 5 shows a statistical analysis of the intensity and lifetime distributions for the entire FLIM image (Fig. 1a). Fig. 5a shows that the grain interiors have a median intensity of 421 counts per second per pixel (cps), while the grain boundaries have an intensity of 389 cps, a difference of 8%. At the same time, Fig. 5b shows that the median lifetime increases from 30.9 to 32.7 ns going from the interior to the boundaries, a change of 6%.
 Fig. 4  Typical line profiles across grain boundaries (GBs) between two neighboring grains with comparable PL intensity and lifetime. The three regions (GB1–3) are indicated as yellow dashed squares in Fig. 1a. Five consecutive regions (about 280 nm size) along each line scan were selected to obtain the TCSPC histograms. The intensity–weight PL lifetimes and total PL intensities from each region are shown as the red circles and black squares, respectively. 
 Fig. 5  Statistical analysis of the (a) FLIM intensity and (b) FLIM lifetime over the entire image (Fig. 1a) for the grain interiors (red dashed lines) and grain boundaries (blue continuous lines). The vertical lines show the median intensity and lifetimes. The grain boundaries have a lower intensity but longer lifetime. 
Conclusion
In summary, we have examined grain boundaries with respect to their interiors and surfaces in high-quality perovskite MAPbI3 thin films using high-resolution confocal FLIM microscopy and theoretic modeling. The MAPbI3 films were prepared by using a non-stoichiometric precursor to ensure that the grain size is suitable for these imaging studies. We have identified the importance of considering charge-carrier diffusion following the initial laser photoexcitation to properly understand the confocal PL imaging results. An snalysis of the FLIM results, coupled with kinetic modeling of carrier decay processes, has led to several important observations about the roles of GBs and grain sizes in charge transport and recombination in our polycrystalline MAPbI3 thin films. (1) Although GBs display lower luminescence intensities than their interiors/surfaces, the luminescence lifetimes at GBs are similar or slightly longer than lifetimes at the interiors/surfaces. This implies that GBs are not dominant non-radiative recombination centers in comparison to the non-GB regions. (2) Grain boundaries are impervious to photocarriers explaining why each grain has approximately a single luminescence lifetime/intensity and why there are abrupt changes between neighboring grains. (3) The variations of confocal PL intensity are caused by changes in the grain size, thickness, and possibly the stochastic distribution of traps.
Acknowledgements
The work at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract no. DE-AC36-08GO28308. KZ and DK acknowledge the support from the U.S. Department of Energy SunShot Initiative under the Next Generation Photovoltaics 3 program (DE-FOA-0000990). YZ acknowledges the support on the FLIM instrumentation by the BioEnergy Science Center (BESC), a DOE Bioenergy Research Center funded by the Office of Biological and Environmental Research (BER) in the DOE Office of Science. JvdL acknowledges the support from the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences (DOE). MY and ZL acknowledge the support by the hybrid perovskite solar cell program of the National Center for Photovoltaics funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Solar Energy Technologies Office.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light sensitizers for photovoltaic cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, 
            et al., Lead iodide perovskite sensitized all-solid-state submicron thin film mesoscopic solar cell with efficiency exceeding 9%, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Efficient hybrid solar cells based on meso-superstructured organometal halide perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, 
            et al., Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, 
            et al., Efficient inorganic–organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 487–492 CrossRef .
D. Y. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Perovskite solar cells with a planar heterojunction structure prepared using room-temperature solution processing techniques, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Zhou, 
            et al., Interface engineering of highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, 
            et al., Self-formed grain boundary healing layer for highly efficient CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, 
            et al., Under the spotlight: The organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite for optoelectronic applications, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhao and K. Zhu, Organic–inorganic hybrid lead halide perovskites for optoelectronic and electronic applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel, T. Miyasaka, K. Zhu and K. Emery, Towards stable and commercially available perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16152 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Xiao, Q. F. Dong, C. Bi, Y. C. Shao, Y. B. Yuan and J. S. Huang, Solvent annealing of perovskite-induced crystal growth for photovoltaic-device efficiency enhancement, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. De Marco, 
            et al., Guanidinium: A route to enhanced carrier lifetime and open-circuit voltage in hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, 
            et al., Perovskite solar cells with near 100% internal quantum efficiency based on large single crystalline grains and vertical bulk heterojunctions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9210–9213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Tosun and H. W. Hillhouse, Enhanced carrier lifetimes of pure iodide hybrid perovskite via vapor-equilibrated re-growth (verg), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2503–2508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, 
            et al., Enhanced optoelectronic quality of perovskite thin films with hypophosphorous acid for planar heterojunction solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Yang, Y. Y. Zhou, Y. N. Zeng, C. S. Jiang, N. P. Padture and K. Zhu, Square-centimeter solution-processed planar ch3nh3pbi3 perovskite solar cells with efficiency exceeding 15%, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6363–6370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, T. Miyasaka, J. Y. Kim and I. Mora-Sero, Trend of perovskite solar cells: Dig deeper to build higher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2315–2317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, 
            et al., Impact of microstructure on local carrier lifetime in perovskite solar cells, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vrucinic, 
            et al., Local versus long-range diffusion effects of photoexcited states on radiative recombination in organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 136 Search PubMed .
M. J. Simpson, B. Doughty, B. Yang, K. Xiao and Y.-Z. Ma, Imaging electronic trap states in perovskite thin films with combined fluorescence and femtosecond transient absorption microscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1725–1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, 
            et al., Enhanced photoluminescence and solar cell performance via lewis base passivation of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. T. Shi and Y. F. Yan, Unique properties of halide perovskites as possible origins of the superior solar cell performance, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long, J. Liu and O. V. Prezhdo, Unravelling the effects of grain boundary and chemical doping on electron–hole recombination in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite by time-domain atomistic simulation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3884–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Seok Il, Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, Highly reproducible perovskite solar cells with average efficiency of 18.3% and best efficiency of 19.7% fabricated via lewis base adduct of lead(II) iodide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. G. Reid, M. Yang, N. Kopidakis, K. Zhu and G. Rumbles, Grain-size-limited mobility in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite thin films, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 561–565 CrossRef CAS .
I. Visoly-Fisher, S. R. Cohen, A. Ruzin and D. Cahen, How polycrystalline devices can outperform single-crystal ones: Thin film cdte/cds solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 879–883 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Jiang, R. Noufi, K. Ramanathan, J. A. AbuShama, H. R. Moutinho and M. M. Al-Jassim, Does the local built-in potential on grain boundaries of Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin films benefit photovoltaic performance of the device?, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 2625–2627 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dziuba, P. Jurkiewicz, M. Cebecauer, M. Hof and M. Hocek, A rotational bodipy nucleotide: An environment-sensitive fluorescence-lifetime probe for DNA interactions and applications in live-cell microscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 174–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Draguta, 
            et al., Spatially non-uniform trap state densities in solution-processed hybrid perovskite thin films, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 715–721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, 
            et al., Observation of a hot-phonon bottleneck in lead-iodide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, High charge carrier mobilities and lifetimes in organolead trihalide perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp08770aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Typical FLIM imaging results. (a) FLIM image of a perovskite MAPbI3 thin film deposited on a glass slide. The imaging area is 20 × 20 μm2 with 512 × 512 pixels. Typical FLIM intensity and lifetime line scans across three neighboring grains with different intensity and lifetime characteristics: similar lifetime with (b) stronger or (c) weaker intensity in the middle grain; longer lifetime with (d) stronger or (e) weaker intensity in the middle grain; and shorter lifetime with (f) stronger or (g) weaker intensity in the middle grain. The corresponding line profiles (L1–6) are labeled in the FLIM image with arrows indicating the scan direction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Kinetic modeling of the FLIM results. The solid circles represent the calculated (a) average grain PL lifetime and (b) PL intensity (normalized by the grain area) as a function of the grain area. The open squares represent the bin-average of grain PL lifetime/intensity with respected to grain sizes. In both (a) and (b), the solid line represents a global fitting to the grain PL lifetime/intensity (solid circles) based on a surface recombination model (i.e., negligible GB recombination), whereas the dashed lines assume that non-radiative recombination at GBs dominates the recombination kinetics. The fits are performed on the full data set instead of the bin-averaged data. The details of these fittings are given in the text. About 300 individual grains from the FLIM image (Fig. 1a) were analyzed.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Distribution of the monomolecular recombination rate constant C. The distribution of C is centered at around C = 1.62 × 107 s−1. The continuous line shows the expected distribution if the variation in C was due to a variation in the film thickness.	 

 	Fig. 4  Typical line profiles across grain boundaries (GBs) between two neighboring grains with comparable PL intensity and lifetime. The three regions (GB1–3) are indicated as yellow dashed squares in Fig. 1a. Five consecutive regions (about 280 nm size) along each line scan were selected to obtain the TCSPC histograms. The intensity–weight PL lifetimes and total PL intensities from each region are shown as the red circles and black squares, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Statistical analysis of the (a) FLIM intensity and (b) FLIM lifetime over the entire image (Fig. 1a) for the grain interiors (red dashed lines) and grain boundaries (blue continuous lines). The vertical lines show the median intensity and lifetimes. The grain boundaries have a lower intensity but longer lifetime.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp08770a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
