Functional inks and extrusion-based 3D printing of 2D materials: a review of current research and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR04933F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR04933F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19007-19042Functional inks and extrusion-based 3D printing of 2D materials: a review of current research and applications

        
          
            Kamrul 
            Hassan
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Md Julker 
            Nine
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tran Thanh 
            Tung
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Nathan 
            Stanley
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Pei Lay 
            Yap
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hadi 
            Rastin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Le 
            Yu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Dusan 
            Losic
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: dusan.losic@adelaide.edu.au; kamrul.hassan@adelaide.edu.au
bARC Research Hub for Graphene Enabled Industry Transformation, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
Received 
      1st July 2020
    , Accepted 4th September 2020First published on 7th September 2020AbstractGraphene and related 2D materials offer an ideal platform for next generation disruptive technologies and in particular the potential to produce printed electronic devices with low cost and high throughput. Interest in the use of 2D materials to create functional inks has exponentially increased in recent years with the development of new ink formulations linked with effective printing techniques, including screen, gravure, inkjet and extrusion-based printing towards low-cost device manufacturing. Exfoliated, solution-processed 2D materials formulated into inks permits additive patterning onto both rigid and conformable substrates for printed device design with high-speed, large-scale and cost-effective manufacturing. Each printing technique has some sort of clear advantages over others that requires characteristic ink formulations according to their individual operational principles. Among them, the extrusion-based 3D printing technique has attracted heightened interest due to its ability to create three-dimensional (3D) architectures with increased surface area facilitating the design of a new generation of 3D devices suitable for a wide variety of applications. There still remain several challenges in the development of 2D material ink technologies for extrusion printing which must be resolved prior to their translation into large-scale device production. This comprehensive review presents the current progress on ink formulations with 2D materials and their broad practical applications for printed energy storage devices and sensors. Finally, an outline of the challenges and outlook for extrusion-based 3D printing inks and their place in the future printed devices ecosystem is presented.(From left to right) Hadi Rastin, Le Yu, Md Julker Nine, Dusan Losic, Pei Lay Yap, Nathan Stanley, Kamrul Hassan, Tran Thanh Tung
The Losic Group, led by Prof. Dusan Losic, is based at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, University of Adelaide. The Losic Group research interests focus on graphene and other advanced materials and include fundamental and applied aspects across disciplines of nanotechnology, chemistry, materials science, engineering, medicine and agriculture. The group is part of ARC Research Hub for Graphene Enabled Industry Transformation. (From left) Hadi Rastin is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on development of bio-inks for soft tissue engineering and biomedical application. Le Yu is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on development of radiation shielding composites using graphene and other 2D materials. Md Julker Nine is a postdoctoral researcher in the group, working on synthesis and application of multifunctional inks and paints and coatings based on graphene and 2D materials for broad applications. Dusan Losic is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, the University of Adelaide, and leader of Nano research group with 20 researchers. Also, he is The Director of ARC Graphene Research HUB and ARC Future Fellow. Pei Lay Yap is a third year PhD student in the group, working on the development of graphene 3D composites for environmental and water remediation. Nathan Stanley is now a postdoctoral researcher in the group, working on innovative potential of materials for the creation of biosensors to transform medical diagnosis and nanocomposites to realize the technologies of tomorrow. Kamrul Hassan is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on engineering nanomaterials for printed electronics, sensing and energy. Tran Thanh Tung is a Research Fellow in the group, working on carbon nanomaterials, conducting polymers and nanocomposites for sensors and electronic applications.
1. Introduction
Graphene and related two-dimensional (2D) materials hold great promise for developing the technologies of tomorrow.1,2 Beyond single-layer graphene, a broad range of 2D materials including transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), black phosphorus (BP), MXenes, and non-layered materials [e.g. MnO2, Co(OH)2, and Ni(OH)2] have been discovered and explored over the last 15 years.3,4 By employing low-cost and scalable exfoliation techniques such as mechanical exfoliation,5,6 chemical exfoliation,7,8 electrochemical exfoliation,9,10 and thermal exfoliation,11,12 it is possible to produce 2D materials in large quantities from their inexpensive layered bulk precursors. Based on the specific application, the exfoliated 2D materials may be sorted in order of thickness and size to formulate uniform dispersions.13 Most of these 2D materials have good solution processability and can be further modified to fine-tune the electrical and other characteristics which make them attractive candidates for formulation of functional printable inks, as the key element required for conventional and new printing technologies as well as low-cost and high-volume manufacturing.14
Among many applications of 2D materials, printable electronics and wearable devices fabricated by printing techniques are of considerable interest and emerging as one of the most rapidly developing research topics in recent years.15,16 From an economic landscape point of view, it is projected that by 2021 an attractive market of USD 124 billion will be available to the printing industry.17 Such a notable economic significance has encouraged the development of diverse printing methods undergoing continuous advancement, including screen printing,18 spray coating,19 inkjet printing,20 and extrusion-based 3D printing.21 These types of printing technologies are broadly used to apply additive patterning of ink materials onto rigid, conformable and flexible surfaces. The techniques enabling traditional low-cost, high-speed, and large-scale manufacture of everyday documents, newspapers, packaging materials, and magazines are evolving to accommodate device manufacturing by adapting inks with 2D materials.
The emergence of solution-processed 2D materials has heightened interest in their value-added application for device development using printing technologies, offering the promise of economically viable, scalable manufacturing for future industries.2 However, the execution of the developed printing methods is highly dependent on the functional ink formulation, which must be matched to known printing methods and equipment. The development of inks has a long history that can be traced back to as early as the 3rd century in China and related to the production of paper and calligraphy.22 Yet even today, the formulation of inks with the required rheological characteristics while being compatible with various substrate materials is still challenging.
Graphene-based conductive inks for direct inkjet printing of flexible conductive patterns for application in electric circuits was first reported in 2011 by L. Huang et al.23 Further application of printed 2D material was reported in 2012, where field-effect transistors (FETs) were fabricated via inkjet printing of exfoliated graphene prepared by a solution processing approach.24 This area of research has since experienced a rapid improvement in ink formulation methodology along with device fabrication. In conjunction with graphene, several other 2D materials have been considered as key active additives.25–27 Although the first-generation inks using exfoliated 2D materials were not optimised for the appropriate printing methods, different 2D material ink formulations with functionalization are now starting to emerge. The viability and scope of aqueous dispersions, organic solvents, and solvent mixtures for functional ink formulation has now been well demonstrated.28,29 For formulating conventional inks, polymers and surfactants were introduced as additives and binders.27,30 The adaptation and adjustment of ink formulations has permitted the fluidic characteristics, drying dynamics and interaction with different substrates of the inks to be optimised not only for inkjet printing but also for extrusion-based 3D printing, screen, gravure and flexographic printing.31–34 As a result, apart from electronics, a range of printable 2D material applications such as conductive inks, optoelectronics (e.g. photodetectors), photonics (e.g. non-linear optical devices), batteries, super-capacitors and sensors have been revealed.25–27,30–35
To date, simple printing methods along with the convenience of machines at affordable prices make the extrusion-based 3D-printing method the most common among all 3D-printing technologies. Extrusion-based 3D-printing techniques generally consist of the deposition of the functional material which is liquefied prior to dispensing via a nozzle head. The usual 3D printing technology utilizing this method is known as fused deposition modelling (FDM) which produces 3D architectures composed of thermoplastic materials, first developed by Scott Crump in 1989.36 In this method, before the extrusion process begins via dispenser nozzle, thermoplastic materials are heated to a semi-molten state immediately before deposition onto the substrate in a layer-by-layer manner. Once the semi-molten materials are deposited on the substrates, the solidification properties of this material produce a uniform solid layer which stacks on top of the previous layer based on the sliced model design. Creation of multi-material architectures can be accomplished by using several nozzles with different materials. Using a related principle, direct ink writing (DIW) methods permit the controlled deposition of various materials providing that they are in the form of an ink, which is in a viscous liquid state and able to maintain shape after deposition before drying. This direct ink writing 3D-printing technology is highly adaptable since a vast array of diverse materials can be deposited, ranging from ceramics, plastics, food to living cells as well as functional 2D materials.37,38
Since 2012, we have witnessed tremendous advancements in functional ink formulations and their printing applications using 2D materials with progress being presented in several reviews.2,39,40 However, there remains a gap in comprehensive reviews, recent development and guidance on how graphic ink formulations, and extrusion-based 3D printing technologies can be aligned for formulating functional inks along with printing of 2D materials. In particular, a complete summary on the latest advancements in extrusion-based 3D printable applications of 2D materials, and specifically the economic and research scenarios for use of functional 2D materials inks is lacking. Having this in mind, the aim of this review paper is to provide readers with a comprehensive overview of recent progress in this field. The review is composed in the following sections starting with a brief preface to introduce key 2D materials and recent advances in their exfoliation methods and processing strategies. In the following section, physical characteristics, general composition, and processing principles of inks, and the demonstrated functional ink formulations of 2D materials for extrusion-based 3D printing processes are presented. The fourth section covers the working principles of several printing methods; and finally, the fifth section covers the most recent progress in applications of extrusion-based 3D printed functional 2D materials from published literature and industry practices. The concluding section summarizes our observations on the recent trends, technology convergence, economic landscape and potential impact of functional 2D material inks and extrusion-based 3D printing technology and their future trends.
2. 2D Materials for Inks
2.1. Printable 2D materials: properties for inks and other applications
Among many 2D layered materials known, graphene, transition metal carbides and/or carbonitrides (MXene), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD, e.g. MoS2), hexagonal boron nitrides (hBN) and black phosphorus (BP), in particular have shown great potential for use in printed flexible electronics and devices due to their atomic thickness, mechanical flexibility, their own unique properties along with their integrated properties. A graphical representation of the 2D structures of these materials and corresponding energy band diagrams are presented in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Atomic structure of presentative 2D materials and their band structure of (a) graphene, (b) MXene, (c) MoS2, (d) hBN and (e) BP, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 Copyright [2019] Wiley-VCH. 
The key properties of these selected 2D materials are highlighted below:
Graphene, commonly referred to as a single layer of graphite and consisting of an atomically thin layer of hexagonally arranged carbon atoms, is the most studied representative of the 2D material family. Graphene possesses many remarkable properties such as outstanding electrical conductivity, good optical transparency (97%), mechanical strength (∼1 TPa and 1 GPa) and flexibility, high thermal conductivity (5000 Wm−1 K−1), inherently high mobility charge carriers (200000 cm2 V−1 s−1) with a carrier density of 1012 cm−2 and a large surface area (theoretical value, 2630 m2 g−1).41–46 Other distinctive properties of graphene include gas impermeability, chemical resistance (acid/base/salt), antibacterial potential, thermal stability and eco-friendliness.47,48 The prevailing method for scalable production of graphene-based materials requires direct de-lamination from a graphite precursor. Another common method is oxidative intercalation and exfoliation of graphite into single or few layer graphene oxides (GO), followed by partial restoration of electrical/thermal conductivity and structural integrity via chemical or thermal reduction processes.49 The chemically derived graphene sheets, known as reduced graphene oxide (rGO) contain functional groups and defects, restricting their application in applied physics and electronics. However, the material may be efficiently deposited on substrates via the functional groups through covalent bonding or interfacial adhesion and is easy to handle as water-based dispersions, in contrast to exfoliated graphene.50,51
MXene is a single layer of transition metal carbides, carbonitrides and nitrides with a general formula of Mn+1Xn, where M is a transition metal (TiCr, Mo, Sc, Zr, V, Nb, etc.), and X represents carbon and/or nitrogen. The name ‘MXene’ was given to describe both its single layer structure similar to graphene and the precursor MAX phase. MXenes are exfoliated from MAX phase by wet-etching in hydrofluoric acid (HF) or by an in situ HF etchant which adds surface-terminated functional groups such as –O, –OH and –F.52 MXene possesses a hydrophilic surface and high metallic conductivities (∼6000–8000 S cm−1), allowing application across fields such as energy storage, transparent electrodes, EMI shielding, sensors and transistors. The major challenge hindering the application of MXene is poor ambient stability due to oxidation in the presence of either water or oxygen.53
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), is an inorganic compound that exists in nature in the mineral molybdenite, has a hexagonal layered structure similar to graphene, displays both semiconducting and metallic behaviour, and excellent dry lubrication properties.54 The layer-dependent bandgap of MoS2 makes it attractive for application in electronics, optoelectronics and photonics. The band-gap value of this material is higher than the band-gap of graphene, which enables a higher ON–OFF ratio (>106) making it effective for fabrication of switching devices.55
Black phosphorus, a relatively rare allotrope of phosphorus, has recently emerged as a useful 2D material for photonics and optoelectronic applications due to it's direct band-gap semiconductor properties. The 2D black phosphorus exhibits a distinctive wrinkled structure with the high hole mobility up to 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1, excellent mechanical properties, tunable band structures as well as anisotropic thermal, electrical and optical properties.56 This material is promising for application in electronics and optoelectronics in the near infrared region.57 However, the wrinkled layered structure and poor environmental stability and degradation via oxidation, limits application to some extent.
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) belongs to a hexagonal system, sometimes referred to as ‘white graphene’, is an isomorph of graphene with a very similar layered structure. The hBN is a lattice consisting of alternately arranged BN atoms in a 2D plane, which are bonded via sp2 orbitals to form strong σ bonds in a honeycomb structure.58 It has unique characteristics, specifically exotic opto-electrical properties, resistance to chemical oxidation, mechanical robustness, thermal stability, and chemical inertness.59 Thus, hBN has attracted researchers to use this material in the application of field effect transistors (FETs), tunnelling devices, deep UV emitters/detectors, photoelectric devices, and as a nanofiller, especially in the water industry as a replacement for both classical bulk and nano-adsorbents.
In order to exploit the characteristics of 2D materials for printing technology, stable ink formulations along with compatible printing properties are required.22 The formulation of 2D printing inks has adopted a three-component strategy analogous to conventional graphic inks, comprising 2D materials, solvents and additives which allows the inks to behave similarly to graphical printing inks. In this context, the 2D materials play the role of conductive fillers (e.g. graphene, MXene and BP) for synthesizing functional printable inks with enhanced electrical conductivity, mechanical reinforcement, tunable band structures and thermal conductivity (hBN and BP). Solvents that make up the body of the inks can be water or organic compounds such as ethanol, toluene, DMF, NMP or terpineol. Additives, such as binders, dispersants and surfactants are used to enhance and tune the ink rheological properties. However, the additives are usually insulators which reduce conductivity, thus their content needs to be optimized. Some 2D materials (e.g. graphene oxide, MXene, TMDs and BP) can be used to formulate inks using solvents and co-solvents without any binders (binder-free inks). These electrically conductive 2D inks are far cheaper than inks containing precious metal nanoparticles (e.g. Ag, Au, Pt) and unlike those containing copper, nickel and aluminium nanoparticles, 2D material inks are not prone to oxidation. 2D materials are opening new windows of opportunity for manufacturing the advanced electronics and devices of the future, replacing traditional semiconductor technologies.
The processing of 2D materials inks generally follows a three-step scheme, including selection of an optimal 2D material concentration, dispersion of the materials by mechanical action and dilution or let down with ink varnishes. Developed inks would form a diverse source of 2D crystals in which their characteristics would be advantageous in a broad range of applications including optoelectronics, sensors, catalysts and energy storage.60 As an example, graphene has been used to fabricate the world's fastest photodetector.24 Graphene based field-effect transistors (GFETs) have also presented brilliant prospects for sensing applications because of their single gas molecule sensitivity along with higher selectivity. For the application of optoelectronics, among all the semiconductor materials, the absorption cross-sections of 2D TMDs are among the highest reported of any material. In addition, these 2D TMDs are an attractive candidate for photovoltaic acceptors in heterojunction solar cells because of their atomically thin layered structure and superior self-passivated optical absorption capability.61 The large defect sites and various morphologies of these materials allow them to fulfil dual roles as absorbers and catalysts for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic reactions.62 Moreover, the direct band gaps in the visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum grant them unprecedented performance improvements in optoelectronic devices such as photovoltaics.63 Importantly, compared with bulk material, and composites, TMDs 2D materials such as graphene show enhanced Seebeck coefficients because of higher thermoelectric power factor properties.64 Key characteristics of 2D materials along with their properties and potential applications are summarised in Table 1.
Table 1 Key characteristics, properties and application of 2D materials58,75




2D materials
Definition
Properties
Applications




Graphene derivatives (pG, GO, rGO)
Covalently-bonded hexagonal lattice of carbon atoms
Semimetal (bandgap: Zero) for pristine graphene, semiconductor for GO (bandgap: ∼2.2 eV) and RGO (bandgap ∼1.00 to 1.69 eV); high electron mobility and electrical conductivity, excellent thermal stability and mechanical properties
Transistors and optoelectronics, flexible circuits, active sensing layers, electromagnetic adsorption, film electrodes, environmental remediation and mechanical reinforcements


MXenes (e.g. Mn+1Xn)
A ‘clay-like’ 2D material composed of early transition metals (such as titanium) and carbon atoms
Semimetal or semiconductor (bandgap: 0–1.86 eV), high electrical conductivity, electronic, optical, plasmonic and thermoelectric properties, having surface terminations allowed them to be easily dispersed in aqueous suspensions and inks (without binders)
Transistors, gas and bio sensors, flexible circuits, active sensing layers, EMI shielding, electrodes energy storage, reinforcement for composites, water purification, lubrication, photo and electro-catalysis


TMD (MX2), e.g.: MoS2, WS2, MoSe2.
Tree atoms thick, consisting of the metal layer sandwiched between two chalcogenide layers, various morphologies with exposed edges that include triangular, hexagonal or star-shaped clusters and nanoribbons.
Semiconducting characteristics (bandgap: 1–2.5 eV), remarkable optical and electronic properties, photoelectrochemical, thermoelectric and lubrication properties
Active sensing layer, nonlinear photonic devices, visible to near-infrared photodetectors, field effect transistor, thermoelectric, electrochemical, photocatalytic


BP
A layered, stable allotrope of elemental phosphorus, its monolayer structure is not planar, but buckled
Semiconductor (bandgap: 0.3–2 eV), featuring highly anisotropic properties, bandgap semiconductor with a puckered honeycomb structure, extremely high carrier mobility
Field effect transistors, sensors, nonlinear photonic devices, visible to near-infrared photodetectors


hBN
An isomorph of graphene, where has boron and nitrogen atoms instead of carbon
wide-bandgap insulator (∼6 eV), thermal stability, Hyperbolic properties, photonics functionalities
Gate dielectric layer in field effect transistors, sensor material, protective cover in devices,76 deep UV emitters and detectors.58,75




2.2. Methods, medium and surfactants for top-down exfoliation of 2D materials
The quality of ink formulation of 2D materials is highly dependent on the exfoliation methods and medium. Numerous top-down synthesis approaches for 2D materials were established within the last decade which show excellent scalability, and facile processing pathways for obtaining single and few layer 2D materials with desired properties. Many of these synthesis processes were already collated, reviewed and discussed by experts in detail which cover mechanical exfoliation,6 electrochemical exfoliation,65 and related methods principally based on liquid-phase exfoliation and ion-intercalation.66,67 The exfoliation of 2D materials (graphene, MXene, TMD, BP, hBN) from their bulk are significantly influenced by the exfoliation approach, the medium of exfoliation and the surfactants used during the process. Therefore, this section outlines the fundamental mechanisms of widely used synthesis routes, and the influence of different groups of media, and effect of interacting surfactants, to achieve a high-yield synthesis of 2D materials.

2.2.1. Methods of exfoliation of 2D materials. 
Most of the top-town routes for exfoliation of 2D materials can be classified into four categories: (a) mechanical, (b) chemical, (c) electrochemical and (d) thermal exfoliation, as well as their combinations.
2.2.1.1. Mechanical exfoliations. 
Mechanical exfoliation is based on the mechanical influence in exfoliation via fragmentation of the bulk layered materials by means of shear and frictional force, compressive and tensile force, and multidirectional vibration.68,69 These forces can be introduced by different processing methods such as ball-milling,70 three-roll-milling,71 vortex chamber,5 sonication,72 and other relevant rotating mechanical-mixture,73 as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Mechanical exfoliation. (a) Schematic representation of the mechanism for exfoliation via sonication. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6 Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Mechanism of mechanical exfoliation via ball milling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70 Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Pressure driven shear force for exfoliation of 2D materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5 Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of a high shear generator to exfoliate 2D materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Sonication (Fig. 2a) causes generation and distribution of cavitation-induced microbubbles through the liquid medium during the exfoliation process. Due to pressure differences, the collapse of these bubbles generates micro-jets and shock waves, causing compression stresses on the particles and tensile stresses in the opposite direction to the compression which drives mechanical exfoliation and fragmentation of the bulk layered materials.6,74
Ball-milling,70 and three-roll-milling,71 primarily creates shear stress and collision impact (e.g. compression) leading to exfoliation and fragmentation of the bulk particles. The shear force cleaves layered bulk into 2D sheets from the outer surface while the compression forces act laterally, often breaking the particles into smaller fragments (Fig. 2b). The production yield of mono- and few-layer material via milling depends on the rotation speed, duration and exfoliation medium.6
The effects of fluid-dynamics were harnessed to produce multiple mechanical forces for exfoliation, by designing special mechanical devices such as a flow channel with high-pressure/velocity gradient,77 and vortex chamber,5 as shown in Fig. 2c. The inherent cavitation in low pressure zones and the collapse of cavitation micro bubbles can generate shockwaves which impact on layered materials with the velocity gradient-induced viscous shear stress. Furthermore, the flow channel-induced collisions and turbulence-induced Reynolds shear stress can generate lateral forces capable of cleaving bulk layered materials. A high-shear generator is another device that consists of a specially designed rotor blade possessing a rotor swept-region, a hole-region and a jet-region (Fig. 2d).78 The system combines the mechanisms observed in sonication and ball-milling such as shear, micro jet cavitation and collision towards a high yield synthesis of 2D materials.73
These aforementioned mechanical methods were applied to exfoliate most of the known 2D materials such as graphene, hBN,5 TMD (e.g. MoS2, WS2, MoSe2),66 phosphorene,79 and antimonene.80
2.2.1.2. Chemical exfoliation. 
Chemical exfoliation of layered bulk materials was predominantly driven by chemical oxidation,81–83 chemical etching,84 and ion-intercalation.85 These oxidation approaches involved strong oxidising agents (e.g. KMnO4, K2FeO4) in an acidic medium (e.g. H2SO4, HNO3) to break the van der Waals (vdW) forces between layers (e.g. graphite, hBN) as presented in Fig. 3a,7 while acid etching with hydrofluoric acid (HF) or hydrochloric acid (HCl) was performed to remove the targeted metallic layer in the layered bulk of ternary carbide and nitride Mn+1AXn phase.86,87
 Fig. 3  Chemical exfoliation process via (a) oxidation exfoliation of 2D materials using oxidising agent and acid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7 and 91 Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (b) Chemical etching of MAX phase to produce MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
Although Brodie revealed acid oxidation of graphite in 1859 using NaNO3 and H2SO4,88 most current chemical exfoliation of graphite via oxidation is based on Hummers’ method reported in 1958 for graphite oxidation.89 The method uses KMnO4 and NaNO3 in concentrated H2SO4 for chemical treatment which was modified and improved by substituting NaNO3 and optimizing the composition for efficient and high-yield production of oxidised graphene.7,90 However, the chemical oxidation leads to rigorous disruption of the lattice structure of 2D materials by the introduction of oxygen-containing functional groups on basal plane and edges of the layers, creating a material which exhibits low electrical and thermal conductivity. To address this problem, different oxidising agents (e.g. peroxyacetic acid) with H2SO4 were introduced as an alternative to exfoliate graphite into few-layer graphene in a single step at room temperature.91 In this process, the exfoliated graphene derivative contains less oxygen (1.2%) and structural defects than previously reported chemical exfoliation methods hence exhibits superior electrical and thermal conductivity.
Etching is a chemical process to subtract or remove materials which was applied to the exfoliation of 2D materials, particularly for the synthesis of MXene from its carbide Mn+1AXn-phase as shown in Fig. 3b.92 The process starts with an HF-treatments of the MAX-phase (e.g. Ti3AlC3) where Al atoms are replaced by OH after reaction with HF followed by the breaking of hydrogen bonds and separation of nanosheets by mechanical forces (e.g. sonication).86,92
2.2.1.3. Electrochemical exfoliation. 
The electrochemical process is an extension of chemical exfoliation wherein the chemical reaction takes place by the application of an electrical current in liquid-phase. This process has been widely explored for synthesis of graphene and other 2D materials (e.g. hBN, TMD, Mxene, phosphorene).9,65,93 Basically, the cell consists of two electrodes, an electrolyte and external power-supply wherein both anodic and cathodic approaches can be applied for the exfoliation of 2D materials as shown in Fig. 4a. The working electrode is made of the target materials for exfoliation which might be in the form of foil, plate, rod and placed as either anode or cathode corresponding to the selected type of intercalants (e.g. anionic or cationic intercalants).95 In the case of graphite, anodic intercalation results in oxidised graphene while non-oxidized exfoliated graphene were synthesized in the cathodic regime. The limitation of the electrochemical route is the need to provide an unbroken voltage bias which does not occur in ideal case. Few-layered 2D materials, even multilayered chunks are produced as the ionic intercalation and exfoliation will occur simultaneously at all edges of the working electrode in contact with the electrolyte.96
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical exfoliation. (a) A typical configuration of electrochemical cell and the representative reactions at the anode and cathode, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (b) High-temperature exfoliation under an atmospheric pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. 
2.2.1.4. Thermal exfoliation. 
Thermal exfoliation of layered materials requires heating to trigger thermally active intercalating compounds between layers causing internal pressure that results in the exfoliation of layers. The rise in internal pressure enhances spacing distance between layers by releasing intercalant dependent gaseous species (e.g. H2O-vapor, CO2, SO2etc.) hence, overcoming interlayer vdW attraction of graphite and boron nitride-like materials.98,99 The heating source can be a furnace, oven or microwave/infrared radiation.100,101
The heating can be slow or rapid depending on the heating process adopted based on intercalating compounds employed. Slow heating to high temperature can oxidise materials in an air atmosphere allowing oxygen atoms (O2) to enter between layers. In the case of boron nitride, heating at 1000 °C in air allows diffusion of O2 between layers which leads to the formation of exfoliated hydroxylated boron nitride.98 Self-curling assisted layer by layer exfoliation of BN can also be achieved by heat-induced intercalation of molten hydroxides which initiates self-exfoliation of BN.102 However, intercalation using oxidising agents in acidic media is very common and has been primarily investigated for the intercalation of graphite and TMDs (e.g. MoS2, WS2) to obtain their derivatives (Fig. 4b).85,103 To increase the exfoliation yield using a similar process, the heating can be performed in vacuum or ambient conditions.97,104 Rapid heating using microwaves has become a widely used route which can generate up to 93% yield of exfoliated material with a high selectivity (95%) towards ‘single-layer’ graphene in ionic liquid.105,106


2.2.2. Medium for liquid exfoliation process. 
Prior to the exfoliation by any of these methods, understanding the interaction between solvents and bulk-flakes is important to assist in choosing the right solvent for high yielding exfoliation of 2D materials. In practice, an ideal solvent for liquid phase exfoliation must be able to vigorously exfoliate the material at the highest concentration and have ability to increase the metastable lifetime of the suspension by reducing interparticle attraction.66,107 To achieve this objective, researchers initially considered Hildebrand (δ) solubility parameter (non-polar),12 and Hansen solubility parameters (HSP) (dispersive forces, di-polar forces and hydrogen bond),108 however neither models were found suitable for determining optimum solvent for carbon nanomaterials.109 Liquid phase exfoliation of 2D materials involves different groups of media, (a) non-ionic media by matching the surface energy of materials,66 (b) ionic exfoliation media based on the size of ions and their efficient intercalating ability through layers materials,67 (c) combination of ionic and non-ionic media to change the interfacial interaction,110 and (d) diffusion of supercritical fluids and decompression.111 In this section, we will discuss how a group media in a cohort functions in exfoliation of layered materials.
2.2.2.1. Non-ionic liquids. 
Non-ionic liquids do not dissociate into ions, hence showing negligible or no electrical conductivity. However, these liquids may be polar or non-polar and many polar non-ionic liquids may be able to form hydrogen bonds (protic) and some cannot (aprotic) which affects their surface tension. The strong intermolecular forces between the solvent molecules decreases wettability and dispersion ability, which results in poor yields of 2D materials during exfoliation.66Fig. 5a displays the wettability of a series of solvents on the solid surfaces of layered materials (e.g. BN, graphite, MoS2, WS2). A new library of 40 solvents and their different mixtures was built by Shen et al.66 to match surface tension components between solvents and 2D materials to achieve better exfoliation and solubility. With the assistance of a mechanical exfoliation device (e.g. sonicator, high-shear mixer), it becomes straightforward to obtain highly efficient exfoliation of 2D materials as shown in Fig. 5b and c. A list of non-ionic liquids used to exfoliate 2D materials in presented in Table 2.
 Fig. 5  (a) Typical contact angle images of hBN, graphite and MoS2, WS2 with 12 different solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (b) The layered crystal is sonicated in a solvent, resulting in exfoliation and nanosheet formation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112 Copyright (2013) The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) The stable suspension of different layered materials in solvent of the matched surface tension fluids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. (d) ((i) Ion intercalation, and (ii) ion exchange procedure during exfoliation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright (2013) The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic illustrations of a pressure–temperature phase diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 and 114 Copyright (2004) American Chemical Society. (f) Example of the SCFs induced exfoliation of bulk layered materials (e.g. graphite). Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (g) Photographs of (i) MoS2, and (ii) BN dispersions in various ethanol/water mixtures, which have been stored under ambient conditions for a week. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 Copyright (2011) Wiley-VCH. 
Table 2 Frequently used exfoliation media for 2D materials




Non-ionic liquids
Ionic liquids
Supercritical (Sc) fluids
Mixed fluids





Graphite – Water,118 acetonitrile,119 ethylene glycol,120N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF)121N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),122 Glycerol, N,N-dimethyl Acetamide (DMA)

Graphite – [C4mim][Tf2N],123 ([EMIm]Cl),124 [TRPIL],125

Graphite – Sc-CO2,126,127 Sc-NH3,128 Sc-Acetonitrile,129 Sc-NMP/Sc-EtOH/Sc-DM,130 Sc-H2O,131

Graphite – Isopropanol/water,132 ethanol/water,133,134 water/acetone,135 water/ammonia solution,136



TMDs (MX

2

) – MoS2-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),137 Cyclohexylpyrrolidone,138

TMDs (MX

2

) – MoS2-[TRPIL],125

TMDs (MX

2

) – Sc-DMF (MoS2)139,140; (MoS2, MoSe2)141 Sc-CO2, (MoS2)142,143 (WS2)144

TMDs (MX

2

) – ethanol/water,110



Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – Isopropyl alcohol (IPA),145N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),146 Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),147 and N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP),148

Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – Molten hydroxide (NaOH/KOH (molar ratio = 51.5/48.5),102 [Emim][Tf2N], [Hmim][Tf2N], [bpy][Tf2N], [bpy][Tf2N], [Bmim][TfO], [Emim][BF4], [Bmim][BF4], [Bmim][PF6], [Hmim][PF6]149, [TRPIL],125

Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – Sc-Isopropanol/H2O (hBN)150, Sc-EtOH (V2O5 powder)151

Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – ethanol/water,110 ammonia water/isopropyl alcohol (IPA),152tert-butanol/water.153



Black phosphorus (BP)-Iso-propyl alcohol (IPA),154 acetone,155 acetonitrile,156 ethanol,157 tetrahydrofuran (THF), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),158 Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),159N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),79N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone,160

Black phosphorus (BP)-[HOEMIM]-[TfO]161, [Emim][Tf2N] and [Bmim][Tf2N]162
Black phosphorus (BP)-Sc-CO2163

Black phosphorus (BP)-NMP/NaOH solution,164 Triton X-100/DI water.165



Mxene – *MAX phase (Exfoliation media used after dissolving the A layer from MAX phase by etching), DMSO.166 Tetraalkylammonium salts,92,167 Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH)92, Choline hydroxide.168 n-butylamine,168 Aryl diazonium salt in water,169 Lithium fluoride (LiF)/sodium fluoride (NaF),170 Hydrochloric acid (HCl).170




2.2.2.2. Ionic liquid/molten salt medium. 
Ionic liquids (ILs) or molten salts (i.e. Polyatomic organic or inorganic ions) were explored to a great extent for exfoliation of layered materials due to their ability to penetrate through the interlayer space of layered materials.67 The presence of ILs makes it easier to obtain high yield exfoliation by simple mechanical agitation by means of sonication or stirring as shown in Fig. 5d(i).112 The intercalation of the small ionic species (cations, e.g. Li+, Na+ and K+, and anions, e.g. Cl−, Br−, I−, OH−, SO42−) enlarges the interlayer gap of layered materials resulting in reduction of the energy required to break the vdW forces during exfoliation. The efficient ion intercalation and exfoliation can be performed by mechanical, chemical, and electrochemical approaches which were discussed above in the section: methods of exfoliation. In the presence of ILs, ion exchange is also a common phenomenon occurring in some group of layered materials (e.g. layered double hydroxides, clays, and some metal oxides) which contain ions between the layers. In liquid medium, the ion can be exchanged to balance the charge on the layers which results in exfoliation by mild agitation as shown in Fig. 5d(ii).112,113 A list of frequently used ILs for exfoliation of layered materials is shown in Table 2.
2.2.2.3. Super-critical fluids. 
Supercritical fluids (SCFs) do not possess distinct liquid and gas phases above their critical temperature and pressure as shown in Fig. 5e.114 At this phase, the substances behave like both gas and liquid phase with almost zero surface energy, high diffusion coefficients, excellent wetting of surfaces that enables them to effuse through solids like a gas, and dissolve materials like a liquid.115 The density, viscosity, and dielectric constants are temperature and pressure dependent, hence diffusivity and wettability can be easily altered. These features make SCFs useful for exfoliating layered materials by allowing them to diffuse through the layers, resulting in the increase in interlayer gap by weakening interlayer vdW forces (Fig. 5f). Recently many solvents at their supercritical state (enlisted in Table 1) were used for efficient exfoliation of 2D materials.111 The spontaneous depressurization of gaseous SCFs make them highly suitable for synthesizing 2D materials with minimal solvent residuals while the liquid state SCFs requires slight change in critical parameters to enhance their exfoliation ability.
2.2.2.4. Mixed solvents strategy. 
The above discussed three different type of exfoliation medium can be mixed with each other to improve solubility parameters which enables a second degree yield of exfoliation with enhanced stabilization.110 The mixture of polar/polar, non-polar/polar solvents, or combining them with Ionic liquids (ILs) as well as SCFs with other co-solvents (e.g. pyrene and pyrene-derivatives),116 becomes a common strategy to obtain an enhanced outcome in exfoliation and stabilization of suspension.117Fig. 5g presents exfoliation of MoS2 and BN in different ethanol/water mixture wherein 45% ethanol in water results in high concentration of exfoliation and stable dispersion which is 55% for BN.110 The high solubility composition of solvents can be explained by HSP to evaluate the compatibility between solvents and solutes for high quality dispersion. The alteration in HSP distance can be achieved by mixing two or three solvent in different ratios. The smaller the HSP distance, the higher the solubility of solvents.

2.3. Designing functional 2D material inks
Conventional printing technologies, such as screen printing, gravure printing and flexographic printing are based on different operating principles that require the properties of the inks (e.g. viscosity, surface tension, solvent system, binder, nanomaterial loading) to be tailored accordingly. Likewise, the printing resolution and production speed differs according to technique. The various techniques are compared visually in Fig. 6. Consequently, selection of suitable printing methods mostly depends on the target printed feature size but is also affected by the printed substrates.171 Therefore, it is essential to select a particular printing method and ink which are carefully matched to the target application. In this section, we discuss the fundamental principles of functional 2D material inks formulation, providing a context for printable 2D material application with a particular focus on extrusion-based 3D printing.
 Fig. 6  Comparison graph of conventional printing technologies in terms of print throughput and best achievable resolutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.3.1. Basic principles of ink systems. 
Direct to substrate, mask-less, stencil-free additive electronics printing represents an increasingly valuable tool in the fabrication of electronic circuits and sensing devices. Digital extrusion printing of 2D materials is a largely untapped technique for high precision patterning towards the electronic sensing devices of the future. This section outlines the state of the art regarding 2D material inks, comparing the required characteristics for differing printing methods, highlighting the particular strengths and limitations of each and finally how extrusion printing fits into the future printed electronics ecosystem.
2.3.1.1. Ink composition. 
The inks are traditionally composed of pigments dispersed in a fluid vehicle consisting of a polymeric binder dissolved in one or more solvents, collectively referred to as a varnish. Many conventional inks include other additives to improve printing adhesion and drying, maintain pigment dispersion and prevent growth of microbes. When formulating functional inks based on 2D materials, however, the use of additives is largely avoided to maximize the electrical, thermal, dielectric and semi-conductive functionality of the printed ink. Ideally, the 2D material dispersion, equivalent to the traditional pigment, will be uniformly dispersed within the varnish and remain dispersed on storage without settling or re-agglomeration (Fig. 7). The main relevant difference between printing techniques is the maximum loading of 2D material which may be achieved. High resolution printing techniques such as inkjet require very low viscosity and surface tension which necessitates a high solvent loading and low 2D material loading. Each print pass deposits a layer of ink less than 1 μm thick, which in turn only comprises a small amount of active material. This requires many print passes which creates a bottleneck to obtaining sufficient active material patterned on the substrate surface. By contrast, high viscosity, high loading inks such as those used for screen and extrusion printing can achieve suitable functionality by patterning of a thick layer of active material in the micron range in a single pass. Though the resolution of this type of printing is lower than inkjet, it is much more suitable for printed devices where a thicker layer with more functional 2D material may be deposited on the substrate much faster. Extrusion printing technology can easily accommodate the same ink formulations as screen printing, while allowing digital patterning without the need for a stencil or mask. This section includes key highlights on the composition and formulation of printable inks with 2D functional materials.
 Fig. 7  Visual concept for ideal versus non-ideal 2D material ink formulation. The disperssion mechanism, (a) pigment agglomeration, (b) agglomerates are wetted from outside, (c) pigment wetting, (d) homogeneous dispersion of primary particles, and (e) unsuccessful dispersion. 
2.3.1.1.1 Ink composition for 2D functional material. 
The active component of the ink is the functional material, in this case a selected 2D material (e.g. graphene, MXene, black phosphorous, molybdenum disulfide, hexagonal boron nitride). Due to the differing properties of each 2D material, the required formulations vary, but each requires a uniform dispersion of the material throughout the solvent or vehicle to facilitate printing. Important aspects of recent 2D ink formulation are outlined in Table 3, with particular attention to binders, solvents, drying/annealing temperature and tested substrates. Each aspect of ink formulation is covered in more detail thereafter.
Table 3 Comparison of 2D material Ink formulations and processing




2D material
Type
Binder
Solvent(s)
Drying/annealing
Substrate
Printing method




Graphene
Conductive
Na-1-PSA
Water
40 °C
Paper (PEL P60)
Inkjet172






EC
Cyclohexanone, terpineol
250 °C
Polyimide
Inkjet30






EC
terpineol
375 °C
Glass, polyimide, SiO2/Si
Inkjet173






EC
Terpineol
300 °C
Polyimide
Screen174






CAB
Dihydrolevoglucosenone (Cyrene)
100 °C
Paper
Screen175






EC
Ethanol, terpineol
250 °C
Polyimide
Aerosol Jet176




Biosensor
NC
Dibutyl phthalate, ethyl lactate (1:9 v/v)
350 °C
Polyimide
Aerosol Jet177




Gas sensor
EC
Terpineol
415 °C
Glass, SiO2/Si
DIW178






CMC
Water, octanol (2% v/v)
25 °C, 350 °C
Monolith
DIW179


MXenes (MxCxTx)
Conductive
None
Water
60 °C
Paper
DIW180




Electro-optical
None
IPA
50 °C
PET, glass, SiO2/Si
Inkjet181


Black phosphorus (BP)
Semi-conductive
None
NMP, IPA, n-BuOH
60 °C
PET, glass, SiO2/Si
Inkjet182


Molybdenm disulfide (MoS2)
Semi-conductive
EC
DMF, terpineol
450 °C
SiO2/Si
Inkjet183






None
NMP
60 °C
PET, Teslin
Inkjet184






None
DMF
—
SiO2/Si
Spray (Laser Patterning)185






—
(−)-Ethyl L-lactate, butyl lactate, ethylene di(acetate), dimethyl succinate
60 °C
SPE
Screen186


Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)
Semi-conductive
HPMC
Water, propylene glycol (5.7% v/v)
80 °C
Polyimide
Aerosol Jet187




Dielectric
Na-1-PSA
Water


SiO2/Si
Inkjet188




Dielectric
Polycarbonate
DMF, chloroform
25–150 °C
BoPET
Screen189


Tungsten disulfide (WS2)
Electro-optical


Ethanol, water


SiO2/Si
Inkjet188




2.3.1.1.2 Binders and additives. 
The ink binder is vital for acquiring the final rheological properties matched with the printing technique and for ensuring substrate adhesion. There are many binders reported including ethyl cellulose (EC),176,178,183 polycarbonate,189 polyaniline (PANI),190 polyvinylpyrrolidone-polyvinylacetate co-polymer (PVP-PVAc),191 cellulose acetyl butyrate (CAB),175 polyvinylpyrrolidinone (PVP),192,193 nitrocellulose,177 polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS),194 polystyrene sulfonate (PSS)195 and carboxymethylcellulose (CMC).179,196 However, the choice of binder should be linked with the desired solvent system, printing technique and substrate to maximize the print quality. The choice of binder may also be influenced by the final application of the printed device as some binder materials may be incompatible or unstable when in contact with water, acids, bases or organic solvents. While binders are essential for most practical ink applications, excessive binder loading adversely affects the functional properties of the ink such as electrical and thermal conductivity and dielectric constant, thus the binder loading must be optimised.
The fate of the binder after ink drying has been studied by Loh et al. where SEM imaging revealed the presence of clumps of ethyl cellulose binder scattered over the surface of the dried graphene ink after a single extrusion-printed layer (Fig. 8).178 Further investigation showed that by increasing the number of printed layers that the clumps of EC become draped with graphene sheets after five printed layers, so increasing the conductivity of the final structures and minimizing binder interference.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of (a–f) extrusion-printed graphene gas sensing element showing ethyl-cellulose (EC) clumps after 1 print layer and (g and h) graphene sheets covering the EC after five print layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
Some inks require additives such as dispersants, surfactants, humectants, adhesion modifiers or rheology modifiers to meet printing specifications. One common dispersant is 1-pyrenesulfonic acid sodium salt first reported by Yang and his colleagues in 2013.197 This dispersant interacts with the 2D material by π–π stacking and the large, polar sulfonate group prevents re-agglomeration of the particles. This has the added effect of improving dispersion in polar solvents including water. Occasionally surfactants such as the anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) or non-ionic Triton X-100 are employed which play a similar role to pyrene sulfonic acid, but with less specificity. Surfactants can improve the ability of the ink to wet the substrate surface by decreasing the ink surface tension.
For extrusion printing, generally no dispersant is required due to the high loading of 2D material in the varnish. The formulation of 2D material inks for extrusion printing may incorporate common binders suitable for formulation of screen print inks such as ethyl cellulose, cellulose acetate butyrate (CAB), PDMS or even no added binder as in the case of a water-based MXene ink.
2.3.1.1.3 Solvents. 
The ideal solvent for printable inks is water because it is abundant, inexpensive, non-flammable and non-toxic. The use of water as a solvent for inks development is hampered by the viscosity, polarity and surface tension demands of both the printing technique and the 2D materials to be dispersed. Several solvents often used for exfoliation and formulation of inkjet inks, such as DMF and NMP have recently raised awareness of their toxicity.198 As such, future exfoliation methods and ink formulations should avoid using these solvents. One excellent replacement has recently been identified, a newly developed bio-solvent, dihydrolevoglucosenone, marketed as Cyrene. This new solvent has closely matched solubility properties with DMF and NMP and has shown excellent performance for exfoliation and dispersion of graphene.199 Alternatively, an industrially established, non-toxic solvent such as dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) may be employed. Inks can be divided into two types based largely on the solvent content. Paste inks such as those required for screen and extrusion printing typically have a low solvent content, for example 18% v/v, whereas liquid inks required for inkjet or aerosol jet printing may have a solvent content in excess of 50% v/v (Fig. 9). For liquid inks, the choice of solvent becomes much more important to achieve the desired rheology, adhesion and resolution of the printed structures.
 Fig. 9  Percentage composition of (a) paste inks compared with (b) liquid inks. 

Table 4 highlights the critical specifications for many commonly used solvents typically used for formulation of all ink types. For liquid inks, a blend of solvents is often employed consisting of at least one higher boiling solvent and one lower boiling solvent to meet the requirements for droplet formation in inkjet printing, to avoid the coffee ring effect and facilitate uniform patterning and drying. Other relevant solvents specifications such as cost, toxicity and flammability should also be investigated before making a selection for ink formulation. Due to the high 2D material loading in extrusion printing inks, a solvent blend with a relatively high boiling point is usually selected to avoid the ink drying in the dispenser during storage or clogging the nozzle during printing.
Table 4 Key properties of commonly used solvents for ink formulation200




Solvent
Viscosity (mPa s)
Surface tension (mN m−1)
Boiling point (°C)
Polarity (logP)a





a Higher logP indicates greater hydrophobicity.





Acetone
0.31
23.0
56
−0.16


Cyclohexanone
2.02
34.4
156
0.81


Cyrene
10.5
33.6
227
−1.52



D-limonene
0.92
28.5
176
4.23


DMF
0.79
34.4
153
−0.83


DMSO
2.00
43.5
189
−1.35


Ethanol
1.07
22.0
78
−0.18


Ethyl acetate
0.46
23.2
77
0.71


Ethylene glycol
16.1
48.4
197
−1.30


Isopropanol
2.04
23.3
83
0.16


NMP
1.67
44.6
202
−0.38



p-Cymene
0.75
28.1
177
4.10


Terpineol
6.92
31.9
219
3.28


Toluene
0.53
28.5
111
2.68


Water
0.89
72.7
100
−1.40




2.3.1.2. Ink viscosity. 
The accurate composition of the ink components defines the physical characteristics of the inks. Parameters such as density, viscosity, drying rate and surface tension can affect the printing process, however for any particular printing method, the ink viscosity is a key parameter. As an example, viscous inks exhibiting thixotropic fluid behaviour are required for screen printing, while in contrast low viscosity fluids are required for inkjet printing. Table 5 summarizes the ink compositions along with their static viscosities for usual print technologies relevant to 2D materials.
Table 5 Typical compositions and viscosity properties of inks for general printing technologies2,201–205




Wet Ink composition (wt%)
Viscosity (mPa s)


 
Binder
Additive
Solvent
Pigment




Inkjet printing
5–20
1–5
65–95
5–10
4–30


Screen printing
45–65
1–5
20–30
12–20
1k–10k


Gravure printing
20–35
1–2
60–65
12–17
100–1k


Flexo printing
40–45
1–5
25–45
12–17
1k–2k


Extrusion printing
40–60
1–5
25–35
10–15
1k–10k




From the literature it is evident that the viscosity property of the ink is a rheological representation of a fluid with respect to the shear stress, the shear rate and the shear time.206–208Fig. 10a displays the common rheological behaviours of fluids, where each fluid has been categorised as either Newtonian fluids or non-Newtonian fluids. A Newtonian fluid is an ideal fluid with a linear shear stress/shear rate relationship and a constant viscosity. In practise very few fluids exhibit this type of behaviour. On the other hand, a pseudoplastic fluid presents decreased shear stress under increased shear rate along with drop in viscosity. This type of fluid requires less force to maintain flow at higher shear rates. For this reason, pseudoplastic characteristics are significant for formulating functional ink, as the ink pigments are more readily dispersed under stress. Each printing technique has slightly different demands in terms of ink viscosity. For example, screen printing requires the highest viscosity ink ranging from around 1000 up to 10000 Pa s. This requirement is similar to that for extrudable ink applied to direct ink writing (DIW). In order to obtain an ink within the range suitable for screen or DIW printing, polymeric binders are usually required. When formulating a graphene DIW ink, Loh and co-workers clearly showed the requirement for an ethyl cellulose binder, without which the required viscosity range could not be achieved (Fig. 10b).178
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic showing shear stress of different fluids with respect to shear rate.2 (b) Effect on viscosity versus shear of a graphene/terpineol DIW ink system with and without addition of ethyl cellulose (EC) binder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
2.3.1.3. Ink processing. 
In the literature, the formulation of inks usually begins with liquid exfoliation of the 2D material, sometimes with the desired binder or dispersion agent already discussed in section 2.1 and 2.2, however this has been shown to be an extremely inefficient process. For example, one study revealed the yield of dry ink material to be around 0.1 mg mL−1 using a 100-fold excess of ethyl cellulose binder.30 While the exfoliation solution may be reused multiple times, it requires the process to be repeated many times to collect sufficient material even for small scale ink development. Liquid exfoliation is carried out by either ultra-sonication or high shear mixing processes and is responsible not only for exfoliation of the 2D material, but also for dispersion of the nanosheets within the polymeric binder. If the formulated ink requires further blending to ensure a homogeneous mixture, this is often carried out by simple bath sonication in the case of low viscosity inks or by ball milling or three roll milling as in the case of highly viscous screen print inks. Low viscosity inkjet or aerosol jet inks are usually filtered at 0.3, 0.45 or 3 μm to remove larger particles due to the nozzle size constraints. Extrusion printing ink may be formulated by a solvent exchange process where the 2D material is dispersed with binder in a lower boiling, less viscous solvent before being exchanged for a higher boiling, more viscous solvent by removal of the first solvent under rotary vacuum evaporation. Alternatively, the 2D material may be directly blended into the varnish, consisting of binder and solvent system by three roll milling.
2.3.1.4. Ink spreading and drying. 
To obtain high fidelity printed patterns, the ink should exhibit minimal spread after application to the substrate. The ink must adhere to the substrate after drying with controllable shrinkage characteristics. Ideally, the ink will be cured or annealed at relatively low temperature to ensure the highest range of compatible substrates. Where the ink has a high solvent loading, particularly with inkjet printing, but also with flexographic and gravure printing, the surface energy of the substrate should be matched to the surface tension of the solvent system.
The relationship between the surface wetting of a substrate by a given fluid ink can be understood through Young's eqn (1), given γs/v, γs/l and γl/v representing the interfacial tensions between the substrate surface (s), the fluid ink (l) and the vapour above the ink (γ).209 The key to determining good substrate wetting is the factor θ, representing the contact angle of the fluid on the substrate in degrees. γs/v = γs/l + γl/vcosθ(1)

Fig. 11illustrates the measurement of solvent droplet contact angles on a substrate showing the appearance of poor wetting of the substrate by the solvent where θ > 90°, good wetting of the substrate where θ < 90° and finally solvent spreading where θ = 90° that fully wets the substrate.
 Fig. 11  Left to right diagram showing a range of contact angles for inks on poorly wetted substrates to fully wetted substrates (ink spreading). 
Particularly for liquid inks, to achieve the required viscosity, surface tension and drying parameters, several solvents are often blended to formulate the final ink. Due to the high solvent content of liquid inks such as those used for inkjet printing, the coffee ring effect often prevents high resolution patterning. The coffee ring effect is caused by flow of dispersed particles towards the outer rim of printed droplets as the solvent evaporates from the droplet edges, causing particle concentration at the edges and uneven printing. A phenomenon known as Marangoni flow can help to attenuate this effect if the correct blend of solvents is chosen.210 These effects are illustrated in Fig. 12. In formulating versatile inks, many commercially relevant target substrates should be considered including paper, polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polyimide, silicon, epoxy (FR2/4), glass, ceramic and polystyrene and the surface energy properties taken into account.
 Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of coffee ring effect and (b) elimination of the effect due to Marangoni flow inside printed droplets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182 Copyright (2017) Springer Nature. 
All inks require a post-printing step to dry or anneal the printed features. This step is vital to ensure sufficient adhesion to the substrate and to maximize possible electrical conductivity. Many reported 2D material inks have been shown to require a high temperature post-printing treatment (e.g. 250–450 °C) in order to gain the highest functionality.30,173,176–178,183,211 This is most likely due to the selection of binder, often ethyl-cellulose in the case of graphene, which requires temperatures of at least 200 °C to initiate binder decomposition.30,178 Numerous literature examples also employ photonic annealing, a technique adopted from metal nanoparticle ink curing methodology where short, very high energy pulses of light cause molecular heating within the ink material and subsequent decomposition of the polymeric binder.212 Due to the fact that only the ink absorbs energy, photonic annealing widens to range of substrate compatibility to include PET and paper which are not suitable for high temperature annealing.213,214 The inks formulated for extrusion printing have a high viscosity and show thixotropic behaviour which means that after leaving the printing nozzle, the ink will have minimal flow over the surface of the substrate. This effect is beneficial to improve the x–y printing resolution; however, it results in a relatively thick layer of deposited ink compared to inkjet printing. The layer thickness of extrusion printed 2D material may in the range of 5–20 microns which lends itself very well to applications in sensing and energy storage where a high area to volume ratio of the printed structures is desirable. Due to the high loading of active material in extrusion ink, the printed structures are usually dried at ambient or mild temperatures (e.g. 50–80 °C) sometimes under vacuum to ensure all residual solvent is removed. The decomposition of polymeric binder is usually not required due to a low binder to 2D material ratio. Where the extrusion printed ink is printed in multiple layers along the z-axis, the resulting 3D structures may be freeze-dried to obtain aerogel or sponge-like porous structures.215 These structures are also ideal as printed battery electrodes, gas sensors or as bio-compatible scaffolds for tissue engineering.216 This further highlights the versatility of extrusion printing.

3. Printing techniques
Printing technologies can be classified into two distinct schemes: conventional methods and digital printing.217 In this study, screen printing and gravure printing are described as conventional mass printing schemes whereas inkjet and extrusion printing are described as digital printing schemes. Besides these printing methods, other printing methods do exist, although in this study we consider the latent printing approach, which permits scaling-up for wide production at an industrially attainable scale. Moreover, the resolution of printed structures reasonably achievable with various printing techniques outlined herein as summarized in Table 6, along with the throughput (speed), setup cost, required viscosity range, acceptable particle size and overall 2D material loading. In the following section, key performances of these methods are summarised.
Table 6 Summary of printing techniques comparing resolution, speed and cost212,218–226




Printing technique
Resolution (μm)
Speed
Setup cost
Ink viscosity (mPa s)
Particle size
2D material loadinga (wt%)





a Wet ink.





Extrusion
50–200
++
$
5–500000
+++
12–40


Screen
30–100
+++
$
1000–10000
+++
12–20


Inkjet
20–100
+
$$
4–30
+
2–10


Aerosol Jet
20–200
++
$$$
1–500
++
5–12


Flexographic
30–100
++++
$$$$
1000–2000
+++
12–17


Rotogravure
25–100
++++
$$$$
100–1000
+++
12–17




3.1. Extrusion-based 3D printing
Extrusion-based 3D printing, relative to other printing processes, provides greater flexibility in the variation of ink materials as well as the large range of printed structures with featured sizes from micro to macro-scale.227 This process can also fabricate robust 3D structures by printing and embedding materials into substrates, which benefits from wide adoption, easy operation, and precise printing of complex-geometry, with multiple solidification methods, which is not possible by other printing methods.228
In the last decade, the extrusion 3D printing has improved from single component or material printing to complex multi-component printing, facilitated by the use of customized combinations, open source software and printers.229 The fundamentals of extrusion 3D printing are summarised in the following steps.
Firstly, this process utilizes a screw device or pneumatic actuator to feed the material using a cartridge and then transferred into a needle or nozzle for deposition, which is commonly used for compatibility with a large range of materials.229 The material deposition in the x, y and z axes is monitored by an actuator which regulates the nozzle position in 3D space, enabling the printing of complex geometries where each layer is built on the top of the previous layer.230
Secondly, a user needs to employ 3D geometry design software via CAD to set up a model for the extrusion 3D printing system, where specific parameters can be defined to interpolate the surface properties or inner geometry.231 For the purpose of construction of perfusion process, fluid dynamics simulations can be used to model a fluid flow through exchange and diffusion in and out of the fabricated object.232
The final step is to fabricate an extruded 3D construct and generate the pattern for the printer. To complete this process, the slicing program will take overall produced geometry via CAD software to slice them into layers, creating a tool path for material deposition.233 During the slicing process, the set-up spacing between layers is very critical to make sure there is enough contact between layers to prevent delamination.234 However, the z height can change between layers from 75–100% of the strand diameter. According to the mechanical properties of the materials being deposited, strand-to-strand spacing can be altered to prevent layer sagging, especially for unsupported regions, and these can be modified by changing strand diameter via (1) extrusion rate, (2) needle diameter, (3) printed head speed, extrude material viscosity and (5) nozzle temperature.229 Therefore, it is important to control these parameters to ensure high printing fidelity and maintain structural integrity.
Regarding the materials used for extrusion printing, a range of different approaches exist, from solid filament melting to ink-droplet deposition onto the substrate. Direct-ink-writing (DIW) and fused-deposition-modelling (FDM) are the two best known methods for the production of intricate structures using a range of various base materials, and a scheme indicates the processing set-up of FDM 3D printing in Fig. 13a.235Fig. 13(b and c) depicts two typical cellular printing structures produced by FDM, where the successful FDM needs a supporting substrate deposited by a secondary nozzle.236 This approach can be applied to produce fully or partially solid structures with the size of a few hundred micrometres.237
 Fig. 13  Extrusion-based 3D printing methods. (a) Schematic illustration of the basic working principle and setup for Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM). Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (b) A polymer octet-truss lattice fabricated by FDM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (c) A composite lattice with polymer core and Ni outer shell synthesized through FDM and electroless plating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239 Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (d) Schematic of the working principle behind Direct Ink Writing (DIW) using viscoelastic inks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (e) 3D micro lattice fabricated by multi-material DIW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (f) Balsa wood-inspired fibre-filled epoxy honeycomb composite printed using DIW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (g)Custom-built extrusion printing system for Direct Ink Writing of graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
As previously mentioned, another technique analogous to FDM is DIW, in which a viscoelastic ink can be extruded from a nozzle and then deposited onto a printing-bed surface by an external force including screws and mechanical piston.238 The printing bed and ink can be cooled or heated to a designated temperature using a cooling and heating system, it is also possible to employ ambient conditions.241Fig. 13d illustrates the 3D printing procedure, which is applied to fabricate metamaterials with different porosities, ranging from a porous structure to a solid beam. Similar to FDM processing, a variety of particles, such as ceramic particles, may be infused with the ink for the purpose of production of a various range of material structures.242 However, the fabricated structures normally present a soft texture, due to the use of a viscoelastic ink for printing.235 Post-processing approaches (curing and sintering) are needed in order to fabricate rigid pattern and enhance the structural integrity.242
In summary, we can say that DIW extrusion-based 3D printing is capable of bridging the gap between 2D printing and 3D printing, allowing a layer of ink with greater thickness than that achievable with inkjet printing, but with a single print pass allowing a higher resolution compared to extrusion-based 3D printing due to layer boundary effects.225 For example, Ho et al. have clearly shown the utility of this technique for constructing layered zinc micro-batteries back in 2010.243 More recently, researchers at West Virginia University employed a custom built extrusion ink printing system to precisely pattern 1.7 × 8.0 mm lines of graphene/ethyl cellulose ink onto diced silicon wafer for the creation of an active gas sensor.178 Photographs of the computer-controlled x–y–z positioning and extrusion setup are displayed in Fig. 13g.
Capitalizing on the high conductivity of MXene 2D material, Zhang et al. succeeding in formulating a binder-free aqueous ink with sufficient viscosity to be used directly for extrusion printing. Taking advantage of the solvent wicking properties of a porous paper substrate, multiple layers of MXene ink could be built up to pattern electrodes with suitable conductivity for building printed microsupercapacitors.180Fig. 14 illustrates the formulated ink viscosity and printed structures, resistance decrease with successive printed layers and SEM imaging of the printed MXene material.
 Fig. 14  (a and b) Extrusion-printed water-based MXene ink used to create micro-supercapacitor electrodes on paper; (c and d) SEM images of printed ink; (e) SEM images of ink layering and ink cross-section; (f) decrease in resistance with number of path layers printed; (g) combined series and parallel design and final printed electrodes on flexible paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright (2019) Springer Nature. 
3.2. 3D printing
3D printing aims to automatically fabricate complex-shaped 3D parts from digital (CAD) data without using any tooling.244 This is an additive manufacturing process, where materials can be deposited onto each other in layers to produce a 3D object.245 Ink for 3D printing consists of polymers in the form of solid, liquid or powder, which is different with previous 2D printing methods.246 This automated fabrication has some advantages, such as computer-aided design, quick design editing of the CAD model and precise dimensioning, compared to other manual or moulding processes.247 Current and evolving 3D printing methods have some procedural features: the surface of the CAD model needs to be first created, and then the model is converted into layers with predetermined thickness by using slicing software for each 3D printing machine. These layered cross-sections can define the shape of the printed part and the collected information about each sliced section can be transmitted to the 3D printing device layer by layer.248 The basic 3D printing process can be summarised as the following five steps: (1) creation of a designed CAD model, (2) conversion of the CAD model to an STL file, (3) slicing the STL file to several 2D layered cross-sections, (4) 3D printing the prototypes, and (5) post processing.249
3.3. Screen printing
The principle of screen printing or serigraphy is a stencil-based process where ink is transferred to the substrates by a stencil screen made of a fine and porous mesh of fabric, silk, metal threads or synthetic fibres.250 The porous mesh is tightly stretched over a wood or metal frame, wherein the pores are blocked in the non-imaging areas using a photo-polymerised resin, while the remaining pores in the imaging areas are kept open to let ink flow through.251Fig. 15a demonstrates a schematic illustration of a flatbed screen printing process. During the printing, the ink is firstly flooded over the screen, and a squeegee is used to draw across it, forcing the ink through the open pores using shear force. At the same time, the substrate is held in place to make contact with the screen for receiving the ink. Moreover, high efficiency cylinder presses are possible to employ for roll-to-roll (R2R) with higher speed sheet-fed operation shown in Fig. 15b. Screen printing has been applied to directly print 2D materials on substrates, such as paper, plastic and glass (Fig. 15c).247
 Fig. 15  Schematic of a (a) flatbed and (b) rotary screen printer. (c) Screen-printed conductive graphene ink on paper when bent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.4. Gravure printing
Gravure printing technology is commonly applied to printing for packaging onto substrates such as foils, plastics and boxes and is a direct process where the ink is carried from the ink trough to the substrate using a gravure cylinder.247 This printing process relies on the viscosity of ink in the range of 100–1000 mPa s, and is particularly suitable for high-speed and low-cost fabrication of 2D printed applications due to high throughput.244Fig. 16a illustrates how the designed pattern is directly engraved into a metal cylinder, where the cells are filled with ink as the cylinder passes through the ink trough. The ink is delivered by passing the substrate between an impression roller and a gravure cylinder.252 In an ideal gravure printing process, the cells are filled with the ink during inking phase and become empty when the roller contacts the substrate.244 This process depends on three distinct forces: (1) cohesive force (FI), (2) adhesive force on the cell surface (FIC), and (3) adhesive force on the substrate (FIS). An ink transfer is in ideal condition when FIS > FIC.
 Fig. 16  (a) 2D schematic of gravure printing. Inset shows the magnified schematic of ink transfer from gravure roller to substrate. (b) Optical microscopy images of printed graphene lines using cell sizes of 15 μm (lines printed without the specified cell size are shaded grey). Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.5. Inkjet printing
Inkjet printing is a digital process where printing is achieved in a non-contact manner whereby ink droplets are propelled and deposited in fast succession onto the substrates to produce pre-designed images.253 Inkjet is a digital method due to the fact that deposition of ink droplets and printing patterns are both monitored electronically.254 Rapid and flexible fabrication is feasible, especially at the prototyping stage, as 2D materials are introduced to inkjet printing.255 There are two major droplet jetting mechanisms: one is continuous inkjet (CIJ), and the other is drop-on-demand inkjet (DOD). CIJ is a technique where a stream of ink droplets is constantly produced and jetted out of an ink reservoir.247Fig. 17a indicates that ink droplets firstly pass through an electrostatic field are either charged or not charged by electrodes, these charged droplets are deflected onto a substrate, while the uncharged droplets are gathered by the ink catcher.256Fig. 17(b and c) shows that the ink droplets are produced via either a piezoelectric or a thermal process. In the DOD process, stabilized jetting of single droplets is an important requirement under electrical impulses without any satellite droplets occurring.257 The behaviours of droplet jetting are mainly determined by the properties of the ink fluids, and characterized by a dimensional inverse Ohnesorge (Oh) number, Z. Importantly, the value of Z should be in the range of 1–14 for producing stable ink jetting.
 Fig. 17  (a) Continuous inkjet (CIJ), (b) drop-on-demand inkjet (DOD), and (c) DOD printer with thermal head. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.6. Other printing techniques

3.6.1 Flexographic printing. 
The principle of flexographic printing is a relief process with a positive impression patterned on the outside of the printing cylinder as opposed to a flat plate used for screen printing or an embossed cylinder used for gravure printing.258 To print an image, the flexible relief printing plates are assembled and registered on a plate cylinder. Ink is firstly applied to the surface of the printing plates via an anilox roller, which is rolled through the ink trough to fill the cells with ink. Excessive ink will be removed by a doctor blade, keeping an even metering of the ink on the surface of the anilox roller, and then ink is transferred to a plate cylinder with the relief printing plate (Fig. 18).244
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of a flexographic printing system and (b) flexographic press during operation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.6.2 Aerosol jet printing. 
There is a growing body of published research related to application of aerosol jet printing to 2D materials. A schematic of the aerosol jetting process is depicted in Fig. 19. An inert carrier gas flowing through the nanoparticle ink creates an aerosol consisting of tiny ink droplets. The reservoir of ink may also be simultaneously ultrasonicated to maintain uniform particle dispersion. Gas pressure carries the aerosol to the printhead where an inert sheath gas focuses the stream of droplets through a narrow bore nozzle. The gas flow coupled with rapid solvent evaporation creates a very thin stream of particles which is patterned onto the substrate by a digitally-controlled precision gantry.219
 Fig. 19  Schematic of aerosol jet printing system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225 Copyright (2008) Elsevier. 
The aerosol jet technique allows a wide range of fluid viscosities while providing access to high resolution patterning, including on three-dimensional substrates. Drawbacks include the high equipment cost and the requirement for a fixed substrate making this a low-throughput technique, currently. Various diameter nozzles may be used depending on the resolution required, however, the requirement for particles with lateral dimension in the nanometre range may limit the resolution achievable with some 2D materials.226

4. Extrusion printed 2D materials and their applications
Extrusion-based 3D printing of functional 2D material inks with suitable characteristics have been applied for many applications such as printed batteries, energy storage devices, sensors, electronics, optoelectronics and photonics. We note that many of the extrusion-based 3D printing applications based on functional 2D material inks not included in this section can potentially stand to benefit from functional 2D material ink formulations with the advancement of scalable extrusion-based 3D printed devices. Current progress on extrusion 3D printing for device fabrication for these applications is summarized in the following sections.
4.1. Extrusion-printed batteries
In energy storage, batteries, notably lithium-ion batteries, play a significant role due to their high power and capacity, which are generally used in stationary grids, electric vehicles, and portable electronics, for storing renewable energy.261,262 Batteries are basically made of separators, electrodes and an electrolyte, with a metal or plastic casing. Generally, active materials, polymer binders and conductive additives are used to fabricate anode and cathode of an electrode. These materials are usually slurry-casted onto metal-foil current collectors for producing planar electrodes. Extrusion-printed electrodes can be obtained from printable inks. By modifying the viscosity and composition of the inks, and the parameters of printing such as pressure and speed; the dimension, shape, and thickness of an electrode can be controlled utilizing extrusion-printing. 3D electrodes have several advantages over 2D planar electrodes for example low tortuosity, high areal-loading density, and short ion diffusion distance.263–267 Additionally, fluidic and combustible electrolytes are generally used in conventional batteries which may cause safety and capacity decay problems because of probable leakage and the evaporation of liquid electrolyte259. These issues can be optimized by the extrusion-printed electrolyte because of its safer operation, enhanced electrochemical properties, and structural stability. With the advancement of extrusion-printing technology, several 3D printed batteries and electrodes have been widely developed and studied. In this section, the current advances of extrusion-printing in battery applications are reviewed.259,268–270
In 2013, Lewis et al. first worked on 3D-printed batteries using an extrusion-type 3D printer.268 They fabricated interdigitated electrodes (IDEs) for Li-ion micro-battery architectonics based on a layer by layer direct printing of anode and cathode on the top surface of a current collector. However, the current collector was made of gold and patterned on a substrate before initializing printing. After electrode printing, in a sealed case, 3D-IDEs and electrodes were placed by maintaining a small gap which was finally filled with liquid electrolytes. It is worthy to say that for extrusion printing technology, electrode ink with high electrical conductivity is an important parameter to improve the electrochemical properties of a battery. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has been proposed as a potential material to improve the electrical conductivity of extrusion printed electrodes for superior battery performance. Recently, Hu et al. reported graphene oxide (GO)-based inks for Li-ion battery electrode which employed by extrusion-printing technique.259 In this study, aqueous graphene oxide-based inks were composed of electrode active materials as well as concentrated graphene oxide sheets. In this GO-based solution for ink formulation, water is used as a non-toxic, non-flammable solvent enabling low-cost manufacturing, simple processing and rapid drying. On the other hand, GO is used for this ink formulation because of its high surface area which helps to load electrode materials onto the surface of the flakes. Through extrusion-3D printing technology, GO flakes tend to coordinate along the extrusion direction owing to shear stress employed by the extruding nozzle providing an unbroken electron pathway. Besides, these GO flakes can also offer a wide space to accommodate the electrolyte within the extruded porous structure. As displayed in Fig. 20a, 3D-printed full cell has been constructed using IDEs where the cathode and anode were fabricated by LFP/GO ink and LTO/GO ink. Inset of Fig. 20a illustrates the large porous fragment structure of GO sheets. In this design, first, Al2O3 nanoparticles (NPs) and poly(vinylidene fluoride) cohexafluoropropylene (PVDF-co-HFP) were soaked in a liquid electrolyte to fabricate solid-state electrolyte followed by printing a within the channel between two IDEs both creating a gel-polymer electrolyte as well as an insulated separator.259
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustrations of extrusion-based 3D-printed interdigitated batteries. (Inset of Fig. 20a illustrates the large porous fragment structure of the extruded 3D printed gel-polymer composite containing GO sheets.) (b) Apparent viscosity vs. shear rate analysis for pure GO, GO/LFP, and GO/LTO inks, respectively. (c) Analogy of apparent viscosity for GO/LFP ink all-along four-week storage. (d) Storage- and loss-modulus aging characteristics as a function of time for GO/LFP. (e–j) Morphological characterizations of the annealed rGO/LFP electrodes. (k–l) Optical images of a miniaturized extrusion-based 3D printed electrodes. (m) Optical image of extrusion-based 3D printed electrodes array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259 Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH. 
To achieve high quality extrusion-printing of graphene oxide (GO)-based electrode inks, appropriate rheological properties are necessary. Fig. 22b illustrates the comparison between the apparent viscosity as a function of shear rate for pure GO, GO/LFP, and GO/LTO inks. From the figure, it can be observed that all synthesized materials (GO, GO/LFP, and GO/LTO) exhibited analogous viscosity curves, which suggests that the behaviour of the composite inks was dominated by the graphene oxide even though a large number of active nanoparticles were added. Non-Newtonian inks can ensure printability due to shear-thinning characteristics along with a large apparent viscosity. These as-synthesized inks also exhibited retained their apparent viscosities over four weeks of storage time which confirmed the stable viscosity of GO-based ink for an prolonged storage period (Fig. 20c). To analyze the stability of the storage modulus (G′) and loss modulus (G′′), the structural requirements under applied shear were also determined by using an oscillatory time sweep with a shear of 6 Pa at a frequency of 1 Hz for 3 hours which confirms the relative independence of the moduli over time (Fig. 20d).259 Moreover, the solidification process of the electrodes was performed by a freeze-drying and annealing process after completing printing. Post-print thermal reduction of graphene oxide was carried out to ensure sufficient electrical conductivity. After performing the annealing process, the rGO/LFP and rGO/LTO electrodes exhibited electrical conductivities of 31.6 and 6.1 S cm−1, respectively. Fig. 20e–j shows the morphologies of the annealed rGO-based interdigitated electrodes, which were constructed of stacked filaments. In addition, GO sheets were coated with the electrode active materials. The inner part of the circular printed filament showed a porous structure which was aligned with the rGO sheets. Fig. 20k and l, represents a pair of multilayer miniaturized IDEs (3 mm × 2 mm) prepared from printed graphene oxide-based electrode inks. By following this design, an array of IDEs was printed out on a flexible substrate to fulfil the battery current and voltage requirements (Fig. 20m). This array may be used as an energy storage unit to incorporate with other portable electronics for simplifying a printable electronics arrangement.259
4.2. Extrusion-printed in-plane electrochemical capacitors
Compared to solid-state capacitors, electrochemical capacitors show higher cycling stability and high-power density272–274. Right now, in-plane electrochemical capacitors are attracting special attention due to their capability for complementing/replacing batteries as well as electrolytic capacitors.275–277 As a result, extrusion-based 3D printing approaches enable convenient and programmable patterning of micro-electrodes on arbitrary substrates over conventional micro-fabrication techniques260. Unlike batteries, this type of in-plane two electrode system in an electrochemical capacitor may comprise similar or differing materials providing symmetrical and asymmetrical electrochemical capacitors, respectively.278,279 Sun et al. reported this kind of symmetrical in-plane micro-supercapacitors printed by extrusion-based 3D printing, with graphene oriented interdigitated micro-electrodes.260 They managed to build a 3D micro-extrusion system for printing the GO viscous ink (20 mg mL−1). As depicted in Fig. 21a, the interdigitated extrusion-printed GO ink micro-electrodes were patterned on the substrate for fabrication of symmetrical micro-supercapacitors. Fig. 21b, illustrates the thickness vs. printed layers curve for this micro-electrode which is linearly proportional. Moreover, from the electrochemical test results, it is evident that the usual electrical double-layer electro-chemical behaviours and areal capacitance were dependent on the thickness of the electrode layers. With a four-layer printed device the capacitance value reached 19.8 mF cm−2. Remarkably, the reduced extrusion-printed GO films on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate demonstrated not only an outstanding flexibility through good mechanical robustness but also showed steady electrochemical behaviour as well (Fig. 21c and d). Jiang et al. developed a functional putty-like graphene oxide (GO) material which was employed for direct extrusion-based 3D printing of anticipated architectures along with tailor-patterned structures.280 These tailored IDEs integrated into planar supercapacitors demonstrated an areal capacitance of 41.6 mF cm−2 with a current density of 8.4 mA cm−2. However, due to the high-power density properties, these type of in-plane electrochemical capacitors may be used as a vital element in the field of electrochemical energy storage devices (EESDs), which are preferable for high power-consumption micro-sized devices. Though, the specific confined energy delivery hinders their practical applications. Thus, it is anticipated that researchers will focus more on improving the energy densities for this type of micro-capacitor without sacrificing their power densities.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustrations of the device fabrication techniques. (b) The thickness of laminated reduced graphene oxide (rGO) film with deviations of layers (n = 4 samples). (c) cyclic-voltammetry of the printed MSC with different bending states. (d) Cycling stability of the as-fabricated MSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260 Copyright (2015) Elsevier. 
4.3. Extrusion-printed free-standing supercapacitors
Additive manufacturing (AM) mechanization arrives as an example for manufacturing scalable electrochemical energy storage devices, where free-standing 3D structures are generally required but are difficult to attain by conventional techniques. The integration of these technologies and advanced material compositions are of increasing interest because integration augments the accessible surface area along with the transportation of ions within the electrodes, at the same time reducing device volume. Yang et al. introduced an organic ink formulation with the maximum loading of MXene material (2D Ti3C2Tx) based on ideal viscoelastic characteristic for developing different structures. They developed several sizes and shapes of freestanding extrusion-based 3D printed architectures with high specific surface area (Fig. 22(a–d)). Other studies reported that compared with conventional colloidal techniques, wet-processed materials (large-aspect-ratio and high surface charge) such as MXene, clay, and graphene oxide (GO) are more efficient for tuning the rheological characteristics.282–284 In particular, the positive edges285 and highly negatively charged surfaces of bi-dimensional MXenes provide favourable electrostatic characteristics along with the ability to intercalate water which is similar behaviour to some clays.170 Yang et al. reported extrusion-based 3D printable ink which is composed of few-layer thick MXene flakes (large lateral size) in a water medium.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustrations of the developing strategy for extrusion-based 3D printing of freestanding MXene structures and micro supercapacitor (MSC) demonstration. (a) Synthesis process of 2D Ti3C2Tx, (b) Advancement of Ti3C2Tx inks at neutral pH and study of their compatibility for extrusion-based 3D printing via specific rheological property, (c) 3D printing of as-synthesized inks with compatible viscoelastic properties to produce different 3D architecture. The following freeze-drying procedure allows fabrication of freestanding 3D designs that maintain their dimensions and shape. (d) Probing the compatibility of the printable inks to develop high-performance symmetrical current-collector-free (CC-Free) Ti3C2Tx solid-state MSCs. (e–g) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) of dimensional analysis for Ti3C2Tx flakes, (h) cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 5 mV s−1 showing the ideal capacitive behaviour. The MSC Mxene interdigitated electrode configuration is shown in the inset (5 mm smallest lateral size) (i) Cycling stability test showing over 90% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at 1 A g−1, and (j) Ragone plots of the 3D-printed Ti3C2Tx supercapacitors together with other reported values for comparison. Reproduced with permission from ref. 271 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, without using any sacrificial additives they successfully tuned the rheological characteristics of the ink.287–290 They synthesized Ti3C2Tx flakes with a thickness of 1–3 nm and ∼8 μm lateral size (length/thickness ≈4000) to satisfy the suitability of 2D structured MXenes for extrusion-based 3D printing (Fig. 22(e–g)). Following this, the material was applied as a current collector and electrode material which they used to directly print interdigitated symmetric micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) along with a solid electrolyte using Ti3C2Tx which removes the requirement for noble metals291 as a current collector in extrusion-based 3D printed architectures.285,289,292Fig. 22h depicts the gravimetric capacitance (242 F g−1), areal capacitance (2.1 F cm−2) for the fabricated electrodes with 8.5 mg cm−2 loading of active material at 0.2 A g−1. These devices also demonstrated high power with large energy densities and capacitance retention of more than 90% after 10000 cycles. Compared with graphene or carbon nanotube (CNT) hybrids, these extrusion-based 3D-printed Ti3C2Tx micro-supercapacitors showed enhanced energy density along with power density.293 Not only that, it showed similar characteristics compared with Ruthenium(IV) oxide (RuO2)/Ti3C2Tx hybrid material-based capacitor294 (Fig. 22j). It is worth noting that the energy density of these MSCs is limited to some degree by the very narrow voltage window. Accordingly, to overcome this limitation, the use of an organic electrolyte or ionic liquid as well as designing asymmetric supercapacitors with different materials (e.g. graphene) will be further developed as impressive strategies to boost the energy density.
4.4. Extrusion-printed sensing devices
2D nanomaterials have been enormously favoured in sensing applications due to their high aspect ratio, abundance of functional groups on their surface and high sensitivity295–297. Additive manufacturing technology offers feasible approaches for transmitting the exceptional intrinsic qualities of 2D nanomaterials into 3D macroscopic architectures to fabricate different kinds of sensors for temperature, chemicals, gases and vapours, and strain sensors. In this segment, the current advances of extrusion-printing in sensing applications are reviewed.298,299

4.4.1. Temperature sensors. 
Wearable temperature sensors are of great interest in the medical field that enable better personal health monitoring regardless of movement or device flexing.281 The ideal temperature sensors should possess high sensitivity, quick response to temperature alteration, and stability in physiological conditions. The exploitation of 2D nanomaterials in temperature sensing applications has been widely investigated. For example, Wang et al. developed a printable ink composed of a graphene nanoplatelet and PDMS composite in which PDMS functions as a stretchable matrix with high printability while graphene provides the temperature sensitivity. Fig. 23a presents the fabrication method of graphene/PDMS temperature sensors via direct ink writing. The ink was patterning into three different structures including grid, triangular, and hexagonal designs and compared with solid composite in terms of temperature sensitivity (Fig. 23b). It was found that the electrical resistance of the device followed a linear pattern over the temperature ramp for both printed and solid composites, showing high temperature sensitivity of 0.008 °C (Fig. 23c). In addition, the temperature sensitivity of solid composite decreased upon application of external strain or bending, while the sensitivity of the printed grid structure remained almost stable (Fig. 23d and e).
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the graphene/PDMS composite, (b) different patterns including grid, triangular, and hexagonal designs printed by the ink, (c) change in the electrical resistance of printed patterns and solid composite over temperature ramp, (c and d) temperature sensitivity of printed and solid composite under application of external strain and bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 


4.4.2. Chemical sensors. 
Kim et al.286 reported the fabrication of freestanding reduced graphene oxide nanowires without supporting material via meniscus-guided growth in which a meniscus of GO ink formed once the micropipette was placed close to the surface. Pulling the micropipette resulted in the stretching of the meniscus and evaporation of water from GO colloidal solution (Fig. 24a). The GO wire radius could be tuned by adjusting the pulling rate of the micropipette (Fig. 24a). The GO wires were converted into rGO by thermal or chemical treatment. Different structures were constructed using rGO wires, showing the ability of rGO wires formation at any direction and site (Fig. 24b). The as-prepared rGO nanowires can serve as 3D transducers in gas sensing applications in which the electrical conductivity of rGO depends on the CO2 concentration. Since the electrical conductivity of rGO depends on the positive charge carriers and CO2 is electron donor, the electron transfer from CO2 to rGO decreases the hole numbers and electrical conductivity (Fig. 24c).
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of rGO wires formation via meniscus-guided growth and the dependence of wire radius to the pipette pulling rate, (b) fabrication of different 3D structures by rGO wires, (c) change in the electrical resistance of printed rGO wires once exposed to different concentration of CO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286 Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH. 


4.4.3. Strain sensors. 
Flexible wearable strain sensors have drawn significant attention due to their broad application. An et al.300 fabricated a stretchable, wearable sensor with graphene aerogel that showed high conductivity and sensitivity to deformation. Fig. 25a outlines the fabrication process of the graphene aerogel sensors in which GO solution with different concentrations was prepared and printed by extrusion printing. Next, the printed GO structures were freeze dried, chemically reduced and sandwiched between PDMS layers. The microstructure of graphene aerogel can be tuned by adjusting the initial concentration of GO (Fig. 25b). After attachment of five devices to a glove, the printed graphene aerogel can monitor complicated hand gestures. Deconvolution of the combined changes in electrical resistance of the aerogel devices was demonstrated by principal component analysis (Fig. 25c).
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of the rGO aerogel formation, (b) tuning the porosity of printed aerogel by adjusting the GO concentrations, (c) placing the printed aerogel to the joints and analysis of the measured electrical conductivity over seven different gestures by employing principal component analysis (PCA), and hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) statistical operations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300 Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another study, fumed silica was combined with GO solution to improve the shear thinning and yield stress behaviour of the ink which was reflected in better printability of the GO solution (Fig. 26a).38 Fumed silica is a viscosity enhancing nanofiller that can be removed from the structure by etching with hydrofluoric acid solution. The ink was printed to produce macroscopic 3D architectures within an organic liquid bath (isooctane) which prevented evaporation of the water solution during printing and gelation. Supercritical CO2 was used to dry the printed GO ink followed by reduction at high temperature and etching of the fumed silica with hydrofluoric acid solution. The electrical resistance of the printed 3D rGO aerogel upon application of strain over multiple cycles, showed a high sensitivity of printed aerogel to deformation (Fig. 26b). Elsewhere, GO solutions with low concentration were printed in a cold bath (−25 °C) to immediately solidify the printed layers (Fig. 26c).301 Afterwards, the printed structures were freeze-dried and reduced at high temperature to achieve 3D rGO aerogels. The electrical resistance of the 3D printed aerogel showed a high sensitivity to compression strain over multiple cycles (Fig. 26d). In addition, the electrical resistance of the printed rGO aerogel demonstrated high recoverability over loading and unloading strains (Fig. 26e).
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic representation of the graphene/fumed silica ink, reproduced with permission from ref. 38 Copyright (2016) Springer Nature. (b) Change in the electrical resistance during application of multiple strains, (c) printing of GO ink with low concentration on cold bath for solidification of printed layers, (d) electrical sensitivity of the printed graphene aerogel over compression, (e) hysteresis of electrical resistance over loading and unloading strains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301 Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH. 
It is clear that extrusion-based 3D printed flexible electronic devices play a significant role in changing the approach of human interaction with electrical devices as well as improving the outlook of human life by enhancing electronic devices with particular customization. However, the complete application of extrusion-based 3D printing technology is yet to be realized with further research and development required to match the capabilities of 2D extrusion inks with suitable 3D printing technologies. We conclude that novel flexible functional 2D conductive material design and fabrication are suitable for several extrusion-based 3D printing technologies which can promote the rapid improvement of extrusion-based 3D printed flexible devices in several fields including biomedical, opto-electronics and soft-robotics.

5. Conclusions and perspectives
5.1. Conclusions
As a growing technology, printed portable electronics are achieving an ever-increasing consideration by society, not only in the arena of research but also in industry. The application of printable 2D material inks for fabricating portable electronics, including batteries, super-capacitors, sensors, opto-electronics, has enormous potential for rapid manufacturing and large-scale production. These multipurpose printable platforms will grant an abundance of opportunities for the fabrication of next-generation smart devices. Moreover, additive manufacturing, usually known as extrusion-based 3D printing, has become more widespread due to the introduction of inexpensive and straightforward printing machines. This extrusion-based 3D-printing technology is increasingly being adopted by many entities worldwide, including research laboratories, industry, and research institutions. Not only that, it has even reached to individuals for personal use. With the help of this printing method, people will soon be able to design and fabricate wide-ranging devices with exciting capabilities in the comfort of their own home.
In this review, we have summarized the current progress development and advancements of functional 2D material inks and several printing techniques with a highlight on extrusion-based 3D printing with their real-world applications. Since the first demonstration of graphene-based printed electronics, this printing arena has experienced four considerable advances: first, the functional material demand has expanded from graphene alone to a broader choice of available 2D materials. Second, 2D material inks have progressed from simple solution-processed dispersions toward formulated functional inks adapted for meeting the specific criteria for several print processes. Third, the available printing methods have expanded from inkjet printing techniques to a wider printing stage including screen-printing, flexographic printing, gravure printing, as well as extrusion-based 3D printing that offers quicker production rates along with complex device architectures. Fourth, the examined applications for extrusion-based 3D printing have expanded to numerous major technological areas, including opto-electronics, energy storage devices (battery & super-capacitors), sensors and photonics. Taken together these represent significant developments for the scope of functional 2D material inks, and associated extrusion-based 3D printing, as a promising podium for the future generation of disruptive technologies.
Despite these developments, there are numerous prospects for improving the quality and performance of the fabricated device applications discussed above. There is considerable need to scale-up extrusion-based 3D printing technology from laboratory scale to device manufacturing scale preparing for real applications. With this scenario in mind, noteworthy improvement steps were taken to develop the ideal ink for particular applications through the underlying materials processing and ink formulations. Although remarkable advancement has been observed in the previous decade, still there is opportunity to study 2D material processing to develop the exfoliation productivity, to increase the manufacturing yield and decrease the manufacturing cost, and to better sort the exfoliated flakes. Certainly, it is significant to achieve a high manufacturing yield of mono-layers as well as mono-dispersed 2D material flakes with precisely controlled flake size and thickness. On this basis, optimising the process of functional ink formulations for achieving ideal fluidic properties, ink-substrate interactions, drying dynamics along with fundamental studies into additive, solvent and binder compatibility are of demanding concern. As for the formulation of functional printable inks, there is still a gap between active materials and printable inks.
5.2. Future research directions
To date, several 2D materials have been used to commercially formulate functional inks for existing printing methods. However, it is difficult to recommend a common formulation process for 2D-materials-based printable inks that can satisfy various requirements (e.g. rheology, thermal, and electrical stability) of a particular printing method. This complexity of functional ink formulation stems from various factors. From a materials viewpoint, the intrinsic dispersibility of 2D materials is influenced by material species, functional groups, size distribution, and surface charge which make the formulation process different for every single material. For example, the surface negative charge and hydrophilicity of MXene flakes permits the facile synthesis of additive free along with concentrated aqueous MXenes dispersions. By contrast, realizing additive free inks with graphene flakes without functionalization is exceptionally difficult. On the other hand, every printing method has its specific rheological requirements for functional inks, such as viscosity, volatility, wettability and viscoelasticity. That is why a multipurpose functional ink formulation process is thus considered impossible. Still, we can put efforts to realize these parameters and put forward some guidelines for tailoring them. To establish the required rheological characteristics, developed inks typically contain more or less additives requiring a post-treatment step for their removal.
The proposed post-treatments procedure such as annealing at elevated temperatures is incompatible with most flexible substrates, which hinders their flexible electronics applications. Lastly, a few matters of current methods are remaining to be solved such as scalability of present printing methods from lab-scale to industry-scale for extended production along with printing resolution of various miniaturized devices. In spite of continuing progress, development of advanced printing methods that can acquire high resolution and promising scalability for 2D material inks is of tremendous interest for fabricating printable electronics.
Nowadays, there are various types of 3D printing technologies available in the market. More importantly, different materials can be used in these technologies for continuing the fabrication process which have already benefited many fields of application such as medicine, mechanical, electrical, and material engineering, chemistry, the arts and design, and core sciences of physics by rapid prototyping using extrusion-based 3D-printing. Electrochemistry will surely benefit from the development of such novel devices via rapid prototyping with enhanced performance and at reduced cost. Because of the simplicity of testing new ideas and prototypes fabrication, a new era in sensing, energy-storage, and energy-related applications, as well as electrochemistry-assisted syntheses are now being progressively studied via extrusion-based 3D printing.
In the longer term, this amalgam of technologies, and materials functionality will lead to the production of flexible, high-level integrated and miniaturised functional 2D material-based printable electronics, sensing and interactive devices. This will need accurately controlled, additive patterning of multiple 2D materials and other functional materials over large areas and for thousands of devices with tight manufacturing tolerance, and could potentially lead to the improvement of all printed, complex device structures for novel applications in light detection and imaging, energy storage, interactive touch surfaces, wearable sensors, RFID tags and even artificial skins. It is thus concluded that there are still enormous opportunities in 2D materials-based functional inks formulation for extrusion-based 3D printing methods and more efforts are required to acheive their real-world applications.
Abbreviations

BMP1-Butyl-1-methyl-pyrrolidinium
[HOEMIM]-[TfO]1-Hydroxyethyl-3-methylimidazolium trifluoromethansulfonate
[Emim][Tf2N]1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[Bmim][Tf2N]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[Emim][BF4]1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[Bmim][BF4]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[C4mim][Tf2N]1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
AMAdditive manufacturing
AFMAtomic force microscopy
BPBlack phosphorus
Co(OH)2Cobalt(II) hydroxide
CECounter electrode
COCarbon dioxide
CABCellulose acetate butyrate
CMCCarboxymethylcellulose
CADComputer-aided design
CIJContinuous inkjet
CNTCarbon nanotube
CC-FreeCurrent-collector-free
CVCyclic voltammetry
CECounter electrode
DIWDirect ink writing
DMFDimethylformamide
DMSODimethylsulfoxide
DODDrop-on-demand inkjet
EMIElectromagnetic
[EMIm]ClEthyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride-aluminum chloride
ECEthyl cellulose
EESDsElectrochemical energy storage devices
FETsField-effect transistors
FDMFused deposition modelling
FDMFused-deposition-modelling
AuGold
hBNHexagonal boron nitride
HFHydrofluoric acid
HSPHansen solubility parameters
HCAHierarchical cluster analysis
HClHydrochloric acid
HPMCHydroxypropylmethyl cellulose
ILsIonic liquids
IPAIsopropanol
IDEsInterdigitated electrodes
LiFLithium fluoride
LTOLithium-titanate
LPELiquid phase exfoliation
LFPLithium iron phosphate
MnO2Manganese dioxide
MoS2Molybdenum disulfide
MoSe2Molybdenum diselenide
MSCMicro-supercapacitors
Ni(OH)2Nickel(II) hydroxide
NMP
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
HNO3Nitric acid
NCNitrocellulose
NMP
N-Methylpyrolidinone
1-Butanol
n-BuOH –
PtPlatinum
PGPristine graphene
KMnO2Potassium; oxido(oxo)manganese
K2FeO4Potassium ferrate
PANIPolyaniline
PVP-PVAcPolyvinylpyrrolidone-polyvinylacetate co-polymer
PVPPolyvinylpyrrolidinone
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PSSPolystyrene sulfonate
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PVDF-co-HFPPoly(vinylidene fluoride) cohexafluoropropylene
PCAPrincipal component analysis
REReference electrode
AgSilver
SiO2Silicon dioxide
H2SO4Sulfuric acid
NaNO3Sodium nitrate
NaFSodium fluoride
SO2Sulfur dioxide
SCFsSupercritical fluids
Na-1-PSASodium 1-pyrenesulfonate
SPEScreen-printed electrodes
SDSSodium dodecyl sulfate
TMDsTransition metal dichalcogenides
WS2Tungsten disulfide
TMATetra-methyl-ammonium
TPATetra-propyl-ammonium
TBATetra-n-butylammonium
THATetra-n-heptyl-ammonium
[]Thermoresponsive polyionic liquid
vdWvan der Waals
WEWorking electrode

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC, IH150100003).
References
A. C. Ferrari, F. Bonaccorso, V. Fal'Ko, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roche, P. Bøggild, S. Borini, F. H. Koppens, V. Palermo and N. Pugno, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4598–4810 RSC .
G. Hu, J. Kang, L. W. Ng, X. Zhu, R. C. Howe, C. G. Jones, M. C. Hersam and T. Hasan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265–3300 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutirrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Ter renes, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, Progress, challenges, and opportuni ties in two-dimensional materials beyond graphene, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. F. Dobson and C. L. Raston, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3703–3705 RSC .
M. Yi and Z. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11700–11715 RSC .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS .
T. Habib, X. Zhao, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, W. Sun, H. An, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 1–6 CrossRef .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, A. S. Nia and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907857 CrossRef CAS .
C. Low, F. Walsh, M. Chakrabarti, M. Hashim and M. Hussain, Carbon, 2013, 54, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsumoto, Y. Saito, C. Park, T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 730 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, M. Lotya, D. Rickard, S. D. Bergin and J. N. Coleman, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3208–3213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, J. D. Wood and M. C. Hersam, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 943–951 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Bartolotta, J. N. Coleman and C. Backes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6136–6166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1712–1740 RSC .
W. Wu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7342–7372 RSC .
Technavio, Ind. Biotechnol., 2016, 12, 216–218 CrossRef .
S. Khan, L. Lorenzelli and R. S. Dahiya, IEEE Sens. J., 2014, 15, 3164–3185 Search PubMed .
A. Moridi, S. M. Hassani-Gangaraj, M. Guagliano and M. Dao, Surf. Eng., 2014, 30, 369–395 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cummins and M. P. Desmulliez, Circuit World, 2012, 38(4), 193–213 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tian, J. Jin, S. Yuan, C. K. Chua, S. B. Tor and K. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700127 CrossRef .

          L. Ng, G. Hu, R. Howe, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. G. Jones and T. Hasan, Printing of Graphene and Related 2D Materials, Springer,  2018 Search PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Huang, J. Liang, X. Wan and Y. Chen, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 675–684 CrossRef CAS .
F. Torrisi, T. Hasan, W. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Lombardo, T. S. Kulmala, G.-W. Hsieh, S. Jung, F. Bonaccorso and P. J. Paul, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2992–3006 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya, G. Cunningham, R. J. Smith, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan and J. N. Coleman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 925–932 RSC .
A. G. Kelly, T. Hallam, C. Backes, A. Harvey, A. S. Esmaeily, I. Godwin, J. Coelho, V. Nicolosi, J. Lauth and A. Kulkarni, Science, 2017, 356, 69–73 CrossRef CAS .
D. McManus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S.-K. Son and G. Iannaccone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 343 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, X. Jin, A. Ali, Y. Hu, R. C. Howe, K. Shehzad, Z. Yang, X. Zhu and R. I. Woodward, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bianchi, T. Carey, L. Viti, L. Li, E. H. Linfield, A. G. Davies, A. Tredicucci, D. Yoon, P. G. Karagiannidis and L. Lombardi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef .
E. B. Secor, P. L. Prabhumirashi, K. Puntambekar, M. L. Geier and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1347–1351 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. G. Schwab, A. J. Strudwick, I. Hennig, X. Feng, Z. Wu and K. Müllen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1035–1040 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Karagiannidis, S. A. Hodge, L. Lombardi, F. Tomarchio, N. Decorde, S. Milana, I. Goykhman, Y. Su, S. V. Mesite and D. N. Johnstone, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2742–2755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baker, D. Deganello, D. Gethin and T. Watson, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2014, 18, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, S. Lim, H. Zhang, C. D. Frisbie, L. F. Francis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4533–4538 CrossRef CAS .
T. Carey, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, J. Ren, A. Mansouri, J. M. Kim, C. Wang, C. Ducati, R. Sordan and F. Torrisi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Crump, Apparatus and Method for Creating Three-Dimensional Objects Patent US,  1992, p. 5121329 Search PubMed .
U. G. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23–36 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, T. Y.-J. Han, E. B. Duoss, A. M. Golobic, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini and M. A. Worsley, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. S. Tran, N. K. Dutta and N. R. Choudhury, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 261, 41–61 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Chen, T. Shu and X. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 13, 1330–1353 CrossRef .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne and Y. K. Gun'Ko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Bolotin, K. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Nine, M. A. Cole, D. N. H. Tran and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12580–12602 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, V. Fal, L. Colombo, P. Gellert, M. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 381–398 RSC .
T. T. Tung, M. J. Nine, M. Krebsz, T. Pasinszki, C. J. Coghlan, D. N. Tran and D. Losic, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702891 CrossRef .
T. T. Tung, M. T. Tran, J.-F. Feller, M. Castro, T. Van Ngo, K. Hassan, M. J. Nine and D. Losic, Carbon, 2020, 159, 333–344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, H. Wang, P. Urbankowski and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8744–8765 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef .
X. Tong, E. Ashalley, F. Lin, H. Li and Z. M. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2015, 7, 203–218 CrossRef .
P. Chen, N. Li, X. Chen, W.-J. Ong and X. Zhao, 2D Mater., 2017, 5, 014002 CrossRef .
F. Xia, H. Wang, J. C. Hwang, A. C. Neto and L. Yang, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2019, 1, 306–317 CrossRef CAS .
W. Auwärter, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2019, 74, 1–95 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, Y. Feng, F. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De and R. J. Smith, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jariwala, S. L. Howell, K.-S. Chen, J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, S. A. Filippone, R. Turrisi, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176–7177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wong, D. Jariwala, G. Tagliabue, K. Tat, A. R. Davoyan, M. C. Sherrott and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7230–7240 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, C. Liu, F. Jiang, Z. Xu, X. Wang, X. Li, C. Li, J. Xu and X. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 17560–17567 RSC .
Y. Yang, H. Hou, G. Zou, W. Shi, H. Shuai, J. Li and X. Ji, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16–33 RSC .
J. Shen, Y. He, J. Wu, C. Gao, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, M. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5449–5454 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ravula, S. N. Baker, G. Kamath and G. A. Baker, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4338–4353 RSC .
Z. Lin, P. S. Karthik, M. Hada, T. Nishikawa and Y. Hayashi, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 125 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, J. Tan, Y. Pan, X. Cai, X. Zou, H.-M. Cheng and B. Liu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 7, 324–332 CrossRef .
Y. Yao, Z. Lin, Z. Li, X. Song, K.-S. Moon and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13494–13499 RSC .
J. Chen, M. Duan and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19625–19628 RSC .
T. T. Tung, J. Yoo, F. K. Alotaibi, M. J. Nine, R. Karunagaran, M. Krebsz, G. T. Nguyen, D. N. H. Tran, J.-F. Feller and D. Losic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16521–16532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Shen, M. Yi, X. Zhang and S. Ma, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 36464–36470 RSC .
M. V. Bracamonte, G. I. Lacconi, S. E. Urreta and L. E. F. Foa Torres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15455–15459 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Caldwell, I. Aharonovich, G. Cassabois, J. H. Edgar, B. Gil and D. Basov, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 552–567 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Nine, A. C. Hee, T. T. Tung, K. Hassan and D. Losic, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100764 CrossRef .
M. Yi, Z. Shen and J. Zhu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 1794–1799 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Utomo, M. Baker and A. W. Pacek, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2008, 86, 1397–1409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batmunkh, A. Shrestha, M. Bat-Erdene, M. J. Nine, C. J. Shearer, C. T. Gibson, A. D. Slattery, S. A. Tawfik, M. J. Ford, S. Dai, S. Qiao and J. G. Shapter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bat-Erdene, G. Xu, M. Batmunkh, A. S. R. Bati, J. J. White, M. J. Nine, D. Losic, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Ma and J. G. Shapter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4735–4739 RSC .
G. Shao, Y. Lu, F. Wu, C. Yang, F. Zeng and Q. Wu, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 4400–4409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
A. Feng, Y. Yu, Y. Wang, F. Jiang, Y. Yu, L. Mi and L. Song, Mater. Des., 2017, 114, 161–166 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, A. Gomathi, A. K. Manna, D. J. Late, R. Datta, S. K. Pati and C. N. R. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4059–4062 CrossRef .
W. Sun, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, Z. Tan, H. Gao, T. Habib, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21663–21668 RSC .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Brodie, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1859, 149, 249–259 CrossRef .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339–1339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, B. Zhang, C. Bulin, R. Li and R. Xing, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36143 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Wu, T. Liu, Y. Liu, B. Guo and R. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 181–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Abdelkader, A. J. Cooper, R. A. W. Dryfe and I. A. Kinloch, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6944–6956 RSC .
T. Habib, X. Zhao, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, W. Sun, H. An, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 8 CrossRef .
C. T. J. Low, F. C. Walsh, M. H. Chakrabarti, M. A. Hashim and M. A. Hussain, Carbon, 2013, 54, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhong, Z. Tian, G. P. Simon and D. Li, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, D.-M. Tang, Y.-B. He, C.-H. You, Z.-Q. Shi, X.-C. Chen, C.-M. Chen, P.-X. Hou, C. Liu and Q.-H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3730–3736 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cui, A. J. Oyer, A. J. Glover, H. C. Schniepp and D. H. Adamson, Small, 2014, 10, 2352–2355 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, W. Lv, X. Xie, D. Tang, C. Liu and Q.-H. Yang, Carbon, 2013, 62, 11–24 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McAllister, J.-L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car and R. K. Prud'homme, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz and M. Thommes, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Hao, M. Zhao, Y. Wu, J. Yang, Y. Tian and G. Qian, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2200–2204 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. McAllister, J.-L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2118–2122 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsumoto, Y. Saito, C. Park, T. Fukushima and T. Aida, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 730–736 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Talyzin, T. Szabó, I. Dékány, F. Langenhorst, P. S. Sokolov and V. L. Solozhenko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11279–11284 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Cullen, K. M. Cox, M. K. Bin Subhan, L. Picco, O. D. Payton, D. J. Buckley, T. S. Miller, S. A. Hodge, N. T. Skipper, V. Tileli and C. A. Howard, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 244–249 CrossRef CAS .

          C. M. Hansen, Hansen solubility parameters: a user's handbook, CRC press,  2007 Search PubMed .
S. D. Bergin, Z. Sun, D. Rickard, P. V. Streich, J. P. Hamilton and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2340–2350 CrossRef CAS .
K.-G. Zhou, N.-N. Mao, H.-X. Wang, Y. Peng and H.-L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10839–10842 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Q. Fan, M. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Tao and J. Texter, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901084 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
Y. Jung, Y. Zhou and J. J. Cha, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 452–463 RSC .
P. S. Shah, T. Hanrath, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9574–9587 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kajimoto, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 355–390 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jang, D. Rangappa, Y.-U. Kwon and I. Honma, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3462–3466 RSC .
U. Halim, C. R. Zheng, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, S. Jiang, R. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2213 CrossRef .
J.-H. Ding, H.-R. Zhao and H.-B. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5567 CrossRef .
M. H. Chakrabarti, N. S. A. Manan, N. P. Brandon, R. C. Maher, F. S. Mjalli, I. M. AlNashef, S. A. Hajimolana, M. A. Hashim, M. A. Hussain and D. Nir, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 274, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
A. Amiri, M. Shanbedi, G. Ahmadi, H. Eshghi, S. N. Kazi, B. T. Chew, M. Savari and M. N. M. Zubir, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32686 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Keeley, A. O'Neill, N. McEvoy, N. Peltekis, J. N. Coleman and G. S. Duesberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7864–7869 RSC .
J. N. Coleman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3680–3695 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, P. F. Fulvio, G. A. Baker, G. M. Veith, R. R. Unocic, S. M. Mahurin, M. Chi and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4487–4489 RSC .
H. Lei, J. Tu, Z. Yu and S. Jiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36702–36707 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2504–2514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, W. Shi, W. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Lei and R. Miao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 2839–2845 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Gao and Y. Zhao, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2014, 85, 95–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Sasikala, K. Huang, B. Giroire, P. Prabhakaran, L. Henry, A. Penicaud, P. Poulin and C. Aymonier, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30964–30971 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qian, X. Cui, R. Hao, Y. Hou and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2259–2264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rangappa, K. Sone, M. Wang, U. K. Gautam, D. Golberg, H. Itoh, M. Ichihara and I. Honma, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 6488–6494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suresh Balaji, M. Karnan and M. Sathish, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 4044–4057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Xu, B. Zhou, Y. Zhu and X. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 279–286 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Liu, B.-Y. Xia, X.-X. Wang and J.-N. Wang, Front. Mater. Sci., 2012, 6, 176–182 CrossRef .
J. S. Y. Chia, M. T. T. Tan, P. S. Khiew, J. K. Chin, H. Lee, D. C. S. Bien and C. W. Siong, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 249, 270–278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yi, Z. Shen, X. Zhang and S. Ma, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 46, 025301 CrossRef .
H. Ma, Z. Shen, M. Yi, S. Ben, S. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang and S. Ma, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 503, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jawaid, D. Nepal, K. Park, M. Jespersen, A. Qualley, P. Mirau, L. F. Drummy and R. A. Vaia, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 337–348 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS .
P. Thangasamy and M. Sathish, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 1165–1169 RSC .
V. Gunasekaran, M. K. Devaraju, S. Yuvaraj, V. J. Y. Surya, V. Singh, K. Karthikeyan and S. J. Kim, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 66, 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Truong, M. Kempaiah Devaraju, Y. Nakayasu, N. Tamura, Y. Sasaki, T. Tomai and I. Honma, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2360–2367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, Q. Xu, Y. Wang, B. Yan, Y. Ren and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, N. Wang, Q. Xu, H. Li, P. Zhou, X. Lu and G. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6726–6729 RSC .
P. Zhou, Q. Xu, H. Li, Y. Wang, B. Yan, Y. Zhou, J. Chen, J. Zhang and K. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15226–15230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shang, F. Xue, C. Fan and E. Ding, Mater. Lett., 2016, 181, 144–147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhi, Y. Bando, C. Tang, H. Kuwahara and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Mukhopadhyay and A. Datta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 811–822 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, R. A. Boulos, J. F. Dobson and C. L. Raston, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 498–502 RSC .
T. Morishita, H. Okamoto, Y. Katagiri, M. Matsushita and K. Fukumori, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12068–12071 RSC .
P. Thangasamy and M. Sathish, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 5895–5899 RSC .
Q. An, Q. Wei, L. Mai, J. Fei, X. Xu, Y. Zhao, M. Yan, P. Zhang and S. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16828–16833 RSC .
L. Cao, S. Emami and K. Lafdi, Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Marsh, M. Souliman and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 187–190 RSC .
S. Lin, Y. Li, W. Lu, Y. S. Chui, L. Rogée, Q. Bao and S. P. Lau, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025001 CrossRef .
A. E. Del Rio Castillo, V. Pellegrini, H. Sun, J. Buha, D. A. Dinh, E. Lago, A. Ansaldo, A. Capasso, L. Manna and F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 506–516 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, X. He, L. She, J. Sun, R. Jiang, H. Xu, F. Shi, Z. Lei and Z.-H. Liu, J. Materiomics, 2018, 4, 129–134 CrossRef .
H. Mu, S. Lin, Z. Wang, S. Xiao, P. Li, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, H. Bao, S. P. Lau, C. Pan, D. Fan and Q. Bao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1447–1453 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10443–10445 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sresht, A. A. H. Pádua and D. Blankschtein, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8255–8268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. Zhang, K. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. J. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. D. O'Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Z. Xue, J. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Zhao and T. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27608–27612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, A. K. Roy, S. Jo, Y. Choi, A. Chae, B. Kim, S. Y. Park and I. In, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 125603 CrossRef .
S. Yan, B. Wang, Z. Wang, D. Hu, X. Xu, J. Wang and Y. Shi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 80, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, H. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Wang, S. Tang, J. Shao, Z. Sun, H. Xie, H. Wang, X.-F. Yu and P. K. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6996–7002 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, J. R. Brent, M. Shorie, H. Kaur, G. Chadha, A. G. Thomas, E. A. Lewis, A. P. Rooney, L. Nguyen, X. L. Zhong, M. G. Burke, S. J. Haigh, A. Walton, P. D. McNaughter, A. A. Tedstone, N. Savjani, C. A. Muryn, P. O'Brien, A. K. Ganguli, D. J. Lewis and P. Sabherwal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 22860–22868 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, X. Cai, H. Cui, S.-W. Lee, X.-F. Yu and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17859–17864 RSC .
M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Huang, G. Li, X. Zhang and Z. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 384, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Suganuma, Introduction to printed electronics, Springer Science & Business Media,  2014 Search PubMed .
K. Parvez, R. Worsley, A. Alieva, A. Felten and C. Casiraghi, Carbon, 2019, 149, 213–221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, F. Ye, S. Vaziri, M. Muhammed, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3985–3992 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, E. B. Secor, M. C. Hersam, C. D. Frisbie and L. F. Francis, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pan, Y. Fan, T. Leng, J. Li, Z. Xin, J. Zhang, L. Hao, J. Gallop, K. S. Novoselov and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5197 CrossRef .
E. Jabari and E. Toyserkani, Mater. Lett., 2016, 174, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parate, S. V. Rangnekar, D. Jing, D. L. Mendivelso-Perez, S. Ding, E. B. Secor, E. A. Smith, J. M. Hostetter, M. C. Hersam and J. C. Claussen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8592–8603 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Loh, A. R. Graves, C. D. Stinespring and K. A. Sierros, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 4104–4112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, S. Barg and B. Derby, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11440–11447 RSC .
C. Zhang, L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S.-H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral–Ascaso, S. Barwich, C. Ó. Coileáin, N. McEvoy, H. C. Nerl, B. Anasori, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1795 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, W. Li, T. Hai, R. Yue, Z. Chen, C. Lao, Y. Ge, G. Xie, Q. Wen and H. Zhang, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 34 CrossRef .
G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, X. Jin, A. Ali, Y. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, K. Shehzad, Z. Yang, X. Zhu, R. I. Woodward, T.-C. Wu, H. Jussila, J.-B. Wu, P. Peng, P.-H. Tan, Z. Sun, E. J. R. Kelleher, M. Zhang, Y. Xu and T. Hasan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 278 CrossRef .
J. Li, M. M. Naiini, S. Vaziri, M. C. Lemme and M. Östling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6524–6531 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Finn, M. Lotya, G. Cunningham, R. J. Smith, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan and J. N. Coleman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 925–932 RSC .
L. Cao, S. Yang, W. Gao, Z. Liu, Y. Gong, L. Ma, G. Shi, S. Lei, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2013, 9, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Rowley-Neale, G. C. Smith and C. E. Banks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22539–22548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, J. A. Cardenas, R. Worsley, N. X. Williams, J. B. Andrews, C. Casiraghi and A. D. Franklin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11263–11272 CrossRef CAS .
F. Withers, H. Yang, L. Britnell, A. P. Rooney, E. Lewis, A. Felten, C. R. Woods, V. Sanchez Romaguera, T. Georgiou, A. Eckmann, Y. J. Kim, S. G. Yeates, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and C. Casiraghi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Joseph, B. Nagendra, E. Bhoje Gowd and K. P. Surendran, ACS Omega, 2016, 1, 1220–1228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, I. Hennig, D. Freyberg, A. James Strudwick, M. Georg Schwab, T. Weitz and K. Chih-Pei Cha, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
K. Arapov, E. Rubingh, R. Abbel, J. Laven, G. de With and H. Friedrich, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 586–593 CrossRef CAS .
T. Juntunen, H. Jussila, M. Ruoho, S. Liu, G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, L. W. T. Ng, R. C. T. Howe, T. Hasan, Z. Sun and I. Tittonen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800480 CrossRef .
S. Santra, G. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, A. De Luca, S. Z. Ali, F. Udrea, J. W. Gardner, S. K. Ray, P. K. Guha and T. Hasan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17374 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Yue, J. Xu, W. Xu, X. Sun, Y. Chen, J. Jiang and Y. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 345501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stankovich, R. D. Piner, X. Chen, N. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 155–158 RSC .
D. Sinar and G. K. Knopf, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 123 CrossRef .
H. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Schlierf, A. Felten, A. Eckmann, S. Johal, P. Louette, J. J. Pireaux, X. Feng, K. Mullen, V. Palermo and C. Casiraghi, Carbon, 2013, 53, 357–365 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Bergkamp and N. Herbatschek, Review of European, Comparative & International Environmental Law,  2014, vol. 23, pp. 221–245 Search PubMed .
H. J. Salavagione, J. Sherwood, M. De bruyn, V. L. Budarin, G. J. Ellis, J. H. Clark and P. S. Shuttleworth, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2550–2560 RSC .

          D. Enterprises, Viscosity, Surface Tension, Specific Density and Molecular Weight of Selected Liquids, https://www.accudynetest.com/visc_table.html?rd=self&, Accessed 5 May, 2020.

          R. H. Leach, R. J. Pierce, E. P. Hickman, M. J. Mackenzie and H. G. Smith, The Printing Ink Manual,  1993,  DOI:10.1007/978-1-4020-6187-5 .

          E. W. Flick, Printing ink and overprint varnish formulations, William Andrew,  1999 Search PubMed .

          A. A. Tracton, Coatings technology handbook, CRC press,  2005 Search PubMed .
T. Smith, Pigm. Resin Technol., 1986, 15(3), 11–12 CrossRef .

          H. Kipphan, Handbook of print media: technologies and production methods, Springer Science & Business Media,  2001 Search PubMed .
G. Pangalos, J. Dealy and M. Lyne, J. Rheol., 1985, 29, 471–491 CrossRef CAS .
D. Doraiswamy, Rheol. Bull., 2002, 71, 1–9 Search PubMed .

          H. A. Barnes, J. F. Hutton and K. Walters, An introduction to rheology, Elsevier,  1989 Search PubMed .
R. J. Good, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 5041–5042 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu and R. G. Larson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7090–7094 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baker, D. Deganello, D. T. Gethin and T. M. Watson, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2014, 18, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
K. Arapov, G. Bex, R. Hendriks, E. Rubingh, R. Abbel, G. de With and H. Friedrich, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2016, 18, 1234–1239 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, B. Y. Ahn, T. Z. Gao, J. A. Lewis and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6683–6688 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, T. Z. Gao, M. H. Dos Santos, S. G. Wallace, K. W. Putz and M. C. Hersam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 29418–29423 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rastin, B. Zhang, A. Mazinani, K. Hassan, J. Bi, T. T. Tung and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16069–16080 RSC .
H. Rastin, B. Zhang, J. Bi, K. Hassan, T. T. Tung and D. Losic, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 5862–5876 RSC .
Y. Aleeva and B. Pignataro, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6436–6453 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Deiner and T. L. Reitz, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1600878 CrossRef .
T. Smith, Pigm. Resin Technol., 1986, 15, 11–12 CrossRef .
H. A. D. Nguyen, C. Lee, K. Shin and D. Lee, IEEE Trans. Compon., Packag., Manuf. Technol., 2015, 5, 1516–1524 CAS .
M. Lahti, S. Leppävuori and V. Lantto, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 142, 367–370 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lievens, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1995, 76–77, 744–753 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, A. Lombardo, T. Hasan, Z. Sun, L. Colombo and A. C. Ferrari, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 564–589 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. B. Hon, L. Li and I. M. Hutchings, CIRP Ann., 2008, 57, 601–620 CrossRef .
E. B. Secor, Flexible Printed Electron., 2018, 3, 035002 CrossRef .
P. Calvert, T. L. Lin and H. Martin, High Perform. Polym., 2016, 9, 449–456 CrossRef .
C. A. Mire, A. Agrawal, G. G. Wallace, P. Calvert and M. In Het Panhuis, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2671–2678 RSC .
J. K. Placone and A. J. Engler, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, e1701161 CrossRef .
H. Yoo and C. Kim, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 468, 234–245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Boetker, J. J. Water, J. Aho, L. Arnfast, A. Bohr and J. Rantanen, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 90, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gu, E. Tomaskovic-Crook, R. Lozano, Y. Chen, R. M. Kapsa, Q. Zhou, G. G. Wallace and J. M. Crook, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1429–1438 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Miller, K. R. Stevens, M. T. Yang, B. M. Baker, D. H. Nguyen, D. M. Cohen, E. Toro, A. A. Chen, P. A. Galie, X. Yu, R. Chaturvedi, S. N. Bhatia and C. S. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 768–774 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Kolesky, R. L. Truby, A. S. Gladman, T. A. Busbee, K. A. Homan and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3124–3130 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Surjadi, L. Gao, H. Du, X. Li, X. Xiong, N. X. Fang and Y. Lu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2019, 21, 1800864 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, L. Gao, X. Hu, K. Cao, W. Zhou, W. Wang and Y. Lu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11(46), 1–13 Search PubMed .
M. Kaur, T. G. Yun, S. M. Han, E. L. Thomas and W. S. Kim, Mater. Des., 2017, 134, 272–280 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lewis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, L. Gao, K. Cao, H. Zhang, S. Xu, C. Jiang, J. U. Surjadi, Y. Xu and Y. Lu, Compos. Struct., 2018, 203, 750–763 CrossRef .
J. U. Surjadi, L. Gao, H. Du, X. Li, X. Xiong, N. X. Fang and Y. Lu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2019, 21, 1800864 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, C. Parisi, L. Di Silvio, D. Dini and A. E. Forte, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 16293 CrossRef .
R. L. Truby and J. A. Lewis, Nature, 2016, 540, 371–378 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Ho, J. W. Evans and P. K. Wright, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2010, 20, 104009 CrossRef .
G. Hu, J. Kang, L. W. T. Ng, X. Zhu, R. C. T. Howe, C. G. Jones, M. C. Hersam and T. Hasan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265–3300 RSC .
C. Schubert, M. C. van Langeveld and L. A. Donoso, Br. J. Ophthalmol., 2014, 98, 159–161 CrossRef .

          R. Noorani, 3D Printing : Technology, Applications, and Selection, CRC Press LLC, 1st edn,  2017 Search PubMed .

          L. W. T. Ng, G. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. G. Jones and T. Hasan, in Printing of Graphene and Related 2D Materials: Technology, Formulation and Applications, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2019, pp. 103–134,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-91572-2_4 .
D. Zhang, B. Chi, B. Li, Z. Gao, Y. Du, J. Guo and J. Wei, Synth. Met., 2016, 217, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fu, Y. Wang, C. Yan, Y. Yao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, S. Lacey, Y. Wang, J. Wan, T. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Pierce, E. P. Hickman, M. J. Mackenzie and H. G. Smith, The Printing Ink Design, Springer Netherlands, 5th edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. P. Sreenilayam, I. U. Ahad, V. Nicolosi, V. Acinas Garzon and D. Brabazon, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 147–177 CrossRef .
H. A. D. Nguyen, K. Shin and C. Lee, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., 2015, 16, 517–523 CrossRef .
M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat and G. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 673–685 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, T. Albrow-Owen, X. Jin, A. Ali, Y. Hu, R. C. T. Howe, K. Shehzad, Z. Yang, X. Zhu, R. I. Woodward, T. C. Wu, H. Jussila, J. B. Wu, P. Peng, P. H. Tan, Z. Sun, E. J. R. Kelleher, M. Zhang, Y. Xu and T. Hasan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 278 CrossRef .
A. Dani, Compos. Sci. Technol., 1996, 56, 911–920 CrossRef CAS .

          I. M. Hutchings and G. D. Martin, Inkjet Technology for Digital Fabrication, Wiley & Hoboken,  2012 Search PubMed .
D. Jang, D. Kim and J. Moon, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kang, W. H. Lee and K. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2302–2315 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fu, Y. Wang, C. Yan, Y. Yao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, S. Lacey, Y. Wang, J. Wan, T. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, J. An, C. K. Chua, H. Pang, J. Zhang and P. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 51, 33–36 CrossRef CAS .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Yu and P. V. Braun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 277–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, N. Li, M. D. Goodman, H. G. Zhang, E. S. Epstein, B. Huang, Z. Pan, J. Kim, J. H. Choi and X. Huang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1985–1994 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pikul, H. G. Zhang, J. Cho, P. V. Braun and W. P. King, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, H. G. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Cho, J. H. Pikul, E. S. Epstein, X. Huang, J. Liu, W. P. King and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7096–7101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Chen, J. Kim, Q. Zheng, H. Ning, P. Sun, X. Huang, J. Liu, J. Niu and P. V. Braun, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4501–4507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, T. S. Wei, B. Y. Ahn, J. Y. Seo, S. J. Dillon and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4539–4543 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Jiang, S. Cui, Y. Duan, T. Liu, H. Guo, L. Lin, Y. Lin, J. Zheng and K. Amine, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600856 CrossRef .
C. C. Ho, K. Murata, D. A. Steingart, J. W. Evans and P. K. Wright, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 094013 CrossRef .
W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. A. Dryfe and S. Barg, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902725 CrossRef .
G. Xiong, C. Meng, R. G. Reifenberger, P. P. Irazoqui and T. S. Fisher, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 897–905 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
T. Tooming, T. Thomberg, H. Kurig, A. Jänes and E. Lust, J. Power Sources, 2015, 280, 667–677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maeng, Y.-J. Kim, C. Meng and P. P. Irazoqui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13458–13465 CrossRef CAS .
W. Si, C. Yan, Y. Chen, S. Oswald, L. Han and O. G. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3218–3223 RSC .
X. Dong, Z. Guo, Y. Song, M. Hou, J. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3405–3412 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ganesh, S. Pitchumani and V. Lakshminarayanan, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1523–1532 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang, H. Li and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4009–4015 RSC .
Y. Jiang, H. Shao, C. Li, T. Xu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10287–10292 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Gao, Q. Zhang, K. Zheng, J. Xu, W. Xu, E. Shang, J. Jiang, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 1344–1352 CrossRef .
B. Akuzum, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, N. J. Alvarez, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2685–2694 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Solomon, A. S. Almusallam, K. F. Seefeldt, A. Somwangthanaroj and P. Varadan, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 1864–1872 CrossRef CAS .
S. Naficy, R. Jalili, S. H. Aboutalebi, R. A. Gorkin III, K. Konstantinov, P. C. Innis, G. M. Spinks, P. Poulin and G. G. Wallace, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 326–331 RSC .
V. Natu, M. Sokol, L. Verger and M. W. Barsoum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27745–27753 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, W. S. Chang, D. Kim, J. R. Yang, J. T. Han, G.-W. Lee, J. T. Kim and S. K. Seol, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 157–161 CrossRef CAS .
E. García–Tuñon, S. Barg, J. Franco, R. Bell, S. Eslava, E. D'Elia, R. C. Maher, F. Guitian and E. Saiz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1688–1693 CrossRef .
V. G. Rocha, E. Garcia-Tunon, C. Botas, F. Markoulidis, E. Feilden, E. D'Elia, N. Ni, M. Shaffer and E. Saiz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37136–37145 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Compton and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5930–5935 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, A. DeConinck and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, H177–H177 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
T. S. Wei, B. Y. Ahn, J. Grotto and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703027 CrossRef .
M. Beidaghi and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4500–4500 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703043 CrossRef .
X. Li, T. Yang, Y. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Li, F. E. Alam, X. Li, K. Wang, H. Cheng and C. T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1322–1329 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, J. Shen, G. Ge, Y. Zhang, W. Jin, W. Huang, J. Shao, J. Yang and X. Dong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 56–62 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Abbas, B. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Cong, N. Aroonyadet, M. Köpf, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5618–5624 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ota, S. Emaminejad, Y. Gao, A. Zhao, E. Wu, S. Challa, K. Chen, H. M. Fahad, A. K. Jha and D. Kiriya, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600013 CrossRef .
H. W. Choi, T. Zhou, M. Singh and G. E. Jabbour, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3338–3355 RSC .
B. An, Y. Ma, W. Li, M. Su, F. Li and Y. Song, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10948–10951 RSC .
Q. Zhang, F. Zhang, S. P. Medarametla, H. Li, C. Zhou and D. Lin, Small, 2016, 12, 1702–1708 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
(From left to right) Hadi Rastin, Le Yu, Md Julker Nine, Dusan Losic, Pei Lay Yap, Nathan Stanley, Kamrul Hassan, Tran Thanh Tung	
The Losic Group, led by Prof. Dusan Losic, is based at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, University of Adelaide. The Losic Group research interests focus on graphene and other advanced materials and include fundamental and applied aspects across disciplines of nanotechnology, chemistry, materials science, engineering, medicine and agriculture. The group is part of ARC Research Hub for Graphene Enabled Industry Transformation. (From left) Hadi Rastin is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on development of bio-inks for soft tissue engineering and biomedical application. Le Yu is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on development of radiation shielding composites using graphene and other 2D materials. Md Julker Nine is a postdoctoral researcher in the group, working on synthesis and application of multifunctional inks and paints and coatings based on graphene and 2D materials for broad applications. Dusan Losic is a professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, the University of Adelaide, and leader of Nano research group with 20 researchers. Also, he is The Director of ARC Graphene Research HUB and ARC Future Fellow. Pei Lay Yap is a third year PhD student in the group, working on the development of graphene 3D composites for environmental and water remediation. Nathan Stanley is now a postdoctoral researcher in the group, working on innovative potential of materials for the creation of biosensors to transform medical diagnosis and nanocomposites to realize the technologies of tomorrow. Kamrul Hassan is a third year PhD student in the group and is working on engineering nanomaterials for printed electronics, sensing and energy. Tran Thanh Tung is a Research Fellow in the group, working on carbon nanomaterials, conducting polymers and nanocomposites for sensors and electronic applications.

 	Fig. 1  Atomic structure of presentative 2D materials and their band structure of (a) graphene, (b) MXene, (c) MoS2, (d) hBN and (e) BP, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 Copyright [2019] Wiley-VCH.	 

Graphene derivatives (pG, GO, rGO)	Covalently-bonded hexagonal lattice of carbon atoms	Semimetal (bandgap: Zero) for pristine graphene, semiconductor for GO (bandgap: ∼2.2 eV) and RGO (bandgap ∼1.00 to 1.69 eV); high electron mobility and electrical conductivity, excellent thermal stability and mechanical properties	Transistors and optoelectronics, flexible circuits, active sensing layers, electromagnetic adsorption, film electrodes, environmental remediation and mechanical reinforcements
MXenes (e.g. Mn+1Xn)	A ‘clay-like’ 2D material composed of early transition metals (such as titanium) and carbon atoms	Semimetal or semiconductor (bandgap: 0–1.86 eV), high electrical conductivity, electronic, optical, plasmonic and thermoelectric properties, having surface terminations allowed them to be easily dispersed in aqueous suspensions and inks (without binders)	Transistors, gas and bio sensors, flexible circuits, active sensing layers, EMI shielding, electrodes energy storage, reinforcement for composites, water purification, lubrication, photo and electro-catalysis
TMD (MX2), e.g.: MoS2, WS2, MoSe2.	Tree atoms thick, consisting of the metal layer sandwiched between two chalcogenide layers, various morphologies with exposed edges that include triangular, hexagonal or star-shaped clusters and nanoribbons.	Semiconducting characteristics (bandgap: 1–2.5 eV), remarkable optical and electronic properties, photoelectrochemical, thermoelectric and lubrication properties	Active sensing layer, nonlinear photonic devices, visible to near-infrared photodetectors, field effect transistor, thermoelectric, electrochemical, photocatalytic
BP	A layered, stable allotrope of elemental phosphorus, its monolayer structure is not planar, but buckled	Semiconductor (bandgap: 0.3–2 eV), featuring highly anisotropic properties, bandgap semiconductor with a puckered honeycomb structure, extremely high carrier mobility	Field effect transistors, sensors, nonlinear photonic devices, visible to near-infrared photodetectors
hBN	An isomorph of graphene, where has boron and nitrogen atoms instead of carbon	wide-bandgap insulator (∼6 eV), thermal stability, Hyperbolic properties, photonics functionalities	Gate dielectric layer in field effect transistors, sensor material, protective cover in devices,76 deep UV emitters and detectors.58,75

 	Fig. 2  Mechanical exfoliation. (a) Schematic representation of the mechanism for exfoliation via sonication. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6 Copyright (2015) Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Mechanism of mechanical exfoliation via ball milling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70 Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Pressure driven shear force for exfoliation of 2D materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5 Copyright (2012) Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of a high shear generator to exfoliate 2D materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73 Copyright (2014) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical exfoliation process via (a) oxidation exfoliation of 2D materials using oxidising agent and acid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7 and 91 Copyright (2019) Elsevier. (b) Chemical etching of MAX phase to produce MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical exfoliation. (a) A typical configuration of electrochemical cell and the representative reactions at the anode and cathode, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (b) High-temperature exfoliation under an atmospheric pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Typical contact angle images of hBN, graphite and MoS2, WS2 with 12 different solvents. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66 Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. (b) The layered crystal is sonicated in a solvent, resulting in exfoliation and nanosheet formation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112 Copyright (2013) The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) The stable suspension of different layered materials in solvent of the matched surface tension fluids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66 Copyright (2009) American Chemical Society. (d) ((i) Ion intercalation, and (ii) ion exchange procedure during exfoliation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright (2013) The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic illustrations of a pressure–temperature phase diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 111 and 114 Copyright (2004) American Chemical Society. (f) Example of the SCFs induced exfoliation of bulk layered materials (e.g. graphite). Reproduced with permission from ref. 130 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (g) Photographs of (i) MoS2, and (ii) BN dispersions in various ethanol/water mixtures, which have been stored under ambient conditions for a week. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110 Copyright (2011) Wiley-VCH.	 


Graphite – Water,118 acetonitrile,119 ethylene glycol,120N,N-dimethyl formamide (DMF)121N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),122 Glycerol, N,N-dimethyl Acetamide (DMA)	
Graphite – [C4mim][Tf2N],123 ([EMIm]Cl),124 [TRPIL],125	
Graphite – Sc-CO2,126,127 Sc-NH3,128 Sc-Acetonitrile,129 Sc-NMP/Sc-EtOH/Sc-DM,130 Sc-H2O,131	
Graphite – Isopropanol/water,132 ethanol/water,133,134 water/acetone,135 water/ammonia solution,136

TMDs (MX

2

) – MoS2-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),137 Cyclohexylpyrrolidone,138	
TMDs (MX

2

) – MoS2-[TRPIL],125	
TMDs (MX

2

) – Sc-DMF (MoS2)139,140; (MoS2, MoSe2)141 Sc-CO2, (MoS2)142,143 (WS2)144	
TMDs (MX

2

) – ethanol/water,110

Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – Isopropyl alcohol (IPA),145N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),146 Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),147 and N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP),148	
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – Molten hydroxide (NaOH/KOH (molar ratio = 51.5/48.5),102 [Emim][Tf2N], [Hmim][Tf2N], [bpy][Tf2N], [bpy][Tf2N], [Bmim][TfO], [Emim][BF4], [Bmim][BF4], [Bmim][PF6], [Hmim][PF6]149, [TRPIL],125	
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – Sc-Isopropanol/H2O (hBN)150, Sc-EtOH (V2O5 powder)151	
Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) – ethanol/water,110 ammonia water/isopropyl alcohol (IPA),152tert-butanol/water.153

Black phosphorus (BP)-Iso-propyl alcohol (IPA),154 acetone,155 acetonitrile,156 ethanol,157 tetrahydrofuran (THF), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),158 Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),159N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),79N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone,160	
Black phosphorus (BP)-[HOEMIM]-[TfO]161, [Emim][Tf2N] and [Bmim][Tf2N]162	Black phosphorus (BP)-Sc-CO2163	
Black phosphorus (BP)-NMP/NaOH solution,164 Triton X-100/DI water.165

Mxene – *MAX phase (Exfoliation media used after dissolving the A layer from MAX phase by etching), DMSO.166 Tetraalkylammonium salts,92,167 Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH)92, Choline hydroxide.168 n-butylamine,168 Aryl diazonium salt in water,169 Lithium fluoride (LiF)/sodium fluoride (NaF),170 Hydrochloric acid (HCl).170

 	Fig. 6  Comparison graph of conventional printing technologies in terms of print throughput and best achievable resolutions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Visual concept for ideal versus non-ideal 2D material ink formulation. The disperssion mechanism, (a) pigment agglomeration, (b) agglomerates are wetted from outside, (c) pigment wetting, (d) homogeneous dispersion of primary particles, and (e) unsuccessful dispersion.	 

Graphene	Conductive	Na-1-PSA	Water	40 °C	Paper (PEL P60)	Inkjet172

	
	EC	Cyclohexanone, terpineol	250 °C	Polyimide	Inkjet30

	
	EC	terpineol	375 °C	Glass, polyimide, SiO2/Si	Inkjet173

	
	EC	Terpineol	300 °C	Polyimide	Screen174

	
	CAB	Dihydrolevoglucosenone (Cyrene)	100 °C	Paper	Screen175

	
	EC	Ethanol, terpineol	250 °C	Polyimide	Aerosol Jet176

	Biosensor	NC	Dibutyl phthalate, ethyl lactate (1:9 v/v)	350 °C	Polyimide	Aerosol Jet177

	Gas sensor	EC	Terpineol	415 °C	Glass, SiO2/Si	DIW178

	
	CMC	Water, octanol (2% v/v)	25 °C, 350 °C	Monolith	DIW179
MXenes (MxCxTx)	Conductive	None	Water	60 °C	Paper	DIW180

	Electro-optical	None	IPA	50 °C	PET, glass, SiO2/Si	Inkjet181
Black phosphorus (BP)	Semi-conductive	None	NMP, IPA, n-BuOH	60 °C	PET, glass, SiO2/Si	Inkjet182
Molybdenm disulfide (MoS2)	Semi-conductive	EC	DMF, terpineol	450 °C	SiO2/Si	Inkjet183

	
	None	NMP	60 °C	PET, Teslin	Inkjet184

	
	None	DMF	—	SiO2/Si	Spray (Laser Patterning)185

	
	—	(−)-Ethyl L-lactate, butyl lactate, ethylene di(acetate), dimethyl succinate	60 °C	SPE	Screen186
Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)	Semi-conductive	HPMC	Water, propylene glycol (5.7% v/v)	80 °C	Polyimide	Aerosol Jet187

	Dielectric	Na-1-PSA	Water	
	SiO2/Si	Inkjet188

	Dielectric	Polycarbonate	DMF, chloroform	25–150 °C	BoPET	Screen189
Tungsten disulfide (WS2)	Electro-optical	
	Ethanol, water	
	SiO2/Si	Inkjet188

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of (a–f) extrusion-printed graphene gas sensing element showing ethyl-cellulose (EC) clumps after 1 print layer and (g and h) graphene sheets covering the EC after five print layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Percentage composition of (a) paste inks compared with (b) liquid inks.	 


Acetone	0.31	23.0	56	−0.16
Cyclohexanone	2.02	34.4	156	0.81
Cyrene	10.5	33.6	227	−1.52

D-limonene	0.92	28.5	176	4.23
DMF	0.79	34.4	153	−0.83
DMSO	2.00	43.5	189	−1.35
Ethanol	1.07	22.0	78	−0.18
Ethyl acetate	0.46	23.2	77	0.71
Ethylene glycol	16.1	48.4	197	−1.30
Isopropanol	2.04	23.3	83	0.16
NMP	1.67	44.6	202	−0.38

p-Cymene	0.75	28.1	177	4.10
Terpineol	6.92	31.9	219	3.28
Toluene	0.53	28.5	111	2.68
Water	0.89	72.7	100	−1.40


Inkjet printing	5–20	1–5	65–95	5–10	4–30
Screen printing	45–65	1–5	20–30	12–20	1k–10k
Gravure printing	20–35	1–2	60–65	12–17	100–1k
Flexo printing	40–45	1–5	25–45	12–17	1k–2k
Extrusion printing	40–60	1–5	25–35	10–15	1k–10k

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic showing shear stress of different fluids with respect to shear rate.2 (b) Effect on viscosity versus shear of a graphene/terpineol DIW ink system with and without addition of ethyl cellulose (EC) binder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 
γs/v = γs/l + γl/vcosθ	(1)

 	Fig. 11  Left to right diagram showing a range of contact angles for inks on poorly wetted substrates to fully wetted substrates (ink spreading).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of coffee ring effect and (b) elimination of the effect due to Marangoni flow inside printed droplets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182 Copyright (2017) Springer Nature.	 


Extrusion	50–200	++	$	5–500000	+++	12–40
Screen	30–100	+++	$	1000–10000	+++	12–20
Inkjet	20–100	+	$$	4–30	+	2–10
Aerosol Jet	20–200	++	$$$	1–500	++	5–12
Flexographic	30–100	++++	$$$$	1000–2000	+++	12–17
Rotogravure	25–100	++++	$$$$	100–1000	+++	12–17

 	Fig. 13  Extrusion-based 3D printing methods. (a) Schematic illustration of the basic working principle and setup for Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM). Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (b) A polymer octet-truss lattice fabricated by FDM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 237 Copyright (2017) Elsevier. (c) A composite lattice with polymer core and Ni outer shell synthesized through FDM and electroless plating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239 Copyright (2018) Elsevier. (d) Schematic of the working principle behind Direct Ink Writing (DIW) using viscoelastic inks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (e) 3D micro lattice fabricated by multi-material DIW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (f) Balsa wood-inspired fibre-filled epoxy honeycomb composite printed using DIW. Reproduced with permission from ref. 240 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH. (g)Custom-built extrusion printing system for Direct Ink Writing of graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178 Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) Extrusion-printed water-based MXene ink used to create micro-supercapacitor electrodes on paper; (c and d) SEM images of printed ink; (e) SEM images of ink layering and ink cross-section; (f) decrease in resistance with number of path layers printed; (g) combined series and parallel design and final printed electrodes on flexible paper. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180 Copyright (2019) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of a (a) flatbed and (b) rotary screen printer. (c) Screen-printed conductive graphene ink on paper when bent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) 2D schematic of gravure printing. Inset shows the magnified schematic of ink transfer from gravure roller to substrate. (b) Optical microscopy images of printed graphene lines using cell sizes of 15 μm (lines printed without the specified cell size are shaded grey). Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Continuous inkjet (CIJ), (b) drop-on-demand inkjet (DOD), and (c) DOD printer with thermal head. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of a flexographic printing system and (b) flexographic press during operation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 2 Copyright (2018) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic of aerosol jet printing system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 225 Copyright (2008) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustrations of extrusion-based 3D-printed interdigitated batteries. (Inset of Fig. 20a illustrates the large porous fragment structure of the extruded 3D printed gel-polymer composite containing GO sheets.) (b) Apparent viscosity vs. shear rate analysis for pure GO, GO/LFP, and GO/LTO inks, respectively. (c) Analogy of apparent viscosity for GO/LFP ink all-along four-week storage. (d) Storage- and loss-modulus aging characteristics as a function of time for GO/LFP. (e–j) Morphological characterizations of the annealed rGO/LFP electrodes. (k–l) Optical images of a miniaturized extrusion-based 3D printed electrodes. (m) Optical image of extrusion-based 3D printed electrodes array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 259 Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustrations of the device fabrication techniques. (b) The thickness of laminated reduced graphene oxide (rGO) film with deviations of layers (n = 4 samples). (c) cyclic-voltammetry of the printed MSC with different bending states. (d) Cycling stability of the as-fabricated MSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260 Copyright (2015) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustrations of the developing strategy for extrusion-based 3D printing of freestanding MXene structures and micro supercapacitor (MSC) demonstration. (a) Synthesis process of 2D Ti3C2Tx, (b) Advancement of Ti3C2Tx inks at neutral pH and study of their compatibility for extrusion-based 3D printing via specific rheological property, (c) 3D printing of as-synthesized inks with compatible viscoelastic properties to produce different 3D architecture. The following freeze-drying procedure allows fabrication of freestanding 3D designs that maintain their dimensions and shape. (d) Probing the compatibility of the printable inks to develop high-performance symmetrical current-collector-free (CC-Free) Ti3C2Tx solid-state MSCs. (e–g) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) of dimensional analysis for Ti3C2Tx flakes, (h) cyclic voltammetry (CV) at 5 mV s−1 showing the ideal capacitive behaviour. The MSC Mxene interdigitated electrode configuration is shown in the inset (5 mm smallest lateral size) (i) Cycling stability test showing over 90% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at 1 A g−1, and (j) Ragone plots of the 3D-printed Ti3C2Tx supercapacitors together with other reported values for comparison. Reproduced with permission from ref. 271 Copyright (2019) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the graphene/PDMS composite, (b) different patterns including grid, triangular, and hexagonal designs printed by the ink, (c) change in the electrical resistance of printed patterns and solid composite over temperature ramp, (c and d) temperature sensitivity of printed and solid composite under application of external strain and bending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281 Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic illustration of rGO wires formation via meniscus-guided growth and the dependence of wire radius to the pipette pulling rate, (b) fabrication of different 3D structures by rGO wires, (c) change in the electrical resistance of printed rGO wires once exposed to different concentration of CO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286 Copyright (2015) Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic representation of the rGO aerogel formation, (b) tuning the porosity of printed aerogel by adjusting the GO concentrations, (c) placing the printed aerogel to the joints and analysis of the measured electrical conductivity over seven different gestures by employing principal component analysis (PCA), and hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) statistical operations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 300 Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic representation of the graphene/fumed silica ink, reproduced with permission from ref. 38 Copyright (2016) Springer Nature. (b) Change in the electrical resistance during application of multiple strains, (c) printing of GO ink with low concentration on cold bath for solidification of printed layers, (d) electrical sensitivity of the printed graphene aerogel over compression, (e) hysteresis of electrical resistance over loading and unloading strains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301 Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH.	 
BMP	1-Butyl-1-methyl-pyrrolidinium
[HOEMIM]-[TfO]	1-Hydroxyethyl-3-methylimidazolium trifluoromethansulfonate
[Emim][Tf2N]	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[Bmim][Tf2N]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
[Emim][BF4]	1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[Bmim][BF4]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[C4mim][Tf2N]	1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide
AM	Additive manufacturing
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
BP	Black phosphorus
Co(OH)2	Cobalt(II) hydroxide
CE	Counter electrode
CO	Carbon dioxide
CAB	Cellulose acetate butyrate
CMC	Carboxymethylcellulose
CAD	Computer-aided design
CIJ	Continuous inkjet
CNT	Carbon nanotube
CC-Free	Current-collector-free
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
CE	Counter electrode
DIW	Direct ink writing
DMF	Dimethylformamide
DMSO	Dimethylsulfoxide
DOD	Drop-on-demand inkjet
EMI	Electromagnetic
[EMIm]Cl	Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride-aluminum chloride
EC	Ethyl cellulose
EESDs	Electrochemical energy storage devices
FETs	Field-effect transistors
FDM	Fused deposition modelling
FDM	Fused-deposition-modelling
Au	Gold
hBN	Hexagonal boron nitride
HF	Hydrofluoric acid
HSP	Hansen solubility parameters
HCA	Hierarchical cluster analysis
HCl	Hydrochloric acid
HPMC	Hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose
ILs	Ionic liquids
IPA	Isopropanol
IDEs	Interdigitated electrodes
LiF	Lithium fluoride
LTO	Lithium-titanate
LPE	Liquid phase exfoliation
LFP	Lithium iron phosphate
MnO2	Manganese dioxide
MoS2	Molybdenum disulfide
MoSe2	Molybdenum diselenide
MSC	Micro-supercapacitors
Ni(OH)2	Nickel(II) hydroxide
NMP	
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
HNO3	Nitric acid
NC	Nitrocellulose
NMP	
N-Methylpyrolidinone
1-Butanol	
n-BuOH –
Pt	Platinum
PG	Pristine graphene
KMnO2	Potassium; oxido(oxo)manganese
K2FeO4	Potassium ferrate
PANI	Polyaniline
PVP-PVAc	Polyvinylpyrrolidone-polyvinylacetate co-polymer
PVP	Polyvinylpyrrolidinone
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PSS	Polystyrene sulfonate
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PVDF-co-HFP	Poly(vinylidene fluoride) cohexafluoropropylene
PCA	Principal component analysis
RE	Reference electrode
Ag	Silver
SiO2	Silicon dioxide
H2SO4	Sulfuric acid
NaNO3	Sodium nitrate
NaF	Sodium fluoride
SO2	Sulfur dioxide
SCFs	Supercritical fluids
Na-1-PSA	Sodium 1-pyrenesulfonate
SPE	Screen-printed electrodes
SDS	Sodium dodecyl sulfate
TMDs	Transition metal dichalcogenides
WS2	Tungsten disulfide
TMA	Tetra-methyl-ammonium
TPA	Tetra-propyl-ammonium
TBA	Tetra-n-butylammonium
THA	Tetra-n-heptyl-ammonium
[]	Thermoresponsive polyionic liquid
vdW	van der Waals
WE	Working electrode

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
