Function-driven engineering of 1D carbon nanotubes and 0D carbon dots: mechanism, properties and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR08738E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR08738E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1475-1504Function-driven engineering of 1D carbon nanotubes and 0D carbon dots: mechanism, properties and applications

        
          
            Quan 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Weijun 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lan 
            Ding
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenjing 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haihua 
            Xiao
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wee-Jun 
            Ong
          
          
        
      *cd
aState Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, China University of Petroleum-Beijing, 102249, China. E-mail: xuquan@cup.edu.cn
bInstitute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
cSchool of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University Malaysia, Selangor Darul Ehsan 43900, Malaysia. E-mail: ongweejun@gmail.com; weejun.ong@xmu.edu.my
dCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China
Received 
      30th October 2018
    , Accepted 14th December 2018First published on 14th December 2018AbstractMetal-free carbonaceous nanomaterials have witnessed a renaissance of interest due to the surge in the realm of nanotechnology. Among myriads of carbon-based nanostructures with versatile dimensionality, one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and zero-dimensional (0D) carbon dots (CDs) have grown into a research frontier in the past few decades. With extraordinary mechanical, thermal, electrical and optical properties, CNTs are utilized in transparent displays, quantum wires, field emission transistors, aerospace materials, etc. Although CNTs possess diverse characteristics, their most attractive property is their unique photoluminescence. On the other hand, another growing family of carbonaceous nanomaterials, which is CDs, has drawn much research attention due to its cost-effectiveness, low toxicity, environmental friendliness, fluorescence, luminescence and simplicity to be synthesized and functionalized with surface passivation. Benefiting from these unprecedented properties, CDs have been widely employed in biosensing, bioimaging, nanomedicine, and catalysis. Herein, we have systematically presented the fascinating properties, preparation methods and multitudinous applications of CNTs and CDs (including graphene quantum dots). We will discuss how CNTs and CDs have emerged as auspicious nanomaterials for potential applications, especially in electronics, sensors, bioimaging, wearable devices, batteries, supercapacitors, catalysis and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Last but not least, this review is concluded with a summary, outlook and invigorating perspectives for future research horizons in this emerging platform of carbonaceous nanomaterials.Quan XuQuan Xu received his Bachelor's degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University and Ph.D. from the University of North Texas, Department of Materials Science and Engineering under Prof. Zhenhai Xia's supervision. He joined the Department of New Energy and Materials Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum-Beijing in 2014 and is now promoted as an Associate Processor. He has over 50 publications and his research is related to zero to two-dimensional carbon materials, including carbon dots, graphene, and carbon nanotubes for their energy and environmental applications.Weijun LiWeijun Li received his Bachelor's degree from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Northwest Normal University in 2017. He is currently a graduate student at the Institute of New Energy, China University of Petroleum (Beijing). His research focuses on manufacturing two-dimensional carbon materials and bio-inspired materials.Wee-Jun OngWee-Jun Ong received his B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in Chemical Engineering from Monash University. In 2015, he was a Visiting Research Fellow at the University of New South Wales and Monash University, Australia. In 2016, he joined IMRE, A*STAR Singapore as a Staff Scientist. Since 2018, he has been an Assistant Professor in the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Xiamen University, Malaysia. His research interests focus on photo(electro)catalytic and electrochemical H2O splitting, CO2 reduction and N2 fixation for energy conversion and storage. To date, he has more than 10 ESI highly cited papers and 5 hot papers. He has published over 45 papers with more than 4000 citations and an h-index of 28. In 2018, he worked as an Emerging Investigator of the Journal of Materials Chemistry A. Currently, he serves as the Associate Editor of Frontiers in Chemistry and Frontiers in Materials, a Board Member of Materials Horizons, Scientific Reports, Nanotechnology and Nano Futures. For more details, see https://sites.google.com/site/wjongresearch/.
1. Introduction
Carbon materials, such as graphite, diamond, fullerenes,1 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),2 graphene3 and carbon dots (CDs),4 consist of various allotropes and possess diverse properties,5 thus playing a crucial role in materials science. Since the breakthrough discovery of CNTs 26 years ago, this research field has seen a tremendous upsurge in interest from the technological and scientific communities with a cornucopia of exciting investigations in recent years. In 1991, the groundbreaking work on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) in carbon-soot was reported by Iijima.6 Two years later, he observed single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs).7 Since then, CNTs have become a hotspot and attracted the interests of the researchers in this fields around the world. Due to the robust sp2 hybrid C–C bond, which is the strongest chemical bond that endows CNTs with extraordinary mechanical strength,8–10 CNTs are some of the strongest materials ever found in the world. CNTs are some of the typical Dirac materials.11–13 Similar to other Dirac materials, CNTs have excellent mechanical, electrical,14 optical and thermal properties,15 having tremendous potential applications in nanoelectronics, actuators, ultrafast photonics, biosensors, filters, ultra-strong fibers and so on.16,17
With 20 years of continuous research, CNTs have been widely applied in science and engineering, including polymer composites, electrochemical energy storage, catalysis, conductive additives, air filtration, etc.18 In addition, when the particle size is introduced as a new parameter, there are significant changes in chemical and physical properties of nanoscale substances. Quantum dots (QDs), which are nanoclusters behaving like atoms, are a typical example of this effect.
In 2000, Riggs et al.19 found that CNTs emitted visible fluorescence in solutions.20–23 In 2002, Smalley and his team found that SWCNTs can absorb photons and fluorescence (800–1600 nm) in the near-infrared (NIR) region.21 Subsequently, they conducted an in-depth analysis of CNTs in terms of their size and spatial dimensions, deducing that the fluorescence emitted by CNTs stemmed from their enhanced defects on the surface, and the fluorescence was actually the photoluminescence (PL) of the band gap.22 However, the accidental advent of carbon dots (CDs) was discovered by Xu et al.24 in 2004 from the purified SWCNTs. The reported carbon dots with a diameter of less than 10 nm were obtained by oxidizing arc discharge soot with HNO3, and exhibited green-blue, yellow and orange fluorescent properties.4 On top of that, the spherical CDs are also typically modified with molecules and functional groups on their surface to achieve functionalization or passivation.25
Due to their low toxicity,26 excellent optical and electrical properties,27,28 superior photostability,29 high quantum yield, exceptional productivity and low cost, CDs have triggered increasing worldwide attention across the breadth of nanoscience and nanotechnology in the 21st century. The unique performances of CDs prominently expand their application fields, for instance, ion detectors30–32 and DNA,33 biosensors,26,34–36 catalysis,37,38 white-light-emitting diodes (WLEDs),27 solar cells,39,40 semiconductors,41 non-invasive glioma imaging and photothermal therapy.34,42–44 Over the years, more and more researchers have paid considerable attention to CDs and have adopted numerous synthetic methods, which can be categorized into two major classifications: “top-down” synthesis and “bottom-up” synthesis. The former mainly consists of arc-discharge,4 laser ablation45 and electrochemical etching,46 while the latter comprises microwave,47,48 hydrothermal technique,49,50 thermal combustion,51 templates52 and the ultrasonic method.51,53 As a matter of fact, the unprecedented optical properties of CNTs and CDs can be employed not only in the field of ultramicro-optical devices, but also to trace cells and diagnose tumors according to their coveted fluorescent characteristics.
To the best of our knowledge, there are a limited number of reviews underscoring the recent use, intriguing properties and mechanisms of 1D CNTs and 0D CDs for myriads of versatile applications despite several inspiring reviews on CNTs and CDs as heterogeneous catalysts thus far.54–59 Hitherto, there is a paucity of reviews in the realm of electronics, sensors (ion detection, glucose and DNA testing), bioimaging, wearable devices and light-emitting diodes (LEDs) utilizing CNTs and CDs as promising materials. In this respect, this review will put a huge emphasis on this relevant application for breakthrough research up to now. Importantly, the spiraling interest in CNT- and CD-driven “gold rush” can be ascertained by a search of the Web of Science database using “carbon nanotube” or “carbon dot” as the keywords with >3000 publications since 2015 and >3000 citations from 2015 to the present.
Given the increasing numbers of research studies, we will emphasize the most vital and cutting-edge discoveries contributing to advancement in this emerging platform of CNTs and CDs within the past few years in this review to provide readers an overview of the current trends. Understanding the synthetic routes, materials engineering, captivating characteristics and detailed mechanisms of CNTs and CDs for a plethora of technological applications (particularly in biosensors, chemical sensors, bioimaging, wearable devices and LED) will be the spotlight in the present work. Lastly, we will provide a summary of the challenges and invigorating prospects at the frontier of this research arena.
2. Preparation routes
2.1. Preparation of CNTs
By and large, according to the different morphologies, CNTs can be divided into three types: aggregated CNTs,60,61 vertically aligned CNTs (VACNTs)62–65 and horizontally aligned CNTs (HACNTs).66–70 Although the first two kinds of CNTs exhibit a large yield every year, they commonly contain many structural defects and their lengths are shorter than millimeters. Therefore, it is impossible to obtain aggregated CNTs with a perfect structure and a few centimeters length. HACNTs can generally reach a few centimeters or even decimeter in length with an aspect ratio of up to 106–108. HACNTs are also divided into single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs). On the whole, most of the reported HACNTs are SWCNTs.71 They have weak interactions and conform to the free growth pattern, which offers the possibility of forming relatively low defect densities and ultra-long lengths.
During the last two decades, there have been countless revolutions in the preparation of CNTs (see Fig. 1). Herein, we briefly overview the history of synthesizing HACNTs. With the pioneering experimental evidence for HACNTs in 1991, Iijima firstly discovered MWCNTs with a diameter of 4–30 μm and a length of 1 μm in the cathode sediments.6 Two years later, he produced SWCNTs using transition-metal catalysts.7 These findings prompted many researchers to prepare preferable HACNTs. In 1998, Dai et al.72 first reported surface-parallel growth of individual SWCNTs on a silicon substrate, which led to remarkable revolution and researchers began to study the growth mechanism in depth. A series of methods were proposed to synthesize ultra-long and super-strong HACNTs, including rapid heating,73 electric field guidance74 and gas flow guidance.75–77 The first 4 cm SWCNTs were obtained in 2004.78 Since then, many researchers systematically studied the growth conditions of HACNTs and synthesized well-aligned HACNT arrays. A diverse range of methods for efficient synthesis, assembly and characterization based on CNTs have been developed.79 It is worth mentioning that Wei et al. successfully synthesized 20 cm HACNTs in 2010.80 In recent years, there have been two mainstream HACNT arrays. The first focus is on chirality-controlled SWCNT synthesis,81–84 while the second emphasizes large-scale production of HACNTs with macro-length85–87 and high density.82,88 Much progress has been made in the study of HACNTs. For example, HACNT arrays have an areal density of 130 μm−1 (ref. 68) and a one-growth semiconductor SWCNT ratio of 97.6%.89 The half-meter long CNTs were synthesized by Wei et al. in 2013,85 which made an expeditious leap in the preparation of ultra-long HACNTs. Subsequently, Zhang et al. proposed a new strategy for the epitaxial growth of CNTs with a chiral index (2 m, m) structure using the symmetry matching between CNTs and the catalyst. Thermodynamic control of the nucleation of CNTs and kinetic control of the growth rate were achieved.85
 Fig. 1  Timeline of major milestones in the controlled synthesis of CNTs. This timeline includes the following reports. Iijima, Nature, 1991 (reproduced with permission.2 Copyright 1991, Nature Publishing Group), Iijima et al., Nature, 1993 (reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 1993, Nature Publishing Group), Dai et al., Nature, 1998 (reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 1998, Nature Publishing Group), Dai et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999 (reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society), Dai et al., Science, 2000 (reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2000, American Association for the Advancement of Science), Zhu et al., Nat. Mater., 2004 (reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2004, Nature Publishing Group), Rogers et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006 (reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society), Joselevich et al., Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008 (reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group), Wei et al., Chem. Mater., 2010 (reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society), Zhou et al., Nat. Commun., 2012 (reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group), Wei et al., ACS Nano, 2013 (reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society), Li et al., Nature, 2014 (reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group), Li et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015 (reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society), Cheng et al., Nat. Commun., 2016 (reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group), Zhang et al., Nature, 2017 (reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). 
After more than ten years of development, several review articles have provided a comprehensive description of the growth,90 properties and characterization of HACNT arrays. Based on these summarizations, multifarious practical preparation methods have been developed, and their advantages and disadvantages have been compared in a comprehensive manner. Herein, we briefly review the synthesis routes of CNTs.

2.1.1. Arc discharge method. 
The arc method uses a vacuum vessel in a low-pressure arc chamber filled with a certain pressure of inert hydrogen or other gases. The anode of the arc is a graphite rod with a catalyst between the two poles to maintain a distance, whereas the cathode is a pure graphite rod. During the preparation process, the anode graphite rod is reduced, while the CNTs are precipitated and deposited at the cathode. The setup for fabricating CNTs and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the as-prepared CNTs are included in Fig. 2A and 3B, respectively.91,92 The study revealed that the arc discharge method is mostly used in fabricating MWCNTs. However, the reaction temperature is extremely high, resulting in high energy consumption and high cost as well as more defects present in the product, which are, in turn, not conducive to industrialization.93,94
 Fig. 2  Summary of the schematic of the proposed preparation of CNTs. (A) Schematic of arc-discharge method. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (B) Diagram of a CVD setup and models for CNT growth. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (C) Diagram of the laser-furnace apparatus. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (D) Summary of the proposed growth mechanism of CNTs on the substrate. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2001, AIP Publishing LLC. (E) Diagram of the pyrolysis device. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 1997, Nature Publishing Group. (F) Diagram of the acetylene flame reactor. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 3  SEM and TEM of CNTs prepared by five typical preparation methods. (A) SEM images of aligned nanotubes synthesized by the catalytic pyrolysis method. (i)–(iii) Low and higher magnification of adjacent bundles. (iv) Electron diffraction patterns. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 1997, Nature Publishing Group. (B) EM showing individual single-shell nanotubes fabricated by the arc-discharge method. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 1993, Nature Publishing Group. (C) SEM of SWCNTs prepared by the laser evaporation method. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 1996, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (D) SEM image (i), TEM image (ii), and electron diffraction patterns of CNTs produced by the template method. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2003, Wiley-VCH. (E) EM (i) and TEM images (ii) of CNTs synthesized by an ethylene diffusion-flame. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. 


2.1.2. Laser evaporation method. 
Unlike the arc discharge method, the laser evaporation method is frequently applied in SWCNTs.95 In this method, CNTs are formed by bombarding a graphite target surface doped with iron, cobalt, nickel or their alloys with a high energy CO2 laser or a Nd/YAG laser under an inert gas (He) atmosphere at 1200 °C. The results indicated that the yield of CNTs is closely related to the choice of the catalyst:96 SWCNTs made of nickel–cobalt alloy are ten times or even hundred times larger than those made of a pure metal catalyst. In addition, the yield of CNTs employing this method is generally higher than that of a pure platinum catalyst. We can see the schematic for fabricating CNTs in Fig. 2C and the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the as-developed CNTs in Fig. 3C.97


2.1.3. Catalytic pyrolysis method. 
The catalytic pyrolysis method is a technique using a gas furnace with a carbon source gas, which comes into contact with the metal catalyst and decomposition takes place to yield CNTs. In this process, the carbon atoms deposit on the catalyst surface, leading to the generation of CNTs at atmospheric pressure and in the range of 500 to 1100 °C. The schematic for fabricating CNTs and the SEM image of the prepared CNTs can been seen in Fig. 2E and 3A.98 Thus far, catalytic pyrolysis is the most widely used chemical vapor deposition method. Moreover, the catalytic pyrolysis method is divided into four parts according to the type of catalyst: chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the matrix method, the spray method and the floatation method.
2.1.3.1. CVD method. 
CVD uses a carbon-containing gas or a liquid carbon source as a raw material to prepare CNTs. The carbon precursors are usually methane, ethylene, benzene, toluene, etc. In this instance, the raw materials undergo cracking reaction and generate hydrogen and CNTs under the treatment of nano-metal catalyst.99 This approach is employed not only to prepare CNTs, but also to produce high-purity hydrogen free from impurity gases like carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide (a diagram of the setup and models for CNT growth is shown in Fig. 2B and 3B). Nevertheless, this technique actually produces CNTs on the surface of the catalyst. When the product reaches a certain amount, it will inactivate the catalyst. Therefore, this method requires strengthening of the surface properties of the metal catalyst, improving the internal structure of the reactor, removing the product as soon as possible and resolving other issues. CVD has many advantages, including simple equipment, cost-effective raw materials, facile production and high yield. However, the products with more impurities require further purification.96
2.1.3.2. Matrix method. 
In this synthetic route, the matrix is usually graphite or ceramic. The preparation process is to transport the gas containing carbon source into the container (including the substrate with the surface-attached catalyst) under high temperature, and CNTs are then grown on the side of the catalyst particles after the gas is decomposed. The obtained product is highly pure, but the shortfall is a low yield due to the difficulty in controlling the morphology of the catalyst.100
2.1.3.3. Spray method. 
The spray method is universally simple to produce CNTs. To begin with, the catalyst is dissolved in the liquid carbon source. When the reactor temperature rises to the growth temperature, the dissolved carbon source is injected into the reactor with a pump. The whole process represents the so-called “catalytic effect” of CNTs.101 This method gives rise to a high yield, but the product lacks purity because of the difficulty in controlling the ratio of the catalyst and the carbon source.


2.1.4. Float method. 
In the float method, the catalyst precursor is first heated to gasify and then gaseous hydrocarbons are added to the reaction chamber. While heating the reactor, the reactants decompose at different temperatures. The specific decomposition process is that the catalyst precursor first decomposes into atoms, and then aggregates into nanoparticles, floats in the reactor, forms carbon atoms, and finally deposits on the surface of thecatalyst to generate CNTs.102


2.1.5. Template method. 
Nowadays, researchers mostly select porous materials with a pore size of nano- to micrometers as the templates. The preparation in the selected template hole wall is combined with electrochemical methods, chemical vapor deposition, the sol–gel method, etc. The advantages of this method are facile templates, small and uniform tube diameter, and easiness to separate the product and the template. The schematic of setup is displayed in Fig. 2D and the SEM image of prepared CNTs is provided in Fig. 3D.103,104


2.1.6. Flame method. 
The flame method is a means for producing CNTs by burning a carbonaceous material.105 The carbon materials selected in this method can be gaseous or liquid, such as methanol, ethanol, methane, ethylene, etc. These substances decompose activated carbon ions that deposit on the substrate material during combustion to generate CNTs. The catalysts are generally derived from iron, cobalt, nickel and their compounds (Fig. 2F and E).106 This method has several advantages. Firstly, the catalyst, the carbon source and the heat source required in the combustion process can be simultaneously achieved. Secondly, energy is efficiently utilized, and the equipment is easy to control with less environmental pollution. However, there are many uncontrollable factors encountered when using the flame method. Impurities are inevitably produced during the preparation of CNTs like residual catalyst particles. Hence, purification of the products is of paramount importance, which can be divided into physical, chemical and integrated methods depending on different characteristics of CNTs and impurities.

2.2. Preparation of CDs
As can be seen from the previous section, ample approaches have been created for the successful engineering and functionalization of CDs.38,107,108 However, several shortcomings still exist in the carbonaceous materials. For example, nanodiamond is expensive and complicated to prepare; graphite and CNTs usually possess poor water solubility and inability to provide a strong luminescence, particularly in the visible region, which may limit their potential applications.109 More recently, to produce highly fluorescent CDs, the doping approach was used to tune the fluorescent properties and was considered as the most appealing engineering pathway.110 Up to now, substantial work has been carried out and significant progress has been achieved in the synthesis and applications of doped CDs.111 As a matter of fact, doping elements can be generally classified into metal atoms and heteroatoms (non-metal). Because of the toxicity of metal atoms, this section will mainly accentuate non-metal based heteroatom doping of CDs, which has become a focal field in materials science.112Fig. 4 reveals the developing timeline of heteroatom-doped CDs. A multitude of doping methods with heteroatoms have been proposed conspicuously in order to enhance the optical and electronic performances of CDs. The effects of different elements on the properties (e.g. PL properties) of modified CDs are reviewed.
 Fig. 4  Timeline of major milestones in the controlled synthesis of CDs. 

2.2.1. Single heteroatom doping. 
2.2.1.1. N-Doped CDs. 
Benefiting from their fascinating properties, nitrogen (N)-containing carbon materials have been extensively applied in multifunctional fields, namely catalysis, sensors, superconductors, nanogenerators, lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors.113,114 Recent research results have illustrated efforts towards fluorescent N-doped carbon materials (FNCMs).115,116 There are many dissimilar methods such as reflux, microwaves, and solvothermal heating. The aforementioned methods are used to engineer N-doped CDs (N-CDs), which have been acquired by heating organic components such as urea, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, glucosamine HCl, amino acids and so on.117,118 In this way, Li and co-workers synthesized polymer nanodots from grass.118
To date, there are a myriad of top-down approaches for designing highly fluorescent N-CDs.117 Polymerization of glycine and glucose is one of the facile, cheap, and green routes to synthesize CDs at a low reaction temperature. The specific experimental procedure is described as follow. A certain quantity of glucose and glycine is dissolved in distilled water and heated for 50 min at different reaction temperatures (from 80 °C to 150 °C). When the solution temperature is cooled to room temperature, a dark brown solution is obtained, indicating the formation of CDs. After filtration and dialysis against deionized water, a brown aqueous solution containing CDs with high purity is obtained. CDs were also prepared using 30 mM glucose or 30 mM glycine (named CDs-Sa and CDs-Sb, respectively) as controls.116,118,119
2.2.1.2. S-Doped CDs. 
Compared to the extent of research on how to produce N-CDs, CDs containing a single S atom have rarely been reported. Recently, continuing reports indicated that heteroatom doping can greatly enhance the optical and electronic properties of carbon nanomaterials.120 In particular, heteroatom-doped CDs display a significant enhancement in their electronic and fluorescent performances, which have prompted enormous interest.107 For instance, Yang et al. synthesized N-CDs with citric acid and ethylenediamine with a hydrothermal method. The quantum yield (QY) of these CDs can reach up to 80%, which was practically equivalent to that of fluorescent dyes. Preparation of nitrogen and sulfur co-doped CDs (N,S-co-CDs) was done using citric acid and L-cysteine as precursors with the same hydrothermal method of Yu et al., of which 73% is the exemplified QY. Nevertheless, these high quantum yield CDs are all obtained by nitrogen doping or nitrogen/sulfur co-doping modification. In 2015, our group fabricated S-CDs with relatively high QY (as high as 67%) for the first time by a hydrothermal method. In this work, sodium citrate and sodium thiosulfate were utilizing as the starting materials (Fig. 5A–C). Moreover, the application of previously prepared S-CDs is the effective nanosensor probe for Fe3+ detection.121
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthesis of common doped CDs. (A) Schematic diagram of the hydrothermal synthesis process of CDs from Bombyx mori silk. (B) Photoluminescence spectra and UV-visible absorption spectra. The insets show photos taken under daylight (left) and 365 nm (right). (A) and (B) are reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) A synthetic scheme with S-doped C dots with blue luminescence. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Scheme of the preparation of S,N-co-CDs with blue luminescence. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2.1.3. B-Doped CDs. 
Excellent PL has been exhibited in CDs relying on surface modification and element doping, and their remarkable bio-compatibility provides applications in detection and sensors in biology, especially in glucose sensors with promising potential.122,123 Chen et al. made good use of the peroxidase-like catalytic activity of CDs in order to detect H2O2 and glucose with colorimetry.124 These two studies proved that quantification of glucose was implemented by monitoring the coloration of TMB induced by the oxidation of H2O2.125 These studies involve the perplexing functionalization of CDs with boron-doped compounds for sensing purposes. In 2014, Feng et al. reported a distinctive fluorescence sensing system based on boron-doped carbon dots (B-CDs) without further functionalization, which was used for hydrogen peroxide and glucose detection. The synthesis method is a facile one-pot solvothermal procedure. By exploiting the sensibly strong fluorescence quenching ability of H2O2 to B-CDs, a new detection tactic for hydrogen peroxide-based B-CDs without chemical modification and a measurement system based on glucose oxidase (GO) for B-CD glucose detection were developed (Fig. 6A). Intriguingly, the system's limit of detection of glucose is as low as 8.0 mM and can therefore be suitable for actual sample determination in microdialysis fluids.126
 Fig. 6  Scheme of the synthesis of uncommon doped CDs. (A) Scheme of B-CD preparation and glucose-sensing mechanisms based on B-CDs and H2O2. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (i) Synthetic process diagram of Gd-CDs. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (ii) Synthetic scheme of CDs with carboxyl and amine groups by one-step solvothermal method. (iii) The principle of operating a fluorescent CD-Tb nanoprobe for the identification of dipicolinic acid (DPA). Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2.1.4. Other CDs. 
Apart from N-, S- and B-doped CDs, there are still many other single heteroatom doped CDs that have been investigated,107 to name a few, Gd-doped (Fig. 6B (i–ii))127 and Tb-doped (Fig. 6B (iii)).128 Overall, single atom doping can effectively inactivate the surface active sites by the stabilization of the excitons in the CDs, resulting in an apparent improvement of the emission properties.110 The percentage of doped atoms in CDs plays an indispensable role in realizing a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) efficiency. Essentially, the higher the heteroatom content on CDs, the more surface states are formed on doped CDs which trap more electrons, leading to a high fluorescence QY.109,112


2.2.2. Co-doping multiplex heteroatoms. 
Apart from single heteroatom doping, co-doping of multiple heteroatoms has attracted broad interdisciplinary attention because they can build distinctive electronic frameworks because of the synergistic combination of heteroatoms doped in CDs. The following sections will summarize important discoveries pertaining to co-doping of CDs and their effect on PLQY.
2.2.2.1. N,P-co-CDs. 
Most CDs emit in the blue range under ultraviolet excitation. Many concerted efforts are being made to develop synthetic methods for CDs with emission in the higher wavelength region (green, yellow or red). However, the reported synthesis is complex, involving toxic components, or the resulting CDs suffer from low emission quantum yields. The ability to freely tune the fluorescence emission of CDs has been considered as a key requirement for the broad application of CDs, but this tunability has rarely been achieved.107 The emission of CDs could be adjusted via several means: (1) by controlling the condensation reaction that generated the CDs, (2) by chemical manipulations, and (3) most commonly by doping other elements. Nitrogen (N) is by far the most prominent doping candidate, while boron (B), sulfur (S) and phosphorus (P) are also used in combination with nitrogen. Excitation-dependent fluorescence emissions of single CD preparations were reported, but generally there was a significant decrease in the fluorescence intensity upon modulation of the excitation wavelength. Therefore, to synthesize bright CDs with different fluorescence emission wavelengths via a simple strategy remained an onerous task up to now. Lei et al. reported a rapid and simple microwave-assisted method for the synthesis of N- and P-co-doped CDs (N,P-co-CDs). The N,P-co-CDs exemplify very bright dual (blue-51% quantum yield/green-38% quantum yield) emissions. The dual emission enables the use of N,P-co-CDs in ratiometric sensing and other applications that can integrate merits of dual wavelengths emission properties.129
2.2.2.2. N,S-co-CDs. 
In general, amorphous CDs show superior PL properties, whereas (with a few exceptions) crystalline CDs manifest profoundly low PLQY. This hinders a convenient way to modify the lattice structure to derive favorable luminescence properties.127,130 Thus, it is of timely importance to develop a comparatively inexpensive and green approach to generate crystalline/semi-crystalline CDs with excellent, tunable PL and QY from considerably low precursor molar ratios.131 Moreover, gaining a deeper understanding of the PL enhancement mechanism of the product will be beneficial for further refinement of the process.132 Sun's group synthesized N,S-co-CDs with high PLQY by a facile, single-step hydrothermal method.130 It was the first research to report that doped CDs with high PLQY utilizing such an ultra-low precursor ratio. They also studied the luminescence mechanism based on molecular simulations and proposed the mechanism of doping-induced changes in the CD energy state that promoted the enhanced luminescence of the CD surface by electron/hole liberation. The ultra-low molecular weight (1:0.1) sodium citrate and sulfonamide were utilized as carbon, nitrogen and sulfur sources. The as-prepared N,S-co-CDs were highly dispersed with a narrow size distribution, and semi-crystalline structure. They had steady PL characteristics over a wide range of pH values and under a reactive oxidative environment, rendering them an ideal choice for luminescence-based sensors.130–132
2.2.2.3. Other element-doped CDs. 
In addition to the aforementioned doping elements, metal-heteroatom co-doping has been reported to ameliorate the fluorescence properties of CDs. Metals such as Mg (Mg, N-co-doped) and Co (Co, N-co-doped) were reported to enhance the properties of CDs when co-doped in combination with other elements such as N.107,110 For instance, our group reported the synthesis of Mg, N-co-CDs with ultrahigh PLQY (up to 83%) efficiency using citric acid as a carbon source and Mg(OH)2 as a chelation agent.107 We demonstrated that the chelation of Mg–citric acid can introduce Mg into CDs and protect the carboxyl group of citric acid during the hydrothermal process. This resulted in the enhancement of the PL properties and dramatic improvements in PLQY. Following a similar strategy, Li et al. employed Mg, N-co-CDs for the fluorescence-based detection of Hg2+ and cysteine.133 The resultant CDs had an average diameter of 5.2 nm and possessed a high PLQY (58.8%). Apart from that, the HRTEM micrographs showed crystalline regions present on the surface of the Mg, N-co-CDs, which were responsible for the bright PL emissions.110,112

3. Properties and PL mechanisms
3.1. Features of CNTs
CNTs can be considered as curled around the central axis of one or more graphite sheets, resulting in diversiform configurations with different properties. Fascinatingly, numerous properties of CNTs are derived from graphene. Because the typical two-dimensional Dirac material has a Dirac conical structure, this structure renders graphene with mass-less fermions, Hall effect, ultra-high carrier mobility, and other properties.16,17 Besides, there are a large number of conjugated electron structures and defects on the surface of CNTs, which can endow them with distinct optical properties.134 Therefore, CNTs manifest a broad range of excellent mechanical, electrical, optical and thermal functions. In this section, we briefly cover these superb properties of CNTs.

3.1.1. Mechanical properties. 
Among many properties, their extraordinary mechanical properties are the most remarkable. Due to the fact that hexagonal carbon atoms on the grid form strong CC double bonds and the closed structures, CNTs possess the highest tensile strength above 100 GPa and Young's modulus higher than 1 TPa in their axial direction.135 In the radial direction, the CNTs are relatively soft.136,137 The radial modulus varies with the diameter of the CNTs with the experimental data ranging from 9 to 57 GPa. Reversible radial deformation of CNTs can reach 40%.137 When the CNTs are bent and twisted, they will not break but will be flattened at the bending site (Fig. 7A).138,139 The eminently high strength and excellent flexibility of CNTs make them a very desirable 1D material for the production of light weight or composite materials with high strength and exceptional stability.
 Fig. 7  Four representative properties of CNTs. (A) (i) Deformability of MWCNTs on a silicon wafer as visualized by tapping-mode AFM. (ii) Force–strain curves of the MWCNTs based on deformabilities. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2000, American Physical Society. (B) (i) SEM image of typical SWCNTs. (ii) Extracted values of the thermal conductivity vs. average SWCNT temperature. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (C) Scan gate microscopy images of (i) the device with normal peak mobility and (ii) the circled device. (iii) Electrical properties of CNTs. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2005, American Physical Society. (D) (i) Solvent-driven influences on the PL characteristics and brightness of SWCNTs in ethyl acetate. (ii) PL emission. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2009, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.1.2. Thermal properties. 
Furthermore, CNTs show excellent thermal properties. Theoretical calculations demonstrate that the thermal conductivity of a SWCNT can reach up to 6600 W (m K)−1, which is related to the longer phonon free path in this 1D material.15 On the other hand, the experimental results reveal that the thermal conductivity of SWCNT is 3500 W (m K)−1,140 while the thermal conductivity of a MWCNT can achieve 3000 W (m K)−1 (Fig. 7B).141 Albeit the experimentally measured thermal conductivity is conceivably lower than predicted, these measured thermal conductivities are in fact higher than the thermal conductivity of the best currently available diamond with a value of about 2000 W (m K)−1.142


3.1.3. Electrical properties. 
The electrical properties of CNTs are governed by their intriguing structure. CNTs can be grouped into three primary categories according to the orientation of the carbon six-membered ring in the CNT wall: “chair”, “tooth” and “chiral” CNTs. The “chair” structure of CNTs is metallic, the result of which is similar to that of two-dimensional graphite planes.143 One third of the “toothed” and “chiral” structures of CNT are metallic and the remaining two thirds are semiconducting.144 The bandgap of semiconducting CNTs narrows as the diameter of CNTs increases. The carrier mobility of CNTs can reach 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is an order of magnitude higher than that of common silicon materials (Fig. 7C).145 In addition, CNTs have astonishingly high electrical conductivity, and their current density can reach 109 A cm−2, which is nearly a thousand times higher compared with other conductors such as copper and aluminum. Some studies have found that CNTs have superconducting properties, while some studies cast doubt on the superconducting properties of CNTs. In view of that, the superconducting properties of CNTs warrant comprehensive research in the future.


3.1.4. Optical properties. 
Other than that, CNTs demonstrate outstanding optical properties. CNTs show a strong absorption of far-infrared to electromagnetic waves. For example, vertically oriented MWCNT arrays have a light reflectivity of only 0.045%.146 In addition, a strong PL is observed in CNTs. The light-emitting efficiency of SWCNTs after dispersion treatment is as high as 20%.147 For two-walled CNTs, the inner and outer CNTs have their own PL, showing a weak interaction between the inner and outer CNTs (Fig. 7D).148

3.2. PL mechanisms of CDs
Significant development in the design of CDs has actively been thrust into the limelight in the last five years, and countless researchers have unraveled rational PL mechanisms in terms of the size and surface/edge. For instance, Yang et al. systematically have summarized the photoluminescence mechanism in CDs including graphene quantum nanodots, carbon nanodots and polymer dots.149 Thereafter, Jiang and coworkers revealed developments in the mechanism of CDs.150 Kim et al. exhibited the PL mechanisms in dual heteroatom-doped CDs.151

3.2.1. Size. 
The PL peak energy decreases as the CD diameter increases up to ca. 17 nm, which is comparable to the quantum confinement effect (QCE). However, when the diameter is larger than ca. 17 nm, the PL peak energy increases with increasing diameter; in other words, the QCE no longer holds. These results originate from changes to the edges. For diameters <17 nm, the majority of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have a circular/elliptical shape, with mixed zigzag and armchair edges; however, for diameters >17 nm, the edges exhibit a polygonal shape with mostly armchair edges. These switchable edges disturb the evolution between the QCE and the size of the GQDs. As mentioned above, the greater number of armchair edges as compared with zigzag edges could result in larger energy gaps for graphene materials.
3.2.1.1. Quantum confinement effect of conjugated π-domains in GQDs. 
As for GQDs, it has an intrinsic graphene core and a few functional groups on the surface; hence the band gap of conjugated π-domains is thought to be the true inner PL center. A major feature of QDs is the QCE, which occurs when QDs are smaller than their exciton Bohr radius.152 Establishing theoretical calculations is also an efficient way to elucidate the PL mechanism of GQDs.
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations have illustrated that the band gap increases to 2 eV in GQDs consisting of 20 aromatic rings and 7 eV for benzene. In other words, the luminescence energies are blue-shifted to a higher energy with the increase of rings, indicating that the PL emission of the GQDs can be systematically tuned by altering the size of the conjugated π-domains (Fig. 8A).110
 Fig. 8  Photoluminescence mechanisms of GQDs. (A) Density functional theory (DFT) calculations in GQDs. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (B) The suggested energy levels of C42H18, C96H30, C132, C132H34, and C222H42. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (C) UV-vis spectra of GQDs A, B, and C, which correspond to synthesized reaction temperatures at 120, 100, and 80 °C, respectively. The inset is a photograph of the corresponding GQDs under UV light with 365 nm excitation. (D) PL spectra of GQDs with different emission colors excited at 318, 331, and 429 nm. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (E–F) Size-dependent PL spectra excited at 325 nm for GQDs with average sizes of 5–35 nm in deionized water. Also shown is the dependence of PL peak shifts on the excitation wavelength from 300 to 470 nm for GQDs with average sizes of 5–35 nm. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Sk et al. adopted DFT and time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) calculations to investigate the fluorescent properties of GQDs. According to their study, the emission of zigzag-edged GQDs varied among the whole visible light spectrum with the diameter rising from 0.89 to 1.80 nm. While armchair edges and pyrrolic N-doping would result in a blue-shift, chemical functionalities and defects would lead to a red shift. Besides, the isolated inhomogeneous sp2 domains could broaden the PL peaks of GQDs.153 Müllen et al. developed an oxidative condensation method to develop GQDs, which had weak spin–orbit coupling and a small dielectric constant. These characteristics imparted strong carrier–carrier interactions and a larger energy band, thus resulting in the PL shift from blue to green.154 In addition, strong carrier–carrier interactions could generate more than one photon GQDs, which is a prudent way to boost the efficiency of photon-generated carriers.155 The suggested energy levels of C42H18, C96H30, C132, C132H34, and C222H42 exhibit gradually decreasing trend. The size-dependent energy levels in these H-passivated small GQDs are in an agreement with the molecule orbital calculation. The intrinsic state depends on size. The energy-level offset between the intrinsic state and the edge state governs the optical performances.
As a continuation of the previous research, Yang et al. synthesized organic GQDs (C42H18, C96H30, C132H34, and C222H42) and they found that the energy-level offset between the intrinsic state and the edge state indeed determined the optical properties of the GQDs. Hence, the green fluorescence of C42H18 and C96H30 was markedly dependent on the size and bright edge state. The fluorescence dominated when the energy-level offset between the intrinsic state and the edge state was adequately large. When the energy level offset was small, the long carrier lifetime in the intrinsic state could facilitate intersystem crossing from a singlet-excited edge state to a triplet-excited edge state, such as C132. As for C132H34 and C222H42, the intrinsic state probably declined and was lower than the edge state, thus losing the expected fluorescence (Fig. 8B).156 Subsequently, Peng et al. engineered three dissimilar sized GQDs (1–4 nm, 4–8 nm, and 7–11 nm) by simply varying the reaction temperature, and the emission ranged from blue and green to yellow (Fig. 8C and D).157 Size-dependent PL spectra excited at 325 nm for GQDs with average sizes of 5–35 nm in deionized water were observed. Moreover, it is evident that the dependence of PL peak shifts on the excitation wavelength from 300 to 470 nm for GQDs with average sizes of 5–35 nm.
In another related research, size-dependent shape/edge-state GQDs were prepared by Kim et al., and their PL also indicated anomalous size dependences (Fig. 8E). The peak energy of the absorption spectra monotonically decreased with the increasing size from 5 to 35 nm (Fig. 8F). As such, the size of the GQDs strongly determined the peak energy and shape of the PL spectra. As is shown in Fig. 8E, all PL spectra possess identical peak shifts, almost irrespective of excitation wavelength except 470 nm.158 At present, the diameter of most reported GQDs is greater than 5 nm and manifests strong visible PL emission. However, the band gap energies of GQDs with diameters greater than 5 nm are lower than 1.0 eV based on DFT calculations.153
3.2.1.2. Fast carrier–carrier scattering. 
To produce strong and controllable visible PL emissions, the electronic transitions can be readily tuned in nanometer-sized GQDs owing to its size-dependent shape/edge-state variations. Fast carrier–carrier scattering dominating over electron–phonon scattering is a fascinating property and results in a high energy PL, thus promoting straightforward reintegration of excited electron–hole pairs before thermalization of the carriers with the lattice. The strongly reduced dielectric screening in the two-dimensional structure not only causes high Coulomb scattering rate, but also leads to high-density non-equilibrium carriers responsible for the strong electron–hole recombination.159
3.2.1.3. Chromatographic separation. 
Chromatographic separation is another powerful tool for uncovering the PL mechanism of GQDs. For instance, Zhu et al. utilized column chromatography to separate GQDs with a tuned oxidation degree and obtained different GQDs with PL from blue to green.149 Matsuda and co-workers used size-exclusion high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) to separate the prepared GQDs and found pronounced changes in the PL spectra from UV to red among different sized GQDs. The variation in emission wavelength highlighted that the number of small sp2 fragments of various sizes and shapes can ultimately bring about PL changes.160


3.2.2. Surface. 
Functional groups have various energy levels, which may result in a series of emissive traps. When the light of a certain excitation wavelength illuminates the CDs, a surface state emissive trap will dominate the emission. A high degree of surface oxidation or other effective modification can result in more surface defects, giving rise to a red-shifted emission. The surface state does not consist of isolated chemical groups, but rather the hybridization of the carbon backbone and connected chemical groups.
3.2.2.1. Molecule state and carbon-core state in CDs. 
Giannelis et al. originally studied the formation mechanism of CDs in the molecule and carbon-core states. Applying citric acid (CA) and ethanolamine (EA) as the model molecules, they designed contrast experiments in different temperatures and obtained CDs with various quantum yields. The quenching of the carbon-core structure to facilitate the emission of the neighboring molecule state might also account for the suppressed emission of the PL center observed for CDs prepared at high temperature.161 Furthermore, Yang and co-workers also investigated the molecule and carbon-core states by using CA and ethylenediamine (EDA) as model molecules. They prepared four kinds of CDs under different temperatures. At high temperatures, partial fluorophores were consumed to form the carbon core because of further carbonization, and the PL was due to the synergistic effect of the carbogenic ore and the molecule state.32,162
3.2.2.2. Surface state in CDs. 
In 2004, Xu et al. firstly obtained CDs via electrophoretic analysis and purification of fluorescent and they proved that most PL centers of CDs were surface states.163 Whereafter, Sun et al. prepared CDs by laser ablation and systematically illustrated the surface passivation of CDs by amino polyethylene glycol (PEG). They found that many organic molecules could offer surface passivation and their surface energy traps could control the PL mechanism (Fig. 9A).164
 Fig. 9  Photoluminescence mechanisms of CDs. (A) The CD structure and AFM topography image of CDs on the mica substrate with the height profile along the line in the image. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (B) Three types of CDs with green emission chosen to clarify the surface-state PL mechanism. (C) The electronic state in CDs. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Though the excitation might induce the band-gap absorption band, the resulting fluorescence was regulated by the surface state emission.165 Pang and co-workers also implied that the surface states were an essential factor in tuning the luminescence of electrochemical CDs and high surface oxidation degree could result in red-shifted emissions.166 Tang's group deduced that core and surface state emissions could lead to dual PL bands. They conducted temperature independent fluorescence measurements and established that the dual emission bands exhibited similar temperature dependence (Fig. 9B and C).167 Wen et al. deduced that the PL of CDs composed of two overlapping spectral bands owing to the intrinsic and extrinsic states.168
Although the origin of fluorescence in CDs is not yet entirely understood, there is mounting evidence that emission arises from both an intrinsic band gap resulting from confined sp2 conjugation in the core of CDs and extrinsic fluorescence caused by a surface state that can be either directly excited or excited by energy transfer from an intrinsic band. As a result, the tunable fluorescence emission of CDs can be achieved by either controlling the domain size of sp2 conjugation or modifying the chemical groups formed on the surface of CDs.

3.3. Excitation-dependent emission properties of CDs
In general, the emission intensity of CDs tends to decrease.169 For some specific cases, the emission intensity shows an initial increase followed by a decrease, and thus there exists an optimal fluorescence emission between the excitations.170 Factors affecting the excitation-related emission characteristics of carbon quantum dots include quantum confinement effects, surface defects, red edge effects, edge states, electronegativity of heteroatoms, and combinations thereof. These effects have been extensively discussed in the literature.171
In general, quantum confinement effect, also known as size effect, is one of the most comprehensively accepted mechanism models to date.169–171 Thus far, the insertion of isolated sp2 clusters in the sp3 carbon matrix has been generally accepted. Therefore, it is believed that excitation wavelength dependent emission is derived from electron–hole pairs. The pair of radiative recombination is located in the sp2 cluster. The Eda's team further refined the model of sp2 cluster size effects by numerical calculation based on Gaussian and TDDFT.172 For surface traps, a rich trap was found on the surface of three different CDs, graphene oxide derivatives (GODs) and GQDs. Firstly, oxygen-containing groups, such as –COOH, –OH, and COC, are ubiquitous in various preparation methods. Secondly, the surface dangling bonds are small due to their size, which can be ignored. Therefore, defects may occur at locations other than the ideal sp2 domain.169 Herein, the surface trap state is summarized as functional groups, local states induced by oxygen-related disorders, and surface defects. There are also huge red edge effects and edge states, which greatly affect the nature of the excitation-related emissions. For the electronegativity of the heteroatom model, Yang et al. reported a series of CDs of similar size and shape, which endowed different fluorescence characteristics (excitation–emission relationship, PL intensity, lifetime, etc.).173 Interestingly, groups and heteroatoms in surface active CDs have a profound effect on their fluorescence. By means of collaborative models, Kumar et al. performed a large set of realistic CDs using classification dynamics and DFT calculations to uncover the effects of different functional groups on stability, work function and PL. Although the excitation-dependent PL has been widely reported, the excitation-independent PL has also been observed in the CDs.174 They are affected by surface state, shape and degree of carbonization, which have been largely discussed in numerous literature studies and hence will not be discussed in this review.169–171
4. Emerging application
4.1. CNTs
As discussed earlier, CNTs have various controllable structures which can be classified to be SWCNTs and MWCNTs according to the graphene layers’ numbers or classified to be HACNTs and VACNTs in terms of the distribution direction of the microtubes arrays.6,175 As a typical inorganic nanomaterial, CNTs endow multifarious outstanding properties in mechanical, electrical, optical, thermal, chemical and biological applications.176–178 Particularly, the surface of the CNTs can be facilely functionalized by the addition of various impurities, which can realize the accurate targeting and combination between the functionalized CNTs and the receptors. These specific targeting strategies along with the lower toxicity of CNTs give rise to a wide range of biomedical applications of CNTs.179,180Fig. 10 depicts the classification of the functionalization strategies of CNTs. In the following section, three typical bio-applications of CNTs will be systematically summarized.181
 Fig. 10  Classification and specific methods of CNT functionalization strategies. (A) The detailed classification of the functionalization strategies and some specific methods. (B) A basic structure of the glucose biosensors with the glucose oxidase (GO) and a cationic poly (diallyl dimethyl ammonium) chloride (PDDA) immobilized layer-by-layer on the surface of CNTs. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) The detecting mechanism of the CNT-based DNA biosensors. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. 

4.1.1. Biosensors. 
Biosensors, which can accept the biological signals and output the chemical or physical information after transference, are principally used to realize the specific detection of the bio-molecular. Therefore, the sensitivity of biosensors is of vital importance, especially in drug discovery.182 The superior electrochemical properties, high specific surface area and exposure sensitivity of the CNTs render them an ideal sensing element, which can realize the accurate and rapid detection in a relatively low concentration.183,184 Compared with other material-based biosensors, the CNTs-based biosensors show myriads of advantages such as high sensitivity, short response time, less redox reaction and a long life span.128 The most common biosensors based on CNTs are enzyme biosensors and DNA biosensors.
The high specific surface area of CNTs leads to an easy conjugation with biomolecules. Notably, enzymes can be immobilized on the surface of CNTs, enabling the CNTs-based enzyme biosensors to detect the biological signals.185 Among all the enzyme biosensors, the most universally used one is glucose biosensors. The first glucose biosensors were fabricated by the conjugation of CNTs and glucose oxidase (GO) through a Teflon binder for the detection of glucose.186 The typical structure of the glucose biosensors with the GO and a cationic poly(diallyl dimethyl ammonium) chloride (PDDA) immobilized layer by layer on the surface of CNTs is shown in Fig. 10B. It is anticipated that the CNT-based glucose biosensors may be able to detect the blood pressure in vivo practically.187 Similarly, the CNT-based biosensors can be modified for the detection of various biomolecules such as fructose,188 dopamine,189 acetylcholine,190etc. In addition to glucose biosensors, composite electrodes coated with CNTs, enzymes and other substances can also be applied in enzyme biosensors such as electrodes coated with CNTs, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride (IL) and NAD+. Thanks to the coveted electrochemical properties of CNTs and the good bio-compatibility and conductivity of IL, the sensitivity of these biosensors can be dramatically enhanced.191 In a similar vein, CNTs can also be combined with tyrosinase and IL, filmed by dihexadecyl phosphate (DHP) and coated on a glassy carbon electrode to fabricate the tyrosinase biosensors, through which the sensitivity and stability can be overwhelmingly boosted.192
Another typical category of biosensors is DNA biosensors. DNA can be classified into single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), which can be used as the sensing element. CNT-based DNA biosensors have been proved to demonstrate a handful of bio-applications in the medical and genetic fields. The basic mechanism of CNT-based biosensors is delineated in Fig. 10C. It is revealed by previous research that ssDNA is more adsorptive to the surface of CNTs than dsDNA.193 Thereby, a sequence of the ssDNA probes can be absorbed and immobilized on the surface of the CNT-modified electrode, which can generate the response signals through the combination of CNTs and DNA.194,195 For example, Tang et al. fabricated DNA biosensors through SWCNT–DNA binding and proposed a convincible mechanism for the label-free detection of DNA hybridization. The developed DNA biosensors are easily modified to high density sensor arrays and may be applied in “lab-on-chips” microanalysis systems.196 Besides, for the sensitivity enhancement, the CNT–DNA compound can be modified by labels such as enzymes, fluorophores, and magnetic or radioactive substances.197 Some metal nanoparticles can also be added to the CNT surface for the enhancement of biosensors’ sensitivity and stability.198,199


4.1.2. Bioimaging. 
Bioimaging, which has been an advanced and universally-applied imaging approach in biomedical technology, can reflect the behaviors of cells, tissues, organs, or even human bodies. On account of the unique physical (electrical or optical) properties and a good bio-compatibility, CNTs are believed to be an excellent bio-contrast agent.200 There have been many imaging approaches, among which the most prevalent is based on the CNTs’ optical properties. Sparked by the exceptional optical properties of CNTs, they have been proved to be applicable to conduct bioimaging technologies. The photoacoustic bioimaging strategy based on the CNTs’ strong adsorption in the NIR-I window (750–1000 nm) is one of the typical methods.201,202 De La Zerda et al. first applied photoacoustic imaging in a mice tumor model using CNTs as a contrast agent, which promoted research on imaging and diagnosis technologies.201 In fact, many other contrast agents have also been studied and applied in photoacoustic imaging. The use of different contrast agents in specific targeting sites enables the imaging of deep tissues.201 The combination of CNTs and specific contrast agents such as gold nanoparticles can also serve as an effective contrast agent. Kim et al. studied the growth of gold nanoparticles on the surface of CNTs. It was proved that CNTs coated with gold nanoparticles were capable of being used in photoacoustic imaging and that cancer cells could be selectively killed because of the photothermal effect.203 Besides, unremitting efforts have been devoted to the coating of nanoparticles, which are expected to contribute to the enhancement of bioimaging effects and the expansion of this bio-application.204 Moreover, the unique tubular structure of CNTs leads to fluorescence emission in the NIR-II window (1000–1700 nm), which can be used as fluorescent contrast agents to detect and image the CNTs in living cells, tissues or organs.205 Based on CNTs, many other methods are present for bioimaging such as magnetic resonance imaging,206 scanning gate imaging,207etc.


4.1.3. Wearable devices. 
The burgeoning development of electronic technologies brings about an increasing expectation for life and production. Recently, the spotlight of research has been cast on the engineering of flexible and wearable electronics.208 The key to create these functional devices is designing a stretchable and flexible energy-storage system to replace the traditional ones.209,210 As a proof of concept, two typical electronics devices that have energy-storage performances are lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and supercapacitors (SCs), which are mainly composed of the cathode, the anode, a current collector, a separator, an electrolyte and package materials.211
The traditional electrodes of LIBs and SCs are rigid and heavy due to the slurry-casting preparation method. The electrode slurry usually includes active materials and conductive materials such as carbon black and polymer binders. Based on the conventional manufacturing methods, electrode materials are easy to separate from the current collector after repeatable deformation. To supply the electronics which are wearable and flexible, the energy-storage systems demand several characteristics including flexibility, high energy density, outstanding stability and good rate capability, light weight and low cost.212 Thereby, the continuous research for developing flexible energy-storage systems with remarkable electronic conductivity and without noticeable electrochemical performance decay after deformation to achieve the wearability of electronics is of vital significance in the scientific and engineering world.213
CNTs, which have a controllable cylindrical nanostructure, possess tremendous electrochemical and mechanical properties. CNTs are promising in the design of flexible electrodes, thus accomplishing the wearable properties of electronics. In recent years, CNTs have been applied in the design of flexible 2D (paper-shaped) and 3D (fiber-shaped and array-structured) electrode configurations, which will be highlighted below.
Cui et al.214 first fabricated paper-shaped LIBs where paper was used as separators and conductive paper-shaped CNTs films were used as current collectors (Fig. 11A (i)). During the lamination process, the LIB materials and current collectors were combined onto a paper through which a flexible 2D electrode configuration was realized. The CNT-based paper-shaped LIBs demonstrated high electrochemical and mechanical properties as shown in Fig. 11A (ii) and (iii). Besides, the paper-shaped LIBs with only 300 μm thickness showed a relatively high energy density of 108 mW h g−1.
 Fig. 11  Application of CNTs in electronic devices. (A) (i) Schematic of the lamination process and a demonstration of the paper-shaped LIBs. (ii) The galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of the CNT-based paper-shaped LTO–LCO battery for the first cycle. (iii) The performance of LTO–LCO battery. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (B) Two typical 3D structures of CNTs: (i) fiber-shaped and (ii) array-structured. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2014, Wily-VCH. (C) (i) Preparation method of the fluorescent fiber electrodes. (ii), (iii) Photos of the fluorescent fiber under natural light and ultraviolet light, respectively. (iv), (v) SEM and optical microscopy images of a fluorescent supercapacitor fiber, respectively. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (D) Schematic of (i) the structure and (ii) the working mechanism of the 3D silicon–oxygen fiber battery. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Emerging from the unique array-structures and controllable mechanical properties, CNTs have been broadly applied in designing 3D-configured electrodes, which suggests their large potential for use in the development of wearable devices. Based on CNTs, various 3D structures can be fabricated and have been reported. Two typical structures of CNTs are fiber-shaped and array-shaped configurations as shown in Fig. 11B.
Peng's group is the pioneer in the field of flexible electronics based on CNTs.215 They fabricated fiber-shaped electronics based on CNTs, which exemplified outstanding electrochemical properties, suggesting their large potential for use in developing future wearable devices. They have successfully fabricated twisted aligned MWCNTs/Si215 or CNTs/Si216 fiber as the anode material for flexible LIBs (Fig. 11B). Si particles were first deposited on the surface of MWCNTs by their group through the atomic layer deposition (ALD) method. The composite nanotubes could then be twisted to form a flexible electrode fiber. In 2017, Zhang et al.217 developed a 3D silicon–oxygen fiber with a lithiated silicon/carbon nanotube hybrid fiber as the inner anode, a polymer gel as the middle electrolyte and a bare carbon nanotube sheet as the outer cathode (Fig. 11D). Because of the coaxial structure, this fiber demonstrated a high energy density of 512 W h g−1, an ultra-high flexibility and a long-term stability after bending for 20000 cycles.
As a viable alternative to LIBs, He et al.218 successfully synthesized ultrasmall MnO nanoparticles supported on nitrogen-doped CNTs (N-CNTs@MnO) as anode materials of sodium ion batteries (SIBs). In this instant, the interaction between MnO and N-CNTs provided a high rate capability and long-term cycling life span as a result of the high surface area, electrical conductivity, enhanced diffusion rate of Na+ ions, prohibited agglomeration and high stability of MnO nanoparticles. More importantly, SIBs equipped with these fiber-shaped anode materials had a high electronic capacity and a long lifespan even after 3000 cycles. Moreover, Ren and co-workers219 revealed that MWCNTs/LiMn2O4 (LMO) and MWCNTs/LTO fibers as the anode and cathode materials, respectively, could realize the flexibility of LIBs, whose stretchability could be optimized to nearly 100%. Most recently, a plethora of fiber-shaped CNT-containing electronics with unique properties were synthesized by Peng's group.220 They have conducted much work on flexible cable LIBs with excellent stretchability and/or bendability. In this study, they created stretchable heating CNT fibers with excellent heating and mechanical properties, which exhibited an ultrafast thermal response over 1000 °C s−1, a low operating voltage, and a high heating stability over 5000 cycles. The same group of researchers has synthesized a series of multicolor fluorescent electrodes and supercapacitors from red to purple by the addition of fluorescent dye particles onto the surface of MWCNTs (Fig. 11C).221 In addition, Deng et al.222 reported a method for the preparation of hierarchically-arranged helical fiber (HHF) actuators, which were responsive to solvents and vapors. These actuators were created by the helical assembly of CNTs into primary fibers at first and then twisting of the primary fibers into a helical structure. It is worth noting that CNTs could serve as auspicious candidates to be assembled into artificial muscles owing to their excellent physical properties, thus signifying their large potential for application in the field of flexible and wearable bio-devices.
Another 3D-designed energy-storage system is array-structured electrodes. Owing to the desired aligned structure of CNTs, which contributes to both flexibility and robustness,223 the family of CNTs has received global attention on the fabrication of soft batteries or supercapacitors. Ajayan's group223 successfully synthesized a flexible CNT–copper oxide–poly (vinylidene fluoride) (CNTs–Cu2O–PVDF) film, which was applied as an electrode separator material in LIBs. This 3D array-structured electrode presented a relatively higher discharge capacity (2.3 mA h cm−2) in comparison with the pure CNTs (1.2 mA h cm−2). Besides, as shown in Fig. 11B(ii), Liu et al.224 designed flexible Li4Ti5O12 (LTO)-C nanotube arrays for application in LIBs with an outstanding rate capability of 121 mA h g−1 and a long lifespan during recycling. This phenomenon stemmed from increased electronic conductivity and an enhanced electroactive interface when transferring ions.


4.1.4. Electrochemical sensors. 
The unique properties of CNTs make them suitable for electrochemical biosensors. For instance, CNTs can be an ideal material for microelectrodes due to their stiffness and conductivity, which are of great value in cell and tissue sensors. In addition, biosensors containing degradable CNTs are considered the future direction of CNTs. To date, the electrocatalytic activity of CNTs can be directly used to fabricate many electrochemical biosensors, which are considered as nanoprobes for electrochemical biosensors to detect DNA, catalytic activity of hydrogen peroxide, as nanocarriers and as electrochemical immunosensors.225 Başkaya et al. used highly monodisperse nickel nanoparticles modified on glassy MWCNTs to synthesize glucose biosensors through the microwave assisted method.226 The H2O2 biosensor was reported by Komori et al.;227 it was a seamless hybrid film composed of CNTs grown on the surface of graphene and heme peptide. Puertas et al. achieved the targeted binding of antibodies by considering the effects of pH and net charge, which greatly improved the performance of the immunosensor.228

4.2. CDs

4.2.1. Sensing. 
Sensing is one of the magnificent prospects of CDs. A wide variety of biological/chemical sensors have been developed based on the fluorescence properties and surface functional groups of CDs, such as the detection of Hg2+, glucose and DNA. Hitherto, CDs are extensively used for biological/chemical sensing due to their low toxicity, water solubility, high photostability and superior chemical stability.
4.2.1.1. Ion detection. 
One of the first attempts at utilizing CDs in chemical sensing is the selective detection of Hg2+ in aqueous solutions.229,230 Yang et al. fabricated a novel oligodeoxyribonucleotide (ODN)-CDs and graphene oxide optical sensor to detect Hg2+.231 In detail, fluorescence of ODN-CDs were efficiently quenched by graphene oxide via fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). With the addition of Hg2+, the luminescence was recovered by releasing ODN-CDs from graphene oxide due to the formation of the T–Hg2+–T duplex. An ultrasensitive CD-based sensor was achieved via a one-step hydrothermal treatment of potatoes to detect phosphate (Fig. 12C and D).232 Other applications of CDs in ion probes include the detection of Cu2+, Fe3+, Pb2+, Ag+ and Cr(VI), and ion detection mechanisms are similar to Hg2+ sensing.233 Most of the proposed procedures were based on the abovementioned fluorescence quenching by the metal ions. For instance, Liu et al.116 increased the reaction temperature and produced photoluminescent CDs with decreased particle size and higher quantum yield. The CDs were used as an effective fluorescence sensing platform for label-free sensitive and selective detection of Cu(II) ions with a detection limit as low as 1 nM.
 Fig. 12  Application of CDs in LED and bioimaging. (A) Characterization of white LED devices fabricated using CDs. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2018, Springer. (B) CD based white LED device. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) Emission spectra of F-CNPs in the presence of different concentrations of Hg2+. (D) The plot of the fluorescence intensity ratio of F-CNPs at 435 nm vs. the concentrations of Hg2+ (performed in pH 7.0, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer; I0 and I correspond to the fluorescence intensity of the F-CNPs at 435 nm in the absence and presence of Hg2+, respectively; the excitation wavelength is 340 nm.). The inset shows the linear region of the curve. (C) and (D) are reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (E) Brightfield (i) and multicolor fluorescence [(ii) blue, (iii) green, and (iv) red] images of zebrafish embryos at 3 hpf after soaking for 3 h in CD solutions with different concentrations. Images acquired under bright light show the yolk sac (ys) and the inner mass of embryos (ime). A 10× ocular lens and 4× objective lens were used. Scale bars: 1.0 mm. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
4.2.1.2. Glucose testing. 
Moreover, other attempts at utilizing CDs in biosensing were in the detection of biologically active substances. The detection limits of glucose in the colorimetric method were 0.18 and 1.6 μM, respectively.234 Zhang et al.235 prepared boric acid modified C-dots for the detection of glucose with a detection limit of 0.03 nM through the use of the strong affinity between boric acid and glucose (Fig. 12E). They synthesized CDs via a neutralizing heat process with glucose as the precursor. These CDs exhibited an excellent affinity to boric acid because the adjacent hydroxyl groups from glucose remained on the CDs’ surface. Therefore, the CDs elucidate a potential for the detection of the glycoprotein.
4.2.1.3. DNA testing. 
Apart from that, CD-based sensors have been developed to detect nucleic acid. Loo et al. designed carboxylic carbon dots (cCDs) for DNA sensing.236 The underlying principle behind the sensing of nucleic acid lies in the different propensity of ssDNA and dsDNA to adsorb onto the surface of cCDs. For both types of cCDs, a superior range of detection of at least 3 orders of magnitude is achieved, and the potential to distinguish single-base mismatch is also exhibited.236 On the other side, DNA-labeled CDs have also been developed to detect proteins and enzymes.237 For instance, a novel CD-dsDNA sensor was synthesized to detect histone.238 In this sensor, the PL was quenched in the presence of dsDNA, while upon the addition of histone, the luminescence was turned on through unwinding of dsDNA from CDs due to the strong affinity between histone and dsDNA. Using the binding affinity between DNA and proteins, quantitative detection of proteins could be calculated by fluorescence restoration.
4.2.1.4. Electrochemical sensors. 
Recently, the electrochemical properties of CDs have attracted great interest, and representative results have demonstrated the enormous potential of CD-based electrochemical biosensors. CDs can also be utilized in biosensors as novel nanocarriers due to their biocompatibility. Huang et al. prepared Pd, Au-co-CDs nanocomposites by a simple continuous reduction strategy. They obtained electrochemical DNA-based biosensors by immobilizing single-stranded probe DNA with a carboxyl group condensation reaction.239 Hu's team reported a series of assays based on a CD-containing membrane and obtained DA biosensors for the detection of dopamine (DA).240 A possible mechanism is that the CDs can expand the surface area and increase the electrodes’ conductivity. Moreover, many oxygen-containing groups of CDs generated electrostatic interactions between CDs and DA. Thus, the sensitivity and selectivity of DA detection can be greatly improved.


4.2.2. Bioimaging. 
Although semiconducting QDs such as CdSe and other related core–shell nanoparticles have been investigated in bioimaging in vitro and in vivo, serious health problems and environmental concerns limit their bio-applications due to the existence of heavy metals. CDs with superior photostability and low cytotoxicity have been widely studied in optical imaging applications as an alternative to QDs. Both in vitro and in vivo evaluations have indicated that CDs are excellent candidates in bio-applications thanks to their visible excitation and emission wavelengths, and high brightness at the individual dot level.
4.2.2.1. In vitro imaging. 

In vitro imaging is performed to provide abundant information on the imaging ability, distribution and cytotoxicity of probes in cells. To this end, Sun et al. used PEG1500N-passivated CDs to non-specifically stain Caco-2 cells to demonstrate the possibility of using CDs as fluorescent labels for cellular imaging.45 Furthermore, Yang et al. employed stable GQDs with 14% QY as a fluorescent labeling agent in long-term stem cell imaging, such as neurosphere cells (NSCs), pancreas progenitor cells (PPCs) and cardiac pro-genitor cells (CPCs) without affecting their viability and proliferation or differentiation capacity.241 Since then, CDs have been successfully utilized in a wealth of cell transfection imaging, including E. coli,242 HeLa cells,243–246 human neural stem cells,247 4T1,248 NIH-3T3,249 human lung cancer (A549),250,251 LoVo cells,252etc.
4.2.2.2. In vivo imaging. 
Zebrafish is widely used in basic medicine science, such as disease progression, developmental mechanism and pattern formation, because of its well-defined development stages, and amenability to optical imaging. The zebrafish is often chosen as a model for fluorescence imaging. Lee et al. presented brightfield and multicolor fluorescence images of embryos after soaking with CDs and the different brightness between the yolk and the inner mass of embryos in fluorescence images demonstrated the different affinities of CDs to these tissues (Fig. 12E (i)).253 By simple soaking, CDs entered embryos across the chorion and the germ ring, and mainly deposited in the yolk sac due to their small size. The fluorescence image of embryos became brighter with the increasing concentrations of CDs (Fig. 12E (ii)–(iv)), but their brightfield images did not differ from each other (Fig. 12E (i)). A blue fluorescence image of embryos was observed using irradiation with ultraviolet light (Fig. 12E (ii)), while green and red images were detected under blue and green lights, respectively (Fig. 12E (iii), (iv)). CD fluorescence enabled the observation of their distribution in the embryos of zebrafish, hence validating the practicability of CDs as an imaging probe.253,254
The fluorescence imaging of zebrafish embryo after soaking with CDs permitted the visualization of the embryo development (i.e. from the single cell to larva).255,256 The zebrafish larvae exposed to CDs became brighter with the increase of CD concentration in a concentration-dependence mode. After the CDs entered the larvae body through swallowing and skin-absorption, they selectively accumulated in the head, yolk sac and the tail, thus showing the tissue-dependent affinity of CDs. The brightness of the dorsal aorta revealed that CDs entered the circulatory system, which was essential for CDs’ transport in zebrafish. The eyes were the brightest part of the zebrafish head and their brightness increased with CD concentration, and the lens can be readily distinguished from the eyeball. This suggested that CDs entered the eye across the blood–ocular barrier. CDs in the yolk sac mainly accumulated in the intestine and this indicated that the CDs entered the digestive system and could be eliminated from the body. Some CDs were removed from the zebrafish larva by metabolism, which was confirmed by the bright gut. The CDs preferentially accumulated at the periphery of the zebrafish, revealing that skin-absorption was also an important route for the transport of CDs into zebrafish. The outline of the zebrafish was therefore illustrated by the fluorescence emitted from CDs.
Apart from the zebrafish, mice are another promising experimental and laboratory animal which has inspired interdisciplinary interests among researchers.257,258 In regard to that, Sun's group has integrated oxaliplatin with luminescent CDs (CDs-Oxa) as a theranostic nanomedicine for experiment on hepatocarcinoma 22 cell line (H22) liver cancer of Chinese Kun Ming (KM) mice.259 As shown in Fig. 13, CDs-Oxa was initially concentrated at the injection site and formed a highlight point, gradually spread around this area and finally distributed at the tumor site. The intensity also decreased with time and became relatively weak after 24 h, evincing the digestion of CDs-Oxa particles within the body. The tumor size decreased from 6.5 cm3 to 1.2 cm3 with the time of therapy (Fig. 13), which indicated that 82.4% of the tumor was cured within three days. At present, CDs with the emission peak at 640 nm have been used for the HeLa tumor,260 glioma261 and brain tumor,262 thus moving a step forward in designing advanced CDs for bioimaging in the near future. Nevertheless, emitting in the red or NIR region is a scientifically critical challenge in the application of CDs to in vivo imaging, and the most recent studies have reported CDs with blue or green fluorescence. Hence, future studies should be further devoted to exploring fluorescent CDs with long wavelength light.
 Fig. 13  
In vivo fluorescence images of mouse bearing H22 liver cancer after the first intralesional injection of CDs-Oxa. (a–g) 0 min, 2 min, 6 h, 24 h, 24 h 20 min (the second injection), 48 h and 72 h. All are taken under blue light unless otherwise stated. (h) Semiquantitative fluorescence intensities of the tumor area determined at different times. The red arrow indicates the 2nd injection. (i–m) Photographs of the tumor area after intralesional injection of CDs-Oxa after 2 min, 18 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h. (n) Tumor sizes of the H22 xenograft model as a function of time. Reproduced with permission.259 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. 


4.2.3. LEDs. 
4.2.3.1. Electroluminescence of CDs with LEDs. 
The advancement of electroluminescent LEDs has been the subject of intense academic research for years.263–265 Colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), such as CdSe, CdTe and PbTe, have emerged as prevailing candidates.266–268 However, their acute toxic and detrimental effects on humans and the environment are still crucial impediments in the use of Cd2+/Pb2+-based QDs as next-generation luminophores for future LEDs.269,270 The evolving quantum-sized (<10 nm) CDs appear to be an ideal alternative to Cd2+/Pb2+-based semiconductor QDs in electroluminescent LEDs thanks to their tunable stable fluorescence emission, lower cost, and remarkable environment compatibility.45,271 Therefore, it comes as no surprise that incessant efforts have been made to improve the properties of CDs for their potentially wide application in electroluminescent LEDs.
To date, a series of research studies have been performed and a proof-of-concept has demonstrated that CDs could achieve white and multicolor light emission. Wang et al. have accomplished direct white-light emission based on CDs’ PL under laser excitation272 and WLED devices based on CDs’ electroluminescence, but the “Achilles’ heel” of this work is that very high operation voltage is required to obtain a reasonable brightness.273 Choi,274 Tang275 and Lau276et al. reported CD-based LEDs with limited absorption in the deep blue (260–300 nm) region. Thus, InGaN blue LEDs with wavelengths between 450 and 460 nm, which are the most commonly used LEDs, cannot be effective.
Furthermore, CD-based LEDs with driving current controlled color change were presented by Zhang et al.277 These devices are based on a CD emissive layer sandwiched between an organic hole transport layer and an organic or inorganic electron transport layer fabricated by a solution-based process. By monitoring the device structure and the injecting current density, emission of blue, cyan, magenta and white could be obtained from the same CDs. This current density-dependent emission is pivotal for the design of colorful LEDs. In 2017, Yuan et al.278 reported the first synthesis of CDs from blue to red with QY up to 75% for blue fluorescence through a facile solvothermal method. By taking the merits of the extraordinary bandgap emission, monochrome LEDs from blue to red with the direct use of CDs as an active emission layer were fabricated. The maximum luminance reached about 136 cd m−2 for blue LEDs, which is the best performance ever reported for CD-based monochrome electroluminescent LEDs. Furthermore, WLEDs were fabricated with a Commission Internationale de L'Eclairage (CIE) coordinate realized at (0.30, 0.33).279 The maximum luminance and ηc achieved were as high as 2050 cd m−2 and 1.1 cd A−1, respectively, with low V of about 3.9 V, even comparable to QDs-LEDs. As such, this work serves as the silver bullet to understand and provide significant opportunities for further improvement of CD-based electroluminescent LEDs.
Most recently, Miao et al.280 developed a new synthesis method of CDs through thermal pyrolysis of citric acid and urea for further optimization of the charge (holes and electrons) injection, and for controlled device fabrication. The emissions were shifted from blue to red on increasing the effective conjugation length and the amount of surface functional groups (e.g. –COOH). The as-prepared CDs were well dissolved in polar organic solvents to form homogeneous solutions that maintained strong light emissions. Importantly, these CD resin discs could be fabricated as efficient phosphor-based LED devices with different color light emissions. By mixing three types of CDs into epoxy resins, pure white LED devices were achieved with a color coordination of (0.33, 0.34) and a color rendering index (CRI) of 92. The white LED devices exhibited excellent stability and no photo bleach was observed. The emitting light spectrum covered most of the visible-light region from 400 to 670 nm (Fig. 12A).279 To test the stability of the white LED device, the device was continuously kept for 20 days (Fig. 12B).280 This indicated that the CD-based white LED device rendered excellent stability without evident photo bleach. Thus, these confirm the stability of the CDs as potential phosphors for LEDs. Most recently, Yuan et al. reported the synthesis of high color purity, narrow bandwidth (FWHM of 29–30 nm), and multicolor (from blue to red) emission triangular CDs (T-CDs) with a quantum yield up to 54–72%. The multicolored LEDs based on the T-CDs displayed high color purity and high performance with a maximum luminance (Lmax) of 4762 cd m−2 and a current efficiency (ηc) of 5.11 cd A−1.281
4.2.3.2. PL of CDs with LEDs. 
The PL properties of CDs are also presented. Min et al. successfully synthesized a polymer/quantum dot composite as a down-converting phosphor layer for white LEDs with a CIE coordination of (0.367, 0.367).282 However, these quantum dots containing heavy metals have adverse effects on the environment, which greatly limits their practical application in the LED field. Fluorescent CDs are now receiving widespread attention as new phosphors for white LEDs due to their unique fluorescent properties and low toxicity.283,284 LEDs based on CDs of PL typically include UV or blue chips and fluorescent CDs. The CDs used as phosphors are excited by the strong UV or blue light from the chip electroluminescence in the WLEDs. Tang et al. employed GQDs as an excellent optical converter, and for the first time experimentally coated a layer of GQDs with a blue LED centered at 410 nm.285
Fan et al. successfully synthesized red-emitting carbon dots (R-CDs) with a quantum yield of 53% and realized a warm white light-emitting diode (WLED) based on UV pumped CD phosphor with a CRI of 97.286 Zhang et al. prepared PL carbon quantum dots by using citric acid monohydrate as a precursor and N-(3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl) ethylenediamine as a coordination and deactivating agent.287 Due to its excellent optical properties and rapid film-forming ability, a WLED device was fabricated using a UV-LED chip in combination with a single CD fluorescent film to produce bright cool white, which showed a CIE coordinate of (0.31, 0.36) with a CRI of 84 and the correlated color temperature of 6282 K. Besides that, white LEDs demonstrated excellent optical stability under different operating currents and operating times. Li et al. synthesized a warm white LED using CDs and CdTe QDs with a CIE of (0.38, 0.36) and a CRI of 87.288 At the same time, Sun et al. made white LEDs by combining CDs and polymer dots. The corresponding color temperature (CCT) was 5821 K, and the CIE chromaticity coordinates were (0.33, 0.34).289 These results signify that it is feasible to increase the warm-light ratio by mixing some effective QDs with CDs to generate CDs with longer emission wavelengths under UV excitation.


4.2.4. Catalysis. 
4.2.4.1. CDs used for photocatalysis. 
CDs can effectively replace semiconductor QDs and molecular dyes in the field of photocatalysis. In addition to their advantages such as cost-effectiveness and low toxicity, CDs have excellent photostability and high solubility properties in aqueous solutions. Although CDs possess these remarkable properties, there are still limited amounts of studies in the field of photocatalysis compared with the coupling of semiconductors with another photosensitizer (e.g. TiO2, Ag3PO4, CdS, ZnO and Fe2O3) in the degradation of organic pollutants and deleterious gases.290 Apart from the environmental remediation, the electron storage properties of CDs can drastically enhance the electron transfer between the organic photosensitizer and the Pt nanoparticles to improve the photocatalytic H2 activity rather than acting as a light absorber.291 Besides H2 production, our group has successfully constructed metal-free 0D/two-dimensional (0D/2D) CD-hybridized protonated g-C3N4via electrostatic attraction for the enhancement of the carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction reaction to CO and CH4 due to the effective electron shuttling from g-C3N4 to CDs.292 As such, CDs are found to be a versatile nanomaterial to be employed in the arena of environmental science and energy conversion.
4.2.4.2. CDs used for metallic catalysis. 
The first study of CDs as the sole photosensitizer for solar fuel production is the photoreduction of CO2 to formic acid, wherein the PEG-passivated CD is modified by depositing with noble metals (e.g. Au or Pt).293 The CDs are prepared by oxidizing carbon powder with nitric acid, followed by modifying the surface with poly(ethylene glycol) diamine and coating the precious metal via a photoreduction of the metal salt precursor. The CDs coated with Au and Pt are purged with CO2, and formic acid is generated from the CO2 conversion reaction with a quantum yield of 0.3%. The same system in the case of high pressure CO2 forms a mixture of small organic acids, but with an order of magnitude increase of 1200 and 60 mmol g−1 h−1 for the production of formic acid and acetic acid, respectively.294 In a recent study, CDs derived from yeast in an ammonia solution were synthesized, and after incorporating with Pt, the modified CDs produced a considerable amount of H2 (31 mmol g−1 h−1) in TEOA solution under UV irradiation.295
4.2.4.3. CDs used for synthetic molecular catalysis. 
Recently, CDs have been integrated into hybrid systems for solar fuel generation using synthetic molecular 3d transition metal proton reduction catalysts. These catalysts have received substantial attention as a low-cost alternative to precious metals, with product selectivity and resistance to inhibitors such as CO and O2.296 The first study of the combined application of CDs and molecular catalysts is to synthesize CDs by pyrolysis of citric acid at 180 °C.297 Most of the synthesized CDs are amorphous (a-CDs), with some sp2 hybrid carbon regions and an average particle size of 6.8 nm. Molecular [Ni(P2N2)2]2+ catalyst (NiP) and a-CDs are integrated in aqueous solution for photocatalytic experiments under simulated sunlight using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a sacrificial electron donor (ED).297 No H2 is detected in the absence of any components (i.e. a-CDs, EDTA or NiP) in the reaction system, which attests that all components of the system must be present and that these CDs do not act as electron donors or catalysts. The a-CDs/NiP system achieves 398 μmol H2 (gCD)−1 h−1 and a ‘per Ni catalyst’ turnover frequency (TOF) of 41 h−1. Fascinatingly, CDs exhibit photocatalytic activity in the visible region beyond λ > 455 nm and maintain robust photocatalytic activity and durability for at least one day under the irradiation of solar light. Therefore, these a-CD molecular catalyst systems demonstrate that CDs can be used for long-term H2 production in non-precious-metal photocatalytic systems, thus hindering the use of exorbitant noble metals for practical benefits.

5. Summary and perspectives
Among the carbonaceous nanomaterials, 1D CNTs and 0D CDs render extraordinary thermal conductivity, mechanical properties and optical properties. They can be mixed with various polymers using versatile carbon chemical reactions and manipulations, offering the possibility to change their structure and optimize their solubility and dispersibility. Remarkably, CNTs are perfect structures on a molecular scale, signifying that they do not suffer from the drawbacks of degrading their properties in nanotube structures. Their composite properties therefore achieve very high levels of intrinsic characteristics. In view of the superior characteristics of CNTs and CDs, they have tremendous potential for use in multitudinous applications, especially in the biomedical field. In this review, we have systematically summarized recent advances in the preparation and properties of emerging CNTs and CDs for specific applications followed by a brief overview and future directions in this frontier of science and technology.
Nanotube-based transistors, also known as carbon nanotube field effect transistors (CNTFETs), are capable of operating at room temperature using single-electron digital switches.298 However, one of the major obstacles to achieving nanotubes is the lack of mass production technology. SWCNTs are attractive for transistors due to their low electron scattering and bandgap. SWCNTs are compatible with field-effect transistor (FET) architectures and high-k dielectrics. Additionally, all kinds of performance are higher than silicon devices. However, the control of diameter, chirality, density and placement is still insufficient for commercial large-scale production. The use of CNT arrays/transistors increases the output current and compensates for differences in defects and chirality, thus improving device uniformity and reproducibility. For example, a transistor using a horizontally aligned CNT array achieves a mobility of 80 cm2 V−1 s−1, a subthreshold slope of 140 mV per decade, and an on/off ratio of up to 105. Furthermore, as an alternative to solder bumps, CNTs can be used as a conductor and heat sink for high power amplifiers. Finally, the concept of a nonvolatile memory based on a single CNT aspect switch has been adapted for commercialization by patterning entangled CNT films into functional elements.
In the future, CNTs will not only rely on physics, chemistry and materials science, but also on other engineering disciplines. With the booming development of new technology in the 21st century, there will be a key breakthrough in the large-scale control of the synthesis of CNTs for versatile applications. Simultaneously, the advancement of CNTs has markedly prompted extensive research on other appealing nanocarbons, namely the current thermal graphene as well as CDs. The combination of CNTs and other potential nanocarbons will unequivocally open up new horizons for the rational development of metal-free carbon-based nanostructures, which is a step closer to attaining vast prospects toward industrialization and commercialization.
In short, we have elucidated an overview of different categories of synthesis methods, PL mechanism, intriguing properties and a broad range of applications using 1D CNTs and 0D CDs. At this juncture, a handful of methods can be applied to synthesize different CDs with excellent and controllable characteristics. Heteroatom doping is one of the prudent strategies to produce a variety of CDs with diverse chemical structures and to tune their PL properties. Until now, the burgeoning development in the preparation of CDs has become a cutting-edge research area and unraveling the PL mechanism remains a hot research topic, which can be divided into three groups: (1) the quantum confinement effect of conjugated π-domains in GQDs determined by the carbon core; (2) the molecule state and carbon-core state in CDs determined by the fluorescent molecules modified on the surface or interior of the CDs; and (3) the surface state in CDs determined by hybridization of the backbone and connected chemical groups. Moreover, diverse exquisite advantages are observed for CDs such as low cost, high PLQY, stability, bio-compatibility and others. As a result, CDs have opened up large opportunities for diversified applications. For example, they can be used as a sensitive detector of different ions, DNA and other materials. Inspired by their excellent optical performance, they can be applied in LEDs, and their low toxicity leads to their development in bioimaging, photothermal therapy and other related biochemical fields.
Although significant accomplishment has been made in CNTs and CDs thus far, many challenges still remain to be tackled for their future development. On the one hand, many researchers have reported high QY and blue CDs, but it is worth highlighting that CDs with NIR emission are still in the low QY region, thus preventing their in-depth study for biological applications. On the other hand, more advanced characterization tools are of timely significance to strengthen the fundamental PL mechanism, which requires efforts from all parties and disciplines with diverse backgrounds such as materials engineering, chemical engineering, chemistry, physics, biology, biomedical engineering and computational engineering. Looking forward, it is envisioned that a combination of experimental results and theoretical simulations will be imperative to fill the gap between experiments and theory for the properties of CNTs and CDs so that this will bring momentous breakthroughs in multifunctional applications. Last but not least, with astounding discovery in this realm of CNTs and CDs in times to come, we are certain that this will be far beyond what has been overviewed in the current review paper.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Q. Xu acknowledges support from Beijing Nova Program through Interdisciplinary Studies Cooperative Project (No. Z181100006218138) and Science Foundation of China University of Petroleum-Beijing (No. 2462018BJC004). W.-J. Ong acknowledges financial assistance and faculty start-up grant support from Xiamen University.
References
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. C. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 2 CrossRef .
S. Lijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hirsch, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 868–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, M. B. Nardelli and J. Bernholc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 144105 CrossRef .
B. I. Yakobson and R. E. Smalley, Am. Sci., 1997, 85, 324–337 Search PubMed .
H. Dai, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 218–241 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ponomarenko, R. Gorbachev, G. Yu, D. Elias, R. Jalil, A. Patel, A. Mishchenko, A. Mayorov, C. Woods and J. Wallbank, Nature, 2013, 497, 594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wehling, A. M. Black-Schaffer and A. V. Balatsky, Adv. Phys., 2014, 63, 1–76 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, I. Skachko, F. Duerr, A. Luican and E. Y. Andrei, Nature, 2009, 462, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wei, R. Vajtai and P. Ajayan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1172–1174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berber, Y.-K. Kwon and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Jiao, Y. Yao, X. Xian and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2285–2310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. De Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Riggs, Z. Guo, A. D. L. Carroll and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5879–5880 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. R. Wilson and D. I. Schuster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5348–5349 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley, K. L. Rialon, R. B. Weisma, S. M. Bachilo, M. J. O'Connell, W. H. Noon, P. J. Bout, C. B. Huffman and M. S. Strano, Science, 2002, 297, 593–596 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. W. And and S. M. Bachilo, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1235–1238 CrossRef .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
W.-D. Liu and B. Yang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2017, 28, 675–690 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, R. Cong, S. Zhu, X. Zhao, J. Liu, J. S. Tse, S. Meng and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4062–4068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, J. Song, Y. Dong, L. Xu, J. Li and H. Zeng, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 143–156 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Shen, X. Liu, Y. Zhu and H. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2565–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, N. Gao, L. Wu, J. Ren, W. Wei and X. Qu, Chemistry, 2013, 19, 13362–13368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Li, J. Ji, R. Fei, C.-Z. Wang, Q. Lu, J.-R. Zhang, L.-P. Jiang and J.-J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2971–2979 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Mei and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5602–5606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Zhang, H. Wang, A. L. Antaris, L. Li, S. Diao, R. Ma, A. Nguyen, G. Hong, Z. Ma, J. Wang, S. Zhu, J. M. Castellano, T. Wyss-Coray, Y. Liang, J. Luo and H. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6872–6879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858–6860 RSC .
Y.-F. Kang, Y.-H. Li, Y.-W. Fang, Y. Xu, X.-M. Wei and X.-B. Yin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11835 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu and L. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16064 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, Y.-C. Tan, L.-L. Tan, N. Li, Y. H. Ng, X. Wen and S.-P. Chai, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1673–1696 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Huang, Y. Zou, B. Guo, Y. Gu and H. Zeng, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 433–439 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jin, Z. Chen, C. Dong, Z. Cheng, X. Du, Q. Zeng, F. Liu, H. Sun, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7101–7110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Z. Zhu, Y. Zou and H. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13407–13413 RSC .
R. Zhang, K. Cheng, A. L. Antaris, X. Ma, M. Yang, S. Ramakrishnan, G. Liu, A. Lu, H. Dai, M. Tian and Z. Cheng, Biomaterials, 2016, 103, 265–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Z. Ma, H. Wang, B. Zhou, S. Zhu, Y. Zhong, J. Wang, H. Wan, A. Antaris, R. Ma, X. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Sun, W. Liu, Y. Liang and H. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605497 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Welsher, S. P. Sherlock and H. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8943–8948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. Tsang, X. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strauss, J. T. Margraf, C. Dolle, B. Butz, T. J. Nacken, J. Walter, W. Bauer, W. Peukert, E. Spiecker, T. Clark and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17308–17316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, W. Lu, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 184, 156–162 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, B. Li, Y. Ye, W. Cai, W. Li, C. Yang, Y. Chen, M. Xu, N. Li, X. Zheng, J. Street, Y. Luo and L. Cai, Nano Res., 2017, 11, 3691–3701 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Su, L. Cai, B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, N. Li, X. Gong, Z. Gu, Y. Chen, Y. Tan, C. Dong and T. S. Sreeprasad, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17919–17927 RSC .
Q. Xu, T. Kuang, Y. Liu, L. Cai, X. Peng, T. Sreenivasan Sreeprasad, P. Zhao, Z. Yu and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7204–7219 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Yang and C. Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8605–8607 RSC .
S. Zhuo, M. Shao and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9454–9477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gam, M. Bcm and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
R. Wang, K. Q. Lu, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3717–3734 RSC .
M. Han, S. Zhu, S. Lu, Y. Song, T. Feng, S. Tao, J. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2018, 19, 201–218 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, T. Zheng, X. Li, J. Xu and H. Zeng, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 457–472 CrossRef .
L. Wang and M. Pumera, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 134–141 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, F. Wei, G. Luo, H. Yu and G. Gu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 364, 568–572 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wick, P. Manser, L. K. Limbach, U. Dettlaff-Weglikowska, F. Krumeich, S. Roth, W. J. Stark and A. Bruinink, Toxicol. Lett., 2007, 168, 121–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, K. Teo, C. Ducati, N. Rupesinghe, G. Amaratunga, A. Ferrari, D. Roy, J. Robertson and W. Milne, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5308–5317 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Z. Huang, J. Xu, J. Wang, P. Bush, M. Siegal and P. Provencio, Science, 1998, 282, 1105–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jo, Y. Tu, Z. Huang, D. Carnahan, D. Wang and Z. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3520–3522 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, M. Jain, Q. Li, D. E. Petersion, Y. Zhu and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1130–1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Peng, X. Sun, F. Cai, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Liao, D. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Lu and Y. Zhu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 738–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, Z. Zhang, X. Lu, G. Guan, H. Li and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7776–7780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, L. Kang, Q. Zhao, H. Zhong, S. Zhang, L. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Lin, Q. Li and Z. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, D. Hasegawa, S. Chiashi and S. Maruyama, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15119–15123 RSC .
D. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Terrones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 419–501 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, H. T. Soh, A. M. Cassell, C. F. Quate and H. Dai, Nature, 1998, 395, 878 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, M. Woodson, R. Smalley and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1025–1028 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. Chang, J. Cao, Q. Wang, W. Kim, Y. Li, N. Morris, E. Yenilmez, J. Kong and H. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3155–3157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, X. Cai and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5636–5637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Cassel, N. R. Franklin, T. W. Tombler, E. M. Chan, J. Han and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7975–7976 CrossRef .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zheng, M. O'connell, S. Doorn, X. Liao, Y. Zhao, E. Akhadov, M. Hoffbauer, B. Roop, Q. Jia, R. Dye and Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kocabas, A. Moonsub Shim and J. A. Rogers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4540–4541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wen, R. Zhang, W. Qian, Y. Wang, P. Tan, J. Nie and F. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1294–1296 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Yang, D. Luo, Z. Xu, J. Wei, J.-Q. Wang, Z. Xu, F. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2014, 510, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, L. Ding, S. Yang and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3849–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, C. Wang, X. Tu, B. Liu, L. Chen, M. Zheng and C. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1199 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Kang, X. Wang, L. Tong, L. Yang, Z. Wang, K. Qi, S. Deng, Q. Li and X. Bai, Nature, 2017, 543, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, H. Xie, W. Qian and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6156–6161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Geblinger, A. Ismach and E. Joselevich, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Wang, D. Zhang, K. Qi, J. Yang, Z. Xu, M. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8688–8691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ding, A. Tselev, J. Wang, D. Yuan, H. Chu, T. P. McNicholas, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 800–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Che, C. Wang, J. Liu, B. Liu, X. Lin, J. Parker, C. Beasley, H.-S. P. Wong and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7454–7462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, P. X. Hou, C. Liu, B. W. Wang, H. Jiang, M. L. Chen, D. M. Sun, J. C. Li, H. T. Cong, E. I. Kauppinen and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ebbesen and P. Ajayan, Nature, 1992, 358, 220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ando, X. Zhao, T. Sugai and M. Kumar, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Fan, M. Liu, H. Cong, H. Cheng and M. S. Dresselhaus, Science, 1999, 286, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, Z. L. Wang, Z. Bai, W. A. De Heer, L. Dai and M. Gao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thess, R. Lee, P. Nikolaev, H. Dai, P. Petit, J. Robert, C. Xu, Y. H. Lee, S. G. Kim and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 1996, 273, 483–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saito, K. Takatani, T. Sakka and Y. H. Ogata, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2002, 197, 56–60 CrossRef .
S. Tamir and Y. Drezner, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2006, 252, 4819–4823 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terrones, N. Grobert, J. Olivares, J. P. Zhang, H. Terrones, K. Kordatos, W. K. Hsu, J. P. Hare, P. D. Townsend and K. Prassides, Nature, 1997, 388, 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, A. M. Cassell and H. Dai, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 292, 567–574 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Xie, Y.-W. Mai and X.-P. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2005, 49, 89–112 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, B. T. Chu, B. Ballesteros, W. Wang, C. Johnston, J. M. Sykes and P. S. Grant, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065605 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, T. Hayashi, M. Endo, Y. Kaburagi, T. Tsukada, J. Shan, K. Osato and S. Tsuruoka, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2243–2250 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, M. Wan, T. Lin and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 136–139 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, K. B. K. Teo, C. Ducati and N. L. Rupesinghe, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5308–5317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, K. Saito, W. Hu and Z. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 346, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Liu and Y. Y. Li, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2045–2050 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, T. Kuang, Y. Liu, L. Cai, X. Peng, T. S. Sreeprasad, P. Zhao, Z. Yu and N. Li, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7204–7219 RSC .
X. Zhang, M. Jiang, N. Niu, Z. Chen, S. Li, S. Liu and J. Li, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 11–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-P. Sun, X. Wang, F. Lu, L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, P. G. Luo, L. Gu and L. M. Veca, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18295–18298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, Y. Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. A. Chen, I. S. Chen, C. W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17036 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Zhang, L. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. An, D. Zhou, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Joule, 2017, 1, 383–393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Y. Xie, K. Zou and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1144–1173 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wu, P. Zhang, M. X. Gao, C. F. Liu, W. Wang, F. Leng and C. Z. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2868–2873 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Qin, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2037–2041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, Q. Lu, Y. Hou, M. Liu, H. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Yao, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 2195–2203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Chen, M. Zheng, H. Zhao, Y. Zhao and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 4, 298–304 CrossRef .
M. Xu, G. He, Z. Li, F. He, F. Gao, Y. Su, L. Zhang, Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10307–10315 RSC .
L. K. Putri, W. J. Ong, S. C. Wei and S. P. Chai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 2–14 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, P. Pu, J. Zhao, C. Dong, C. Gao, Y. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 542–546 RSC .
C. Shen, J. Wang, Y. Cao and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6668–6675 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, G. Trivizas, M. A. Karakassides, M. Baikousi, A. Kouloumpis, D. Gournis, A. Bakandritsos, K. Hola, O. Kozak, R. Zboril, I. Papagiannouli, P. Aloukos and S. Couris, Carbon, 2015, 83, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, X. Song, Y. Chen, M. Rong, T. Zhao, Y. Wang and X. Chen, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 869, 89–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Li, L. Q. Xu, Y. Qiao and J. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3905–3912 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shan, L. Chai, J. Ma, Z. Qian, J. Chen and H. Feng, Analyst, 2014, 139, 2322–2325 RSC .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Bakandritsos, A. Kouloumpis, D. Gournis, M. Krysmann, E. P. Giannelis, K. Polakova, K. Safarova, K. Hola and R. Zboril, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23327–23330 RSC .
H. Chen, Y. Xie, A. M. Kirillov, L. Liu, M. Yu, W. Liu and Y. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5036–5039 RSC .
X. Sun, C. Brückner and Y. Lei, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17278–17282 RSC .
X. Miao, X. Yan, D. Qu, D. Li, F. F. Tao and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18549–18556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, J. S. Wei and H. M. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13817–13823 RSC .
Y. Zhang and J. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 20154–20159 RSC .
F. Li, C. Liu, J. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Liu and F. Tian, RSC Adv., 2013, 4, 3201–3205 RSC .
R. B. Weisman and S. M. Bachilo, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1235–1238 CrossRef CAS .
D. Robertson, D. Brenner and J. Mintmire, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 12592 CrossRef .
Y. Yang and W. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 041901 CrossRef .
M.-F. Yu, T. Kowalewski and R. S. Ruoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 1456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Ruoff and D. C. Lorents, Carbon, 1995, 33, 925–930 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Ruoff, J. Tersoff, D. C. Lorents, S. Subramoney and B. Chan, Nature, 1993, 364, 514 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pop, D. Mann, Q. Wang, K. Goodson and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 96–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kim, L. Shi, A. Majumdar and P. McEuen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 215502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, P. K. Kuo, R. L. Thomas, T. R. Anthony and W. F. Banholzer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 70, 3764–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mintmire, D. Robertson and C. White, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1993, 54, 1835–1840 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ando, NPG Asia Mater., 2009, 1, 17 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, J.-Y. Park, S. Huang, J. Liu and P. L. McEuen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 146805 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-P. Yang, L. Ci, J. A. Bur, S.-Y. Lin and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 446–451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Ju, W. P. Kopcha and F. Papadimitrakopoulos, Science, 2009, 323, 1319–1323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Iakoubovskii, N. Minami, S. Kazaoui, T. Ueno, Y. Miyata, K. Yanagi, H. Kataura, S. Ohshima and T. Saito, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17420–17424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Koutnik, P. Anzenbacher, P. J. Roland, R. Ellingson and L. Sun, MRS Adv., 2017, 2, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, B. Kang, J. Lee, S. Kim, G. T. Kim, H. Kang, B. R. Lee, H. Kim, S. Shim and G. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6840–6847 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Chen, C. H. Park, B. W. Boudouris, J. Horng, B. Geng, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, R. A. Segalman, S. G. Louie and F. Wang, Nature, 2011, 471, 617–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Sk, A. Ananthanarayanan, L. Huang, K. H. Lim and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6954–6960 RSC .
Z. Tomovic, M. D. Watson and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 755–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Mueller, X. Yan, B. Dragnea and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 56–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, L. Wang, B. Li, Y. Song, X. Zhao, G. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Lu, J. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 77, 462–472 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. Hwang, M. Kim, D. Shin, D. Shin, C. Kim, S. Yang, J. Park, E. Hwang, S. Choi, G. Ko, S. Sim, C. Sone, H. Choi, S. Bae and B. H. Hong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8203–8208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kim, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075449 CrossRef .
N. Fuyuno, D. Kozawa, Y. Miyauchi, S. Mouri, R. Kitaura, H. Shinohara, T. Yasuda, N. Komatsu and K. Matsuda, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, S. Zhu, S. Xiang, X. Zhao, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Fu and B. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4676–4682 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Ray, Y. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Cao, S. T. Yang, F. Lu, M. J. Meziani, L. Tian, K. W. Sun, M. A. Bloodgood and Y. P. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5310–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bao, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D. W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, X. Wen, Y.-R. Toh and J. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 25552–25557 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, P. Yu, Y.-R. Toh, X. Hao and J. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 173–178 CrossRef .
Z. Gan, S. Xiong, X. Wu, T. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Gan, J. Guo, J. Shen, L. Sun and P. Chu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 926–932 CrossRef .
S. N. Qu, X. Y. Wang, Q. P. Lu, X. Y. Liu and L. J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12215–12218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gan, H. Xu and Y. Hao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7794–7807 RSC .
G. Eda, Y. Lin, C. Mattevi, H. Yamaguchi, H. Chen, I. Chen, C. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Sun, X. Li, W. Zhou, Z. Wang, P. He, G. Ding, X. Xie, Z. Kang and M. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8660–8667 RSC .
H. Ding, S. B. Yu, J. S. Wei and H. M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Reddy, A. Rehor, H. G. Schmoekel, J. A. Hubbell and M. A. Swartz, J. Controlled Release, 2006, 112, 26–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2013–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hong, S. Diao, J. Chang, A. L. Antaris, C. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Zhao, D. N. Atochin, P. L. Huang and K. I. Andreasson, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Antaris, J. T. Robinson, O. K. Yaghi, G. Hong, S. Diao, R. Luong and H. Dai, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3644–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, K. Yang and H. Dai, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. Chen, X. Zhao, L. V. Kuznetsova, S. S. Wong and I. Ojima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16778–16785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, R. Rani, N. Dilbaghi, K. Tankeshwar and K. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 46, 158–196 RSC .
S. Polizu, O. Savadogo, P. Poulin and L. H. Yahia, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1883–1904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Odom, J.-L. Huang, P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1998, 391, 62 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, N. R. Franklin, C. Zhou, M. G. Chapline, S. Peng, K. Cho and H. Dai, Science, 2000, 287, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng and P. Ji, Biotechnol. Adv., 2011, 29, 889–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and M. Musameh, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 2075–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Nagarajan, I. Habibulla and D. Venkataraman, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 2691–2697 RSC .
M. Tominaga, S. Nomura and I. Taniguchi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 1184–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Azadbakht, M. Roushani, A. R. Abbasi, S. Menati and Z. Derikvand, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 68, 585–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kesik, F. E. Kanik, J. Turan, M. Kolb, S. Timur, M. Bahadir and L. Toppare, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 205, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mundaca, M. Moreno-Guzmán, M. Eguílaz, P. Yáñez-Sedeño and J. Pingarrón, Talanta, 2012, 99, 697–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Vicentini, B. C. Janegitz, C. M. Brett and O. Fatibello-Filho, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 188, 1101–1108 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Shearer, L. Yu, R. Fenati, A. J. Sibley, J. S. Quinton, C. T. Gibson, A. V. Ellis, G. G. Andersson and J. G. Shapter, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1625–1634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. T. Ng, A. Cassell, W. Fan, H. Chen, Q. Ye, J. Koehne, J. Han and M. Meyyappan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 597–602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, S. Bansaruntip, N. Nakayama, E. Yenilmez, Y.-L. Chang and Q. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1632–1636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, S. Taylor, H. Li, K. A. Shiral Fernando, L. Qu, W. Wang, L. Gu, B. Zhou and Y. P. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 527–541 RSC .
G. Li, X. Li, J. Wan and S. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3281–3287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saeedfar, L. Y. Heng and C. P. Chiang, Bioelectrochemistry, 2017, 118, 106–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gong, R. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 1951–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. De La Zerda, C. Zavaleta, S. Keren, S. Vaithilingam, S. Bodapati, Z. Liu, J. Levi, B. R. Smith, T.-J. Ma and O. Oralkan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, P. Pu, J. Zhao, C. Dong, C. Gao, Y. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 542–546 RSC .
J.-W. Kim, E. I. Galanzha, E. V. Shashkov, H.-M. Moon and V. P. Zharov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Chang, X. Chen, Z. Gu, F. Zhao, Z. Chai and Y. Zhao, Biotechnol. Adv., 2014, 32, 727–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, Y. Liu, B. D. Dolash, Y. Jung, M. N. Slipchenko, D. E. Bergstrom and J. X. Cheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 7, 56 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wen, Y. Xu, H. Li, A. Lu and S. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11346–11358 RSC .
X. Zhou, J. Hedberg, Y. Miyahara, P. Grutter and K. Ishibashi, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 495703 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, Sensors, 2014, 14, 11957–11992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, Y. Zhang, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3349–3337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2461–2466 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 RSC .
A. Vlad, N. Singh, C. Galande and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402115 CrossRef .
L. Hu, H. Wu, F. L. Mantia, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5843–5848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, W. Weng, J. Ren, L. Qiu, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Chen, J. Deng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Weng, Q. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Lin, J. Ren, X. Lu, M. Wang and H. Peng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3432–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Jiao, L. Lu, L. Wang, T. Chen and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 13929–13934 CrossRef .
Y. He, P. Xu, B. Zhang, Y. Du, B. Song, X. Han and H. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38401–38408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, Y. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Fang, W. Weng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 7998–8003 CrossRef .
P. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Xu, L. Bao, L. Wang, J. Pan, Z. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Small, 2018, 14, 1702926 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liao, H. Sun, J. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Xie, X. Fu, X. Sun, B. Wang and H. Peng, Small, 2017, 14, 1702052 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, Y. Xu, S. He, P. Chen, L. Bao, Y. Hu, B. Wang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Nat. Protoc., 2017, 12, 1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goyal, A. L. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2011, 7, 1709–1713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, K. Song, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2597–2603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and Z. Dai, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6420–6431 RSC .
G. Başkaya, Y. Yıldız, A. Savk, T. O. Okyaya, S. Eriş, H. Serta and F. Şen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 91, 728–733 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Komori, T. Terse-Thakoor and A. Mulchandani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3647–3654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Puertas, M. D. Villa, E. Mendoza, C. Jimenez-Jorquera, J. M. de la Fuente, C. Fernandez-Sanchez and V. Grazu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 274–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, J. Shao, C. Chen, H. Li, R. Wang, Y. Chi, X. Lin and G. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4738–4743 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, F. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Y. Choi, N. Guo, J. Guo, K. Tackett, P. Anilkumar, G. Liu and Q. Quan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5684–5693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, L. Zhu, J. Wu, Y. Hou, P. Wang, Z. Wang and M. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 63, 506–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, M. Dong, S. Liu and C. Huang, Luminescence, 2015, 30, 411–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shellaiah and K. W. Sun, Chemosensors, 2017, 5, 36 CrossRef .
X. Chang, H. Xin, C. Shuai, C. Xu-Wei and W. Jian-Hua, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2016, 44, 41–48 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z.-Y. Zhang, R.-P. Liang, Y.-H. Li and J.-D. Qiu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 4423–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Loo, Z. Sofer, A. D. Bouå, P. Ulbrich, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1951–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-H. Noh, H. Y. Ko, C. H. Lee, M.-S. Jeong, Y. W. Chang and S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4438–4445 RSC .
S. Maiti, K. Das and P. K. Das, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8851–8853 RSC .
Q. Huang, X. Lin, J. J. Zhu and Q. X. Tong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 507–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Hu, Q. T. Huang, Y. Lin, C. Wei, H. Q. Zhang, W. X. Zhang, Z. B. Guo, X. X. Bao, J. G. Shi and A. Y. Hao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Bai, W. Shang, W. Xie, H. Ma, Y. Fu, D. Fang, H. Sun, L. Fan, M. Han, C. Liu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7461–7467 RSC .
R. Liu, D. Wu, S. Liu, K. Koynov, W. Knoll and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 4668–4671 CrossRef .
Y. Choi, S. Kim, M. H. Choi, S. R. Ryoo, J. Park, D. H. Min and B. S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5781–5789 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chandra, P. Das, S. Bag, D. Laha and P. Pramanik, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1533–1540 RSC .
F. Yuan, L. Ding, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, S. Zhou, D. Fang and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11727–11733 RSC .
Y. Dong, H. Pang, H. B. Yang, C. Guo, J. Shao, Y. Chi, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7800–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shang, X. Zhang, M. Zhang, Z. Fan, Y. Sun, M. Han and L. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5799–5806 RSC .
Y. Wu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2112–2124 RSC .
X. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Xu, L. Feng, Y. Ji, L. Tao, S. Li and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5581–5584 RSC .
M. Vedamalai, A. P. Periasamy, C.-W. Wang, Y.-T. Tseng, L.-C. Ho, C.-C. Shih and H.-T. Chang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13119–13125 RSC .
D. Qu, Z. Sun, M. Zheng, J. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, H. Zhao, X. Liu and Z. Xie, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, G. Liang and S. H. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500002 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Lee, P. D. Nallathamby, L. M. Browning, C. J. Osgood and X.-H. Xu, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 133–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, B. Liu, D. Feng, C. Gao, M. Wu, N. He, X. Yang, L. Li and X. Feng, Integr. Biol., 2012, 4, 285–291 RSC .
E. R. Reddy, R. K. Banote, K. Chatti, P. Kulkarni and M. S. Rajadurai, ChemBioChem, 2012, 13, 1889–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Handy, T. B. Henry, T. M. Scown, B. D. Johnston and C. R. Tyler, Ecotoxicology, 2008, 17, 396–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, L. Cao, P. G. Luo, F. Lu, X. Wang, H. Wang, M. J. Meziani, Y. Liu, G. Qi and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 763–777 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yuan, S. Li, Z. Fan, X. Meng, L. Fan and S. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 565–586 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zheng, S. Liu, J. Li, D. Qu, H. Zhao, X. Guan, X. Hu, Z. Xie, X. Jing and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3554–3560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, Q. Jia, W. Liu, L. Guo, Q. Liu, M. Lan, H. Zhang, X. Meng and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4169–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ruan, J. Qian, S. Shen, J. Zhu, X. Jiang, Q. He and H. Gao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10040–10047 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Meng, S. Wang, C. Li, W. Shi, J. Chen, J. Wang and R. Huang, Small, 2015, 11, 3575–3581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, I. Park, J. Lim, M. Park, H. Cho, H. Woo, D. Y. Yoon and K. Char, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2362–2366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. A. Wang, L. S. Li, D. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Xu, C. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 717 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bai, G. Caputo, Z. Hao, V. T. Freitas, J. Zhang, R. L. Longo, O. L. Malta, R. A. Ferreira and N. Pinna, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
V. Colvin, M. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W.-K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nature, 2002, 420, 800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bhattacharya and Z. Mi, Proc. IEEE, 2007, 95, 1723–1740 CAS .
A. Valizadeh, H. Mikaeili, M. Samiei, S. M. Farkhani, N. Zarghami, A. Akbarzadeh and S. Davaran, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2012, 7, 480 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fan, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, S. Zhou, D. Fang and S. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 70, 149–156 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, M. Kreiter, B. He, S. Pang and C.-Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3309–3311 RSC .
F. Wang, Y.-H. Chen, C.-Y. Liu and D.-G. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3502–3504 RSC .
H. Choi, S.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J.-W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha and J.-R. Jeong, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Cao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, X. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. Zeng and J. Hao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luk, L. Tang, W. Zhang, S. Yu, K. Teng and S. Lau, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22378–22381 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Kalytchuk, S. V. Kershaw, Y. Wang, P. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Zhao and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11234–11241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yuan, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Li, Z. A. Tan, L. Fan and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604436 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Hames, I. Mora-Seró and R. S. Sánchez, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1575–1588 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, D. Qu, D. Yang, B. Nie, Y. Zhao, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704740 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yuan, T. Yuan, L. Sui, Z. Wang, Z. Xi, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, Z. Tan, A. Chen, M. Jin and S. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2249 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-Y. Min, J. Bang, J. Park, C.-L. Lee, S. Lee, J.-J. Park, U. Jeong, S. Kim and T.-W. Lee, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11585–11589 RSC .
L.-H. Mao, W.-Q. Tang, Z.-Y. Deng, S.-S. Liu, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 6417–6425 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Cao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, X. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. Zeng, J. Hao and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, F. Yuan, X. Li, Y. Li, H. G. Zhong, L. Fan and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702910 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, X. Feng, Y. Zhang, L. Yan, Y. Yang and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8618–8632 RSC .
C.-X. Li, C. Yu, C.-F. Wang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 6307–6311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Y. Zhang, K. Sun, C. Reckmeier, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Zhao, C. Wu, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12045–12050 RSC .
H. Yu, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9454–9477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Zhan, K. Ohkubo, Y. Yamada, M. Wu and S. Fukuzumi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2015, 152, 63–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, Y.-C. Tan, L.-L. Tan, N. Li, Y. H. Ng, X. Wen and S.-P. Chai, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1673–1696 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sahu, Y. Liu, P. Wang, C. E. Bunker, K. A. S. Fernando, W. K. Lewis, E. A. Guliants, F. Yang, J. Wang and Y.-P. Sun, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8631–8636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, H. Cui, L. Li and Z. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3058–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Willkomm, K. L. Orchard, A. Reynal, E. Pastor, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 9–23 RSC .
B. C. M. Martindale, G. A. M. Hutton, C. A. Caputo and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6018–6025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Postma, T. Teepen, Z. Yao, M. Grifoni and C. Dekker, Science, 2001, 293, 76–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Quan Xu	Quan Xu received his Bachelor's degree from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University and Ph.D. from the University of North Texas, Department of Materials Science and Engineering under Prof. Zhenhai Xia's supervision. He joined the Department of New Energy and Materials Science and Engineering, China University of Petroleum-Beijing in 2014 and is now promoted as an Associate Processor. He has over 50 publications and his research is related to zero to two-dimensional carbon materials, including carbon dots, graphene, and carbon nanotubes for their energy and environmental applications.
Weijun Li	Weijun Li received his Bachelor's degree from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Northwest Normal University in 2017. He is currently a graduate student at the Institute of New Energy, China University of Petroleum (Beijing). His research focuses on manufacturing two-dimensional carbon materials and bio-inspired materials.
Wee-Jun Ong	Wee-Jun Ong received his B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in Chemical Engineering from Monash University. In 2015, he was a Visiting Research Fellow at the University of New South Wales and Monash University, Australia. In 2016, he joined IMRE, A*STAR Singapore as a Staff Scientist. Since 2018, he has been an Assistant Professor in the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering at Xiamen University, Malaysia. His research interests focus on photo(electro)catalytic and electrochemical H2O splitting, CO2 reduction and N2 fixation for energy conversion and storage. To date, he has more than 10 ESI highly cited papers and 5 hot papers. He has published over 45 papers with more than 4000 citations and an h-index of 28. In 2018, he worked as an Emerging Investigator of the Journal of Materials Chemistry A. Currently, he serves as the Associate Editor of Frontiers in Chemistry and Frontiers in Materials, a Board Member of Materials Horizons, Scientific Reports, Nanotechnology and Nano Futures. For more details, see https://sites.google.com/site/wjongresearch/.

 	Fig. 1  Timeline of major milestones in the controlled synthesis of CNTs. This timeline includes the following reports. Iijima, Nature, 1991 (reproduced with permission.2 Copyright 1991, Nature Publishing Group), Iijima et al., Nature, 1993 (reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 1993, Nature Publishing Group), Dai et al., Nature, 1998 (reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 1998, Nature Publishing Group), Dai et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999 (reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society), Dai et al., Science, 2000 (reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2000, American Association for the Advancement of Science), Zhu et al., Nat. Mater., 2004 (reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2004, Nature Publishing Group), Rogers et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006 (reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society), Joselevich et al., Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008 (reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group), Wei et al., Chem. Mater., 2010 (reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society), Zhou et al., Nat. Commun., 2012 (reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group), Wei et al., ACS Nano, 2013 (reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society), Li et al., Nature, 2014 (reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group), Li et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015 (reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society), Cheng et al., Nat. Commun., 2016 (reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group), Zhang et al., Nature, 2017 (reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of the schematic of the proposed preparation of CNTs. (A) Schematic of arc-discharge method. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (B) Diagram of a CVD setup and models for CNT growth. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2004, Elsevier. (C) Diagram of the laser-furnace apparatus. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (D) Summary of the proposed growth mechanism of CNTs on the substrate. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2001, AIP Publishing LLC. (E) Diagram of the pyrolysis device. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 1997, Nature Publishing Group. (F) Diagram of the acetylene flame reactor. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2006, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM and TEM of CNTs prepared by five typical preparation methods. (A) SEM images of aligned nanotubes synthesized by the catalytic pyrolysis method. (i)–(iii) Low and higher magnification of adjacent bundles. (iv) Electron diffraction patterns. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 1997, Nature Publishing Group. (B) EM showing individual single-shell nanotubes fabricated by the arc-discharge method. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 1993, Nature Publishing Group. (C) SEM of SWCNTs prepared by the laser evaporation method. Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 1996, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (D) SEM image (i), TEM image (ii), and electron diffraction patterns of CNTs produced by the template method. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2003, Wiley-VCH. (E) EM (i) and TEM images (ii) of CNTs synthesized by an ethylene diffusion-flame. Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2001, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Timeline of major milestones in the controlled synthesis of CDs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthesis of common doped CDs. (A) Schematic diagram of the hydrothermal synthesis process of CDs from Bombyx mori silk. (B) Photoluminescence spectra and UV-visible absorption spectra. The insets show photos taken under daylight (left) and 365 nm (right). (A) and (B) are reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) A synthetic scheme with S-doped C dots with blue luminescence. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Scheme of the preparation of S,N-co-CDs with blue luminescence. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme of the synthesis of uncommon doped CDs. (A) Scheme of B-CD preparation and glucose-sensing mechanisms based on B-CDs and H2O2. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) (i) Synthetic process diagram of Gd-CDs. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (ii) Synthetic scheme of CDs with carboxyl and amine groups by one-step solvothermal method. (iii) The principle of operating a fluorescent CD-Tb nanoprobe for the identification of dipicolinic acid (DPA). Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Four representative properties of CNTs. (A) (i) Deformability of MWCNTs on a silicon wafer as visualized by tapping-mode AFM. (ii) Force–strain curves of the MWCNTs based on deformabilities. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2000, American Physical Society. (B) (i) SEM image of typical SWCNTs. (ii) Extracted values of the thermal conductivity vs. average SWCNT temperature. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (C) Scan gate microscopy images of (i) the device with normal peak mobility and (ii) the circled device. (iii) Electrical properties of CNTs. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2005, American Physical Society. (D) (i) Solvent-driven influences on the PL characteristics and brightness of SWCNTs in ethyl acetate. (ii) PL emission. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2009, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photoluminescence mechanisms of GQDs. (A) Density functional theory (DFT) calculations in GQDs. Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH. (B) The suggested energy levels of C42H18, C96H30, C132, C132H34, and C222H42. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. (C) UV-vis spectra of GQDs A, B, and C, which correspond to synthesized reaction temperatures at 120, 100, and 80 °C, respectively. The inset is a photograph of the corresponding GQDs under UV light with 365 nm excitation. (D) PL spectra of GQDs with different emission colors excited at 318, 331, and 429 nm. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (E–F) Size-dependent PL spectra excited at 325 nm for GQDs with average sizes of 5–35 nm in deionized water. Also shown is the dependence of PL peak shifts on the excitation wavelength from 300 to 470 nm for GQDs with average sizes of 5–35 nm. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photoluminescence mechanisms of CDs. (A) The CD structure and AFM topography image of CDs on the mica substrate with the height profile along the line in the image. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society. (B) Three types of CDs with green emission chosen to clarify the surface-state PL mechanism. (C) The electronic state in CDs. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Classification and specific methods of CNT functionalization strategies. (A) The detailed classification of the functionalization strategies and some specific methods. (B) A basic structure of the glucose biosensors with the glucose oxidase (GO) and a cationic poly (diallyl dimethyl ammonium) chloride (PDDA) immobilized layer-by-layer on the surface of CNTs. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) The detecting mechanism of the CNT-based DNA biosensors. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Application of CNTs in electronic devices. (A) (i) Schematic of the lamination process and a demonstration of the paper-shaped LIBs. (ii) The galvanostatic charging and discharging curves of the CNT-based paper-shaped LTO–LCO battery for the first cycle. (iii) The performance of LTO–LCO battery. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (B) Two typical 3D structures of CNTs: (i) fiber-shaped and (ii) array-structured. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2014, Wily-VCH. (C) (i) Preparation method of the fluorescent fiber electrodes. (ii), (iii) Photos of the fluorescent fiber under natural light and ultraviolet light, respectively. (iv), (v) SEM and optical microscopy images of a fluorescent supercapacitor fiber, respectively. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (D) Schematic of (i) the structure and (ii) the working mechanism of the 3D silicon–oxygen fiber battery. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Application of CDs in LED and bioimaging. (A) Characterization of white LED devices fabricated using CDs. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2018, Springer. (B) CD based white LED device. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (C) Emission spectra of F-CNPs in the presence of different concentrations of Hg2+. (D) The plot of the fluorescence intensity ratio of F-CNPs at 435 nm vs. the concentrations of Hg2+ (performed in pH 7.0, 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer; I0 and I correspond to the fluorescence intensity of the F-CNPs at 435 nm in the absence and presence of Hg2+, respectively; the excitation wavelength is 340 nm.). The inset shows the linear region of the curve. (C) and (D) are reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (E) Brightfield (i) and multicolor fluorescence [(ii) blue, (iii) green, and (iv) red] images of zebrafish embryos at 3 hpf after soaking for 3 h in CD solutions with different concentrations. Images acquired under bright light show the yolk sac (ys) and the inner mass of embryos (ime). A 10× ocular lens and 4× objective lens were used. Scale bars: 1.0 mm. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  
In vivo fluorescence images of mouse bearing H22 liver cancer after the first intralesional injection of CDs-Oxa. (a–g) 0 min, 2 min, 6 h, 24 h, 24 h 20 min (the second injection), 48 h and 72 h. All are taken under blue light unless otherwise stated. (h) Semiquantitative fluorescence intensities of the tumor area determined at different times. The red arrow indicates the 2nd injection. (i–m) Photographs of the tumor area after intralesional injection of CDs-Oxa after 2 min, 18 h, 24 h, 48 h, and 72 h. (n) Tumor sizes of the H22 xenograft model as a function of time. Reproduced with permission.259 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
