Adsorption characteristics and oxygen reduction reactions on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes: a DFT-D study  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NJ05805B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NJ05805B
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1138-1146Adsorption characteristics and oxygen reduction reactions on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes: a DFT-D study

        
          
            Yifan 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianping 
            Sun
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Huilan 
            Wei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mei 
            Ai
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhao 
            Li
          
        
      
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing, 102206, People's Republic of China. E-mail: sunjp@ncepu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st November 2019
    , Accepted 10th December 2019First published on 11th December 2019AbstractThe adsorption characteristics of oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) intermediates on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes are studied using dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D). The most energy-favorable site of O atoms on pristine antimonene is the top site, with adsorption energy of 3.81 eV. OH, O2, and OOH tend to adsorb on the vacancy site, with adsorption energy of 2.43 eV, 1.59 eV and 1.04 eV, respectively. The most energy-favorable sites of Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes are the valley sites, and the adsorption energies are 4.83 eV and 3.47 eV, respectively, which are higher than the binding energies to form dimers. After the antimonene is decorated with Pt, Co, all intermediates are adsorbed on the Pt, Co atom, with significant enhancement of adsorption strength. Furthermore, the ORR process is simulated, and the free energy changes and activation barriers in each step are calculated. There are both four-electron and two-electron paths on pristine antimonene, and the two-electron path is the dominant path. There are solely four-electron paths on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes. The free energy decline in each step on Pt-decorated antimonene is more even. However, from a kinetic perspective, there exists similarity in the OOR path on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes. The rate-determining steps are the reactions of the adsorbed O atoms reducing to OH on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, and the activation barrier of the rate-determining step on Pt-decorated antimonenes is 0.27 eV lower than that on Co-decorated antimonenes. These findings provide a useful reference for the experimental exploration of monoatom-dispersed antimonenes as fuel cell cathodes.
1. Introduction
With the rapid consumption of fossil fuel energy, greenhouse gases and other pollutants emitted in the process of use have caused serious environmental problems. Therefore, it is urgent to find sustainable energy to replace traditional fossil energy. Fuel cell technology has attracted increasing attention due to its advantages of high energy utilization, environment friendliness, safety and convenience.1–3 However, the energy conversion efficiency of fuel cells is limited by the slow kinetics of oxygen reduction reactions on the cathode, which requires the catalyst to accelerate the reaction.4 Pt and its alloys are the commonly used catalysts, but they have shortcomings, such as high cost, limited reserves, poor durability and easy poisoning by CO.5–7 Therefore, it is essential to develop a new and efficient cathode electrocatalyst for fuel cells. Two-dimensional materials such as graphene, hexagonal boron nitride, phosphorene and antimonene have promising applications in energy storage devices, solar cells and electrocatalysts due to their unique structures and properties, which have gained great interest recently.
Graphene is a hot research material for fuel cell electrodes. Because pristine graphene is chemically stable with no catalytic activity, it is commonly required as a support for using Pt as catalysts.8 In addition, Pt catalysts can be replaced by doping graphene with non-noble metals. Experimentally, Dai's group is one of the pioneers in the study of oxygen reduction reactions of nitrogen-doped carbon materials. Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNT) and nitrogen-doped graphene (N-graphene) were synthesized by pyrolysis and chemical vapor deposition of methane. Compared with Pt, vertically aligned nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (VA-NCNT) and N-graphene have better electrocatalytic activity, long-term operational stability and tolerance to cross-effects in the oxygen reduction reaction of alkaline fuel cells.9,10 Sheng et al. doped boron into graphene by non-catalytic thermal annealing to form boron-doped graphene (B–G). Because of its special structure and unique electronic properties, the synthesized B–G has good electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in alkaline electrolytes.11 Through theoretical calculations, Chen et al. calculated the ORR performance of 10 metals (Al, Si, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Pd, Ag, Pt and Au) doped with graphene (M-G) as electrocatalysts. The binding energy of metal atoms embedded in graphene vacancies is higher than the cohesion energy of the corresponding bulk metals, indicating that the formed M-G catalyst is stable in the reaction environment. Gold-, cobalt- and silver-doped graphene materials were predicted to be efficient ORR catalysts.12 Lu et al. calculated the single-vacancy sulfur-doped graphene (SGV) by using dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D). They found that SGV is very stable, and the sulfur-doped site is the active center of ORR. It was predicted that SGV would be an efficient ORR electrocatalyst.13 Sun et al. studied the adsorption characteristics of O, O2, OH and OOH on B, P-doped graphene and B, P-co-doped graphene based on the first-principles density functional theory. It was found that B, P-co-doped graphene has synergistic effects and better catalytic ability for ORR.14 Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) has attracted much attention due to its low cost and stability. However, pristine hexagonal boron nitride has low ORR activity and conductivity, and a wide bandgap of about 5.5 eV. Its conductivity and ORR activity can be significantly improved by metal loading, metal doping, etc.15,16 Back et al. systematically studied the ORR activity of Ag-, Pt- and Pd-supported h-BNS with/without B and N vacancies. It was found that h-BN@Ag, h-BN@Pd and h-BN@Pt exhibit catalytic activity only when B- or N-vacancy defects are introduced, while h-BN@Cu does not need vacancy defects. Even without vacancy defects, h-BN@Cu is a highly active ORR catalytic system.17 Wen et al. calculated the activation energy and reaction energy of each ORR step of the negatively charged boron nitride (BN) nanosheet by density functional theory (DFT). It was proved that the negatively charged boron nitride nanosheet is a promising and efficient metal-free oxygen reduction electrocatalyst.18 Deng et al. designed a series of metal atom-doped two-dimensional boron nitride (2D-BN) model materials to reveal the relationship between ORR activity and metal dopants. It was found that the oxygen reduction reaction on Co-doped 2D-BN materials takes place through a four-electron path. The activation energy is 0.30 eV, which is lower than that obtained using Pt-based catalysts (0.79 eV), indicating that metal atom-doped 2D-BN materials are suitable candidate materials to replace Pt-based catalysts in oxygen reduction reactions.19 Successfully stripped in 2014,20,21 phosphorene has gained great research interests in energy conversion, storage, photovoltaic devices, etc., because of its unique properties.22–24 However, phosphorene is easily oxidized in ambient environment, which makes it difficult to be applied directly to the field of fuel cells as an ORR electrode material.
Antimonene is a new two-dimensional semiconductor material prepared recently. It has good chemical stability, high thermal conductivity, stress-adjustable bandgap and excellent carrier mobility, which makes it a hot research material.25–27 Experimentally, Wu et al. successfully synthesized monolayer antimonenes on different substrates by the van der Waals epitaxial growth and liquid-phase peeling. The atomic structure of the stripped antimonene with single atomic thickness clearly shows the hexagonal periodicity, which is also known as β-antimonene.28 Ji et al. synthesized high-quality two-dimensional few-layer antimonene by the van der Waals epitaxial growth method. Combined with the first-principles calculations, it was predicted that antimonene has good photoelectric properties.29 Mao et al. synthesized antimonenes on Ag(111) by molecular beam epitaxy. The group indicated that antimonene deposited on the surface of the AgSb2 alloy had a buttoned honeycomb structure.30 Using theoretical calculations, Zhou et al. studied the effect of doping of 3d transition metal (TM) atoms in antimonenes based on the density functional theory (DFT). It was found that doping can endow the nonmagnetic antimonene system with magnetic behavior. Depending on the type of doped atoms, the electronic properties of antimonenes can be effectively adjusted to be semi-metallic, metallic or spin-polarized semiconductive.31 Akturk et al. found that H2, O2, H2O, etc., have weak interactions with antimonenes, while O, H, Li, Al, Ti, etc., have high binding energies with antimonenes, due to which the electronic structure and local atomic structure of antimonenes changed.32 However, there are few reports about antimonenes as electrocatalytic cathodes of fuel cells. In this paper, based on the dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D), we studied the adsorption characteristics of various ORR intermediates (O, OH, O2 and OOH) on pristine antimonenes (Sb), Pt-decorated antimonenes (Pt/Sb) and Co-decorated antimonenes (Co/Sb) as fuel cell cathodes. The ORR process was simulated, and the free energy changes and activation barriers in each step were calculated. It is predicted that our findings would provide useful guidance for the experimental exploration.
2. Theoretical methods
All calculations in this paper were carried out by using the VASP software package based on density functional theory. Considering the non-uniform distribution of charge density, the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the form of Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) was employed to describe exchange and correlation effects, and the dispersion-corrected density functional theory (DFT-D) was used to modify the van der Waals force interaction. The pseudopotential augmented wave method was used to describe the interaction potential between valence electrons and ions. The structural optimization and calculation were carried out using plane wave bases with a cutoff energy of 500 eV. The Monkhorst–Pack was used in the Brillouin zone integral calculation, and the k-points including the Gamma point were set as 11 × 11 × 1. The convergence accuracy of atomic relaxation was set to 0.01 eV Å−1 for the force and 1 × 10−4 eV for the energy. A 4 × 4 × 1 supercell of antimonenes was built, which included 32 atoms. The vacuum layer in the Z direction was set as 20 Å to avoid any interlayer interference. All atoms were fully relaxed in structural optimization.
Adsorption energy (Ead) is defined as: Ead = Eantimonene + Eadsorbate − Eantimonene/adsorbate(1)where Eantimonene, Eadsorbate, and Eantimonene/adsorbate are the energy of the antimonene, species adsorbed on the antimonene, and the whole system after adsorption, respectively.
Reaction energy ΔE is defined as: ΔE = E2 − E1(2)where E1 is the total energy of the system before the reaction, and E2 is the total energy of the system after the reaction.
The calculation method of free energy change ΔG is:33–35 ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS(3)where ΔE, ΔZPE, T, and ΔS are the reaction energy, zero point energy correction, temperature (300 K), and entropy difference, respectively. ΔE and ΔZPE are calculated by DFT, and ΔS is access to literature.36 The PH and the potential impact on the free energy change could be neglected.33
To determine the activation barrier (Eb), the transition states (TS) were searched using the CL-NEB method and further confirmed with a criterion that requires TS having only one imaginary vibration frequency.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Pristine antimonene
Because the most stable structure of antimonene obtained in the relevant experimental reports is β antimonene,28–30 we built a 4 × 4 pristine β antimonene supercell, as shown in Fig. 1(a and b). To be clear, we use different colors to distinguish the upper and lower layers of atoms. The purple atoms represent the upper layer Sb atoms, and the light blue atoms represent the lower layer Sb atoms. The top view and side view of the optimized antimonene are shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. Antimonene has an undulating honeycomb structure, which is a graphene-like structure. The bond length of Sb–Sb is 2.87 Å, and the bond angle is 89.41°, which is consistent with those reported in the literature.30,37 As shown in Fig. 1(c), it is the energy band diagram of pristine antimonenes in which the Fermi energy Ef is set as 0 eV. The top site of the valence band is located at G point in the center of the Brillouin zone, and the bottom of the conduction band is located at K point. Therefore, the pristine antimonene is an indirect band gap semiconductor with a band gap of 1.06 eV. Because the calculated band gap is usually underestimated by the PBE method, the actual band gap of the antimonene is larger than the value we calculated. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the top site of the valence band has high energy dispersion, which indicates that the effective mass of electrons is small, and the electrons have large non-local properties. On the contrary, the energy band is relatively flat at the bottom of the conduction band. The density of states of the pristine antimonene is shown in Fig. 1(d), there is a clear band gap, and the density of states is asymmetric around the Fermi level. The above-mentioned results are consistent with those reported in the literature,32 which shows that the calculation method and parameter settings we selected are reliable.
 Fig. 1  Pristine antimonene: the purple atoms represent the upper layer Sb atoms, and the light blue atoms represent the lower layer Sb atoms. (a) The top view; (b) the side view; (c) the band structure; (d) the density of states. 
The rate of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on fuel cell cathodes is sluggish, and catalysts are usually needed to accelerate the reaction. The adsorption characteristics of ORR intermediates (O, OH, O2, and OOH) will have an important influence on the rate of the reaction in each step. If the adsorption is too weak, it is not conducive to the adsorption of O2 or OOH in the first step of ORR. If the adsorption is too strong, it will make it difficult for OH to combine with H to form H2O, which makes desorption of H2O difficult, thus hindering the further adsorption of O2 or OOH by the active site. Therefore, studying the adsorption characteristics of various intermediates on antimonenes is the first step for the ORR study.
Considering four possible highly symmetric adsorption sites on the antimonene surface, as shown in Fig. 1(a), they are denoted as vacancy H (above the center of the Sb ring), bridge B (above the middle layer of the Sb–Sb bond), top T (above the upper layer of the Sb atom) and valley V (above the lower layer of the Sb atom). We performed structural optimization of four possible adsorption configurations, with all atoms fully relaxed. The top view and side view of the most energy-favorable adsorption configuration are shown in Fig. 2, in which the red atoms represent O atoms and the yellow atom represents a H atom. The most energy-favorable adsorption site of O atom is the T site, and the structure of the antimonene is locally deformed. In addition, the data of the most energy-favorable adsorption configurations are given in Table 1, where adsorption distance d is defined as the shortest distance between the O atom in the intermediates and Sb or Pt, Co atom on the surface of antimonenes, and O–O is defined as the O–O bond length of O2 and OOH after adsorption. The adsorption energy of O atoms on pristine antimonenes is 3.81 eV, and the adsorption distance is 1.87 Å, which shows strong chemical adsorption. OH, O2, and OOH tend to adsorb on the vacancy of antimonene, and the adsorption is relatively weak. The adsorption energies are 2.43 eV, 1.59 eV and 1.04 eV, and the adsorption distances are 2.14 Å, 2.11 Å, and 2.33 Å, respectively. While antimonene keeps its original geometric structure well after adsorption, the atom bond length of intermediates has changed. The O–O bond length of O2 increased from 1.29 Å to 1.46 Å, and the O–O bond length of OOH increased from 1.38 Å to 1.51 Å, indicating that antimonene has clear interaction with the intermediates O2 and OOH, thus weakening the strength of the O–O bonds. The increase in the O–O bond length is conducive to the cleavage of the O–O bond, which is a crucial step for ORR.
 Fig. 2  Adsorption configurations of pristine antimonene: the red atoms represent O atoms, and the yellow atom represents a H atom. Panels (a), (b), (c), and (d) illustrate the top view and side view of the most energy-favorable structure after adsorption of O, OH, O2, and OOH on pristine antimonene, respectively (O-, OH-, O2-, and OOH-Sb). 
Table 1 The adsorption characteristics of O, OH, O2, and OOH on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes




System
O
OH
O2
OOH



E
ad/eV

d/Å

E
ad/eV

d/Å

E
ad/eV

d/Å
O–O/Å

E
ad/eV

d/Å
O–O/Å




Sb
3.81
1.87
2.43
2.14
1.59
2.11
1.46
1.04
2.33
1.51


Pt/Sb
3.70
1.87
2.30
1.99
2.06
2.06
1.45
1.67
2.02
1.49


Co/Sb
4.94
1.64
3.82
1.79
3.23
1.86
1.43
2.44
1.80
1.51




3.2 Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes
Pt and its alloy are the cathode catalytic materials with the highest energy conversion efficiency in commercial fuel cells.38 The adsorption strength of ORR intermediates on the catalyst can reflect the catalytic ability of the catalyst. Pt's appropriate combination with ORR intermediates on the cathode makes Pt the best catalyst. However, as the most commonly used and best performing electrocatalysts, Pt's high cost and low reserves limit its application in fuel cell commercialization. Therefore, it is highly demanding to improve the utilization rate of Pt catalysts or find cheap non-noble metal alternatives.5–7 As antimonene is a new type of two-dimensional semiconductor material, we have studied various transition metal atom-decorated antimonenes and the adsorption of ORR intermediates on the decorated antimonenes. It is found that the adsorption energy of O is too strong on W- and Mo-decorated antimonenes (W/Sb and Mo/Sb), too weak on Cu-decorated antimonenes (Cu/Sb), while relatively moderate on Pt- and Co-decorated antimonenes (Pt/Sb and Co/Sb). Therefore, we mainly focus on the configuration and properties of Pt- and Co-decorated antimonenes in this work.
First, we studied Pt-decorated antimonenes. Pt atoms were placed on the four high symmetrical positions B, H, T, and V sites. After a full structural optimization, the top and side views of the most energy-favorable configuration of Pt-decorated antimonenes are shown in Fig. 3(a), where the Pt atom is at the valley site, which is represented by the gray atom. The calculated adsorption energy of Pt on antimonenes is 4.83 eV. The high adsorption energy indicates that the Pt atom is less likely to migrate and is stable when adsorbed on the surface of antimonenes. In addition, the binding energy of two Pt atoms is calculated to be 3.90 eV, which is obviously lower than the adsorption energy, indicating that when two Pt atoms reach the surface of antimonenes, they will adsorb on antimonenes separately, rather than forming a dimer.
 Fig. 3  Pt-Decorated antimonene (Pt/Sb): the gray atom represents a Pt atom. (a) The top view and side view; (b) the differential charge density; (c) the band structure; and (d) the density of states. 
The top and side views of differential charge density of Pt-decorated antimonenes are shown in Fig. 3(b). Electron transfer occurs between Pt and its four neighboring Sb atoms. The vicinity of Pt is mainly an electron accumulation region, and the vicinity of the four neighboring Sb atoms is an electron depletion region. Through the Bader charge analysis, it is found that the four neighboring Sb atoms bonded to Pt lost a total of 1.83e, while the Pt atom obtains 1.90e. The electrons obtained by the Pt atom mainly come from the four neighboring Sb atoms, indicating that there is a strong binding between Pt atoms and Sb atoms. The energy band structure and density of states of Pt-decorated antimonenes are shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). Fermi energy Ef is set as 0 eV. It is found that both the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band are located at the G point in the center of the Brillouin zone. Compared with pristine antimonenes, the band gap is reduced to 0.65 eV, and the antimonene is transformed from the indirect band gap semiconductor to the direct band gap semiconductor.
The adsorption of Co atoms on the antimonene surface is similar to that of Pt atoms. The Co atom was placed at B, H, T, and V sites. After full optimization, it is found that the most energy-favorable adsorption site of Co atoms is the valley. The adsorption energy is 3.47 eV, which is lower than the Pt atom, indicating that the interaction between the Co atom and the antimonene is weaker than that between the Pt atom and the antimonene. In addition, the binding energy of two Co atoms is calculated to be 3.22 eV, which is lower than the adsorption energy, indicating that when two Co atoms are dispersed on the surface of the antimonene, they are more likely to adsorb on the antimonene separately than to form a dimer. It is calculated that the top of the valence band is located at the G point in the center of the Brillouin zone, and the bottom of the conduction band is located between the G and M points. Compared with the pristine antimonene, the band gap is reduced to 0.71 eV. The decoration of the Co atom also changes the electronic properties of antimonenes.
Similarly, the ORR intermediates O, OH, O2, and OOH were placed near to Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, respectively, and the structural optimization was performed. All atoms were fully relaxed. The most energy-favorable adsorption configurations of ORR intermediates on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes are shown in Fig. 4, where (a)–(d) are the top view and side view of O, OH, O2, and OOH on Pt-decorated antimonenes, respectively (O-, OH-, O2-, and OOH-Pt/Sb), and (e)–(f) are O, OH, O2, and OOH on Co-decorated antimonenes, respectively (O-, OH-, O2-, and OOH-Co/Sb). The dark blue atom represents a Co atom.
 Fig. 4  The adsorption configurations: dark blue atom represents Co atom. Panels (a)–(d), (e)–(h) illustrate the top view and side view of the most energy-favorable structure after adsorption of O, OH, O2, and OOH on Pt/Sb, Co/Sb, respectively. 
All the intermediates are adsorbed on the Pt or Co atom, which indicates that the Pt and Co atoms are the catalytic active sites. The data of the adsorption characteristics are given in Table 1. From the table, the adsorption energy of O and OH on Pt-decorated antimonenes is slightly lower than that on pristine antimonenes, while the adsorption energy of O2 and OOH is larger than that on the pristine antimonene. The adsorption energies of all ORR intermediates on the Co-decorated antimonene are larger than those on the Pt-decorated antimonene, and the adsorption distances are shorter than those on Pt-decorated antimonene, which indicates that the interaction between the intermediates and Co atoms is stronger than that between the intermediates and Pt atoms. Because when the intermediates are adsorbed on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, it is the O atom in the intermediate that bonds directly with the Pt, Co atom. Therefore, the adsorption energy is determined by the bonding strength. The electronegativity values of Co, Pt and O atoms are 1.88, 2.28 and 3.44, respectively. The difference in electronegativity between O and Co is 1.56, and that between O and Pt is 1.16. Apparently, the former is larger. Therefore, the interaction between O and Co atoms is stronger, and thus the intermediates have stronger interaction with Co atoms than with Pt atoms.
In ORR, the cleavage of the O–O bond in OOH is the most crucial step. Strong adsorption is conducive to weakening the strength of the O–O bond. The Bader charge analysis shows that in the OOH-Pt/Sb system, OOH obtains electrons (0.50e), Pt obtains electrons (2.54e), and four neighboring Sb atoms bonded to Pt lost electrons (2.99e), indicating that all the electrons lost by four Sb atoms are transferred to Pt and OOH. Compared with the case when OOH is not adsorbed, the electrons obtained by Pt increases by 0.64e. As shown in Table 1, the bond length of O–O in OOH increases from 1.38 Å to 1.49 Å, and the O–O bond length of O2 increases from 1.29 Å to 1.45 Å, which reflects a strong interaction between Pt and intermediate OOH and O2. In the OOH-Co/Sb system, OOH obtains electrons (0.56e), Co loses electrons (0.15e), and four neighboring Sb atoms bonded to Co lose electrons (0.38e). The electrons obtained by OOH primarily come from Co and four Sb atoms. As shown in Table 1, the bond length of O–O in OOH increases from 1.38 Å to 1.51 Å, and the O–O bond length of O2 increases from 1.29 Å to 1.43 Å. The O–O bond length increases significantly, indicating that the adsorption of OOH on Co-decorated antimonene weakens the strength of the O–O bond in OOH, which is beneficial to the adsorption of OOH or O2 in the first step, and the cleavage of the O–O bond in the second step of ORR.
The TDOS of the OOH-Pt/Sb system is shown in Fig. 5(a), compared with Fig. 3(d), there are impurity peaks at Fermi level. The impurity peaks originate from the resonance overlap of the d-electronic state of Pt and the p-electronic state of O near the Pt atom, as shown in Fig. 5(c) and (d). A series of clear resonance peaks appear in the region near −4 eV, −2 eV, and −1 to 1 eV. The TDOS of the OOH-Co/Sb system is shown in Fig. 5(e), there are few electronic states at the Fermi level, and the system still exhibits semiconductor properties. As shown in Fig. 5(g) and (h), the d-electronic state of Co and the p-electronic state of O near the Co atom show a clear resonance overlap in the region of −4 eV, −2 eV, and −1 to 0 eV, which reflects a strong interaction between the Co atom and OOH. As shown in Fig. 5(b) and (f), the height and density of the PDOS peaks of the Sb atom nearest to the Pt atom are clearly larger than those of Sb atoms nearest to the Co atom, indicating that the interaction between Sb and Pt is stronger than that between Sb and Co. In addition, Fig. 5(d) compares the PDOS of O in OOH near the surface of Pt-decorated antimonenes with that of pristine antimonenes. It is found that the resonance peaks near the Fermi level are strengthened in the OOH-Pt/Sb system, and the number and location of resonance peaks are changed, which indicates that Pt-decorated antimonenes have stronger adsorption on OOH. From Fig. 5(h), the same conclusions can be drawn for the OOH-Co/Sb system. Therefore, the decoration of Pt, Co is beneficial to the adsorption of OOH in the first step of ORR, which further promotes the cleavage of the O–O bond in the second step.
 Fig. 5  TDOS and PDOS of OOH-adsorbed Pt-decorated antimonenes (OOH-Pt/Sb), OOH-adsorbed co-decorated antimonenes (OOH-Co/Sb): (a) the TDOS of OOH-Pt/Sb; the PDOS of (b) the Sb atom nearest to Pt; (c) the Pt atom; (d) O bonded to Pt (s1, p1, d1) and O bonded to Sb in pristine antimonenes (s2, p2, d2); (e) the TDOS of OOH-Co/Sb; the PDOS of (f) Sb atom nearest to Co; (g) the Co atom; (h) O bonded to Co (s1, p1, d1) and O bonded to Sb in pristine antimonene (s2, p2, d2). 
The adsorption energy of ORR intermediates (O, OH, O2, and OOH) on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes are shown in Fig. 6. It is clear that the adsorption characteristics of ORR intermediates on the three systems show a linear relationship. The adsorption energy increases after the antimonene is decorated with Pt or Co atoms, and the adsorption energy on Co-decorated antimonenes is significantly higher than that on pristine and Pt-decorated antimonenes. The strong adsorption effect is beneficial to the adsorption of OOH or O2 in the first step of ORR. It also helps to weaken the strength of the O–O bond and make the O–O bond break more easily. Weak adsorption effect is conducive to OHs combining with H to form H2O. Compared with pristine and Pt-decorated antimonenes, the system of Co-decorated antimonene has stronger adsorption for both OOH and OH, which helps to the adsorption of OOH, but hinders the formation of H2O. The adsorption energy of O and OH on Pt-decorated antimonenes is slightly lower than that on pristine antimonenes, and the adsorption energy of O2 and OOH is higher than that on pristine antimonenes, which indicates that Pt-decorated antimonenes are conducive to each step in ORR.
 Fig. 6  Adsorption energy of O, OH, O2, and OOH on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes. 
To sum up, it is found that Pt and Co atoms prefer to stably adsorb on antimonenes, than to form dimers. The Pt, Co adsorption sites are active sites, and all ORR intermediates are adsorbed on Pt and Co atoms. The adsorption strength of ORR intermediates on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes is enhanced. From the above analysis, it can be inferred that the decoration of Pt and Co has an important influence on the catalytic ability of the system. In order to investigate the catalytic activity of pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, the ORR process is simulated, and the free energy changes in each step are calculated.
3.3 ORR
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is the fundamental reaction occurring on the fuel cell cathode. There are two reaction paths of ORR on cathodes. One is four-electron path. Through a four-step reaction, H and O2 are combined to form H2O as the final product (O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O). The other is a two-electron path with a lower efficiency to produce the intermediate H2O2 (O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2). The reaction process of the four-electron and two-electron paths is shown below:33
Four-electron path: O2 → *O2(4) *O2 + e− + H+ → *OOH(5) *OOH + e− + H+ → *O + H2O(6) *O + H2O + e− + H+ → *OH + H2O(7) *OH + H2O + e− + H+ → 2H2O(8)
Two-electron path: O2 → *O2(9) *O2 + e− + H+ → *OOH(10) *OOH + e− + H+ → H2O2(11) H2O2 + e− + H+ → *OH + H2O(12) *OH + H2O + e− + H+ → 2H2O(13)
where “*” represents adsorbing on the antimonene.
As shown in Fig. 7, the ORR process on pristine and Pt-decorated antimonene systems was simulated. Based on the most energy-favorable configuration of OOH-adsorbed pristine antimonene, H atoms were successively added to the system. The first way of adding H is shown in Fig. 7(a). One H atom was placed close to the O atom which is not bonded with Sb in OOH. After structural optimization, the O–O bond was broken.
 Fig. 7  Sequential illustration of ORR paths: (a) the four-electron path; (b) the two-electron path on pristine antimonenes; and (c) the four-electron path on Pt-decorated antimonenes (Pt/Sb). 
The formed H2O escaped, and the remaining O atom was adsorbed on the surface of pristine antimonenes. Then the second H was added, and the adsorbed O atom was reduced to OH. After that, the third H was added, and the adsorbed OH was further reduced to H2O. The second way of adding H is shown in Fig. 7(b). When H atom was placed close to O atom bonded with Sb in OOH, H2O2 was produced. Adding H in the vicinity of H2O2 for further structural optimization, the O–O bond was broken, and H2O was formed. Continue to add H atom, the remaining OH was reduced to H2O. The results indicate that there exist both four-electron path and two-electron path in the ORR process on pristine antimonenes.
The ORR simulation on Pt-decorated antimonenes is shown in Fig. 7(c). The results indicate that in the most energy-favorable configuration of the OOH-Pt/Sb system, whether we add H atom close to the O atom which is not bonded with Pt in OOH or close to O atom bonded with Pt in OOH, the O–O bond is directly broken to form H2O after full optimization. Continuing to add H atoms, the O atom adsorbed on the Pt atom is successively reduced to OH and H2O. It shows that there is only a four-electron path on Pt-decorated antimonenes. The simulated ORR reaction on Co-decorated antimonene is similar to that on Pt-decorated antimonenes.
From the above-mentioned results, there is only a four-electron path in the ORR process of Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, and there are both four-electron and two-electron paths in pristine antimonenes. As mentioned earlier, the adsorption energy of OOH adsorbed on pristine antimonenes is lower than that on Pt-decorated antimonenes, and this accounts for the two-electron path.
The free energy changes (ΔG) and the activation barriers (Eb) of the ORR in each step on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes are calculated, in which H+ + e− is replaced by the free energy of 1/2H2 (gaseous) under standard conditions, pH = 0 in the electrolyte, and the zero vibration energy (ΔZPE) is calculated by DFT.33 The calculated values are shown in Table 2, and the detailed reaction pathways are shown in Fig. 8.
Table 2 Free energy changes (ΔG) and activation barriers (Eb) of the ORR in each step on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes




Systems
ΔG and Eb in each step/eV


ΔG 0 → 1

E
b (TS1)
ΔG 1 → 2

E
b (TS2)
ΔG 2 → 3

E
b (TS3)
ΔG 3 → 4

E
b (TS4)
ΔG 4 → 5




Pristine antimonene (four-electron path)
−1.49
0.90
−0.57
1.36
−2.93
1.68
−0.92
1.98
−1.72


Pristine antimonene (two-electron path)
−1.49
0.90
−0.57
0.64
−0.90
2.71
−2.95
1.98
−1.72


Pt-Decorated antimonene
−1.95
1.76
−0.74
2.39
−2.21
2.45
−0.90
1.53
−1.83


Co-Decorated antimonene
−3.12
1.76
−0.34
2.43
−2.66
2.72
−1.18
0.73
−0.33




 Fig. 8  Reaction pathways of ORR on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes. 
As can be seen from Table 2, the values of the free energy changes in each step are negative, which indicates that the process of ORR on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes can happen spontaneously, and the energy of the system decreases gradually to achieve a more stable state.
As shown in Fig. 8(a), the red line and blue line represent the four-electron and two-electron detailed paths of ORR on pristine antimonenes, respectively. From a thermodynamic perspective, the free energy decline for the formation of the first H2O molecule (from 2 to 3) is larger than that for the formation of H2O2 (from 2 to 3′) in the reaction of OOH combining with the H atom, which indicates that the process from 2 to 3 is more energetically favorable. However, from a kinetic point of view, the activation barrier required from 2 to 3′ is 0.64 eV, which is significantly lower than the activation barrier (1.36 eV) from 2 to 3. The result indicates that the reaction rate from 2 to 3′ is faster than that from 2 to 3, and thus H2O2 is more likely to generate. Comparing the process from 3 to 4 with the process from 3′ to 4, from the thermodynamic perspective, the free energy decline from 3′ to 4 is larger, which means that this process is more energetically favorable. From a kinetic point of view, however, the activation barrier from 3′ to 4 (2.71 eV) is higher than that from 3 to 4 (1.68 eV), indicating that the reaction rate from 3 to 4 is faster. For the four-electron path on pristine antimonene, our results show that the rate-determining step of ORR is the reaction of the adsorbed OH's further reducing to the second H2O molecule (from 4 to 5), with an Eb of 1.98 eV. For the two-electron path on pristine antimonene, the rate-determining step of ORR is the reaction of H2O2 combining with H to form the first H2O molecule (from 3′ to 4), with an Eb of 2.71 eV. In addition, it is calculated that the adsorption energy of H2O2 on antimonene is 0.26 eV, indicating that H2O2 cannot stably adsorb on antimonene. Besides, the further hydrogenation of H2O2 is difficult to occur due to a high activation barrier (2.71 eV). Therefore, H2O2 is more likely to be the main product, and the two-electron path is the dominant path on pristine antimonenes.
As shown in Fig. 8(b), the yellow line and green line represent the four-electron detailed paths of ORR on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, respectively. From the thermodynamic perspective, the free energy decline in each step on Pt-decorated antimonenes is more even than that on Co-decorated antimonenes. The reason is that the ORR intermediates have relatively moderate adsorption energy on Pt-decorated antimonenes. From a kinetic point of view, there exists some similarity in the OOR path. The activation barrier from 1 to 2 and the barrier from 2 to 3 are very close on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes. The rate-determining steps are the reactions of the adsorbed O atoms reducing to OH (from 3 to 4) on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, with the activation barriers of 2.45 eV and 2.72 eV, respectively. Therefore, the reaction rate of the rate-determining step on Pt-decorated antimonene is faster, and thus the reaction is easier to take place.
Based on the above analysis, it can be concluded that there are both four-electron and two-electron ORR paths on pristine antimonenes, and the two-electron path is the dominant path. There are solely four-electron ORR paths on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes with some similarity. The activation barrier of the rate-determining step on Pt-decorated antimonene is lower than that on Co-decorated antimonenes.
4. Conclusions
In this paper, the adsorption characteristics of various ORR intermediates (O, OH, O2 and OOH) on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes have been studied. Through the analysis of adsorption energy, adsorption distance, bond length, energy band, density of states and charge transfer, the adsorption of various ORR intermediates on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes are compared. The ORR process is simulated, and the free energy changes and activation barriers in each step of ORR are given. Our findings include: (1) the most energy-favorable adsorption sites of Pt, Co on antimonenes are in the valley, with adsorption energies of 4.83 eV and 3.47 eV, respectively. Two Pt atoms or two Co atoms are more likely to adsorb on antimonenes separately than to form dimers. The strong adsorption of metal atoms on antimonenes is beneficial to the monoatom dispersion, and the further improvement of catalysts utilization. (2) The adsorption energy of O, OH O2 and OOH on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes all show linear relationships. After decorating with Pt, Co atoms, the adsorption of the intermediates is enhanced, and all intermediates are adsorbed on Pt, Co atoms. (3) ORR has both four-electron and two-electron paths on pristine antimonenes. H2O2 is more likely to be the main product, and the two-electron path is the dominant path on pristine antimonene. There are solely four-electron ORR paths on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes. Compared with Co-decorated antimonenes, the free energy decline in each step on Pt-decorated antimonenes is more even. However, from a kinetic point of view, there exists similarity in the OOR path on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, which indicates that the Co-decorated antimonene could be a potential alternative of the Pt-decorated antimonene as an ORR electrocatalyst. The rate-determining steps are both the reaction of the adsorbed O atoms reducing to OH on Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes, with activation barriers of 2.45 eV and 2.72 eV, respectively. The lower activation barrier of the rate-determining step on Pt-decorated antimonenes means that the reaction rate is faster, and thus easier to take place. The above-mentioned results provide a theoretical reference for the experimental exploration of metal atom-decorated antimonenes as ORR electrocatalyst materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Supported by the “National Natural Science Foundation of China” (Grant No. 61372050).
References
S. Zhang, Y. Y. Shao, X. H. Li, Z. M. Nie, Y. Wang, J. Liu, G. P. Yin and Y. H. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 457 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagashree, N. Raviraj and M. Ahmed, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2629 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2009, 324, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Li, C. G. Meng and Y. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neergat, A. K. Shukla and K. S. Gandhi, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 373 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Yu and S. Y. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. J. Yang, S. Chen, X. Wang and Z. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, H. L. Gao, W. J. Bao and F. B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 22, 390 RSC .
X. Chen, S. J. Chen and J. Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 379, 291 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Lu, S. Li, C. Liu and C. Z. He, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 20398 RSC .
J. P. Sun, K. L. Zhou and X. D. Liang, Acta Phys. Sin., 2016, 65, 383 Search PubMed .
A. Khan, M. P. Down, G. C. Smith and C. W. Foster, J. Mater. Chem., 2017, 5, 4103 RSC .
G. Elumalai, H. Noguchi and K. Uosaki, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13755 RSC .
S. Back and S. Siahrostami, Nano. Adv., 2019, 1, 132 RSC .
X. Wen, Y. C. Wang and J. X. Zhao, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 12838 RSC .
C. Deng, R. He, D. Wen, W. Shen and M. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 10240 RSC .
E. Samuel Reich, Nature, 2014, 506, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. F. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. F. Liu and M. H. Rümmeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1702093 CrossRef .
M. Z. Rahman, C. W. Kwong, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 709 RSC .
S. Haldar, S. Mukherjee, F. Ahmed and C. V. Singh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 23018 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. Karna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Li, C. He and W. X. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 441, 77 CrossRef CAS .
D. Campi, M. Bernasconi and G. Benedek, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075446 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y. L. Wang, J. T. Sun, C. Liu, J. O. Wang, Z. L. Liu, S. Y. Zhu, Y. Q. Wang, S. X. Du, Y. G. Shi, K. Ibrahim and H. J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Ji, X. F. Song, J. Z. Liu, Z. Yan, C. X. Huo, S. L. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. H. Wang, Z. H. Ni, Y. F. Hao and H. B. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Mao, L. F. Zhang, H. L. Wang, H. Shan, X. F. Zhai and Z. P. Hu, Front. Phys., 2018, 3, 61 Search PubMed .
Y. G. Zhou and X. D. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 458, 572 CrossRef CAS .
O. U. Aktürk, E. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 035450 CrossRef .
J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and L. Lindqvist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Li, L. P. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. B. Niu and Z. H. Xia, J. Catal., 2014, 314, 66 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lim and J. Wilcox, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3653 CrossRef CAS .

          P. W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 6th edn,  1998, pp. 485, 925–927, 942 Search PubMed .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel and D. A. Aldave, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Lim, M. J. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. M. Lu, Y. M. Zhu and Y. N. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
Table Content:
Ead = Eantimonene + Eadsorbate − Eantimonene/adsorbate	(1)
ΔE = E2 − E1	(2)
ΔG = ΔE + ΔZPE − TΔS	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Pristine antimonene: the purple atoms represent the upper layer Sb atoms, and the light blue atoms represent the lower layer Sb atoms. (a) The top view; (b) the side view; (c) the band structure; (d) the density of states.	 

 	Fig. 2  Adsorption configurations of pristine antimonene: the red atoms represent O atoms, and the yellow atom represents a H atom. Panels (a), (b), (c), and (d) illustrate the top view and side view of the most energy-favorable structure after adsorption of O, OH, O2, and OOH on pristine antimonene, respectively (O-, OH-, O2-, and OOH-Sb).	 


Sb	3.81	1.87	2.43	2.14	1.59	2.11	1.46	1.04	2.33	1.51
Pt/Sb	3.70	1.87	2.30	1.99	2.06	2.06	1.45	1.67	2.02	1.49
Co/Sb	4.94	1.64	3.82	1.79	3.23	1.86	1.43	2.44	1.80	1.51

 	Fig. 3  Pt-Decorated antimonene (Pt/Sb): the gray atom represents a Pt atom. (a) The top view and side view; (b) the differential charge density; (c) the band structure; and (d) the density of states.	 

 	Fig. 4  The adsorption configurations: dark blue atom represents Co atom. Panels (a)–(d), (e)–(h) illustrate the top view and side view of the most energy-favorable structure after adsorption of O, OH, O2, and OOH on Pt/Sb, Co/Sb, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  TDOS and PDOS of OOH-adsorbed Pt-decorated antimonenes (OOH-Pt/Sb), OOH-adsorbed co-decorated antimonenes (OOH-Co/Sb): (a) the TDOS of OOH-Pt/Sb; the PDOS of (b) the Sb atom nearest to Pt; (c) the Pt atom; (d) O bonded to Pt (s1, p1, d1) and O bonded to Sb in pristine antimonenes (s2, p2, d2); (e) the TDOS of OOH-Co/Sb; the PDOS of (f) Sb atom nearest to Co; (g) the Co atom; (h) O bonded to Co (s1, p1, d1) and O bonded to Sb in pristine antimonene (s2, p2, d2).	 

 	Fig. 6  Adsorption energy of O, OH, O2, and OOH on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes.	 
O2 → *O2	(4)
*O2 + e− + H+ → *OOH	(5)
*OOH + e− + H+ → *O + H2O	(6)
*O + H2O + e− + H+ → *OH + H2O	(7)
*OH + H2O + e− + H+ → 2H2O	(8)
O2 → *O2	(9)
*O2 + e− + H+ → *OOH	(10)
*OOH + e− + H+ → H2O2	(11)
H2O2 + e− + H+ → *OH + H2O	(12)
*OH + H2O + e− + H+ → 2H2O	(13)

 	Fig. 7  Sequential illustration of ORR paths: (a) the four-electron path; (b) the two-electron path on pristine antimonenes; and (c) the four-electron path on Pt-decorated antimonenes (Pt/Sb).	 


Pristine antimonene (four-electron path)	−1.49	0.90	−0.57	1.36	−2.93	1.68	−0.92	1.98	−1.72
Pristine antimonene (two-electron path)	−1.49	0.90	−0.57	0.64	−0.90	2.71	−2.95	1.98	−1.72
Pt-Decorated antimonene	−1.95	1.76	−0.74	2.39	−2.21	2.45	−0.90	1.53	−1.83
Co-Decorated antimonene	−3.12	1.76	−0.34	2.43	−2.66	2.72	−1.18	0.73	−0.33

 	Fig. 8  Reaction pathways of ORR on pristine and Pt-, Co-decorated antimonenes.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2020
