Adhesion behaviors on four special wettable surfaces: natural sources, mechanisms, fabrications and applications  - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SM00248A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SM00248A
(Review Article)
Soft Matter, 2021, 17, 4895-4928Adhesion behaviors on four special wettable surfaces: natural sources, mechanisms, fabrications and applications

        
          
            Yi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhiguang 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Weimin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      b
aMinistry of Education Key Laboratory for the Green Preparation and Application of Functional Materials, Hubei University, Wuhan 430062, People's Republic of China
bState Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zguo@licp.cas.cn;  Fax: +86-931-8277088;   Tel: +86-931-4968105
Received 
      17th February 2021
    , Accepted 11th April 2021First published on 13th April 2021AbstractThe study of adhesion behaviors on solid–liquid surfaces plays an important role in scientific research and development in various fields, such as medicine, biology and agriculture. The contact angle and sliding angle of the liquid on the solid surface are commonly used to characterize and measure the wettability of a particular surface. They have a wide range of values, which results in different wettability. It boils down to the adhesion of solid surfaces to liquids. This feature article is aimed at revealing the essence of the adhesion behavior from the aspects of controlling the chemical composition or changing the geometrical microstructure of the surface, and reviewing the natural sources, wetting models, preparation methods and applications of four kinds of typical solid–liquid surfaces (low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces (SLIPS) and hydrophilic/superhydrophilic surfaces). Last, a summary and outlook on this field are given to point out the current challenges and the potential research directions of surface adhesion in the coming future.
Yi Wang
Miss Yi Wang joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at Hubei University in 2019 to pursue her PhD degree. Her current scientific interests are focused on studying the adhesion mechanism and applications of special wettable surfaces.
Zhiguang Guo
Professor Zhiguang GUO received his PhD from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2007. After that, he joined Hubei University. From Oct 2007 to Aug 2008, he worked at University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, as a post-doctor. From Sep 2008 to Mar 2011, he worked in Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Charge de Researcher”. From Feb 2009 to Feb 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. Now he is a full professor and the Dean of the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University. Till now, he has published more than 320 papers about the interfaces of materials, cited more than 11000 times, and the impact factor is about 54.
Weimin Liu
Professor Weimin Liu received his PhD in lubricating materials and tribology from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1990. After that, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication (LSL) of the LICP. From June 1993 to June 1994, he worked as a Visiting Scholar at Pennsylvania State University, USA. In 2013 and 2016, he was elected a Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), respectively. Currently, he is a professor of LICP and head of the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication. Up to now, he has published more than 600 papers with citations over 27000. He holds 100 Chinese patents and 1 US patent and has won 2 National Awards for Technological Invention (second class) and 2 National Awards for Natural Sciences (second class). He was the winner of The Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation Materials Prize of 2016, and received a Supreme Achievement Award in Tribology in 2017. His research interests mainly focus on space and aviation lubrication, high performance lubricating materials and tribochemistry.
1. Introduction
Nature runs smoothly under the coordination of numerous species. In addition to maintaining the ecological balance, some of them have inspired human beings in functions and structures. Learning from nature is the eternal driving force of technological progress. The development of bionics has promoted the progress of various industries and improved people's lives. In nature, wetting of a solid by a liquid is a common interface phenomenon. Crystal clear water drops roll on a lotus leaf, taking away dirt and dust.1,2 Dewdrops on a rose sparkle on the surface of the petals.7 The mouth of the pitcher plant secretes and holds a smooth mucus, which makes the caught insects slip into the bottle.10 Aquatic plants, including Anubias barteri, reduce gas exchange and photosynthesis on the plant surface.13 There are diverse adhesion mechanisms between the liquid and solid behind these wonderful and unique wetting phenomena. With the rapid development of materials science, chemistry and other related disciplines, inspired by surfaces with special wettability in nature, and guided by the classical wettability model,15–18 the preparation and application of special wettable surfaces are becoming increasingly diversified, and they have penetrated into all aspects of people's daily life. This review focuses on four special wettable surfaces (low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces (SLIPS) and hydrophilic/superhydrophilic surfaces). The preparation of low-adhesion/high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces is mainly via constructing rough microstructures of corresponding sizes and modifying with a low surface energy substance, and the preparation of SLIPS additionally requires the injection of low-viscosity fluids and low-volatility lubricants. A super-hydrophilic surface requires strong attraction between the surface and the liquid molecules. The applications of these special wettable surfaces involve self-cleaning, anti-fouling, anti-icing, oil–water separation, microfluidic sensors, etc.44,45,47,50,52–55
Hereinafter, this review reveals the adhesion nature of four surfaces from four aspects: reviewing natural sources, designing theoretical models, selecting preparation methods, and generalizing application areas (Table 1). Finally, the areas to be improved and the future development direction of this research field are discussed.
Table 1 Introduction of the four special wettable surfaces






Low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces
High-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces
Liquid-infused porous surfaces (SLIPS)
Hydrophilic/superhydrophilic surfaces




Natural sources
Lotus leaf1,2

Rosa, cv. Bairage7
Pitcher plants10

Anubias barteri
13



Underside of the ramee leaf5

Rosa, cv. Showtime7
Earthworms11,12

Sphagnum squarrosum



Rice leaf4
Chinese kafir lily8



Rhacocarpus purpurescens



Feathers of waterfowl67
sunflower petal8



Tillandsia usneoides
14



Cicada wing68
scallion9



Calathea zebrine



Water strider3–6
garlic9



Ruellia devosiana



Wetting model














CA or SA
CA > 150°, SA < 10°
CA > 150°, sticking
CA < 120°, SA = 2.1 ± 0.8°
CA < 5°


Factors affecting adhesion
Geometric structure with micro–nano and micro-line structure
Layered micro-nipples and nano-folds whose distance is greater than that in the low-adhesive one
Rough micro–nano structures treated with low surface energy groups
For smooth surfaces: strong attraction between the surface and liquid molecules


Chemical composition with low surface energy
Low surface energy substances
Lubricants with low surface energy, low viscosity and low volatility
For rough porous surfaces: microstructure and chemical composition


Preparation methods
Electrodeposition19
Use petals as a template8
Lubricant selection33
Sol–gel method37


Chemical vapor deposition20–23
Deposited by using fluorinated monomers or fluorinating various nanostructured surfaces30
Preparation of the substrate34
Phase separation method38


Sol–gel24–27
Fluorine-free preparation31
Substrate modification35
Vapor deposition method39


Layer-by-layer assembly28
Build super-hydrophilic patterns on super-hydrophobic surfaces32
Lubricant injection process36
Layer-by-layer self-assembly method40


Solution-immersion29




Template-based method41








Electrochemical method42








Electrospinning43


Applications
Self-cleaning44,45
Controlled transport of small volumes of liquids49
Antifouling52
Self-cleaning58


Corrosion prevention46
Microfluidic devices50
Anti-frosting/icing33,53
Biomedical applications59


Anti-icing47
Biochemical separation51
Oil–water separation54,55
Oil–water separation60


Drag reduction48
Bio/chem analysis assay51
Other applications56,57
Other applications61,62


Current problems
Insufficient mechanical durability and stability
Failure to quantitatively analyze the relationship between adhesion and surface structure
Insufficient durability and adaptability
Complex and expensive preparation technology


High manufacturing cost
Insufficient economy and practicality
Industrial applications are limited by high cost and scalability issues
Poor mechanical strength and weather resistance


Future directions
Improve the chemical stability and durability in harsh environments
Prepare a multifunctional, fast response, sensitive, economical and practical intelligent adhesive superhydrophobic surface
Achieve low-cost mass manufacturing; enhance the stability of the lubricating layer
Resolve disputes on the definition and mechanism


Develop novel and low-cost technology, use low-cost and environmentally friendly raw materials


Research on the automatic replenishment system of lubricants
Prepare a functionally responsive, environmentally-friendly and durable super-hydrophilic surface




2. Low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces
2.1. Sources of structure in nature
It is the traditional Chinese culture's praise of a virtuous person that the lotus grows out of the mud and is not stained with it. This phenomenon of self-cleaning has aroused great interest among researchers. With the development of scanning electron microscopy studies of biological surfaces, Barthlott and Neinhuis concluded that the water resistance of many terrestrial and aquatic plants represented by the lotus leaf is due to the surface microstructure papillae and special cuticle which is composed of soluble lipids embedded in a polyester matrix.1 These two factors give the plant such a surface with a high contact angle (CA) of more than 150° and a low sliding angle (SA) of less than 10°, called a low-adhesion superhydrophobic surface. The process that makes plants self-cleaning can be expressed as that epicuticular wax crystalloids provide plants with highly effective hydrophobicity,2 and then the rough papillary structure causes the droplet to have less contact with the plant surface, the droplet only stays at the top of the papillary epidermal cells, and, when the droplet rolls on the leaf surface, it takes away the contaminating particles. In a follow-up study, the researchers concluded two factors that contribute to the superhydrophobic nature of plant surfaces: a chemical composition with a low surface energy, and a geometric structure with micro–nano and micro-line structure.63,64

Fig. 1 shows water contact angle (WCA) measurements of some plant surfaces and insect body parts, as well as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. The lotus leaf is a representative plant with micro and nanostructure. It can be found from the SEM images that there are 70–100 nm hydrophobic waxy particles and lots of randomly distributed nanorod-like structures with an average size of 50 nm found in the grooves and ridges of 3–10 mm on the lotus leaf surface, which makes a WCA of about 161 ± 2° and a SA of about 3° (Fig. 1a). There are also plentiful superhydrophobic plants with diverse microstructures, such as the ramee leaf. It is interesting that the front surface of the ramee leaf has hydrophilic properties, while, for the reverse side, from the SEM image (Fig. 1b) it can be seen that fibers with a diameter of 1–2 mm are evenly distributed on the surface. This micro-line structure can also form a superhydrophobic surface, with a WCA of 164 ± 2°.64,65 Another common plant with a binary structure similar to the lotus leaf is the rice leaf, which has papillae with an average diameter of 5–8 μm and a WCA of up to 157 ± 2° on the surface (Fig. 1c), but the papillae are different from the lotus leaf. Arranged in a fixed direction, the SA in this direction is 4° and perpendicular to this direction is 12°, making it difficult for water droplets to roll. Besides rice leaves, the feathers of waterfowl or ducks also have anisotropy of water droplet rolling (Fig. 1d).66 Ducks often play in the water and forage for food, but their feathers will not be wetted by water. This is because the feathers have neatly arranged micron and sub-micron strips, which give the feathers good hydrophobicity and air permeability. And this orderly arranged microstructure can make it easy for water droplets to roll away along the strip to achieve directional drainage. For winged insects, including Odonata (dragonfly), Hymenoptera (bee), Trichoptera (moth), Lepidoptera (butterfly), Homoptera (cicada), Coleoptera (beetle) and Diptera (Mosquitoes, flies), etc, they have microstructures of various shapes distributed on their wings. The resulting superhydrophobicity makes the surface of the wings self-cleaning to maintain their flight ability.67,68Fig. 1e shows the microstructure and special wettability of the cicada wing surface. The CA of water droplets on the surface is as high as 145.6°. For water striders, they need waterproof legs to stand and jump on water. The leg of water striders is covered with lots of tiny chitinous setae, which are tilted about 20° relative to the surface of the legs. These setae are about 50 μm in length and less than 3 μm in diameter. It can be derived from the SEM image (Fig. 1f) that the surfaces of microsetae have tiny nano-grooves to accommodate more air, and the legs have rough micro–nano structures. In subsequent research, Wei and Chen et al.3–6 measured the CA of water striders in contact with the deformed water surface at 168.8° and derived a mechanism related to the adhesion of water when they jumped on the water surface.
 Fig. 1  Photos of low-adhesion superhydrophobic plant surfaces and insect body parts. (a) A drop of water (macroscopic view) resting on the surface of the lotus leaf and the SEM images of lotus leaves with different magnifications whose bars are 50 and 1 μm, respectively. The inset is a WCA on a lotus leaf, with a value of 161 ± 2°.63,69 (Copyright: 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.) (Copyright: 2002, Wiley-Blackwell.) (b) Water droplets floating on the underside of the ramee leaf and the bars of the SEM images are 100 and 5 μm, respectively. The inset is a WCA on the underside of a ramee leaf, with a value of 164 ± 2°.64 (Copyright: 2007, Elsevier Ireland Ltd.) (c) Water stays on the surface of the rice leaf and can only slide in a fixed direction and the SEM images of rice leaves with different magnifications covered with papillae arranged in a fixed direction. The inset is a WCA on a rice leaf, with a value of 157 ± 2°, showing a good superhydrophobic property.63 (Copyright: 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.) (d) SEM image of the micron and sub-micron strip structure on a duck feather surface.66 (Copyright: 1970, Nature.) (e) The microstructure of the cicada wing surface and the topography of the water droplets on the cicada wing surface.68 (Copyright: 2000, Elsevier Ltd.) (f) A water strider resting on the surface of water with its bristly legs and the SEM images of its leg surface covered with setae 50 μm long and 3 μm wide, making the water strider's contact angle with the deformed surface of the water 168.8° and allowing the water strider to jump and stay at the surface of the water freely.5 (Copyright: 2007, American Chemical Society.) 
2.2. Wetting model and adhesion mechanism
Simplifying the structures of low-adhesion superhydrophobic plants and animals in nature into explicit wetting models is an essential step in biomimetic research to prepare materials with corresponding structures and functions. There are many factors that affect the wetting state of solids, including roughness, chemical heterogeneity, surface reconstruction, swelling and dissolution. Among these factors, the roughness of the structure has a large effect on the wetting behavior of the surface; it is necessary to construct theoretical models to explain and quantify the wetting behavior of the surface according to the wetting state.70 For low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, the effect of roughness on the superhydrophobic performance is that air remains trapped below the drop to form a nano-scale air layer, which causes the drop to sit partially on air.71 As early as 1944, this phenomenon was reduced to the Cassie–Baxter model.15 Before the Cassie equation and Cassie model are obtained, it is necessary to understand the generation of the Cassie contact angle. The actual surface is rough or uneven, on which the resting liquid droplets can be in a stable equilibrium state, that is, the lowest energy state, or can be in a metastable equilibrium state, which is isolated from its adjacent state by an energy barrier, and then hysteresis of the contact angle will occur.72,73 As shown in Fig. 2a, droplets on an inclined plane can explain this intuitively.
 Fig. 2  (a) The droplet is on a tilted plate, θa is the advancing angle and θr is the receding angle. (b) Microstructural diagram of a droplet in the Cassie–Baxter state. 
For a droplet with a stable CA on the horizontal plane, if the surface is ideally smooth and uniform, when a small amount of liquid is added to the droplet, the leading edge of the droplet perimeter expands forward, but still maintains the original CA. On withdrawing a small amount of liquid from the droplet, the perimeter front of the droplet shrinks backward, but still maintains the original CA. If the surface is rough or uneven, adding a little liquid to the droplet will only make the droplet higher and the perimeter will not move, which will increase the CA. The CA at this time is called the advancing angle θadv. If enough liquid is added, the perimeter of the droplet will suddenly creep forward, and the angle at which this sudden motion occurs is called the maximum advancing angle θadv,max. If a small amount of liquid is taken out of a droplet, the droplet becomes flatter without the perimeter moving, and the CA becomes smaller. The CA at this time is called a receding angle θrec. When enough liquid is pumped away, the perimeter of the droplet will suddenly contract. The angle at which this sudden contraction occurs is called the minimum receding angle θrec,min. In this process, the difference in the energy barrier between the forward and backward droplets causes contact angle hysteresis, which is also a measure of the energy dissipated when a droplet flows along a solid surface. The Cassie contact angle is caused by the heterogeneity of the solid surface. Because of the energy barrier, the front of the liquid often stays at the interface of the phase. The advancing angle often reflects the area with a lower surface energy, or the part of the solid surface with a weak affinity for the liquid. The receding angle often reflects the area with a higher surface energy or the part of the solid surface that has a strong affinity for the liquid. For a surface composed of two surfaces with different wetting properties, the area fractions are assumed to be f1 and f2, respectively, and the following relations are obtained: cosθCB = f1cosθ1 + f2cosθ2(1)Eqn (1) above is the Cassie–Baxter equation, where θCB is the apparent contact angle of the droplet on a multi-phase rough surface, and θ1 and θ2 are the intrinsic contact angles of the liquid on the first surface (S1) and the second surface (S2), respectively. The model of the water droplet wetting state in the Cassie–Baxter (CB) state is shown in Fig. 2b. In this state, the cavities on the rough surface are filled with air, and the liquid droplets cannot penetrate into the cavities. It can be seen from Fig. 2b that S1 and S2 are composite interfaces composed of solid–liquid and liquid–air. Therefore, fSL and fLA (fSL + fLA = 1) are used to replace f1 and f2, and cosθ1 is the intrinsic contact angle of the droplet on the rough solid surface; at the same time, the concept of phase area fraction r is introduced to deal with the effect of chemically heterogeneous surfaces on wettability.74–77 The CA between the droplet and the air is 180°, and thus cosθ2 is −1. The above parameters are introduced into eqn (1):cosθCB = rfSLcosθ1 + (1 − fSL)cosθCB2i.e.: cosθCB = rfSLcosθ1 + fSL−1(2)eqn (2) explains the mathematical relationship between the parameters in the Cassie–Baxter state. After understanding the theoretical model, the lotus effect can be explained more clearly, that is, there are many tiny papillae on the surface of the lotus leaf, and the concave part of the papillae is filled with air, so that a nano-thick air layer is formed. When dust and raindrops of a size larger than this structure fall on the surface of the lotus leaf, the water droplets form a spherical shape under the action of their surface tension. And the water ball absorbs dust and cleans the leaf surface during the rolling process, which is the so-called lotus effect.
2.3. Fabrication of low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces
Inspired by the superhydrophobic phenomena in nature, researchers found that there are two main effective methods for preparing superhydrophobic materials: to prepare suitable roughness with a micro–nano composite structure on a hydrophobic substrate or to prepare the corresponding roughness and modify it with low surface energy substances.78–81 According to these two principles, researchers have adopted many methods to construct superhydrophobic surfaces, among which the commonly used methods are electrodeposition, chemical vapor deposition, sol–gel, layer-by-layer assembly, solution-immersion, the electrospinning method, etc.

Electrodeposition. 
Electrodeposition is a cheap, simple, efficient method and is not limited by the shape of the substrate. Liu et al.19 used a solution of cerium nitrate hexahydrate and tetracyclate dissolved in ethanol to rapidly prepare a superhydrophobic surface with a CA as high as 159.8° and SA less than 2° on a Mg–Mn–Ce alloy plate by electrochemical deposition (Fig. 3A and B). Yan et al.82 prepared an alkyl pyrrole film with an array structure on ITO glass. Due to the large roughness and low surface energy, this pyrrole film has good superhydrophobic characteristics. Wang et al.83 prepared a cobalt-nickel coating of tungsten carbide particles with a solid layered microsphere structure on a carbon steel substrate by electrochemical deposition. After a linear wear test, it was found that, when the content of tungsten carbide is 9.8 wt%, the CoNi/WC coating exhibits excellent superhydrophobicity and solves the problem that the superhydrophobic surface is limited by the mechanical durability in the application process (Fig. 3C). Although the electrochemical deposition method can quickly and easily prepare superhydrophobic coatings, the basic requirement that the materials must have electrical conductivity makes many materials unable to be converted into superhydrophobic materials by this method.
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the electrodeposition process. (B) Variation in the water contact and sliding angles of the surfaces obtained at different electrodeposition times at a voltage of 30 V.19 (Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society.) (C) (a and b) The water contact angle (WCA) variations with the WC particles of the CoeNi/WC composite coating before and after PFTEOS modification. (c) The water sliding angles (WSA) of the CoeNi/WC composite coatings after PFTEOS modification. The WC particles were 0, 5.3 wt%, 9.8 wt% and 19.1 wt%, respectively. 9.8 wt% displays excellent super-hydrophobicity with a WCA of 162° and WSA of 3°.83 (Copyright: 2020, Elsevier.) (D) FTIR spectra of three materials: pure CNTs, the CNT–SiO2 hybrid material and pure SiO2.84 (Copyright: 2014, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.) (E) Summary of the contact angle results for aerogel-coated and xerogel-coated surfaces. The surfaces coated with xerogels prepared from a precursor recipe with 10 or 25% MTMS are hydrophilic.85 (Copyright: 2014, Springer US.) (F) Changes in water contact angles and sliding angles of the films with different deposition cycles.28 (Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society.) (G) Liquid entry pressure (LEP) distributions for the top side of the (a) uncoated PTFE, (b) coated PTFE, and (c) coated CA membranes.86 (Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.) 


The chemical vapor deposition method (CVD). 
CVD uses a chemical reaction at a gas phase or a gas–solid interface to form a solid deposit (thin film). Due to the variety of deposits that can be deposited by this method, and the fact that the purity of the thin-film coating obtained by the reaction is high and the chemical composition and crystal structure of the coating can be controlled by adjusting the deposition parameters, the CVD method has received extensive attention in the field of preparing superhydrophobic coatings.20–23 Liu et al.39 first reported the use of CVD to prepare columnar, island, honeycomb, and other arrays of carbon nanotube films on quartz substrates, and showed that this array of micro–nano structures is the main reason for generating contact angles up to 164.3° and sliding angles less than 5°. Rezaei et al.87 used ethyl orthosilicate as a precursor, vinyl trimethylsilane as a modifier, and ammonia as a catalyst to prepare superhydrophobic surfaces on glass and aluminum sheets. It is worth mentioning that CVD is an effective method for preparing transparent superhydrophobic coatings.88–90 Mcgaughey et al.86 used the CVD method to coat two porous substrates (hydrophilic cellulose acetate (CA) and hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)) with a cross-linked fluoropolymer to improve the moisture resistance of the membrane. The experimental results show that the coated membranes have higher moisture resistance than the uncoated membranes (Fig. 3G), which solves the problem of difficulty in increasing the hydrophobicity of porous membranes. In future membrane design, it provides a new way to replace perfluorinated membranes with environmentally friendly materials. Although the CVD method does not have high requirements for material selection, the required reaction temperature is 850–1100 °C, and many substrate materials cannot withstand high temperatures. At this time, plasma or laser-assisted technology must be used to reduce the deposition temperature, thus increasing the operating cost, and the method is not suitable for large-area preparation, and the prepared superhydrophobic coating has a weak binding force.


The sol–gel method. 
The sol–gel method involves the use of the target product as a precursor to carry out chemical reactions such as hydrolysis and condensation in solution to form a stable and transparent sol system. After the sol is aged, the colloidal particles slowly polymerize to form a gel with a three-dimensional network structure. In recent years, sol–gel technology has not only been successfully applied in the synthesis of glass, functional ceramic powders and composite oxide materials which are difficult to prepare by traditional methods, but has also been recognized as an ideal method for preparing superhydrophobic materials with controlled roughness structure.24–27 Xu and colleagues catalyzed the preparation of highly transparent and superhydrophobic anti-reflective coatings under alkaline conditions by using methyl triethoxysilane and ethyl orthosilicate as reactants through the sol–gel method.91 Li et al.84 synthesized a sol containing a CNT–SiO2 nano/micro composite structure, and then sprayed it on the surface of a glass substrate to form a film. After fluorination, the WCA was as high as 167°. The FTIR spectra showed that the surface of the nanotube was rich in hydroxyl groups (Fig. 3D), which can be condensed with the hydroxyl groups on the surface of silica to obtain a micro–nano rough structure connected by covalent bonds, which is superhydrophobic. Justin et al.85 prepared silica aerogels and xerogels using tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) and methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS) sol–gels. After being prepared into a powder, a double-sided adhesive was used to bond to a glass surface to test the hydrophobic performance. The results showed that, when the value of MTMS was 0.1–0.75, the aerogel powder achieved a superhydrophobic effect in the entire range, and the WCA is 167–170° (Fig. 3E). Although the sol–gel method has good controllability and does not require high reaction conditions, there are still some shortcomings. For example, the use of organic materials as raw materials is harmful to health, the entire sol–gel method takes a long time, and the presence of a large number of micropores in the gel causes the surface to shrink during drying, affecting the stability of the coating.


Layer-by-layer assembly method. 
Apart from the preparation methods of these common low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, there are some methods that deserve attention. The research team of Sun reported a method of using layer-by-layer assembly to grow silica beads with a particle size of 220 nm onto silica beads with a particle size of 660 nm. The system is a raspberry-like binary micro–nano hierarchical structure. After grafting with a hydrophobic reagent, the CA of the system reaches 157°, and the SA is less than 5° (Fig. 3F).28


Solution-immersion method. 
Liu et al.29 prepared superhydrophobic surfaces of zinc, silicon and steel by a simple solution-immersion method. They immersed zinc, silicon or steel in 1H,1H,2H,2H-(perfluorooctyl)-trichlorosilane and PFTS/methanol solution, respectively, and controlled the immersion time (24 h) and immersion temperature (50 °C) to form micron-level balls (1.7–2 μm in diameter) on the surface of the substrate.


Electrospinning method. 
Sheng et al.92 prepared a polyacrylonitrile film using the electrospinning method, and introduced amino silicone oil as a low surface energy substance and silica particles with a multi-layer rough structure to prepare a strong superhydrophobic microporous film. It can be seen that there are still many problems to be solved in the industrialization process of superhydrophobic materials. The preparation process of many superhydrophobic materials requires complicated and time-consuming steps and expensive raw materials and equipment. The stability of superhydrophobic materials is also a bottleneck in the development of this field.

2.4. Applications of low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces

2.4.1. Self-cleaning. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces have a rough micro–nano structure and a low surface energy substance, which makes them have the lotus effect. Pollutants such as dust and mud on the surface can be taken away by rolling water droplets, so that the surface of the material remains clean. The self-cleaning properties of superhydrophobic materials have great application value in fabrics, smart equipment, building exterior walls, and high-altitude glass that is difficult to clean.44,45 By spraying organosilane-modified alumina particles on conductive glass, Yoon et al.93 prepared a highly transparent self-cleaning superhydrophobic surface. When the droplets roll off, they can take away the carbon black powder with greater surface adhesion. Yao et al.94 used a perfluorosilane-coated titanium dioxide nanoparticle ethanol suspension as a coating to spray or immerse on the substrate to prepare a self-cleaning surface with strong mechanical properties that can also run in oil. Milles et al.95 prepared superhydrophobic pure aluminum textured self-cleaning surfaces by surface laser processing methods such as direct laser writing (DLW) and direct laser interference pattern (DLIP), and then contaminated the surface with manganese oxide and polyamide particles with sizes of 1 μm and 100 μm. Then they used nine drops of water (10 μL) for washing, and the results show that the residual pollution is as low as 1% (Fig. 4A).
 Fig. 4  (A) Extracts from high-speed videos on a 7 μm DLIP structured sample tilted 15°. The surface was covered with 1 μm MnO2 (a–e) and 100 μm polyamide particles (f–j). The time frame for each sequence is 40 ms. The arrows indicate the particles adsorbed by the 10 μL deionized water droplet.95 (Copyright: 2020, Elsevier.) (B) Cross-sectional SEM image of the superhydrophobic sample. (C) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hydrophobic Mg–Al LDH coating on AZ31. (D) Bode plots of the untreated aluminum and superhydrophobic sample after immersion in 3.5 wt% NaCl aqueous solution for different times.97 (Copyright: 2014, Elsevier.) (E) Potentiodynamic curves of (a) different coatings and (b) Mg–Al LDH/LA coatings intercalated with different anions in 3.5 wt% NaCl. (F) Condensation of water droplets on the superhydrophobic surface at −40 °C.101 (Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.) (G) The histogram of the time consumption of each specimen to finish the route.103 (Copyright: 2019, Maney Publishing.) 


2.4.2. Corrosion prevention. 
A superhydrophobic material on a metal substrate does not easily react with water and corrode due to a layer of air on the surface. Hydrophobic treatment of the metal surface improves the corrosion resistance of the material, extends the life of the material and saves economic expenses.46 Sun et al.96 constructed roughness on an aluminum sheet substrate by hydrochloric acid etching, and used polydimethylsiloxane as a low surface energy substance to prepare a superhydrophobic aluminum sheet with corrosion resistance. Liang et al.97 combined the traditional Stöber method with the in situ growth method to prepare a 55 μm-thick film layer on the surface of an aluminum substrate with a WCA of 155° (Fig. 4B). A corrosion test in 3.5% NaCl solution shows that the corrosion potential of the substrate has a large positive shift, showing superior corrosion resistance – the Bode plots of the untreated aluminum and superhydrophobic sample are shown in Fig. 4D. In general, the impedance behavior in the low frequency region reflects the properties of the protective layer in the electrolytic solution. As can be seen from Fig. 4D-a, the |Z| value of the superhydrophobic sample decreased gradually to approach the value of the untreated aluminum with the evolution of the immersion time. This was in good agreement with the result from the Nyquist plot and potentiodynamic polarization curve (Fig. 4D-b), indicating that the superhydrophobic coating film provided the aluminum substrate with excellent corrosion resistant properties even after immersion in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution for 1440 min. Xin et al.98 grew a magnesium aluminum layered double hydroxide (Mg–Al LDH) in situ on AZ31 magnesium alloy as a corrosion inhibitor, and then sealed it with a superhydrophobic coating (Fig. 4C). The potential dynamic polarization curves of different coatings (sodium stearate (SS), lauric acid (LA) and myristic acid (MA)), which were used to bring the surface energy down, and electrochemical impedance spectra intercalated with different anions (NO3−, VO43−, MO42−) were recorded (Fig. 4E). What's more, the protective effect of coatings can be quantified by the corrosion inhibition efficiency (ηp) and the corrosion inhibition efficiency of Mg–Al–NO3− LDH/LA reaches up to 99.96%, showing that the magnesium alloy had excellent corrosion resistance.


2.4.3. Anti-icing. 
There is an air layer between the surface of a low-adhesive superhydrophobic material and the droplets, which makes it possible to delay freezing or roll the water droplets off the surface before freezing. Therefore, superhydrophobic materials have great significance in anti-icing applications of power systems, communication systems and roads.47 Li et al.99 prepared a 2–5 nm silica sol, and then dispersed 20–30 nm silica powder in the sol, sprayed it on the surface of a glass insulator together, and finally used perfluorosiloxane (PDTS) for surface chemical modification. A superhydrophobic coating with a WCA of 163° was prepared. Under the test temperature of −3 to 1 °C, relative humidity of 87–91%, and wind speed of 5.9–6.6 m s−1, only scattered ice appears within 5–6 h, showing excellent anti-icing performance. Farhadi and his colleagues prepared micro–nano rough superhydrophobic coatings by spin coating or dip coating, and used an organosilane, a fluoropolymer or silicone rubber as the top layer.100 The prepared material was placed in a wind tunnel at −10 °C for an anti-icing performance test. The results showed that, after up to 11 cycles of icing/deicing, the performance of the superhydrophobic material gradually declined, pointing to the research focus of the durability of the anti-icing performance. Later researchers prepared superhydrophobic surfaces based on the assembly of sprayed SiO2 nanoparticles. Tests have shown that when a slide with a superhydrophobic surface is exposed to an ultra-low temperature of −40 °C, the freezing time of water droplets is extended to 372.0 s. The superhydrophobic surface has a good free energy barrier and a low heat transfer rate, so that the surface has good mechanical durability while having ice resistance (Fig. 4F).101


2.4.4. Drag reduction. 
The air layer on a superhydrophobic surface can greatly reduce the resistance of the liquid to its movement, so that the superhydrophobic material has a good drag reduction and floatation effect, which is of great importance for reducing the water resistance during hull operation.48 Wang et al.48 prepared alkali-etched copper alloys and modified them with perfluorosilane to prepare superhydrophobic copper surfaces. A water jet system was used to study the frictional resistance of the liquid to its surface. The results showed that the superhydrophobic surface had a drag reduction effect of 40% at a low wall shear rate and a drag reduction effect of 20% at a high wall shear rate. Moaven et al.102 used butyl orthotitanate hydrolysis to prepare a sol. After dilution, it was spin-coated on a sandblasted aluminum alloy to form a film. The WCA was 157–160°, and the drag reduction effect for laminar and turbulent flow was 30% and 15%, respectively. Zhao et al.103 implemented ultraviolet laser texturing on a stainless steel surface, and then spin-coated a reagent to reduce the surface free energy, thereby obtaining a superhydrophobic stainless steel surface with a CA of up to 161.5°. After testing the sliding performance of the surface, it was shown that, when the laser-textured scanning interval is 80 μm, the drag reduction effect of the surface is increased by 29.7% (Fig. 4G).

3. High-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces
3.1. Sources of structure in nature
In the previous section, the surfaces of animals and plants such as the lotus leaf, rice leaf, and water strider have superhydrophobic properties with low adhesion due to their rough micro–nano structure and low surface energy. The WCA on their surface is greater than 150°, and it has a low hysteresis of the contact angle (the SA of water drops on the surface is less than 10°). The magic of nature lies in the diversity of species, which can bring infinite inspiration to human scientific research. Unlike the lotus effect, although water droplets are spherical on the surface of red rose petals and they have superhydrophobic properties, the water droplets have high contact angle hysteresis, as if the water droplets “adhere” to the leaves; even if the leaves are overturned, the water droplets will not drop, which is due to the layered micro-nipples and nano-folds on the surface of red roses.8 These micro–nano structures provide sufficient roughness for superhydrophobicity. As for high adhesion, we can find the answer from the following figures.

Fig. 5 is the optical morphology diagram, water droplet contact angle diagram and SEM image of some high-adhesion or low-adhesion superhydrophobic plants. Fig. 5a (Rosa, cv. Bairage) and Fig. 5b (Rosa, cv. Showtime) are two different varieties of roses.7 Their SEM images all show layered micro–nano structures. The low magnification shows the raised cell morphology and the irregular epidermis in the center of the cell folds; there are parallel folds in the anticline area of the cell. The difference between the SEM images of the two is that the density of the micro–nano structure is different; the distance between the papillae in Fig. 5a is greater than that in Fig. 5b, which leads to a difference in adhesion between the two. The static contact angle of the water droplets on the surface of 5a is 152°. As shown in the illustration, even if the petals are turned upside down, the water droplets will not fall, showing high adhesion. Although the static contact angle of water droplets on the surface of Fig. 5b is as high as 167°, the SA is 6°; when the blade is slightly inclined the water droplets will roll off, showing low adhesion. Because of the similar periodic microstructure, there are many plants with high adhesion and superhydrophobic properties.8 The SEM image of the petal of Chinese kafir lily shows that the structure is closely packed hexagons with an average side length of 75 μm and the width of each hexagon is 780 nm (Fig. 5c). The CA observation illustration shows that the water droplets are spherical on the surface of the petals, and, even if the petals are inverted, they will not drip. Meanwhile, the sunflower petal shows a periodic array of parallel lines with an average diameter of 15 μm and a spiral width of 2.5 μm on each line (Fig. 5d). Similarly, water droplets have high adhesion on the surface. Scallion and garlic are common plants in life. Like many terrestrial plants, there is a waxy layer on the surface. Its function is to drain and prevent stomatal dehydration.9 In addition, its surface has a convex linear micro–nano structure, and the groove part has complex folds (Fig. 5e and f); water droplets have a CA of more than 150° on the surface. Even if the blade is placed vertically, the water droplets will not roll (as shown in the illustration), showing high contact angle hysteresis. It is analyzed that the hysteresis of the contact angle is caused by the fixation of the contact line due to the hydrophobic defect.
 Fig. 5  Photos of high-adhesion superhydrophobic plant surfaces. (a) A drop of water (macroscopic view) stays upside down on the surface of a rose petal (Rosa, cv. Bairage) and the SEM images of the rose petal with different magnifications whose bars are 20 and 5 μm, respectively.7 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) (b) Water staying on the surface of another variety of rose petals (Rosa, cv. Showtime) and SEM images with different magnifications showing a tighter micropapillary structure than in Fig. 5a. The inset is a WCA on a rose petal, with a value of 167° and a SA of 6°.7 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) Water drops stay on the surface of a petal of Chinese kafir lily and a sunflower petal upside down (c and d). The SEM images in (c and d) are compact hexagonal and linear periodic arrays, respectively, which makes the petals have high adhesion and superhydrophobicity.8 (Copyright: 2008, American Chemical Society.) Water drops are still on the surface of the scallion and garlic placed vertically (e and f). SEM images with a magnification of 10 μm show linear grooves making the water droplets highly adherent.9 (Copyright: 2009, American Institute of Physics.) 
The above plant surfaces are also superhydrophobic due to low surface energy substances and layered micro–nano structures, but the sizes of the micro–nano structures on the surfaces of these plants are larger than that of lotus leaves, and water droplets will enter larger grooves. Taking red rose petals as an example, there are closely arranged micro-nipples on the petal surface and there are many nano-folds on the top of each nipple. The water sealed in the micro-nipple will adhere to the surface of the petals, making the water droplets superhydrophobic with high adhesion; this phenomenon is called the petal effect.
3.2. Wetting model and adhesion mechanism
The superhydrophobicity of water droplets on a solid surface can be explained by two basic models: the air enters the texture groove, allowing the water droplets to freely advance and retreat at different contact line points – the Cassie–Baxter model; and the water droplets enter the grooves of the coarse structure with a larger size, so that the water droplets “stick” to the solid surface – the Wenzel state. In the Wenzel state, fSL can be changed to 1 in eqn (2) because the liquid and air contact parts are not considered.16 At this time, the Cassie–Baxter equation becomes the Wenzel equation (eqn (3)). The Wenzel equation illustrates the relationship between the change in WCA and roughness. cosθw = cosθy(3)
In the above equation, θw is the Wenzel contact angle and θy is the Young contact angle. Since the actual surface has a certain roughness, the actual contact area is larger than the ideal surface, and r represents the roughness, that is, the ratio of the real area to the projected area. However, the Wenzel equation is not valid for porous rough surfaces; when the plant leaf is regarded as a solid filled with grooves, the solid grooves are wetted by the liquid, and the solid platform remains dry. This phenomenon is called the Cassie impregnating state. The wetting specific surface area of the solid surface in the Cassie impregnating state is smaller than that in the Wenzel state and greater than that in the Cassie–Baxter state. Combining the adhesion of the droplets in the three states, the conclusion can be drawn that the degree of hysteresis of the contact angle, that is, the adhesion of the droplets, depends on the wetting specific surface area of the solid surface. The greater the specific surface area of wetting, the higher the droplet adhesion. The Cassie impregnating equation is converted on the basis of the Cassie–Baxter equation.75,76,104 For eqn (1), f1 is still fSL, f2 = fLA = 1 − fSL, and θ2 is the contact angle of the liquid and air (θLA). Because in the Cassie impregnating state, the hole is filled with water (θLA = 0°, cosθLA = 1), so the Cassie impregnating equation is as follows: cosθCB = 1 + fSL(cosθ1 − 1)(4)
The model of the water droplet wetting state in the Wenzel state and the Cassie impregnating state is shown in Fig. 6a and b. It is worth mentioning that, besides the periodic rough micro–nano structure grooves, the other factor affecting the droplets staying on the petal surface is the volume of the droplets. For small droplets, their weight is smaller than the surface tension, so they can adhere to the surface. When the volume of the water droplet is about 10 μL, its weight and surface tension are balanced, and the water droplet will fall.
 Fig. 6  Microstructural diagram of a droplet in the Wenzel state (a) and Cassie impregnating state (b). 
3.3. Fabrication of high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces

3.3.1. Use of petals as templates. 
The microstructure of natural rose petals provides us with inspiration – the pitch value of the rough structure and the density of the nanostructure play a key role in controlling the adhesion in the preparation of artificial superhydrophobic surfaces. The initial preparation of a high-adhesion superhydrophobic surface was to use rose petals as a repeating template, and to evaporate the solvent at ambient temperatures to drive the nanoimprint pattern transfer process to prepare polymer films that mimic the structure of rose petals. According to the method, by using different types of petals as templates, polymer films with different periodic microstructures can be obtained to meet the needs of different polymer precursors, such as polyacrylonitrile, polyethylene, polypropylene, poly vinyl chloride, polydimethylsiloxane, polymethyl methacrylate, polyester and polyamide. Feng et al.8 poured a poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA, Mw = 22000 g mol−1, ca. 10 wt%) aqueous solution on the surface of rose petals. When the aqueous solution was completely evaporated, a PVA film with a petal structure was obtained (Fig. 7A-a and A-b). Polystyrene (PS, Mw = 100000 g mol−1) films were then obtained by pouring 15 wt% PS chloroform solution onto the prepared PVA film (Fig. 7A-c and A-d). And the water droplets were pinned to the surface in a spherical shape, even if the surface was turned over.
 Fig. 7  (A) (a and b) SEM images of the duplicated PVA film with inverse petal structures. (c and d) SEM images of the duplicated PS film with similar petal surface structures. (The inset in panel (d) is the shape of a water drop on the PS film when it is turned upside down.)8 (Copyright: 2008, American Chemical Society.) (B) Preparation procedure of surfaces with tunable water adhesion.110 (Copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society.) (C) SEM images of the films produced on cold-rolled aluminum foil at plasma frequencies of (a) 22500 Hz and (b) 10000 Hz and (c) on a polished aluminum substrate at a 22500 Hz plasma electrical excitation frequency.112 (Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society.) 


3.3.2. Prepared using fluorinated monomers. 
In later research, most of these high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces were deposited using fluorinated monomers, or prepared by fluorinating various nanostructured surfaces.105–107 Due to the loose arrangement of the fluorinated compounds, the gain effect caused by the greater affinity with water is offset (the polarity of C–F is greater than that of C–H). The fluorinated compound has strong hydrophobicity.108 Zhang et al.30 treated periodic hydrophobic patterns and superhydrophobic structures by irradiating silicon with femtosecond lasers. The superhydrophobic structures are two-scale spike structures induced by femtosecond lasers. They adjusted the surface adhesion by changing the area ratio of superhydrophobic regions to hydrophobic regions. Cho et al.109 spin-coated silica nanoparticles on a substrate to increase the roughness of the surface, and then modified the surface with a self-assembled fluorosilanized monolayer to make the surface change from the Wenzel state to the Cassie impregnating state. After secondary spin coating with silica nanoparticles to produce a multi-scale rough structure, a smooth superhydrophobic surface can also be obtained. Ou et al.110 immersed titanium alloy substrates in an H2O–H2O2–HF solution at 140 °C for 30, 60 and 120 minutes, and then deposited low surface energy molecules such as 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl trichloride (PFOTS) on them, making these samples superhydrophobic. As a result, the SA of the surfaces with immersion times of 30, 60, and 120 minutes was measured to be 180°, 31 ± 2°, and 8 ± 1°, respectively (Fig. 7B). The adjustment of water adhesion on the surface of titanium dioxide is achieved.


3.3.3. Fluorine-free preparation methods. 
Although the surface energy of fluorine is very low, conducive to the superhydrophobic performance, fluoride will harm the ecological environment. Thus, some fluorine-free high-adhesion superhydrophobic surface preparation methods have emerged. Yao et al.31 selected different shearing and thermal conditions to make pure isotactic poly(propylene) (iPP) subjected to a shearing field while lowering the temperature to form an appropriate crystalline network structure, so that, without modifying with low surface energy components, a superhydrophobic polymer surface with adjustable SA (range of 1° to 90°) can be obtained, and the surface has good thermal properties, chemical resistance and moisture resistance. Guo et al.111 spin-coated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) vinyl on an etched aluminum alloy template, controlling the time to adjust the surface roughness, so that the SA of the superhydrophobic surface is larger than 90°. Boscher and his colleagues used atmospheric pressure dielectric barrier discharge (AP-DBD) of hexamethyldisiloxane on cold-rolled aluminum foil to prepare a fluorine-free high-adhesion superhydrophobic surface.112 It can be seen from the SEM images at different plasma frequencies that the prepared surface has a dual-scale rough structure (Fig. 7C), indicating that the nano-scale particles generated on the surface of the film and bonded to the aluminum substrate during the process are the key to achieving high adhesion.


3.3.4. Preparing a superhydrophilic pattern on a superhydrophobic surface. 
In addition to increasing the SA of the droplet, preparing a superhydrophilic pattern on a superhydrophobic surface with low adhesion can also achieve adhesion of the superhydrophobic surface. Ghosh et al.113,114 adjusted the content of TiO2 filler particles in a hydrophobic fluoroacrylic polymer matrix to 80 wt%, and at this time it will become a composite material with superhydrophobic properties. The superhydrophobic substrate was then irradiated with ultraviolet (390 nm) for 30 minutes through a patterned photomask, and the exposed area became superhydrophilic (superhydrophilic tracks showed a CA of less than 3°), and unexposed areas remain superhydrophobic. The preparation of superhydrophilic patterns on superhydrophobic surfaces overcomes other opposing forces (such as gravity) within the viscosity-related length range, and provides a solution for low-cost microchannel droplet transport. Yong et al.32 used a femtosecond laser (center wavelength 800 nm, repetition frequency 1 kHz) to scan the surface of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) (scanning speed 4 mm s−1, constant average power 30 MW) to obtain a fine linear structure. By adjusting the interval between adjacent scan lines, the period or average distance of adjacent micro grooves is adjusted to obtain a superhydrophobic surface with a periodic hydrophilic pattern, and the adhesion and anisotropic sliding of water are controlled on the surface. Plasma treatment is an efficient and environmentally friendly modification method, which is widely used in surface wettability control.115 Tsougeni et al.116 proposed a method for the production of superhydrophilic microchannels in polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and polyether ether ketone (PEEK) using direct lithography on the polymer surface followed by anisotropic O2 plasma etching. However, this low-pressure plasma treatment method requires an expensive vacuum device and a dedicated mask. Compared with this, the atmospheric plasma jet has lower cost and higher efficiency.117 Huang et al.118 combined CuCl2 etching, stearic acid modification, and mask-based nitrogen-cooled plasma treatment to achieve spontaneous pump-less transportation (SPT) of liquids on Al substrates, including horizontal transportation, inclined transportation, and directional transportation.

3.4. Applications of high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces
Superhydrophobic surfaces with adjustable adhesion have huge application potential in the fields of controlled transport of small volumes of liquids, microfluidic devices, biochemical separation, and bio/chem analysis assay. Balu et al.49 used phase shifter printing technology to pattern superhydrophobic paper substrates with high hysteresis ink patterns (dots and lines), and designed simple two-dimensional lab-on-paper (LOP) devices: by adjusting the shape and size of the ink pattern, the drag and extension adhesion of the droplets to the substrate are controlled to realize the storage, transfer, mixing and sampling of the droplets (Fig. 8A). Unlike previous LOP equipment, which relies on the capillary force inside the paper to achieve droplet transmission and mixing, it is only necessary to adjust the adhesion force to control the droplets on the substrate surface. Zhang et al.50 prepared a row of polystyrene (PS) nanotube layers on a porous alumina film template. The superhydrophobic surface with strong adhesion can transport microdroplets completely controllably, and realize the reversible directional transport of superparamagnetic micro-upgraded liquid droplets; furthermore, there is no volume loss in an alternating magnetic field. It can be widely used in many fields such as biochemical separation, targeted drug delivery, immunoassay, etc. Nine et al.51 reported a method to adjust the air-gap and roughness-height by changing the concentration (4–16 wt%) of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to control the adhesion of droplets (the sliding angle range is 2 ± 1°–87 ± 2°). It is concluded that the change in droplet adhesion is attributed to the change of the contact type between the droplet and surface from “point contact” to “regional contact” (Fig. 8B).
 Fig. 8  (A) (a) Photographs of an array of drops and a high magnification image of a single drop stored on a vertical substrate. (b) Snapshots of a drop being transferred between two substrates. (c) Photographs of merging and mixing: (i) pickup mixing (two drops) and (ii) line mixing (three drops) and a plot that shows the working zone of drop volumes suitable for line mixing. (d) Photographs of drop splitting between two substrates.49 (Copyright: 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.) (B) Effect of the PDMS concentration on the surface morphology to tune air-pockets of composites, (a) 4 wt% PDMS, (b) 7 wt% PDMS, (c) 10 wt% PDMS, (d) 13 wt% PDMS, and (e) 16 wt% PDMS, and (f) schematic representation of the PDMS concentration effect on the roughness height and air-gap.51 (Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society.) 
4. Slippery liquid infused porous surfaces
4.1. Sources of structure in nature
A slippery liquid infused porous surface (SLIPS) has the functions of liquid repellency and self-cleaning like a superhydrophobic surface, but the difference is that a superhydrophobic surface repels the liquid by the air layer formed by the micro–nano structure, and a SLIPS is a low surface energy liquid-perfused porous rough structure, so as to obtain a homogeneous and stable solid–liquid membrane layer, thereby playing the role of lyophobicity.119 SLIPS, a peculiar structure, can also be found in nature – Nepenthes. The bottle cap of the pitcher plant on the top can secrete fragrance and lure insects. The bottle mouth is smooth, the insects will slip into the bottle, and are drowned by the liquid secreted at the bottom of the bottle, and the nutrients of the insect body are decomposed and then digested and absorbed.10 The smooth waxy area of the bottle mouth is the “lubricant infused surface.” The locked liquid in the rough microstructure will produce a continuous liquid retention pad, forming a water-repellent surface. The retention liquid pad can also remove grease on the feet of insects, so it is difficult for insects to stand on the edge of the insect trap cage, and it is easy to slip from the edge to the bottom filled with digestive juice.120 As shown in Fig. 9, the growth process of the pitcher plant waxy layer is divided into several parts. The key process of forming a rough porous structure is shown in Fig. 9b (elongation of stalks is finished) and Fig. 9c (at distal ends of stalks, flat platelets of the upper wax layer develop).121
 Fig. 9  Photos of SLIPS of Nepenthes and earthworms. (a) Optical photos of pitcher plants. (b) Cryo-SEM micrographs of developmental stage 5 of the waxy layer of Nepenthes: elongation of stalks is finished. (c) Developmental stage 6 of the waxy layer of Nepenthes: at the distal ends of stalks, flat platelets of the upper wax layer develop. Scale bars: 1 μm.121 (Copyright: 2013, Springer Nature.) (d) Earthworms walk through the dirt without stains. (e) Image of the earthworm's skin before mechano-stimulus and (f) image of the earthworm's skin after mechano-stimulus.123 (Copyright: 2018, Wiley-Blackwell.) 
Similar to Nepenthes, the earthworm's epidermis also has a rough liquid injection structure. Earthworms can pass through sticky soil without adhering to stains because of their unique self-lubricating mechanism: the epidermal glands of earthworms continue to secrete mucus under external mechanical stimuli and their skin is rough with a macroscopic annulus and microscopic texture structure; this structure will lock the mucus to form a lubricating layer.11,12 The lubricating layer will prevent earthworms from directly contacting the soil particles, which will reduce drag, prevent wear and allow self-cleaning.122Fig. 9e is an SEM image of the earthworm epidermis without external stimulation. It can be seen that the earthworm epidermis has linear grooves that can be filled with lubricating fluid. After the epidermis is filled with lubricating fluid, as shown in Fig. 9f, the surface of the lubricating layer is very smooth, making earthworms move smoothly through the soil.123
4.2. Wetting model and adhesion mechanism
The rough liquid injection surface represented by the inner wall of Nepenthes and the epidermis of earthworms can significantly reduce the sliding angle and hysteresis angle of droplets. Therefore, it has excellent self-cleaning and self-repairing properties, and has broad application prospects in the fields of self-cleaning coatings, marine antifouling, and biomedicine.124 It is very important to understand the model, construction mechanism and principle of SLIPS. The system on SLIPS involves four different phases, i.e. the solid, lubricant, working liquid impinging on the lubricant surface and surrounding air; the interaction of the complex interface between the four phases and the geometry of the solid play a decisive role in the effectiveness and stability of SLIPS.17
The geometry of a solid surface can be described by a geometric factor R (R = r − 1/r − ∅, the range of R varies from 0 on a smooth plane to an extremely rough surface 1); r represents the roughness of the solid surface, that is, the ratio of the actual solid surface area to the projected area, and ∅ represents the proportion of the solid surface in contact with the bottom of the impact droplet. In addition, the interface energy γ (taking γx and γxy as examples, γx refers to the surface energy between the x phase and the surroundings, and γxy refers to the interface energy between phases x and y), and the contact angle θ between the four phases need to be introduced to describe the interface interaction.
When the repelled liquid is completely filled in the rough solid surface structure, the surface energy EA equals Rγsa + γa, when the lubricating liquid is completely filled in the rough solid structure, the surface energy E2 equals Rγsb + γb, and when the lubricating liquid is filled in the rough structure and the repelled liquid spreads on the lubricating layer, the surface energy of the entire system E1 equals Rγsb + γab + γa; in this system, if the solid is preferentially wetted by the lubricating fluid, the repelling fluid is present on the lubricating layer, and the following two energy conditions (eqn (5) and (6)) must be met:33 ΔE1 = EA − E1 = R(γbcosθb − γacosθa) − γab > 0(5) ΔE2 = EA − E2 = R(γbcosθb − γacosθa) + γa − γb > 0(6)Among them, γab, γa and γb represents the interface energy of the repelling liquid and the lubricating liquid, the repelling liquid and the air interface, and the lubricating liquid and the air interface, respectively; θa and θb represent the contact angle of the repelling liquid and lubricating liquid with the solid surface when the system is in equilibrium. At this time, the model of the entire system is shown in Fig. 10a.
 Fig. 10  (a) SLIPS system. The failure model of SLIPS predicted from the surface energy and extended parameters: (b) (Sba < 0) the droplet is covered with lubricant, and the lubricant is taken away when the droplet leaves the SLIPS; (c) (Sab < 0) the droplet spreads over the lubricating layer; (d) (Sbs > −γbR) the lubricant cannot enter the solid surface where air exists; (e) (Sbs(a) > −γabR) the lubricant cannot enter the solid surface where impinging droplets exist; and (f) (γab > 0) the impinging fluid is miscible with the lubricant, forming an infinite interface.123 (Copyright: 2018, Wiley-Blackwell.) (h) Schematic diagram of the wetting structure of the solid rough structure outside and below the droplet in the oil–solid–air state and (i) the oil–solid–water state, respectively. In the case where the droplets are not covered by the lubricant (g), the droplets present on the surface of the lubricating oil package have six possible thermodynamic states (j) according to the way the lubricant wets the texture in the presence of air (vertical axis) and water (horizontal axis). A3–W3 of figure j are the qualified SLIPS (o – oil, s – solid, w – water, a – air).127 (Copyright: 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
The extended parameter S between the four phases can also be used as a criterion to determine whether the SLIPS is effective and meets the functional criteria. Preston et al.125,126 proposed five basic conditions to be met by SLIPS systems and failure models if the conditions are not met according to the surface energy and its extended parameters. (I) Sba = γa − (γab + γb) < 0(7)If condition (I) is not met, it means that the diffusion parameter of the lubricant on the droplet is a positive number. The lubricant spontaneously diffuses on the droplet, covering the droplet (Fig. 10b). When the droplet leaves the surface, it will take away part of the lubricant, and the lubricant will gradually disappear over time. Not only that, it will also contaminate the repelled droplet. (II) Sab = γb − (γab + γa) < 0(8)If condition (II) is not met, the impinging droplet will endlessly diffuse onto the lubricant to form a liquid film (Fig. 10c), making the SLIPS ineffective. (III) Sbs = γs − (γbs + γb) > −γbR(9)where S represents a rough solid, γs represents the surface energy of the solid in the surroundings, and γbs represents the interface energy between the lubricant and the solid. If condition (III) is not met, the lubricant will not be injected into the solid structure in the presence of ambient air (Fig. 10d). (IV) Sbs(a) = γs − (γbs + γb) > −γabR(10)Subscript (a) means the presence of the impinging droplet. If condition (IV) is not met, the lubricant will not be injected into the solid structure in the presence of impinging droplets (Fig. 10e). (V) γab > 0(11)If condition (V) is not met, the interface surface area between the lubricant and the impinging fluid will increase indefinitely to minimize the energy, which ultimately leads to miscibility of the two fluids (Fig. 10f).
These five conditions have guiding significance when constructing SLIPS. Similarly, Smith and his colleagues list 12 possible combinations between the four phases in a SLIPS system,127 according to the above condition (I), S < 0 (the droplet will not be covered by lubricating oil), and when condition (I) is not met, S > 0 (the lubricating oil diffuses onto the droplet and blocks the droplet33,125), each divided into six combinations: A3–W1, A3–W2, A3–W3, A2–W1, A2–W2, and A2–W3 (as shown in Fig. 10h and i, A1: not impregnated in the oil–solid–air state, A2: impregnated with emergent features, A3: impregnated with submerged features, W1: impaled in the oil–solid–water state, W2: impregnated with emergent features, W3: impregnated with submerged features). Fig. 10j shows the six SLIPS design constraints expressed in terms of the intrinsic contact angle, apparent contact angle, or spreading coefficient when the droplets are not covered by a lubricant, i.e. six ways for lubricants to wet the texture in the presence of air (vertical axis) and water (horizontal axis). (A3–W3) of Fig. 10j are the phase relationship of the qualified SLIPS, i.e. the stable configuration is the one with the lowest total interface energy, from which we can know that only when the lubricating film completely wets the texture is the lubricating film encapsulating the texture stable. The study of the thermodynamic model provides a theoretical basis for the design and preparation of a stable liquid-repellent SLIPS.
4.3. Fabrication of SLIPS

4.3.1. Lubricant selection. 
A SLIPS is composed of a rough micro–nano structure, base layer modification and an injected lubricating fluid. The construction of SLIPS needs to follow some principles: the lubricating liquid and the repelling liquid are incompatible with each other; the chemical affinity of the lubricating liquid and the solid substrate is higher than that of the repulsive liquid and the solid substrate; and the micro–nano structure on the solid surface should provide enough surface to adsorb and store the lubricant. These three principles are the guarantee to obtain stable SLIPS.33 The preparation of SLIPS does not simply involve injecting lubricating fluid into the rough solid structure, but involves four key steps: the selection of the lubricant, the preparation of the base rough structure, the modification of the substrate, and the lubricant injection process.
The lubricant is the phase of SLIPS that most directly contacts the outside, so the physical and chemical properties of the lubricant are the key to determining the characteristics of SLIPS. Mineral oil,128 perfluoropolyether (krytox),33 ionic liquid,129 silicone oil,130etc. have all been used as lubricants. Lubricants applied to SLIPS need to have low surface energy to enhance the anti-adhesion ability, and low viscosity to reduce sliding resistance and repair damaged parts, but also need to have low volatility to strengthen the coating durability. A lubricant used in the optical field must have transparency in order not to affect the optical properties of the material. Low surface energy of the lubricant is a necessary condition to impart SLIPS with liquid repellency. Sett and his colleagues reviewed the surface energy of common lubricants and low-surface-tension fluids at 20 °C.131 The surface energy of perfluoropolyether krytox is 17–19 N m−1. Due to the lower surface energy, perfluoropolyether is often used as the first choice for the preparation of lyophobic surfaces. However, low surface energy cannot be pursued blindly for liquid repellency. A too low surface energy will cause condition (I) in the above to be not met, resulting in the oil film blocking liquid droplets and the droplet movement being hindered, causing surface function failure or substrate erosion. When such a SLIPS is used as a condenser surface, tiny droplets are wrapped by an oil film, and then developed into a water film covering the surface of the condenser, which affects the heat transfer effect of the condenser.132 When selecting a lubricant, besides considering the surface energy factor, it is also necessary to consider the relationship with the impinging droplet. For example, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), pentane and hexane cannot condense into droplets on a surface wetted by perfluoropolyether, but form a liquid film, because they have large air–liquid surface tension, which makes them penetrate the lubricant and enter the solid rough structure.133 In addition, the dosage of the lubricant and the size of the droplets are also factors that affect whether the lubricant produces a cloaking behavior.134Fig. 11a–c show that, as the thickness of the lubricating layer gradually decreases, the state of the droplets in the lubricant is flooded, coated, and exposed, respectively. As can be seen from Fig. 11d and e, with the same lubricating layer thickness, as the droplets evaporate, the size decreases, and the possibility of the lubricant cloaking the droplets becomes greater. Fig. 11f is the curve of the dimensionless ratio of the ridge height (z) and drop height (h) of the lubricant in the three states of flooded, coated, and exposed with the time increasing. The states recorded at 38 s are shown in Fig. 11g and i, indicating that the lubricant takes the shortest time to complete the cloaking behavior in the flooded state. Fig. 11j is the curve of the droplet height changing with time. The curve slope of the flooded state is the lowest, indicating that the droplet evaporation rate is the lowest under the cover of a large amount of lubricant. Therefore, in order to improve the stability of SLIPS and reduce the loss of lubricant, excessive lubricant should be removed to enhance the interaction between the lubricant and the substrate, and the volume of impinging droplets should be increased to slow down the production of lubricant cloaking behavior in consideration of the surface energy.
 Fig. 11  The coating thickness is classified as the flooded (a), coated (b) and exposed configuration (c). The droplet state (d) and the droplet state after 19 s of evaporation (e) with the same lubricant thickness. (f) The curves of the dimensionless ratio of ridge height (z) and droplet height (h) with time for the three states. (g)–(i) correspond to the water drop status of the flooded, coated and exposed configuration at 38 s, respectively. The droplet height with time (j) indicates that the SLIPS with more lubricant takes the shortest time (38 s) to complete the cloaking and the droplet evaporation rate is the lowest.134 (Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society.) 


4.3.2. Preparation of the substrate. 
Rough micro–nano structures with different shapes on the substrate increase the contact area with the lubricant and provide capillary force for locking the lubricant.34 There are many methods for preparing rough micro–nano structures, such as the hydrothermal method (Fig. 12a),135 polymer crystallization method (Fig. 12b),136,137 anodizing method (Fig. 12c)138 and electrochemical deposition method (Fig. 12d).139 The preparation of rough substrates in SLIPS has many similarities with that of superhydrophobic surfaces. For example, etching methods, chemical deposition, sol–gel methods, and layer-by-layer self-assembly methods (LbL) can be used to prepare rough surfaces to construct SLIPS. Rykaczewski et al.133 used photolithography and deep reactive ion etching to form a patterned surface with a width of 10 μm, a depth of 10 μm, and a spacing of 5 μm on the surface of a silicon wafer, and then subjected it to hydrophobic treatment with octadecyltrichlorosilane, injecting perfluoro oil to obtain a SLIPS that can effectively promote the droplet condensation of a low surface tension liquid (Fig. 12e). However, it is not suitable for large-scale preparation due to its complex preparation process and strict requirements on surface materials and shapes. Hozumi et al.140 deposited 1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane on a silicon wafer by chemical vapor deposition to obtain a rough structure, and then used triethoxysilane to increase the polarity of the surface, and injected ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazole bis-trifluoromethanesulfonimide salt ([EMI][TFSI]) to obtain a SLIPS (Fig. 12f). [EMI][TFSI] has a lower vapor pressure and higher thermodynamic stability and is less volatile than perfluoropolyether. Kim et al.141 used the sol–gel method to convert an aluminum sol into nano-scale boehmite (AlO(OH)), spin-coated it onto silicon wafers, and obtained a gel film after heat treatment at 400 °C. A stable SLIPS can be obtained after the membrane is fluorinated and lubricant is poured (Fig. 12g). The sol–gel method is characterized by economical efficiency and simple operation, and can prepare SLIPS on different substrates, but requires heat treatment and fluorination treatment. Vogel et al.142 used layer-by-layer self-assembly (LbL) to perform plasma treatment on the surface of a silicon wafer to make it negatively charged, then deposited polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC) cations and negatively charged silicon nanoparticles to the desired number of layers, and then calcined to form a porous silicon layer. After fluorination to reduce the surface energy, Krytox100 is poured to obtain a thermodynamically stable SLIPS (Fig. 12h). Although LbL can build SLIPS on different substrates, it involves complex technologies such as plasma treatment and chemical vapor deposition, and is not suitable for large-scale production.
 Fig. 12  Substrate morphology of rough porous structures. (a) Hydrothermal ZnO.135 (Copyright: 2017, Elsevier Ltd.) (b) Organic polymeric porous PDMS.134 (Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society.) (c) Porous anodic aluminum oxide.138 (Copyright: 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag.) (d) Electrodeposited LiClO4.139 (Copyright: 2015, Elsevier.) (e) Photoetched silicon surface.133 (Copyright: 2014, Springer Nature.) (f) Carbon nano-fiber by CVD.140 (Copyright: 2014, American Institute of Physics.) (g) Polyaniline–silicon dioxide by the sol–gel method.141 (Copyright: 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.) (h) Seven-layer self-assembled silicon wafer surface.142 (Copyright: 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag.) Stability comparison of SLIPS prepared with four types of interfaces: (i) smooth surface; (j) micron scale rough surface; (k) nano scale rough surface; and (l) fractal surface.143 (Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society.) 
The above method for preparing superhydrophobic surfaces can also be used to prepare SLIPS, but the characteristics and roughness range of SLIPS substrates are still worth exploring. Philseok et al.143 came to the following conclusions by studying the difference between the lubricant loss, contact angle and sliding angle on smooth surfaces, micro-scale surfaces, nano-scale surfaces and micro–nano hierarchical surfaces (shown in Fig. 12i–l): for the superhydrophobic surface of bionic lotus leaf, the roughness of the hierarchical structure can provide the largest contact angle, which is conducive to improving the hydrophobicity. The nano-scale rough surface of the SLIPS can resist the shear force of the fluid to the greatest extent, which is conducive to the construction of a stable oil film. The nano-scale voids provide denser bump contacts, which can bear the impact of external forces and increase the stability. The capillary force generated can also better lock the lubricant without affecting the movement of droplets on the surface due to excessive roughness.
In addition to the effect of roughness on the stability of SLIPS, the open and closed state of the pores storing lubricant is also an important factor affecting the stability of SLIPS. A porous structure with interconnected pores will lose lubricant under the action of shear, while a closed pore structure (nanopores are separated from the adjacent nanopores by a membrane-like surface) can effectively maintain the lubricant and improve the mechanical stability. A closed-cell structure can be prepared by a template method using colloidal spheres as a template,144 hollow polymer sphere self-assembly methods,145 soft-plate printing,146etc. A closed-cell structure applied to a superhydrophobic surface makes the air trapped in the pores difficult to discharge, reducing the possibility of a transition from the Cassie model to the Wenzel model. For SLIPS, a closed-cell structure can not only effectively prevent the loss of lubricant and improve the mechanical damage resistance, but also provide adjustable transparency.17


4.3.3. Low surface pretreatment (substrate modification). 
For SLIPS, the micro–nano rough structure used to store the lubricant on the solid substrate after treatment with low surface energy groups will not only help the spreading and storage of the lubricant, but also enhance the hydrophobic property of the surface.35 On the contrary, if the substrate is not modified, the air trapped in the rough structure will bring resistance to complete filling.147 Common modifiers that can reduce the surface energy are fluorides such as fluorosilanes and fluorocarbon materials, because fluorinated functional groups have good compatibility with fluorinated lubricants, and can react to form precursors or miscible molecules.148 Caitlin et al.149 prepared a rough surface based on polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) by a sol–gel method. After fluorination, the lubricant was poured and the excess was discharged, and then (0.05 ± 0.01) g residual lubricant on the rough structure was detected, while only 0.003 g of lubricant remained on the surface without fluoride treatment. The results show that the surface modified by fluoride increases the adsorption of lubricants. Levkin et al.150 controlled the size of the micro–nano structure and the lubricity of the surface by controlling the composition of the polymer solution. They used UV-induced free radical polymerization to prepare a polybutyl methacrylate-ethylene glycol dimethacrylate P(BMA–EDMA) porous membrane, which was treated with methanol and dried, and then immersed in fluorinated lubricant (Krytox 100 and 103). An antibacterial SLIPS was prepared without fluoride treatment. Hashaikeh et al.151 took advantage of the fact that fluorine is present in polyvinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene (PVDF–HFP), so no further fluorination treatment is required to reduce the surface energy, and sprayed PVDF–HFP acetamide solution on an aluminum surface by electrospinning to form a porous structure composed of fibers with a diameter of 100–500 nm, and then infiltrated Krytox-1506 to form SLIPS that can promote the condensation of droplets.
In addition to introducing low surface energy modifiers to enhance the adhesion of lubricants, the use of π-electronic interactions can also increase the stability of lubricant injection into the surface. The π-electronic interaction refers to the typical non-polar interaction between electron-deficient groups and electron-rich groups. For example, an oily liquid and –OH, –COOH, –CHO, and –CH groups are adsorbed onto a silanized smooth surface through the interaction of OH–π, COOH–π, CHO–π and CH–π, so as to achieve the purpose of forming a liquid layer even on a smooth surface without micro–nano structure. Togasawa et al.152,153 used the –COOH group in oleic acid to form OH–π interactions with the π-electrons in the base layer, so that oleic acid with a surface tension of up to 32.5–33.6 mN m−1 could also be fixed on a smooth surface to obtain a fluorine-free lubricating coating. What's more, by increasing the density of π-electrons in the base layer, the OH–π interaction between the lubricant and the base layer is enhanced, thereby improving the stability of the surface. Covalent immobilization of the lubricant can produce an effect similar to the interaction of π-electrons. Krumpfer et al.131 dip-coated silicone oil on the surface of aluminum oxide at 100 °C. After 24 hours, a lubricant gel surface with a low hysteresis angle was formed. The mechanism of action is that the silicone oil is attached to the surface through the Si–O–Al covalent bond, and the polycondensation reaction between the lubricant and Si–OH produces a low hysteresis phenomenon. There are many other elements whose inorganic oxides can produce covalent fixation, such as silicon, titanium and nickel.154,155
Delaying the loss of the lubricant inside the substrate can also be achieved by controlling the elastic contraction of the substrate. Yao et al.156 crosslinked perfluorinated acrylates and perfluoropolyethers and then cured them to obtain fluorine gel elastomers. The cross-linked network structure of the fluorine gel (as shown in Fig. 13a) can seal the lubricant into the substrate to make the surface have super slippery properties. It has a strong ability to repel proteins and blood cells, and has significant applications in medical fields such as dialysis and blood analysis. In the same way, Hozumi et al.157 used organic liquids with changeable composition and polysiloxane (PDMS) to cross-link to prepare organic gels with self-lubricating properties. By changing the composition of the organic liquid to control its compatibility with the PDMS network and the shrinkage rate of the gel substrate, they achieved the purpose of controlling the secretion of lubricant and slowing down the process of the SLIPS being transformed into a superhydrophobic surface due to the loss of lubricant.
 Fig. 13  (a) The fluorinated lubricant is dispersed in the polymer network to form a cross-linked network structure of fluorine gel.156 (Copyright: 2014, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.) (b) Fabrication of a silicone oil infused surface with PDMS polymer injection (D4: 1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane).158 (Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic diagram of a lubricant-infused structured surface and an oil-impregnated gel. (d) Fabrication strategies for oil-impregnated gels.159–161 (Copyright: 2015, Springer Nature.) (Copyright: 2015, Wiley.) (Copyright: 2020, Springer Netherlands.) (e) Schematic diagram of a periodically spaced microchannel in a lubricant rapidly replenishing the lubricant onto the polymer surface.162 (Copyright: 2015, ICE Publishing Ltd.) 


4.3.4. Lubricant injection process. 
The modification of a substrate with low surface energy groups, physical or covalent interactions and altering the elastic contraction of the substrate mentioned above can enhance the adhesion between the lubricant and the substrate. The next step is to inject the lubricant into the substrate with a micro–nano structure, which is also the key to determining whether the lubricant can better bond with the substrate. Since the complete filling of the substrate cannot be guaranteed, simply immersing the substrate in the lubricant through the capillary force of the micro–nano structure and the surface tension of the lubricant cannot meet the requirements of preparing SLIPS.36 The injection of the lubricant has to solve two key problems. One is how to remove the air in substrates with different shapes so that the lubricant can completely infiltrate the structure. The available methods include vacuum infusion, which involves extracting the air from the hole and refilling the lubricant,163 and the pressure injection method, which creates a pressure difference between the inside and outside of the hole to drive the lubricant into the substrate.164 There is also a heating method, which involves heating the air in the hole to make it expand and escape. What's more, high temperature can reduce the viscosity of the filled liquid, which is suitable for high-viscosity lubricants.165 In addition, a solution exchange method with fast filling speed and complete filling can also be used. The micro–nano structure is filled with a small molecule solution first (e.g. ethanol solution), and then an intermediate (lubricant solvent) is used to replace the small molecule solution, finally replacing the intermediate with the specified lubricant.36
The second key issue is how to fix the lubricant. Besides covalent interactions (π-electronic interactions), modification with a low surface energy modifier35 and the control of the elastic contraction of the substrate156 mentioned above, a polymer can also be injected into the lubricant so that the lubricant is locked in the cross-linked network, and a continuous self-regulating secretion system of a supramolecular polymer–gel matrix (Fig. 13c and d) is introduced through the diffusion of the lubricant.159–161 Zhang et al.158 obtained a surface of a PDMS-infused organogel through heat treatment. Thermally responsive organogels are potential anti-icing materials that exhibit good long-term synergistic behavior when silicone oil is injected. Due to the compatibility with PDMS, silicone oil can be injected at the molecular level and locked in the PDMS (Fig. 13b). In the same way, it is possible to control the synergistic behavior of organogels by adjusting the compatibility of the PDMS network with different immersion organic liquids – by continuously and slowly releasing the liquid layer, the long-term performance of the liquid layer can be extended.166 Damle et al.162 embedded a network of periodically spaced channels (Fig. 13e) in the lubricant to connect the microchannels to the polymer surface to achieve rapid replenishment of the lubricant, and solve the problem of slow diffusion of silicone oil to the lubricating layer in PDMS.

4.4. Application of SLIPS.
By infusing a low surface energy liquid into the porous rough structure, a continuous, stable and homogeneous solid–liquid film layer can be formed on SLIPS. For SLIPS, it is the injected lubricant rather than the substrate that contacts with the droplets. Therefore, the characteristics of SLIPS mostly depend on the physical and chemical properties of the lubricant. The main properties of SLIPS are: Low sliding resistance. The low viscosity and surface energy of the lubricant make the object subject to less frictional resistance when moving on a near-molecularly smooth surface. The critical size of the droplet sliding on its surface is 20 μm, and the dynamic contact angle hysteresis is as low as 2.5°.167–169 Difficult for contaminants to attach. It is difficult for the lubricant film to provide nucleation and adsorption points, effectively reducing the condensation of droplets,147 ice crystal nucleation170 and scaling with deposition.171 Even if contaminants attach to the surface and nucleate, due to the fluidity of the lubricant, the attached droplets, ice crystals, fouling and microorganisms can be easily removed under the action of a small shear force.172 Fast self-healing. When the SLIPS is worn or impacted, the lubricant can quickly release and fill the “wound” within 150 ms, and a “wound” that has experienced multiple injuries can still heal automatically.173 In addition, SLIPS also have pressure resistance,174 anti-friction properties and adjustable light transmittance. Due to a series of excellent properties, SLIPS have important applications and influences in many fields.

4.4.1. Antifouling. 
Reduce the adhesion of droplets. The lubricant (such as silicone oil, olive oil, and ionic liquids) perfused on SLIPS has good repellency to water droplets and the surface has good sliding properties. The droplets on it can slide off at a small angle.175 Therefore, SLIPS can effectively reduce the adhesion of droplets.52 What's more, SLIPS can also resist biological adhesion and inhibit the formation of biofilms. They have great application prospects in the fields of medicine176 and marine antifouling.177,178
Anti-bioadhesion. 
Due to the low surface energy and fluidity of SLIPS, bacteria can be removed with a small shear force, which effectively inhibits the formation of biofilms. Alexander et al.179 prepared SLIPS with fluoroalkylsilane functionalized silicon as a substrate and a perfluorinated liquid as a lubricant, and then confirmed that the surface can prevent 99.6% of P. aeruginosa and 97.2% of S. aureus, and 96% of E. coli, showing superior anti-bacterial performance to the PEGylated substrate. Levkin et al.150 conducted UV-initiated free radical copolymerization on a glass substrate to prepare SLIPS, and then used bacteria such as P. aeruginosa, algae spores and larvae to conduct anti-fouling tests to simulate biological pollution in the real marine environment. The results showed that, when the culture time was less than seven days, the SLIPS showed resistance to algae spore settlement. A SLIPS prepared on a polymer or glass substrate is not suitable for anti-fouling of ships. To solve this problem, Wang et al.180 constructed an anode Al2O3 nanowire-like layer on an aluminum surface and poured a fluorinated lubricant. The SLIPS prepared can effectively inhibit the adhesion and growth of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) on metal surfaces. Similarly, Tesler et al.181 electrodeposited a nanoporous tungsten film on a steel substrate, and injected Krytox GPL-K103 after hydrophobic treatment to obtain a tungsten oxide SLIPS (TO-SLIPS). In the anti-pollution test, TO-SLIPS, a tungsten oxide superhydrophobic surface (TO-SHS) and an untreated steel surface were exposed to C. reinhardtii culture for eight days to grow a biofilm. The algae attached to the three surfaces are shown in Fig. 14A. The residual algae on TO-SHS and untreated steel are as high as 88 ± 4% and 99 ± 1%. Most of the algae on TO-SLIPS fall off easily, leaving only 7 ± 6% on the edge of the untreated surface (Fig. 14B), showing the superior performance of TO-SLIPS in marine antifouling.
 Fig. 14  (A) (i–iii) The samples just before (top panels) and after (bottom panels) being removed from the culture and dried: (i) TO-SLIPS, (ii) TO-SHS and (iii) untreated stainless-steel control. (B) Area remaining fouled after the removal of the sample from the growth media followed by drying.181 (Copyright: 2015, Springer Nature.) 
Corrosion prevention. 
There are two main mechanisms for SLIPS as a protective layer to protect metal materials from corrosion. One is to repel corrosive microorganisms such as SRB through fluidity and low adhesion mentioned above; the other is to prevent the penetration of corrosive media such as water, ions and dissolved oxygen.182 For resistance to environmental corrosion, it is mainly attempted to construct a superhydrophobic rough structure on a metal surface and inject lubricant. Tuo et al.183 constructed layered double hydroxides (LDHs) on an aluminum alloy substrate by the hydrothermal method. After being hydrophobically modified with fluoroalkyl silane, perfluoropolyether oil was injected to obtain an anti-corrosion barrier. The key problem to be solved is that the loss of lubricant will cause the failure of the anti-corrosion coating. Tenjimbayashi et al.184 used phase separation technology to insert perfluoropolyether (PFPE) oil into two self-standing porous surfaces (SPS) made of poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) PVDF-HFP with an Fe plate (Fig. 15A)185 to obtain a lubricant-inserted microporous triple-layered surface (LIMITS) (Fig. 15C). PFPE wets the SPS to form a lubricating layer, and the lubricant sandwiched in the middle gradually secretes itself to the surface. The design of the LIMITS reduces the loss of lubricant due to contact with other liquids or evaporation. In the anti-corrosion test, the LIMITS shows excellent corrosion resistance (>45 days) compared with general SLIPS (Fig. 15B).
 Fig. 15  (A) Schematic illustrations showing the design procedure for the preparation of anticorrosion coatings on an Fe plate (the inserted spectrum is X-ray photon microscopy analysis of SPS). (B) Time-lapse photographic images of an Fe plate surface coated with a control (uncoated), LIS*, LIS**, and LIMITS under salt water conditions as a function of immersion time τ. (C) The liquid thickness is estimated by dividing the liquid volume by the coating area185 (Copyright: 2014, American Chemical Society). 


4.4.2. Anti-frosting/icing. 
The chemical homogeneity of SLIPS can reduce the nucleation temperature of supercooled water and reduce the formation of ice nuclei, thereby prolonging the freezing time, reducing the rate of ice formation in high humidity environments, and reducing the adhesion of ice. They are an excellent anti-icing material.33,53 Zhou et al.186 studied frosting on a pure and smooth PDMS film without pores, fluorination and lubricant (SF), a fluorinated porous film (FF) and a fluorinated porous film infiltrated with perfluoro polyether (Krytox from Dupont) lubricant (LF). As shown in Fig. 16, the ice layer on SF is thick and compact, and on FF is thick and granular, while the ice layer on LF is rough and sparse. Due to the various condensation states of water on the three films, their frosting time and frost layer morphology are different. It can be seen that the structure of the substrate and the characteristics of the lubricant are significant factors to be considered when preparing anti-icing SLIPS. SLIPS with micro–nano texture surface have plenty of space for absorbing and storing lubricant. This texture structure can be divided into ordered structure and disordered structure.187,188 Photolithography is usually used to prepare ordered structures with specific shapes.189 When preparing a random structure surface with a porous pattern, methods such as etching, plasma and spin coating are usually used.190,191 An orderly structure is more conducive to achieving anti-icing performance, but creating a disordered structure is more convenient and practical. However, a textured porous substrate will lose the lubricant and lose its anti-icing ability over time. Aizenberg et al.144 developed a closed-cell system using a composite material with a single layer of reverse colloid and a transparent nanostructure, which can trap lubricant in the texture structure. Similarly, Liu et al.192 used electrochemical etching and hydrothermal methods to prepare a slippery liquid-infused porous network surface (SLIPNS) with interconnected microchannels and cross-linked nanosheet structures (Fig. 17A), and compared its anti-icing performance with ordinary SLIPS by measuring the icing delay time of static droplets. The results show that when the water droplets slide 100 times at −10 °C, the water droplets on the SLIPS freeze at 547 s and remain on the SLIPS after the ice melts, while the water droplets on the SLIPNS freeze at 896 s and the melted droplets can slide off the SLIPNS spontaneously (Fig. 17D), which is due to the stronger oil storage and retention function of the SLIPNS (Fig. 17B and C).
 Fig. 16  Digital images of ice layers formed on (a) SF, (b) FF, and (c) LF under a mimic freezing rain environment. (d) The average ice adhesion strength on the three films.186 (Copyright: 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag.) 
 Fig. 17  (A) Schematic diagram of the process of preparing SLIPNS. (B and C) Schematics for the replenishment mechanism of stored oil on the SLIPS and SLIPNS after oil depletion. (D) Sequential images showing the icing (i and ii) and thawing (iii and iv) process of droplets on the SLIPS and SLIPNS, respectively.192 (Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.) 
Most lubricants are organic fluids with low surface energy and low fluidity. They can reduce the intermolecular interactions between ice and the solid surface, such as hydrogen bonds, thereby reducing the adhesion of the ice.193,194 Different from traditional SLIPS, researchers covered the surface with a hygroscopic polymer to prepare a self-lubricating liquid layer inspired by the sport of skating. The hygroscopic polymer will ionize in water, and the activity, melting point and freezing point of water will all decrease. When the hydrophilic side groups come into contact with ice and snow, they can be melted. Then the hygroscopic polymer will expand after absorbing water to form a water-based lubricating layer on the surface to replace oil-based lubricants.195–197
In order to improve the durability of icephobic materials, researchers have developed a new anti-icing surface using ferrofluid as a lubricant. The surface is exposed to a magnetic field, which can lock the liquid in the structure without micro–nano textures. This locking effect can reduce the adhesion strength between the surface and the ice, and its ice nucleation delay time is three orders of magnitude longer than other icephobic surfaces.198 However, this surface has the problem that the magnetic field cannot be maintained for a long time. There are other practical icephobic surfaces that have been developed. Rykaczewski et al.199 imitated the skin structure of poison frogs that can secrete venom and designed a SLIPS consisting of a porous superhydrophobic skin and a lower layer of nylon filled with wick-like lubricant propylene glycol. When high-speed impact droplets and condensed frost penetrate into the pores, the structure of the coating releases the stored antifreeze, which melts the ice and removes it.


4.4.3. Oil–water separation. 
Recently, SLIPS have provided new ideas for efficient oil–water separation.54,55 Aizenberg et al.200 used a capillary liquid as a reversible and reconfigurable gate. The liquid will seal the membrane pores in the closed state, and open to form an anti-fouling channel under pressure (Fig. 18A). It is introduced into the separation of complex multiphase liquids to achieve controllable separation. In addition, the multiphase fluid in the microfluidic and macrofluidic system can be quickly and reproducibly controlled by simply adjusting the system pressure (Fig. 18B and C), adding a hydraulically controlled porous membrane to the port of the microfluidic channel, and then setting the critical pressures of air and water to 2.3 kPa and 9.8 kPa, respectively. By setting different thresholds for each component of the three-phase air–water–oil mixture, pressure can be used to actively adjust and control the fluid passing through the hydraulic control membrane, and to prevent any component from escaping while achieving selective collection of different phases.
 Fig. 18  (A) Hypothesis for gating a pore by liquid reconfiguration. (B) Rapid pressure-tunable sorting of multiphase flows in a microfluidic system (Pcritical(gas) = 2.3 kPa and Pcritical(liquid) = 9.8 kPa). (C) Schematic diagram of the liquid-filled porous membrane separating the three-phase mixture of air, water and oil.200 (Copyright: 2015, Nature.) 
For liquid-infused membranes, a certain critical pressure must be applied to overcome the Laplace pressure of the infused liquid when the gas passes through the pores. The following is the relationship between the critical pressure of the liquid-injected membrane and materials with various chemical properties and pore structures (Fig. 19A), the time of different phase separation (Fig. 19B), the flow rate of three phases through the gating liquid (Fig. 19C) and the pore size of the liquid film (Fig. 19D). It can be seen from the figures that liquid-gated pores can be open and closed in response to different conditions and transport materials. For each material, in the absence of a gate liquid, Pcritical(gas) = 0, and in the case of a gate liquid, Pcritical(gas) > 0. When determining the critical pressure of a gas and liquid, for a gas, the pressure that must be overcome is the Laplace pressure: 4γla/de, where γla is the surface tension of the pore-filled liquid, and de is the average effective pore diameter. These parameters are sufficient to predict the critical pressure observed in the experiment of air injected into a porous membrane of a low surface energy liquid. Through the differential adjustment of the absolute and relative critical pressures of air and water flowing through liquid-controlled pores with different pore diameters, the gate pressure at different flow rates can be accurately predicted with and without the pore-filled liquid.200 A certain operating pressure ΔP (eqn (12)) must also be applied when the liquid passes through the pores.ΔP ∝ Qμ/k (12)(Q is the flow rate of the permeate, μ is the viscosity of the permeate, Φ is the pore density, T is the average pore size, σ is the standard deviation of the membrane pore distribution, γII is the liquid–liquid interfacial tension, and d is the membrane pore size.) In addition to applying different pressures to the liquid-filled porous membrane to control the sequence of oil–water separation, Manna et al.54 used a layer-by-layer self-assembly method to form a porous substrate on a topologically structured stainless steel mesh, and then formed a porous molecular layer through the reaction of decylamine, and filled with lubricant to achieve separation of oil and water.
 Fig. 19  (A) Critical pressure required for gas to flow through porous materials of various chemistries and pore structures with and without a gating liquid. (B) The critical pressure for water transport through a liquid-filled membrane is less than that for transport through the same membrane without a liquid. (C) The predictive model (lines) agrees with the experimentally obtained critical pressures (squares) over a range of flow rates for air through liquid-gated pores (green), water through liquid-gated pores (blue), and water through pores without a liquid gate (red). (D) Differential tuning of absolute and relative critical pressures for air and water to flow through liquid-gated pores with different pore sizes.200 (Copyright: 2015, Nature.) 


4.4.4. Other applications. 
Enhancing condensation.56 Since condensed droplets have good mobility on the lubricant layer and easily gather and form nucleation points, a SLIPS can promote drop-like condensation. At the same time, it can improve the heat transfer coefficient of the gas in the condensation process and improve the condensation efficiency. It has great prospects in the fields of seawater desalination, water collection, heat treatment and power generation.
Dynamically regulating the fluid-infused surface57. 
The size of the micro–nano structure in the substrate of SLIPS is below the diffraction limit. Choosing lubricants with different refractive indexes and light transmittances can adjust the degree of light penetration or reflection, thereby adjusting the light transmission performance. Based on this, a gradual tensile force can be applied to the substrate. When the film is deformed, the pressure inside the pores drops, and the lubricant flows into the pores, which deteriorates the optical transparency of the film. When the force is removed, the lubricant overflows outwards and becomes a dynamic fluid-infused surface, which can be tunable between transparent and opaque by stimulating the substrate.

5. Hydrophilic/superhydrophilic surfaces
5.1. Sources of structure in nature
Several surfaces that distinguish wettability and adhesion according to the range of CA and SA have been described, and the surface to be introduced next is another extremely wettable surface in addition to a superhydrophobic surface – a superhydrophilic surface. In academia, there are two definitions of superhydrophilic surfaces. One is defined by the contact angle, i.e. a superhydrophilic surface means that the water droplets can be completely spread on the surface, and the CA is equal to or close to 0° (Fig. 20b).201,202 Some researchers have set requirements for the spreading time of droplets on superhydrophilic surfaces. Huang et al.203 pointed out that when superhydrophilic surfaces have a contact angle of less than 5°, the spreading time of the droplets must be less than 0.5 s. Another is defined by the mechanism. There are few smooth superhydrophilic surfaces in nature, and most of the complete wetting phenomena occur on rough porous surfaces. Therefore, a superhydrophilic surface is also defined as a surface with a roughness factor greater than 1 (r > 1) and droplets can be completely spread.204
 Fig. 20  (a) 10° < CA < 90°, the hydrophilic leaf is Alocasia odora. (b) CA < 10°, the superhydrophilic one is Ruellia devosiana. SEM micrographs of superhydrophilic plant surfaces. (c) The flat and unstructured surface of a water plant (Anubias barteri) is shown. (d) The spongy epidermal structure of a water-adsorbing moss (Sphagnum squarrosum) is shown. (e) The porous cell structure of the epidermis of moss (Rhacocarpus purpurescens) is shown. (f) Multicellular water-absorbing trichomes of Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides) are shown. (g) The surface of Calathea zebrina composed of uniform conical cells is shown. (h) The composition of different cell types of the superhydrophilic leaves of Ruellia devosiana is shown.14 (Copyright: 2009, The Royal Society.) 
Superhydrophilic plants in nature can be divided into two categories. One is permanently wet aquatic plants. Fig. 20c is the SEM image of the submerged aquatic plant Anubias barteri. It can be seen that the leaf has a relatively smooth plate-like or slightly convex cell surface.13 This surface structure reduces the gas exchange on the plant surface, which reduces the photosynthetic activity of plants. Another type of superhydrophilic plants absorb water over their surfaces and let water spread over the surface. The superhydrophilicity of plants is caused by various microscopic nanostructures. As shown in Fig. 20d, the spongy epidermal structure of sphagnum squarrosum consists of pores with an inner diameter of 10–20 mm. These pores formed by dead and collapsed cells can absorb up to 20 times their own dry weight. Fig. 20e shows the porous surface structure of Rhacocarpus purpurescens; the diameter of the pore for quickly absorbing fog, dew or rain is between 0.2 and 1 mm. Apart from pores and porous surfaces, the water-absorbing structure of the plant surface can also be absorbent hair, for example, the surface composed of multicellular water-absorbing trichomes of Tillandsia usneoides is shown in Fig. 20f.14 What's more, the surface of Calathea zebrina composed of uniform conical cells (Fig. 20g) enables the water droplets to spread to a contact angle of 0° within a few seconds. Fig. 20h shows the Ruellia devosiana surface of a composite structure with hair papilla, papilla cells, glands and some extended channel-like structures, whose superhydrophilicity is determined by the surface roughness and the hydrophilic substances secreted by the glands. Studies have found that a hydrophilic substance that can reduce the surface tension of water, promote the effective diffusion of water, and prevent the formation of biofilms is saponin.205
Since there are no roots that absorb water or a vascular system for water delivery, super-hydrophilicity is the basis for many lower plants to absorb water and nutrients. In addition, the superhydrophilic leaves of some higher plants such as Ruellia devosiana can accelerate the acquisition and evaporation of water by increasing the water–air interface, which is a good way to reduce the growth of microorganisms and increase the gas exchange with the environment.14
5.2. Wetting model and adhesion mechanism
The superhydrophilicity of a smooth surface is caused by the strong attraction between surface and liquid molecules, and the superhydrophilicity of a rough porous surface is determined by the microstructure and chemical composition. Therefore, understanding the mechanism of super-hydrophilic phenomena and constructing a wetting model is conducive to the development of superhydrophilic research in theory, preparation and application.
The CA of water droplets on a smooth superhydrophilic surface can be described by Young's equation. The liquid-solid wetting effect involves the three-phase interface of a gas, liquid, and solid. We set the solid–gas, liquid–gas, solid–liquid three-phase interfacial tensions to be δSG, δLG, and δSL, respectively. There are many disputes about the Young equation derived from the interfacial tension, and the process of the Young equation being derived from the energy point of view is as follows. When the state of the droplet on the solid surface is as shown in Fig. 21A, the system reaches the minimum free enthalpy state. Ignoring the gravity influence of the droplet, now the droplet has a small displacement, and the area change of each phase interface is dASG, dALG, and dASL, and the change of the system free enthalpy is: dG = δSGdASG + δLGdALG + δSLdASL.(13)And when the liquid slides: dASL = −dASG(14) dALG = cosθdASL(15)We combine eqn (13)–(15) to get eqn (16): dG = (δLGcosθ − δSG + δSL)dASL(16)When the system reaches equilibrium (dG = 0), the Young equation (eqn (17)) is obtained:18 (17)
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic diagram of the derivation of Young's equation. (B) The relationship between the minimum roughness factor required for a rough surface to achieve superhydrophility and the intrinsic contact angle.204 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) 
The Young equation is not only the basis for the study of liquid–solid wetting, but also reflects the influence of the solid surface free energy on the contact angle. The greater the surface energy of a solid, the better it is for wetting. However, there are few smooth superhydrophilic surfaces; most of the superhydrophilic phenomena occur on rough porous surfaces.
That used to describe the effect of surface roughness on the wetting characteristics is the Wenzel equation (as shown in eqn (3) in Section 3.2). For a rough superhydrophilic surface (θr = 0°), the roughness and intrinsic contact angle must satisfy the following eqn (18): (18)which is a necessary condition for the rough surface to achieve superhydrophilicity. Fig. 21B is the relationship between the roughness factor and the intrinsic contact angle.204 When θ > 60°, the roughness factor required to achieve superhydrophilicity is greater than 2, which is difficult to achieve. Therefore, Jiang et al.206 consider that 65° instead of 90° is the dividing line between hydrophilic and hydrophobic.
The wetting mechanism on the rough porous surface is multi-complex. The capillary action produced by the hydrophilic material will make the liquid penetrate into the pores and grooves. At this time, the Cassie–Baxter model is used to describe its wetting characteristics.15 According to the Cassie–Baxter equation (eqn (2)) in section 2.2, when the surface is superhydrophilic (θ2 = 0°), the equation is: cosθCB = ∅s(cosθ − 1) + 1(19)θCB is the CA of the porous surface, ∅s is the area fraction of the solid, and ∅p = 1 − ∅s is the surface porosity. Thus the wetting state is related to the intrinsic contact angle and surface porosity. With the development of micro–nano preparation technology, it is difficult to completely distinguish the porous surface from the rough surface. Therefore, the explanation of the superhydrophilic mechanism is mostly based on the Wenzel model or the Cassie–Baxter model.
5.3. Fabrication of superhydrophilic surfaces
According to the mechanism and model, the key to preparing a superhydrophilic surface is roughness and porosity. There are two main ways to prepare it. One is photo-induced superhydrophilicity (PIH), which means that some metal oxides can exhibit superhydrophilicity under ultraviolet light.207 The mechanism is that, under irradiation with ultraviolet light, the hydrophobic organics on the surface undergo a photocatalytic degradation or a oxidation–reduction reaction.208 Taking TiO2 as an example, due to irradiation with ultraviolet light, the valence band electrons of TiO2 are excited to form electron–hole pairs, and then the oxidation–reduction reaction between holes and surface bridge oxygen ions forms oxygen vacancies (Fig. 22A-a), thereby adsorbing water in the air (Fig. 22A-b) and forming a hydroxyl adsorption surface (Fig. 22A-c) to further adsorb moisture in the air to obtain a physical adsorption layer. So it exhibits superhydrophilicity in a macroscopic view.
 Fig. 22  (A) Diagram of the oxidation–reduction mechanism of ultraviolet light irradiation: (a) oxygen vacancies are generated; (b) oxygen vacancies absorb water molecules in the air; and (c) hydroxylation of the surface forms a chemically adsorbed water layer.208 (Copyright: 2003, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.) (B) Schematic diagram of PLL driving an intelligent reversible switching surface. (C) Cycle process of water CAs between state I and state III for PLL thin films on a rough substrate (state I: T: 20 °C, pH: 6.5; state I′: T: 60 °C, pH: 6.5; state II: T: 20 °C, pH: 11.5; state III: T: 60 °C, pH: 11.5; state III′: T: 20 °C, pH: 11.5).209 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) (D) Schematic illustration of fabricating the CaP film micropattern. (E) SEM image of the superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic composite surface.210 (Copyright: 2016, Elsevier.) 
Another way to prepare superhydrophilic surfaces is to build micro–nano rough or porous structures on the surface of hydrophilic materials. The method used is roughly similar to the method to prepare superhydrophobic surfaces.
The sol–gel method37 involves changing the precursors of hydrolysis and polycondensation to obtain films with different morphologies and chemical compositions. The method requires low reaction temperature, has advantages of easy control of the process, a simple process, and convenient operation, and is one of the most common methods for preparing inorganic coatings. However, this method requires ultraviolet light generally, and is not applicable for the preparation of polymer materials.
In the phase separation method,38 phase separation of polymer solutions or polymer blends by changing factors such as temperature, humidity, solubility or pressure can form a rough structure, which can be used to prepare special wettable surfaces. The method is simple and easy to implement, and low in cost, and can be used to prepare large area superhydrophilic surfaces, but due to its poor adhesion to the substrate, the durability will be affected.
The vapor deposition method,39 which is a common method for constructing films, is divided into chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and physical vapor deposition (PVD). CVD has high production efficiency and is suitable for hard-to-evaporate materials, but requires high-temperature operation and will generate toxic or corrosive gases. The PVD preparation process is environmentally friendly and the prepared coating has better durability, but its equipment is expensive and the preparation efficiency is low.
The layer-by-layer self-assembly method (LbL)40 refers to the process of spontaneous formation of molecular structures with specific functions between layers by means of alternating the deposition layer by layer, with the help of the weak interaction between molecules of each layer. The method has no limitation on the film substrate, and a wide selection range of driving force, and is suitable for preparing transparent surfaces with special wettability. However, its efficiency is low, the process is complicated and it is difficult to use in industrial production.
The template-based method,41 which includes the natural template method and artificial template method, involves using an extrusion or pouring method to cover a mold (high molecular weight polymer) on the surface of the template and realize the replication of the template structure. The method has simple operation steps, high efficiency and diversified templates, but it is limited by the templates when preparing a large surface area.
The electrochemical method42 refers to using electrochemical methods (including electrochemical deposition, anodic oxidation, galvanic reaction, electrochemical polymerization, etc.) to treat the surface with a rough structure. The method does not require light, but requires special equipment. It is difficult to achieve large-scale preparation, and the superhydrophilicity can only be maintained for one to two days.
Electrospinning43 involves obtaining a fiber surface with nano-channels through the phase separation of the solution during the spinning process. The fiber has a multi-scale three-dimensional capillary effect, which makes the surface superhydrophilic. The method can continuously prepare polymer nanofibers with higher specific surface area, but the strength of the nanofibers is insufficient.
Combining two special wettable surfaces can prepare more functionalized surfaces, such as superhydrophilic/superhydrophobic reversible transition surfaces, superhydrophilic/superhydrophobic patterned surfaces, and superhydrophilic/superhydrophobic gradients surfaces. Guo et al.209 prepared a synergistic dual-responsive poly-L-lysine (PLL) surface by changing the conformation of the polymer chain segment (Fig. 22B). In this model, PLL mainly adopts a random coil conformation (state I) at low pH. Raising the pH allows the dominant existence of an α-helix conformation (state II). Heating up the surface destabilizes the α-helix conformation to produce aggregated β-sheet structures (state III). Lowering the pH and temperature induces a reversible conversion process from state III to state I. When the pH is less than the acidolysis constant of PLL, the polypeptide surface is superhydrophilic. When the temperature and pH are increased, the surface becomes superhydrophobic, realizing a change in wettability (Fig. 22C). Lin et al.210 used an inkjet printer to print patterns on a superhydrophobic coating based on a titanium-based oxide layer, and degraded some of the superhydrophobic molecules by ultraviolet radiation to obtain superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic micro-patterns. Then electrochemical methods are used to deposit calcium phosphate films (CaP) of different types on the superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic regions, and in vitro cell culture tests indicate a difference in adhesion between the superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic regions of MG63 cells (Fig. 22D and E). A gradient surface can also be obtained by selectively removing the hydrophobic substances on the superhydrophobic surface. Han et al.211 decomposed chlorodimethyloctylsilane molecules on a SiO2 surface into carboxylate, ether and carbonyl groups by ultraviolet light irradiation, and controlled the irradiation time to obtain a gradient wettable surface (the CA varies between 165° and 10°). Surfaces with different wettability have many potential applications in fluid control, immobilization of biomolecules, controlled growth of cells, and microreactors.212,213
5.4. Applications of superhydrophilic surfaces

5.4.1. Self-cleaning. 
With the development of preparation technology of superhydrophilic surfaces, they have more extensive applications in self-cleaning, biomedical fields, oil-water separation and other aspects. Water droplets can spread instantly on them, which is beneficial to take away the dirt on the surface, thus achieving a self-cleaning effect. Yang et al.58 used a microemulsion polymerization method and blended with modified silica gel to prepare a TiO2/PMMA (polymethylmethacrylate) composite surface, which exhibited superhydrophilicity under ultraviolet light irradiation. The gradual degradation test of methyl blue on the surface shows that it has self-cleaning properties. Since water droplets can completely wet the superhydrophilic surface, it effectively prevents water vapor from condensing into water droplets on the surface, thus having an excellent anti-fog effect. Based on this, superhydrophilic surfaces have important applications in life and industrial fields such as car window mirrors, solar cells, spacecraft observation windows and optical antireflection coatings for lasers.214,215 Guo et al.210 used a one-step self-masking reactive ion etching method to prepare a superhydrophilic quartz broadband antireflection film with good anti-fogging ability. The quartz glass covered by the film was placed on top of boiling water for an anti-fogging test, and the results showed that the water droplets spread quickly on the hydrophilic film and had no effect on the transparency of the quartz glass.


5.4.2. Biomedical applications. 
Studies have shown that superhydrophilic materials have good biocompatibility and bioactivity, so they have great application value in the field of biomedicine. For example, their good wettability is conducive to the movement of a catheter in the patient's body and makes contact lenses more comfortable.59 The superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic patterned surface mentioned in Section 5.3 enables biomolecules and nanoparticles to be immobilized in the superhydrophilic area, which is convenient for targeted drug delivery and monitoring of toxicity.216
However, the biggest contribution of superhydrophilic materials in the medical field is TiO2 biomaterials. A superhydrophilic TiO2 surface irradiated with ultraviolet light has better albumin and fibrin adsorption capacity, osteoblast adhesion and reproduction capacity, and is conducive to the formation of bone apatite layers. Therefore, it can promote the reproduction of bone cells on the implant, strengthen the combination of bone tissue and the implant, and facilitate the long-term use of the implant.217


5.4.3. Oil–water separation. 
Among many oil–water separation membranes, superhydrophilic and superoleophobic membranes have the advantages of high efficiency, anti-adhesion, and reusability.60 They mainly include two types: superhydrophilic underwater superoleophobic membranes and stimulus-responsive superhydrophilic superoleophobic membranes. The preparation of them can be divided into two types. One is to prepare a polyelectrolyte–fluorosurfactant composite coating solution first. The fluorosurfactant complex is composed of hydrophilic groups and fluoroalkyl chains. When subjected to static electricity, the hydrophilic groups and fluoroalkyl chains will be positioned on the surface of the material.60 Then water molecules can responsively pass through the fluorine-containing layer and enter the hydrophilic surface, while oil molecules will be hindered to achieve the effect of oil–water separation.
The other is to use surface grafting, surface spraying and self-assembly methods to coat a solution on various substrates, and after drying and UV irradiation obtain superhydrophilic and superoleophobic materials. Around these two types, researchers have developed many preparation methods. Kota et al.218 prepared a polymer blend composed of poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate (x-PEGDA) and fluorodecyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS). The mesh coated with fluorodecyl POSS + x-PEGDA exhibits superoleophobicity and superhydrophilicity. Water droplets can penetrate the coating within a few seconds, while the coated mesh or fabric can continuously separate insoluble oil with a separation efficiency of up to 99% only under gravity drive. Yang et al.219 used dimethyl diallyl ammonium chloride as the hydrophilic part and perfluorooctane carboxylate as the oleophobic part to prepare a moisture-responsive superhydrophilic and super oleophobic membrane, which can change from superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic under humidity stimulation (the CA of water decreases from 165 ± 2° to 0°), while maintaining the CA of oil at 155 ± 1°. Li et al.220 used the interface produced by mixing 2-carboxylic acid ethyl acrylate, poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate and silica nanoparticles as the hydrophilic part, and used 1H,1H-perfluorodecyl modified polyfunctional mercaptan (F-PETMP) as the oleophobic part, and then cured using ultraviolet to form a superhydrophilic and superoleophobic coating. Studies have shown that when the contents of F-PETMP and SiO2 are 30% and 50% respectively, the performance of the coating is optimal (the CA of oil is greater than 150° in air or in water, while the CA of water reached 0° within 10 s).


5.4.4. Other applications. 
There are many other applications for superhydrophilic surfaces. For example, the visualization under high humidity conditions can be used to prepare micro–nanofluidic devices and micro-reactors. Their rapid response to humidity can be used to make humidity sensors. And superhydrophilic surfaces’ superior absorbent and perspiration functions can be used on fabric to make clothes more comfortable.61 In addition, a superhydrophilic surface can provide the power for liquid replenishment and relieve the vapor film from hindering the process of liquid replenishment to the heating device. Therefore, it can significantly increase the critical heat flux density (CHF), thereby increasing the evaporation and condensation heat transfer coefficient.62

6. Summary and outlook
Based on the adhesion state of liquid droplets on a solid surface, four kinds of surfaces with typical wetting states (low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, high-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces, slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces and hydrophilic/superhydrophilic surfaces) are reviewed in this paper. Tracing the whole process – starting from their natural sources, with the development of optical and qualitative instruments, researchers use bionics methods to design wetting models with corresponding structures and chemical components, and then obtain artificial special wettable surfaces with needed properties through various preparation methods and apply them in industries such as life and production. Finally, we point out current problems and new research directions in the development of these four special wettable surfaces.
Low-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces inspired by the lotus leaf have broad application prospects in daily life, biomedicine and industrial development because of their self-cleaning, anti-corrosion and anti-fouling properties. They are mainly obtained by reducing the surface energy of the surface with a micro–nano rough structure and building a micro–nano rough structure on the low surface energy one, so that the water droplets cannot enter the air grooves while forming a spherical shape to obtain a low-adhesion superhydrophobic surface. The method of reducing the surface energy is mainly through modification with fluorine-containing silane, while fluorocarbons have high thermal stability and are difficult to decompose, and their extensive use will cause environmental problems such as water, soil and air pollution. The main methods for constructing micro–nano rough structures include the template method, chemical deposition method, phase separation method, sol–gel method, layer-by-layer self-assembly method, etc. These preparation methods rely on complex chemicals and sophisticated experimental equipment. Based on the current problems of preparation cost, environmental pollution and mechanical durability, the direction of future research on superhydrophobic surfaces is to find low-cost, green and energy-saving material systems while optimizing and simplifying the preparation process, design a preparation method suitable for large-scale industrial production, and, what's more, make superhydrophobic surfaces non-fluorinated and have the properties of strong mechanical stability and self-repair.
High-adhesion superhydrophobic surfaces inspired by rose petals have layered micro-papillae and nano-folds, which provide sufficient roughness while making the surface have high adhesion to water. By replicating the surface morphology of a petal, it is known that the high-adhesion superhydrophobic surface is in a Cassie impregnating state. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been used to analyze the difference between the micro–nano structure and a structure with the lotus effect and it was concluded that its P–B (peak-to-base) height and bump density are smaller, which is the root cause of high adhesion. The method of obtaining an artificial high-adhesion superhydrophobic surface is mainly based on its surface as a template to replicate polymer films with different periodic microstructures to meet the needs of different polymer precursors, which can realize large-scale manufacturing. In addition, it can also be prepared by constructing a superhydrophilic pattern on a low-adhesion superhydrophobic surface. This surface with adjustable adhesion can be used in broad applications of liquid transportation, microfluidic devices, biochemical analysis and targeted drug transportation. At present, researchers have not been able to accurately measure the size of the adhesion force, nor have they been able to quantitatively analyze the relationship between the adhesion force and the surface structure. In addition, improving the economics and practicality of the surface is a problem that we urgently need to solve. The research on the preparation of multifunctional, responsive and adhesive intelligent superhydrophobic surfaces with special materials is still in the early stage of development, and further efforts are needed.
SLIPS inspired by pitcher plants separate the external liquid from the solid substrate due to their lubricating layer. They have excellent properties such as resistance to organic and complex liquids, resistance to ice, good compression stability and self-repair. Therefore, they have great application prospects in the fields of anti-fouling, anti-frost, anti-icing, oil–water separation, etc. Designing and preparing SLIPS with stable performance requires an in-depth understanding of the four phases (solid substrates, lubricant film, impinging droplets and gas environment), as well as selection of suitable substrate roughness, and suitable surface energy and viscosity lubricants. However, the preparation of SLIPS has the problems of a complicated process, high cost, and poor stability and durability. In addition, the surface morphology, shear force, and the ratio of the viscosity of the external liquid to the lubricant will affect the stability of the lubricating layer. The future research directions of SLIPS are: looking for new materials, designing innovative structures to lock the lubricant layer and extend the service life of SLIPS, adding functional particles (bactericides, anti-icing agents, fluorescent substances, etc.) to lubricants to increase the usage scale of SLIPS and introducing smart materials (shape memory materials and phase change materials) to make a SLIPS adjust its parameters actively, in order to adapt to changes in the environment and achieve a wide range of industrial applications.
Superhydrophilic surfaces inspired by some aquatic plants and lower mosses can allow water droplets to be completely wetted and spread. Therefore, they have important applications in the fields of self-cleaning, anti-fogging, oil–water separation and biomedicine. In addition, combining surfaces with different special wettability (superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic) can be used for directional infiltration and microfluidic devices. The key to preparing a superhydrophilic surface is to control the surface microstructure and chemical composition. The problems faced are that the preparation technology is expensive and complicated, it is not easy to mass produce and it will pollute the environment during the preparation process, as well as the fact that the prepared surface is susceptible to external conditions such as light, heat, and oxygen, and has poor weather resistance and mechanical strength. At present, there are still controversies in the definition and mechanism of the research on superhydrophilic surfaces. With the increasing demand for functional surfaces in different fields, environmentally-friendly, functionally responsive, and durable superhydrophilic surfaces made by constructing microstructures and using light-induced mechanisms will surely develop by leaps and bounds.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51735013).
References
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Burton and B. Bhushan, Ultramicroscopy, 2006, 106, 709–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, Nature, 1973, 242, 132–133 CrossRef .
X. Gao and L. Jiang, Biophysics, 2004, 432, 36 CAS .
X. Feng, X. Gao, Z. Wu, L. Jiang and Q. Zheng, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4892–4896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wei, S. Chen and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1526–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bhushan and E. Her, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 8207–8217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, Y. Zhang, J. Xi, Y. Zhu, F. Xia and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4114–4119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chang, S. Hong, Y. Sheng and H. Tsao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 064102 CrossRef .
A. Lopez-Moreno, J. D. Sepulveda-Sanchez, E. Guzman and S. L. Borgne, Biofouling, 2014, 30, 547–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Ma, L. Guo, J. Sun and J. Tong, Soil. Tillage Res., 2016, 158, 57–66 CrossRef .
F. Gao, E. Baraka-Kamali, N. Shirtcliffe and C. Terrell-Nield, J. Bionic Eng., 2010, 7, 13–18 CrossRef .
C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Ann. Bot., 1997, 79, 667–677 CrossRef .
K. Koch and W. Barthlott, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1487–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1944, 40, 546–551 RSC .
B. Edward, S. Tamir, W. Gene, B. Yelena and P. Roman, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9982–9985 CrossRef .
X. Chen, G. Wen and Z. Guo, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1697–1726 RSC .
P. G. Gennes, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1985, 57, 827–863 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, D. Chen and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1859–1867 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pakdel, C. Zhi, Y. Bando, T. Nakayama and D. Golberg, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6507–6515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Crick, J. C. Bear, A. Kafizas and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3505–3508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Z. Gu, R. Huo and Y. Ye, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 7263–7267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Si, H. Zhu, L. Chen, T. Jiang and Z. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16794–16797 RSC .
Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhan and F. Chen, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 4540–4550 RSC .
X. Wu, Q. Fu, D. Kumar, P. Kanhere and H. Zhou, Mater. Des., 2016, 89, 1302–1309 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, X. Xiao, G. Pan and Z. Ye, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2020, 17, 657–6568 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, N. An, Y. Li and J. Sun, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 12361–12369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, S. Szunerits, M. Pisarek, W. Xu and R. Boukherroub, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2086–2091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, F. Chen, Q. Yang, J. Yong, H. Bian, Y. Ou, J. Si, X. Meng and X. Hou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4905–4912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, D. Xia, H. Song, H. Ge and C. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 27, 1627–1631 CrossRef .
J. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, D. Zhang, U. Farooq, G. Du and X. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5499–5507 RSC .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Diamantopoulos and W. Durner, Adv. Water Resour., 2013, 59, 169–180 CrossRef .
R. Palakolanu, K. M. Ajith and N. K. Udayashankar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 75, 398–3401 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Shin, Y. Jiang, C. Jeong, H. A. Stone and C. H. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606040 CrossRef .
K. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Zhou and L. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2016, 37, 463–485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Chiou, C. Lu, J. Guan, L. J. Lee and A. J. Epstein, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 354–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, L. Feng, J. Zhai, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5659–5661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eshaghi and M. Mojab, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2014, 405, 148–152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, T. Tai and T. Fang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, 625–630 CrossRef .
T. Kikuchi, O. Nishinaga, D. Nakajima, J. Kawashima, S. Natsui, N. Sakaguchi and R. O. Suzuki, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2010, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef .
S. Sutha, S. Suresh, B. Raj and K. R. Ravi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 165, 128–137 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suryaprabha and M. G. Sethuraman, Cellulose, 2017, 24, 395–407 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mohamed, M. A. Aboubakr and A. Y. Nathalie, Arabian J. Chem., 2015, 8, 749–765 CrossRef .
J. B. Boreyko, B. R. Srijanto, T. D. Nguyen, C. Vega and C. P. Collier, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9516–9524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, H. Zhang and Z. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 18909–18914 RSC .
B. Balu, A. D. Berry, D. W. Hess and V. Breedveld, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 3066–3075 RSC .
S. Zhang, H. Lu, L. Z. Zhang, S. Riffat, Z. Ure and H. Zhang, Int. J. Low-Carbon Technol., 2020, 15, 443–449 CrossRef .
M. J. Nine, T. T. Tung, F. Alotaibi, D. N. H. Tran and D. Losic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8393–8402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. G. Damle, A. Tummala, S. Chandrashekar, C. Kido, A. Roopesh, X. Sun, K. Doudrick, J. Chinn, J. R. Lee and T. P. Burgin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4224–4232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Yang, M. Huang, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu and X. Liang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 346, 68–76 CrossRef CAS .
U. Manna and D. M. Lynn, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3007–3012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tenjimbayashi, K. Sasaki, T. Matsubayashi, J. Abe and S. Shiratori, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10922–10927 RSC .
S. Anand, K. Rykaczewski, S. B. Subramanyam, D. Beysens and K. Varanasi, Soft Matter, 2015, 11, 69–80 RSC .
X. Yao, Y. Hu, A. Grinthal, T. S. Wong, L. Mahadevan and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 529–534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Zhou and L. Wu, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 85, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Dursch, D. E. Liu, Y. Oh and C. J. Radke, Acta Biomater., 2015, 15, 48–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, H. Tang, H. Song, X. Gao, K. Liang and C. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 268, 245–250 CrossRef .
D. Chen, L. Tan, H. Liu, J. Hu, Y. Li and F. Tang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4675–4679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu, J. Han, J. Kim, C. Lee and Y. Nam, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 108, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Park, M. H. Han and Y. H. Ahn, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo and W. Liu, Plant Sci., 2007, 172, 1103–1112 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Z. Feng, J. Hao and W. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15670–15671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Kennedy, Nature, 1970, 227, 736–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wagner, C. Neinhuis and W. Barthlott, Acta Zool., 2010, 77, 213–225 CrossRef .
N. S. Gorb, A. Kesel and J. Berger, Arthropod Struct. Dev., 2000, 29, 129–135 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Li and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20112–20127 RSC .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, G. Whyman, Y. Bormashenko and M. Erlich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 201917 CrossRef .
J. T. Korhonen, T. Huhtamäki and O. Ikkala, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3858–3863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Wenzel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1936, 28, 988–994 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2007, 58, 162–193 CrossRef .
M. Nosonovsky and B. Bhushan, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1525–1533 CrossRef CAS .
G. Whyman, E. Bormashenko and T. Stein, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 450, 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fürstner, W. Barthlott, C. Neinhuis and P. Walzel, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 956–961 CrossRef .
H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, T. D. G. Elisabeth and F. Guittard, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 2694–2716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yu, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1775–1794 RSC .
X. M. Li, D. Reinhoudt and M. Crego-Calama, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1350–1368 RSC .
Y. Hu, K. Kurogi and K. Tsujii, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 292, 27–31 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Xue, C. Ban, Y. Xue and Y. Jin, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2020, 385, 125390 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, X. Zhu, X. Zhou, G. Bo, S. Chen and W. Wu, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2014, 115, 765–770 CrossRef .
J. E. Rodriguez, A. M. Anderson and M. K. Carroll, J. Sol–Gel. Sci. Technol., 2014, 71, 490–500 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Mcgaughey, P. Karandikar, M. Gupta and A. E. Childress, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1256–1267 Search PubMed .
S. Rezaei, I. Manoucheri, R. Moradian and B. Pourabbas, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 252, 11–16 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Ling, I. Y. Phang, G. J. Vancso, J. Huskens and D. N. Reinhoudt, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3260–3263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lai, Y. Tang, J. Gong, D. Gong, L. Chi, C. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420–7426 RSC .
X. Zhao, D. S. Park, J. Choi and M. C. Murphy, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 574, 347–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Du, W. Lei, X. Si, T. Zhou, J. Lin and L. Peng, Thin Solid Films, 2017, 631, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sheng, Y. Xu, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15139–15147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoon, H. Kim, S. S. Latthe, M. Kim, S. Al-Deyab and S. S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11403–11410 RSC .
Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, J. Song, C. R. Crick, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1132–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Milles, M. Soldera, T. Kuntze and A. F. Lasagni, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 525, 146518 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, L. Wang, Z. Yang, S. Li, T. Wu and G. Liu, Corros. Sci., 2017, 128, 176–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Hu, Y. Wu and H. Chen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 240, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Jing, Y. Chen, X. Wang and Y. Zhang, J. Magnesium Alloys, 2020, 8, 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, B. Yang, Y. Zhang, G. Gu, M. Li and L. Mao, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2014, 69, 441–447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhadi, M. Farzaneh and S. A. Kulinich, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 6264–6269 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qi, H. Chen, L. Shen, X. Li, Q. Fu, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2047–2057 CrossRef CAS .
K. Moaven, M. Rad and M. Taeibi-Rahni, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 2013, 51, 239–243 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Y. Xue, H. Yang, W. Xue, F. Li, A. He and Y. Cao, Surf. Eng., 2019, 1560911 Search PubMed .
P. G. D. Gennes, F. Brochard-Wyart, D. Quéré, A. Reisinger and B. Widom, Phys. Today, 2004, 57, 66–67 Search PubMed .
D. Z. Xiao, M. F. Hai, Y. L. Xiang, H. Pan and Y. X. Hong, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 3224–3228 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nicolas, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 343, 608–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, P. Yu, S. Zeng, X. Liu, J. Chen and W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5926–5931 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Dalvi and P. J. Rossky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 13603–13607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Cho and L. J. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 445706 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ou, W. Hu, C. Li, Y. Wang, M. Xue, F. Wang and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5737–5741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo and W. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 988 Search PubMed .
N. D. Boscher, D. Duday, S. Verdier and P. Choquet, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1053–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, R. Ganguly and T. M. Schutzius, Lab Chip, 2014, 14, 1538–1550 RSC .
Y. Lai, L. Lin, F. Pan, J. Huang, R. Song, Y. Huang, C. Lin, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Small, 2013, 9, 2945–2953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Song, G. Wang, F. Chen, S. Liu, X. Yang, J. Sun, H. Zheng, L. Huang, Z. Jin and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7497–7503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tsougeni, D. P. Papageorgiou, A. Tserepi and E. Gogolides, Lab Chip, 2010, 10, 462–469 RSC .
D. Pappas, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 2011, 29, 020801 CrossRef .
S. Huang, J. Song, Y. Lu, F. Chen, H. Zheng, X. Yang, X. Liu, J. Sun, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2942–2949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Federle, Integr. Comp. Biol., 2002, 42, 1100–1106 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Gorb and S. Gorb, Ecol. Biomech., 2006, 147–162 Search PubMed .
E. V. Gorb, M. J. Baum and S. N. Gorb, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3078 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tong, J. Sun, D. Chen and S. Zhang, Soil Tillage Res., 2005, 80, 1–12 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, Q. Sun, X. Deng and J. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802141–1802146 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, G. Sun, H. Guo, Q. Liu, J. Liu, J. Yu, R. Chen, L. Gao and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 3170–3180 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lafuma and D. Quéré, EPL, 2011, 96, 56001 CrossRef .
D. J. Preston, Y. Song, Z. Lu, D. S. Antao and E. N. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42383–42392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Smith, R. Dhiman, S. Anand, E. Reza-Garduno, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley and K. K. Varanasi, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 1772–1780 RSC .
P. B. Weisensee, Y. Wang, H. Qian, D. Schultz, W. P. King and N. Miljkovic, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 109, 187–199 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Xue, J. Ding, L. Feng, X. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 11635–11638 CrossRef .
C. Wei, G. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhan and F. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34810–34819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sett, X. Yan, G. Barac, L. Bolton and N. Miljkovic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36400–36408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anand, A. T. Paxson, R. Dhiman, J. D. Smith and K. K. Varanasi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10122–10129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rykaczewski, A. T. Paxson, M. Staymates, M. L. Walker and K. K. Varanasi, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4158 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. N. Pham, S. Zhang, K. Montazeri and Y. Won, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 14439–14447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, T. Li and D. Zhang, Corros. Sci., 2017, 128, 110–119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Erbil, A. L. Demirel, Y. Avci and O. Mert, Science, 2003, 299, 1377–1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Juchniewicz, D. Stadnik, K. Biesiada, A. Olszyna, M. Chudy, Z. Brzózka and A. Dybko, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 126, 68–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Shin, Y. Jiang, C. Jeong, H. A. Stone and C. H. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606040 CrossRef .
S. Yang, R. Qiu, H. Song, P. Wang, Z. Shi and Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 491–500 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Miranda, C. Urata, B. Masheder, G. J. Dunderdale, M. Yagihashi and A. Hozumi, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 056108 CrossRef .
W. Ma, Y. Higaki, H. Otsuka and A. Takahara, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 597–599 RSC .
S. Sunny, N. Vogel, C. Howell, T. L. Vu and J. Aizenberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6658–6667 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim, M. J. Kreder, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1793–1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, R. A. Belisle, B. Hatton, T. S. Wong and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2167 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xiong, H. Zhou, C. Qi, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Zhang and Z. Qiao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125527 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hashimoto, K. Mogi and T. Yamamoto, Surf. Interface Anal., 2015, 47, 723–727 CrossRef CAS .
R. Redón, A. Vázquez-Olmos, M. E. Mata-Zamora, A. Ordóñez-Medrano, F. Rivera-Torres and J. M. Saniger, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 287, 664–670 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Ding, Z. Ao, Y. Zhou and L. Jiang, Small, 2015, 11, 1782–1786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Howell, T. L. Vu, C. P. Johnson, X. Hou, O. Ahanotu, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1792–1800 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, T. Kleintschek, A. Rieder, Y. Cheng, T. Baumbach, U. Obst, T. Schwartz and P. A. Levkin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6704–6711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Lalia, S. Anand, K. K. Varanasi and R. Hashaikeh, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 13081–13088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tenjimbayashi, R. Togasawa, K. Manabe, T. Matsubayashi, T. Moriya, M. Komine and S. Shiratori, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6693–6702 CrossRef CAS .
R. Togasawa, M. Tenjimbayashi, T. Matsubayashi, T. Moriya, K. Manabe and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4198–4205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, E. Ueda, D. Paulssen and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1802317 CrossRef .
J. W. Krumpfer and T. J. Mccarthy, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 11514–11519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, S. S. Dunn, P. Kim, M. Duffy, J. Alvarenga and J. Aizenberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4418–4422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Urata, G. J. Dunderdale, M. W. England and A. Hozumi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12626–12630 RSC .
C. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Zhang and N. S. Zacharia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5892–5901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, D. Daniel, A. Grinthal, K. Lin and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 790–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, S. Wu, L. Chen, J. Ju, Z. Gu, M. Liu, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8975–8979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, X. Zhu, B. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Song, X. Miao, G. Ren and X. Li, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 2817–2827 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Damle, A. Uppal, X. Sun, T. P. Burgin and K. Rykaczewski, Surf. Innovations, 2015, 4, 102–108 CrossRef .
J. Martín, M. Vázquez, M. Hernándezvélez and C. Mijangos, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 175304 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kong, Y. Xu, K. Yung, Y. Xie and L. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 624–629 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimm, K. Schwirn, P. Göring, H. Knoll, P. T. Miclea, A. Greiner, J. H. Wendorff, R. B. Wehrspohn, U. Gösele and M. Steinhart, Small, 2010, 3, 993–1000 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Eifert, D. Paulssen, S. N. Varanakkottu, T. Baier and S. Hardt, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300138 CrossRef .
T. S. Wong, S. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. Smythe, B. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sett, X. Yan, G. Barac, L. W. Bolton and N. Miljkovic, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36400–36408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anand, A. T. Paxson, R. Dhiman, J. D. Smith and K. K. Varanasi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10122–10129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dou, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Cui, Y. Song, L. Jiang and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6998–7003 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. J. Charpentier, A. Neville, S. Baudin, M. J. Smith, M. Euvrard, A. Bell, C. Wang and R. Barker, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 444, 81–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, H. Kim and Y. Nam, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8400–8407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, K. Kato, A. P. Blois and T. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8265–8271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rowthu and P. Hoffmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10560–10570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, Y. Higaki, H. Otsuka and A. Takahara, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 597–599 RSC .
A. K. Epstein, D. Hong, P. Kim and J. Aizenber, New J. Phys., 2013, 15, 095018 CrossRef CAS .
R. Deng, T. Shen, H. Chen, J. Lu, H. Yang and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7536–7547 RSC .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Epstein, T. S. Wong, R. A. Belisle, E. M. Boggs and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13182–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Z. Lu and D. Zhang, Corros. Sci., 2015, 93, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Tesler, P. Kim, S. Kolle, C. Howell, O. Ahanotu and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8649 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ouyang, J. Zhao, R. Qiu, S. Hu, M. Chen and P. Wang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2019, 367, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tuo, H. Zhang, W. Chen and X. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 423, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tenjimbayashi, S. Nishioka, Y. Kobayashi, K. Kawase, J. Li, J. Abe and S. Shiratori, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 1386–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Okada and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1502–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Pei, B. Yu and F. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4237–4245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, W. Cheng, J. L. Song, Y. Lu, Y. K. Sun, L. Huang, X. Liu, Z. J. Jin, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, Chin. J. Mech. Eng. (Engl. Ed.), 2018, 31, 72 CrossRef .
R. Jafari, C. Cloutier, A. Allahdini and G. Momen, Int. J. Adv. Des. Manuf. Technol., 2019, 103, 1225–1238 CrossRef .
Y. Song, C. Wang, X. Dong, K. Yin, F. Zhang, Z. Xie, D. Chu and J. Duan, Opt. Laser Technol., 2018, 102, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jafari, G. Momen and E. Eslami, Surf. Eng., 2019, 35, 450–455 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vazirinasab, R. Jafari and G. Momen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2019, 375, 100–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Li, C. Lu, Y. Liu, S. Feng and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25471–25477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang and Z. Guo, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22615 RSC .
J. Li, E. Ueda, D. Paulssen and P. A. Levkin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1802317 CrossRef .
J. Chen, R. Dou, D. Cui, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Xu, X. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4026–4030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Li, S. Wu, J. Liu, K. Liu and Q. Fan, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2047–2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. He, J. Lv, Y. Jin, S. Wu, G. Liu, F. Zhou and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 840 RSC .
P. Irajizad, M. Hasnain, N. Farokhnia, S. M. Sajadi and H. Ghasemi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Sun, V. G. Damle, S. L. Z. Liu and K. Rykaczewski, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400479 CrossRef .
X. Hou, Y. Hu, A. Grinthal, M. Khan and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2015, 519, 70–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, K. Liu, D. Wang, H. Li, P. Li, S. Li, S. Su, S. Xu and Y. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 338, 126–136 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liang, H. Li, X. Su, X. Lai, H. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Zhuang and X. Zeng, Prog. Org. Coat., 2016, 101, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, M. Lei, H. Huang, J. Chen and H. Chen, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 3954–3961 CrossRef CAS .
J. Drelich and E. Chibowski, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18621–18623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Osbourn, Trends Plant Sci., 1996, 1, 4–9 CrossRef .
Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 291–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Ibhadon and P. Fitzpatrick, Catalysts, 2013, 3, 189–218 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takata, S. Hidaka, M. Masuda and T. Ito, Int. J. Energy Res., 2003, 27, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, F. Xia, L. Xu, J. Li, W. Yang and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1024–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, D. Zhou, J. Zhou, M. Huang and X. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2016, 180, 309–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, S. Kim and A. Karim, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2608–2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Q. Sun, S. Han, J. Wang, Z. Wang and C. Jin, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 87, 155–160 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, J. Zhang and J. Tu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 352, 573–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liang, H. Li, X. Lai, X. Su, L. Zhang and X. Zeng, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2016, 13, 1115–1121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, X. Jiang, J. Huang, F. Geng, L. Sun, X. Zu, W. Wu and W. Zheng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Li, N. Wang and J. M. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 9230–9237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, C. Xiong and Z. Wang, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2015, 30, 302–318 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Kota, G. Kwon, W. Choi, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1025 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Men and X. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2834–2837 RSC .
X. Li, G. Wei, B. M. Alameda, R. K. Sloan, W. D. Walker and D. L. Patton, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 10278–10285 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yi Wang
	Miss Yi Wang joined Prof. Guo's biomimetic materials of tribology (BMT) group at Hubei University in 2019 to pursue her PhD degree. Her current scientific interests are focused on studying the adhesion mechanism and applications of special wettable surfaces.

Zhiguang Guo
	Professor Zhiguang GUO received his PhD from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2007. After that, he joined Hubei University. From Oct 2007 to Aug 2008, he worked at University of Namur (FUNDP), Belgium, as a post-doctor. From Sep 2008 to Mar 2011, he worked in Funds of National Research Science (FNRS), Belgium, as a “Charge de Researcher”. From Feb 2009 to Feb 2010, he worked in the Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK, as a visiting scholar. Now he is a full professor and the Dean of the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Hubei University. Till now, he has published more than 320 papers about the interfaces of materials, cited more than 11000 times, and the impact factor is about 54.

Weimin Liu
	Professor Weimin Liu received his PhD in lubricating materials and tribology from Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1990. After that, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication (LSL) of the LICP. From June 1993 to June 1994, he worked as a Visiting Scholar at Pennsylvania State University, USA. In 2013 and 2016, he was elected a Member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), respectively. Currently, he is a professor of LICP and head of the State Key Laboratory of Solid Lubrication. Up to now, he has published more than 600 papers with citations over 27000. He holds 100 Chinese patents and 1 US patent and has won 2 National Awards for Technological Invention (second class) and 2 National Awards for Natural Sciences (second class). He was the winner of The Ho Leung Ho Lee Foundation Materials Prize of 2016, and received a Supreme Achievement Award in Tribology in 2017. His research interests mainly focus on space and aviation lubrication, high performance lubricating materials and tribochemistry.

Natural sources	Lotus leaf1,2	
Rosa, cv. Bairage7	Pitcher plants10	
Anubias barteri
13

Underside of the ramee leaf5	
Rosa, cv. Showtime7	Earthworms11,12	
Sphagnum squarrosum

Rice leaf4	Chinese kafir lily8	
	
Rhacocarpus purpurescens

Feathers of waterfowl67	sunflower petal8	
	
Tillandsia usneoides
14

Cicada wing68	scallion9	
	
Calathea zebrine

Water strider3–6	garlic9	
	
Ruellia devosiana

Wetting model	

	

	

	


CA or SA	CA > 150°, SA < 10°	CA > 150°, sticking	CA < 120°, SA = 2.1 ± 0.8°	CA < 5°
Factors affecting adhesion	Geometric structure with micro–nano and micro-line structure	Layered micro-nipples and nano-folds whose distance is greater than that in the low-adhesive one	Rough micro–nano structures treated with low surface energy groups	For smooth surfaces: strong attraction between the surface and liquid molecules
Chemical composition with low surface energy	Low surface energy substances	Lubricants with low surface energy, low viscosity and low volatility	For rough porous surfaces: microstructure and chemical composition
Preparation methods	Electrodeposition19	Use petals as a template8	Lubricant selection33	Sol–gel method37
Chemical vapor deposition20–23	Deposited by using fluorinated monomers or fluorinating various nanostructured surfaces30	Preparation of the substrate34	Phase separation method38
Sol–gel24–27	Fluorine-free preparation31	Substrate modification35	Vapor deposition method39
Layer-by-layer assembly28	Build super-hydrophilic patterns on super-hydrophobic surfaces32	Lubricant injection process36	Layer-by-layer self-assembly method40
Solution-immersion29	
	
	Template-based method41

	
	
	Electrochemical method42

	
	
	Electrospinning43
Applications	Self-cleaning44,45	Controlled transport of small volumes of liquids49	Antifouling52	Self-cleaning58
Corrosion prevention46	Microfluidic devices50	Anti-frosting/icing33,53	Biomedical applications59
Anti-icing47	Biochemical separation51	Oil–water separation54,55	Oil–water separation60
Drag reduction48	Bio/chem analysis assay51	Other applications56,57	Other applications61,62
Current problems	Insufficient mechanical durability and stability	Failure to quantitatively analyze the relationship between adhesion and surface structure	Insufficient durability and adaptability	Complex and expensive preparation technology
High manufacturing cost	Insufficient economy and practicality	Industrial applications are limited by high cost and scalability issues	Poor mechanical strength and weather resistance
Future directions	Improve the chemical stability and durability in harsh environments	Prepare a multifunctional, fast response, sensitive, economical and practical intelligent adhesive superhydrophobic surface	Achieve low-cost mass manufacturing; enhance the stability of the lubricating layer	Resolve disputes on the definition and mechanism
Develop novel and low-cost technology, use low-cost and environmentally friendly raw materials	
	Research on the automatic replenishment system of lubricants	Prepare a functionally responsive, environmentally-friendly and durable super-hydrophilic surface

 	Fig. 1  Photos of low-adhesion superhydrophobic plant surfaces and insect body parts. (a) A drop of water (macroscopic view) resting on the surface of the lotus leaf and the SEM images of lotus leaves with different magnifications whose bars are 50 and 1 μm, respectively. The inset is a WCA on a lotus leaf, with a value of 161 ± 2°.63,69 (Copyright: 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.) (Copyright: 2002, Wiley-Blackwell.) (b) Water droplets floating on the underside of the ramee leaf and the bars of the SEM images are 100 and 5 μm, respectively. The inset is a WCA on the underside of a ramee leaf, with a value of 164 ± 2°.64 (Copyright: 2007, Elsevier Ireland Ltd.) (c) Water stays on the surface of the rice leaf and can only slide in a fixed direction and the SEM images of rice leaves with different magnifications covered with papillae arranged in a fixed direction. The inset is a WCA on a rice leaf, with a value of 157 ± 2°, showing a good superhydrophobic property.63 (Copyright: 2011, Wiley-Blackwell.) (d) SEM image of the micron and sub-micron strip structure on a duck feather surface.66 (Copyright: 1970, Nature.) (e) The microstructure of the cicada wing surface and the topography of the water droplets on the cicada wing surface.68 (Copyright: 2000, Elsevier Ltd.) (f) A water strider resting on the surface of water with its bristly legs and the SEM images of its leg surface covered with setae 50 μm long and 3 μm wide, making the water strider's contact angle with the deformed surface of the water 168.8° and allowing the water strider to jump and stay at the surface of the water freely.5 (Copyright: 2007, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The droplet is on a tilted plate, θa is the advancing angle and θr is the receding angle. (b) Microstructural diagram of a droplet in the Cassie–Baxter state.	 
cosθCB = f1cosθ1 + f2cosθ2	(1)
cosθCB = rfSLcosθ1 + (1 − fSL)cosθCB2
cosθCB = rfSLcosθ1 + fSL−1	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic illustration of the electrodeposition process. (B) Variation in the water contact and sliding angles of the surfaces obtained at different electrodeposition times at a voltage of 30 V.19 (Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society.) (C) (a and b) The water contact angle (WCA) variations with the WC particles of the CoeNi/WC composite coating before and after PFTEOS modification. (c) The water sliding angles (WSA) of the CoeNi/WC composite coatings after PFTEOS modification. The WC particles were 0, 5.3 wt%, 9.8 wt% and 19.1 wt%, respectively. 9.8 wt% displays excellent super-hydrophobicity with a WCA of 162° and WSA of 3°.83 (Copyright: 2020, Elsevier.) (D) FTIR spectra of three materials: pure CNTs, the CNT–SiO2 hybrid material and pure SiO2.84 (Copyright: 2014, Springer Berlin Heidelberg.) (E) Summary of the contact angle results for aerogel-coated and xerogel-coated surfaces. The surfaces coated with xerogels prepared from a precursor recipe with 10 or 25% MTMS are hydrophilic.85 (Copyright: 2014, Springer US.) (F) Changes in water contact angles and sliding angles of the films with different deposition cycles.28 (Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society.) (G) Liquid entry pressure (LEP) distributions for the top side of the (a) uncoated PTFE, (b) coated PTFE, and (c) coated CA membranes.86 (Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Extracts from high-speed videos on a 7 μm DLIP structured sample tilted 15°. The surface was covered with 1 μm MnO2 (a–e) and 100 μm polyamide particles (f–j). The time frame for each sequence is 40 ms. The arrows indicate the particles adsorbed by the 10 μL deionized water droplet.95 (Copyright: 2020, Elsevier.) (B) Cross-sectional SEM image of the superhydrophobic sample. (C) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the hydrophobic Mg–Al LDH coating on AZ31. (D) Bode plots of the untreated aluminum and superhydrophobic sample after immersion in 3.5 wt% NaCl aqueous solution for different times.97 (Copyright: 2014, Elsevier.) (E) Potentiodynamic curves of (a) different coatings and (b) Mg–Al LDH/LA coatings intercalated with different anions in 3.5 wt% NaCl. (F) Condensation of water droplets on the superhydrophobic surface at −40 °C.101 (Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.) (G) The histogram of the time consumption of each specimen to finish the route.103 (Copyright: 2019, Maney Publishing.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Photos of high-adhesion superhydrophobic plant surfaces. (a) A drop of water (macroscopic view) stays upside down on the surface of a rose petal (Rosa, cv. Bairage) and the SEM images of the rose petal with different magnifications whose bars are 20 and 5 μm, respectively.7 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) (b) Water staying on the surface of another variety of rose petals (Rosa, cv. Showtime) and SEM images with different magnifications showing a tighter micropapillary structure than in Fig. 5a. The inset is a WCA on a rose petal, with a value of 167° and a SA of 6°.7 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) Water drops stay on the surface of a petal of Chinese kafir lily and a sunflower petal upside down (c and d). The SEM images in (c and d) are compact hexagonal and linear periodic arrays, respectively, which makes the petals have high adhesion and superhydrophobicity.8 (Copyright: 2008, American Chemical Society.) Water drops are still on the surface of the scallion and garlic placed vertically (e and f). SEM images with a magnification of 10 μm show linear grooves making the water droplets highly adherent.9 (Copyright: 2009, American Institute of Physics.)	 
cosθw = cosθy	(3)
cosθCB = 1 + fSL(cosθ1 − 1)	(4)

 	Fig. 6  Microstructural diagram of a droplet in the Wenzel state (a) and Cassie impregnating state (b).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) (a and b) SEM images of the duplicated PVA film with inverse petal structures. (c and d) SEM images of the duplicated PS film with similar petal surface structures. (The inset in panel (d) is the shape of a water drop on the PS film when it is turned upside down.)8 (Copyright: 2008, American Chemical Society.) (B) Preparation procedure of surfaces with tunable water adhesion.110 (Copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society.) (C) SEM images of the films produced on cold-rolled aluminum foil at plasma frequencies of (a) 22500 Hz and (b) 10000 Hz and (c) on a polished aluminum substrate at a 22500 Hz plasma electrical excitation frequency.112 (Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) (a) Photographs of an array of drops and a high magnification image of a single drop stored on a vertical substrate. (b) Snapshots of a drop being transferred between two substrates. (c) Photographs of merging and mixing: (i) pickup mixing (two drops) and (ii) line mixing (three drops) and a plot that shows the working zone of drop volumes suitable for line mixing. (d) Photographs of drop splitting between two substrates.49 (Copyright: 2009, Royal Society of Chemistry.) (B) Effect of the PDMS concentration on the surface morphology to tune air-pockets of composites, (a) 4 wt% PDMS, (b) 7 wt% PDMS, (c) 10 wt% PDMS, (d) 13 wt% PDMS, and (e) 16 wt% PDMS, and (f) schematic representation of the PDMS concentration effect on the roughness height and air-gap.51 (Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Photos of SLIPS of Nepenthes and earthworms. (a) Optical photos of pitcher plants. (b) Cryo-SEM micrographs of developmental stage 5 of the waxy layer of Nepenthes: elongation of stalks is finished. (c) Developmental stage 6 of the waxy layer of Nepenthes: at the distal ends of stalks, flat platelets of the upper wax layer develop. Scale bars: 1 μm.121 (Copyright: 2013, Springer Nature.) (d) Earthworms walk through the dirt without stains. (e) Image of the earthworm's skin before mechano-stimulus and (f) image of the earthworm's skin after mechano-stimulus.123 (Copyright: 2018, Wiley-Blackwell.)	 
ΔE1 = EA − E1 = R(γbcosθb − γacosθa) − γab > 0	(5)
ΔE2 = EA − E2 = R(γbcosθb − γacosθa) + γa − γb > 0	(6)

 	Fig. 10  (a) SLIPS system. The failure model of SLIPS predicted from the surface energy and extended parameters: (b) (Sba < 0) the droplet is covered with lubricant, and the lubricant is taken away when the droplet leaves the SLIPS; (c) (Sab < 0) the droplet spreads over the lubricating layer; (d) (Sbs > −γbR) the lubricant cannot enter the solid surface where air exists; (e) (Sbs(a) > −γabR) the lubricant cannot enter the solid surface where impinging droplets exist; and (f) (γab > 0) the impinging fluid is miscible with the lubricant, forming an infinite interface.123 (Copyright: 2018, Wiley-Blackwell.) (h) Schematic diagram of the wetting structure of the solid rough structure outside and below the droplet in the oil–solid–air state and (i) the oil–solid–water state, respectively. In the case where the droplets are not covered by the lubricant (g), the droplets present on the surface of the lubricating oil package have six possible thermodynamic states (j) according to the way the lubricant wets the texture in the presence of air (vertical axis) and water (horizontal axis). A3–W3 of figure j are the qualified SLIPS (o – oil, s – solid, w – water, a – air).127 (Copyright: 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 
(I) Sba = γa − (γab + γb) < 0	(7)
(II) Sab = γb − (γab + γa) < 0	(8)
(III) Sbs = γs − (γbs + γb) > −γbR	(9)
(IV) Sbs(a) = γs − (γbs + γb) > −γabR	(10)
(V) γab > 0	(11)

 	Fig. 11  The coating thickness is classified as the flooded (a), coated (b) and exposed configuration (c). The droplet state (d) and the droplet state after 19 s of evaporation (e) with the same lubricant thickness. (f) The curves of the dimensionless ratio of ridge height (z) and droplet height (h) with time for the three states. (g)–(i) correspond to the water drop status of the flooded, coated and exposed configuration at 38 s, respectively. The droplet height with time (j) indicates that the SLIPS with more lubricant takes the shortest time (38 s) to complete the cloaking and the droplet evaporation rate is the lowest.134 (Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Substrate morphology of rough porous structures. (a) Hydrothermal ZnO.135 (Copyright: 2017, Elsevier Ltd.) (b) Organic polymeric porous PDMS.134 (Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society.) (c) Porous anodic aluminum oxide.138 (Copyright: 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag.) (d) Electrodeposited LiClO4.139 (Copyright: 2015, Elsevier.) (e) Photoetched silicon surface.133 (Copyright: 2014, Springer Nature.) (f) Carbon nano-fiber by CVD.140 (Copyright: 2014, American Institute of Physics.) (g) Polyaniline–silicon dioxide by the sol–gel method.141 (Copyright: 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.) (h) Seven-layer self-assembled silicon wafer surface.142 (Copyright: 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag.) Stability comparison of SLIPS prepared with four types of interfaces: (i) smooth surface; (j) micron scale rough surface; (k) nano scale rough surface; and (l) fractal surface.143 (Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The fluorinated lubricant is dispersed in the polymer network to form a cross-linked network structure of fluorine gel.156 (Copyright: 2014, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.) (b) Fabrication of a silicone oil infused surface with PDMS polymer injection (D4: 1,3,5,7-tetramethylcyclotetrasiloxane).158 (Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic diagram of a lubricant-infused structured surface and an oil-impregnated gel. (d) Fabrication strategies for oil-impregnated gels.159–161 (Copyright: 2015, Springer Nature.) (Copyright: 2015, Wiley.) (Copyright: 2020, Springer Netherlands.) (e) Schematic diagram of a periodically spaced microchannel in a lubricant rapidly replenishing the lubricant onto the polymer surface.162 (Copyright: 2015, ICE Publishing Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) (i–iii) The samples just before (top panels) and after (bottom panels) being removed from the culture and dried: (i) TO-SLIPS, (ii) TO-SHS and (iii) untreated stainless-steel control. (B) Area remaining fouled after the removal of the sample from the growth media followed by drying.181 (Copyright: 2015, Springer Nature.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Schematic illustrations showing the design procedure for the preparation of anticorrosion coatings on an Fe plate (the inserted spectrum is X-ray photon microscopy analysis of SPS). (B) Time-lapse photographic images of an Fe plate surface coated with a control (uncoated), LIS*, LIS**, and LIMITS under salt water conditions as a function of immersion time τ. (C) The liquid thickness is estimated by dividing the liquid volume by the coating area185 (Copyright: 2014, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  Digital images of ice layers formed on (a) SF, (b) FF, and (c) LF under a mimic freezing rain environment. (d) The average ice adhesion strength on the three films.186 (Copyright: 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag.)	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Schematic diagram of the process of preparing SLIPNS. (B and C) Schematics for the replenishment mechanism of stored oil on the SLIPS and SLIPNS after oil depletion. (D) Sequential images showing the icing (i and ii) and thawing (iii and iv) process of droplets on the SLIPS and SLIPNS, respectively.192 (Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Hypothesis for gating a pore by liquid reconfiguration. (B) Rapid pressure-tunable sorting of multiphase flows in a microfluidic system (Pcritical(gas) = 2.3 kPa and Pcritical(liquid) = 9.8 kPa). (C) Schematic diagram of the liquid-filled porous membrane separating the three-phase mixture of air, water and oil.200 (Copyright: 2015, Nature.)	 
ΔP ∝ Qμ/k
	(12)

 	Fig. 19  (A) Critical pressure required for gas to flow through porous materials of various chemistries and pore structures with and without a gating liquid. (B) The critical pressure for water transport through a liquid-filled membrane is less than that for transport through the same membrane without a liquid. (C) The predictive model (lines) agrees with the experimentally obtained critical pressures (squares) over a range of flow rates for air through liquid-gated pores (green), water through liquid-gated pores (blue), and water through pores without a liquid gate (red). (D) Differential tuning of absolute and relative critical pressures for air and water to flow through liquid-gated pores with different pore sizes.200 (Copyright: 2015, Nature.)	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) 10° < CA < 90°, the hydrophilic leaf is Alocasia odora. (b) CA < 10°, the superhydrophilic one is Ruellia devosiana. SEM micrographs of superhydrophilic plant surfaces. (c) The flat and unstructured surface of a water plant (Anubias barteri) is shown. (d) The spongy epidermal structure of a water-adsorbing moss (Sphagnum squarrosum) is shown. (e) The porous cell structure of the epidermis of moss (Rhacocarpus purpurescens) is shown. (f) Multicellular water-absorbing trichomes of Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides) are shown. (g) The surface of Calathea zebrina composed of uniform conical cells is shown. (h) The composition of different cell types of the superhydrophilic leaves of Ruellia devosiana is shown.14 (Copyright: 2009, The Royal Society.)	 
dG = δSGdASG + δLGdALG + δSLdASL.	(13)
dASL = −dASG	(14)
dALG = cosθdASL	(15)
dG = (δLGcosθ − δSG + δSL)dASL	(16)
	(17)

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic diagram of the derivation of Young's equation. (B) The relationship between the minimum roughness factor required for a rough surface to achieve superhydrophility and the intrinsic contact angle.204 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.)	 
	(18)
cosθCB = ∅s(cosθ − 1) + 1	(19)

 	Fig. 22  (A) Diagram of the oxidation–reduction mechanism of ultraviolet light irradiation: (a) oxygen vacancies are generated; (b) oxygen vacancies absorb water molecules in the air; and (c) hydroxylation of the surface forms a chemically adsorbed water layer.208 (Copyright: 2003, John Wiley and Sons Ltd.) (B) Schematic diagram of PLL driving an intelligent reversible switching surface. (C) Cycle process of water CAs between state I and state III for PLL thin films on a rough substrate (state I: T: 20 °C, pH: 6.5; state I′: T: 60 °C, pH: 6.5; state II: T: 20 °C, pH: 11.5; state III: T: 60 °C, pH: 11.5; state III′: T: 20 °C, pH: 11.5).209 (Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.) (D) Schematic illustration of fabricating the CaP film micropattern. (E) SEM image of the superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic composite surface.210 (Copyright: 2016, Elsevier.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
