Recent developments in zinc metal anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes for zinc-ion hybrid capacitors  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3SE00565H View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00565H
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, Advance Article Recent developments in zinc metal anodes, cathodes, and electrolytes for zinc-ion hybrid capacitors
Meghali Devi†
a, 
Brindha Moorthy†b and 
Ranjith Thangavel*a
aSchool of Energy Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 781039, India. E-mail: ranjith.t@iitg.ac.in; ranjith.cecri@gmail.com
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Tirupati, Tirupati, 517619, India
Received 
30th April 2023
, Accepted 23rd June 2023First published on 23rd June 2023AbstractRecent developments in Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, and supercapacitors are redefining their applications in several portable and large-scale energy storage applications. However, the demand for energy storage devices with the combination of high energy density and high power density is rapidly increasing and research on hybrid-ion capacitors, which combines the benefits of battery and capacitors is gaining much momentum. The multivalent-ion-based energy storage device, zinc-ion hybrid capacitors (ZICs) are gaining attention as a low-cost and eco-friendly alternative to commercial lithium and sodium analogues for several energy storage applications. ZICs combine the benefits of batteries and capacitors, exhibiting a high energy-power density combination, and remarkable safety. The energy–power–cycle life metrics of ZICs are often controlled by the Zn metal anode, electrolytes, and cathode employed in the system. Research on ZICs are still in the nascent stage and requires a lot of attention to address the issues and to enable their use in commercial application. This review presents a comprehensive summary of recent developments in ZICs with particular emphasis on several materials and design strategies developed to address the key issues in ZICs. Moreover, the revolving issues with each component of ZICs, the strategies to overcome issues, and their influence on the performance of ZICs are briefly discussed. Recent trends in applications of emerging 2D materials, pseudocapacitive materials, MXenes, and flexible capacitors systems are also discussed as this could be a trendsetter for next-generation storage devices. Furthermore, a brief outlook and perspective on the future research of ZICs are provided, which will help the researcher to direct their future research towards the development of scalable next-generation energy storage systems.
1. Introduction
The global push for dependency on renewable energy sources has fuelled the research and development of high energy-density energy storage devices.1 Electrochemical energy storage devices, viz., batteries and capacitors are the key essential components for storing the renewable energy generated and help to integrate the renewable energy with electric grid.2 Moreover, electrochemical energy storage systems have potential applications in emission-free electric-vehicles.3 At present, lead acid batteries, Li-ion batteries (LIBs), and electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) are the most dominant electrochemical energy storage device for several portable applications, and large-scale energy storage system (ESS) applications.4 However, for large-scale applications, the energy cost (USD kW h−1) safety, cost, and energy–power–cycle life performance are the most critical parameters to be considered.5 Moreover, the sustainability, and manufacturing processability of the energy storage devises are also crucial. Irrespective of the energy density, and long cycle life, the energy cost LIBs are high due to the presence of lithium and cobalt compounds in the battery.6 Moreover, the safety concerns from the thermal runway of LIBs impede the potential application of LIBs in large-scale applications. Lead–acid batteries are safe and relatively low cost but limited by short cycle life and poor power density.7 EDLCs have a great potential to be employed in large-scale energy storage applications. Nevertheless, the low energy density of the EDLCs is the great limitation for advancement.8 Electrochemical energy storage technology with high energy density, high power density, high safety, low capital cost, and long cycle life is mandatory for implication in large-scale energy storage systems.9
Recently, energy storage devices based on multivalent ion storage mechanisms based on Zn2+, Mn2+, and Al3+ have been proposed for large-scale applications as they can provide high energy–power–cycle life at low cost.10 In particular, rechargeable zinc-ion batteries have received great attention in modern portable/wearable electronics, and large-scale ESS systems owing to their low energy cost, high safety, sustainability, and abundant availability of electrode materials for zinc-ion based energy storage systems.11 The advantages of zinc-ion-based energy storage systems mainly originate from high-capacity zinc metal (820 mA h g−1/5855 mA h cm−3), low electrochemical potential (−0.76 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode), and stability in water due to high hydrogen evolution overpotential, making zinc-ion-based energy storage systems more attractive over lithium and sodium analogues.12,13 Zinc-ion battery features a Zn metal as the anode, and a transition metal containing metal oxide as the cathode in an aqueous/non-aqueous electrolyte, and the charge storage mechanism involves the shuttling of Zn2+ ions between anode and cathode during the charge and discharge process.14 The charge storage mechanism in cathode materials of Zn-ion battery involves several generalized reaction mechanisms, such as intercalation/deintercalation of Zn2+, conversion reactions, electrocatalysis, and phase transformations, depending on the nature of the cathode, and electrolyte.15,16 Meanwhile, the charge storage mechanism in the Zn metal anode involves stripping and platting of Zn2+ ions during the charge/discharge process.
The charge storage mechanisms in zinc-ion batteries are highly sluggish due to the presence of redox-mediated intercalation type storage, impeding the power output and kinetics of the zinc-ion based energy storage system. Thus the design of efficient Zn-based electrochemical energy storage systems with high energy and power densities incorporating diverse charge storage mechanisms is a challenge. To overcome the kinetic limitations in zinc-ion batteries, a new class of hybrid devices named, zinc-ion hybrid capacitors (ZICs) was recently proposed.17 The concept of hybrid energy storage devices was first proposed by Amatucci et al. who constructed an asymmetrical energy storage device, hybrid-ion capacitors, by coupling a battery-type electrode and a capacitor-type electrode.18 The hybrid capacitors show higher energy density than capacitors and power density close to capacitors by employing a simultaneous dual charge storage mechanism: (i) redox-based bulk storage in the battery electrode and (ii) double-layer-based surface storage in the capacitor electrode, bridging the performance gap between batteries and capacitors.19 Inspired by the design, ZIC was proposed by replacing the transition metal-containing cathode in a zinc ion battery with a porous carbon-based cathode in an aqueous/non-aqueous electrolyte. Unlike transition metal oxide-based cathodes, which exhibit sluggish intercalation type storage and limited cycle life due to dissolution and other parasitic reactions, porous carbon cathodes can undergo a non-faradic EDLC charge storage mechanism without phase transition.16,20 The charge storage mechanism in ZICs involves simultaneous plating/stripping of Zn in the anode, and anion adsorption/desorption during the charge/discharge process.21 A schematic illustration of the components and working mechanism of ZIC is shown in Fig. 1a.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of components and working mechanism of ZIC. (b) Advantages and disadvantages of ZIC. (c) A historical timeline of developments of ZIC and other electrochemical energy storage systems. 
Unlike intercalation/deintercalation type storage in anodes of lithium-ion and sodium-ion hybrid capacitors, the storage in the Zn anode involves platting/stripping of Zn2+.22,23 Furthermore, the charge storage capacity of the Zn metal anode is remarkably high (820 mA h g−1), higher than that of the conventional intercalation type anode in lithium-ion (graphite, Li4Ti5O12, etc.) and sodium-ion (NaTi2(PO4)3, V2O5, SnS2, etc.) hybrid capacitors.24,25 Moreover, the capacity originating from the Zn anode is faradaic in nature with flat charge–discharge plateaus, and so the output capacitance and energy density of ZICs are much higher than the symmetrical carbon-based capacitors.22 These unique features of ZICs help to realize an energy storage device with higher energy density than lithium and sodium counterparts. Meanwhile, the capacitance originating from the cathode is purely surface-mediated storage, achieving a high-power density than zinc-ion batteries. Several advantages and disadvantages of ZICs are concisely depicted in Fig. 1b.
However, ZICs face multiple challenges, making it hard to achieve high energy density – power density – cycle life combinations. The performance metrics of ZICs are mainly controlled by the components: capacitor-type cathode, Zn metal anode, and electrolyte.12,26 One limitation is the low energy densities of ZICs, originating from a low capacity of the capacitor-type cathode. The large atomic mass and high positive polarity of Zn2+ ions cause sluggish diffusion and lower solid-state solubility in porous carbon electrodes.27 Many efforts to increase the capacity of carbon cathode involve architecture engineering of the cathode materials to achieve maximum textural/structural properties, surface engineering to increase the pseudo capacitance storage of cathode, and replacing carbon cathode with next-generation 2D materials.28 Strategies to increase energy densities of ZICs also involve widening the working voltage windows of ZICs by novel non-aqueous and ionic liquid-based electrolytes. An aqueous ZICs have a limited voltage window of 0–1.8 V and beyond which parasitic reactions, such as hydrogen evolution, electrolyte decomposition, and Zn corrosion will reduce the cycle life of the ZICs.29,30 The thermodynamic potential for H2/H+ is much higher than the redox potential of Zn/Zn2+, making the anode vulnerable to parasitic hydrogen evolution reaction. The slow kinetics of HER on the Zn metal anode induce high overpotential, which facilitates the platting and stripping of Zn in an aqueous electrolyte. However, HER inevitably reduces the coulombic and energy efficiencies of ZICs during long-term cycling with the Zn anode. The main strategies to inhibit HER rates are: controlling the operating voltage window and reducing the water activity on the Zn anode surface with optimized electrolyte components or the introduction of an artificial interlayer. Zn corrosion is another parasitic process that generates passivation by-products such as ZnO and Zn(OH)2. These randomly formed by-products are associated with the dendrite formation, deteriorating the cycle life of the Zn anode. Zn corrosion is strongly related to the pH of the electrolyte and more research is needed to analyse this phenomenon.23,27 The utilisation of non-aqueous electrolytes, electrolyte additives, concentrated electrolytes, and different solid electrolytes have significantly increased the energy density of ZICs. On the anode side, the host-less nature of the Zn metal anode provokes an irregular plating/stripping process, leading to the formation of dendrites, Zn metal dissolution into the electrolyte, and shortening the lifespan of ZICs.31 Therefore, the cycle life of ZICs is far below that of commercial EDLCs, which usually last beyond 100000 cycles.27 Although a porous carbon cathode could contribute to the longer cycle life of ZICs, the poor stability of Zn metal anode negates the longevity of ZICs. Efforts to increase the cycle life of ZICs mostly involve regulating the ion flux and electric field distribution to achieve a dendrite-free plating/stripping process.32 Several designs such as 3D Zn metal host designs, artificial solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) over Zn metal, and composite with other metals were proposed.33 Electrolyte additives are also proposed to regulate the Zn deposition while simultaneously widening the operating voltage with reduced parasitic reactions. Another limitation of aqueous ZICs originates from the intrinsic difference in the energy storage mechanism of the electrode consisting of the electrochemical energy storage system. The kinetic imbalance between the capacitor-type cathode and battery-type anode in ZIC prevents it from simultaneously achieving high energy and power densities.27
In the last few years, several new anode/cathode materials, storage mechanisms, and designs are continuously studied for ZICs. However, the research and development on ZICs are still in a nascent stage when compared to other electrochemical energy storage systems. A timeline showing the history of developments in ZICs and several other relevant electrochemical energy storage systems is pictorially depicted in Fig. 1c. A clear understanding of the materials and mechanisms for ZICs is needed to further explore the benefits of the new energy storage. In this review, we present a comprehensive summary of the recent research developments in terms of material development, design, and mechanism, as well as future challenges on ZICs. Also, we propose a possible research direction on ZICs to commercialize low-cost, and high-performance ZICs with performance metrics equivalent to commercial state-of-the-art hybrid-ion capacitors.
2. Cathode materials
Several conventional/nanostructured carbon-based materials, transition metal oxides/nitrides, and 2D materials (MXenes, phosphorene) and polymers were studied as cathodes for ZICs. The charge storage mechanism involved in the cathode is generally anionic storage via non-faradic surface storage via adsorption/desorption reactions. The pores of the carbon are the site for ion storage in the carbon-based cathode while anions get stored between the layered structure or surface through faradaic pseudocapacitance reactions in the noncarbon-based cathode. Few studies discussed the Zn2+ storage (cation storage) through adsorption/desorption in the cathode when the working voltage goes to a lower limit.34,35 However, such a mechanism needs further deep investigation and validation. The carbon cathode materials employed in ZICs should have a highly porous nature and high surface area. The unsatisfactory energy density of ZICs is mainly attributed to the low-capacity cathode, and the demand for high-capacity cathode materials is increasing to realize practical ZICs.
2.1. Carbon-based materials
Porous carbon-based materials have shown tremendous potential as capacitor-type electrodes as cathodes for high power density. The efficiency of these materials relies on the structure, morphology, and porosity of the materials for charge storage with an electrical double-layer capacitive mechanism. Several nanostructured carbons such as graphene, CNT, graphene composites, porous carbon derived from biomass, polymers, and MOFs were studied as cathodes for ZICs. Several template-derived carbons and carbide-derived carbon with three-dimensional (3D) ordered structures were also studied for ZICs. Nanostructured porous carbons can have a tailored, hierarchical structure with variable porous architecture that could increase the maximum available surface for adsorption ion storage, increasing the energy density of ZICs. Moreover, the hierarchical porous architecture can provide short channels for ions and electron conduction, increasing the kinetics, rate performance, and power density of ZICs.36,37 The latest advancements in various carbon-based materials as cathodes in ZICs are summarized in the following sections focusing on their synthesis, morphology, and electrochemical behaviours.
2.1.1. Activated carbon. Highly porous activated carbon derived from carbon-rich precursors such as coal and coke are the eminent choice because of their high electrical conductivity, high surface area, and low cost. The pores in the activated carbon are the charge storage sites for anions during the charge–discharge process. ZICs employing a Zn anode, and conventionally activated carbon in ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte showed an energy density of 84 W h kg−1, and a power density of 14.9 kW kg−1 along with 91% cycle life retention after 10000 cycles (Fig. 2a and b).38 ZICs employing MnO2 nanorod as the anode and activated carbon as the cathode offered a maximum energy density of 34.8 W h kg−1.39 Although activated carbon has a high surface area, they exhibited poor kinetics, and low capacity (<100 mA h g−1 vs. Zn) due to ion-diffusional losses originating from tortuous pore networks (bottleneck pores). The poor wettability of traditional activated carbon results in an inefficient electrode–electrolyte interface, which inhibits fast adsorption/desorption at high current rates, reducing the power capability of ZICs. The poor wettability will also increase the charge-transfer resistance within the system, thereby reducing the power density of ZICs. Inadequate electrical conductivity and micropore-dominated porosity also impede adsorption/desorption storage in an activated carbon-based material, resulting in poor electrochemical performance. These limitations are countered with the development of carbon-based materials with appropriate nanostructures and functionalization through heteroatom doping.37,40,41
 Fig. 2  (a) BET isotherm and pore size distribution of activated carbon (AC) cathode. (b) Cyclic performance of AC//ZnSO4(aq)//Zn ZIC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. (c) BET isotherm and pore size distribution of biomass derived carbon. (d) Cyclic performance of coconut-shell-derived AC of AC//Zn(CF3SO3)2(aq)//Zn ZIC. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier. (e) Synthesis of MDC from Ni-MOF. (f) SEM image of MDC. (g) Cyclic performance of ZIC with MDC. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of NLPC by ammonia activation. (i) GCD curves of NLPC at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from ACS. 

2.1.2. Biomass-derived carbon. Biomass-derived porous carbon materials are inexpensive and eco-friendly cathode materials for realizing suitable ZICs.42 Porous carbon-derived biomass showed the highest capacity due to their ultra-high surface area, tailored architecture with large pore volume, micro–meso–macro porous morphology, and tuned surface characteristics.43 ZIC employing the corncob-derived porous carbon cathode with surface area (SA) – 2617 m2 g−1 showed a high energy density of 94 W h kg−1 and 98.2% retention after 10000 cycles at 5 A g−1.44 ZIC studied with a porous carbon cathode derived by KOH activation of a coconut shell showed a high energy density of 52.7 W h kg−1 and 91% cycle life retention after 20000 cycles in Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte (Fig. 2c and d).45 The porous carbon cathode derived by hydrothermal activation of bagasse and coconut shell mixture showed a capacity of 305 mA h g−1, and a high energy density of 118 W h kg−1 along with excellent stability of 94.9% after 20000 cycles.46 The surface area and pore volume of porous carbon derived from the combination of two biomass precursors were 3401 m2 g−1 and 2.03 cm3 g−1, respectively, higher than that of the porous carbon obtained from individual precursors. The composition of cellulose and lignin in the bio-mass precursor aids in favourable graphitization degree of porous carbon along with high surface area and electronic conductivity. Along with the pore-formation method: chemical/physical/hydrothermal activation, activation agent ratio, pore formation temperature, and activation time, the textural and structural properties of the porous carbon greatly depend on the composition of cellulose and lignin in the bio-mass precursors. Chemical activation is typically performed using chemical reagents such as KOH, H3PO4, ZnCl2, and CaCO3 while the physical activation technique uses CO, CO2, and steam as activation agents.23,47,48 Chemical activation has great advantages over physical activation due to ease in favorable poor architecture formation. Jian et al. discussed the physical activation of lignin-derived porous carbon (NLPC) with NH3 at 900 °C and achieved a surface area of 1053.8 m2 g−1. The constructed ZIC exhibited a capacitance of 153.6 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and capacity retention of 97.3% after 7000 cycles. The enriched activity is attributed to pseudocapacitance by oxygen functionalities and enhanced textural properties (Fig. 2h and i).48 The effect of functional groups over the carbon surface on the capacity of the cathode was also investigated by several research groups. ZICs made with waste pencil derived oxygen-rich porous carbon (SA: 948 m2 g−1) showed an energy density of 147.0 W h kg−1, higher than high surface area porous carbon (SA: 1922 m2 g−1) without oxygen functionalities.49 The heteroatoms (O, N, S, B, and P) based functional groups over the surface can increase the capacity of porous carbon cathodes by redox reactions in surface functional groups. Dextrin-derived B, N codoped porous carbon synthesized by salt template strategy showed improved capacity due to additional contribution from pseudocapacitance reactions.50 The N, O doped lignin-derived porous carbon synthesized showed a specific capacitance of 266 F g−1, higher than that of porous carbon without nitrogen functionalities. The ZIC studied with this defect-engineered cathode material also showed long-term cyclic stability even after 10000 cycles. The theoretical calculations and molecular dynamics simulation demonstrated that the edge defects through N and O dopants contributed to the additional adsorption/desorption of Zn2+ and H+ ions.51
2.1.3. Nanostructured carbon. ZICs employing CNTs as the cathode and zinc anode in ZnSO4 electrolyte exhibited a capacitance of 53 F g−1 and a stable cycling life for 5000 cycles.52 The low capacitance of the ZICs with CNT cathode could be attributed to the low surface area (<1000 m2 g−1) nature of the CNTs compared with porous activated carbon (1500–3200 m2 g−1), and graphene (2600 m2 g−1). In situ self-templating method was used to synthesize ultra-thin porous carbon nanosheets using calcium gluconate as the precursor. After acid etching, the nanosheets achieved an excellent surface area of 1414.93 m2 g−1 and well-balanced porosities. The carbon nanosheet cathode materials displayed a high energy density of 75.22 W h kg−1 with a stable capacity retention of 90.9% after 4000 cycles.53 Metal-organic frameworks (MOF) are crystalline porous structures comprising metal ions/clusters interconnected by organic ligands. High-temperature MOF derivatives usually offer enhanced electronic conductivity, thermochemical stability, and overall electrochemical performance for energy storage and conversion in comparison to pristine MOF and MOF composite materials.54–57 MOF-derived porous carbon materials can inherit the morphology, structure, and pore distribution/size of corresponding MOFs by rational design and synthesis.58–60 Xiong and co-workers studied the performance of MOF-derived porous carbon as a cathode for aqueous ZICs. The MOF was prepared using Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and terephthalic acid in a 3:2 molar ratio through a solvothermal reaction at 125 °C for 24 h. The synthesized MOF was further calcined at 450 °C in an N2 atmosphere and washed with conc. HNO3 to remove Ni metal. The BET surface area of the porous carbon materials was observed to be 3 times higher than that of the bulk Ni-MOF. The ZIC with the porous carbon (MDC) as the cathode and zinc anode in 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte showed capacitance of 123 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and a capacitance retention of 99% after 20000 cycles (Fig. 2e–g).61 V-MOF was hydrothermally synthesized with V2O5 and 2-hydroxy terephthalic acid using ascorbic acid as a reducing agent. V-MOF was carbonized at 800 °C for 3 h and V metal was removed with etching by HCl. The aqueous ZIC constructed by MOF-derived porous carbon cathode and zinc anode in 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte showed a capacity of 168 mA h g−1 along with energy retention of 84% after 10000 cycles.62 The efficient transfer of the porous surface nature of MOFs to the ensuing carbon materials through the high-temperature carbonization and acid etching steps can facilitate fast charge transfer and offer more active sites for ion storage, and high electrical conductivity.63,64Overall, the textural properties of nanostructured carbon such as surface area, and pore characteristics play a crucial role in achieving a high-capacity cathode. The presence of high surface area, hierarchical porous, and right combination of micro- and meso pores will allow easy accessibility of electrolyte ions to effectively utilize the inner most pores for ion storage. The presence of surface functionalities and heteroatoms will further increase the electrode–electrolyte wettability, charge storage through pseudo-capacitance, and electronic conductivity, favouring a high energy density and high-power density ZIC. However, nanostructured carbon materials (especially graphene) suffer from low tapping density, reducing the volumetric performance of ZICs.

2.1.4. Heteroatom doped carbon. Heteroatom-doped carbon-based porous materials have also been studied as cathodes for ZICs. N and P doped porous carbon nanosheets were synthesized by high temperature (850 °C, under Ar atmosphere) carbonization of a supramolecular polymer of phytic acid and melamine. The ZIC with the N and P doped porous carbon (CNPK) nanosheets as the cathode and zinc anode in 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte showed a capacitance of 233 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 and excellent capacitance retention after 10000 cycles. The heteroatom-doped 3D cross-linked sheets exhibited outstanding surface wettability, conductivity, and porosity. The storage of –OH and Zn2+ ions was verified with ex situ XPS during the cycling process (Fig. 3a–d).65 The ZIC with N, O codoped porous carbon cathode and Zn foil anode in 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte displayed a capacity of 100 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and retention of 63% after 20000 cycles.66 Deng and co-workers also studied N- and O-doped porous carbon cathode for aqueous ZIC with a high capacity of 138.5 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and cyclic stability of 100% after 10000 cycles. The co-doped material was prepared by carbonization in Ar environment (800 °C for 2 h) and acid etching of ZIF-8/polyacrylonitrile composite deposited over carbon cloth. The zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF) conveyed its porous structure to the heteroatom-doped carbon cathode, which assisted the dual cation (Zn2+, H+) storage, and chemical absorption/precipitation/dissolution of anions (SO42−, –OH). This N, O co-doped porous carbon electrode also displayed excellent energy storage ability in quasi-solid state ZIC devices.67 O-rich porous carbon was derived by a molten-salt self-templating strategy and showed an excellent surface area of up to 1886 m2 g−1 and a high energy density of 136.5 W h kg−1 (Fig. 3e).68 The 3D porous B, N, and O co-doped carbon flower cathode showed a capacity of 133.5 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 100% capacitance retention after 20000 cycles. The role of boron was observed to be crucial for the chemical adsorption of SO42− on the electrode surface resulting in improved energy density. The pseudocapacitance contributed to storage greatly increased with an increase in doped O-sites.69 Similarly, the bimetallic MOF-derived pyridinic N-doped porous carbon material showed high rate capability and cyclic stability.70
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of CNPK. (b) SEM image of CNPK. (c) BET isotherms of the CNPK. (d) Cyclic performance of ZIC with carbon materials. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from RSC. (e) Schematic illustration of molten salt templating of O-rich porous carbon. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from ACS. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZMDPC, (g) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the ZMDPC materials, (h) Nyquist plots of ZMDPCs//Zn. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Elsevier. 
Wang and co-workers synthesized Zn-MOF with a solvothermal reaction of Zn(acac)2·2H2O and trimellitic acid and the corresponding product was carbonized to obtain ZnO@C. The ZnO@C precursor was then treated with 2-methylimidazole to prepare ZIF-8@C. The ZIF-8@C was finally carbonized at 700 °C for 2 h in an Ar environment. Residual metallic Zn was further removed by etching with HCl to synthesize Zn and N co-doped porous carbon material (ZMDPC-700). In this study, the effect of the metallic final carbonization temperature (600 °C, 700 °C, 800 °C and 900 °C) was studied in terms of Zn doping and its subsequent effect on the electrochemical performance of the co-doped porous carbon material. The aqueous ZIC with the ZMDPC-700 cathode, Zn anode, and 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte displayed an attractive specific capacitance of 252.2 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and cyclic stability of 97.8% after 10000 cycles. This report is also interesting for duel-ligand binding and its effect on the physicochemical stability, and exceptional surface area morphology (Fig. 3f–h).71 Heteroatom incorporation into porous carbon cathode materials has exhibited a critical role in increasing the adsorption/desorption of the reactive species. The presence of heteroatoms also provides redox-active sites for enhanced pseudocapacitance. The wettability and electrical conductivity are also improved along with the change in electron density, resulting in better rate capability.72–74 Several research groups have studied the effects of heteroatoms of doped carbon materials on charge storage mechanisms. Yin and co-workers discussed the origin of the pseudocapacitance in addition to the EDLC charge storage. Pseudocapacitance storage is mainly attributed to the reversible ion adsorption to variation of oxidation states of the O-functional groups present in the porous carbon cathode.20 P, N doped hollow nanospheres offered fast ion/electron diffusion and enriched Zn2+ reaction kinetics helping to realize a ZIC with an energy density of 116 W h kg−1 and an extraordinary power density of 21660 W kg−1.75

2.1.5. Graphene-based carbon. Graphene, a single-layer of carbon sheet material has excellent structural and textural properties with high theoretical surface area, and high electrical conductivity, thereby could be an excellent cathode candidate for ZICs. Graphene offers enormous possibilities for electrode material design with its sp2-hybridized 2D sheet and easy control over physicochemical properties, surface area, and electrical conductivity.37,76–79 Wu and co-workers designed an exfoliated graphene oxide using microwave treatment and thermal exfoliation with KOH. This chemically activated graphene demonstrated a specific capacitance of 166 F g−1 and energy density of 106.3 W h kg−1 in aqueous ZIC with Zn foil as the anode and 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 as the electrolyte. This hybrid supercapacitor exhibited an extraordinary capacitance retention of 93% after 80000 cycles. This study included an array of electrolytes for the ZIC and the effect of bulky CF3SO3− anion on the ease of diffusion of Zn2+ in the aqueous system.80 Previously, graphene oxide was exfoliated using microwave irradiation and subsequent KOH treatment at 800 °C.81 This accretive exfoliation process ensures a high surface area of the nanosheets and high electrical conductivity. The O-functionalities of reduced graphene oxide (rGO) enable fast redox reactions through pseudocapacitance. Shao and co-workers reported the reduction of GO with hydrazine hydrate and ammonia and studied the effects of carboxyl and carbonyl groups on GO and rGO towards wettability, conductivity, Zn2+ ion adsorption, and pseudocapacitance in ZICs. The rGO cathode attained a specific capacitance of 277 F g−1 and energy density of 342 μW h cm−2 in aqueous ZIC with the Zn anode and 1 M ZnSO4 as the electrolyte (Fig. 4a).82 ZICs employing the P-doped CNT/rGO composite aerogel cathode showed an energy density of 42.2 W h kg−1 at a high power density of 80 kW kg−1. This composite cathode also showed a retention of 94.2% after 10000 cycles with 100% coulombic efficiency (Fig. 4g–i).83 Song and co-workers demonstrated defect engineering into graphene by ball-milling where 15 fold increase in specific capacity was observed though the surface area of graphene was decreased. Here, the ball-milling process introduced defects for efficient ion storage.84 However, this method has the potential to destroy the pore structure and other textural properties, limiting its widespread application.23
 Fig. 4  (a) Cyclic performance of ZIC with rGO. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the diamond fiber and the fabrication of the ZIC. (c) SEM image of the diamond fiber, (d) cyclic performance of ZIC with diamond fiber. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley. (e) SEM image of g-C3N4. (f) CV responses of the ZIC in the presence and absence of light. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from ACS. (g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of P-CNT/rGO composite aerogel. (h) CV curves at 20 mV s−1. (i) Cyclic performance of ZIC with P-CNT/rGO. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier. 
High gravimetric/volumetric energy density and power density were achieved in ZICs by coupling CVD-derived B-doped diamond fibers cathode material and diamond fiber-coated Zn nanosheet anode for ZIC. This unique ZIC displayed a specific capacitance of 246.1 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and cyclic stability of 89.9% after 10000 cycles (Fig. 4b–d).85 A photo-ZIC device was fabricated with 2D g-C3N4-FTO as the cathode, Zn anode, and 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte. The device showed a 160% increase in capacitance under solar illumination. In this study, another photocathode g-C3N4@rGO-FTO was also analysed, and the device showed a specific capacitance of 11377 mF g−1 with 90% cyclic stability after 1000 cycles (Fig. 4e and f).86 Ranjith et al. also studied the ion-storage kinetics of 3D graphene nanospheres fabricated with a sacrificial silica template. The 3D graphene nanospheres show much higher and faster charge storage kinetics due to, the positive binding energies of 3D graphene spheres than 2D planar graphene. Moreover, the nitrogen and sulfur hetero atoms in 3D graphene nanospheres thermodynamically favoured ion diffusion and reduced the activation barrier.42
One of the significances of graphene-based materials is their exceptionally high cycle life, which makes them suitable for rapid power delivery and frequent recharging. Along with the high physicochemical stability, graphene-based materials enhance the safety and environmental friendliness of ZICs.87,88 However, graphene-based materials show poor packing density, leading to a low volumetric efficiency. Several strategies, such as vertically aligned graphene structures, micron-size porous graphene assembly, graphene foams, and compressed graphene showed much higher density than conventional 2D graphene.89,90 The utilization of new-generation graphene materials can significantly increase the volumetric energy density of ZICs.

2.1.6. Polymer-based materials. The use of organic cathode materials, conductive polymers in particular have drawn fair attention due to their redox ability, low cost/green synthesis, tunable structure, high cycling life, flexibility, and stability in a wide variety of anions and cations.91 Polyaniline (PANI), polydopamine (PDA), polypyrrole (Ppy), polythiophene (PTh) are redox-active polymers that are frequently used as electrode materials for energy storage devices like supercapacitors and batteries.92,93 However, exclusive use of these polymers is limited by kinetically slow charge transfer and mechanical degradation due to frequent charge/discharge. These drawbacks are usually resolved with the construction of composite materials with carbon-based or metal-based materials.37 A 3D graphene@PANI hydrogel film electrode was synthesized by in situ polymerization of aniline with HClO4. The ZIC with the hydrogel film cathode, Zn metal anode, and 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte, delivered a specific capacitance of 154 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and cyclic stability of 80.5% after 6000 cycles. Here, the Zn2+ storage mechanism consists of pseudocapacitance type redox reaction in PANI and EDLC type Zn2+ adsorption/desorption in graphene. Again, the 3D structure presented an efficient diffusion path for the reactive species at the electrode–electrolyte interface.93 The performance of ZICs was studied with polydopamine (PDA) and PDA-coated oxygen-functionalized porous carbon cloth (PCC). The thermal oxidation of the carbon cloth enhanced the surface area and Zn2+ adsorption/desorption efficiency. The ZIC with the PDA@PCC cathode, Zn metal anode, and 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte, exhibited a specific capacity of 1.25 mA h cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2 and no apparent loss in specific capacitance after 10000 cycles. Similar to the 3D graphene@PANI hydrogel film electrode, the Zn2+ storage in the ZIC with PDA@PCC cathode also consisted of pseudocapacitance and EDLC (Fig. 5a–c).94
 Fig. 5  (a) CV curves at 1 mV s−1. (b) Nyquist plots. (c) Cyclic performance of ZIC with PDA@PCC. Reproduced with ref. 94 with permission from ACS. (d) SEM image of MnO2 nanorods. (e) Cyclic performance of ZIC with MnO2 nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier. (f) SEM image of RuO2·H2O. (g) Nyquist plots of RuO2·H2O//Zn Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Springer. (h) Ragone plot for ZIC and other traditional electrochemical energy storage systems. (i) Ragone plot comparing different cathode materials for ZIC discussed here. 
Conductive polymers offer a unique feature of the free rotation of the chain structure that enables smoother adsorption/desorption of Zn2+ preserving the structural integrity.87 There is still enormous scope for improvement in the areas of rate capability and capacitance retention through extensive charge/discharge cycles and redox-active polymer-based cathode materials. However, composite electrode materials with redox polymers have huge potential for wearable devices, owing to their abundance of precursors, low-cost sustainable synthesis, and flexibility.

2.2. Metal-based materials
Transition metal-based oxides, sulphides, and nitrides are also studied as high-performance electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage owing to their high specific capacitance.95–97 MnO2 and V2O5-based materials are systematically investigated as cathode materials for zinc ion capacitors/batteries. Layered δ-MnO2 nanodots were synthesized with a facile reduction of aqueous KMnO4 with ethylene glycol. The electrochemical performance of the ZIC with layered δ-MnO2 cathode with porous carbon anode and 2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M MnSO4 electrolyte was analysed and the specific capacitance was 123.6 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and cyclic stability of 86.9% after 5000 cycles. This study explored the H+/Zn2+ co-insertion mechanism for energy storage with ex situ XRD and electrochemical kinetics analysis.98 MnO2 nanorods synthesized by co-precipitation method using MnSO4 and (NH4)2S2O8 in an aqueous solution. This study focused on multivalent ion storage mechanisms to reversibly store/release electrical energy and achieved prolonged cycle life even in wearable electronics applications. The assembled ZIC with MnO2 nanorod cathode, activated carbon anode, and 2 M ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte achieved a specific capacity of 54.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and retention of 93.5% after 5000 cycles (Fig. 5d and e).99 Despite the high specific capacity, these metal oxide-based cathodes suffer from poor cyclic life and rate performance that impairs overall device performance for practical application. Two popular strategies to overcome this limitation are (i) the introduction of metal/non-metal defects through doping/intercalation, and (ii) the construction of metal oxide-based hybrid electrode material with conductive polymers or carbon.98 These strategies are applied in the design of N-doped MnO2, Na+ intercalated MnO2, MnO2-CNT, and cathode materials.100–102 The modified cathodes showed incredible enhancement in cycling life along with high specific capacitance and energy density. A ZIC system with an electrodeposited V2O5-PANI cathode and MXene anode ZnSO4/VOSO4 hydrogel electrolyte showed a high capacitance of 584 mF cm−2 at current density 0.4 mF cm−2.103 Nano-RuO2 is widely used for electrode material design especially in supercapacitor devices due to its high specific capacity and long cyclic life.104–106 Dong and co-workers fabricated a RuO2·H2O cathode with a mixture of commercial RuO2·xH2O powder, carbon black, and PVDF over stainless steel foil and its electrochemical performance was assessed with the Zn anode, 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte, and air-laid paper as a separator. The aqueous ZIC delivered a capacity of 122 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and excellent retention of 87.5% after 10000 cycles due to efficient pseudocapacitance as well as fast ion transport (Fig. 5f and g).107 Easy synthesis, high specific capacitance, and multiple oxidation states attract research interest in electrode material development for ZIBs and ZICs. As discussed in the above reports, their low capacitance retention through extensive charge–discharge cycles can be resolved through the composite formation and doping/intercalation. A Ragone plot comparing energy and power densities of ZIC with traditional electrochemical energy storage systems, and a Ragone plot of different cathode materials discussed in previous sections is depicted in Fig. 5(h) and (i), respectively. It can be noted that ZICs are really high energy – high power devices, bridging the performance gap between batteries and capacitors. Also, a concise comparison of various advantages and disadvantages of cathode materials discussed in previous sections is presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of different types of cathode materials of ZICs




Cathode material
Advantages
Disadvantages




Activated carbon
Low-cost and abundant precursor
Poor wettability


Easy synthesis procedure
Low electrical conductivity


High surface area
Microspore dominated porosity


Good cycle life
Low capacitance


 
Poor energy and power density


Biomass-derived carbon
Low-cost and abundant precursor
Microspore dominated porosity


Easy synthesis procedure
Poor energy and power density


Moderate wettability
 


Moderate electrical conductivity
 


Moderate capacitance
 


Good cycle life
 


Nanostructured carbon
Low-cost and abundant precursor
Tedious synthesis procedure


Moderate wettability
 


Balanced porosity
 


Moderate energy and power density
 


Good cycle life
 


Heteroatom doped carbon
Abundant
Often involve pricey precursor


Good wettability
Tedious synthesis procedure


Good cycle life
 


Graphene-based carbon
Low cost and abundant
Relatively poor cycle life


Moderate synthesis procedure
 


Moderate wettability
 


Balanced porosity
 


Moderate cycle life
 


Polymer-based materials
Low cost and abundant
Low surface area


Moderate synthesis procedure
Relatively poor cycle life


Good wettability
 


Metal-based materials
Good wettability
Often expensive


High electrical conductivity
Low surface area


Balanced porosity
Relatively poor cycle life


High capacitance
 


High energy and power density
 




3. Zinc metal anode
The outstanding theoretical gravimetric/volumetric capacities, moderate redox potential, high safety, and inexpensive nature of Zn metal make it an ideal anode material for ZICs. Similar to other lithium/sodium metal anodes, dendrite growth in zinc anodes is the major hurdle in realizing high-performance anode materials for ZICs. The uneven dendritic Zn deposition/stripping leads to a cycle of issues involving hydrogen evolution, corrosion, formation of poor electronic/ion conductive passivation layer over the Zn anode, affecting the kinetics, and stability of ZIC.108,109 The hostless 2D nature of the Zn anode, the uneven surface morphology of the Zn anode, and micro/nanoscale defects over the Zn anode would trigger heterogeneous Zn2+ ion distribution over the surface of the Zn anode during the platting/stripping process. Zn nucleation occurs at localized regions with a high Zn-ion flux and high electric field, inducing an irregular/localized Zn deposition. Zinc dendrites are the needle-like depositions over the Zn anode that occur during the irregular platting/stripping process in ZIC. The initial formation of dendrites further promotes the localized regions for the continuous growth of dendrites. The formation of Zn dendrites ruins the coulombic efficiency of the ZICs, elevating the polarization at current densities or high charge capacity conditions. The continuous growth of Zn dendrites could reach the cathode side of ZIC, short-circuiting the energy storage system. Moreover, the structural defects and impurities in the 2D planar Zn anode would provoke the unwanted Zn corrosion at the anode and H2 evolution at the cathode, leading to the poor cycle life of ZIC. The hydrogen evolved would increase the alkalinity of the electrolyte by increasing OH− concentration, leading to the formation of electrochemical inactive/passive products such as Zn(OH)2 or ZnSO4(OH)6·xH2O over the Zn anode.23,110 The issues in the Zn metal anode are addressed by (i) developing 3D engineered hosts for the Zn anode, (ii) surface engineering strategies to improve the anode–electrolyte interface, and (iii) modifying electrolyte components by additives and development of bi-functional separators. Overall, these strategies tend to regulate the local current distribution and favours the homogenous Zn nucleation and surface charge distribution to achieve a smooth Zn deposition/stripping process.
3.1. 3D engineered hosts Zn metal anode
Inhomogeneous Zn deposition on the surface of 2D Zn metal anode is the main contribution towards the dendrite formation, leading to a cycle of issues such as low coulombic efficiency, poor cycle-life, and safety issues. Therefore, a stable host/substrate design will regulate the Zn deposition and hinder dendrite growth, preventing the cycle of issues. Several 3D engineering approaches have been adapted to increase the cycle life and coulombic efficiency of the Zn metal anode. The 3D-engineered hosts have great potential to alleviate the polarization during the Zn deposition process by reducing the areal current density and regulating the Zn-ion flux. 3D-engineered hosts have a high surface area, high flexibility, and high mechanical strength to synergistically reduce the effective current density, polarization, and accommodate the volume change during the deposition/stripping process. Several 3D carbon, and metal-based structures with high surface area, porous nature, high conductivity, low density, and desirable mechanical properties have shown great potential to reduce the dendrite growth in Zn metal anode.23
3D sponge zinc anode and 3D porous zinc anode were studied as modified hosts for realizing dendrite-free Zn anode. The 3D structured anodes with porous frameworks provide nucleation sites for smooth Zn deposition/stripping by reducing the local current density and regulating the Zn-ion flux.110 These modified anodes (DCP-Zn) demonstrated a facile plating/stripping in a symmetrical cell configuration for over 1400 h, and 200 h at 0.1 mA h cm−2, and 10 mA h cm−2, respectively, along with low overpotential. Meanwhile, 3D nanostructured Zn anodes were studied by electrodepositing the Zn metal over several metals such as copper, titanium, and steel tin in 3D nanoarchitecture with porous foam/mesh architecture. The 3D porous hosts exhibit a high surface area than 2D planar foils (ex: 3D porous Cu hosts show a surface area of 0.1 m2 g−1, 400% higher than 2D planar Cu foil), aiding homogeneous zinc deposition with low polarization.111 Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) derived 3D Zn – carbon anodes were also studied as hosts for Zn anode. The 3D Zn–C anode made from zinc-containing MOFs delivered efficient platting/stripping behaviour in a symmetrical cell along high coulombic efficiencies at a wide range of current densities (1–30 mA cm−2).112 The presence of well-dispersed Zn metal nanoparticles from Zn-based MOF (ZIF-8) induced a uniform deposition over the modified electrode. The ZICs studied with 3D Zn–C exhibited a remarkable retention of 72% after 20000 cycles. Another interesting example of the 3D-engineered host is MOF-derived ZnO/C over 3D porous graphene-CNT reported by Xue et al. Here, in situ optical microscopy was used to visualize dendrite growth over the Zn anode and irregular Zn electrodeposits started to appear only after 10 cycles. Consecutive cycles further led to uncontrollable dendrite growth over the Zn anode. However, the 3D-engineered Zn anode (Zn@3D-ZGC) preserved its smooth Zn deposition and thus retained a dendrite-free morphology (Fig. 6).113 In addition, 3D structured Zn anodes were developed by electrodepositing the Zn metal over several nanostructured carbons such as carbon cloth, carbon fibre, cellulose paper, carbon yarn, graphene, carbon nanotubes, and graphite felts. These carbon supports offer high surface area/electrochemically active sites, enhanced electronic conductivity, increased cycling stability, and excellent mechanical flexibility to the Zn-deposited anodes. These hierarchically interconnected 3D structured Zn anodes have displayed enhanced ionic transport and improved energy-storing performances.114–117 3D metals were also investigated as hosts for the Zn metal anode. 3D Macroporous copper (Cu) mesh exhibited facile electrodeposition of Zn than 2D planar Cu metal. Moreover, it was found that a minor CuZn5 alloy phase formed over Cu metal during the initial cycling increased the binding energy for Zn deposition, regulating the dendrite-free Zn nucleation. However, similar behaviour was not observed for Ni mesh, and it was mainly attributed to the poor zinco-philic nature of the Ni metal than Cu metal.118
 Fig. 6  In situ optical microscopy images: (a) bare Zn foil, (b) Zn@3D-ZGC at 20 mA cm−2 with respect to platting/stripping cycles. Cycling performance of Zn foil and Zn@3D-ZGC at (c) 10 and (d) 20 mA cm−2. On the right, enlarged figures detailing the voltage profile for the corresponding cycle time. (e) Rate performance of symmetrical cell using Zn@3D-ZGC anode at different current densities. (f) Comparison of cyclic performance of symmetrical cell with Zn@3D-ZGC anode and some previously reported 3D Zn composite anodes at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Wiley. 
3.2. Interface engineered Zn metal anode
Interface engineering the Zn metal anode involves developing an artificial solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer over stable zinc anodes to improve the interface stability of the Zn anode and electrolyte. The artificial SEI layers suppress the unwanted side reactions occurring at the Zn anode–electrolyte interphase, alleviating the formation of Zn dendrites. The artificial SEI layer acts as a functional barrier to homogenize the electric field across the Zn anode and Zn-ion concentration distribution at the anode surface, facilitating a smooth stripping/stripping process. An ideal artificial SEI should possess ultrathin nanostructures, dense with high mechanical stability, high electrochemical stability, and high Zn-ion conductivity. The artificial SEI layer protects the direct contact of the zinc anode with the electrolyte, preventing Zn corrosion. Several carbon materials, metal nanoparticles, metal oxides, metal sulfides, and polymers were studied as artificial SEI layers for stabilizing the interface.23,109
Several 0D–3D carbon materials were extensively studied as an artificial SEI layer for the Zn anode. Carbon materials including carbon black, graphite, graphene, carbon fibres, and carbon nanotubes were studied as artificial SEI layers over the Zn anode. The artificial SEI layers based on carbon materials stabilize the surface charge distribution over the Zn anode, leading to dendrite-free zinc deposition with high reversibility and stability. However, the thickness of the interface layer plays a crucial role in regulating the performance of the Zn metal anode.23
A thicker coating layer can give a long-life Zn anode but adversely affects the Zn-ion kinetics. A thinner protection layer is favourable for rapid ionic diffusion kinetics. The strategy employed to adapt the interfacial coating over the Zn metal anode will play a significant role in deciding the performance metrics of the Zn anode. The carbon coating strategy has shown tremendous potential in terms of the suppression of dendrite formation. The zinc foil anode coated with mesoporous hollow carbon spheres with an enlarged available surface area achieved lower polarization than the bare Zn anode. The assembled ZIC with the coated Zn anode, mesoporous carbon hollow sphere (MCHS) as cathode material, and 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte showed an ultrahigh areal capacitance and 96% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles.119 Another simple and interesting approach is graphite coating over the Zn anode with a pencil drawing, where the graphite layer limited the formation of dendrites and other by-products. The active graphite layer also performed as an ion buffer and channelled even nucleation of Zn2+ with its voids.120 Homogeneous Zn2+ nucleation was also achieved by artificial polymer coating over the Zn anode. Polyamide and polyacrylonitrile-coated Zn anodes have shown ultralong cyclic life along with efficient dendrite inhibition.121,122 Zn anode coated with 3D nanoporous ZnO, Zn3(PO4)2, and ZnF materials have shown efficient inhibition of dendrite formation and thereby achieved extraordinarily longer cycle life.123–125 Sol–gel mediated ZrO2 coatings on Zn metal reduced the polarization from 75.1 to 55.2 mV, and increased high columbic efficiency to 99.36% and a lifetime to 3800 h.126 The sulfide counterparts of the metal oxides were also studied as artificial interfaces for the Zn metal anode. The unbalanced charge distribution between these Zn and metal sulfide, results in a tight and stable contact between the Zn metal and metal sulfide phase, exhibiting smoother electrostatic attractions toward Zn2+ to facilitate a lower Zn nucleation energy barrier.127 However, a thicker SEI coating of interface layers on the Zn anode surface can eventually increase the overall impedance, therefore, the thickness of the deposited layer can be controlled by atomic layer deposition and chemical vapor deposition.128–130
Xie et al. studied the mechanism of dendrite growth with the introduction of zincophilic and zincophobic sites on Zn metal anodes. Zn ions bonded with pyridine N sites resulted in the homogeneous deposition of Zn in a spacious distribution of Zn nuclei. In contrast, the absence of zincophilic sites resulted in uneven Zn deposition morphology and thus dendrite growth (Fig. 7a and b).131 Zhu et al. used a similar strategy for the construction of an interface protective layer over the Zn anode with zincophilic MXene coating, which successfully prevented dendrite growth and enhanced stability for repeated cycles (Fig. 7c–f).132 The CeO2-modified Zn anode achieved an interfacial anti-blocking layer to prevent dendrite deposition, which eventually resulted in an ultra-stable Zn anode (Fig. 7g–k).133
 Fig. 7  (a) Spacious Zn nucleation and homogeneous Zn deposition on the surface with zincophilic sites. (b) Dense nucleation and subsequent formation of Zn-dendrite on zincophobic surface. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Wiley. In situ electron microscopy images of Zn-electrodeposition on (c) bare Zn and (d) MX-TMA@Zn electrode at 5 mA cm−2. The simulation of electric field distribution for (e) bare Zn and (f) MX-TMA@Zn. (f) Cyclic stability of the symmetric cells at 2 mA cm−2 with different anodes. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier. SEM images of (g) bare Zn and (h) CeO2@Zn after plating at different current densities. (i) coulombic efficiencies of bare Zn and CeO2@Zn plating/stripping cycles on Cu foil, and corresponding galvanostatic cycling curves for (j) Zn–Cu and (k) CeO2@Zn–Cu asymmetry cells at different cycles. Reproduced ref. 133 with permission from Wiley. 
3.3. Separator and electrolyte modification
Several strategies involving the modification of the electrolyte, and separator were also proposed to suppress the dendrite growth in the Zn metal anode. Modification of electrolytes and separators will reduce the nucleation barrier for Zn plating and regulate the uniform Zn-ion flux, favouring achieving a dendrite-free Zn deposition.32,134 Separators are the physical barrier between the Zn anode and cathode while providing ionic conduction between electrodes. Conventional separators are microporous polymer/glass fibre-based membranes and have good potential to store electrolyte solutions, and provide good pathways for ion transportation. Generally, the dendrite growth occurs at the interface between the Zn anode and the separator, and the dendrites can easily puncture the conventional separator, provoking safety issues.135,136 The following are the essential characteristics of a separator in a Zn-ion capacitor system: (i) thinner membrane with favourable porous architecture to achieve high Zn-ion transference number, high ionic conductivity, and low activation energy, (ii) excellent compatibility with the electrodes and electrolyte (iii) high mechanical stability along with high elastic modulus, absorption rate, and homogeneity, (iv) high electrochemical and thermal stability; (v) favourable functional groups to improve electrolyte wettability; (vi) regulate zinc metal deposition and Zn-ion flux distribution in a direction to Zn anode.
Therefore, modifying the separator to achieve the above characteristics is also an effective way to control the Zn dendrite growth towards the cathode. Several separators comprising polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), Nafion membranes, and Lyocell dual-layer (PLD) have been studied as novel separators to control the dendrite growth in Zn anode.134 The novel separators possess highly favourable physical, chemical, and mechanical characteristics to regulate the Zn-ion flux, improving the kinetics, and stability of the Zn metal anode. Several inorganic and organic coating layers have been developed on the separator to improve their mechanical strength, thereby increasing the cycle life and safety of the Zn-ion energy storage system. Graphene oxide (GO) coated glass fibre (GF) separator membranes can efficiently undertake preferential Zn deposition in a direction perpendicular to the Zn anode surface, controlling the dendrite growth. Furthermore, GO-modified separators have enhanced Zn-ion conductivity compared to conventional separators, enabling a dendrite-free deposition even at high current density (20 mA cm−2).137 A cellulose nanofiber-ZrO2 composite-based separator showed an outstanding zinc ion transference number and can regulate the Zn-ion flux to achieve a high coulombic efficiency >99.5% along with high cycle for 2000 h at 0.5 mA cm−2.138
For ZICs, the electrolyte plays a crucial role as they determine the working potential, electrochemical storage reaction, and kinetics at the electrode–electrolyte interface. Features of the electrolytes such as ionic conductivity, working potential, viscosity, temperature adaptivity, Zn-ion transferability, and corrosion effect play a crucial role in determining the energy–power–cycle life of the ZICs. Non-aqueous electrolytes based on organic electrolytes, and ionic liquids solved the limited working window issues in ZICs. Several organic solvents such as (acetonitrile, dimethoxyethane, and 1,3-dioxolane, diglyme propylene carbonate, and dimethylformamide) solvents are used along with several salts. The Zn(CF3SO3)2 is the mostly used as a salt due to its high solubility in organic solvents and acetonitrile is the mostly used organic solvent due to its high electrochemical stability. The hybrid non-aqueous electrolyte based on the combination of Zn(TFSI)2 and LiPF6 in ethyl methyl carbonate pushed the anodic stability up of ZICs beyond 4 V vs. Zn/Zn2+. The presence of dual anions in the hybrid electrolyte increased anodic stability by reducing parasitic oxidation reactions. Although ZICs based on non-aqueous electrolytes reached a high voltage (4 V), they are limited by poor cycle life, poor power density, and high cost. The capacitance, and rate capability of ZICs are much smaller than those of aqueous electrolytes due to the high viscosity, and low ionic conductivity of non-aqueous electrolyte ions than those of conventional non-aqueous electrolytes. Moreover, the non-aqueous electrolytes are prone to thermal runway due to the limited ignition point of the solvents. Room temperature ionic liquids were also studied for ZICs and ionic liquids show high Zn-ion ionic conductivity and high thermal stability than conventional electrolytes. The type of anions, water concentration, and temperature of ionic liquid electrolytes significantly affect the zinc metal deposition process. The anions in ionic liquids strongly influence the Zn metal interface, the speciation of Zn ions, morphology, and orientation of zinc deposits.139,140
Modifying the electrolytes with new additives is also an effective strategy to regulate the dendrite growth in the Zn metal anode. The electrolyte additives will reduce the nucleation energy barrier for Zn plating/stripping process, helping to achieve a dendrite-free deposition/stripping process. Several organic/inorganic electrolyte additives and metal-ion-based electrolyte additives were studied for controlling the dendrite issue. Several additives such as polyacrylamide, branched polyethyleneimine, diethyl ether, polyacrylamide, polyethylene glycol, quaternary ammonium, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, sodium dodecyl sulfate, and lithium magnesium silicate were studied as additives in electrolytes.32 The electrolyte additive type and the volume of additives will strongly influence the grain size/morphology of the Zn deposit, Zn affinity, kinetics of deposition, orientation of Zn deposition, cathode overpotential, corrosion potential, and electrochemical stability of Zn anode. Electrolyte additives can enable excellent cycle stability of over 2145 h at 1 mA cm−2 along with a low overpotential of 20 mV and cycle stability of over 500 h at 5 mA cm−2.141,142 The electrolyte additives significantly influence the interphase properties between the electrolyte and Zn anode, contributing to the homogeneous distribution of ions and electric field, helping to achieve a dendrite-free Zn anode. A favourable non-aqueous electrolyte may be engineered with a high ignition point, low viscosity, smaller ions, and high ionic conductivity and should be developed for large-scale ESS applications.
4. Emerging systems
Several research groups are currently focusing on the exploration of novel materials for efficient electrode design for ZICs. MXenes are a family of 2D inorganic compounds of transition metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides, and their applications in diverse arenas are expanded rapidly since the discovery of Ti3C2 in 2011. Owing to the wide chemical and structural variety, the energy storage ability of MXenes has been analysed with theoretical and practical studies.102,103,143,144 MXenes offer good hydrophilicity, high conductivity, atomically thin nanosheets, dispersibility in a variety of solvents, and fast ion diffusion coefficient for application in aqueous ZIC.145 Moughan and co-workers analysed Ti3C2 as the cathode material for ZIC and achieved a specific capacity of 189 mA h g−1 and 96% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles. MXenes exhibited superior electrical conductivity and hydrophilic surface, however, the 2D layers of MXenes are prone to restack as a result of van der Waals forces. Therefore, CTAB was used as a pillar to prevent the Ti3C2 nanosheets from stacking.146 An exceptional example of the durability of the MXenes-based electrode material is MXenes@rGO aerogel in aqueous ZIC. This system achieved a specific capacitance of 128.6 F g−1 at 0.4 A g−1 and an extraordinary capacitance retention of 96% after 75000 cycles (Fig. 8a–c).147 Yang et al. fabricated a ZIC device using a Zn@Ti3C2 cathode, Ti3C2 anode, and a gel electrolyte using gelatin in 1 M ZnSO4. This Zn@Ti3C2 composite electrode exhibited a low self-discharge rate as well as anti-self-discharge in the components including electrodes, electrolytes, and separators.148
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of MXenes@rGO aerogel. (b) EIS plot of MXenes@rGO. (c) Cyclic stability of the ZIC with MXenes@rGO. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley. (d) SEM image of a few layer phosphorene. (e) Cycling performance of the ZIC. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Wiley. (f) Schematic illustration of the energy storage mechanism of ZIC with TiN cathode. (g) TEM image of TiN. (h) Cycling performance of the ZIC with TiN. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from (i) a schematic illustration of the key parameters of flexible devices. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Elsevier. 
Phosphorene, the 2D counterpart of black phosphorous, is another novel semiconductor material, which enables ultrafast ion diffusion channels.149,150 Huang and co-workers demonstrated a ZIC (Zn-BP-PC) system with a few-layer phosphorene cathode, Zn anode, and 0.2 M ZnCl2/(Et4NBF4 in propylene carbonate) electrolyte, where, the specific capacitance of 304 F g−1 at current density 0.2 A g−1 and retention of 76% after 9500 cycles were obtained (Fig. 8d and e). The potential window of aqueous supercapacitors with acidic or alkaline electrolytes is restricted by their electrolyte decomposition voltage, which heavily limits their practical applications. In this report, the “water in salt” electrolyte was effectively used to resolve the narrow voltage range.151 Titanium nitride (TiN) is a fascinating material, which is mostly studied as anodes in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors along with other metal nitrides.152,153 Huang and co-workers displayed a ZIC system with TiN nanofiber as the cathode, Zn anode, and ZnSO4 electrolyte, where, a specific capacitance of 489.8 F g−1 and capacitance retention of 83.9% after 10000 cycles. This study also theoretically evaluated the role of different inorganic anions in the diffusion process involving adsorption energies (Fig. 8f–h).154 Other than simple oxides and sulphides, a composite of bimetallic chalcogenide with carbon-based material was also studied as an effective electrode material for ZIC. Patil and co-workers synthesized NbMo6S8/N-doped carbon composite cathode material to evaluate its performance in a ZIC with Zn anode and a modified aqueous Zn-electrolyte. ZICs showed a specific capacity of 167.89 mA h g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 and retention of 87.6% after 15000 cycles.155
The advancement in flexible electronic devices has increased the demand for flexible power sources and ZICs are studied as promising energy storage candidates in recent years. Different carbon materials such as CNTs, porous carbon, and graphene have shown promising results as flexible cathode materials. The stacked 2D structure of graphene limits reversible restacking; thus, Zhu and co-workers have prepared free-standing graphene hydrogel films to prevent the irreversible stacking of graphene layers.156 Transition metal oxides (TMO) are also suitable as a cathode material for flexible ZICs; however, TMOs such as MnO2 suffer from critical structural changes with extensive charging–discharging cycles. Therefore, Zn2+ was intercalated in the synthesis of δ-MnO2 nanowires and the corresponding ZIC showed a retention of 83.1% after 5000 cycles.157 Conducting polymers typically store charge with the doping/de-doping of ions causing major volume change with time, which eventually decreases the mechanical strength and conductivity.158 Therefore, composites of conducting polymers have been studied for flexible ZICs. A sandwich-structured ZIC with poly(33′-dihydroxybenzidine)//AC cathode and Zn foil anode displayed superior cyclic stability and a capacitance of 1.3 F cm−2.159 Yao et al. prepared N, B co-doped carbon quantum dot/rGO aerogel via the hydrothermal method for quasi-solid-state ZIC. Along with good energy and power densities, the N, B codoped carbon quantum dot/rGO//Zn displayed exceptional flexibility and cycle life.160 The potential for planar Zn foil as an anode in flexible ZIC is limited due to its rigidity and low electrochemical surface area. Therefore, Zn metal is deposited over conductive substrates with high surface area such as CNT paper, graphene paper, MXene paper, and Ni nanotubes.158 In recent years, substantial interest has been observed in the development of Zn metal-free anodes. Different MXene materials have been studied as free-standing films as anode materials for excellent conductivity, hydrophilicity, physicochemical stability, and EDLC charge storage mechanism.102,103 Li and co-workers recommended a standard protocol to analyse flexibility in terms of bending tolerance tests. The bending of the device is defined with three independent parameters: the length of the device, the angle of bending, and the radius of bending (Fig. 8i).158,161 The force/area of the device can be can dramatically altered with a change in any one of the above parameters and thus the electrochemical performance of the device can be changed. The full vision of a flexible ZIC incorporates temperature adaptability, ability to self-heal, anti-self-discharging ability, and flexibility in terms of bending of the device.
5. Conclusion and outlook
ZICs hold great promise for application in next-generation energy storage systems, benefiting from the high energy–high power–high cycle life combination at low cost. Recent studies have shown the possibility of ZICs that outperform lithium and sodium analogues. The success of ZICs was realized through porous carbon-based electrodes, and planar 2D Zn metal anode during the initial development stage. However, the research with conventional porous carbon and Zn metal anode is nearing saturation and there is no room for further development. Future research needs to be focussed on next-generation materials employing nanoengineered 3D materials for anode and cathode, and also focus should be given to new emerging ZIC systems. Merging the benefits of nanotechnology and advanced nano-characterization tools could shed new light on the future development of ZICs. The following aspects could be considered for directing future research and development:
➢ Research on carbon-based cathode materials plays an important role in improving the energy density of ZICs. Sufficient advancement has been made in engineering the porous architecture of the carbon to achieve high surface area for ion storage. A few developments are made on porous carbon with high particle density, thereby maximizing the volumetric energy output of the ZICs. Most studies neglect to study the volumetric performance of ZICs as carbon has a very low density. Furthermore, the material/electrode packing density is also very crucial to achieve a high volumetric energy output. Thick carbon electrodes will reduce the ion movement at high rates due to traffic jam issues at the innermost pores. Research studying the porous carbon electrode mass loadings with industrial standards will bring new insights towards their commercialization.
➢ Employing pseudocapacitive electrodes, and grafting pseudocapacitive molecules over a carbon cathode are important strategies to improve the energy efficiency of ZICs at high power density conditions. However, the discharge capacity of pseudocapacitive type cathodes is much smaller than that of porous carbon cathodes, reducing the overall energy density of ZICs. Tuning the crystalline structures, architecture, morphology, redox-active molecular structure, stoichiometry, and elemental valences of pseudocapacitive compounds will increase the capacity of the pseudocapacitive cathodes.
➢ Next-generation 2D materials such as MXenes, phosphorene, metal nitrides, and metal carbides have great potential in future energy storage devices. However, the correlations of physical and chemical properties of 2D materials on charge storage mechanisms must be extensively studied. In particular, the low initial coulombic efficiency of 2D materials, and large electrochemical irreversibility in 2D materials must be revealed. Understanding the interface reactions between electrolyte ions and 2D surfaces also must be made clear. The role of sophisticated and real-time in situ characterization tools will be greater in understanding the storage mechanism in the next-generation 2D materials.
➢ The kinetic mismatch between sluggish platting/stripping reaction in the Zn anode and fast capacitive storage in the carbon cathode undermines the energy output of ZICs at high power condition. To circumvent the kinetic mismatch, designing a 3D nanostructured Zn current collector and a vertically aligned Zn metal anode host is very crucial. The novel architectures would direct uniform Zn-ion flux and would greatly reduce the effective current density to achieve a dendrite-free zinc deposition even under high deposition and high current conditions.
➢ Investigating bi-functional separators could boost the cycle life and efficiency of the Zn anode in ZICs. Thin film coatings of several ceramics over separators can be studied to control Zn dendrite control. Unlike conventional solid/liquid coatings over separators, the thin film coatings will not affect the thickness of the separator membrane.
➢ The utilization of organic electrodes for anion storage in ZICs can also be studied as organic electrodes will increase the eco-friendliness and suitability of ZICs. Recent research showed that organic electrodes would be a strong competitor against porous carbon but the power, and stability of organic electrodes need a lot of improvement. Addressing the charge storage kinetics and the solubility issues in organic electrodes utilizing porous carbon composite, and nano coatings could further increase the commercial viability of organic ZICs.
➢ High demand for flexible electronics has pushed the research on flexible and wearable energy storage systems such as flexible and foldable batteries, and capacitors. Future research should also be directed towards the development of designing a robust, flexible, and lightweight substrate, that could efficiently host large amounts of cathode and anode materials. Integrating the next-generation 2D materials, and pseudocapacitive electrodes, with porous carbon cathode could synergistically improve the energy–power performance of ZICs. Introducing a novel hybrid polymer/gel electrolyte with high Zn2+ ion conductivity would overcome the need for separators, and increase the high flexibility of the devices. However, no compromise on the volumetric performance of ZICs should be made when developing flexible ZICs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), a statutory body of the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India, through the Start-up Research Grant (SRG/2022/000642).
ReferencesL. Stokes and C. Warshaw, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17107 CrossRef .A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. Y. Park, H. H. Ryu, L. Y. Kuo, P. Kaghazchi, C. S. Yoon and Y. K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6(12), 4195–4202 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Whittingham, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(12), 8435–8437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Liu, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu, A. Manthiram and Y. S. Meng, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .A. Manthiram, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3(10), 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Manthiram, S. H. Chung and C. Zu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(12), 1980–2006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y. K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51(40), 9994–10024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Kim, W. Choi, O. H. Kim, H. Park, S. Yun, R. Thangavel, Y. H. Cho and W. S. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 18377–18384 RSC .Y. Liang, H. Dong, D. Aurbach and Y. Yao, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5(9), 646–656 CrossRef CAS .X. Jia, C. Liu, Z. G. Neale, J. Yang and G. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(15), 7795–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17(6), 543–549 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhao, W. Huang, Z. Luo, L. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Li, L. Li, J. Hu, H. Ma and J. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao176 Search PubMed .C. Xu, B. Li, H. Du and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124(4), 957–959 CrossRef .S. D. Han, N. N. Rajput, X. Qu, B. Pan, M. He, M. S. Ferrandon, C. Liao, K. A. Persson and A. K. Burrell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(5), 3021–3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Wang, M. Peng, J. Chen, X. Tang, L. Li, T. Hu, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2022, 16(2), 2877–2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Ma, J. Cheng, L. Dong, W. Liu, J. Mou, L. Zhao, J. Wang, D. Ren, J. Wu, C. Xu and F. Kang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 20, 335–342 CrossRef .I. Plitz, A. DuPasquier, F. Badway, J. Gural, N. Pereira, A. Gmitter and G. G. Amatucci, Appl. Phys. A, 2006, 82, 615–626 CrossRef CAS .R. Thangavel, B. K. Ganesan, V. Thangavel, W. S. Yoon and Y. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4(12), 13376–13394 CrossRef CAS .J. Yin, W. Zhang, W. Wang, N. A. Alhebshi, N. Salah and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(37), 2001705 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, M. Wang and Y. Tang, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 13, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Rani, R. Thangavel, M. Kim, Y. S. Lee and J. H. Jang, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(10), 2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Yin, W. Zhang, N. A. Alhebshi, N. Salah and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(21), 2100201 CrossRef CAS .R. Thangavel, V. Ahilan, M. Moorthy, W. S. Yoon, S. Shanmugam and Y. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2021, 484, 229143 CrossRef CAS .R. Thangavel, R. Ponraj, A. G. Kannan, K. Kaliyappan, D. W. Kim, Z. Chen and Y. S. Lee, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4920–4931 RSC .D. Kundu, S. H. Vajargah, L. Wan, B. Adams, D. Prendergast and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 881–892 RSC .H. Tang, J. Yao and Y. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(14), 2003994 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhang, Y. Tang, S. Guo, X. Cao, A. Pan, G. Fang, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(12), 4625–4665 RSC .B. Wu, W. Luo and M. Li, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 3174–3187 CrossRef CAS .B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(11), 3288–3304 RSC .B. Li, S. Liu, Y. Geng, C. Mao, L. Dai, L. Wang, S. C. Jun, B. Lu, Z. He and J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2023, 2214033 CrossRef .Z. Yi, G. Chen, F. Hou, L. Wang and J. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(1), 2003065 CrossRef CAS .C. Han, W. Li, H. K. Liu, S. Dou and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104880 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zheng, W. Zhao, D. Jia, Y. Liu, L. Cui, D. Wei, R. Zheng and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124161 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, Q. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Teng, X. Liu, P. Fang, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Z. Huang, R. Zhang, S. Zhang, P. Li, C. Li and C. Zhi, Mater. Futures, 2022, 1(2), 022101 CrossRef .D. Sui, M. Wu, K. Shi, C. Li, J. Lang, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, X. Yan and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2021, 185, 126–151 CrossRef CAS .L. Dong, X. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zhao, W. Liu, J. Cheng, C. Xu, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 13, 96–102 CrossRef .X. Ma, J. Cheng, L. Dong, W. Liu, J. Mou, L. Zhao, J. Wang, D. Ren, J. Wu, C. Xu and F. Kang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 20, 335–342 CrossRef .X. Feng, Y. Bai, M. Liu, Y. Li, H. Yang, X. Wang and C. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2036–2089 RSC .Y. Lu, G. Long, L. Zhang, T. Zhang, M. Zhang, F. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2016, 59(2), 225–230 CrossRef CAS .R. Thangavel, A. G. Kannan, R. Ponraj, V. Thangavel, D.-W. Kim and Y.-S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2018, 383, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .R. Thangavel, A. G. Kannan, R. Ponraj, K. Kaliyappan, W. S. Yoon, D. W. Kim and Y. S. Lee, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(6), 1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. He, Y. Liu, C. Li, D. Yang, W. Wang, W. Yan, W. Zhou, Z. Wu, L. Wang, Q. Huang, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Fu, X. Hou and Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5835–5842 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, M. Wang and Y. Tang, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 13, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .P. Yu, Y. Zeng, Y. Zeng, H. Dong, H. Hu, Y. Liu, M. Zheng, Y. Xiao, X. Lu and Y. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 327, 134999 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhang, J. Yin, C. Wang, L. Zhao, W. Jian, K. Lu, H. Lin, X. Qiu and H. N. Alshareef, Small Methods, 2021, 5(11), 2100896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .W. Jian, W. Zhang, B. Wu, X. Wei, W. Liang, X. Zhang, F. Wen, L. Zhao, J. Yin, K. Lu and X. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14(4), 5425–5438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Dong, X. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zhao, W. Liu, J. Cheng, C. Xu, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 13, 96–102 CrossRef .C. L. Zhu, H. L. Wang, W. J. Fan, S. L. Zhai, X. J. Wang, J. Shi, M. H. Huang, S. Liu, Z. Li and J. W. Chen, Rare Met., 2022, 41(7), 2505–2516 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhang, J. Yin, W. Jian, Y. Wu, L. Chen, M. Sun, U. Schwingenschlögl, X. Qiu and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2022, 103, 107827 CrossRef CAS .Y. Tian, R. Amal and D. W. Wang, Front. Energy Res., 2016, 4, 34 Search PubMed .Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, D. Li, Q. Sun, K. Lai, K. Li, Q. Yuan, X. Liu and L. Ci, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22874–22885 RSC .X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia, S. Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132(12), 4662–4678 CrossRef .A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2(1), 86 CrossRef .Q. Jiang, H. Zhang, Z. Ren, H. Ma and M. Xue, Mater. Today Sustain., 2022, 19, 100174 CrossRef .X. F. Lu, Y. Fang, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Nano Lett., 2021, 21(4), 1555–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. C. Hou and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(23), 1801307 CrossRef .A. Indra, T. Song and U. Paik, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(39), 1705146 CrossRef .H. Zhang, J. Nai, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Joule, 2017, 1(1), 77–107 CrossRef CAS .T. Xiong, Y. Shen, W. S. V. Lee and J. Xue, Nano Mater. Sci., 2020, 2(2), 159–163 CrossRef .Y. Liu, A. Umar and X. Wu, Rare Met., 2022, 41(9), 2985–2991 CrossRef CAS .R. Yuksel, O. Buyukcakir, W. K. Seong and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(16), 1904215 CrossRef CAS .X. Wu, G. Meng, W. Liu, T. Li, Q. Yang, X. Sun and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .H. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Zhang, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, L. Bai and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(30), 16565–16574 RSC .X. Yang, P. Huang, P. Zhao, S. Xie, D. Xie, S. Wang and F. Cheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2023, 170(1), 010508 CrossRef .X. Deng, J. Li, Z. Shan, J. Sha, L. Ma and N. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(23), 11617–11625 RSC .L. Zhao, W. Jian, J. Zhu, X. Zhang, F. Wen, X. Fei, L. Chen, S. Huang, J. Yin, N. R. Chodankar and X. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14(38), 43431–43441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Fan, X. Hu, S. Zhang, Z. Xu, G. Gao, Y. Zheng, G. Hu, Q. Chen, T. S. AlGarni and R. Luque, Carbon, 2021, 180, 254–264 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, P. Lu, P. Shang, L. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Dong, R. He and Z. S. Wu, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 56, 404–411 CrossRef CAS .D. Wang, Z. Li, D. Guo and M. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 427, 140854 CrossRef CAS .S. Ghosh, S. Barg, S. M. Jeong and K. Ostrikov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(32), 2001239 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, F. Zhang, T. Zhang, K. Leng, L. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2013, 63, 508–516 CrossRef CAS .Y. G. Lee and G. H. An, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(37), 41342–41349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Li, J. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Gao, X. He, H. Liu, Y. Guo and G. Zhang, Energy Storage Materials, 2021, 42, 705–714 CrossRef .R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(3), 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Sui, L. Xu, H. Zhang, Z. Sun, B. Kan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2020, 157, 656–662 CrossRef CAS .D. Han, J. Zhang, Z. Weng, D. Kong, Y. Tao, F. Ding, D. Ruan and Q. H. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 11, 30–45 CrossRef CAS .F. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Yang, L. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(5), 1623–1632 RSC .S. Wu, Y. Chen, T. Jiao, J. Zhou, J. Cheng, B. Liu, S. Yang, K. Zhang and W. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(47), 1902915 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes and D. Su, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Shao, Z. Sun, Z. Tian, S. Li, G. Wu, M. Wang, X. Tong, F. Shen, Z. Xia, V. Tung and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(6), 2007843 CrossRef CAS .J. Yao, F. Li, R. Zhou, C. Guo, X. Liu and Y. Zhu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2023, 108354 CrossRef .Y. Dong, S. Zhang, X. Du, S. Hong, S. Zhao, Y. Chen, X. Chen and H. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(24), 1901127 CrossRef .Z. Jian, N. Yang, M. Vogel, S. Leith, A. Schulte, H. Schönherr, T. Jiao, W. Zhang, J. Müller, B. Butz and X. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(44), 2002202 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Boruah, A. Mathieson, B. Wen, C. Jo, F. Deschler and M. De Volder, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(8), 5967–5974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Zhao, D. Chen, X. Xiong, B. Song, R. Hu, Q. Zhang, B. H. Rainwater, G. H. Waller, D. Zhen, Y. Ding and Y. Chen, Energy Storage Materials, 2017, 7, 32–39 CrossRef .T. Panja, J. Ajuria, N. Díez, D. Bhattacharjya, E. Goikolea and D. Carriazo, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–11 CrossRef .B. Moorthy, R. Ponraj, J. H. Yun, J. E. Wang, D. J. Kim and D. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(11), 11053–11060 CrossRef CAS .B. Moorthy, J. H. Kim, H. W. Lee and D. K. Kim, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 24, 602–609 CrossRef .R. Thangavel, M. Moorthy, B. K. Ganesan, W. Lee, W. S. Yoon and Y. S. Lee, Small, 2020, 16, 2003688 CrossRef CAS .Q. Meng, K. Cai, Y. Chen and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 268–285 CrossRef CAS .J. Han, K. Wang, W. Liu, C. Li, X. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. An, S. Yi and Y. Ma, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13083–13091 RSC .C. Huang, X. Zhao, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, A. Hu, Q. Tang, X. Song, C. Jiang and X. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(42), 16028–16036 CrossRef CAS .J. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Liu, X. Huang, C. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. Huang, Y. He, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Luo, Q. Mao, D. Hou and J. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 949–973 CrossRef CAS .B. L. Ellis, P. Knauth and T. Djenizian, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(21), 3368–3397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Tang, W. Chen, N. Li, Z. Hu, L. Xiao, Y. Xie, L. Xi, L. Ni and Y. Zhu, Energy Storage Materials, 2022, 48, 335–343 CrossRef .X. Ma, J. Cheng, L. Dong, W. Liu, J. Mou, L. Zhao, J. Wang, D. Ren, J. Wu, C. Xu and F. Kang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 20, 335–342 CrossRef .K. Li, J. Li, L. Wang, X. Li, X. Yang and W. Lü, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 928, 167153 CrossRef CAS .H. Ren, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, T. Miao, R. Yuan, W. Chen, Z. Wang, J. Yang and B. Zhao, Carbon, 2022, 198, 46–56 CrossRef CAS .S. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Zeng, M. Wang, L. Ruan and Y. Ma, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .A. Li, Z. Wei, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, C. Liu, J. Zou, B. Ge and F. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 457, 141339 CrossRef CAS .T. Liu, W. G. Pell and B. E. Conway, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 3541–3552 CrossRef CAS .V. K. A. Muniraj, C. K. Kamaja and M. V. Shelke, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4(5), 2528–2534 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, F. Zheng, M. Li, J. Wang, D. Jia, X. Mao, P. Hu, Q. Zhen and Y. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 446, 136922 CrossRef CAS .L. Dong, W. Yang, W. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Li, C. Xu, S. Wan, F. He, F. Kang and G. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 1–9 CrossRef .A. D. Jagadale, R. C. Rohit, S. K. Shinde and D. Y. Kim, ChemNanoMat, 2021, 7(10), 1082–1098 CrossRef CAS .D. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Gao, Y. Wu and J. Deng, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 1541–1557 CrossRef CAS .W. Guo, Z. Cong, Z. Guo, C. Chang, X. Liang, Y. Liu, W. Hu and X. Pu, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 30, 104–112 CrossRef .Z. Kang, C. Wu, L. Dong, W. Liu, J. Mou, J. Zhang, Z. Chang, B. Jiang, G. Wang, F. Kang and C. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(3), 3364–3371 CrossRef CAS .Z. Wang, J. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2019, 3, 1289–1300 CrossRef CAS .P. Xue, C. Guo, L. Li, H. Li, D. Luo, L. Tan and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34(14), 2110047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Li, J. Meng, Q. Li, M. Huang, X. Liu, K. A. Owusu, Z. Liu and L. Mai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(32), 1802016 CrossRef .T. T. Zuo, X. W. Wu, C. P. Yang, Y. X. Yin, H. Ye, N. W. Li and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(29), 1700389 CrossRef PubMed .G. H. An, J. Hong, S. Pak, Y. Cho, S. Lee, B. Hou and S. Cha, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(3), 1902981 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ma, X. Xie, R. Lv, B. Na, J. Ouyang and H. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(7), 8697–8703 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang, J. Luan, L. Fu, S. Wu, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15841–15847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Liu, W. Liu, Y. Huang, P. Li, J. Yan and K. Liu, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 25, 858–865 CrossRef .Z. Li, L. Wu, S. Dong, T. Xu, S. Li, Y. An, J. Jiang and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(4), 2006495 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .B. S. Lee, S. Cui, X. Xing, H. Liu, X. Yue, V. Petrova, H. D. Lim, R. Chen and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(45), 38928–38935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Xie, S. Liang, J. Gao, S. Guo, J. Guo, C. Wang, G. Xu, X. Wu, G. Chen and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 503 RSC .A. Naveed, H. Yang, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2760–2764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 5374 CrossRef PubMed .P. Liang, J. Yi, X. Liu, K. Wu, Z. Wang, J. Cui, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908528 CrossRef CAS .J. Hao, B. Li, X. Li, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Liu, D. Li, C. Wu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Yu, M. Yan, Q. Wei, P. He, Y. Dong, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(16), 1800848 CrossRef .J. Guo, J. Ming, Y. Lei, W. Zhang, C. Xia, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(12), 2776–2781 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Wu, H. Yang, H. Ding, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Du and N. Liu, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 194, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .F. Xie, H. Li, X. Wang, X. Zhi, D. Chao, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(9), 2003419 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhu, X. Li, M. L. K. Essandoh, J. Tan, Z. Cao, X. Zhang, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, Energy Storage Materials, 2022, 50, 243–251 CrossRef .H. Liu, J. G. Wang, W. Hua, H. Sun, Y. Huyan, S. Tian, Z. Hou, J. Yang, C. Wei and F. Kang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8(23), 2102612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Zhang, J.-P. Hu, N. Fu, W.-B. Zhou, B. Liu, Q. Deng and X.-W. Wu, InfoMat, 2022, 4, e12306 CAS .W. Du, J. Yan, C. Cao and C. C. Li, Energy Storage Materials, 2022, 52, 329–354 CrossRef .B. Moorthy, S. Kwon, J. H. Kim, P. Ragupathy, H. M. Lee and D. K. Kim, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 214–222 RSC .J. Cao, D. Zhang, C. Gu, X. Wang, S. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Qin and Z.-S. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101299 CrossRef CAS .J. Cao, D. Zhang, C. Gu, X. Zhang, M. Okhawilai, S. Wang, J. Han, J. Qin and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106322 CrossRef CAS .T. Carstens, A. Lahiri, N. Borisenko and F. Endres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(27), 14736–14741 CrossRef CAS .D. MacFarlane, M. Forsyth and P. Howlett, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15005 CrossRef CAS .R. Yao, L. Qian, Y. Sui, G. Zhao, R. Guo, S. Hu, P. Liu, H. Zhu, F. Wang, C. Zhi and C. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2102780 CrossRef CAS .J. Cao, D. Zhang, Y. Yue, R. Chanajaree, S. Wang, J. Han, X. Zhang, J. Qin and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2022, 93, 106839 CrossRef CAS .G. Liang, X. Li, Y. Wang, S. Yang, Z. Huang, Q. Yang, D. Wang, B. Dong, M. Zhu and C. Zhi, Nano Res. Energy, 2022, 1(1), e9120002 CrossRef .B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(2), 1–17 Search PubMed .M. H. Zhang, W. Xu, L. S. Wu and Y. F. Dong, New Carbon Mater., 2022, 37(3), 508–526 CrossRef .P. A. Maughan, N. Tapia-Ruiz and N. Bimbo, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 341, 136061 CrossRef CAS .Q. Wang, S. Wang, X. Guo, L. Ruan, N. Wei, Y. Ma, J. Li, M. Wang, W. Li and W. Zeng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5(12), 1900537 CrossRef CAS .Q. Yang, Z. Huang, X. Li, Z. Liu, H. Li, G. Liang, D. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Zhang, S. Chen and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(7), 8275–8283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(4), 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. S. Reich, Nature, 2014, 506, 19 CrossRef PubMed .Z. Huang, A. Chen, F. Mo, G. Liang, X. Li, Q. Yang, Y. Guo, Z. Chen, Q. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(24), 2001024 CrossRef CAS .S. Dong, X. Chen, L. Gu, X. Zhou, H. Wang, Z. Liu, P. Han, J. Yao, L. Wang, G. Cui and L. Chen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 835–839 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Balogun, W. Qiu, W. Wang, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(4), 1364–1387 RSC .Z. Huang, T. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, G. Liang, D. Wang, Q. Yang, Z. Chen, L. Ma, Z. Liu and B. Gao, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133(2), 1024–1034 CrossRef .S. J. Patil, N. R. Chodankar, S. K. Hwang, P. A. Shinde, G. S. R. Raju, K. S. Ranjith, S. V. Karekar, Y. S. Huh and Y. K. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 5112–5126 RSC .Y. C. Zhu, X. K. Ye, H. D. Jiang, J. X. Xia, Z. Y. Yue, L. H. Wang, Z. Q. Wan, C. Y. Jia and X. J. Yao, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227851 CrossRef CAS .Q. Chen, J. Jin, Z. Kou, C. Liao, Z. Liu, L. Zhou, J. Wang and L. Mai, Small, 2020, 16, 2000091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Wang, X. Zeng, P. J. Cullen and Z. Pei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 19054 RSC .N. Wang, T. Xin, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, M. J. Hu and J. Z. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14195–14202 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Yao, C. Liu, J. Y. Li, Z. L. Hu, R. Y. Zhou, C. C. Guo, X. R. Liu, F. F. Yang and Y. R. Zhu, Rare Met., 2023, 1–17 CAS .H. Li, Z. Tang, Z. Liu and C. Zhi, Joule, 2019, 3, 613–619 CrossRef .
Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of components and working mechanism of ZIC. (b) Advantages and disadvantages of ZIC. (c) A historical timeline of developments of ZIC and other electrochemical energy storage systems.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) BET isotherm and pore size distribution of activated carbon (AC) cathode. (b) Cyclic performance of AC//ZnSO4(aq)//Zn ZIC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. (c) BET isotherm and pore size distribution of biomass derived carbon. (d) Cyclic performance of coconut-shell-derived AC of AC//Zn(CF3SO3)2(aq)//Zn ZIC. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from Elsevier. (e) Synthesis of MDC from Ni-MOF. (f) SEM image of MDC. (g) Cyclic performance of ZIC with MDC. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from Elsevier. (h) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of NLPC by ammonia activation. (i) GCD curves of NLPC at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from ACS.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of CNPK. (b) SEM image of CNPK. (c) BET isotherms of the CNPK. (d) Cyclic performance of ZIC with carbon materials. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from RSC. (e) Schematic illustration of molten salt templating of O-rich porous carbon. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from ACS. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of ZMDPC, (g) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of the ZMDPC materials, (h) Nyquist plots of ZMDPCs//Zn. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cyclic performance of ZIC with rGO. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from Wiley. (b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the diamond fiber and the fabrication of the ZIC. (c) SEM image of the diamond fiber, (d) cyclic performance of ZIC with diamond fiber. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley. (e) SEM image of g-C3N4. (f) CV responses of the ZIC in the presence and absence of light. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from ACS. (g) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of P-CNT/rGO composite aerogel. (h) CV curves at 20 mV s−1. (i) Cyclic performance of ZIC with P-CNT/rGO. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) CV curves at 1 mV s−1. (b) Nyquist plots. (c) Cyclic performance of ZIC with PDA@PCC. Reproduced with ref. 94 with permission from ACS. (d) SEM image of MnO2 nanorods. (e) Cyclic performance of ZIC with MnO2 nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier. (f) SEM image of RuO2·H2O. (g) Nyquist plots of RuO2·H2O//Zn Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Springer. (h) Ragone plot for ZIC and other traditional electrochemical energy storage systems. (i) Ragone plot comparing different cathode materials for ZIC discussed here.	 

Activated carbon	Low-cost and abundant precursor	Poor wettability
Easy synthesis procedure	Low electrical conductivity
High surface area	Microspore dominated porosity
Good cycle life	Low capacitance
 	Poor energy and power density
Biomass-derived carbon	Low-cost and abundant precursor	Microspore dominated porosity
Easy synthesis procedure	Poor energy and power density
Moderate wettability	 
Moderate electrical conductivity	 
Moderate capacitance	 
Good cycle life	 
Nanostructured carbon	Low-cost and abundant precursor	Tedious synthesis procedure
Moderate wettability	 
Balanced porosity	 
Moderate energy and power density	 
Good cycle life	 
Heteroatom doped carbon	Abundant	Often involve pricey precursor
Good wettability	Tedious synthesis procedure
Good cycle life	 
Graphene-based carbon	Low cost and abundant	Relatively poor cycle life
Moderate synthesis procedure	 
Moderate wettability	 
Balanced porosity	 
Moderate cycle life	 
Polymer-based materials	Low cost and abundant	Low surface area
Moderate synthesis procedure	Relatively poor cycle life
Good wettability	 
Metal-based materials	Good wettability	Often expensive
High electrical conductivity	Low surface area
Balanced porosity	Relatively poor cycle life
High capacitance	 
High energy and power density	 

 	Fig. 6  In situ optical microscopy images: (a) bare Zn foil, (b) Zn@3D-ZGC at 20 mA cm−2 with respect to platting/stripping cycles. Cycling performance of Zn foil and Zn@3D-ZGC at (c) 10 and (d) 20 mA cm−2. On the right, enlarged figures detailing the voltage profile for the corresponding cycle time. (e) Rate performance of symmetrical cell using Zn@3D-ZGC anode at different current densities. (f) Comparison of cyclic performance of symmetrical cell with Zn@3D-ZGC anode and some previously reported 3D Zn composite anodes at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Spacious Zn nucleation and homogeneous Zn deposition on the surface with zincophilic sites. (b) Dense nucleation and subsequent formation of Zn-dendrite on zincophobic surface. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from Wiley. In situ electron microscopy images of Zn-electrodeposition on (c) bare Zn and (d) MX-TMA@Zn electrode at 5 mA cm−2. The simulation of electric field distribution for (e) bare Zn and (f) MX-TMA@Zn. (f) Cyclic stability of the symmetric cells at 2 mA cm−2 with different anodes. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier. SEM images of (g) bare Zn and (h) CeO2@Zn after plating at different current densities. (i) coulombic efficiencies of bare Zn and CeO2@Zn plating/stripping cycles on Cu foil, and corresponding galvanostatic cycling curves for (j) Zn–Cu and (k) CeO2@Zn–Cu asymmetry cells at different cycles. Reproduced ref. 133 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of MXenes@rGO aerogel. (b) EIS plot of MXenes@rGO. (c) Cyclic stability of the ZIC with MXenes@rGO. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley. (d) SEM image of a few layer phosphorene. (e) Cycling performance of the ZIC. Reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from Wiley. (f) Schematic illustration of the energy storage mechanism of ZIC with TiN cathode. (g) TEM image of TiN. (h) Cycling performance of the ZIC with TiN. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from (i) a schematic illustration of the key parameters of flexible devices. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
