Exciton diffusion controlled quantum efficiency in hybrid dye sensitized solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B812217B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B812217B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1604-1609Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsExciton diffusion controlled quantum efficiency in hybrid dye sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Zaicheng 
            Sun†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yajun 
            Cheng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Maria 
            Lechmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaoli 
            Li§
a, 
      
        
          
            Jixue 
            Li¶
b, 
      
        
          
            Jishan 
            Wu||
a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew 
            Grimsdale**
a, 
      
        
          
            Klaus 
            Müllen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hans-Jürgen 
            Butt
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jochen S. 
            Gutmann
          
        
      *ab
aMax-Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, D-55128, Mainz, Germany
bInstitute for Physical Chemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University, D-55099, Mainz, Germany. E-mail: gutmann@mpip-mainz.mpg.de
Received 
      16th July 2008
    , Accepted 9th December 2008First published on 26th January 2009AbstractWell-ordered and uniform titania nanoparticle arrays were synthesized using diblock copolymers as structure directing agents. High molecular weight copolymers of polystyrene-b-polyethylene oxide and poly(methylmethacrylate)-b-polyethylene oxide were used to control the distance between titania nanoparticles in the range of 20–60 nm. Using these titania nanoparticle arrays and regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene), models for a dye sensitized photovoltaic cell were assembled, in which the interparticle spacing was systematically varied. In these simplified solar cells, the titania nanocrystals were surrounded by a continuous regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) phase. The spacing between the titania nanoparticles was chosen as to provide enough space for the hole transfer material—regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene)—to assemble as π stacks. The external quantum efficiency showed a clear dependence on the distance between titania nanoparticles and reached 12% at an excitation wavelength of 515 nm in the best case. This demonstrates that the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) phase acts as the locus of excition generation while the dye layer prevents charge recombination at the heterointerface. Thus control of the exciton diffusion is a key issue for present solid-state dye sensitized solar cells.
Introduction

Dye-sensitized, nanocrystalline solar cells (DSSC) provide an economically credible alternative to conventional inorganic photovoltaic devices. Owing to their high-energy conversion efficiency and low production cost, they have received considerable attention over the past decade.1–6 At the heart of the device is a semiconducting, mesoporous oxide layer commonly composed of a network of TiO2nanoparticles covered by a monolayer of a sensitizing dye and an organic semiconductor.2,6–10 Upon irradiation with light, optically active molecules absorb the photons and create an electron/hole pair (exciton). In the solid/liquid cells pioneered by Grätzel et al. absorption and charge generation is mainly restricted to the sensitizing dye. In polymer-based hybrid solar cells the initial exciton creation my also take place in the organic semiconductor. To achieve a macroscopic charge separation, electrons need to be injected into the TiO2 film before they can recombine with holes. Electrons then travel through the TiO2 layer to a cathode on one side of the film whereas the holes are transported through the organic semiconductor to the anode. Finally, the electrons move from the cathode through the external circuit to the anode where they recombine with the holes leading to a net electrical current.
In early dye-sensitized solar cell devices, the organic semiconductor was replaced by an iodide redox mediator dissolved in organic liquids which transports holes away from the sensitizing Ru dye (cis-(SCN)2 bis(2,2′ bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) ruthenium(II)) attached to the crystalline TiO2 film. One limitation of this early DSSC approach is the use of a liquid solvent which is difficult to seal and maintain.3,11 Practically it was found to be inadequate for stable 10% (AM 1.5) and efficient out door device.12 Conductive polymers such as poly(phenylvinylene) (PPV) and polythiophene (PHT) have hole mobilities from 10−7 cm2V−1 s−1 up to 10−1 cm2V−1 s−1.13,14 Their discovery has led to research into their use in a new generation of solid state solar cells6–10,15–17 in which the photo-electrochemistry is well understood.29

        Titania films, widely applied as electron transporters in dye-sensitized solar cells, are commonly made by doctor-blading a paste of titania nanocrystals which are then sintered to form a network. Commonly no special attention is given to control the morphologies of the anatase nanoparticles which can range from square bipyramidal to pseudocubic and rodlike. Their irregular shape results in a porous TiO2 network amenable for infiltration with a polymeric solid state electrolyte. However, Bartholomew and Heeger found that only a small fraction of polymeric solid state electrolyte (0.5%) was incorporated into the random TiO2 network.27
A few groups reported synthesis of titania mesostructures with cubic, hexagonal and lamellar structure in bulk and film.18–23 In these works the authors claim that the ordered structure of the TiO2 films will dramatically improve the infiltration of polymer and charge transport. Further they argue that the structural control will increase the efficiency of a photovoltaic cell based on such films. However experimental evidence remained scarce. More recently, McGehee et al. reported that well ordered nanoporous films of titania with uniformly sized pores (∼8 nm) were assembled to solar cells with regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (RR-PHT).15,16 The resulting solar cell showed high external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 10% and 1.5% power conversion efficiency under 33 mW cm−2 514 nm monochromatic light. However, McGehee et al. found that the external quantum efficiency decreased as the conjugated polymer (regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene)) was infiltrated more deeply than 20–30 nm into the mesoporous layer. They explained this finding by the inability of the positive charges generated at deeply infiltrated regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) regions to reach the cathode before undergoing recombination with electrons generated in other regions of the film. Furthermore if the pore size in the mesoporous layer is smaller than the radius of gyration of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) polymer chains, the conformation of the polymer chains is expected to be perturbed which prevents them from assembly in π stacks. This leads to a hole mobility which is lower than in the case of bulk regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene).14,16 For a solid state dye-sensitized solar cell, TiO2nanocrystal films are a good candidate for electron transfer after charge separation. However, the performance of the hole transfer material is a key problem for improving the power efficiency.14 At present, conductive regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) in a perfect π stacked morphology has one of the highest charge carrier mobilities. However, as McGehee et al. pointed out, if regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) cannot form π stacks the hole transport ability and consequently the total solar cell efficiency decreases rapidly.14,16 Providing enough space for the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) to form π stacks is therefore expected to improve the efficiency of dye sensitized solar cells by increasing the charge mobility in the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) phase. However the optimal structural size will be determined by the exciton diffusion distance within the hole conductor acting as an upper size limit above which charge carriers are lost due to recombination.
Recently we reported a simple synthetic route to titania nanoparticles arrays with a structure which is rationally defined, in contrast to the morphology of conventional sintered titania nanoparticle films.24–26 In this study we will apply this templating approach to control the interfacial structure and length scale in the preparation of solar cells.
Results and discussion

        Titania
        nanoparticle arrays were prepared by spin-coating on a substrate with a solution of a titania sol–gel precursor (typically based on titania tetra-isopropylate) and an amphiphilic diblock copolymer (poly(styrenene)-block-poly(ethyleneoxide) or poly(methylmetacrylate)-block-poly(ethyleneoxide). After spin-coating, the sol–gel precursor and diblock copolymer co-assembled into an ordered hexagonal pattern, with titania particle sizes in the range of 15–20 nm. The titania particles consisted of amorphous core comprised of titania and the hydrophilic poly(ethyleneoxide) part of the block copolymer and are surrounded by a hydrophobic shell from the polystyrene block. At a fixed ratio of hydrophilic to hydrophobic block size, the distance between the titania nanoparticles may thus be controlled by the total length of used diblock copolymer and can be tuned by a variation of the block copolymer molecular weight. In order to transfer the titania to a crystalline modification and to allow for an infiltration with the conducting polymer the block copolymer was removed in a second step by calcination of the films at 400 °C for 4 h.
Based on these templated nanoparticle arrays, we assembled a simple model solar cell using the calcined titania nanoparticle array on top of an unstructured titania barrier layer as the electron transfer layer. A sensitizing Ru dye (as additional light-absorbing element) and regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) as the hole transport layer were added to complete the model solar cell. The advantages of this model solar cell are the uniform diameter of the titania nanoparticles and their arrangement in a hexagonal packing. Depending on the molecular weight of the templating block-copolymer chosen, the distance of titania particles can be varied between 20 nm and 60 nm. Nevertheless the surface structure of the monolayer thick titania film allows for a continuous gap network, leaving space for the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) to form π stacks needed for an optimal hole mobility.28
Based on our ability to control the size and interparticle distance of a titania nanocrystal array we propose to investigate two such array as a functional layers in hybrid solar cells. To this end we assembled solar cell devices, starting from a fluorine-doped tin oxide cathode, an unstructured, crystalline, semiconducting titanium dioxide layer, the structured nanoparticle monolayer, a regioregular poly(hexylthiophene) hole transport layer and an evaporated gold anode (cf.Fig. 4). In between the cathode and the hole transport layer a uniform layer of titanium dioxide is required in order to prevent shortcuts. The surface of this homogeneous titanium dioxide layer is modified with the block copolymer templated titanium dioxide crystal nanoarray. In this way we obtain a model of a photovoltaic cell with a filled bilayer structure, which balances charge separation and percolation path for charge transfer.
In order to control the interparticle distance and particle diameter, we choose two kinds of amphiphilic diblock copolymers as structure directing agents. Fig. 1 shows a scanning force microscopy (SFM) image of a film prepared from the PS-b-PEO diblock copolymer mixed with 20 v% titania sol–gel precursor with the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) as an inset. In the scanning force microscopy image a uniform arrangement of titania/PEO nanoparticles in a locally hexagonal packing surrounded by a PS matrix is clearly visible. Furthermore, the fast Fourier transform exhibits a ring rather than six discrete spots, indicating a large number of 2D grains with different orientations. The sharpness of the ring indicates that the interparticle distance is well defined. From the peak position in the corresponding power spectral the interparticle distance is determined to be 25 nm. The average diameter of the particles is calculated from SPM image to be about 16 nm. A second titania nanoparticle array was obtained from a similar synthesis using a larger PMMA-b--PEO block copolymer as a structure directing agent, thus leading to larger nanoparticle structures. In this second array the interparticle distance and particle diameter is about 57 nm and 37 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 1  (a) SFM height image of PS-b-PEO thin film with 20 v% titania sol–gel precursor. The corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) is shown as an inset. (b) The power spectral density calculated from the SPM image. 
The field emission scanning electron microscopy image in Fig. 2 depicts a titania nanoparticle array, synthesized using the PMMA-b-PEO copolymer, after calcination at 400 °C for 4 h. The inset shows the fast Fourier transform calculated from an area of from 1.7 × 1.7 μm. After calcination, the structure directing diblock copolymer is burned away, and only titania particles are left. Because the copolymer template prevents neighboring titania particles from agglomeration during the initial stages of calcination, the particles maintain the locally hexagonal arrangement present before calcination. It is therefore possible to transform the amorphous titania particle array into an array of nanocrystals by careful calcination. X-Ray diffraction results (not shown) indicate that the titania nanocrystal are in the anatase phase after calcination. High resolution transmission electron microscopy imaging (Fig. 3) for the calcined sample from PMMA-b-PEO with 10 v% titania sol–gel precursor prove that the titania particle consist of a few TiO2nanocrystals about 4–5 nm in diameter. The electron diffraction (insert) features the characteristic (101), (004), (200), (105), (204) and (220) Debye–Scherrer diffraction rings of titania in anatase modification.
 Fig. 2  Field emsission scanning electron microscopy image of PMMA-b-PEO thin film with 10 v% titania sol–gel precursor calcination at 400 °C for 4 h. The fast Fourier transform image is shown as an insert, calculated from an area of 1.7 × 1.7 μm. 
 Fig. 3  Transmission electron microscop image of titania nanoparticles obtained from PMMA-b-PEO thin film containing 10 v% titania sol–gel precursor after calcination at 400 °C for 4 h. A selected area electron diffraction pattern is shown as an insert. 
Using the titania nanocrystal array a solar cell device was assembled (cf.Fig. 4 for a schematic). Fluorine-doped tin oxide (SnO2:F, abbreviated FTO) was used as the transparent conductive cathode. In order to prevent the hole transporting regioregular poly(hexylthiophene) (RR-PHT) from shortcutting to the FTO electrode, a layer of unstructured TiO2 was first coated on the FTO by spin-coating of the block copolymer to a free titania sol–gel precursor solution. The titania nanoparticle array was then prepared on top of the TiO2 layer by spin-coating the common solution of amphiphilic block copolymer and sol–gel precursor. From the initially amorphous titania phase, a nanocrystal array was obtained by calcination, which was further sensitized by immersion into Ru-dye solution to apply a light-absorber layer. After dye adsorption, a regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) chloroform solution was spin-coated on the titania nanocrystal array and annealed at 200 °C for 10 min under nitrogen to allow the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) to infiltrate in between the TiO2 particles. A second layer of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) was deposited on top of the infiltrated regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) layer in order to avoid any shortcutting of the TiO2 phase to the anode. Finally, gold contacts were coated on the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) as an anode. Current–λ curves were recorded with Keithley 236 Source-Measure Unit and analyzed in terms of the wavelength dependent external quantum efficiency.
 Fig. 4  Schematic structure of the photovoltaic cell assembly using the titania nanoparticle arrays. 
The experimentally determined external quantum efficiency curves of photovoltaic cells assembled from PS-b-PEO and PMMA-b-PEO templated arrays are shown in Fig. 5. The maximal EQEs are 9.5% ± 0.5% and 12% ± 0.5% from PMMA-b-PEO system and PS-b-PEO system under 5.4 W m−2 at 515 nm. Although the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) layer is the same in all devices, differences in distance between the nanoparticles in the TiO2 layer change the behavior of the device beyond experimental error. Assuming that the size of the pores does not preclude an efficient alignment of the poly(3-hexylthiophene) molecules,28 the enhancement in external quantum efficiency upon changing the templating block copolymer of the TiO2 layer from PMMA-b-PEO to PS-b-PEO can be attributed to two factors: Increase in specific surface area and the variation of the distance over which charge carriers have to diffuse before they are injected into the appropriate conduction bands. Obviously the specific surface area in PS-b-PEO and PMMA-b-PEO differs. In general a larger dye sensitized donor/acceptor interface provides more sites for efficient light absorption and charge separation. However, based on the average diameters and interparticle distance determined from the statistical analysis of the microscopy images and treating the calcined nanoparticles as surface-supported hemispheres, the surface area per unit area of the supporting substrate increases by only 3%. Since our titania particles are prepared following the same synthetic route it is reasonable to assume that the dye loading is likewise only increased by 3%. Thus the increase in surface area cannot explain the observed increase in external quantum efficiency. On the other hand the overall wavelength dependence of both EQE curves in Fig. 5 resembles the absorption spectrum of poly(3-hexylthiophene) in the range of 450 to 600 nm30 combined with the absorption spectrum of the dye sensitized titania (cf.Fig. 6) which features a maximal absorption in the wavelength range of 400 to 440 nm. This suggests that most excitons are generated within the poly(3-hexylthiophene) and not at the poly(3-hexylthiophene)/TiO2 heterointerface. In this case the performance of the solar cell will be determined by a balance between the separation of interfaces at which charges are collected and the exciton diffusion distance within the media in which the photocharges are generated. In the PS-b-PEO template system regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) domains are smaller than 20 nm and, therefore, effectively facilitate charge-separation across the donor/acceptor interface. The size of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) domains in the PMMA-b-PEO based system however exceeds 20 nm, which is bigger than the typical exciton diffusion length (∼10 nm). Consequently an electron hole recombination within the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) phase is likely if the exciton is not formed sufficiently close to the donor/acceptor interface. These internally recombinant charges however do not contribute to the external current.
 Fig. 5  External quantum efficiency of photovoltaic cell based on the PS-b-PEO and PMMA-b-PEO templated, dye sensitized, titania nanoparticle arrays. 
 Fig. 6  Optical adsorption spectra of the pure and dye sensitzed titania nanoparticle arrays. 
To prove that the EQE is controlled by the exciton diffusion distance we have assembled a series of identical solar cell models without the sensitizing dye layer was prepared (Fig. 7). The overall spectral response is identical to that of the dye-sensitized cells (cf.Fig. 5) except for the absence of the dye absorption around 400 nm. Again the maximum EQE for cells with a smaller interparticle spacing is 30% larger than the maximum EQE for the model cells with a larger spacing. Without a dye layer both cells are however 50% less efficient.
 Fig. 7  External quantum efficiency of a photovoltaic cell based on the PS-b-PEO and PMMA-b-PEO templated titania nanoparticle arrays (without dye sensitization). 
Based on our results it is obvious that the distance over which excitons carriers have to diffuse before their charges are injected into the appropriate conduction bands is a key parameter which influences solar cell performance. The coverage of the titania nanoparticle arrays with a sensitizing dye did not change the optical response of our hybrid cells in the region of the maximal EQE. Nevertheless the dye adsorption did change the overall EQE of all cells, suggesting that the dye prevents charge recombination at the heterointerface.
Conclusion
A model photovoltaic cell in which the morphology and spacing of the titania particles was precisely controlled was assembled using block-copolymer-templated titania nanoparticles. In this model photovoltaic cell the semiconducting polymer is the active material in which excitions are photogenerated. Our rational design proved to be capable to yield structured titania electrodes with large pore sizes to allow for an efficient packing of the poly(3-hexylthiophene) polymer acting as a hole conductor. As a result it was possible to selectively prove the connection of exciton diffusion distance and morphology on the external quantum efficiency of the hybrid device. The pore size dependent external quantum efficiency clearly shows that an upper pore size limit exists, above which internal charge recombination processes dominate device efficiency. The adsorbed dye layer however influenced the total EQE which proves that it not only carries a light harvesting functionality but also controls charge recombination at the heterointerface.
Experimental
The titania nanoparticle array was synthesized by spin coating a stock solution of amphiphilic block copolymer and titania sol–gel precursor according to reference.24–26
A poly(styrene)-block-poly(ethyleneoxide) (PS-b-PEO) copolymer with a polydispersity of 1.05 was purchased from Polymer Source Inc. (molecular weight of the PS block 19 kg mol−1 and of the PEO block 6.4 kg mol−1). As a second amphiphilic diblock copolymer a poly(methylmethacrylate)-block-poly(ethyleneoxide) (PMMA-b-PEO) copolymer was synthesized at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research via a coupling of ATRP to living anionic polymerization. The poly(methylmethacrylate)-block-poly(ethyleneoxide) copolymer exhibited a polydispersity of 1.15 and a molecular weight of the PMMA block of 23.3 kg mol−1, and 17.8 kg mol−1 for the PEO block.
In order to prepare the titania sol–gel precursor, 0.25 g of concentrated HCl (37%) was slowly added into 5 ml isopropanol containing 0.71 g of Titania tetra isopropylate (TTIP) under vigorous stirring. Afterwards 5 ml of toluene were added into the solution to dilute the sol–gel precursor. The sol–gel precursor was stirred for at least 1 h after which the desired amount was added into 1 ml of 1 wt% block copolymer solution.
SnO2:F conductive transparent glass substrates (Solaronix AG, TCO 10–10) were first sonicated for 10 min in ethanol then sonicated for 10 min in acetone, and finally, plasma cleaned for 10 min. The conductive glass was spin coated with a layer of titania sol–gel precursor after cleaning to prevent the contact of the conductive glass surface with the hole transfer layer. Then the plate was coated with the block copolymers/sol–gel precursor stock solution to produce the structured titania nanoparticle array. The whole sample was then calcined at 400 °C for 4 h and cooled to 120 °C to avoid adsorbtion of water from air. Ru dye, cis-(SCN)2bis(2,2′ bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate) ruthenium(II) was adsorbed onto the calcined titania surface in 0.5 mM absolute ethanol solution for 24 h at room temperature. The sample was immediately transferred into a glove box after removal from the Ru dye solution. A solution containing 20 mg ml−1 of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) in chloroform was coated on the sample under N2 atmosphere followed by annealing at 200 °C for 10 min to allow for an infiltration of the regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) into the TiO2 layer. After this annealing step a second layer of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) was spincoated onto the infiltrated TiO2 layer followed by the evaporation of a 100 nm gold layer onto the RR-PHT acting as the counter electrode.
Models cells without the sensitizing dye layer were prepared in an identical manner.

Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) images were measured on a Dimension 3100 SPM (DI Instruments, Santa Barbara, CA) in tapping mode using Olympus cantilevers (Olympus inc. 33.2–65.7 N m−1 spring constant, 277.3–346.3 kHz resonance frequency).

Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images were obtained on a field emission SEM (LEO 1530 “Gemini”) under 1 kV accelerating voltage. The high resolution transmission electron microscopy image was taken on FEI Tecnai F-30 electron microscope.
For external quantum efficiency measurements, current–λ curves were recorded with a Keithley 236 Source-Measure Unit. A tungsten–halogen lamp was used as a light source, to supply monochromatic light from 300 nm to 700 nm via a TRIAX 180 monochromator. The maximum power was about 6 W m−2 and the incident light power was determined by a calibrated silicon diode and converted to AM1.5 conditions. In order to obtain an unbiased dataset the reported datasets were averaged over at least five independent devices. For each experiment the performance was tested at six different surface positions of the model solar cell.
Acknowledgements
Financial support by the Max Planck Society and the German Science Foundation through the Korean/German international research and training group (Internationales DFG Graduiertenkolleg 1404) are gratefully acknowledged.
References
B. Oregan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar-cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Molecular photovoltaics, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Solid-state dye-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 solar cells with high photon-to-electron conversion efficiencies, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Light-induced redox reactions in nanocrystalline systems, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Arango, S. A. Carter and P. J. Brock, Charge transfer in photovoltaics consisting of interpenetrating networks of conjugated polymer and TiO2 nanoparticles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1698–1700 CrossRef CAS .
S. Spiekermann, G. Smestad, J. Kowalik, L. M. Tolbert and M. Grätzel, Poly(4-undecyl-2,2′-bithiophene) as a hole conductor in solid state dye sensitized titanium dioxide solar cells, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1603–1604 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gebeyehu, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, D. Vangeneugden, R. Kiebooms, D. Vanderzande, F. Kienberger and H. Schindler, Hybrid solar cells based on dye-sensitized nanoporous TiO2 electrodes and conjugated polymers as hole transport materials, Synth. Met., 2001, 125, 279–287 CrossRef .
A. J. Breeze, Z. Schlesinger, S. A. Carter and P. J. Brock, Charge transport in TiO2/MEH-PPV polymer photovoltaics, Phys. Rev. B, 2001, 6412, 125205 CrossRef .
D. Gebeyehu, C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, Solid-state organic/inorganic hybrid solar cells based on conjugated polymers and dye-sensitized TiO2 electrodes, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403, 271–274 CrossRef .
J. Kruger, R. Plass, L. Cevey, M. Piccirelli, M. Grätzel and U. Bach, High efficiency solid-state photovoltaic device due to inhibition of interface charge recombination, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2085–2087 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Smestad, S. Spiekermann, J. Kowalik, C. D. Grant, A. M. Schwartzberg, J. Zhang, L. M. Tolbert and E. Moons, A technique to compare polythiophene solid-state dye sensitized TiO2 solar cells to liquid junction devices, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 76, 85–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Integrated optoelectronic devices based on conjugated polymers, Science, 1998, 280, 1741–1744 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Conjugated polymer photovoltaic cells, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley, Y. X. Liu, M. D. McGehee, K. L. Frindell and G. D. Stucky, Infiltrating semiconducting polymers into self-assembled mesoporous titania films for photovoltaic applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Photovoltaic cells made from conjugated polymers infiltrated into mesoporous titania, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380–3382 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Wu, A. J. McEvoy and M. Grätzel, Chronoamperometric evidence for fractality in porous TiO2 films, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 291, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang, D. Y. Zhao, D. I. Margolese, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Generalized syntheses of large-pore mesoporous metal oxides with semicrystalline frameworks, Nature, 1998, 396, 152–155 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Yang, D. Y. Zhao, D. I. Margolese, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Block copolymer templating syntheses of mesoporous metal oxides with large ordering lengths and semicrystalline framework, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2813–2826 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, G. J. D. A. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, H. Amenitsch, A. Brunet-Bruneau, A. Bourgeois and C. Sanchez, Highly organized mesoporous titania thin films showing mono-oriented 2D hexagonal channels, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. D. A. Soler-Illia, A. Louis and C. Sanchez, Synthesis and characterization of mesostructured titania-based materials through evaporation-induced self-assembly, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 750–759 CrossRef .
P. C. A. Alberius, K. L. Frindell, R. C. Hayward, E. J. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and B. F. Chmelka, General predictive syntheses of cubic, hexagonal, and lamellar silica and titania mesostructured thin films, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3284–3294 CrossRef .
S. Y. Choi, M. Mamak, N. Coombs, N. Pas, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, Thermally stable two-dimensional hexagonal mesoporous nanocrystalline anatase, Meso-nc-TiO2: Bulk and crack-free thin film morphologies, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, Z. Sun, T. Russell, W. Knoll and J. S. Gutmann, Organic-inorganic nanohybridization by block-copolymer thin films, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1160 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, D. H. Kim, M. Wolkenhauer, G.-G. Bumbu, W. Knoll and J. S. Gutmann, Synthesis and photoluminescence of titania nanoparticle arrays templated by block copolymer thin films, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 370 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng and J. S. Gutmann, Morphology phase diagram of ultrathin anatase TiO2 films templated by a single PS-b-PEO block copolymer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4658 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Bartholomew and A. Heeger, Infiltration of regioregular poly[2,2′-(3-hexylthiopene)] into random nanocrystalline TiO2 networks, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 677 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley, B. S. Srinivasan, J. M. Ziebarth, C. Goh, Y. Liu and M. D. McGehee, Enhanced Hole Mobility in Regioregular Polythiophene Infiltrated in Straight Nanopores, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1927 CrossRef .
U. Rammelt, N. Hebestreit, A. Fikus and W. Plieth, Investigation of polybithiophene: n-TiO2 bilayers by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and photoelectrochemistry, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2363 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. O. Chan and S. C. Ng, Synthesis, characterization and applications of thiophene-based functional polymers, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 1167 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Present address: Advanced Materials Lab/Sandia National Lab, 1001 University Blvd., SE. Albuquerque, NM 87106, USA.‡ Present address: Polymers Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899-8543, USA.§ Present address: Organic Opto-electronics Lab, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China.¶ Present address: State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, Jilin, People’s Republic of China.|| Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095-1569, USA.** Present address: Schools of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SFM height image of PS-b-PEO thin film with 20 v% titania sol–gel precursor. The corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) is shown as an inset. (b) The power spectral density calculated from the SPM image.	 

 	Fig. 2  Field emsission scanning electron microscopy image of PMMA-b-PEO thin film with 10 v% titania sol–gel precursor calcination at 400 °C for 4 h. The fast Fourier transform image is shown as an insert, calculated from an area of 1.7 × 1.7 μm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transmission electron microscop image of titania nanoparticles obtained from PMMA-b-PEO thin film containing 10 v% titania sol–gel precursor after calcination at 400 °C for 4 h. A selected area electron diffraction pattern is shown as an insert.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic structure of the photovoltaic cell assembly using the titania nanoparticle arrays.	 

 	Fig. 5  External quantum efficiency of photovoltaic cell based on the PS-b-PEO and PMMA-b-PEO templated, dye sensitized, titania nanoparticle arrays.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical adsorption spectra of the pure and dye sensitzed titania nanoparticle arrays.	 

 	Fig. 7  External quantum efficiency of a photovoltaic cell based on the PS-b-PEO and PMMA-b-PEO templated titania nanoparticle arrays (without dye sensitization).	 
Footnotes
† Present address: Advanced Materials Lab/Sandia National Lab, 1001 University Blvd., SE. Albuquerque, NM 87106, USA.
‡ Present address: Polymers Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD, 20899-8543, USA.
§ Present address: Organic Opto-electronics Lab, Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China.
¶ Present address: State Key Laboratory of Inorganic Synthesis and Preparative Chemistry, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, Jilin, People’s Republic of China.
|| Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California at Los Angeles, CA 90095-1569, USA.
** Present address: Schools of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2009
