Air as the renewable carbon source of the future: an overview of CO 2 capture from the atmosphere   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE21586A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE21586A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7833-7853Air as the renewable carbon source of the future: an overview of CO2 capture from the atmosphere†

        
          
            Alain 
            Goeppert
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Miklos 
            Czaun
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            G. K. 
            Surya Prakash
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            George A. 
            Olah
          
          
        
      *
      Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute and Department of Chemistry, University of Southern California, University Park, Los Angeles, CA 90089-1661, USA. E-mail: gprakash@usc.edu; olah@usc.edu; goeppert@usc.edu; czaun@usc.edu
Received 
      9th March 2012
    , Accepted 1st May 2012First published on 1st May 2012AbstractThe burning of our diminishing fossil fuel reserves is accompanied by a large anthropogenic CO2 release, which is outpacing nature's CO2 recycling capability, causing significant environmental harm. Much is being done to avert this crisis including more efficient technology for usage, savings and replacing carbon fuels with alternatives whenever feasible. The capture of CO2 followed by sequestration (CCS) into geologic formation or under the seas has also been proposed and in some cases implemented. Carbon capture and recycling (CCR) to fuels and materials is another promising approach. At first, capturing carbon dioxide from concentrated sources such as fossil fuel burning power plants, industrial plants and natural sources might be the most practical. However, the capture of CO2 from the atmosphere is also technically feasible despite its low concentration (∼390 ppm) and presents even some benefits compared to point source CO2 capture. The present article reviews methods developed for the capture of CO2 directly from the air as well as their advantages and drawbacks. While strong bases such as sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide could be used, their regeneration is energy intensive, requiring high temperatures. Amines either physically or chemically immobilized on solid supports require much lower temperatures for their regeneration and are therefore promising candidates.Alain GoeppertAlain Goeppert obtained his PhD in 2002 from the University of Strasbourg, France. He is currently a research scientist in the Olah/Prakash group. His research focuses on methane and CO2 activation and catalytic transformation to more valuable products including methanol, methyl formate, formic acid and dimethyl ether. He is also involved in the catalytic decomposition of formic acid to hydrogen and CO2, as well as the development of regenerative amine sorbents for the separation and capture of CO2 from various sources including the air. He is a co-author of the book “Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy”.Miklos CzaunMiklos Czaun received his MS Chem. Eng. (1998) from the University of Veszprem (Hungary) and completed his PhD (Summa Cum Laude, 2003) under the supervision of Prof. Gabor Speier. He joined the research group of Profs. George A. Olah and G. K. Surya Prakash at the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute at University of Southern California in 2009. Presently, he is a Senior Research Associate focused on the development of solid adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture and the conversion of carbon dioxide to synthesis gas (dry-reforming and bi-reforming reactions). He is also interested in carbon neutral energy- and hydrogen storage systems.G. K. Surya PrakashG. K. Surya Prakash received his B.Sc. (Honors) (1972) from the Bangalore University, his M.Sc. (1974) from IIT, Madras and his Ph.D. (1978) from the University of Southern California (USC). After his postdoctoral work at USC, he joined the faculty at USC in 1981 and is currently a Professor and Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute holding the Olah Nobel Laureate Chair in Hydrocarbon Chemistry. His research interests are in fluorination and synthetic methods, mechanistic studies, superacid chemistry, electrochemistry and hydrocarbon chemistry. He is a co-proponent of the Methanol Economy concept, prolific and has received several American Chemical Society National Awards.George A. OlahGeorge A. Olah is a Distinguished Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and the Founding Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute at the University of Southern California. He received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1994) for his work on carbocations and hydrocarbon chemistry. His research interests are in synthetic and mechanistic chemistry with emphasis on energy and hydrocarbon chemistry. He is the proponent of the Methanol Economy concept to supplement and eventually supplant fossil fuels and their products by carbon capture and recycling (CCR).

Broader context
Fossil fuels are the result of anaerobic decomposition of organic matter. As such, they are essentially fossilized solar energy that was stored away by nature for millions of years. This gift from nature has allowed humankind to reach unprecedented levels of development and standards of living. However, what was formed over the eons is being used up rather quickly! Reserves of fossil fuels will not last much beyond this century. Meanwhile, the CO2 released by burning them for their energy content is raising increasing concerns due to its negative effects on the environment. To reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and at the same time mitigate the CO2 issue, it is time for humankind to live not on fossilized solar energy but on current solar energy. We are not per se facing an energy crisis. Sunlight delivers to Earth each hour as much energy as consumed by humankind in an entire year. Rather than an energy problem we have an energy collecting and storage problem. Mimicking nature by capturing and recycling CO2 (CCR) from the atmosphere using any alternate energy source will provide us with a sustainable carbon source for fuels and materials well beyond the fleeting fossil fuel era.

1 Introduction
1.1 Increasing CO2 concentration in the atmosphere
Our present energy system and infrastructure relies mainly on the use of fossil fuels, which were formed millions of years ago and are non-renewable on the human timescale. The burning of these diminishing fossil fuel resources is also accompanied by large anthropogenic CO2 emissions, which are outpacing nature's carbon cycle causing significant environmental harm, including global warming and ocean acidification.
An increasing concentration of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the atmosphere and resulting global warming are multifaceted problems, requiring serious consideration of their numerous secondary effects such as melting of ice caps, rising of sea level, ocean acidification1 and alterations in the hydrologic cycle, frequent occurrence of climate extremes and unpredictable changes in biodiversity.2
Greenhouse gases such as methane, carbon dioxide, water vapor, nitrous oxide and ozone naturally present in the atmosphere can absorb and emit thermal infrared radiation, affecting the average temperature of the Planet's surface.
The natural greenhouse effect and Earth's distance from the Sun are among the factors that make the Earth habitable and the lack of this phenomenon would be detrimental to the Earth's ecosystem, resulting in an average temperature of −18 °C. Although a certain degree of greenhouse (GH) effects is necessary to maintain the surface temperature in a suitable range for life sustenance, the increasing concentration of greenhouse gases due to human activities resulted in an increase of 0.8 °C in the Earth's surface temperature in the past 100 years (Fig. 1 and 2).3 A 0.6 °C of this warming occurred over just the past three decades.
 Fig. 1  Global surface temperature change from 1880 to 2010, reported as a deviation from the 1951–1980 average. The black curve shows the globally and annually averaged near-surface temperature derived from a variety of instruments including thermometers, satellites, and various ocean sensors, all carefully calibrated and quality-controlled to remove errors. Green bars indicate the 95 percent confidence interval. The red curve shows a five year running average. Original source: NASA/GISS.3 
 Fig. 2  Atmospheric CO2 concentration measured at Mauna Loa, Hawaii from 1958 to 2012. (Source: CDIAC, Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center.) 
In 1895, the Swedish physical chemist Svante Arrhenius estimated that the doubling in CO2 concentration, through human action, would result in an increase of 5–6 °C in the Earth's average surface temperature.4
The impact of various greenhouse gases present in the atmosphere has been estimated to originate at 60% from water vapor, 25% from CO2, 8% from ozone and 7% from methane, nitrous oxide and other trace compounds.5 These values were estimated for a clear sky because clouds also have a GH effect. It should be pointed out that the global warming potential (GWP) of different gases varies widely. Methane and N2O have, respectively, a 23 and 296 times higher GWP than CO2.6 Fluorinated molecules such as HFC-23, perfluoroethane and sulfur hexafluoride have GWPs more than ten thousand times higher than CO2, as well as much longer atmospheric lifetimes. The emission of even relatively small amounts of these gases can have a serious effect on the environment. It should also be noted here that atmospheric black carbon which is primarily released during the inefficient combustion of biomass (e.g. deforestation) and fossil fuels, was suggested to be included among the regulated substances due to its significant global warming potential.7 Taking into account its relatively low concentration in air (390 ppm), CO2 has a very strong greenhouse effect. But the impact of future CO2 emission on the climate change is still controversial due to uncertainties in our knowledge of climate sensitivity to increase in CO2 concentration.8 However, there is a clear consensus that human activities resulting in increasing emission of greenhouse gases (mainly CO2) are the major contributors to global warming. These facts necessitate reducing the anthropogenic emission of GHGs.
1.2 Carbon management
The current concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, 390 ppm, is more than 100 ppm higher than the value (270 ppm), which defined the Earth's atmospheric system9 for the past 420000 years before the Industrial Revolution. Atmospheric carbon dioxide can originate from two major sources, namely natural- and manmade (anthropogenic) emissions. Although yearly anthropogenic CO2 emission represents only a small part of the total carbon in the Earth's carbon cycle,10 Nature cannot keep up with increasing emission associated with fossil fuel combustion. Presently, the combustion of fossil fuels produces more than 30 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide per year. The emission of such large amounts of fossil based CO2 has created an imbalance in the natural carbon cycle resulting in the accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere as well as a progressive acidification of the oceans.
It has been recognized that stabilization of atmospheric CO2 at any level would require reducing anthropogenic CO2 emission eventually to a zero level.7 However, this is a very complex problem. Excessive CO2 emissions cannot be simply banned as it had been done, for example, in the case of some ozone depleting chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) due to the fact that our present transportation and energy production system and many other industrial processes are heavily dependent on fossil fuels and will remain so for the foreseeable future. Moreover, CO2 is an essential ingredient for life on earth (vide infra).
To reduce CO2 emissions, mitigation technologies must be developed and enforced. There are basically three approaches to this problem: emitting less CO2, sequestering CO2 and utilizing CO2. More energy-efficient technologies and conservation can help, but will not be sufficient to stop the global increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Carbon capture and sequestration (CCS)11 processes offer a promising approach to combat global warming. The CCS process can be broken down into three steps, namely (1) extraction and concentration of CO2 from gas streams, (2) pressurization and transportation of CO2 to the storage site (by pipelines or ships12) and finally (3) sequestration in a permanent storage site. The location of storage sites has to be selected very carefully to avoid extensive leakage of sequestered CO2, otherwise the process can become pointless.13 The four most significant anthropogenic sources of CO2 fall into two categories such as point sources e.g. energy production, heating and industrial activities while the second main category includes the so-called dispersed sources mainly from transportation. Extracting CO2 from various sources requires different approaches due to some characteristic features of the emission such as CO2 concentration and temperature of the gas mixture and the presence of impurities (especially SOx, NOx and particulates), etc. These factors may also affect the purity of the recovered CO2 and this may become important if CO2 is utilized rather than sequestered.
Aiming at reducing the anthropogenic CO2 emission close to zero level would necessitate its capture not only from large concentrated sources such as flue gases of fossil fuel burning power plants or cement factories but also from point sources (e.g. cars, trucks, airplanes). Obviously, the latter does not seem to be practical due to the vast number of relatively small emitting units. But could the extraction of CO2 directly from air, coined as ‘air capture’, give an alternative solution to this challenge? Moreover, can air capture serve as a carbon source of the future considering the fact that fossil fuel reserves are finite? In other words, can carbon capture and recycling (CCR) from the air be a solution to our carbon conundrum? In the present review, we attempt to highlight some promising air capture techniques to help the reader weigh the pros and cons.
2 Carbon dioxide capture from concentrated sources
To significantly reduce emissions, the capture of CO2 from industrial and natural sources is becoming essential. Carbon dioxide can be captured most readily from concentrated sources such as flue gases from fossil fuel-burning power plants, typically containing between 5 and 15% CO2 by volume. Existing power plants could be retrofitted for post-combustion CO2 capture and purification using known and developing separation techniques. Technologies such as pre-combustion CO2 capture and oxy-fuel combustion with pure oxygen generating a highly concentrated CO2 stream could also be applied in advanced power plants. Many industrial exhausts, including those from coke ovens, cement, iron, steel and aluminum factories and fermentation plants also contain considerable concentrations of CO2. The recovery of CO2, though not yet employed on a large scale, is a well-developed procedure. The separation of CO2 from gas streams can be achieved by a range of known separation techniques depending on the conditions. They are based on different physical and chemical processes including absorption into liquid solution systems, adsorption onto suitable solids, cryogenic separation and permeation through membranes.14 The use of these techniques for the separation of CO2 from relatively concentrated sources has been reviewed in the recent past and will therefore be only briefly summarized here.11,15–18
Cryogenic distillation, although widely used for the separation of other gases such as nitrogen and oxygen, is very energy intensive and generally considered impractical for large scale CO2 separation. Membranes are more suited for relatively high concentrations of CO2 such as those encountered in some natural gas deposits or for pre-combustion separation in fossil fuel burning power plants.19–21 They may, therefore, not be the best choice for post-combustion CO2 capture or from other more dilute sources. Alcohols, polyethyleneglycol (PEG) and other oxygenated compounds have been used as physical solvents for acid gas removal, mainly CO2 and H2S for at least four decades. Commercial processes include, for example, SELEXOL® from Union Carbide (now a UOP process, using polyethylene glycol dimethyl ethers), Rectisol (methanol chilled at −40 °C) and Sepasolv MPE® from BASF (a mixture of polyethylene glycol dialkyl ethers).22 These physical solvents are generally used for the separation of CO2 at high pressure such as in the purification of syngas or natural gas sweetening. The regeneration by heating or reduced pressure is less energy intensive than in the case of chemical sorbents. These sorbents are also non-corrosive, however, they are not well suited for the separation of CO2 from dilute and low pressure sources.
Among the different CO2 separation technologies, systems based on amine solutions have been previously used industrially for more than half a century and are presently still one of the most suitable and widely employed technologies for high volume flue gas stream treatment. The commonly used absorbents are typically 25–30 wt% aqueous solutions of alkanolamines such as monoethanolamine (MEA) and diethanolamine (DEA), which form carbamates and bicarbonates with CO2 (Fig. 3).22 However, the energy required using this well developed amine solutions for the capture of CO2 is high. The energy penalty for CO2 capture from a coal-based power station using an MEA solution has, for example, been estimated to be 25 to 40%. High energy requirements for the regeneration step, limited concentration of amines due to corrosion problems and amine degradation are major drawbacks warranting the development of more efficient, regenerable and robust CO2 sorbents.
 Fig. 3  Reaction of primary and secondary amines with CO2. 
Ionic liquids (ILs) have been proposed for CO2 absorption. Although ILs possess multiple advantages, for example, very low vapor pressure and with the possibility of containing task-specific functional groups (TSFGs, e.g. –NH2), their preparation and purification is usually difficult and costly. Liquid-like nanoparticle organic hybrid materials (NOHMs)23 have been formulated to address some issues related to ILs. A variety of liquid-like NOHMs which were prepared (a) include ionic or covalent interaction between silica cores (10–15 nm in size) and the polymeric material, (b) with or without linkers e.g. sulfonic acid or glycidyl ether, (c) contain or not contain TSFGs.
A possible pathway to circumvent the difficulties encountered with liquid systems is to use solid CO2 adsorption systems. Most commonly, the solid sorbents used for CO2 separation are physical adsorbents. This process is based on the ability of porous solids to reversibly adsorb certain components in gas mixtures. These solids can have a large distribution of pore size such as silica gel, alumina and activated carbon or a pore size controlled by the crystal structure like zeolites. At a lower temperature (e.g. RT), zeolite based adsorbents have shown high absorption capacities for CO2 (zeolite 13X: 160 mg CO2 per g and zeolite 4A: 135 mg CO2 per g at 25 °C in pure CO2).24 One of the drawbacks of these adsorbents is their fast decline in adsorption capacities with increasing temperature. Moreover, as the gases are only physically adsorbed on these adsorbents, the separation factors between different gases (such as CO2–N2 mixtures) are low, which makes capture from sources containing lower CO2 concentrations impractical.
For practical applications, sorbents with a high selectivity for CO2, high capacity and easy regeneration are desired. Recently, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) with high CO2 storage capacity have been discovered. MOFs are a class of high surface area, highly porous materials. MOF 177 (Zn4O(1,3,5-benzenetribenzoate)2)25 composed of zinc clusters joined by 3,5-benzenetribenzoate units, for example, has a surface area of 4500 m2 g−1 and a CO2 storage capacity of about 1.47 g CO2 per g of MOF at a pressure of 30 atm.26,27 At lower CO2 partial pressure the adsorption capacity was, however, much more modest. To the best of our knowledge, non-functionalised MOFs have never been used as adsorbent materials for air capture. Readers interested in the synthesis and CO2 capture performance of these materials are directed to recent reports and references therein.28
To achieve a higher selectivity to CO2 in solid absorbents, chemical absorption applied to solids is also one of the promising pathways. For this, different approaches can be envisioned including: (i) use of solid amines or polyamine directly as absorbents,29 (ii) amines or polyamines deposited (physical adsorption) on a solid support such as silica or alumina,30–35 (iii) amines or polyamines chemically bonded to the surface of a solid.36–40 Several recent review articles have discussed in detail the characteristics and adsorption properties of physical and chemical CO2 adsorbents for the capture of CO2 from flue gases and other relatively concentrated sources.11,15–18 The present paper will therefore focus on the capture of CO2 from the air, which until now has received little attention.
3 Why capture CO2 from the air?
The 120 ppm increase in CO2 concentration in the atmosphere since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution resulted in an accumulation of 600 Gt of anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere. At the current rate, humanity is adding an additional 15 Gt of CO2 per year to the air.41 While about half of the anthropogenic CO2 emissions are the result of large industrial sources such as power plants and cement factories, the other half originate from small distributed sources such as home and office heating and cooling, and the transportation sector.42 The collection at the source of CO2 from millions, even billions, of small fossil fuel-burning units will be difficult, if at all possible, and is therefore not practical and/or economical. For example, while capturing CO2 from vehicles onboard may be technically feasible, it would be economically prohibitive. Moreover, CO2, once captured, would have to be transported to a sequestration site, requiring the construction of a massive and expensive infrastructure. Capturing CO2 onboard airplanes is even less feasible because of the added weight involved. In homes and offices, producing highly dispersed and limited amounts of CO2, the capture and transportation of CO2 to collection centers would also require an extensive and costly infrastructure. These sources represent a significant part of the global CO2 emissions and their importance cannot be ignored in the long term.
To deal with small and dispersed CO2 emitters and to avoid the need to develop and construct an enormous CO2-collecting infrastructure, CO2 should be eventually captured from the atmosphere – an approach that has already been proposed by some in the past.43–46 The atmosphere could thus serve as a means of transporting CO2 emissions to the site of its capture. This would make the CO2 collection independent of CO2 sources, and CO2 could be captured from any source – small or large, static or mobile. With the concentration of CO2 in air being at equilibrium all around the world, CO2 extraction facilities could be located anywhere, offering considerable flexibility compared to source point capture. However, to allow for any subsequent chemical recycling to feedstocks, fuels and derived products, they should ideally be placed close to hydrogen production sites and major population centers. If sequestration is desired, the collection facilities should be placed close to suitable geological formations. As mixing and equilibration of air is relatively rapid, local depletion in CO2 is not likely to pose any problem. If this were not the case, emissions from power plants would cause a much higher local concentration of CO2 near the plants.
It should be pointed out that air capture has some other advantages compared to conventional CO2 capture from high concentration sources. While conventional CCS can only decrease emissions (“avoided carbon”), CO2 capture from the air is “carbon negative” and could possibly even be used to lower the CO2 concentration in the atmosphere when coupled with recycling to products (CCR). It has also been argued that the recovery factor of an air capture plant could be lower (e.g. 45%) than that of a point-source carbon capture facility (80–90%), allowing the optimization of air capture around the process efficiency rather than around the amount of captured CO2.47 In other words, it can be assumed that air capture processes will be optimized to minimize the cost associated with the recovery of a mass unit of CO2. Finally, the lower concentration of contaminants such as NOx, SOx and particulates in air compared to flue gases is also an advantage for direct air capture.
Despite the low concentration of CO2 of presently only 0.039% (390 ppm) in the atmosphere, nature routinely recycles CO2 by photosynthesis in plants, trees, and algae to produce carbohydrates, cellulose and lipids, and eventually new plant life, while simultaneously releasing oxygen and thereby sustaining life on Earth. Following nature's example, humankind will be able to capture excess CO2 from the air and recycle it to generate fuels, synthetic hydrocarbons and their products. One of the proposed ways to capture atmospheric CO2 for recycling or sequestration would be to use the natural photosynthetic cycle of varied vegetation to produce biomass that could then be further processed. A different route involves the use of synthetic sorbents for the capture and recycling of CO2 from the air.
4 Recycling of CO2 from the air through biomass and its limitations
In the natural carbon cycle, nature uses the sun's energy to recycle carbon dioxide from natural sources through photosynthesis. It captures CO2 from the atmosphere with vegetation, plankton, algae, etc., and using water as the hydrogen source, the energy from the sun and green chlorophyll acting as the catalyst, new plant life is created, which eventually, over million of years, can be naturally converted by anaerobic animal and plant decay to fossil fuels.48 Coal, petroleum, natural gas and other fossil fuels which are at the heart of our industrialized societies are basically fossilized sunshine stored over millions of years by nature.
Photosynthesis is, however, relatively inefficient at converting the sun's energy into chemical energy in the form of sugars, cellulose, lignin, etc. Although some plants such as sugarcane can convert up to 8% of the sun's energy into biomass, most crop's photosynthetic efficiency is generally limited to 0.5–2%, which is very low even compared to the inefficient conversion of solar energy to electricity with solar cells (about 10–20% in commercial systems depending on the technology). The natural carbon cycle can be considerably enhanced by modern technologies. Biomass can be used either as a feedstock for biomaterials and chemicals, burned to produce heat or electricity, or transformed into liquid fuels such as ethanol, methanol, or biodiesel. Today, biomass supplies about 10% of the world's primary energy consumption. Indeed, in many underdeveloped countries it continues to be the most important source of energy for heating and cooking purposes, whereas in developed nations only a small fraction of the energy needs are met by biomass.
Biomass as an energy source has many advantages. In principle, bioenergy is almost inexhaustible and renewable, provided that new plant life is grown sustainably to replace the ones harvested for energy. Biomass has also the advantage of storing energy in the form of chemical bonds unlike other renewable energies such as wind, solar and geothermal. Biomass is also versatile as it includes solid fuels such as wood or crop residues, liquid biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel, and gaseous fuels in the form of biogas or syngas. From an environmental point of view, biomass can help mitigate climate change, as the CO2 released by use of bioenergy is captured from the atmosphere by the growing plants and should therefore result in no net CO2 emissions (i.e. it is carbon neutral).
On the other hand, considerable scrutiny and criticism has been directed at the production of biofuels such as bioethanol and biodiesel from food crops, which has contributed to a significant extent to the sharp increases in food prices experienced in recent years.49 Higher prices and subsidies have resulted in the conversion of forests, savannahs, grasslands, etc., into cropland, especially in Southeast Asia and the Americas. Land clearing also releases large amounts of CO2 as a result of fires set to clear the land and decomposition of leaves and other plant material through microbiological processes. The vast amounts of CO2 released from the land conversion is considered as a “carbon debt”. Some studies suggest that the CO2 emissions avoided by using current biofuels (ethanol from corn, palm oil and soybean biodiesel) compared to fossil fuel based gasoline would take between 35 and 450 years to repay this carbon debt.50,51 These realities raise questions about the value of presently used biofuels based on agricultural crops to cut greenhouse gas emissions.52–55 Besides greenhouse gas emissions, biofuel production also has other environmental effects such as loss of biodiversity when large tracks of rainforest have to be cleared for sugarcane or palm monocultures, utilization of vast amounts of water for irrigation, as well as fertilizers and pesticide run-off.56–59 In order to generate bioenergy on a large scale, vast areas of land and water resources are also necessary. Great care must therefore be taken in choosing crops for energy production, as these should have a high photosynthetic efficiency, grow rapidly, use minimal amounts of fertilizers, herbicides and insecticides, and have limited water needs to minimize energy input into their cultivation. These “energy crops” should also preferably be grown on land not dedicated to food crops in order to avoid competition with food production. With the present technology, a large part of the world's agricultural land would have to be devoted to energy crops if they were to supply a substantial amount of our energy needs. In the transportation sector, the production of cellulose-based ethanol and other liquid fuels, particularly methanol through biomass gasification, will allow a higher yield per unit of land.60 Algae grown in ponds, tanks, or the sea might also eventually extend the scope of bioenergy.61 However, considering current technologies and their limitations, it has been estimated that biomass produced in a renewable and sustainable manner can cover at most 10 to 15% of our energy needs in the future.59
5 Anthropogenic CO2 capture from air
Due to the limitations of CO2 capture and utilization from the air using biological processes, the direct capture of CO2 with technological systems has been proposed as a possible solution to remediate excess CO2 emissions from human activities. A majority of the technologies which have been developed to capture CO2 from air, target the production of CO2 free air and although the regeneration of the sorbents might be important, the recovery of the captured gas in its pure form is not a requirement. Production of CO2 free air is of high importance and widely practiced in some industrial processes. Scrubbing CO2 from the air has been performed since the 1930s in order to avoid fouling and clogging of equipment, i.e. formation of dry ice, in cryogenic air separation plants.62–64 In modern cryogenic air separation plants that produce high purity oxygen, nitrogen and argon, molecular sieve zeolites and activated alumina are mostly used to separate CO2.63–66 Besides synthetic zeolites such as NaX and NaY, naturally occurring zeolites such as clinoptilolites and chabazites have also been proposed.67,68 In smaller cryogenic separation operations, reversing heat exchangers can be used. In this process, the incoming compressed air is cooled down to freeze out water and CO2. During the regeneration step, CO2 and water are evaporated by passing a hot purge gas through the exchanger. The drawback of this technology is the continuous cycling of the exchanger between cooling and heating and the need for large amounts of regeneration gas.
Human beings emit CO2 at a rate of about 1 kg per person per day.69 Continuous removal of CO2 from air is therefore essential in closed-circuit breathing systems (CCBSs) such as submarines and spacecrafts to provide an atmosphere with acceptable CO2 concentrations (in general below 7.6 mmHg).70–72 For space applications NASA developed a poly(methylmethacrylate)-supported PEI/PEG based adsorbent (HSC+) used in a regenerable CO2 removal system (RCRS) that has shown good adsorption capacities and enhanced adsorption and desorption kinetics.70 This system demonstrated its capability to maintain an acceptable CO2 level in a seven-person crew specification (∼7 kg CO2 per day) in a semi-batch pressure swing adsorption (PSA) mode using a space vacuum to regenerate the sorbent. Maintaining the CO2 level in an appropriate range is also very important in medical applications,73 in mining and rescue missions, and for rebreather diving.74
The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommends a maximum concentration of CO2 of 0.1% for continuous exposure. The United States National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), on the other hand, recommends a maximum concentration of CO2 of 0.5% in the workplace with an exposure to concentrations up to 3% for a maximum of 10 minutes.75 A CO2 level above 4% is considered immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH). The United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) also has similar limits with a time weighted average (TWA) level exposure for CO2 set at 0.5% and a short term exposure limit (STEL) up to 3% for 15 min.76 Signs of intoxication have been produced by a 30 minute exposure at 5%, and exposure at 7 to 10% for a few minutes produces unconsciousness.75 It has been reported that submarine personnel continuously exposed at 3% were only slightly affected, provided the oxygen content of the air was maintained at normal concentrations. Considering these limits, CO2 adsorbents used for breathing applications are generally considered exhausted and in need of replacement or regeneration, when the gas at the exit of the scrubber is in a range of about 0.1 to 0.5% CO2.70,73,77
Purification of the air feed from CO2 is also essential for alkaline fuel cells (AFCs) in which CO2 can rapidly react with and deteriorate the basic electrolyte solution, typically based on KOH, resulting in a severe loss of performance.78,79 Although AFCs are among the cheapest fuel cells to manufacture and are utilized in space applications (such as in the Apollo space program and space shuttle orbiters), this sensitivity to CO2 has hampered their general commercial use.80 The same type of problem arises in iron–air batteries, which have been proposed as robust and cost-effective systems for large scale energy storage for grid applications. The accumulation of CO2 in the alkaline electrolyte would result in the conversion of NaOH or KOH used as electrolytes to the corresponding carbonate, damaging the battery's performance.
5.1 Thermodynamics of CO2 capture from the air
The purpose of CO2 capture from the air is basically to concentrate CO2 from about 390 ppm to a relatively pure gas (>90% CO2) so it can be used for recycling or sequestration. The minimum thermodynamic energy to extract CO2 from the air has been determined as being relatively low. Keith et al.81 and Zeman82 found that the minimum energy required to capture CO2 from the air and obtain a pure CO2 stream was close to 20 kJ mol−1 (equivalent to 1.6 GJ per t CO2). For their calculations, they used the free energy of mixing formula RT ln(P/P0), where P0 is the partial CO2 pressure in air (∼0.0004 atm), P is the final pressure of the CO2 in the enriched gas after separation, R is the ideal gas constant (8.3 J mol−1 K−1) and T is the operating temperature. Using a different formula, Ranjan reported a similar value for the thermodynamic minimum work of separation.83 The minimum energy required to capture CO2 grows logarithmically with dilution. Consequently, even though the dilution in air is much higher than in the effluent of a power plant the resulting energy requirement is larger by only a small amount.84 Theoretically, CO2 capture from the air would require between 1.8 and 3.4 times (depending on assumptions on capture conditions) as much energy as capture from flue gases.69,81 In light of these numbers, the capture of CO2 from the air seems feasible. Of course the actual energy needed for air capture will be significantly higher than the theoretically determined minimum energy and depend on the technology employed for the capture. As a comparison, an industrial MEA-based system consumes about 180 kJ mol−1 CO2 captured from natural gas power plants whereas the thermodynamic minimum energy required is only 8.4 kJ mol−1 CO2.82
5.2 Land requirement for CO2 capture from the air
Mixing and equilibration of air is relatively rapid, resulting in a nearly uniform CO2 concentration in the atmosphere around the world. Johnston et al.85 studied this specific aspect by modeling chemical transport of CO2 in the atmosphere. They concluded that the atmospheric increase in CO2 (about 3.3 Gt C per year) can be balanced by a chemical sink with a single area of about 75000 km2. By splitting this area and judicious engineering and placement of sinks, only a small fraction of this surface would be needed. Therefore, other factors such as economics and resources limitations are more likely to dictate the placement of CO2 capture facilities than any local depletion in CO2 concentration. Due to the much lower CO2 concentration and therefore higher volume of gas to be treated, the CO2 plants for the extraction of CO2 from the air are expected to be much larger than a conventional point source CO2 capture unit in an industrial setting.
5.3 Technologies and processes for CO2 capture from the air
As described earlier, various techniques can be applied for the separation of CO2 from relatively concentrated sources such as flue gases from fossil fuel burning power plants and cement factories. Capturing and concentrating CO2 from the air is, however, much more challenging. Due to its very low CO2 concentration (∼390 ppm), the presence of moisture, and the necessity to operate close to room temperature and ambient pressure, many of the technologies applied to gases containing a higher CO2 concentration can be ruled out. At atmospheric pressure, physical adsorbents such as zeolites, activated carbon and alumina can be excluded due to their low selectivity for CO2 in the presence of moisture and very low heat of adsorption, which result in low adsorption capacities. The Selexol process for the capture of CO2 at a rather high pressure also cannot be applied. MEA based sorbents suffer from stability problems when contacted with air as well as evaporation issues due to the large volume of gas to be handled. Nevertheless, MEA based systems are currently the most commonly used in submarines. They are quieter, more efficient and smaller than zeolite based systems. However, due to the toxic nature of MEA, leakage of the amine and its decomposition products has to be kept in check.
5.4 Inorganic chemisorbents
Inorganic chemisorbents such as calcium oxides, magnesium oxides and lithium zirconates require temperatures in excess of 300 °C to react with CO2 at a reasonable rate.15 Systems based on lithium hydroxide have been used for life support since the early days of space exploration and are employed in submarines to control CO2 levels in case of an emergency.86,87 Although the adsorption capacity of LiOH is high (theoretically 1 kg of LiOH can absorb up to 0.91 kg of CO2), it cannot be easily regenerated.2LiOH + CO2 → Li2CO3 + H2O
Among the possible candidates for CO2 adsorption from the air are strong bases such as calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2), potassium hydroxide (KOH) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH), which react readily with CO2 to form calcium carbonate (CaCO3), potassium carbonate (K2CO3) and sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), respectively.82,84 The earlier work on CO2 removal from the air starting at the end of the 1920s88–91 and until recently has been mostly based on the use of aqueous solutions of these alkaline chemicals absorbents. The reaction of CO2 with these hydroxides proceeds as follows:CO2 + 2OH− → CO32− + H2O

5.4.1 Inorganic chemisorbents in solution. 
The use of sodium hydroxide solutions with high pH for the absorption of CO2 from the atmosphere is a well known process. Various systems have been proposed for contacting the air with the absorbent including packed beds, large convection towers,92 spray towers93 and pools.94 One of the most common industrial methods to contact and absorb a gas with a liquid is to drip the liquid, in this case a strong base solution, through a column filled with packing material and flow the gas from the opposite side (counter flow). This packed column design was used by many investigators and CO2 capture efficiencies above 99% were obtained.62,95 These early systems were generally designed to provide air feeds free of CO2 and not for CO2 capture and utilization or sequestration. Baciocchi et al.96 and Zeman82 investigated packed column systems using NaOH as the absorbent specifically for CO2 capture from the air. Various absorber designs, commercially available structured packing and parameters were described and studied. The energy requirements in the absorption step for pumping the air as well as the liquid adsorbent were estimated to be between 30 kJ mol−1 and 88 kJ mol−1. The low concentration of CO2 necessitates large volumes of air to be blown through the absorbent tower. To avoid large pressure drops and associated energy loss, it was determined that the height of the liquid absorber in the packed column should be relatively short and the column cross-section large.96 Herzog pointed out that the use of classical packed columns, such as in the commercially available MEA based systems, would lead to an unacceptably high pressure drop and associated energy consumption due to the very large volume of gas to be handled. The technical analysis done by Baciocchi et al. used a 2 M NaOH solution to absorb CO2 from the air and reduce its concentration from 500 ppm to 250 ppm. The total energy demand for this process including regeneration of the NaOH solution and CO2 capture was estimated to be between 12 and 17 GJ per t CO2. The most efficient CO2 absorption was obtained with a column of 2.8 m height and 12 m in diameter with a liquid to gas flow ratio of 1.44 and a pressure drop of 100 Pa m−1.96 This arrangement, which would result in very flat and wide absorption units, differs greatly from conventional packed column arrangements for the capture of CO2 from sources with much higher concentrations such as the flue gas of fossil fuel power plants. For a similar amount of CO2 to be separated, the volume of gas to be handled would be at least two orders of magnitude larger in the case of CO2 absorption from the air. Due to the large volume of air passing through the packed column, the evaporative water losses are quite high. Zeman determined experimentally that an average of 90 g H2O per g of CO2 captured (220 mol H2O per mol CO2) were lost to evaporation, which may result in a significant economic and environmental penalty.97
An alternate route to the use of packed columns is to spray an absorbing solution through an open tower, much like the cooling tower in a power plant. This route proposed by Keith et al.81,93,98 would avoid large pressure drops and the need for a packing material. An analysis of direct air capture was conducted using as a model a tower of 110 m in diameter and 120 m in height. Considering absorption of 50% of the CO2 in the inlet gas with a 4–6 M NaOH solution, regeneration of the NaOH, capture and compression of CO2, the total energy required in the process was estimated at 679 kJ mol−1 CO2, about 15 GJ per t CO2 captured.81 The water loss by evaporation was significant, although lower than the one reported by Zeman for a packed column.97 At 15 °C, 65% relative humidity using a 1.3 M NaOH solution, a water loss of 20 mol H2O per mol CO2 was observed in a prototype (reaction tower of 3.7 m high and 1.2 m diameter) built by Keith et al. Under otherwise similar conditions, increasing the molarity of the NaOH solution decreased the water loss and at a NaOH concentration of 7.2 M the water loss was eliminated. A general equation to determine the water loss depending on reaction conditions has also been developed.99 The cost of CO2 capture in this case (excluding CO2 solution recovery and utilization or sequestration) was estimated to be between $53 and $127 per ton of CO2 depending on operating conditions, capital costs and mass transfer rate.93 The lower end of the cost range was achieved by decreasing the mean drop diameter of the spray to 50 μm and therefore increasing the interaction between the liquid phase and the gas phase.
Regardless of the technology used, once the NaOH solution has been in contact with CO2 it forms a sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) solution. In order to be a practical process, this carbonate solution has to be recycled back to NaOH to complete the cycle. Na2CO3 is highly soluble in water, which is beneficial because it avoids build up on the internal surfaces of the absorption column. However, the highly soluble nature of Na2CO3 also prevents its precipitation from the aqueous solution and easy collection for regeneration. The resulting need to evaporate large quantities of water would be quite energy intensive. Therefore, the process which is usually proposed for the regeneration of NaOH is known as caustic recovery, or “causticization”, where Na2CO3 is reacted with Ca(OH)2. The resulting solid calcium carbonate (CaCO3) precipitates out of the solution whereas the regenerated NaOH solution is sent back to the contactor. CaCO3 is then dried and calcined in a kiln generally at a temperature in excess of 700 °C to drive off a concentrated stream of CO2 and obtain CaO, which is hydrated with water to form Ca(OH)2 (slaking) to close the cycle. An overview of the Na/Ca cycle is depicted in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Overview of the process of CO2 capture from the air using the Na/Ca cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society. 
A process invented in 1879, known as the Kraft process, is one of the oldest in industrial chemistry and has been used on a continuous basis and large scale in the pulp and paper industry. In the Kraft pulping to make paper, wood is digested with sodium hydroxide to break the bond that links lignin to cellulose and obtain wood pulp consisting of almost pure cellulose. The remaining solution, called black liquor, consists of many organic materials from the wood, mainly lignin along with sodium carbonate which is recovered using the process described, vide supra.  
The Kraft process, which is a mature technology operated on a large scale, can help determine the energetic and economic feasibility of a similar Na/Ca cycle for the capture of CO2 from the air. Due to its high enthalpy of reaction (179.2 kJ mol−1 CO2), the most energy intensive step in this cycle is the regeneration of Ca(OH)2 by calcination which requires high temperatures. The absorption reaction occurs close to room temperature, so the heat generated cannot be practically recovered. Part of the heat produced during the slaking phase (−64.5 kJ mol−1 CO2) could be used to dry CaCO3 before sending it the calciner. A considerable amount of energy would also be needed to circulate air through the absorbent. For the production of lime, cement and in the paper industry, the calcination of CaCO3 to form CaO is practiced on a large scale. Typically, the calciner has the shape of a long cylindrical rotary kiln lined with bricks in which the lime works its way down the shaft by gravity. This kiln is generally fired with natural gas or fuel oil burned in the presence of air. The exhaust gases contain up to 20% CO2 which is generally released to the atmosphere. However, using this setup for the capture of CO2 from the air would require a secondary CO2 capture unit in order to concentrate this stream to almost pure CO2. The addition of essentially a second gas purification step, which could rely on existing amine scrubbing technology as proposed by Keith et al., would however add to the complexity and energy cost of the overall system. An alternative would be to fire the kiln with pure oxygen separated from the air, resulting in an almost pure stream of CO2, leading to a simpler system with significantly lower energy consumption.82 Nevertheless, a Kraft-type recovery plant is capital intensive with numerous units for phase separation, solid handling, washing, dewatering, calcination, etc.
A detailed analysis of this process applied to CO2 capture from the air including technical, economic and environmental aspects has been reported by some research groups. Depending on the type of calcium carbonate precipitation and dewatering technology used, in 2006 Baciocchi et al.96 determined a real specific energy demand for the process between 12 and 17 GJ per t CO2 captured. Zeman estimated an energy requirement around 10 GJ per t CO2 assuming that the heat generated during the slaking reaction can be recovered and used for the dewatering process.100 The practicality of this point has been debated as uncertain by Stolaroff,98 who determined an energy requirement of 16 GJ per t CO2.81 A detailed comparison of these variations on the Kraft process highlighting their main differences were reviewed by Stolaroff as well as Zeman.82,98 The estimated energy needed ranged between 442 and 679 kJ mol−1 CO2 captured.
It was pointed out that the combustion of coal, gasoline and methane generate, respectively, 9, 15 and 20 GJ energy per tonne of CO2 emitted to the atmosphere.96,101 Depending on the fuel source the carbon intensity of electricity generation can vary greatly. For example, whereas in France one mole of CO2 is emitted for every 1900 kJ (43 GJ per t CO2) of electric power produced, due to its high reliance on nuclear power, only 190 kJ mol−1 of emitted CO2 (4.3 GJ per t CO2) are produced in China, which relies extensively on coal.101 Compared to these figures, the energy needed for capture of CO2 from the atmosphere using the Na/Ca cycle as presented, vide supra, are quite high and in some cases larger than the heat released during the combustion of the primary fuel, especially in the case of coal. The economic and environmental feasibility of such a highly energy intensive process therefore seems highly impractical and questionable.
It is clear that using fossil fuels to produce the required energy to run this process is unfavorable as it would defeat its primary objective: reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and reduce carbon emissions. The same could be achieved by simply capturing the CO2 at the source, fossil fuel power plants, with the added benefit of electricity production. The use of alternative energies to run the process would therefore be advantageous. As early as 1977, Steinberg and Dang102 contemplated the use of nuclear fusion plants for the regeneration of spent absorbents for the CO2 absorption from air. Sherman proposed to supply the heat generated by next generation high temperature nuclear power plants103 to the calcination kiln for the regeneration of Ca(OH)2 through decomposition of CaCO3 to CaO and subsequent hydrolysis. The waste heat from the electrical generator as well as electricity generated by the nuclear power plant could also be integrated with the CO2 capture plant. Nikulshina et al., on the other hand, described the use of solar heat for the regeneration of Ca(OH)2.104,105
While using alternative energy is of interest, reducing the energy requirements for CO2 capture from the air through improved designs or different routes is equally, if not more, important. Non-conventional causticization technologies are being developed mainly for the pulp and paper industry, which could be potentially adapted to the capture of CO2. Most of them are based on the addition of a metal oxide (MexOy) or salt to convert Na2CO3 directly to Na2MexOy+1 and CO2. NaOH is then regenerated by dissolving Na2MexOy+1 in water. Autocausticization using sodium borates has been identified as promising. It is based on the recovery of NaOH by the reaction of Na2CO3 with NaBO2 (sodium metaborate) to form Na4B2O5 (sodium pyroborate) and Na3BO3 (sodium orthoborate), which can then be hydrolyzed back to NaOH. However, the temperature needed to release the CO2 through the reaction of Na2CO3 with sodium metaborate or orthoborate (900–1000 °C) being the same or even higher than in the Na/Ca cycle, the process does not appear to offer any clear advantage.106,107  
Direct causticization using sodium titanates proposed for the paper industry108 could potentially also be applied to CO2 capture as suggested by Stolaroff98 and Mahmoudkhani et al.109–111 The advantage of using titanates is a much lower heat of reaction for the regeneration step, i.e. 90 kJ mol−1 compared to 179 kJ mol−1 for CaCO3, which could considerably reduce the energy needed for the process.112 Mahmoudkhani estimated that the heat requirement for this process would be similar to the heat requirement for the regeneration of the sorbent in an amine-based (MEA) capture system for power plants, i.e. around 130 kJ mol−1.109 However, the heat required for the recovery reaction still has to be provided at a high temperature (generally 800–950 °C), close to the one used in the calcium based process. Carbon Engineering Inc., based in Calgary, is also developing a NaOH recovery cycle based on direct causticization with iron oxide (Fe2O3) (see Fig. 5).113
 Fig. 5  Proposed Na/Fe cycle for the capture of CO2 from the air. Reproduced with permission from Carbon Engineering.113 
KOH could also be used to capture CO2 using similar processes and regeneration methods described here. KOH is, however, more expensive than NaOH and about a hundred times less of it is produced annually. In 1995, Bandi et al., using KOH solutions in a 2 m high packed column noticed an increase in the CO2 absorption rate with increasing KOH concentration. With a 2 M KOH solution, about 70% of the CO2 was scrubbed out of the air.114 The chosen regeneration method in this case was acidification by the addition of sulfuric acid or KHSO4 to obtain K2SO4 and release CO2. The produced K2SO4 solution was then electrodialytically converted back to KOH and KHSO4. Although methanol was the desired product, the electrochemical reduction of the captured CO2 by Bandi et al. yielded a mixture of products including CO, CH4 and higher hydrocarbons and alcohols. Stucki et al. proposed removing CO2 from the atmosphere using microporous hollow fiber membranes in which a KOH solution was flown.115 The obtained K2CO3 was recycled to KOH and CO2 by electrolysis. H2 was produced from water concomitantly and complemented by additional H2 prepared in a separate electrochemical cell and then combined with CO2 to form a gas mixture with a H2–CO2 ratio of 3, which is ideal to make methanol.
In order to simplify the overall process, the direct use of calcium hydroxide to capture CO2 from the atmosphere using a variety of absorbing structures has also been explored. The simplest concept consists of relatively large and shallow pools of either stagnant or gently agitated aqueous Ca(OH)2 solutions. By reaction with CO2, the calcium hydroxide forms calcium carbonate, which precipitates and accumulates at the bottom of the pool. Calcium carbonate can then be collected, dried and regenerated by calcination in a kiln, which also produces a high concentration CO2 stream (Fig. 6).116 The same calcination reaction, used on a large scale, is the central step to make cement from limestone. This approach suffers from a number of drawbacks. The solubility of Ca(OH)2 in water at about 0.025 M at room temperature is very low, limiting the amount of OH− groups able to react with CO2 and therefore limiting the rate of CO2 uptake. The mass transfer of CO2 through the air to the liquid surface, establishing an equilibrium between the CO2 concentrations in each phase, having the CO2 diffusing from the surface of the liquid before reacting with Ca(OH)2 can all potentially affect the reaction kinetics. Lackner et al. pointed out that the rate of CO2 uptake was limited by the transport of CO2 through the air to the absorber.84 According to Herzog,117 however, the rate limiting step in the above mentioned steps is the mass transfer in the liquid phase. In this case, some agitation of the liquid phase would probably improve the diffusion problem. A number of designs have been proposed to improve the contact between Ca(OH)2 and air. They include heat exchanger like structures with a large number of flat surfaces and vertical surfaces over which a solution of sorbent is flown.118 Due to the very low solubility of CaCO3, scaling on the surface of the gas–liquid contactor could be a major problem in these types of setups. To limit gas and liquid phase restrictions, misting of the Ca(OH)2 solution and contacting it with air in open towers, similar to the cooling towers used in power plants, was also considered.118 However, regardless of the considered design, the highly energy consuming regeneration of CaCO3 by calcination at high temperature remains and drives most of the cost of the overall system.116Ca(OH)2 + CO2 → CaCO3 + H2O, ΔH0298K = −109 kJ mol−1
 Fig. 6  Air capture with calcium hydroxide.116 
At the end of the 1970s, Steinberg et al. proposed eight different methods to separate CO2 from air with the intention to produce methanol.102,119,120 Among them, the absorption/stripping of air with dilute potassium carbonate solutions was found to require the least energy. After CO2 adsorption at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, the formed KHCO3 solution was treated in a stripper with steam to obtain a concentrated CO2 flow.K2CO3 + CO2 + H2O → 2KHCO3, ΔH0 = −141 kJ mol−1
In a recent patent application, Polak and Steinberg described the use of concentrated K2CO3 solutions for the absorption of CO2 from the air.121 Whereas the solubility of K2CO3 in water is 112 g per 100 mL, the solubility of KHCO3 is only 22.4 g per 100 mL. This difference in solubility results in the precipitation of KHCO3 upon CO2 capture. The precipitate can then be transferred to a regeneration unit heated to 100–200 °C to decompose KHCO3 back to K2CO3, releasing CO2 at the same time. Since little water is carried along with the precipitated K2CO3, the energy needed to move, heat and regenerate the absorbent is expected to be lower than in the case of an aqueous solution. Out of three carbonates (Li2CO3, Na2CO3 and K2CO3), it was shown that solid K2CO3 has some of the most favorable CO2 absorption characteristics.122 It has a wide carbonation temperature range in which CO2 is captured with 100% efficiency. The K2CO3/KHCO3 cycle for the capture of CO2 from the air is currently being commercially pursued by the “Coaway” company.123 Eisaman et al. studied the electrochemical CO2 capture from the atmosphere based on a K2CO3/KHCO3/KOH solution.124,125 They reported that the concentration from 400 ppm to 1 bar consumed about 350 kJ mol−1 at a current efficiency of 23%.
Calcium hydroxide and other inorganic hydroxides strongly bind CO2, far more than needed for the capture of CO2 from air. This excessive bonding requires a considerable energy input for the regeneration step. Other scrubbing and binding agents would therefore be preferable. They should be stable, react fast, be selective for CO2 but exert only a nominal hold on CO2. A medium reacting with CO2 in a simple reversible reaction would be ideal. This capture/regeneration cycle can be described by two mirror reactions: (1) A + CO2 → ACO2 followed by (2) ACO2 → A + CO2, where A represents an absorbent or adsorbent to be determined. High energy requirements, corrosiveness of strong alkaline solutions, water loss, local drying of solutions and mass transfer problems pointed to a possible alternative: the use of solid sorbents such as those proposed by Lackner.101


5.4.2 Solid inorganic chemisorbents. 
The chemisorption of CO2 on inorganic solid bases has been studied by Steinberg and co-workers.105,126–128 Thermodynamic and thermogravimetric analysis of three different Na-based thermochemical cycles were performed.126 The carbonation of solid NaOH at 25 °C with air containing 500 ppm of CO2 was very slow, reaching only 9% after a 4 h reaction. On the other hand, the carbonation of solid NaHCO3 in a flow of water saturated air was only 3.4%. The thermal decomposition of NaHCO3 and Na2CO3 was performed at 90–200 °C and 1000–1400 °C, respectively. The low carbonation rate and consequently the required large mass flow rates made the process inefficient and technically and economically unfeasible. Ca-based cycles studied by the same team were found to have more favorable kinetics.128 The carbonation of Ca(OH)2 and CaO was much faster and catalyzed by the presence of water in the air stream. Up to 80% of CaO could be carbonated to CaCO3. However, the reaction temperature for the carbonation, 300–450 °C and 200–425 °C for CaO and Ca(OH)2, respectively, were substantially higher than in the case of Na-based cycles. It was proposed to use concentrated solar energy to drive the carbonation process in a fluidized bed127 as well as the calcinations step.105 It was shown that the adsorbent maintained its adsorption capacity in five consecutive adsorption–regeneration cycles under the optimized conditions. The required solar thermal energy for the complete CaO–CaCO3 cycle including the carbonation step at 375 °C and calcination of the obtained CaCO3 at 875 °C was estimated at 10.6 MJ mol−1 CO2. This value is quite substantial and more than an order of magnitude higher than the one for CO2 capture from air using alkali metal hydroxide based systems. The need to heat a large volume of air to high temperatures (375 °C) for the carbonation step makes this approach impractical.

5.5 Zeolites
As pointed out vide supra, solid physical adsorbents are not the best choice for the capture of CO2 from a low concentration source such as air due to their low selectivity for CO2. Although zeolites have been used for the production of CO2–free air, their reduced absorption capacity in the presence of moisture is a major drawback. Prior to capture, the air would have to be dried, which would add to the overall system complexity and cost. Nevertheless, in dry air, some zeolites have a reasonable CO2 adsorption capacity. In a recent report by Stuckert and Yang,129 a high cation content lithium exchanged low silica type X zeolite (Li-LSX) has been shown to have the highest capacity for CO2 adsorption from the air at atmospheric conditions and 25 °C (1.34 mmol CO2 per g adsorbent). Using a combination of temperature swing adsorption (TSA) and vacuum swing adsorption (VSA), desorption was achieved around 240 °C and a CO2 concentration higher than 93% could be obtained in the captured gas. However, as expected and observed on other zeolites, the CO2 adsorption capacity decreased by 96% at a relative humidity of 80%.
5.6 Supported organoamine adsorbents (hybrid adsorbents)
A detailed review of solid-supported organoamine CO2 adsorbents can be found in the report by Zhong et al.18 In the present review only those examples will be highlighted that are relevant to CO2 capture from air in addition to the latest results.

5.6.1 Classification of supported organoamine adsorbents. 
Supported amine adsorbents can be classified on the basis of the interaction between support and active sorbent and the approach used in the preparation of these materials.130 Monomeric or polymeric amines physically adsorbed on support materials (often silica) fall into Class 1. Due to the weak physical interaction that holds amines on the surface, Class 1 supported amines have a tendency to gradually loose their adsorption performance mainly because of leaching of the amine.
In order to overcome issues associated with the volatility of amines, Class 2 adsorbents were developed where chemical bonds insure the permanent immobilization of the active compounds preventing rapid degradation in performance. The chemical reaction between the surface OH functions and the alkoxysilane ‘anchoring’ groups of the amines theoretically allows the immobilization of monomeric or polymeric amines to any surface (oxide, metal or polymer) having accessible hydroxyl groups.74,131,132
Class 3 adsorbents consist of an inorganic support and a chemically grafted polyamine component that are prepared by in situ polymerization of amine-containing monomers (e.g. aziridine,133,134 melamine,135–137 Z-protected L-lysine N-carboxyanhydride138). Hyperbranched aminosilicas133,134 (HAS), melamine dendrimer–mesoporous silica and poly(L-lysine)–silica hybrids were synthesized using a ‘grafting from’ technique and successfully applied for CO2 adsorption from concentrated sources and ambient air.


5.6.2 Class 1 hybrid adsorbents. 
Class 1 adsorbent materials that consist of a solid support such as silica, mesoporous materials (MCM-41, MCM-48, SBA-15, etc.), carbon fibers, polymers and physically loaded monomeric or polymeric amines have been studied in detail for CO2 adsorption35,139–148 mainly due to their simple preparation procedure. Some of them were tested for air capture as well.
Olah et al. examined the in detail stability and adsorption capacity of fumed silica (FS)-based sorbents using a variety of low and high molecular weight amines.139,149 While amines with lower molecular weights and lower boiling points such as pentaethylenehexamine (PEH), tetraethylenepentamine (TEP), monoethanolamine (MEA) and diethanolamine (DEA) showed leaching from the solid absorbents, silica supported polyethylenimines (PEIs), especially branched low-molecular-weight (LMW, Mwca. 800) and high molecular weight (HMW, Mwca. 25000) PEIs (Fig. 7) were found particularly suitable for CO2 adsorption in terms of stability and CO2 uptake (147 and 130 mg CO2 per g, respectively at 70 °C from pure CO2 at atmospheric pressure).
 Fig. 7  Structure of branched polyethylenimine. 
It was also found that linear PEI outperformed the branched ones showing an adsorption capacity of 173 mg CO2 per g, however a higher degree of sorbent leaching was observed. A detailed study of the influence of additives such as polyethyleneglycol (PEG-LMW, Mnca. 400), PEG-HMW (Mnca. 8000) and polyethyleneoxide (PEO, Mnca. 100000) on the performance of the adsorbent revealed that the addition of PEG-LMW resulted in better desorption kinetics while maintaining similar adsorption capacities. The better desorption characteristics of absorbents containing low molecular PEG may be due to the lower viscosity of PEG-LMW compared to PEG-HMW, allowing CO2 to desorb from the adsorption site more easily.
An effective FS-PEI-50 (fumed silica supported hybrid adsorbent with 50% PEI loading) was successfully applied for capturing CO2 from air at 25 °C using flow conditions.150 The CO2 concentration of the outlet gas as a function of time is given in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Adsorption of CO2 from the air at 25 °C on FS-PEI-50. Inset: desorption at 85 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
The first segment of the curve indicates the CO2 concentration of the air when the adsorbent was bypassed (420 ppm). Complete adsorption of CO2 occurred with CO2 concentration close to 0 ppm after opening the flow to the adsorbent. After this initial adsorption period, the adsorbent started to get saturated and a slow increase in CO2 concentration in the outlet gas was observed until complete saturation. 2.39 mmol CO2 was captured when the outlet gas contained near zero CO2 concentration and an additional 2.25 mmol was adsorbed in the last segment giving a total of 4.64 mmol adsorbed CO2. Depending on the application viz. a system can be built using this adsorbent for the primary purpose of production of CO2 free air (e.g. alkaline fuel cell and battery applications) or capture and recovery for subsequent utilization of CO2.
The FS-PEI-33 (33% amine loading) showed enhanced adsorption capacities 1.74 mmol CO2 per g under humid conditions (67% relative humidity) that is one of the highest reported CO2 adsorption from humid air.
The regenerability of FS-PEI-50 was tested by a combination of pressure and temperature swings. The adsorbent capacity remained constant in four consecutive adsorption–desorption cycles. An alternative regeneration method, the combination of temperature swing (85 °C) and sweeping gas (335 mL min−1 dry air), was also applied. The CO2 content of the sweeping gas that was monitored is shown in Fig. 8 (inset), demonstrating that almost all CO2 could be desorbed in 1 hour under these conditions. In summary, these are easy to prepare, inexpensive hybrid adsorbents exhibiting remarkable CO2 adsorption capacities, enhanced kinetics under both dry and humid conditions, with good regenerability promising feasibility of these materials.
Solid molecular basket sorbents were prepared from PEI (50 wt%) and SBA-15 and applied to adsorb CO2 from simulated air (400 ppm CO2 in N2). The sorbent demonstrated a capacity of 22.5 mg g−1 at 75 °C as measured by temperature programmed desorption (TPD). The regenerability of this sorbent was tested in 20 cycles of sorption/desorption by TCD using a pure CO2 flow for the adsorption phase and regeneration under helium at a temperature from 50 to 110 °C.151,152
It was considered that the high sorption capacities of PEI containing Class 1 adsorbents is attributed to the presence of highly accessible amino groups at each chain end,153 making these materials the benchmark adsorbents for CO2 capture from air (see structure of PEI in Fig. 7). However, the limited oxidative stability of secondary amino groups necessitates the screening of other amine containing polymers that contain a high mass fraction of basic amine sites and a larger proportion of NH2 groups allowing good stability under oxidative conditions.153
Low-molecular weight poly(allylamine) (PAA) synthesized by free radical polymerization, branched polyethyleneimine (PEIBr) and linear polyethyleneimine (PEILn) were impregnated onto mesocellular silica foams (MCF) and adsorption performance of the obtained composites were compared.153 PAA and PEIBr containing samples were found to be more effective under ultra-dilute conditions relative to their flue gas performance showing capacity reductions by a factor of only 1.6–2.1 and 1.4–2.0, respectively, when the CO2 concentration was reduced by a factor of 250. PAA-MCF-41 and PEIBr-MCF-39 containing 41 and 39% polymer, respectively, showed almost-constant CO2 capture capacities in short multicyclic temperature swing tests. These achievements envision the good applicability of PAA and PEIBr containing silica-supported adsorbents in the direct extraction of CO2 from ambient air.
Although Class 1 adsorbents are easy to prepare, they often show higher organic content and adsorption capacity than Class 2 types, the lack of chemical bonds between the support and the active adsorbent may result in amine leaching and limited stability in the regeneration process. For example, the fumed silica supported low molecular weight PEI (Mwca. 800, branched) showed an adsorption capacity of 147 mg g−1 at 70 °C, but it suffered from some degree of leaching similarly to ‘oligomeric’ ethyleneamines such as tetraethylenepentamine (TEP), pentaethylenehexamine (PEH).139
An elegant modification of the preparation procedure helped to overcome problems associated with the lack of covalent bonds between the active sorbent and the support.154 Application of different additives such as tetraethyl orthotitanate and 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS) in the course of the impregnation procedure resulted in enhanced thermal stability and adsorption kinetics without a significant decrease in the adsorption capacity (2.19 and 2.26 mmol g−1, respectively) compared to PEI-impregnated silica in the absence of additives (2.36 mmol g−1). These adsorption capacities were determined under dry, pseudo-equilibrium conditions in a TGA instrument using simulated air (400 ppm CO2 balanced with Ar).
Although silica materials are the most common supports to prepare solid supported amine adsorbents, alternative supports (e.g. alumina,155–158 titania,159etc.) may also be considered in order to overcome some drawbacks of silica-based adsorbents. It can be assumed that alumina supports are more resistant to structural changes and degradation in adsorption capacities under steam-stripping regeneration conditions due to their crystallinity and lower hydrophilicity.155 Mesoporous γ-alumina-supported PEI composites (SynA) with 30, 40 and 50% amine loading exhibited enhanced CO2 adsorption capacities (1.03, 1.33 and 1.74 mmol g−1, respectively) compared to PEI-impregnated SBA-15 using simulated air (400 ppm in Ar) under dry conditions at room temperature. Both PEI-alumina and PEI-silica materials were stable over a short, inert gas temperature swing adsorption–desorption cyclic test. In order to avoid time demanding multicyclic adsorption–desorption tests, accelerated steaming experiments were carried out in autoclaves to estimate the susceptibility of the adsorbents under steam-stripping regeneration conditions. After steam treatment at 105 °C over 24 h, SynA30 lost only 25.2% of its original CO2 adsorption capacity while the mesoporous silica-based adsorbent suffered from an 81.3% loss under similar conditions, indicating the higher stability of alumina-based sorbents.155
Carbon fibers were also applied as support materials to prepare PEI-based adsorption materials. PEI (Mw = 25000) and an epoxy resin D.E.R. 332 were loaded on a DIALED® carbon fiber and the sorbent was tested for capturing CO2 from dilute gas mixtures (500 ppm CO2 in air). Adsorption capacities around 57 mg g−1 could be reproduced in three consecutive adsorption/desorption cycles demonstrating that the sorbent is fully regenerable.160


5.6.3 Class 2 hybrid adsorbents. 
Belmabkhout et al.74 reported the first example for the removal of CO2 from dry and humid air by adsorption using an amine-functionalized silica. Carefully dried pore-expanded mesoporous silica (PE-MCM-41) was functionalized with 3-[2-(2-aminoethylamino)ethylamino]propyltrimethoxysilane (TRI) under conditions in which the amount of added water was controlled (Fig. 9a).
 Fig. 9  Covalent grafting of trimethoxysilanes to (a) MCM-41, (b) silica gel beads and (c) SBA-15. 
A column-breakthrough measurement of the obtained new adsorbent (TRI-PE-MCM-41) revealed high selectivity for CO2 over N2 and O2 under both dry and humid conditions. The adsorption material also exhibited a twice as high adsorption capacity (0.98 mmol g−1) at low CO2 concentrations (400 ppm) at 25 °C as the one obtained for 13X under similar conditions, suggesting that amine functionalization enhances the adsorption (vis. chemisorption) of CO2.
TRI-PE-MCM-41 outperformed not only plain zeolites (e.g. MCM-41 and 13X) but also other physical adsorbents such as carbon-based materials and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). In addition, while 13X for example requires dry air for optimal performance, the adsorption capacity of TRI-PE-MCM-41 is slightly higher at a relative humidity of 24%, emphasizing the robustness of the hybrid materials. The adsorbent also showed a high adsorption rate and stability in cyclic adsorption–desorption measurements using 1000 ppm CO2 in N2.
The first example for a cyclic temperature-vacuum swing (TVS) process extracting a stream of pure CO2 from low concentration gas mixtures using a Class 2 adsorbent was demonstrated by Wurzbacher et al.131,161 [N-(2-Aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl]trimethoxysilane (AEAPTMS) was grafted to silica gel beads of 2–5 mm diameter (ZEO-beads™ B2) in a solvent free procedure (Fig. 9b) and the obtained silica–organoamine hybrid material was applied to extract CO2 from dry and humid air in 97% purity using a combination of temperature swing and vacuum swing methods.
After optimizing the experimental conditions, the CO2 captured from an air flow with 40% relative humidity could be recovered after heating the sorbent material to temperatures from 74 to 90 °C at 150 mbar pressure. The adsorbent showed a remarkable stability over 40 consecutive adsorption/desorption cycles giving a 2 mmol g−1 cyclic CO2 capture capacity. It is particularly noteworthy that in the TVS process co-adsorbed water from ambient air is released in the course of desorption and it could be a valuable feedstock for the chemical conversion of CO2 to liquid fuels using concentrated solar energy.162,163 This method may be applied in desert areas where high flux solar energy and air is available but water resources are scarce.
A comparison of CO2 adsorption capacities of zeolites and amine-grafted SBA-15 (SBA-15-APTMS, Fig. 9c) adsorbents was carried out using dry and humid air with a CO2 content of 395 ppm. Under dry conditions zeolites such as Li-LSX, K-LSX and NaX demonstrated higher CO2 adsorption capacities of 0.82, 0.25 and 0.32 mmol g−1, respectively compared to the one obtained using SBA-15-APTMS (0.09 mmol g−1). However, under humid conditions the amine-grafted silica performed well (0.13 mmol g−1) compared with zeolites, which lost almost all the adsorption capacity.129
Similar to the poly(L-lysine)-based hybrids138 shown vide infra, other renewable material sources (e.g. cellulose) can be used for the preparation of novel adsorbents for CO2 capture from the air. Nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) is an abundant natural material composed of cellulose fibril aggregates (several micrometers in length and 10–100 nm in diameter), which is very suitable for covalent immobilization of aminosilanes due to the large number of surface hydroxyl groups (Fig. 10).132
 Fig. 10  Covalent immobilization of AEAPDMS to cellulose backbone.132 
A novel amine-based adsorbent was prepared through freeze-drying of N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropylmethyldimethoxysilane (AEAPDMS) and an NFC hydrogel giving a material (NFC-AEAPDMS-FD) with an amine loading of 4.9 mmol N per g material and surface area of 7.1 m2 g−1. Pressurized air with a CO2 content of 506 ppm was utilized for the adsorption measurements. NFC-AEAPDMS-FD was able to adsorb 1.39 mmol CO2 per g at a relative humidity of 40% at 25 °C after 12 h. This adsorption capacity is lower than the one that had been reported for silica–PEI hybrids under dry conditions (2.36 mmol CO2 per g, amine efficiency = 22%),154 but the amine efficiency of NFC-AEAPDMS-FD was found to be better (28%). The authors also reported that the adsorbent showed significantly lower adsorption capacity (0.695 mmol CO2 per g) after twenty consecutive adsorption–desorption cycles. Desorption experiments using Ar as a purge gas at 90 °C revealed that all CO2 can be removed by a temperature swing-gas sweeping technique. Complete desorption of CO2 from the surface of NFC-AEAPDMS-FD was also confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy.


5.6.4 Class 3 hybrid adsorbents. 
In order to combine the advantages of chemically attached adsorbent materials (low volatility and higher stability) with the high nitrogen loading of polymeric amines, Jones et al.164–166 suggested the covalent immobilization of polymeric chemisorbents via acid-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization of aziridine from SBA-15 (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Proposed representation of acid-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization of aziridine from SBA-15.164 
The CO2 adsorption capacity of the obtained hyperbranched aminosilica (HAS) adsorbents were measured using humid gas mixtures with 10% and 400 ppm CO2 content in Ar simulating flue gas and ambient air, respectively.
It was found that the CO2 uptake increased from 0.16 mmol g−1 to 1.72 mmol g−1 as the amine loading increased from 2.3 mmol g−1 (HAS1) to 9.9 mmol g−1 (HAS6), demonstrating that the air capture capacities of HAS are tunable by controlling the organic content. However, it should be added here that due to the more pronounced pore blocking and mass transfer limitations, a higher organic content also resulted in slower adsorption kinetics as reflected by increased adsorption half times. More importantly, the air capture capacities of HAS adsorbents with higher amine loadings were less affected by the drop of the inlet CO2 concentration from 10% to 400 ppm. The reported novel hybrid materials also showed almost constant air capture capacity over four adsorption (25 °C)/desorption (110 °C) cycles measured in a TGA instrument.
Another application of bio-based materials for extracting CO2 from gas mixtures simulating flue gas (10% CO2) and ambient air (400 ppm) was reported by Jones et al.138 Supported solid adsorbents were synthesized in a multi-step procedure including (1) functionalization of calcined SBA-15 with 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane, (2) ring-opening polymerization of Z-protected L-lysine N-carboxyanhydride (NCA) from APTMS-grafted SBA-15 followed by (3) deprotection and neutralization of the polymer chains (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Preparation of poly(L-lysine) brush–mesoporous silica hybrid adsorbent.138 
Adsorbents with increasing amine contents such as 2.76, 4.84 and 5.18 mmol N per g exhibited increasing air capture capacities of 0.19, 0.56 and 0.60 mmol CO2 per g respectively, using a dry gas mixture containing 400 ppm CO2 (balanced with Ar) under pseudo-equilibrium conditions.
The stability of poly(L-lysine)–silica hybrids were investigated by a cyclic temperature-swing operation over three consecutive adsorption (25 °C) and desorption (110 °C) cycles applying 400 ppm of CO2 in Ar for the adsorption and pure Ar purge during desorption. As it could have been predicted, the presence of covalent bonds between the polymer backbone and the support resulted in a robust and regenerable hybrid material that can be considered as an alternative adsorbent for capturing CO2 from ambient air.

5.7 Anionic exchange resins
Lackner et al.101,167 applied an anionic exchange resin to remove CO2 from air in which quaternary amines are attached to a polystyrene backbone. In the preparation procedure the mobile chloride ions of the commercially available resin are exchanged for hydroxide, carbonate or bicarbonate ions, providing a sufficient basicity enabling the adsorbent material to adsorb CO2 from ambient air. The maximum theoretical carbon loading of this resin was described by the total number of positive ionic charges present on the resin (1–2 mol kg−1). Kinetic experiments indicated that the studied adsorbent is able to uptake CO2 with rates between 10 and 80 micro(μ)mol m−2 s−1, which is comparable to those of one molar NaOH solution converting to Na2CO3 solution.
5.8 Techniques for desorption
In addition to CO2 adsorption capacity and adsorption kinetics, the regenerability of the solid adsorbent is also a key feature for practical applications. In order to reduce the cost of CO2 recovery, adsorbents must be regenerable, enabling their use in a large number of cycles (preferably more than a thousand). A variety of regeneration (desorption) methods have been utilized for solid adsorbents. In pressure swing adsorption (PSA) the adsorption step is carried out at pressures higher than atmospheric and CO2 is desorbed, concentrated and collected at lower pressures168,169 while in vacuum swing adsorption (VSA) the adsorption step is run at atmospheric pressure and the desorption step under vacuum.170,171 The combination of PSA and VSA viz. pressure vacuum swing adsorption (PVSA)172 was also studied at pressures up to 5.5 bar and vacuum of 50 mbar. In temperature swing adsorption (TSA)169,173,174 the sorbent is heated in the desorption step by a hot gas (N2 or air) and since gases have a low heat capacity, a large volume of gas must be passed through the adsorbent. The latter can be avoided by using the electrical thermal swing adsorption (ETSA) technique where an electrical current is applied to the sorbent, which is electrically conducting (e.g. activated carbon) in order to release the adsorbed CO2.175,176 The combination of other regeneration techniques, for example temperature vacuum swing adsorption (TVSA)129,131,177,178 and pressure temperature swing adsorption (PTSA),169,179 were also considered to optimize the conditions and to reduce the operation cost of a CO2 removal unit.
Wang and Lackner demonstrated the first example of a moisture swing process applied to capture and concentrate CO2 from dilute sources.180 A flat sheet, heterogeneous ion-exchange material manufactured by co-extrusion of polypropylene (matrix) and quaternary ammonium resin was applied to capture CO2 from a dilute gas mixture (400 ppm CO2). Hydroxide or carbonate functional groups on the surface of the resin are converted to bicarbonate when exposed to simulated air (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Moisture-swing adsorption of CO2 on a quaternary ammonium functionalized ion exchange membrane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. 
In this case, desorption performance was studied by contacting the sorbent to moisture or directly to water. Contact with water increased the desorption kinetics which may also simplify the regeneration process by not requiring elevated temperatures for the generation of steam. The CO2 partial pressure could be altered from 0.04 kPa (ambient air) to values of two orders of magnitude higher by making the sorbent wet.
5.9 Sorbent degradation
As it was pointed out earlier, the high adsorption capacity of a sorbent alone does not qualify it for practical application, and stability under the conditions used for regeneration also has to be considered. An irreversible decrease in the adsorption capacity of a hybrid adsorbent could be caused by the degradation of (a) the support or (b) the active adsorbent.

5.9.1 Degradation of supports. 
Jones et al.130,181 studied the structural change and the decrease in CO2 adsorption capacity of Class 1, 2 and 3 mesocellular silica foam (MCF) supported amine-functionalized sorbents under steam stripping regeneration conditions (106–180 °C, 24 h, under air or N2). Samples were prepared by impregnation with PEI, grafting of APTMS or AEAPTMS and in situ polymerization of aziridine from MCF giving MCF-PEI, MCF-Mono, MCF-DMA and MCF-HAS respectively. All adsorbents exhibited a loss in CO2 adsorption capacity (10% CO2 in Ar at 45 °C) after steam treatment and the loss seemed to increase as a function of temperature. Treatment of bare MCF revealed a significant loss in porosity and BET surface as clear evidence of the microstructural destruction. The overall steam stability of the four adsorbents was found as follows: MCF-HAS > MCF-PEI > MCF-Mono > MCF-DMA under both steam/N2 and steam/air condition, suggesting the advantage of using polymeric amines.
It should be added here that in this preliminary investigation the contribution of structural change of the support to the overall decrease in the adsorption capacity could not be decoupled from that caused by amine degradation and requires more detailed studies. However, it could be suggested that the structural collapse played a major role in the loss of capacity.


5.9.2 Degradation of amines. 
The effect of acidic gases on supported amine adsorbents using various supports (e.g. SBA-15,182 styrene copolymers) has been studied and it was found that while CO2 is adsorbed reversibly, SOx and NOx are irreversibly blocking the adsorbent sites degrading the adsorption capacity. The oxidative environment may also compromise the long term stability of adsorbents especially at elevated temperatures. In large scale commercial technologies 10% of the CO2 separation cost is attributed to the makeup of lost or degraded MEA183 and oxidation reactions are responsible for approximately 50% of the amine degradation. The mechanism of the oxidative degradation has been studied extensively184–186 and it is well known that some of the oxidation products (e.g. formic acid) are responsible for corrosion of the absorption equipments. Sayari et al. investigated CO2 adsorption on triamine-functionalized pore-expanded silica and found no influence of oxygen on the recyclability of the adsorbent even at 50 °C. The first detailed study on the oxidative degradation of mesocellular silica foam (MCF)-supported amine adsorbents derived from primary ((3-aminopropyl)-trimethoxysilane, APTMS), secondary ((N-methylaminopropyl)-trimethoxysilane, MAPS), tertiary amine ((N,N-dimethylaminopropyl)-trimethoxysilane, DMAPS) and a diamine [N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl]trimethoxysilane using oxygen flow at temperatures from 25–135 °C was reported by Jones et al.185 The presence of carbonyl groups from carboxylic acids and amides, aliphatic CC, heterocyclic C–N and/or aromatic CC in the oxidized sorbents was revealed by solid state 13C NMR measurements. One of the major conclusions of the studies is that supported primary and tertiary amines are more resistant towards oxidation than secondary amines. These results should be considered while designing new adsorbents since secondary amines are present in many hybrid adsorbents suggested for use in post-combustion CO2 adsorption. Interestingly, secondary and tertiary amine-grafted MCM-41 showed higher stability than primary amine-grafted MCM-41 under non-oxidative conditions in pure CO2 and were stable even at temperatures as high as 200 °C.187 In multiple adsorption/desorption cycles primary amines suffered from extensive loss of CO2 uptake due to isocyanate and subsequent urea formation.

5.10 Cost and feasibility of CO2 capture from air
The cost of direct CO2 capture from air will highly influence the overall economic feasibility of the utilization of atmospheric CO2 as carbon feedstock. Using current technologies, the cost to remove a ton of CO2 from point sources such as a coal burning power plant that contain 10–15% CO2 has been estimated between $30 and $100. The cost of direct air capture (DAC) on the other hand varies vastly from about $20 to more than $1000 per ton of CO2.69,83,188–192
The technology developed by Steinberg and co-workers and CoAway LLC121,123 using the K2CO3/KHCO3 cycle is described as being able to capture CO2 from air for less than $20 per ton. The total cost including sub-surface injection was estimated to be slightly above $20 per ton. A significant improvement in the feasibility is due to using waste heat from existing power plants, oil refineries, etc.
An air capture system designed by Keith et al. using a Na/Ca cycle was estimated to cost approximately $500 per ton C ($140 per ton CO2).81,98 The authors added that about a third of this cost was related to capital and maintenance cost. Further development and optimization of the system by Carbon Engineering Ltd.113 for the effective extraction of CO2 from air resulted in the decrease of the estimated cost to $49–80 per tonne CO2.193 To test the critical aspects of their full-size contactor design, a prototype working under real outdoor conditions was constructed in 2011.
Lackner et al., in an analysis of a system using Ca(OH)2 as adsorbent material in a convection tower, suggested that the cost of the process would be only on the order of $10–15 per ton of CO2. As expected, a major cost of such a process would be in the recovery step.92 It was also found that the additional CO2 generated in the calcination process due to methane combustion would be substantially less than the amount of CO2 captured and would be captured by the same unit.
More recently, Lackner and co-workers developed an anionic exchange resin able to release CO2 in a moisture swing process. The cost of only the energy required per ton of CO2 collected was around $15.101,194 The initial cost of air capture including manufacturing and maintenance can be estimated at about $200 per ton of CO2. However, this cost is expected to drop considerably as more collectors are built, possibly putting CO2 capture in the $30 per ton range in the long term.
The direct capture of CO2 from the air also received some degree of criticism mostly due to its potentially high cost. The DAC schemes proposed by Lackner and Keith have been labeled by some as overly optimistic. In 2003, Herzog pointed out that the former authors had potentially significantly underestimated the overall cost of air capture, which would be in excess of $1700 per ton CO2 using a CaO–CaCO3 cycle. Critical assumptions that give rise to such large differences are the following according to Herzog et al.: (a) authors assume a dry kiln with 80% thermal efficiency while Herzog assumes a kiln with wet feeds giving about 33% efficiency, (b) authors used lower natural gas and oxygen prices for the calculations, (c) authors do not take into account other cost components such as compression, recycling flue gas from calciner and (d) the extra CO2 associated with the energy requirements of oxygen production, CO2 compression and process auxiliaries. Recent publications by House et al.189 and the American Physical Society estimated that the cost of DAC using hydroxide absorbents was in the order of $1000 per ton and $600–800 per ton, respectively.99
Direct CO2 capture from the air is still in its infancy. The cost of a commercial plant will depend on many factors including the process used as well as the cost of labor, materials and energy. While there is no question that the capture of CO2 from the air is possible, more research and development is clearly needed to optimize this technology and determine its economic viability. Only with the construction of demonstration and pilot plants will we have a clearer understanding of the total cost associated with DAC. A few start-up companies including Carbon Engineering,111,113,195 Kilimanjaro Energy,196–199 Global Thermostat200 and Climeworks160,201 have started such an effort. Some of the proposed devices and prototypes for the capture of CO2 from the air are shown in Fig. 14. It should also be pointed out that the costs associated with DAC units are not “stand alone”. Once captured, the CO2 will be used for applications such as enhanced oil recovery (EOR) or recycling into chemicals and fuels including methanol, DME and hydrocarbons (CCR). This will give an economic value to the captured CO2, lowering the de facto cost of DAC and provide a more favorable overall picture of the process. Water (moisture) could also be separated from the air at the same time as CO2, which could provide clean water as an added value.
 Fig. 14  Examples of prototypes and proposed designs for the separation of CO2 from the air. (a) Prototype for CO2 capture from the air. Reproduced by permission from Kilimanjaro Energy. (b) Solid amine based swing bed for CO2 removal in human space flights. Currently undergoing tests in the International Space Station (ISS). Reproduced by permission from NASA. Courtesy J. C. Graf. (c) Artist rendering of an atmospheric CO2 capture contactor. Reproduced by permission from Carbon Engineering. (d) Artist rendering of an array of atmospheric CO2 capture units also known as Synthetic Trees. Reproduced by permission from Stonehaven Production. (e) Artist rendering of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air using an anionic exchange resin and regeneration by moisture swing. Reproduced by permission from Kilimanjaro Energy. (f) Construction of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air in Alberta, Canada. Reproduced by permission from Carbon Engineering. 
6 Conclusions
Despite its very low concentration of only 390 ppm, the capture of CO2 directly from the air is technically feasible. Theoretically, CO2 capture from the atmosphere would only require about 2 to 4 times as much energy as capture from flue gases, which is relatively modest considering that at the same time the CO2 concentration is decreased by roughly a factor of 250–300. Strong bases such as NaOH, KOH and Ca(OH)2 can effectively scrub CO2 out of the atmosphere. However, their regeneration is energy intensive and requires very high temperatures. The use of K2CO3 as an absorbent offers to considerably lower the regeneration temperature but the bonding energy with CO2 remains high. This excessive bonding with CO2 requires a considerable energy input for the regeneration step. Due to the corrosiveness of strong alkaline solutions, amines either physically or chemically immobilized on solid supports have therefore emerged as possible alternatives. Amines bind more mildly to CO2 and require relatively low regeneration temperatures (i.e. <110 °C). Amines can be immobilized on solids through different techniques such as impregnation, grafting and in situ polymerization. However, the long-term stability of these amine based sorbents under air capture conditions remains to be determined. Regardless of the technology used, the overall cost of CO2 capture from the air remains a highly debated question which will probably get clearer answers only after the construction of demonstration and pilot plants.
CO2 from the atmosphere provides a nearly inexhaustible carbon source for humankind. Combining carbon capture and storage with subsequent withdrawal for technological recycling based on an anthropogenic chemical carbon cycle offers a feasible new solution to our carbon conundrum. As fossil fuels are becoming scarcer and increasingly depleted, carbon capture and recycling offers a renewable and safe source for carbon-containing fuels and their products.202 It also liberates humankind from the limitations associated with the biological natural carbon sources including crops and biomass. The chemical carbon cycle constitutes humankind's practical technological analog of nature's photosynthetic CO2 recycling. At the same time, the anthropogenic chemical carbon cycle (CCR) also helps to mitigate the environmental harmful effect of excessive CO2 in the atmosphere. Instead of just a greenhouse gas harmful to the Planet's ecosystem, CO2 should therefore be considered as a valuable industrial C1-feedstock.202–214
Since the review was submitted, several amine functionalized metallic organic frameworks have been shown to extract CO2 from the air.215,216
Acknowledgements
Support of our work by the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute and the United States Department of Energy is gratefully acknowledged.
References
N. M. Whiteley, Mar. Ecol.: Prog. Ser., 2011, 430, 257–271 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Dawson, S. T. Jackson, J. I. House, I. C. Prentice and G. M. Mace, Science, 2011, 332, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .

America's Climate Choices, National Academic Press, Washington, D.C.,  2011 Search PubMed.
S. Arrhenius, Philos. Mag., 1896, 41, 237 Search PubMed .
T. R. Karl and K. E. Trenberth, Science, 2003, 302, 1719–1723 CrossRef CAS .

IPCC Third Assessment Report: Climate Change 2001, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.,  2001 Search PubMed.
A. J. Weaver, Science, 2011, 332, 795–796 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schmittner, N. M. Urban, J. D. Shakun, N. M. Mahowald, P. U. Clark, P. J. Bartlein, A. C. Mix and A. Rosell-Melé, Science, 2011, 334, 1385–1388 CrossRef CAS .
P. Falkowski, R. J. Scholes, E. Boyle, J. Canadell, D. Canfield, J. Elser, N. Gruber, K. Hibbard, P. Hogberg, S. Linder, F. T. Mackenzie, B. Moore, T. Pedersen, Y. Rosenthal, S. Seitzinger, V. Smetacek and W. Steffen, Science, 2000, 290, 291–296 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Cawley, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 5503–5513 CAS .
J. C. M. Pires, F. G. Martins, M. C. M. Alvim-Ferraz and M. Simões, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2011, 89, 1446–1460 CrossRef CAS .
U. Lee, Y. Lim, S. Lee, J. Jung and C. Han, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011 Search PubMed .

Geological Sequestration of CO2: Is Leakage Unavoidable and Acceptable?, ed. M. A. Celia and S. Bachu, Elsevier Science Bv, Amsterdam,  2003 Search PubMed .

          R. J. Allam, R. Bredesen and E. Drioli, Carbon Dioxide Separation Technologies, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 796–854 CrossRef CAS  , TY - JOUR.
D. M. D'alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 CrossRef CAS .
N. MacDowell, N. Florin, A. Buchard, J. Hallett, A. Galindo, G. Jackson, C. S. Adjiman, C. K. Williams, N. Shah and P. Fennell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1645–1669 CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Luo, Z. Zhong and A. Borgna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 42–55 CAS .
S. Sridhar, B. Smitha and T. M. Aminabhavi, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2007, 36, 113–174 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ebner and J. Ritter, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2009, 44, 1273–1421 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Bredesen and T. A. Peters, in Membrane Technology Volume 2: Membranes for Energy Conversion, ed. K.-V. Peinemann and S. P. Nunes, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008, ch. 7, pp. 217–244 Search PubMed .

          A. Kohl and R. Nielsen, Gas Purification, Gulf Publishing Company, Houston, 5th edn,  1997 Search PubMed .
K.-Y. A. Lin and A.-H. A. Park, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 6633–6639 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Siriwardane, M.-S. Shen, E. P. Fisher and J. A. Poston, Energy Fuels, 2001, 15, 279 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Chae, D. Y. Siberio-Perez, J. Kim, Y. Go, M. Eddaoudi, A. J. Matzger, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 2004, 427, 523–527 CrossRef CAS .
R. Banerjee, A. Phan, B. Wang, C. Knobler, H. Furukawa, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2008, 319, 939 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Millward and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17998 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Gassensmith, H. Furukawa, R. A. Smaldone, R. S. Forgan, Y. Y. Botros, O. M. Yaghi and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15312–15315 CrossRef CAS .

          E. J. Beckman, US Pat., 5 886 061,  1999.
X. Xiaoding, C. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 62, 29–45 CrossRef .
X. Xiaoding, C. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1463–1469 CrossRef .
T. Filburn, J. J. Helble and R. A. Weiss, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 1542–1546 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heydari-Gorji, Y. Belmabkhout and A. Sayari, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12411–12416 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Ebner, M. L. Gray, N. G. Chisholm, Q. T. Black, D. D. Mumford, M. A. Nicholson and J. A. Ritter, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 5634–5641 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Franchi, P. J. E. Harlick and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 8007–8013 CrossRef CAS .
G. Knowles, J. V. Graham, S. W. Delaney and A. L. Chaffee, Fuel Process. Technol., 2005, 86, 1435 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hiyoshi, K. Yogo and T. Yashima, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2005, 48, 29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, R. Serna-Guerrero and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 359 CrossRef CAS .
R. Serna-Guerrero, E. Da'na and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 9406 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. E. Harlick and A. Sayari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 446 CrossRef CAS .

          IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III of the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva, Switzerland,  2008 Search PubMed .

IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007, IPCC,  2007 Search PubMed.

          M. Specht and A. Bandi, in Forshungsverbund Sonnenenergie, Themen 1994–1995, Energiespeicherung,  1995, p. 41 Search PubMed .

          F. Asinger, Methanol, Chemie- und Energierohstoff, in Die Mobilisation der Kohle, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg,  1987 Search PubMed .

          J. Pasel, R. Peters and M. Specht, in Forshungsverbund Sonnenenergie, Themen 1999–2000: Zukunftstechnologie Breenstoffzelle, Berlin, Germany,  2000, p. 46 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            M. Specht and A. Bandi, “The Methanol Cycle” – Sustainable Supply of Liquid Fuels, Center for Solar Energy and Hydrogen Research (ZSW), Stuttgart, Germany,  1999 Search PubMed; 
  (b) C. W. Jones, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 31 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Keith, M. Ha-Duong and J. K. Stolaroff, Clim. Change, 2006, 74, 17–45 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Campbell, The Coming Oil Crisis, Multi-science Publishing, Brentwood, England,  1997 Search PubMed .

Proceedings of the High Level Conference on World Food Security: The Challenges of Climate Change and Bioenergy. Soaring Food Prices: Facts, Perspectives, Impacts and
Actions Required (HLC/08/INF/1), Conference organized by the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome,  3–5 June, 2008 Search PubMed.
T. Searchinger, R. Heimlich, R. A. Houghton, D. Fengxia, A. Elobeid, J. Fabiosa, S. Tokgoz, D. Hayes and T.-H. Yu, Science, 2008, 319, 1238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fargione, J. Hill, D. Tilman, S. Polasky and P. Hawthorne, Science, 2008, 319, 1235 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Gallagher, The Gallagher Review of the Indirect Effects of Biofuels Production, Renewable Fuels Agency, St. Leonards-on-Sea, UK,  2008 Search PubMed .

          H. Lee, W. C. Clark and C. Devereaux, Biofuels and Sustainable Development: Report of an Executive Session on the Grand Challenges of a Sustainability Transition, San Servolo Island, Venice, Italy,  May 19–20, 2008 Search PubMed .
Draft Report on the Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the Promotion of the Use of Energy From Renewable Sources, PR\722155EN, European Parliament. Committee on Industry, Research and Energy,  2008.

Biofuel Support Policies. An Economic Assessment, OECD,  2008 Search PubMed.
C. W. King and M. E. Webber, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 7866 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Zah, H. Böni, M. Gauch, R. Hischier, M. Lehmann and P. Wäger, Ökobilanz von Energieprodukten: Ökologische Bewertung von Biotreibstoffen, in Schlussbericht, Empa, Abteilung Technologie und Gesellschaft im Auftrag des Bundesamtes für Energie, des Bundesamtes für Umwelt und des Bundesamtes für Landwirtschaft, Switzerland,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. P. W. Scharlemann and W. F. Laurance, Science, 2008, 319, 43 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Doornbosch and R. Steenblik, Biofuels: Is the Cure Worse than the Disease, SG/SD/RT(2007)3, OECD, Paris,  2007 Search PubMed .

Energy Technologies for a Sustainable Future, Transport, International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris,  2004 Search PubMed.
M. Voith, Chem. Eng. News, 2009, 87, 22 Search PubMed .
K. Greenwood and M. Pearce, Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng., 1953, 31, 201–207 CAS .
S. U. Rege, R. T. Yang and M. A. Buzanowski, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2000, 55, 4827–4838 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Rege, R. T. Yang, K. Y. Qian and M. A. Buzanowski, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 2745–2759 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Jain, US Pat., 5,232,474,  1993.

          R. Kumar, US Pat., 4,711,645,  1987.
M. W. Ackley, R. F. Giese and R. T. Yang, Zeolites, 1992, 12, 780–788 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Rege, R. T. Yang, K. Qian and M. A. Buzanowski, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 2745–2759 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ranjan and H. J. Herzog, Energy Proc., 2011, 4, 2869–2876 CrossRef CAS .
S. Satyapal, T. Filburn, J. Trela and J. Strange, Energy Fuels, 2001, 15, 250 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, Z. B. Chen, N. Q. Ren, D. X. Hu, D. H. Zheng and Z. P. Zhang, J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci., A, 2009, 10, 1642–1650 CrossRef CAS .

          N. M. Samsonov, E. A. Kurmazenko, L. I. Gavrilov, N. S. Farafonov, N. V. Pavlova, T. N. Pavlova, V. J. Proshkin, S. J. Romanov, A. M. Rjabkin, A. S. Guzenberg, A. N. Slyshchenkov and O. V. Kirjushin, Operation Results Onboard the International Space Station and Development Tendency of Atmosphere Revitalization and Monitoring System, SAE Paper # 2004-01-2494, International Conference on Environmental Systems, July 2004, Colorado Springs,Colorado, USA, (Society of Automotive Engineers International),  2004 Search PubMed .
J. M. Murray, C. W. Renfrew, A. Bedi, C. B. McCrystal, D. S. Jones and J. P. H. Fee, Anesthesiology, 1999, 91, 1342–1348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Belmabkhout, R. Serna-Guerrero and A. Sayari, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 3695–3698 CrossRef CAS .
United States National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/.
United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), http://www.osha.gov/.
K. Shunji, B. Hiromichi, K. Takasumi and S. Shigehito, J. Anesth., 2003, 17, 145–146 CrossRef .
K. Kordesch, V. Hacker, J. Gsellmann, M. Cifrain, G. Faleschini, P. Enzinger, R. Fankhauser, M. Ortner, M. Muhr and R. R. Aronson, J. Power Sources, 2000, 86, 162–165 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ahuja and R. K. Green, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1996, 21, 415–421 CrossRef CAS .

Fuel Cell Handbook, US DOE, National Energy Technology Laboratory (NREL),  2004 Search PubMed .
D. W. Keith, M. Ha-Duong and J. K. Stolaroff, Clim. Change, 2006, 74, 17–45 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zeman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 7558 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Ranjan, Feasibility of Air Capture, Master of Science in Technology and Policy Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. S. Lackner, H.-J. Ziock and P. Grimes, SourceBook, 1999, 57, 6 Search PubMed .
N. A. C. Johnston, D. R. Blake, F. S. Rowland, S. Elliott, K. S. Lackner, H. Ziock, M. K. Dubey, H. P. Hanson and S. Barr, Energy Convers. Manage., 2003, 44, 681–689 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Norfleet and W. Horn, Carbon dioxide Scrubbing Capabilities of Two New Non-Powered Technologies, NSMRL Report No. TR1228, Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory (NSMRL),  2003 Search PubMed .

          C. Matty, Overview of Long-Term Lithium Hydroxide Storage Aboard the International Space Station, SAE Technical Paper 2008-01-1969, presented at the International Conference on Environmental Systems, June 2008, San Francisco, USA,  2008 Search PubMed .

          T. K. Sherwood, Absorption and Extraction, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York,  1937 Search PubMed .
N. A. Spector and B. F. Dodge, Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng., 1946, 42, 827–848 CAS .
J. B. Tepe and B. F. Dodge, Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng., 1943, 39, 255–276 CAS .
H. A. Blum, L. F. Stutzman and W. S. Dodds, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1952, 44, 2969–2974 CrossRef CAS .

          K. S. Lackner, P. Grimes and H. J. Ziock, Capturing Carbon dioxide from the Air, Proceedings of the first National Conference on Carbon Sequestration, Washington, DC,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. K. Stolaroff, D. W. Keith and G. V. Lowry, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 2728–2735 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Dubey, H. Ziock, G. Rueff, S. Elliot and W. S. Smith, Prepr. Symp. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 2002, 47, 81–84 CAS .
P. Hoftyzer and D. van Krevelen, Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng., 1954, 32, S60–S67 Search PubMed .
R. Baciocchi, G. Storti and M. Mazotti, Chem. Eng. Process., 2006, 45, 1047–1058 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zeman, AIChE J., 2008, 54, 1396–1399 CrossRef CAS .

          J. K. Stolaroff, Capturing CO2 from ambient air: a feasibility assessment, PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA,  2006.

Direct Air Capture of CO2 with Chemicals. A Technology Assessment for the APS Panel on Public Affairs, American Physical Society (APS), http://www.aps.org/,  2011 Search PubMed.

          F. Zeman, Air extraction: The feasibility of absorbing CO2 directly from the atmosphere, PhD thesis, Columbia University,  2006.
K. S. Lackner, Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top., 2009, 176, 93–106 CrossRef .
M. Steinberg and V. D. Dang, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 97–112 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Sherman, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2009, 28, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nikulshina, D. Hirsch, M. Mazzotti and A. Steinfeld, Energy, 2006, 31, 1715–1725 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nikulshina, C. Gebald and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 146, 244–248 CrossRef CAS .

          A.-K. Arosenius, Mass and energy balances for black liquor gasification with borate autocausticization, Master thesis, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden,  2007.
D. K. Lindberg, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 6285–6291 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Nohlgren and S. Sinquefield, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 5996–6000 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahmoudkhani and D. W. Keith, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2009, 3, 376–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mahmoudkhani, K. R. Heidel, J. C. Ferreira, D. W. Keith and R. S. Cherry, Energy Proc., 2009, 1, 1535–1542 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Keith and M. Mahmoudkhani, US Pat., Appl. 2010/0034724,  2010.
T. Richards, I. Nohlgren, B. Warnqvist and H. Theliander, Nord. Pulp Pap. Res. J., 2002, 17, 213–221 CAS .
Carbon Engineering Inc., http://www.carbonengineering.com/.
A. Bandi, M. Specht, T. Weimer and K. Schaber, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 899–902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stucki, A. Schuler and M. Constantinescu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1995, 20, 653–663 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Keith and M. Ha-Duong, CO2 Capture from the Air: Technology Assessment and Implications for Climate Policy, Sixth International Conference on Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies, Kyoto, Japan,  2003, pp. 187–197 Search PubMed .

          H. Herzog, Assessing The Feasibility of Capturing CO2 from the Air, Pub. No. LFEE 2003-002 WP, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Laboratory for Energy and the Environment,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. Elliot, K. S. Lackner, H. Ziock, M. K. Dubey, H. P. Hanson and S. Barr, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2001, 28, 1235–1238 CrossRef .
M. Steinberg and V. D. Dang, Energy Convers., 1977, 17, 133–140 CrossRef .

          M. Steinberg and V. D. Dang, Use of Controlled Thermonuclear Reactor Fusion Power for the Production of Synthetic Methanol from the Air and Water, BNL 20016R, Report BNL 20016R, Brookhaven National Laboratory,  1975 Search PubMed .

          R. B. Polak and M. Steinberg, US Pat., 2012/0003722A1,  2012.
H. Hayashi, J. Taniuchi, N. Furuyashiki, S. Sugiyama, S. Hirano, N. Shigemoto and T. Nonaka, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1998, 37, 185–191 CrossRef CAS .
Coaway LCC, http://www.coaway.com/.

          M. D. Eisaman, D. E. Schwartz, S. Amic, D. Larner, J. Zesch, F. Torres and K. Littau, Energy-Efficient Electrochemical CO2 Capture from the Atmosphere, Clean Technology 2009, Houston, Texas,  2009, pp. 175–178 Search PubMed .
M. D. Eisaman, L. Alvarado, D. Larner, P. Wang, B. Garg and K. A. Littau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1319–1328 CAS .
V. Nikulshina, N. Ayesa, M. E. Gálvez and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 140, 62–70 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nikulshina and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 155, 867–873 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nikulshina, M. F. Gálvez and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 129, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Stuckert and R. T. Yang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10257–10264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, S. Choi, J. H. Drese, M. Hornbostel, G. Krishnan, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 899–903 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald and A. Steinfeld, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3584–3592 CAS .
C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher, P. Tingaut, T. Zimmermann and A. Steinfeld, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 9101–9108 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Drese, S. Choi, R. P. Lively, W. J. Koros, D. J. Fauth, M. L. Gray and C. W. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3821–3832 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hicks, J. H. Drese, D. J. Fauth, M. L. Gray, G. Qi and C. W. Jones, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2902–2903 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, B. Fadhel, C. J. Schneider and A. L. Chaffee, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 111, 536–543 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Acosta, C. S. Carr, E. E. Simanek and D. F. Shantz, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 985–989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, J. D. Lunn, S. Gonzalez, J. A. Ristich, E. E. Simanek and D. F. Shantz, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2935–2942 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, J. D. Lunn, D. F. Shantz and C. W. Jones, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10556–10561 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goeppert, S. Meth, G. K. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1949–1960 CAS .
X. C. Xu, C. S. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Energy Fuels, 2002, 16, 1463–1469 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Xu, C. S. Song, J. M. Andresen, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 62, 29–45 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Xu, C. S. Song, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Fuel Process. Technol., 2005, 86, 1457–1472 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Yue, L. B. Sun, Y. Cao, Y. Wang, Z. J. Wang and J. H. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3442–3451 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Xu, C. S. Song, B. G. Miller and A. W. Scaroni, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 8113–8119 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Yue, L. B. Sun, Y. Cao, Z. J. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Yu and J. H. Zhu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 114, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, S.-T. Yang, W.-S. Ahn and R. Ryoo, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3627–3629 RSC .
M. B. Yue, Y. Chun, Y. Cao, X. Dong and J. H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Jiang, V. Kish, D. Fauth, M. L. Gray, H. W. Pennline and B. Y. Li, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2011, 5, 1170–1175 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert, S. Meth and G. K. S. Prakash, US Pat., 7,795,175,  2010.
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, R. B. May, G. K. S. Prakash, G. A. Olah and S. R. Narayanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20164–20167 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Ma, V. Schwartz, J. C. Clark, S. H. Overbury, S. Zhao, X. Xu and C. Song, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1485–1492 RSC .
X. Wang, S. Zhao, X. Ma and C. Song, Prepr. Pap.-Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 2011, 56, 267–269 CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, R. Khunsupat, T. T. Chen and C. W. Jones, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 14203–14210 CAS .
S. Choi, M. L. Gray and C. W. Jones, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 628–635 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chaikittisilp, H.-J. Kim and C. W. Jones, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 5528–5537 CAS .
M. Plaza, C. Pevida, B. Arias, J. Fermoso, A. Arenillas, F. Rubiera and J. Pis, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2008, 92, 601–606 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fisher, J. Tanthana and S. S. C. Chuang, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2009, 28, 589–598 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen and W.-S. Ahn, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 166, 646–651 CrossRef CAS .
C. Knöfel, C.l Martin, V. Hornebecq and P. L. Llewellyn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21726–21734 Search PubMed .

          C. Gebald, J. A. Wurzbacher and A. Steinfeld, EP Pat., 2266680A1,  2010.
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald and A. Steinfeld, Prepr. Pap.-Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 2011, 56, 276 CAS .
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS .

          G. A. Olah and R. Aniszfeld, US. Pat. 7,378,561 and 7,459,590,  2008.
S. Choi, J. H. Drese, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 2420–2427 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Choi, J. H. drese, R. R. Chance, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, US Pat., 2011/0179948A1,  2011.
S. Choi, M. L. Gray, P. M. Eisenberger and C. W. Jones, Prepr. Pap.-Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Fuel Chem., 2011, 56, 277 CAS .

          K. S. Lackner and A. B. Wright, WO Pat., 2010022399A1,  2010.
A. D. Ebner and J. A. Ritter, Sep. Sci. Technol., 2009, 44, 1273–1421 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mulgundmath and F. Tezel, Adsorption, 2010, 16, 587–598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. A. Webley and P. Xiao, Energy Convers. Manage., 2008, 49, 346–356 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, P. Xiao, P. Webley, J. Zhang, R. Singh and M. Marshall, Adsorption, 2008, 14, 415–422 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, C. A. Grande, P. Li, J. Yu and A. E. Rodrigues, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2011, 81, 307–317 CrossRef CAS .
M. Clausse, J. Merel and F. Meunier, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2011, 5, 1206–1213 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tlili, G. Grevillot and C. Vallieres, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2009, 3, 519–527 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Grande and A. E. Rodrigues, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2008, 2, 194–202 CAS .

          C. A. Grande, R. P. L. Ribeiro, E. L. G. Oliveira and A. E. Rodrigues, in Greenhouse Gas Control Technologies 9, ed. J. Gale, H. Herzog and J. Braitsch,  2009, vol. 1, pp. 1219–1225 Search PubMed .
M. Ishibashi, H. Ota, N. Akutsu, S. Umeda, M. Tajika, J. Izumi, A. Yasutake, T. Kabata and Y. Kageyama, Energy Convers. Manage., 1996, 37, 929–933 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Plaza, S. Garcia, F. Rubiera, J. J. Pis and C. Pevida, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 163, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Pugsley, F. Berruti and A. Chakma, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1994, 49, 4465–4481 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, K. S. Lackner and A. Wright, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 6670–6675 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, P. Bollini, S. A. Didas, S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3363–3372 CAS .
R. A. Khatri, S. S. C. Chuang, Y. Soong and M. Gray, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 1514–1520 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Rao and E. S. Rubin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 4467–4475 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chi and G. T. Rochelle, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2002, 41, 4178–4186 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bollini, S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 2416–2425 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Strazisar, R. R. Anderson and C. M. White, Energy Fuels, 2003, 17, 1034–1039 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sayari, Y. Belmabkhout and E. Da'na, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4241–4247 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Simon, N. B. Kaahaaina, S. J. Friedmann and R. D. Aines, Energy Proc., 2011, 4, 2893–2900 CrossRef .
K. Z. House, A. C. Baclig, M. Ranjan, E. A. van Nierop, J. Wilcox and H. J. Herzog, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 20428–20433 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Pielke Jr, Environ. Sci. Policy, 2009, 12, 216–225 CrossRef .

Negative Emissions and Carbon Recycling – Air Capture, Environment Policy Statement 11/01, UK Institution of Mechanical Engineers, IMechE,  2011 Search PubMed .

          N. McGlashan, S. Nilay and M. Workman, The Potential for the Deployment of Negative Emissions Technology in the UK, A Report by AVOID, Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change, Imperial College London,  2010 Search PubMed .

          K. Heidel, G. Holmes, A. Singh and D. W. Keith, Process Design and Costing of an Air-contactor for Air-capture, Information Sheet, Carbon Engineering Ltd., Calgary, Canada,  2011 Search PubMed .
K. S. Lackner, Sci. Am., 2010, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Keith, M. Mahmoudkhani, A. Biglioli, B. Hart, K. Heidel and M. Foniok, US Pat., 2010/0064890 A1,  2010.

          A. B. Wright, K. S. Lackner, B. Wright, M. Wallen, U. Ginster and E. J. Peters, US Pat., 8,088,197,  2012.

          A. B. Wright and E. J. Peters, US Pat., 7.993,432,  2011.

          K. S. Lackner and A. Wright, US Pat., 7,833,328,  2010.
Kilimanjaro Energy Inc., http://www.kilimanjaroenergy.com/.
Global Thermostat, http://www.globalthermostat.com/.
Climeworks, http://www.climeworks.com/.
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 487 CrossRef CAS  , and refs. therein.

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2nd edn,  2009, and refs. therein Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, G. K. S. Prakash and A. Goeppert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12881–12898 CrossRef CAS  , and refs. therein.

Carbon Dioxide as Chemical Feedstock, ed. M. Aresta, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Peters, B. Köhler, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, P. Markewitz and T. E. Müller, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1216–1240 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiaoding and J. A. Moulijn, Energy Fuels, 1996, 10, 305 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
G. Centi, G. Iaquaniello and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1265–1273 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Quadrelli, G. Centi, J.-L. Duplan and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1194–1215 CrossRef CAS .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Olah, Catal. Lett., 2004, 93, 1 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Olah, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2636 CrossRef CAS .

          A. M. Shulenberger, F. R. Jonsson, O. Ingolfsson and K.-C. Tran, Process for Producing Liquid Fuel from Carbon Dioxide and Water, US Pat. Appl. 2007/0244208 A1,  2007 Search PubMed.
S. Choi, T. Watanabe, T.-H. Bae, D. S. Sholl and C. W. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1136 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McDonald, W. R. Lee, J. A. Mason, B. M. Wiers, C. S. Hong and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7056 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This article was submitted as part of a Themed Issue on carbon dioxide. Other papers on this topic can be found in issue 6 of vol. 5 (2012). This issue can be found from the EES homepage http://www.rsc.org/eeThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Alain Goeppert	Alain Goeppert obtained his PhD in 2002 from the University of Strasbourg, France. He is currently a research scientist in the Olah/Prakash group. His research focuses on methane and CO2 activation and catalytic transformation to more valuable products including methanol, methyl formate, formic acid and dimethyl ether. He is also involved in the catalytic decomposition of formic acid to hydrogen and CO2, as well as the development of regenerative amine sorbents for the separation and capture of CO2 from various sources including the air. He is a co-author of the book “Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy”.
Miklos Czaun	Miklos Czaun received his MS Chem. Eng. (1998) from the University of Veszprem (Hungary) and completed his PhD (Summa Cum Laude, 2003) under the supervision of Prof. Gabor Speier. He joined the research group of Profs. George A. Olah and G. K. Surya Prakash at the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute at University of Southern California in 2009. Presently, he is a Senior Research Associate focused on the development of solid adsorbents for carbon dioxide capture and the conversion of carbon dioxide to synthesis gas (dry-reforming and bi-reforming reactions). He is also interested in carbon neutral energy- and hydrogen storage systems.
G. K. Surya Prakash	G. K. Surya Prakash received his B.Sc. (Honors) (1972) from the Bangalore University, his M.Sc. (1974) from IIT, Madras and his Ph.D. (1978) from the University of Southern California (USC). After his postdoctoral work at USC, he joined the faculty at USC in 1981 and is currently a Professor and Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute holding the Olah Nobel Laureate Chair in Hydrocarbon Chemistry. His research interests are in fluorination and synthetic methods, mechanistic studies, superacid chemistry, electrochemistry and hydrocarbon chemistry. He is a co-proponent of the Methanol Economy concept, prolific and has received several American Chemical Society National Awards.
George A. Olah	George A. Olah is a Distinguished Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering and the Founding Director of the Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute at the University of Southern California. He received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1994) for his work on carbocations and hydrocarbon chemistry. His research interests are in synthetic and mechanistic chemistry with emphasis on energy and hydrocarbon chemistry. He is the proponent of the Methanol Economy concept to supplement and eventually supplant fossil fuels and their products by carbon capture and recycling (CCR).

Broader context
Fossil fuels are the result of anaerobic decomposition of organic matter. As such, they are essentially fossilized solar energy that was stored away by nature for millions of years. This gift from nature has allowed humankind to reach unprecedented levels of development and standards of living. However, what was formed over the eons is being used up rather quickly! Reserves of fossil fuels will not last much beyond this century. Meanwhile, the CO2 released by burning them for their energy content is raising increasing concerns due to its negative effects on the environment. To reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and at the same time mitigate the CO2 issue, it is time for humankind to live not on fossilized solar energy but on current solar energy. We are not per se facing an energy crisis. Sunlight delivers to Earth each hour as much energy as consumed by humankind in an entire year. Rather than an energy problem we have an energy collecting and storage problem. Mimicking nature by capturing and recycling CO2 (CCR) from the atmosphere using any alternate energy source will provide us with a sustainable carbon source for fuels and materials well beyond the fleeting fossil fuel era.


 	Fig. 1  Global surface temperature change from 1880 to 2010, reported as a deviation from the 1951–1980 average. The black curve shows the globally and annually averaged near-surface temperature derived from a variety of instruments including thermometers, satellites, and various ocean sensors, all carefully calibrated and quality-controlled to remove errors. Green bars indicate the 95 percent confidence interval. The red curve shows a five year running average. Original source: NASA/GISS.3	 

 	Fig. 2  Atmospheric CO2 concentration measured at Mauna Loa, Hawaii from 1958 to 2012. (Source: CDIAC, Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Reaction of primary and secondary amines with CO2.	 
2LiOH + CO2 → Li2CO3 + H2O
CO2 + 2OH− → CO32− + H2O

 	Fig. 4  Overview of the process of CO2 capture from the air using the Na/Ca cycle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2007) American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Proposed Na/Fe cycle for the capture of CO2 from the air. Reproduced with permission from Carbon Engineering.113	 
Ca(OH)2 + CO2 → CaCO3 + H2O, ΔH0298K = −109 kJ mol−1

 	Fig. 6  Air capture with calcium hydroxide.116	 
K2CO3 + CO2 + H2O → 2KHCO3, ΔH0 = −141 kJ mol−1

 	Fig. 7  Structure of branched polyethylenimine.	 

 	Fig. 8  Adsorption of CO2 from the air at 25 °C on FS-PEI-50. Inset: desorption at 85 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Covalent grafting of trimethoxysilanes to (a) MCM-41, (b) silica gel beads and (c) SBA-15.	 

 	Fig. 10  Covalent immobilization of AEAPDMS to cellulose backbone.132	 

 	Fig. 11  Proposed representation of acid-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization of aziridine from SBA-15.164	 

 	Fig. 12  Preparation of poly(L-lysine) brush–mesoporous silica hybrid adsorbent.138	 

 	Fig. 13  Moisture-swing adsorption of CO2 on a quaternary ammonium functionalized ion exchange membrane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Examples of prototypes and proposed designs for the separation of CO2 from the air. (a) Prototype for CO2 capture from the air. Reproduced by permission from Kilimanjaro Energy. (b) Solid amine based swing bed for CO2 removal in human space flights. Currently undergoing tests in the International Space Station (ISS). Reproduced by permission from NASA. Courtesy J. C. Graf. (c) Artist rendering of an atmospheric CO2 capture contactor. Reproduced by permission from Carbon Engineering. (d) Artist rendering of an array of atmospheric CO2 capture units also known as Synthetic Trees. Reproduced by permission from Stonehaven Production. (e) Artist rendering of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air using an anionic exchange resin and regeneration by moisture swing. Reproduced by permission from Kilimanjaro Energy. (f) Construction of a prototype for CO2 capture from the air in Alberta, Canada. Reproduced by permission from Carbon Engineering.	 
Footnote
† This article was submitted as part of a Themed Issue on carbon dioxide. Other papers on this topic can be found in issue 6 of vol. 5 (2012). This issue can be found from the EES homepage http://www.rsc.org/ee

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
