Ultrafast imaging of photochemical dynamics: roadmap to a new conceptual basis for chemistry   - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6FD00241B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00241B
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2016, 194, 777-828Ultrafast imaging of photochemical dynamics: roadmap to a new conceptual basis for chemistry†

        
          
            R. J. Dwayne 
            Miller
          
        
      ab
aThe Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, The Hamburg Centre for Ultrafast Imaging, Luruper Chausse 149, Hamburg 22607, Germany. E-mail: dwayne.miller@mpsd.mpg.de
bDepartments of Chemistry and Physics, University of Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario L5G 3J6, Canada
Received 
      25th November 2016
    , Accepted 28th November 2016First published on 19th December 2016
1. Introduction – from static structures to a dynamical view of chemistry
One of the long standing objectives in chemistry has now been realized. We can watch directly atomic motions during the defining moments of chemistry.1,2 Given the rare nature of barrier crossings, we currently rely on optical methods to trigger the chemistry of interest on the 100 femtosecond time scale, i.e. current observations are limited to photochemical processes ergo the use of photochemical as a qualifier for this Faraday Discussion. This meeting was dedicated to exploring the latest advances in atomically resolved reaction dynamics to expose current issues and to chart a course for both theory and experiment to fully exploit the information content from this class of experiments. We are now at the fundamental space–time resolution effectively needed to image chemistry.
What new can be learned from the direct observation of chemistry? It is not about reconfirming what we already know about chemistry. As with all things, once you observe a phenomenon at higher and higher spatial and temporal resolution, you start to see things you did not see before and gain a deeper understanding of the phenomenon. There is always a surprise. Observing chemistry on the primary atomic timescales is no different. There is great potential for research in this area to provide a new conceptual basis for chemistry – one in which the fundamental connection between structure and dynamics is considered in a unifying manner.
In this respect, I have taken the opportunity in writing this summary article to give my perspective on this question and personal motivation for entering this field with the goal of achieving the quantum limit in space–time resolution for imaging chemistry. This effort now spans nearly 30 years for my group, with the ultimate goal to resolve the structure–function relationship of biological systems. This issue is related to how these systems so efficiently transduce stored chemical potential into doing work on the surroundings, i.e. breathe life into otherwise inanimate matter.3–5 Our original observations indicated that the protein response function couples to collective modes as the most efficient means of coupling chemistry into biological functions. After many different experiments exploring different time length scales, energetics, and probes, we demonstrated this is indeed the dominant mechanism.3,4,6,7 However, we could only guess at what the collective modes were and how they were encoded in the protein structure. These systems are such complex high dimensional problems that the only way to come to a first principles understanding of the connection between chemistry and biology would be to directly observe proteins in action at the atomic level. It was this rather simple observation, in retrospect, that motivated a nearly 30-year effort to image chemical and biological processes at the atomic level. We now have our first full atom resolved chemical reaction and can now directly see how chemistry scales with increasing complexity up to the level of proteins.
There is a principle of reduced dimensions that naturally occurs through the inherent space–time coupling of molecular motions. It is through these observations I believe we are on the cusp of a new dynamical structural basis for chemistry that explicitly includes the many body nature of the problem and recasts chemistry into a reduced set of key reaction modes for different classes of reactions. Nature has exploited this effect on an even grander scale. This new conceptual basis could change the way we think about chemistry in terms of controlling barrier heights, as well as providing more efficient theoretical sampling of reaction space to enable interactive guidance to synthetic strategies. To put it simply, chemistry is defined by the atomic motions occurring during barrier crossing events. We can now see these processes directly. From the time dependent velocities and known effective masses for the motion, we can directly determine potential energy surfaces in a single measurement, i.e., directly observe reaction forces – the very essence of chemistry. This information will necessarily lead to higher levels of optimization for harnessing these forces.
Historical overview: space–time conundrum in understanding chemistry
In way of background, it is useful to trace the steps that led us to the present status in imaging chemistry to better appreciate what we should expect in terms of providing new insights into chemistry. There has always been an understanding that structure and dynamics are important but there has been a tension in terms of which observable provides more useful information for guiding our thinking. Since the very foundation of the atomic theory for chemistry was laid, we have been fascinated with the atomic details of matter. It is even difficult to imagine that there was a time when the idea of an atomic basis for matter was considered to be theoretical conjecture. We have to go back to the time of Dalton in which matter was established to be conserved (for chemical processes) and the early work of Max Laue as recounted by Eckert8 and W. Lawrence Bragg9 that definitely showed the atomic structure of matter using the newly discovered X-ray sources.10 There is no better example of the connection of atomic structure to chemical processes than the work of Lonsdale that showed that all 6 carbon atoms of benzene lie in a plane;11 hardly a chemistry student does not know the story of Kekule's proposed structure of benzene and the origin of the extra stability or aromaticity of benzene (based on Kekule's account of a dream he had of a serpent slithering to form a ring within the benzene structure).12 The structure of benzene led to the concept of electron delocalization and sharply focused discussion on the relationship between time scales and structure. The debate centered on whether the structure of benzene consisted of 3 double bonds and 3 single bonds in which rapid interconversion between two equivalent forms occurred. The determination of the structure of benzene and many more molecular structures contributed greatly to Pauling's formulation of the hybridization of atom centered orbitals13 and the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory of Gillespie to specifically take into account the effect of neighboring nuclei on electron correlation energies and corresponding electron probability distribution.14,15 The celebrated argument between Olah and Brown on radical cations is yet another example of questioning whether the chemistry involves rapidly interconverting equivalent intermediate structures or new minima involving electron delocalization.16 We see a constant struggle in terms of trying to rationalize nuclear arrangements with its effect on electron distributions and the time needed for creating local stable minima along a reaction pathway. The debate revolves around the connection of structure to the underlying dynamics. This time–spatial relationship for understanding chemistry goes back to the earliest days of formulating an atomic basis for chemistry. Structures were known to us. The dynamics were not.
In parallel, to formulating a structural basis for chemistry, there were very important developments in trying to understand the time scales of chemistry with respect to reaction kinetics. The work of van't Hoff and Arrhenius revealed the barriers to chemical processes and showed the exponential dependence of reaction rates in terms of the statistics of barrier crossing.17 Since this seminal work, it has been appreciated that chemistry is really a race against time. It has long been recognized that it is the manipulation of barrier heights that give chemists such exquisite (exponential) control over different types of chemistry in our quest to make virtually any imaginable molecule. We obtain the highest yield for the process that occurs fastest, and not necessarily the one leading to the most thermodynamically stable state. The work of Eyring and M. Polanyi towards absolute rate theories ultimately led to the formulation of transition state theory and the general concept that there are particular nuclear arrangements that define the barrier height, or mathematically the minimum nuclear flux point in nuclear configuration space.17,18 Since then, the one unifying conceptual basis across all fields in chemistry is this idea of a transition state through which one can gain control over the chemistry. We try to imagine what this rare moment in space–time looks like and to introduce changes in structure to lower or raise the barrier to arrive at the desired chemistry.
The interesting conundrum we have is that we base our present view of chemistry, and the dynamical exploration of nuclear configurations to achieve the near mythical transition state region, on static structures. Chemistry is by definition dynamic; yet we use static structures to project to the barrier region. This present situation has arisen from the great success in correlating material properties with static structures and our previous inability to determine the structural changes occurring during the fleeting moments involved in barrier crossings. How is it that we can get away with describing what is purely a dynamical phenomenon (aka chemistry) with the longest lived structures within a constant blur of motion? Or do we? There is no reason to believe it is even possible to project from any given minima or static structure to the narrow region in nuclear configuration space defining the barrier region that governs the chemistry of interest. The simple rules and general reaction mechanisms found empirically by synthetic chemists seemingly defy statistics.
This issue has perplexed me my entire research career. To put this problem in context, imagine a box with a large number of marbles (N) of different size, shape and colour in which there is one spatial location in which you would like to localize one particularly coloured, say blue, marble to represent the sampling of the transition state for molecular systems. (To make this analogy more closely related to the chemical problem, the spatial location for trapping the blue marble would change depending on the specific arrangement of the other marbles by some hidden rules.) You will find by shaking the box to model the thermal sampling that there are a very large number of permutations. We can formalize this as either a dilute or condensed system with respect to cross section of the particles and the area available for motion to give the precise probability for sampling the designated position. The chances of getting the blue coloured marble at this one site is exceedingly small for N > 100 and would be short lived. This gives some idea of these rare events in chemistry. Now pick one random starting point for the coloured marble. My main point should be made clear by trying to predict the trajectory by which the coloured marble would arrive at the defined transition state region. There is no clear pathway nor arrangement of the other marbles at this position. You would not expect to be able to predict the pathway or arrangement of particles at this point from any given initial starting point. In this problem statement, all the motions are uncorrelated. One way to solve the problem is to impose correlations on the sampling of different configurations to reduce the number of possible arrangements. Clearly the formation of molecular bonds strongly correlates and maintains fixed spatial relationships. We can repeat the thought experiment with a coloured marble connected to some subset of marbles as beads on a string. Again is this a sufficient condition to allow static structures to be used to predict the structural relationship at specific points in configuration space? If you repeat the exercise with spatially correlated particles, you will have reduced the problem to a smaller effective N but the pathway to a given position (in nuclear configuration with respect to particle configurations within this analogy) is still quite complex. Nevertheless, we rely heavily on the static structure of reactants to project to critical points. How can we use static structures as inputs to thinking about nuclear configurations in barrier crossing events?
The problem becomes more complex as we increase N. It is clear that molecular properties depend on the specific 3D structure of the molecule. (This is the entire basis of the pharmaceutical industry.) Within transition state theory, there are a number of key assumptions that merit scrutiny in this regard. (1) The transition state is defined mathematically to be the minimum flux point. (2) The energy is assumed to be equipartitioned within all degrees of freedom, and (3) the passage from reactant to product surface is assumed to be unity at the reaction saddle point or transition state.17 The problem with the assumption of unit probability for reaction is that it does not take into account friction and recurrences at the critical point so that TS theory always overestimates reaction rates.17 One can argue about how to define the transition state region and statistical distribution. The one point that stands out is the assumption of equipartitioning of energy in all modes in terms of the statistical sampling this region. If all modes were equally coupled to the reaction coordinate, this condition would be met for all points in nuclear configuration. If this condition was rigorously true, then every molecule would show different chemistry. We would not be able to find such generalized reaction mechanisms as each molecule would have a unique many body potential, unique properties, and by extension would have significantly different barriers to desired pathways and more importantly other competing pathways steering the system away from a given chemical pathway. In this respect, there is always a caveat on the condition of equipartitioning of the sampling process to all modes of the system. If there are some motions that are more strongly coupled to the reaction coordinate (as is the case – vide infra), statistical fluctuations from this condition will be amplified. This coupling would represent the hidden rules in the above analogy. How indeed have we, over the course of time, found chemical reactions to be transferable from one molecule to another for a given class of compounds? Chemists have discovered generalized reactions that hold true for a wide range of systems much like physics has found generalized equations to describe the operating physics within a range of boundary conditions. The two must meet. We are missing what must be some simple physics or unifying principle that has allowed us to find such generalized reaction mechanisms.
The scaling to more complex systems is yet another question. The number of independent degrees of freedom to arrange the atoms, or dimensions to chemical problems, scale as 3N where N now refers to the number of atoms. Current objectives in chemistry involve targets often involving hundreds of atoms, verging on the mesoscale to emulate biological systems. The increased complexity with requirement for unique properties for such targeted synthesis necessitates that the details of the many body potential matter. Again, this statement begs the question in terms of the underlying physics that makes chemistry transferrable to arbitrarily complex systems.
In scaling to higher levels of complexity, there are lessons to be learned from biological systems. For example, let us scale up the problem to the size of a protein (N > 1000). Mother Nature has found solutions by which these large molecular systems are able to transduce relatively small amounts of stored chemical potential into particular functions. There must be an enormous reduction in dimensionality to couple chemistry to function on this scale. The number of possible permutations, especially within the context of a highly associated or glass-like system,19 are astronomical and with any reasonable sampling time seem to contradict the time scales by which biological systems are observed to execute their functions. In this context, it is important to note that one of the definitions of a living system is that it must be catalytic.20 The evolutionarily optimised structure leads to control over barrier heights by which processes occur faster than without the biological construct. This observation would appear to be at odds with the requirement that protein structures must be robust to have reproducible properties (extension of the required property of self-replication for living systems). Such highly associated constructs should behave as glassy systems, which by the very nature of glasses would greatly retard motions and timescale for sampling barriers and directing chemistry into functions.
This problem in understanding how such large molecules can direct chemistry can be recast following the same logic as Levinthal's paradox for trying to rationalise protein structure and the millions of different structures connected to different biological functions.21 The number of possible nuclear configurations is so enormous that it would seemingly preclude the possibility of a protein finding its active structure, never mind executing its functionalized chemistry. For example, consider the structure of a protein with N amino acids. Each amino acid can rotate along the protein backbone for which there are 3 near degenerate orientations (within kT). The total number of permutations is 3N, just considering this one rotational coordinate. For even a relatively small protein of 100 amino acids, this corresponds to 3100 or 1047 different possible permutations along a single rotational coordinate for each amino acid of which there are many other possible types of motion. If each possible configuration was sampled at the fastest possible sampling rate (1013 s−1, less than half period for the rotation), it would take longer than the age of the universe for the system to find its minimum energy structure. This paradox, as with all paradoxes, is used to point out the problem with a common assumption. The system clearly does not have equal weighting or resident times in sampling possible nuclear configurations. This obvious fact is not taken into account in the way the problem is posed. One could ask very similar questions about forming an ice cube, with even more atoms. Once the potential energy minimum is formed to create a nucleation site for the formation of ice, there is a strong driving force for additional water to bind and conserve the lattice symmetry. There are high barriers to explore other configurations so the water spends an exponentially longer time in the ice configuration, which only grows in time (T < 273 K). Here a clear distinction is needed. If protein structures were so rigid, as in the counter example of ice, we would be dead. The real issue with Levinthal's paradox is that protein systems must be mutable in order to respond to changing environmental conditions. Thus, they must have an active structure with only small barriers separating different conformations such that the system is only marginally bound within kT. This distinction is what makes Levinthal's paradox so profound. There must be a driving force sufficiently strong to reproduce the protein's active structure, yet provide thermally accessible minima to enable function. The two conditions would seem to be mutually exclusive. However, if there were spatial correlations of the protein fluctuations on some comparable length scale of the protein itself, it would reduce the number of minima from a myriad of possible structures to a smaller subset, evidently to the limit of just a few biologically active forms. These spatial correlations represent again an enormous reduction in dimensionality of the problem, from 1000s of degrees of freedom for fully uncorrelated motion of the atoms (as in the above marble problem) to a few strongly correlated motions. The basic physics of these inherent spatial correlations has been discussed within the context of the collective mode coupling model for protein function.3,4,6,7
Returning to our coloured marble analogy involving fully uncorrelated motions, we have now basically deduced that there must be inherent spatial correlations or colored noise on the sampling process for barrier crossing for systems as large as proteins. However, the degree of correlation and specific subset of motions out of the enormous number of degrees of freedom are not known. This point is made to show that we cannot take static structures and predict the nuclear configuration(s) defining the barrier crossing region. There are too many possible configurations and we are missing information on how strongly coupled the different types of nuclear motion are to the electronic degrees of freedom, the convolution of which determines a dynamic potential energy surface. It is impossible to imagine all the possible trajectories and the effective potential. To give yet another analogy, it is like hiking from one valley to another in the mountains where you represent the effective mass of some heavy reduced coordinate depicting motion along the potential energy surface of the mountainous topology. The difference is that your every step, changes the landscape. It would be very difficult to predict the lowest barrier route to go from one valley to another as the landscape continually changes with your very motion.
Given the complexity of the problem, how then have our colleagues in synthetic chemistry managed to make nearly any imaginable molecular structure up to the nm scale of molecular architecture? In the classic exercise of retrosynthesis, various reaction mechanisms are explored to create the required molecular stepping stones to the final product. Over the last 100 years, hundreds of reaction mechanisms have been found empirically using synthetic or molecular probes of the process.22 With the understanding that changes in molecular structure affect the barrier height to the desired process, it is possible to make remarkable progress in understanding qualitatively reaction mechanisms to the point of establishing complex synthetic routes—with remarkable overall yields. Within the spirit of the above discussion of the myriad of possible nuclear configurations leading to the barrier region controlling the chemistry, how is this possible? Consider the typical strategy involved. The desired product structure is the objective. The input reactant structures at each step are known or assumed. From the difference in structure, one can readily discern the minimum atomic displacements needed to create the product structure. In chemistry, we are trained to imagine the structure of the transition state, as the half way point along the reaction path assumed in the above construct. This exercise is central to chemical means to control barrier heights (see Fig. 1 for a tongue-in-cheek presentation of this classic thought experiment). The intellectual challenge is to use various known reaction mechanisms to direct these motions. The reaction forces are controlled by introducing various groups and rearranging atomic positions to manipulate barrier heights. The qualitative effect on barrier heights is typically envisioned through arrow pushing exercises to describe how the electrons will rearrange in the presence of electron donating or withdrawing groups and relative stability of intermediate states along the overall reaction pathway. Reactive complexes are inferred as lowest energy barrier configurations based on similar ideas. This reasoning is based only on very qualitative input; yet it works!
 Fig. 1  Dissecting a Chemist's brain. This figure shows the classic thought experiment all chemists are trained to execute in imagining the critical moment in space time when a chemical event occurs. Here, the particular case chosen is oxygen dissociation or release from myoglobin (my favourite part of the universe where I spend a lot of time thinking about these motions). The star-like objects are used to represent heavy atoms with the giant red star as the central Fe atom of the heme binding site. The bond breaking event is modeled as a super nova-like event with the dumbbell shaped diatomic O2 whisking out of the picture. The motions in this figure are derived using conventional transition state concepts. From the difference in static structure of the reactant and product states, it appears the motion is all along the normal to the heme-porphyrin ring in which highly sequential motions are envisaged transmitted along the proximal histidine in response to this force. The actual process involves coupling to collective modes of the protein and porphyrin ring as well as heme doming coordinates. The specific protein motions are still an open question. (Reproduced with permission from https://www.vecteezy.com © pauldizonr; inset modified from ref. 4; R. D. Miller, Can. J. Chem., 2002, 80, 1–24. © 2008 Canadian Science Publishing or its licensors. Reproduced with permission. 
Presently, quantum chemistry calculations are conducted to better assist in planning synthetic routes but the majority of chemistry has historically been developed through the above thought process. There is an important lesson here. The methods used to conceptualize the chemistry focus on the largest net atomic motions needed to make the new structure and the forces considered in directing the atomic motions are viewed on a local basis. There is no consideration of spatially delocalized motions involving the entire many body potential of the molecule or other competing trajectories – only the principle motions needed. This is a highly localized view of chemistry. Some spatial delocalization of the reaction forces are taken into account in terms of the change in electron distribution and associated degree of bonding but this is really a secondary consideration. The high degree of success of this approach cannot be denied. Synthetic probes of chemistry have empirically discovered that the process of barrier crossing must distil down to a small subset of modes that lead to localized motions. There are undoubtedly other important motions and nuclear configurations involved that affect the barrier crossing but evidently not to the point to change the balance of dynamic flux across barriers of other competing pathways. It is this enormous reduction in dimensionality in the barrier crossing region that enables chemistry to be transferrable from one molecule to another. Further, it needs to be emphasized that the success of this approach demonstrates that it is not essential to have a high level accuracy on the details of the potential energy surface or reaction coordinate. The relative relationship of the desired process relative to other possible pathways and barrier heights needs to be preserved to direct chemistry along the desired pathway.
The main point of the above discussion is to illustrate that there is both considerable empirical evidence and straightforward deductive reasoning using simple analogies that chemistry reduces to a few dominant types of motions or modes. Even within this reduced dimensionality, the actual modes involved are not known. The number of possible permutations of all possible motions that could direct the system from the reactant to product surface are too many to realistically project the initial structures to transition state structures to truly understand what needs to be done to optimally direct the chemistry of interest.
With this in mind, it can be readily appreciated that one of the dream experiments in chemistry would be to directly observe atomic motions during the barrier crossing event to see the specific motions involved (Fig. 1). This information would provide new insight to optimally directing chemistry within the myriad of possibilities. For this reason, there has been a long fascination in going to higher and higher spatial and time resolution to follow chemical processes. Thanks to the perturbative approaches introduced by Porter23 and Eigen,24 we have been able to push the time aspect in the observation of chemistry from milliseconds to nanoseconds and beyond. However, the corresponding spatial resolution always has been the most imposing hurdle. Until the last 10–15 years, I think it is fair to say that it was largely believed that it would be impossible to attain – simultaneously – sufficient spatial and temporal resolution to directly observe atomic motions. The primary processes of chemistry were viewed to be immeasurably fast and one would always have to infer the underlying dynamics from indirect measurements. The above exercises in conceptualizing atomic motion would remain the purest form of a Gedanken experiment.
From Gendanken experiment to realization of atom resolved chemistry
To appreciate the technical challenge to directly resolving the atomic motions involved in chemistry, consider the challenge to build a molecular movie camera to capture chemistry on-the-fly. First, consider the shutter speed required for the simple act of bond breaking. How long does a bond take to break? To answer this question, you have to define when the bond is broken. For typical potentials, the displacement of atoms one additional bond length past the equilibrium position places the atoms within kT of the continuum. We can use this as the point of bond breaking. Using a bond length of 1 Å and for atoms moving along the dissociation coordinate at the speed of sound to approximate thermal fluctuations, we arrive at a required shutter speed of 10−13 s or 100 fs (tdiss = 10−8 cm/105 cm s−1). The required time resolution is on the order of 100 fs.5 This time scale should be familiar as it corresponds to the typical prefactor used in the Arrhenius rate constant expression for unimolecular reactions. There are faster processes involving repulsive potentials. For example the photoinduced bond breaking of Fe–CO in myoglobin and in the ring opening of cyclohexadiene occur within 25 fs.6,25 There are faster nuclear motions such as the O–H vibration of water, which defines the fastest nuclear motions. The period of the OH vibration is 10 fs but the rms motions are less than 0.05 Å, i.e., within harmonic limits of a bound potential, which are not chemically relevant. As in the bond breaking example, chemistry is determined by far from equilibrium motions with net displacements typically larger than 0.1 Å, i.e., beyond harmonic approximations to the local potential. (This point is crucial to understanding the extremely strong anharmonic coupling in this region.) In order for a chemical process to occur, nuclear fluctuations need to sample the reaction saddle point, or be optically prepared at this point, and the rate of passage depends on coupling to dissipative modes that collapse the wavefunction on the product state. There will be a distribution of time scales depending on the particular reaction. However, the overall dynamics are dictated by rearrangements of both intramolecular and intermolecular coordinates, which are dominated by dissipation involving low frequency modes in the highest density of states region. These modes undergo the largest amplitude motion and have the highest degree of anharmonic coupling in relation to the high density of near degenerate states to conserve energy and momentum in the relaxation process to the new configuration.26,27 Whether one is talking about solvent reorganization involved in electron transfer, isomerization, ring closing etc., the most highly damped modes undergoing the largest amplitude motion are the low frequency intramolecular and intermolecular modes on the order of 100 cm−1.1 The half period motion of such modes is again on the time scale of 100 fs. The point being made here is extremely important in terms of defining what constitutes chemistry and the relevant time scales for the far from equilibrium motions which govern the process.
The quantum mechanics of the problem also need to be considered. At any instant, the molecular wavefunction of the system can be described by a time dependent superposition state using any convenient basis to describe the coupling between the reactant and product surfaces. The phase relationships of this superposition state define the temporal and spatial coherence of the wavefunction. At the saddle point, the subsequent relaxation and dissipation collapses this coherence onto the product surface. This point needs to be emphasized. In order to have dynamics and completely irreversible collapse of the wavefunction requires coupling to a continuum of states. Otherwise, at some point there will be recurrence or recrossing to reform the initial state.28 The time scale of chemistry is the time scale by which the system samples the nuclear continuum of states. It is this process which makes the passage through the transition state region irreversible. The relevant time scale for sampling the nuclear continuum of states is as given above. In the case of dissociation, the product states are coupled to the continuum of translational states, whereas in the case of isomerization, bond formation, or electron/proton transfer, it is the coupling of the reaction modes to the nuclear continuum leading to redistribution of energy among the system and bath degrees of freedom. In all cases, the relevant time scale is defined by the nuclear motion along the reaction coordinate convolved to the sampling time of this continuum of states or dissipation dynamics.
The only exception to this statement is for purely electronic derived chemistry involving electron (hole) transfer to a conduction (valence) band state. In this case, the relevant electronic band forms a continuum of states and provides the necessary continuum condition for irreversible collapse of the wavefunction on the product state.29 In this case, the relevant time scale is the electronic coupling between the donor molecule and band states. The lifetime of excited molecular states resonant with band states gives a direct measurement of this coupling.29,30 It is only for this class of chemistry that the time scale of chemistry can be faster than nuclear sampling of states with electron transfer times reported as fast as a few fs.28–31 No nuclear motion is needed to collapse the wavefunction or to define the localization of the electron in the product channel. Dye sensitized solar cells explicitly exploit this process to achieve high quantum yields for photoinduced electron transfer.30
Apart from the electron/hole transfer process to band states, which can be purely electronic, the time scale for the primary processes responsible for barrier passage is determined by the time scale for nuclear fluctuations along the reaction coordinate convolved to the dissipative coupling to the nuclear continuum of states. This timescale will vary depending on the particular chemistry. For most chemical processes, the relevant time scale is related to the effective period of the key modes along the reaction coordinate, which in turn are anharmonically coupled to system-bath modes leading to energy redistribution and relaxation at the reaction saddle point to give the new structure. The upper limit for the rate of passage then is effectively the same as intramolecular vibrational relaxation (IVR)/energy redistribution and intermolecular vibrational energy transfer that traps the system on the product surface.27,32 This tends to be on 100 fs time scales for molecular systems with N > 10 atoms. Thus, the approximate shutter speed of 100 fs can be taken as the canonical shutter speed to capture the atomic motions involved in chemistry.
The lighting source for the molecular movie camera now needs to be considered. The experimental protocol is based on femtosecond spectroscopy methods in which one uses a femtosecond laser pulse to create the excited state under barrierless conditions to play out the chemistry of interest. The ensuing dynamics are generally followed with a probe pulse with a given time delay to follow the dynamics in a stroboscopic fashion. Each time delay between the excitation or preparation pulse and the probe pulse constitutes one time frame in what can be considered a movie of the system response. The observable depends on the probe pulse. If optical or IR probe pulses are used, the observable is related to excited electronic state dynamics. For photochemical processes, this form of transient absorption spectroscopy tracks the population dynamics from the initially excited reactant state through any intermediates to the final photoproduct state. Using IR probes, it is possible to get structural information through the changes in vibrational spectra, however, just as in IR spectroscopy of ground state species, this information is insufficient to fully determine molecular structure. To directly observe atomic motions, the probe pulse must have sufficiently short wavelengths, on the order of interatomic distances, or Å to sub-Å, as in conventional imaging based on the Rayleigh criterion to resolve two points in space. This condition requires either hard X-rays or high energy electrons to achieve sufficiently short carrier wavelengths for direct imaging.
In principle, it would have been possible to achieve these structural probes immediately with the advent of femtosecond lasers using either laser driven X-ray plasma sources or photoemission for electrons. The major obstacle was in fact not the attainment of simultaneous femtosecond time resolution with atomic spatial resolution but rather source brightness, getting enough X-ray photons or electrons to image the atomic motions above background. In all imaging problems, this detail is related to source brightness to illuminate sufficiently the features of interest with appropriate contrast above noise.
Keeping within this movie camera analogy, as one moves to faster and faster shutter speeds, the camera needs a brighter and brighter source in order not to lose image contrast within the noise. Flashbulbs were invented for precisely this reason. In the case of photography, the objective is to have a single frame with enough contrast to see the image. In the case of imaging chemistry, the very act of photoinducing the reaction in general leads to irreversible change in the sample. The sample in this case is the film, a very expensive film, in limited supply. Ideally, we also need single frame imaging but now at the atomic level. It is essential to extract the most information as possible from either amplitude or phase contrast to capture the image and use the least amount of sample as possible. The most sensitive means for imaging is based on diffraction using primarily phase contrast (phase shifts in the scattering process) in which the repeating structure of N identical objects leads to an N2 amplification of the image contrast as the amplitude of the scattered light or electron waves interfere in quadrature. The film in this case requires single crystals for the highest spatial resolution and to fully exploit the N2 amplification factor. The very act of exciting the sample, irreversibly changes the sample, and packing order leading to sample damage. Problems of X-ray or electron induced sample damage are often discussed for static structure determination.33 In the case of time resolved structural dynamics, it is the very act of preparing the system on a reactive excited state surface that damages the sample. Given the limitation in sample, it is not good enough to have imaging sources capable of femtosecond time resolution and atomic spatial resolution. The source brightness must be sufficient to achieve this space–time resolution under or near single shot conditions. In the case of gas phase or solution phase systems, there is the possibility for rapid sample exchange to average more frames with low brightness sources to build up the image. However, the enormous background for solution phase studies or limited density for gas phase studies greatly reduces the SNR (signal-to-noise ratio) and thereby the spatial and time resolution. The higher the brightness the better the image contrast in all cases. The main point is that the brightness criterion has to be fully appreciated. The machine physics for imaging chemistry at the atomic level has been solved with high brightness electron and X-ray sources (vide infra). It is the samples now that are the primary bottleneck – as it should be.
In keeping with the above historical account, the first experiments to combine both the structural and dynamical basis of chemistry was the work of Ischenko et al.34 This work used an elegant beam deflection method to study gas phase reaction dynamics to achieve microsecond time resolution, sufficiently short to capture the structure of reactive intermediates. It was the first resolved structural study of a molecular system, clearly illustrating the importance of time resolved structural dynamics, and laid the foundation for the work to follow. Follow up studies by Ischenko and Ewbank pointed out that it is possible to extract nuclear probability distributions35,36 and introduced a form of quantum tomography using certain constraints on the initial and intermediate states. This approach pointed out the higher information content possible from electron diffraction when the full quantum scattering problem is treated. The subsequent seminal work of Mourou et al. introduced laser excitation of a photocathode to generate short electron pulses via photoemission for the structural probe.37 This work achieved 20 ps time resolution to following the heating of Al, which was originally attributed to melting but the process was reversible with no sample damage. It appears they did not include the heat of fusion to pick their excitation conditions to sufficiently drive the structural phase transition. Nevertheless, this work, and other independent work at the same time (see ref. 38 and 39), introduced the basic source technology that has only recently been supplanted with rf pulse compression methods and compact e gun designs (vide infra). The Zewail group followed this lead, introducing a molecular beam for sample delivery, which is pioneering work on resolving structural intermediates in gas phase photochemistry.40–42 This work would still be considered to be a major accomplishment by today's standard given the very small signal levels in gas phase electron diffraction. Weber and his group introduced the idea of high repetition sampling to improve the time resolution and SNR to the few ps domain to follow the ring opening reaction of cyclohexadiene (CHD) at approximately the same time.43,44 The time resolution for all gas electron diffraction (GED) studies of reaction dynamics to date is limited to the few ps domain by the difference in the electron pulse velocity and the speed of light for the excitation pulse.45 This time resolution is sufficient to resolve intermediates but not to directly observe the key reaction modes, which requires sub-ps time resolution as discussed previously. The velocity mismatch problem in electron diffraction can be solved by using tilted phase fronts for the excitation46,47 to match the electron velocity. The implementation of this has recently been solved for studies of surface dynamics involving reversible phase transitions.48 The alternative is to use relativistic electron sources as will be discussed below.
The first work to achieve atomic resolution on sub-ps timescales was the work of Siwick et al.,49 which was based on the use of a new concept in ultrabright electron sources to provide the structural probe. The use of high bunch charge fs electron pulses, or ultrabright electrons in this context, was the key enabling technology that made real time viewing of atomic motions possible. Prior to this work, it was largely believed that the inherent electron–electron repulsion between electrons, or space charge effects, would destroy any chance of achieving fs time resolution with sufficient electrons for single shot diffraction. The advance in electron source brightness for time resolved studies was based on an effectively exact solution to the coupled equations of motion of some 104 electrons within an approximately 100 fs temporal profile.50 This number of electrons is sufficient for single shot structure determination for simple unit cells (assuming 100% efficient detectors). The exact numerical simulation of the electron propagation showed that there is indeed strong Coulombic repulsion or space charge effects at the required bunch charge densities. However, one does not lose space–time correlation in the longitudinal or temporal profile related to the electron pulse duration. This finding was completely missed in previous treatments of electron pulse propagation dynamics. Most important, the transverse coherence of the electrons was found to be sufficiently conserved to enable atomic imaging of even complex systems. This discussion is relevant to our above discussion of source brightness for imaging. Two solutions to producing ultrabright electron sources were immediately apparent from this work. One solution is to use a dispersive electron optic to provide the opposite linear chirp to temporally refocus the electron pulse at the sample position.50,51 The work of the Luiten group in the development of rf cavities for this purpose is particularly notable.51,52 The most robust solution is to use a compact electron gun design and not allow the pulse to broaden after the high field extraction zone.49,53–55 To give some idea of the source brightness, it is now possible with the newest generations of compact electron guns to achieve electron numbers of 105 to 106 electrons per pulse (100 micron beam diameter) with pulses as short as ∼200 fs and coherences of several nm, sufficient for systems as large as proteins.56,57 These systems reduce the technical difficulty of the experiment to the same level as conventional all optical pump–probe time resolved studies. More technically involved rf pulse compression systems can achieve 30 fs time resolution with time stamping to remove rf timing jitter58 and approximately 10× more electrons per pulse. Both source concepts are capable of single shot atomic resolution. For comparison, XFELs (X-ray Free Electron Lasers) are major international facilities with fully coherent beams and fluxes of 1012 X-ray photons per pulse. Given the 106 higher scattering cross section of electrons relative to hard X-rays for this purpose, the diffracted signal intensity (detected electrons or photons) for typical samples are comparable. These are very bright sources for atomic imaging.
The term atomic movie needs to be defined in relation to imaging chemistry, the central theme of this discussion. The definition must embrace the ability to observe a correlation of events in time to understand causal connections of force and action. Here, I define an atomic movie to mean a measurement of atomic structure with sufficient space–time resolution to observe atomic motions faster than collisional processes blur out the details, i.e. resolve how atoms move relative to one another during changes in atomic structure. As discussed above, the first atomic movie meeting this criterion focused on the simplest possible structural transition, melting, albeit under strongly driven conditions to capture the primary motions.49 High source brightness was essential as each laser shot destroyed the sample, which was in limited supply. This work is distinctive from similar work that followed the ps acoustic modes of Al, a fully reversible process with forces on the 10 nm scale (not atomic scale),59 and from earlier reports of Al melting that could not have resolved this process and were near the melting threshold.37 The first atomic movie resolved a long standing issue on the speed limit for driving phase transitions.49,60 It was discovered that at sufficient degrees of laser induced superheating the system could melt faster than conventional heterogeneous nucleation by over an order of magnitude through the long predicted mechanism of homogeneous nucleation. The time resolution achieved was 600 fs, which was required to clearly distinguish a controversial point on thermal vs. electronic or nonthermal driving forces for the phase transition.60 This work showed that the strongly driven phase transition of Al was a purely thermal process and occurred through homogeneous nucleation (now confirmed by all optical studies61). The remarkable finding was that for sufficient superheating, the Al lattice underwent spinoidal decomposition within 1 ps. All the bonds in the lattice broke within 1 ps, with complete collapse of the transverse barrier to allow atomic motions to acquire the radial distribution of the disordered liquid state. The time scale for the collective bond breaking is faster than collisions could wash out the details. Inspection of the time dependent reduced density (atom pair correlation function) shows the major motions involve shear type motions to the interstitial spaces in the lattice. We teach in physical chemistry that it is thermal motions exceeding the shear barrier to transverse motions that leads to the liquid state. We can now see this at the atomic level. These results also demonstrated that the nucleation sites had to form homogeneously throughout the sample and could only be on the order of 10 atoms. The insight gained from the first atom resolved structural transition helped solve the problem in laser driven ablation and shock wave formation that leads to collateral damage in laser surgery.62 The long held promise of the laser to achieve the fundamental (single cell) limit to minimally invasive surgery has now been achieved and for the first time without scar tissue formation.63,64 This application is noted here as it is the perfect example of how basic research can lead in unexpected ways to important real life applications. This outcome was derived from an atomic level perspective of the simplest structural transition, i.e., melting. One can well imagine what the outcome might be for a complete atomic level understanding of catalysis, or the chemistry of structure–function relationships in biological systems, as just two other examples.
In the years that followed, most the work using high brightness electron sources focused on photoinduced phase transitions from collective many body effects in the formation of charge density waves and bond hardening or changes in nuclear screening with the onset of warm dense matter at electronic temperatures of several hundred thousand K.65–71 There has been a continual increase in source brightness, but equally important developments in source characterization, and detector development. The evolution in source brightness and improvements in space–time resolution of structural transitions are shown in Fig. 2 to give an impression of the rapid progress made towards imaging chemistry once source brightness was realized as the major impediment.
 Fig. 2  Evolution in atom resolved structural dynamics. (a) shows the very grainy images from the first atomic movie, which appear much like the first Duguerre type images in the early days of photography.49 From B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2003, 302, 1382–1385. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. One can still see by eye that the onset of melting occurs within 1 ps between t = 2.5 and 3.5 ps. The time resolution and ability to clearly distinguish nonthermal from thermal structural changes is shown in (b).72 The corresponding real space transform is shown to the right and second row panels, giving the (c) colour coded unit cell and corresponding (d) time dependent motions of the relative atomic positions. Reprinted from B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Chem. Phys., 2004, 299, 285–305. Copyright (2003), with permission from Elsevier. The 3rd row shows dramatically improved diffraction quality in the study of the dynamics of collective phenomena associated with charge density waves (TaS2, left panel).68 (e) Source: WebElements [http://www.webelements.com/]. Adapted from M. Eichberger, H. Schäfer, M. Krumova, M. Beyer, J. Demsar, H. Berger, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2010, 468, 799–802. Copyright © 2010, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. The final row shows the extremely high spatial imaging quality for even poorly diffracting organic systems with diffraction well beyond 0.1 Å (reciprocal space).73 The SNR of just 2 diffraction orders are shown in the bottom right panel, comparable to a high quality all optical pump probe signal, to give an impression of the outstanding SNR now possible in the image contrast. There are hundreds of such diffraction orders of this quality to help constrain the inversion to real space atom resolved movies of chemistry. (g) Adapted from M. Gao, C. Lu, H. Jean-Ruel, L. C. Liu, A. Marx, K. Onda, S. Koshihara, Y. Nakano, X. Shao, T. Hiramatsu, G. Saito, H. Yamochi, R. R. Cooney, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2013, 496, 343–346. Copyright © 2013, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. (h) Adapted from H. Jean-Ruel, PhD Thesis, University of Toronto, 2014. 
The first molecular movie of a chemical reaction was that of electrocyclization with conserved stereochemistry.74 The specific system was the ring closing reaction of diarylethene, which is a photochromic material pioneered by Irie and co-workers.75 They deliberately designed the electrocyclization process by including electron withdrawing groups on the aryl rings to specifically weaken the ethene double bond in the bridge position to allow torsional motions to close the ring. The ideas behind the synthesis of this molecular platform and its photoactive functionalization are not too dissimilar to the previous discussion in thinking about reaction routes to strategic molecular targets. The photoactive process is centered on the bond formation process in electrocyclization and as such represents the formation of collisional complexes in otherwise two body or 2nd order reaction mechanisms. The spatial relationship of the interacting carbon atoms for bond formation had to be fixed by the molecular moiety to reduce the nuclear configuration space so that the dynamics are determined primarily by the very motions involved in bond formation. It was critical to maintain the stereochemistry to ensure a single photoproduct state and some degree of reversibility. The system is set up as if to watch the formation of a collision complex upon photoexcitation. In this respect, it is an ideal system to test the ideas used for maintaining stereochemistry in synthetic routes in general. What are the key motions involved in electrocyclization? Given the enormous phase space for random rotation about multiple points, how is stereochemistry conserved? This latter question is related to the prospect of any long lived intermediate states and the relative dynamics by which the reaction forces (potential energy gradients) in the barrier crossing region drive the system from the open to the closed ring form. Ultrafast time scales for barrier crossing are implied just from consideration of the quantum yield and competing timescales for random rotational/torsional motions sampling other configurations than the desired pathway.
The ultrafast aspect of the reaction dynamics was fully characterized in situ with femtosecond absorption spectroscopy on 100 nm thin single crystals.76 There is an initial fast 200–300 fs inertial like component to the excited state dynamics followed by a 4–5 ps component leading to the formation of the ring closed form. This full characterization of the excited state dynamics is essential background work to this class of studies to correlate the electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom in undergoing photochemical processes. At the excitation level needed for the structural studies, the photochromic nature of the open and closed ring forms was exploited to optically cycle the closed ring photoproduct back to the open ring form.74 Even with the increased sampling per crystal location, the repetition rate was limited to the 0.1 Hz range due to the slow photorecovery and low thermal conductivity of organic crystals. Again, the ultrabright nature of the electron source used, in this case an rf pulse compression scheme, was essential to obtaining sufficient SNR to capture the atomic motions.
The main findings are shown in Fig. 3. The initial fast motion is due to a flexing of the backbone and slight ring torsional motion to bring the two labile carbon atoms into wavefunction overlap. This specific mode involved is a spatially delocalized mode at approximately 55 cm−1 assigned from DFT calculations of the full molecule ground state vibrational mode, which matches well the initial projections based on an ab initio calculation at the CASSCF level for a truncated model system of the diarylethene core. There was however no well defined minimum but rather continuous motion involving primarily the backbone flexing and 3 localized torsions at opposing sides of the closed ring which close the ring in a conrotary fashion. We now see directly at the atomic level how stereochemistry is conserved. The steric groups instinctively put in place by synthetic chemists do create forces that are sufficiently large to steer the system into bond formation. The ensuing vibrational relaxation to the product minimum occurs faster than sampling other coordinate space. The process is dynamically controlled. The transient state in which the labile carbon atoms are within wavefunction overlap of each other could have involved a flat potential with multiple barriers to other orientations that would otherwise cascade into other possible photoproducts with torsional motions leading to loss of stereochemistry. However, this is not the case. The system is strongly driven directly to the closed ring form with conserved stereochemistry. The other main point is that this system has hundreds of degrees of freedom including the surrounding lattice. We see directly now for the first time this distillation of chemistry down to a few key modes. This point will be further reinforced below. For an appreciation of the specific time ordering of the motions involved in conserved stereochemistry see the movie (molecular movie 1 (ESI†)).
 Fig. 3  Modal analysis of the key reaction modes involved in electrocyclization with conserved stereochemistry for diarylethene. The main mode is shown in the upper left panel, which corresponds to motion 3 in the second row. These theoretically generated classes of motions were used in structure refinement to provide a converged fit to the data with hundreds of diffraction orders for constraints. These are the key reaction modes and the time ordering leading to ring closing. There are no long lived intermediates that would allow torsional sampling and loss of stereochemistry, but rather a continual progression from a very fast inertial motion to bring the labile carbon atoms involved in bond formation to be within wavefunction overlap and torsions to click the bond formation into place to close the ring. (a) Adapted with permission from H. Jean-Ruel, R. R. Cooney, M. Gao, C. Lu, M. A. Kochman, C. A. Morrison and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13158–13168. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (b), (c) Adapted with permission from H. Jean-Ruel, M. Gao, M. A. Kochman, C. Lu, L. C. Liu, R. R. Cooney, C. A. Morrison and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 15894–15902. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The next system to receive atomic scrutiny was the intermolecular electron transfer process exhibited in the charge ordered organic crystal ethylenedioxy tetrathiafulvalene (EDO-TTF).73 This system undergoes a thermally driven phase transition from an insulator to a metal at 280 K. This phase transition involves a net transfer of an electron from one EDO-TTF molecule to another within the unit cell to create a delocalized electron distribution. In the low temperature insulating phase, the alternating EDO-TTF cations have a deformed ring as part of the intramolecular reorganization to minimize the energy of the cation state. There is a structural change between the insulating to conducting phases in which the rings all flatten and shift slightly for better π–π wavefunction overlap as part of creating the delocalized band structure commensurate with the onset of metallic properties. The electron transfer process can also be photoinduced under barrierless conditions by exciting a charge transfer band. The ensuing structural dynamics cast out the motions most strongly coupled to the electron transfer coordinate. These motions are expected to include both intramolecular bond length and angle changes as well as intermolecular motions as part of the intra- and intermolecular reorganizational energy defining the electron transfer reaction coordinate. No bonds are made or broken. Electron transfer processes are determined by the intra and intermolecular reorganization or medium repolarization to both bring electronic states into resonance and to stabilize the change in charge distribution. The change in structure of the EDO-TTF lattice with T is known from X-ray diffraction of the insulating and metallic phases. Using the traditional thinking in conceptualizing the transition state, one would expect the key reaction modes would be the flattening of the thio rings to increase wavefunction overlap as part of the process of forming an electronic band. In keeping with the previous discussion, it is not possible to project static structural end points to the motions involved in barrier crossing. There are always surprises from conventional expectations when chemistry is observed at the atomic level.
This experimental study also exploited rf pulse compression to provide the necessary number of electrons and source brightness to overcome the very low thermal conductivity and thermal accumulation artifacts. The experiment had to be conducted at sampling repetition rates of 10 Hz. It would not have been possible to obtain sufficient SNR before the onset of crystal degradation with low brightness sources. The diffraction quality was extraordinary with rms amplitude variation in diffraction intensities on the order of a few percent reflecting the high stability of the electron source. This crystal diffracted well beyond 0.1 Å (reciprocal space parlance) to enable very high spatial resolution (the camera was cut off at 0.2 Å). This is an order of magnitude higher than typical X-ray studies where 2 Å is the cut off in reciprocal space for atomic resolution for proteins (large molecules). For small molecules the resolution is better (< 0.5 A). There were hundreds of diffraction peaks to constrain the diffraction analysis in the to real space.
The first major surprise that strikes you immediately is the enormous reduction in dimensionality. Of the myriad of possible nuclear configurations, the motions collapsed to just a few key motions. There are over 280 degrees of freedom in this problem including all possible molecular motions within a unit cell as part of the intermolecular reorganization. Using a new method for differential diffraction analyses to remove background, and a Pearson correlation analysis of an exhaustive basis of possible atomic motions connecting the initially known structure to the final photoproduct state, it was found that the hundreds of diffraction orders over multiple time points could be described by just 3 key reduced reaction modes. The second major surprise was the specific mode most strongly modulating the electron transfer coordinate or medium reorganization. The dominant mode was not the expected ring flattening but rather the motion of the PF6− counter ion. This observation could not have been guessed as we don't have enough information on how the counterion is coupled to the electronic states. The coupling of the PF6− anion to the electron transfer is substantial from the magnitudes of the relative motions. Most importantly, the three dominant reaction modes were fully correlated. The trajectories appear to be shadow projections of each other. This observation means that the slowest mode of the three is dominating the overall medium repolarization in response to the change in electron distribution. A slow mode would not be able to respond in lock step with a higher frequency mode and would necessarily appear to execute relaxation on separated time scales. This was not the case. The slowest mode is related to the motion of the PF6− counterion. In retrospect, the role of the counterion is obvious. The photoinduced electron transfer from one EDO-TTF to another creates a local electric field, which would electrostatically create the largest force on the PF6−. This counterion is so large that its displacement driven by the reaction field leads to renormalization of the potential energy surface local to the EDO-TTF to assist ring flattening, lowering further the energy for the new charge state, and also the intermolecular potential leading to the change in the centre of mass locations of the EDO-TTF rings. See the atomic movie of these correlated motions for an impression of the significant effect of the counterion in stabilizing the electron transfer (molecular movie 2 (ESI†))
This observation is what inspired the analogy of the hike in the Alps where your every step changes the landscape opening secret passages to hidden valleys. At the hazard of overdoing analogies, the very motion of the PF6− is like an elephant going into a crowded room. Everyone would move out of the way, and if the floor was weak enough, it would bend under the weight to create new minima depending on the location of the elephant in the room, to which this many body/person potential would involve movement to accommodate (the heavy slow mode correlates the lighter mass, faster, motions). This direct observation of the importance of the counterion helps rationalize previously inexplicable counterion dependence of material properties for this class of organic materials. The counterion in organic salts is not screened by the motions of other ions as it would be in a liquid. It is the nearest neighbor and dominant source term to the local electric field. Its motion strongly modulates the energetics, or barrier heights, of the electron transfer reaction coordinate and modifies the potential energy surface to slave other motions that lead to increased wavefunction overlap. The system is poised to interconvert from insulating to metallic through these motions over a collective coordinate. We now see the effect of the bath on electron transfer processes directly at the atomic level.
The most significant advance in ultrafast imaging of chemistry was the recent work on the electron transfer process in the organometallic system Me4P[Pt(dmit)2]2 (Me4P = tetramethylphosphonium, dmit = 1,3-dithiol-2-thione-4,5-dithiolate) or Pt(dmit)2 for short.57 This system, similar to EDO-TTF is a charge separated ionic crystal that undergoes a structural phase transition in which formally an electron is transferred from one [Pt(dmit)2]2 dimer to another but this is triggered by excitation of an electron between frontier molecular orbitals. The local dimer structure therefore acts as a switch mediating the charge transfer process. The motions most strongly coupled to the photoinduced excited state would be the same motions involved in intramolecular and intermolecular reorganization for the thermally accessed electron transfer process. This reaction mechanism is specifically exploited in biological processes involving metal centers for mediating charge transfer and contains all the physics involved in classic metal-to-metal electron transfer in solution phase that we teach in first year chemistry courses. The difference is that we have a well-defined solid state lattice from which we can pull out the details of the reaction forces on the atomic motions, which would not be discernable in the ensemble average of disordered structures in solution phase. We effectively have well defined initial atomic coordinates for the bath to directly image medium repolarization effects. It is also important to note that Pt(dmit)2 has a crystal structure with unit cell dimensions of 3.7 nm, which puts it on a par with protein crystals for complexity. A compact electron gun was used for these studies. This simple robust design concept has now achieved the level of brightness needed to capture the atomic motions for such a high dimensional system. The results were stunning.

Fig. 4 shows the femtosecond electron diffraction (FED) results for Pt(dmit)2 using a new mathematical inversion method. To appreciate the space–time resolution achieved, some comments are warranted. In conventional diffraction analysis, it is not possible to uniquely invert the diffraction pattern to real space as the measurement only contains information on the intensity of the different diffraction orders or structure factors. The scattered wave amplitude also has a phase and interference effects between scattering centres that lead to ambiguity in the reconstruction. Simply put there is not enough information in the intensities to uniquely invert from reciprocal space to real space as there are two spatially dependent variables for which you only have the intensity. This problem cannot be solved for imaging unknown structures. The published atomic structures for molecules based on diffraction data are refined using constraints from either theory or molecular models based on other absolute structures for which some known scattering center was exploited to phase the data. In time resolved diffraction experiments, we are dealing with known initial structures and final structures. We are not trying to solve unknown structures. Here differential detection in combination with this additional information is sufficient to solve the phase problem. The work of Ishikawa, Hayes et al. introduced a new method in which the known initial structure, conserved bond lengths, bond angles and the causal constraint of continuous progression to the product state (no discontinuous jumps) were sufficient constraints to give unique convergence to structures (see supporting online material (SOM) of ref. 57) In effect, the known conserved features act mathematically as phasing centers to uniquely solve the phase ambiguity problem. The atomic motions you see in Fig. 4 are not the result of a fit to a simplified model or computer simulations used for refinement. The results shown in Fig. 4 constitute the first full atom resolved chemical reaction.
 Fig. 4  Molecular movie of Pt(dmit)2. Frame by frame movie of the atomic motions involved in metal-to-metal electron transfer. The atomic positions are indicated as white circles, the largest brightest circles as the Pt atoms, and the other atoms are the sulphur atoms in the rings. The dotted yellow line is given as a reference to enable observation of the motions. The change in Pt motions can be discerned by eye and the tilting of the rings can be seen by the change in the projections of the sulphur atoms along this viewing axis. 
As you zoom in and focus on the details in this figure a number of features become apparent. In this respect, we are very good at discerning space–time correlations (as attempted to convey in Fig. 1), i.e., how one event leads to another and over what length and time scales. We now can directly observe what we tried to imagine previously (Fig. 1). For this reason, movies of causally connected events make a particularly powerful means to convey the operating physics of a phenomenon. This distinguishes the time series of connected actions from separate intermediates, as observed in time lapse photography, for which you see the “before” and “after” structures but not the pathway. To not bias your eye with balls and sticks or van der Waals’ surfaces, Fig. 4 is shown with the atoms depicted as stars against a night sky. The brightest “star” is the Pt atom, which is the largest scattering source term. You can see immediately that not all possible atomic motions are involved or there would be a blur and no well resolved motion. Instead you can make out by eye that there are at least 2 dominant motions involving primarily the Pt–Pt separation and direction of displacement. This system has on the order of 1000 degrees of freedom including all intra- and intermolecular motions that could be involved in the reorganization to stabilize the photoinduced electron transfer. This effect is seen more dramatically than stills if you observe the time correlated motions as a movie to fully exploit our ability to see space time correlations (compare Fig. 4 to molecular movie 3 (ESI†)). From the movie, there is much greater clarity of the causally connected events. You can now see directly the collapse of innumerable possible nuclear configurations to just a few key modes. The timescale is slower than that for IVR in this large molecule such that the condition of equipartition of energy (vide supra) is approximately correct, at least for individual excited sites. Even in this case, not all degrees of freedom are involved. The reaction forces are highly anisotropic and drive specific modes. This enormous reduction in dimensionality during structural transitions is in keeping with the study of the reaction dynamics in diarylethenes, EDO-TTF, and other systems we are exploring. This reduction in dimensionality during structural transitions is a general phenomenon.
The degree of space–time resolution achieved in these experiments to light up the specific reaction modes can only be fully appreciated by examining the relevant motions quantitatively. The time resolved structural changes involving the full set of diffraction orders for constraints could be mapped on to 6 dominant reduced reaction modes, as shown in Fig. 5. The change in electron density upon the photoinduced electron transfer affects largely the Pt metal centres. For this reason, the largest motions involve the Pt atoms. This aspect of the structural changes could have been expected, however, neither the magnitudes nor the anisotropic coupling to the other displacements could be a priori inferred. Also, this system is too large and involves high Z atoms that make it too difficult to properly treat with ab initio methods. The level of detail from these experiments should provide rigorous benchmarks to explore different approximations to theoretically treat reactions on this scale. This step towards treating larger systems is essential if we wish this level of understanding to be relevant to current synthetic objectives.
From the inspection of the time dependent changes in the Pt–Pt distance, it is possible to observe the oscillations and damping of this mode on to the fully relaxed position corresponding to the high temperature charge distribution. The amplitude of the motion is only 0.1 Å but is clearly resolved. The rms noise can be used to estimate the resolution limit to be on the order of 0.01–0.02 Å. This spatial resolution limit is comparable to the zero point motions of bound states for 2nd row atoms in the periodic table. The resolution only depends on the diffraction efficiency such that the same resolution can be achieved for all systems. With high brightness electron sources, we have effectively achieved the fundamental limit for space–time imaging of chemical reactions. We can now directly observe the far from equilibrium motions that direct chemistry with sufficient resolution to provide new experimental benchmarks for theory.
 Fig. 5  Quantifying the atomic motions: analysis of the Pt–Pt separation with photoinduced electron transfer. There are two different Pt–Pt dimers in the crystal depending on the spatially ordered charge state. The motion is schematically depicted for the ball-and-stick structure to the right showing the Pt atoms (large grey spheres), sulphurs in the ring (yellow spheres) and carbon atoms (black spheres). The upper curve is for the −2 dimer and the lower curve is the neutral dimer. The spatial resolution is sufficient to resolve minute changes in energetics as the system undergoes lattice reorganization, with the Pt distances being one of the dominant terms. There are 5 other key modes involved (see SOM ref. 57; Adapted from T. Ishikawa, S. A. Hayes, S. Keskin, G. Corthey, M. Hada, K. Pichugin, A. Marx, J. Hirscht, K. Shionuma, K. Onda, Y. Okimoto, S. Koshihara, T. Yamamoto, H. Cui, M. Nomura, Y. Oshima, M. Abdel-Jawad, R. Kato and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2015, 350, 1501–1505. Reprinted with permission from AAAS). 
The overall message that jumps out of this data is that the simple bit of missing physics discussed above that makes chemical reaction mechanisms transferable is the enormous reduction in dimensionality that occurs in barrier crossing regions. The high degree of anharmonicity in this region of nuclear configuration space couples high frequency modes with more spatially delocalized modes that are most strongly damped. It is the quantum aspect of this coupled state that leads to more localized motions through interference terms. One can readily see from the atomic motions for the photoinduced electron transfer for Pt(dmit2)2 that there are spatially delocalized motions involving the entire Pt(dmit2) moiety and these cascade to larger, more localized motions of the Pt atoms. The proposal here is that different reaction mechanisms involve a certain class of reaction modes that direct the chemistry and it is these conserved features that make chemical reaction mechanisms transferable from one molecule to another. It is the reduction of a high dimensional many body problem of order 3N to just a few key modes that is the “magic” of chemistry. This is the key physics that we need to determine in a systematic way by exploring different classes of reaction mechanisms.
In parallel, there has been tremendous progress in X-ray source development to enable imaging chemical reaction dynamics. The first work to achieve sufficient time resolution to follow chemical reaction dynamics with X-ray probes was based on a table top laser driven X-ray plasma source.77–79 The major new developments were the significantly improved optics for higher collection efficiency with respect to focusing the plasma based X-rays on the sample and the use of very thin metal targets with rapid exchange to obtain X-ray pulses as short as 100 fs. The number of X-rays per pulse constitute a low brightness source such that fully reversible systems need to be studied. It should be mentioned, however, that taking into account the relatively high repetition rate of the laser (kHz) the net photon flux per second can approach X-ray fluxes from beam slicing sources at synchrotrons but with a table top source. The work of the Elsaesser group and collaborators stands out in achieving the highest time resolution to date and the introduction of heterodyne detection strategies for certain symmetry classes to dramatically increase the signal detection and mitigate some of the disadvantages of a low brightness source.77–80 The work to date has focused for the most part on ionic crystals, which appear to be the most capable of reversible charge transfer processes. The most interesting finding is the discovery of a concerted electron–proton transfer and evidence for a highly collective reorganization of the lattice in the formation of a high spin state of the classic iron bispyridine system. The low photon numbers of the source require the use of relatively thick crystals to obtain the maximum diffraction efficiency for a given excitation volume. Given the large mismatch between resonant excitation of the sample and the X-ray probed volume, these experiments have had to use 2-photon excitation to obtain sufficient penetration into the required crystals thicknesses for optimal diffraction. In order to excite at least 10% of the lattice to observe the small signal changes, there will necessarily be higher order multiphoton excitation processes. Further excitation levels above 2-photon are all resonant ionization channels that would strongly compete with pure non-resonant 2-photon state preparation. The observed structural dynamics could involve ionization processes as opposed to photochemistry from well-defined excited state surfaces. It is not clear what excited states or ionization processes may be contributing to the observed structural changes. This is the same limitation for all X-ray studies as there is a large mismatch between the needed X-ray probed volume for sufficient diffraction and resonant 1-photon preparation of well-defined excited states. The very recent development of extremely high power femtosecond IR lasers promises to push the X-ray flux several of orders of magnitude higher, which should be sufficient to enable resonant 1-photon excitation to well defined excited states. The experiments to date illustrate the structural capabilities. This approach will provide a new tool comparable to the high brightness electron sources for the study of systems that are not readily amenable to electron probes such as solution phase and protein systems.
In the past year, X-ray free electron lasers have also achieved real time atomic movies of chemical reaction dynamics. These sources represent an increase of several orders of magnitude in X-ray source brightness over previous generations of major X-ray facilities.81 The source is spatially coherent in the transverse plane like a conventional laser operating at visible wavelengths so it can be focused down to near transform limits of nm dimensions for imaging applications. The enormous X-ray flux is generated by a Self Amplified Spontaneous Emission (SASE) process that is subject to noise fluctuations in initiating the amplification cascade. As such, these sources undergo large stochastic variations in intensity. The accompanying reduced SNR for differential detection of structural dynamics and the longer wavelength intrinsically decrease the effective space–time resolution relative to electron sources, all other factors being constant. However, there are other variables at play that determine the overall imaging efficacy. Samples are a big issue. Source brightness can also play a defining parameter in what systems can be studied. The importance of source brightness and XFELs in particular for X-ray diffraction studies has been amply demonstrated through the work of Minitti et al. in the gas phase study of the ring opening reaction of the classic cyclohexadiene problem.25 This system as in the diarylethene study discussed above serves as a model system for electrocyclization processes. Given the extremely low X-ray scattering cross section and gas density, this experiment would have been impossible without an XFEL source. The diffracted signal went out to a couple of diffraction orders that allowed resolving the bond dissociation dynamics, which correlated well with optical studies. By using theoretical constraints, it was possible to project the resulting dynamics from bond breaking to the ring open structure and onset to the different conformational states of the photoproduct. With a higher number of diffraction orders, it will be possible to directly map these motions on to specific modes. In the gas phase studies, the sample limitations are not an issue and rapid sample exchange is a major advantage over solid state studies. Here the excitation conditions match well those of nonperturbative all optical studies such that the nature of the excited state leading to the observed chemistry is well defined.
As emphasized, the highest spatial resolution is obtained with crystalline samples via the N2 dependence in the diffraction process and reduced diffuse background scatter from disordered systems, e.g. gas and solution phase. In this regard, the major advantage of X-ray sources over electrons is the ability to use conventional crystals or solution phase pathlengths by the very virtue of the much weaker scattering cross section for X-rays. The use of X-ray probes has, however, its own sample limitations. Conventional crystals giving high quality diffraction patterns are typically on the order of 10 microns or thicker. In order to excite 10% of the unit cells to be above background, the peak power typically used to obtain sufficient changes in diffraction intensities for this crystal thickness is on the order of TW cm−2 for nearly every experiment performed to date. Peak powers of the order of 100 GW cm−2 have led to significant non-resonant 3-photon ionization of water for similar pathlengths.82 The phototriggered optical processes for time resolved X-ray diffraction are fully resonant processes, which are greatly amplified above the aforementioned problem with non-resonant 2-photon excitation. The resonance condition creates amplification for all n-photon excitation pathways. Multiphoton processes could be the dominant source for the induced structural changes. This excitation mechanism changes significantly the chemistry from well-defined excited state surfaces undergoing isomerization, cyclization etc. to ionization driven structural changes from ill-defined states. The effect of multiphoton ionization has not been taken into account in terms of contributions to the observed structural changes.
With this caveat, XFELs are still the only source currently capable of studying biological systems, simply due to sample issues. The main limitation for electron sources is the difficulty in obtaining sufficient protein crystals on the 100 nm scale for time resolved studies. This problem of obtaining large numbers of protein crystals has been solved for serial crystallography applications. In this respect, XFELs enable probing the issue of reduced dimensionality for systems of increasing complexity. The ultimate limit in scaling to larger systems is to observe the transduction of chemistry into biological functions. As discussed above in the case of proteins, one is now dealing with highly associated glass-like systems (on long time scales) with >10000 atoms; yet the chemistry driving functions and biochemical pathways is highly robust. The system does not get trapped in local minima along the chemically relevant reaction coordinate. In this context, the reduction of the structure–function relationship of biological systems to a few key modes is a truly profound observation in relation to how highly optimized nature has become. In this regard, the most significant results have come from the study of the structural changes involved in ligand dissociation within carboxymyoglobin as a model system for the tertiary level structural changes involved in molecular co-operativity in hemoglobin.83 This response forms the cornerstone of our understanding in general of molecular cooperativity in biological systems as one form of feedback in biochemical pathways of living systems. As discussed in the Introduction in the context of Levinthal's paradox, this system is highly associated and involves chemistry at the extreme end of the complexity scale. The Collective Mode Coupling Model was proposed as the mechanism by which such highly associated systems beat being trapped in local minima in executing their biological function.3,4,6,7,84,85 This model was based initially on an observation of acoustic-like collective motions of the protein driven by the ligand dissociation and exhaustive all optical studies of different length scales of motion and energetics to show that this is the dominant mechanism. It is the inherent spatial correlations in the fluctuations of biological systems that enables the effective reduction in dimensionality and escape from glass-like dynamics in dictating functional responses. This statement returns to the initial discussion of correlated motions and reaction phase space. The issue in terms of making the connection between the evolutionarily optimized structure and function can only be solved by a direct observation of protein function at the atomic level. The latest XFEL experiments have fully confirmed that the protein motions involved collective modes and these correlated motions are close to those based on molecular dynamics calculations.83 The issue of ionization effects is still a problem. The motions involved may not be biologically relevant. However, it is clear from this work that there are correlated motions, which can be discussed in terms of collective modes bearing out the collective mode coupling model. These studies need to be redone at excitation levels for which the forces driving the protein motion clearly originate from ligand dissociation. The other key experiment is the XFEL study of the light induced structural changes involved in the isomerization of the photoactive yellow protein (PYP).86 Again, this work shows beautifully that there are highly localized changes directing the isomerization process. The excitation process in the sampled volume is ∼1 TW cm−2, which again raises issues of ionization in this interpretation. Power dependences are needed to sort out functionally relevant motions from possible ionization effects.
The main point in light of the above discussion is that even for systems as large as proteins, the chemistry involved reduces to a few key modes. This reduction in dimensionality holds in general for chemical reactions and has been highly exploited by nature in scaling to ever more complex systems. At the extreme end of complexity as defined by proteins, the reaction forces of this reduced chemically active space are further coupled even to mesoscale dimensions by the imposed structural constraints of the highly optimized protein structure. The net effect is to further reduce the phase space (as in the beads on a string analogy) and direct reaction forces to execute biological functions, often at the maximum possible efficiency.3 It is an extraordinary feat in directing chemistry into action.
This discussion has focused on direct atom resolved chemical reaction dynamics – direct imaging of chemistry. As with any observation, as one looks closer and closer with greater acuity, one finds surprises in how things work. Here we are talking about observing chemistry at the fundamental space–time limit, watching chemistry unfold at the atomic level of detail. Our previous conceptual models for chemical reaction mechanisms have been hard earned through the extensive use of molecular probes as in the case of synthetic chemistry or equally extensive spectroscopic and molecular beam studies. We have historically focused on details that were particular to a given molecule. In the process, we have failed to see the generalities of chemical processes. For each system, the concept of reaction modes has long been discussed. However, it is only now that we see directly the innumerable nuclear possibilities collapse to a few key reaction modes that the significance of the anharmonic coupling in the barrier crossing region becomes fully apparent. We can now witness these far from equilibrium motions reduce the dimensionality of the possible nuclear rearrangements to a few key reaction modes for systems as small as a few atoms up to systems as complex as proteins. The first full atom resolved chemical reactions have experimentally established that a general physical principle is indeed at work.
The many body potential is so complex and the degree of nonadiabatic coupling between electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom is not known with the required accuracy to predict reaction pathways. The major advance made is that we can now observe these motions directly. What can we do with this information and new insight into reaction dynamics? This question will now be addressed in relation to developing a new conceptual basis for chemistry.
2. Overview of the discussion
This Faraday Discussion was organized to discuss the latest developments in imaging chemistry, as part of coming to a better understanding of the forces at play that ultimately determine the chemistry, i.e., to basically address the questions posed above. In this regard, I will not review all the papers presented as the work is published in this issue with sufficient detail to appreciate the main findings. I will instead aim to give a flavor of the discussion and where I see the field going.
The meeting had a nice balance between new and established methods in imaging photochemical dynamics, as well as recent theoretical advances. Since photochemistry by definition involves excited states, we need to know the details of the excited state surface or initial state preparation. In other words, we need information on both electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom to understand the chemistry. The nuclear motion and electronic state energies are intrinsically coupled. It is essential to correlate the reaction dynamics to the excited state dynamics. The use of time resolved X-ray spectroscopies and electron spectroscopies, coherent multidimensional spectroscopies, as well as conventional time resolved transient spectroscopy discussed at the meeting provides this critical link. This point was made abundantly clear by the work presented by Orr-Ewing et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00068A) discussing the classic case of the ultrafast relaxation processes in DNA bases and the effect of the surroundings. In addition, there are other probes of reaction dynamics that provide a different perspective of the nuclear dynamics. The Discussion emphasized the importance of theory in fully understanding reaction dynamics, particularly the aforementioned interplay between nuclear coordinates and electronic states with respect to shaping the potential energy surface. In this regard, there are equally dramatic advances in theory that are perfectly timed to take full advantage of the detailed atomically resolved reaction dynamics that are now coming from experiment. The papers in this Faraday Discussions allow the reader to see the full spectrum of experimental and theoretical approaches taken to understand photochemical reaction dynamics.
The alternative approaches to direct imaging of atomic motions (as discussed above) were treated in a number of papers. They provide important additional information on the interplay between electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom in defining the reaction coordinate. One such approach is to take advantage of high field recollision physics of electrons that form the heart of attosecond spectroscopy.87 The interaction of a molecule with extremely short femtosecond pulses in the visible to IR leads to the generation of high harmonics through nonlinear induced polarizability. The major advance of this methodology is that it provides more correlations than spectroscopic methods that typically probe a single quantum state regime (e.g. valence electronic states or vibrations). It is the constraints of higher order correlations in the harmonic generation that gives the additional information. The induced nonlinear polarizability explicitly depends on the electron distribution within the molecule. The specific correlation of the high harmonic intensities can be related to the molecular structure to determine the electronic distribution on the attosecond time scale. These attosecond spectroscopic methods have generally been applied to small molecules. In scaling to larger systems, there is a complication in connecting the high harmonics to electron distribution as the number of channels for generating harmonics and role of ion states become more complex. The field strength driving the harmonics is above the atomic Coulomb potential such that ionization processes occur in concert with high harmonic generation. The ionization processes are expected for the wavelength range of the high harmonics, which is well into the VUV to soft X-ray range where 1-photon resonant processes are significantly above the ionization potential of molecular systems. For non-resonant excitation fields, the field strength is sufficient to lead to tunnel ionization effects. Thus, there are ionization effects, dynamics of the resultant cation state, and recombination processes to consider in the overall harmonic generation. To understand these processes and connection to valence molecular orbitals, a detailed theoretical treatment was presented for benzene and substituted benzenes as a system with a high degree of symmetry and relative ease with substitution to change the electron distribution in known ways (Austin et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00116E). This work was motivated by previous experimental work and found that it is the tunnel ionization interaction that makes the observable more sensitive to the details of the electron distribution. The number of contributing factors to the high harmonic generation is quite complex as further discussed in the work of (Dudovich et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00130K) (see Fig. 2 of this paper). One of the goals in attosecond spectroscopy is to separately determine all the different channels contributing to the high harmonic generation. To separate the different contributing terms, the use of multidimensional spectroscopy was employed to spread the interactions out along a separate time axis (phase) with polarization control between the two excitation fields. Apart from tunnel ionization, the laser field drives electron redistribution. By using multidimensional (2D) correlations of the high harmonic generation, it was possible to obtain information on the laser driven hole dynamics of CO2 upon high IR field ionization. This problem is similar to the inversion problem in converting diffraction data to real space. This work provides additional means to invert high harmonic profiles to imaging of electron dynamics. During the discussion, the prospect of using this information to map out changes in electron distribution during structural changes was pointed out. This information becomes particularly important at a conical intersection (CI) where the Born–Oppenheimer approximation breaks down and the ensuing electron redistribution becomes slower than the nuclear fluctuations and ultimately defines the transition probability between the two coupled surfaces. This is an exciting prospect in terms of obtaining a new spectroscopic observable with sufficiently high order correlations to give information of the electron distribution during a chemical event. The open issue will be to connect the observed molecular dynamics under strong field conditions undergoing simultaneous ionization and laser driven electron redistribution with the weak field conditions of 1-photon photochemistry.
In addition to observing the high harmonics, it is possible to exploit the laser driven electrons to take a snap shot of the molecule in the process of ionization.87 The spatial resolution depends on the electron energy. By pushing the laser field to longer wavelengths into the IR, there is more time for electrons to interact with the field and to pick up more energy before undergoing the recollision process and scattering. The general idea is similar to Rydberg spectroscopy88 in terms of using internal electrons to scatter off nuclear positions to report on structure, with the exception the energy of the electrons is much higher, approaching the 100 eV range. The action of one half cycle of the applied field is to drive the electrons away from the molecular core and then the attractive Coulomb potential adds to the electric field of the subsequent half cycle field of opposite sign to accelerate the electrons to the point of coherently scattering from the molecules. The effect has been referred to as Laser Induced Electron Diffraction (LIED).89 The diffraction comes directly from the molecular frame of reference. The energy range of the electrons involved in LIED is in the same range as Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED) used typically for surface studies. The difference is that the source coherence cannot be independently determined such that again theory is essential to interpret the observed electron photoemission patterns. Recently, this approach was used in a tour de force experiment to observe proton motion in dissociation from the second ionization state of acetylene.90 The scattering cross section of the proton is extremely small and it is not clear how convolved the observable is to all the other scattering processes as delineated in the aforementioned papers.
The energy of the photoemitted electrons can be used to determine the energetics of the excited state dynamics. In this way, photoelectron spectroscopy in conjunction with structural dynamics gives the coupling between the electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom, i.e. the energetics. There were a number of papers that exploited some form of photoelectron spectroscopy to probe the reaction dynamics. For example the work of (Iikubo et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00063K) used VUV probes to track the ring opening reaction of cyclohexadiene and could track the changes in energy of the molecular orbitals upon passage through the conical intersection in the process of ring opening. This study complements previous work using fs diffraction to follow the ring opening25 and previous optical studies.44,91 The ring opening was found to occur an order of magnitude slower than that found in the diffraction studies, which was ascribed to the difference in the excited state preparation. This work excited the 31A and 21B levels as opposed to the lower energy 11B electronic surface in the aforementioned X-ray diffraction studies. This excitation creates an excited state wavepacket nearly 2 eV higher energy than excitation directly to the 11B state of the previous work. The dramatically different time scales observed was ascribed to the time for IVR to partition the excess energy into the reactive modes and sample the CI. This difference highlights the importance of the excited state preparation, which will be discussed later. The most important point is that the details of the molecular orbitals and energetics of the photochemical reaction can be directly observed in this manner. The information content can be enhanced by spatially imaging the photoelectron distribution as shown by (Zawadzki et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00092D) in the systematic study of the nonadiabatic relaxation dynamics of aniline derivatives using UV excitation mixing Rydberg states with valence states. With time dependent ab initio cluster methods, there is enough information to connect the spatial distribution of photoelectrons to specific molecular processes involving bond elongation along key coordinates as well as projection to two competing channels of nonradiative relaxation to longer lived S1 states or direct dissociation along N–CH3 channels. The lone pair of the N of the aniline moiety is implicated to play a central role in how the Rydberg-valence mixed states evolve. Again, the nature of the details of the excited state preparation come into play.
One of the limitations in Rydberg spectroscopy to resolving structural dynamics is the lack of sensitivity to vibrational modes. This feature arises from the fact that the Rydberg orbitals are very similar to the ionic states as the electron is effectively only weakly bound by this condition in terms of its spatial distribution about the molecule. This means that the Franck–Condon factors for the Rydberg transitions are highly focused near the origin and other vibrational modes that may play a role in the photochemistry are largely invisible. The work of Beaulieu et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00113K) have explored the use of chiral probes for the photoelectron process using a combination of circularly polarized, and linearly polarized excitation conditions for 1-photon and multiphoton/tunnel ionization regimes to follow dynamics in chiral molecules using fenchone as a model system. This work is able to distinguish chirality in the angle resolved photoelectron spectra, and from modulation in the dynamics which affect the chirality, it is possible to tease out information on vibrational modes generally hidden in Rydberg spectroscopy. The number of observable modes is still very sparse compared to those observed in fs transient absorption spectroscopy where time dependent FC factors help to observe the excited state wavepacket dynamics. The spreading of wavepackets in due course of relaxation along the excited state potential may wash out the contrast in the photoelectron dichroism spectra. The ability to observe vibronic states with photoelectron spectroscopy is in all cases an important development.
In light of the above work, the importance of the nature of the excited state was further amplified in the use of attosecond pulse trains and angle resolved photoemission during the process of high harmonic generation. All attosecond studies involve strong laser field interactions in which tunnel ionization occurs with multiple scattering source terms (vide supra). The work of Veyrinas et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00137H) illustrated how angle resolved photoemission gives the molecular reference frame photoelectron angular distributions, to give a spatial picture of the different scattering processes leading to photoemission. The states probed and the ensuing nuclear motion of the resultant ion states can be followed in this manner but it needs to be understood that these processes are high field ionization physics and cannot be connected to 1-photon photochemistry, as can be well appreciated in the sensitivity of the initial state conditions observed for cyclohexadiene or the chirality problem in terms of 1-photon or multiphoton effects, discussed above.
Attosecond spectroscopic methods in general involve strong fields and as such inherently involve ionization processes and ensuing molecular dynamics of highly excited ion states. The other way to probe the same physics is to use Coulomb Explosion Imaging methods made possible with COLTRIMS and Velocity Map Imaging detection schemes to follow the partitioning of the multiphoton excitation into different molecular degrees of freedom and different ionization channels. The work by Rudenko et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00152A) on the CO2 ionization was able to map out vibrational energy redistribution pattern for the different ion fragmentation states. Similarly, the studies of Burger et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00082G) were able to follow proton isomerization in the formation of vinylidene. Here Coulomb Explosion Imaging was exploited to post sample the excited state dynamics of H migration on the doubly ionized excited state surface of acetylene. The high time resolution of this experiment was able to identify specific vibrational wavepacket motions along C–C and C–H bonds in picturing the proton rearrangement. There was very interesting related work using XFELs to excite core level transitions in I (iodine) substituted molecules (Ueda et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00085A). Here rather than involving multiphoton electronic excitations, the intense XFEL pulse can selectively cause multiple resonant absorption of the I atom. The subsequent redistribution of charge (created vacancies) and electronic relaxation leads to the Coulomb explosion process. This mechanism gives a much more localized view to the ensuing ionization processes. The highly localized nature of the initial forces made the observed dynamics particularly amenable to Classic Coulomb Explosion with Charge Exchange (CCE-CE) models and self-consistent charge density functional based tight binding (SCC-DFTB) theory to depict the charge transfer from the I to the adjacent moiety and atomic motions coupled to this change in charge density. This level of theory is less than that typically needed to understand 1-photon excited state processes, which seems counterintuitive in terms of the highly excited nature of the XFEL driven process.
The important role XFELs will play in imaging photochemistry was well represented by the studies of the photodissociation dynamics of diiodobenzene (DIB) (Stankus et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00135A), using laser based time resolved photoelectron spectroscopy and XFEL based X-ray scattering (8.3 keV). The photoelectron spectroscopy work showed that the excited state of DIB accessed with 267 nm is a nominally bound predissociative state with a lifetime of approximately 35 fs and could be understood in light of the supportive ab initio calculations. The very fast relaxation to another strongly coupled surface follows the trends found for halogen substitutions but other resonant conditions need to be considered in a systematic way. The X-ray scattering studies of DIB were limited in the dynamic range and can be viewed as preliminary work towards resolving the structural details. The very fact that X-ray scattering can be observed for typical gas phase sources illustrates the brightness of XFELs. In this regard, one of the main advantages of ultrabright electron sources as discussed in the Introduction at length is the 6 orders higher scattering cross section of electrons over X-rays. Electrons are ideally suited for gas phase diffraction studies. The problem in the past has been the time resolution due to velocity mismatch between the laser excitation and the nonrelativistic electron probe. The development of relativistic electron sources solves the velocity mismatch problem. In addition, with the introduction of rebunching cavities it is possible to generate high bunch charge, pulses as short as 10 fs with sufficient transverse coherence for all classes of samples,92 especially gas phase systems. The work of Yang et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00071A) have demonstrated the ability to observe the vibrational wavepacket of excited I2, as a first step in resolving the primary motions involved in gas phase reaction dynamics. The relativistic source technology as well as nonrelativistic electron sources using tilted phase fronts for 100 fs time resolution will fill this experimental niche in imaging photochemistry.
The other major application of XFELs was presented in the form of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) of excited state dynamics. One of the most important applications will be in elucidation of the structure of the active site for photocatalytic water splitting in PSII. We currently have no viable photocatalysts for water splitting and nothing on par with the solution found by nature in the form of the PSII photocycle to harness 4 photons to split water. The paper by Yano et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00084C) was informative in setting the stage for the studies that are forthcoming. One of the most innovative applications of time resolved XAS was presented by Gessner et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00125D) in which a synchrotron X-ray source was used as a probe to follow the interfacial dynamics of cuprous oxide as a test case.The dynamics could be understood in the form of carrier dynamics and interfacial states in line with previous work. XAS probes for interfacial processes with sufficient sensitivity are now in place to follow photocatalysis in situ and even in operando of catalytic reactors, as discussed at the meeting. In this context, the theoretical work of Neville et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00117C) showed the use of various levels of theory to fit time dependent XAS spectra to the nuclear motions involved in the isomerization of acetylene in a highly satisfactory way. It will be informative to see how sensitive time resolved XAS spectra are to more complex systems and how unique such effective lineshape analysis is. This aspect of relating XFEL based XAS studies to structural dynamics is needed, especially at the high excitation typically used where the excited state is not well defined.
All of the above requires some level of theory to fully understand the connection between the electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom. The recent advances in theory were well represented by the work of Martín et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00074F) in treating the ionization and various scattering, hole dynamics, and ionizing electrons on the nuclear dynamics as studied in attosecond pump–probe measurements. They resorted to treating the strong IR probe field used in these experiments as a weak XUV probe pulse to isolate the hole dynamics using various levels of time dependent ab initio theory based on DFT approaches with time dependent perturbation theory and Ehrenfest MD to study the ionization and nuclear dynamics, respectively. The hole dynamics are superpositions of cationic states, which depend on the spectrum especially near the threshold. This work illustrated that with this insight it should be possible to use spectrally shaped attosecond pulses to control hole or charge dynamics in molecules at least as large as their glycine model system. Similar concepts were explored by Vacher et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00067C) in the valence ionization of bismethylene-adamantane. This work used higher levels of theory at the CASSCF level to more accurately treat the electron dynamics in which the electronic states may have gaps of less than 0.3 eV for which the redistribution of electron density slows down to nuclear time scales. The ionization process was found to involve symmetric and antisymmetric CC bond elongations that could potentially be controlled with shaped pulses to give what they called “charge directed reactivity”. With respect to treating 1-photon resonant photochemistry involving well defined excited states, the work of Chen et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00083E) and Makhov et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00073H) treated the effect of the bath dissipation on the overall reaction yield and new means of more efficiently sampling MD trajectories for a full quantum description of photochemistry, respectively. The effect of the bath on the passage through a conical intersection is critical to understand in the context of open quantum systems. This work used the hierarchical equation of motions approach developed by Tanimura and Kubo to treat the system-bath coupling as described in ref. 93. This formalism is exact for certain types of system-bath coupling and allows the exploration of the effect of dissipation on reaction dynamics, in a very similar vein to Kraemer's classic work on friction in transition state crossing.17 This work found that dissipation had a pronounced effect depending on the details of the coupling or tuning modes in the formation of the conical intersection, which should inspire future experiments in testing these findings. Finally, the work discussed by Makhov et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00073H) gave some appreciation of the enormous gains made recently to fully exploit trajectory guided quantum dynamics. A new means of introducing multiple quantum states to sample the same initial trajectories using so-called cloning and spawning methods enables a much more computationally efficient means to calculate on-the-fly quantum state dynamics with sufficient statistics to compare to experiment. This paper included tunneling effects to calculate the total kinetic energy release spectrum of hydrogen atoms for the photodissociation dynamics of pyrrole, which appears to be essential to get the physics correct. The larger implication is that this new methodology allows the calculation of reaction dynamics along excited state surfaces for relatively large systems.
The main message from this Discussion is that theory and experiment are reaching the same level of capability in terms of “imaging” photochemical dynamics for increasingly complex systems.
3. Roadmap to a reaction mode basis for chemistry
The above introduction was intended to point out one of the truly remarkable features of chemistry that makes this discipline unique. Fundamentally, chemical principles involve nonlinear many body problems of extremely high dimension. Each different molecule has a distinct many body potential and properties. The smallest changes in molecular composition or structural arrangements in space change their properties, i.e., the details of the many body potential matter. The very fact that chemical reaction mechanisms have been discovered that can be applied to a near infinite number of molecular systems indicates there is some reduction principle at play. It can be deduced from the simple observations made in the introduction that the reaction forces do not sense the entire molecule but must be localized to some self-similar features in the dynamic sampling of the molecular framework.
We have now achieved the fundamental space–time limit needed to image chemistry to directly observe this reduction in dimensionality. “Seeing is believing”. This new ability will change how we think about chemistry. This assertion is based on the fact that we cannot, save for a few small molecule systems, predict the nuclear configuration(s) of the system in the barrier crossing region. The information that will be forthcoming will help to create a new reaction mode basis to better predict reaction pathways and categorize chemical reactions.
There are a number of challenges on both the experimental and theoretical fronts that need to be discussed to achieve this vision of developing a reaction mode basis for chemistry. Firstly, barrier crossings are rare events such that some means must be used to trigger the chemistry of interest. This rather obvious point may be the Achilles Heel of this overall methodology. There are very few molecular systems that can be optically prepared along barrierless, reactive, excited state surfaces. New means need to be found to initiate chemistry. Secondly, there are significant constraints on the sample preparation both to avoid peak power limits in the initial state preparation and with respect to developing means for a systematic study of different reaction mechanisms. Ideally, we would like to isolate different aspects of the bath with respect to coupling to the nuclear continuum of states that is ultimately responsible for the formation of the product state. Thirdly, it is highly desirable to push the space–time resolution to the highest possible limit. The current limit to spatially resolved reaction dynamics is on the order of 0.01 Å. These very motions can be connected to the energetics of the reaction coordinate. Finally, new theoretical frameworks are needed to cast the problem within tractable computation limits and explicitly exploit the experimental information to predict the key reaction modes involved in barrier crossing. The experimental results will provide the proving ground for theoretical advances aimed to reduce computational costs and focus on what matters most, the key modes driving the chemistry. This coordinated comparative approach will enable a limited number of experimentally testable systems to be generalized. In this limit, we will have arrived at a formulation of chemistry that can be readily transported to guide synthetic strategies.
Phototrigger challenge
There have been thousands of photochemical processes studied over the past several decades. The classic systems involve photoisomerization, electron/proton transfer, keto–enol tautomerization, dissociation processes, cyclization reactions as a short list. Of these, only a small subset can be photoinduced along barrierless reaction coordinates. As discussed above, in the limit of a barrier in the excited state surface, the observed dynamics involve uncorrelated events and only the intermediate structures can be resolved – not the pathway. Moreover, there is the problem of connecting the photoinduced processes to thermally driven reactions along ground state surfaces. This latter issue was brought up in the discussions (see comments by Dave Townsend). Excited state processes often involve conical intersections that naturally reduce the problem to a few key types of motion. It is these motions that create degeneracies in the electronic surfaces, and thereby create curvatures in the potential energy surface that direct the chemistry. I would argue that if this pathway intersects the ground state reaction coordinate, typically in the barrier region, then these modes are also involved in the chemistry along the ground state surface. The point can be understood by simply playing the atomic movie of the photoinduced reaction dynamics backwards in time and the barrier region is reconstructed. Even if this is only one subset of possibilities of the thermally sampled barrier, it is precisely the needed information to recreate a saddle point in the barrier region. It is the back projection that gives the critical nuclear arrangements that open a seam to the product surface and define the barrier region. It is these key reaction modes we wish to characterize to develop a new dynamic reaction mode basis for conceptualizing chemistry. It is not completely inclusive of all possible pathways but it gives enough information on the critical arrangement of atoms at the barrier crossing region to more accurately think about manipulating the barrier height and better controlling the chemistry.
The problem is that there are precious few systems that can be triggered under barrierless conditions and it is highly unlikely that a systematic means of discovering new photochemical systems can be found at this point. The ultimate solution is to drive chemistry along the ground state surface and explicitly take advantage of what has been learned from atomically resolved reaction dynamics to date, namely there are only a few key modes in the barrier crossing process. Again, one needs 100 fs time resolution which dictates that any experimental protocol must involve femtosecond laser approaches to initiate the chemistry. There are at least two possible avenues to explore. The most obvious is to use femtosecond IR pulses to drive the purported reaction modes. This idea dates back to the early discussion of laser selective chemistry, which has largely been abandoned due the extremely fast intramolecular vibrational redistribution processes that quickly dissipates the vibrational energy entropically as heat into the system modes. In this case, laser selective chemistry is no more selective than a Bunsen burner. The problem with past attempts is that generally only a single mode was adiabatically excited in a ladder climbing fashion up the anharmonic potential. At some point, well below the barrier crossing region, the energy is anharmonically coupled into modes orthogonal to the reaction coordinate. Another way to look at the wavepacket dynamics is that below the barrier crossing region, the potential is necessarily repulsive and keeps the system in the reactant half space. Also, as stated, previous studies have focused on a single vibrational mode. As shown above, chemistry undergoes this remarkable reduction in dimensionality, however, reactions requires at least 2–3 modes at the bare minimum to direct the chemistry. Previous failures in pursuing laser selectivity chemistry are due to this neglect. The challenge is to develop new laser sources capable of driving at least 2–3 different modes, with addressable phase relations, to give the last proper kick into the product channel on the canonical 100 fs timescale of barrier crossing. New high power femtosecond IR laser systems with IR pulse shaping now puts this prospect at least within reach.94
The other prospect discussed at the meeting is to use attosecond methods with shaped VUV pulses to mix electronic states and direct electron density into labile coordinates (Martín et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00074F, Vacher, Robb et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00067C).87 The fields involved must be on the order of the atom Coulomb potential such that this process will occur from highly ionized excited states. It will not be possible to connect the reaction dynamics of these highly excited ion states to ground state chemistry, however, as pointed out in the Discussion this process does provide an interesting new proving ground for theory.
Other means for controlling the potential energy surface or perturbative means needs to be found. The work discussed on the use of optical cavities to shape excited state surfaces by Mukamel et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00095A) holds promise for controlling chemistry with modest input fields. The local field is still a high field problem. This approach necessarily involves extremely low number densities of molecules to single molecule regimes. Here, the velocity map imaging and other charged particle detection schemes are nearly perfect platforms for this class of studies. With increased electron source brightness, it is conceivable that even imaging of single molecule reaction dynamics within optical cavities is possible with repetitive sampling of identically prepared systems. The significant advances in electron source brightness would also enable imaging of cross molecular beam reactions to open up the study of bimolecular, second order, reaction mechanisms.
Other perturbations need to be explored as well. Most molecules are unstable in the anion state and undergo electron induced reactions. The use of either hot electrons to drive chemistry as recently shown for initiating phase transitions95 or the use of femtosecond electron pulses in lieu of optical excitation can be used to induce chemistry and this process would be along ground state anion surfaces. Other perturbative variables not involving photoexcitation such as extreme pressure and temperature conditions can be used to induce chemical processes very near the primary timescales. This prospect is possible if the perturbation is of sufficient magnitude to emulate the instantaneous conditions corresponding to the rare statistical events where the system has sufficient energy to overcome the barrier.
If the phototrigger challenge can be solved and in particular if multimode IR driven chemistry can be developed, it would enable atomically resolved reaction dynamics for all classes of chemistry. The single most important outcome would be to open up the systematic study of catalysts. We presently have a very poor understanding of why certain metals and substituents make better catalysts than others. The single most glaring example to illustrate this lack of understanding is our inability to develop a water splitting photocatalyst that operates even remotely close to the quantum efficiency of PSII (see discussion of Yano et al., DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00084C).
Sample challenge
There are different problems for sample preparation that depend on the structural probe to image the chemistry of interest. The method of inducing the chemistry also needs to be considered. For photochemistry, the photoexcited and probed volumes must match well with a sufficient fraction excited above background. The needed fraction excited is typically on the order of 10%. This absorbed photon requirement needs to be scaled with respect to absorption cross sections to ensure the excitation peak power stays below thresholds leading to multiphoton ionization effects. This threshold is on the order of 100 GW cm−2. This statement is reinforced by the reported optical damage thresholds for high power laser optics that are generally below 10 GW cm−2. For condensed phase samples (solid or liquid state), the pathlength must be on the order of microns, and must employ very strong absorbing states to decrease the number of incident photons (peak power) to stay within safe peak power limits. This statement is predicated on typical densities for condensed phase systems and does not pertain to gas phase samples. In the gas phase case, it only depends on the number density needed to observe signal and velocity mismatch issues. The maximum incident peak power in all cases should not exceed 100–200 GW cm−2 as a general guideline. For studies of condensed phase systems using electron probes, the samples have to be on the order of 100 nm thin (depending on electron energy) irrespective of the laser excitation conditions but the point of the peak power limitations needs to be equally respected. The challenge is to devise a means to prepare high quality samples with sufficient surface area to provide the “movie film” for either electrons or X-ray probes with the above constraint. New methods of sample preparation need to be developed. Present methods involve microtoming, arrested crystal growth, ion milling, spin coating. All have to be refined to make sample preparation more routine. The machine physics for atomically resolving reaction dynamics has been solved. Now, it all comes down to samples.
In terms of sample selection, we need to systematically explore different types of chemistry. We are looking for a sample preparation platform that will meet the above limits. In this respect, the use of polymer chemistry to introduce photoactive systems would provide a generalized approach. It is straightforward to spin coat polymers or drop cast polymers to the desired dimensions with nm precision over large areas. The film could be in endless supply. The problem is that the polymer host must not constitute more than 90% of the scattering centres so not to obscure the atomic motions of interest. Also the amorphous nature of polymers reduces greatly the sharpness of the diffraction patterns. There are means to create oriented polymer films to help in promoting constructive interference for reciprocal space imaging. There are also a number of other materials that can be processed as thin films to provide the necessary large area films for both electron and X-ray diffraction experiments. The advent of numerous nanofabrication methods have opened up a number of different means for obtaining the necessary sample geometries.
In principle, the sample preparation problem can be solved. We really need to enlist the help of synthetic chemists to provide systems poised to undergo a specific type of chemistry. To date, all the problems studied have involved well known photochemistry and standard model problems. We need to move beyond the standard problems and start to design molecular systems specifically to test various reaction mechanisms. The inspiration for specific molecular targets can be gained from theoretical calculations. The enormous success in the design of a synthetic analogue to mimic the primary photoisomerization steps involved in vision is a case in point.96 The system was synthesized based on the truncated model used in ab initio calculations to treat the photoisomerization observed in rhodopsin. The molecule was designed in silico and was found to nearly exactly replicate the primary processes, even the observed dynamics, of the primary step of vision.96–99 (This greatly truncated molecular system and its success in replicating the photochemistry of retinal is just another example of the key chemistry involving highly localized motions.) Given this success and recent advances in theory, I can see in the not too distant future that ab initio theories using a refined localized basis (to be discussed later) generate in silico structures to test various aspects of different reaction mechanisms. It is at this point that we need synthetic chemists to make these constructs and to play an active role in helping drive the field.
This effort will be largely frustrated if we do not develop standard templates for sample preparation and delivery to meet the requirements for atomically resolved structural dynamics. There are a few approaches that could be amenable to systematic synthetic strategies such as polymers discussed above and metal organic frameworks that are naturally 2D materials for which different active groups could be introduced. These are just two examples of many different support structures that could be used as templates for targeted synthesis. A solution to sample delivery in some form of common template is crucial to advancing the field.
Towards the quantum limit in imaging chemistry
The major issues associated with this challenge have been largely discussed in the Introduction. The most important technological advance was the development of ultrabright electron and X-ray sources of sufficient brightness to literally light up atomic motions under single shot or framing conditions. Of the two sources, electrons have more than an order of magnitude shorter de Broglie wavelength and amplitude stability than the corresponding XFEL sources. The highest space–time resolution has been achieved with electrons with time resolution on the 100 fs times cale and 0.01 Å spatial resolution.57 In addition, the phasing problem in inverting diffraction observables to real space motions has been solved as discussed above by explicitly taking advantage of conserved atomic positions or information to provide phase references for the inversion process. This space–time resolution has been achieved without any models or refinement using theoretical inputs. These are the first full atom resolved chemical reactions. It is notable that the spatial resolution of 0.01 Å is comparable to zero point motions of small Z (<10) atoms. In this regard, the fundamental space–time requirements for imaging chemistry have been achieved. What are the ultimate limits? The reason this question is important is that the net displacement of the atoms can be directly related to the energetics of the reaction coordinate. From the dynamics, the reaction forces can be determined and the net displacements give the energetics. For example, the photoinduced electron transfer for Pt(dmit2)2 involves a net reorganization energy on the order of 1 eV typical for electron transfer processes30 and has fully relaxed displacements of 0.1 Å. Spatial resolution of 0.01 Å translates to following motions corresponding to relaxation processes dissipating less than 100 meV. The higher the spatial resolution, the more accurate the measurements will be in comparing to theory and could achieve energy accuracy requirements comparable to spectroscopy. The important difference in benchmarking theory against prediction of specific nuclear motions as opposed to describing electronic states is that one is observing the actual motions (absolute measures) as opposed to relative changes in electronic states. The spatial resolution is determined by the SNR in the image reconstruction, which in turn depends on the source brightness, source noise, and sampling noise. For a given sample, the problem reduces to source issues. The brighter and more stable the imaging source, the higher the spatial resolution and dynamic range for contrast. Electrons have the edge over X-rays in this regard due to the much shorter wavelength and lower amplitude noise. As good as the current electron sources are, there is room for at least a factor of 100 increase in electron source brightness. The fundamental quantum limit has been addressed by the Luiten and Scholten groups.100,101 New electron source technology based on ultracold atoms will approach this quantum limit. The other approach is to develop new photocathodes with lower emittance. The work of Bazarov et al.102,103 has led to the development of trialkali photocathodes with an order of magnitude lower emittance and can be lowered another factor of 10 by going to lower temperature, for an overall factor of 100 brighter source. These developments along with improved sample preparation to increase the amount of signal averaging possible for image reconstruction will enable at least an order of magnitude higher spatial resolution with normal assumptions on scaling with increased SNR. Gas phase electron diffraction routinely obtains 0.001 Å resolution or better (e.g.ref. 104). I expect we will soon achieve similar resolution limits with fs atomically resolved reaction dynamics, which then puts our effective resolution to the reaction energetics below 10 meV or thermal noise. This is the true fundamental limit. It should also be pointed out that higher space–time resolution will also greatly enhance the ability to better resolve probability distributions as pointed out by Ischenko et al. using tomographic reconstruction35 and also in the paper of Centurion et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00071A). This feature of diffractive imaging will be extremely revealing in the study of reaction dynamics involving multiple pathways and could resolve a number of issues with respect to competing ideas of dominant relaxation channels.
In addition to source issues, there is also considerable room for improvement in detection and theory of image reconstruction. As shown in the work of Ishikawa et al.,57 prior knowledge of the system can provide important mathematical constraints in the image reconstruction. What is the fundamental limit with respect to detected signal counts that we need to image chemistry for a given resolution? This question has to be posed in relation to the background noise of the detector. For both XFELs and electron sources, there has been tremendous progress made in detector technology such that detection can approach noise free conditions. Each ping on the detector is a real signal count. This seemingly trivial technical detail means that it is possible to do high order spatial correlations of the accumulated signal with known constraints to reconstruct an image with far less signal. I would hazard a guess that within the next few years with the development of new algorithms for image reconstruction that we will be able to obtain atomically resolved reaction dynamics for a given resolution with an order of magnitude less signal counts. This development will be comparable to increasing the source brightness by yet another order of magnitude.
It is exciting to think of the level of detail we will soon be able to tease out of direct observations of chemical reactions. We will soon (I hope) be able to directly observe subtle quantum effects such as the Berry phase in passing through conical intersections, quantum interference effects involved in the reduction of phase space during barrier crossing etc. (vide infra). Higher space–time resolution will equate to more information and a higher level of understanding of reaction dynamics.
The theory challenge: the critical link to a new conceptual basis for chemistry
As stated above, it will not be possible to experimentally solve the phototrigger problem for all classes of chemical reactions. It is conceivable we will be able to achieve laser selective chemistry by driving key vibrational modes along ground state potentials. This development will open up a significant number of chemical processes but still for the most part unimolecular processes. We will still not have similar information on second order collision induced reaction dynamics that constitutes the bulk of chemistry. It may be possible to create molecular constructs such as the diarylethene case discussed above to approximate binary collision complexes and new perturbation schemes may be developed but it will only be possible to study a small fraction of chemical processes. In order for this field to have a broader impact in chemistry, it will be essential for there to be a close marriage between experiment and theory in which higher space–time resolution in imaging chemical processes is used as a critical benchmark for refining theoretical approaches within the fixed number of test cases. Here, I would add that the goal does not mean that we need higher and higher accuracy in predicting precise motions or energetics. We need to be able to better predict scaling relations for different reaction mechanisms and the critical points, almost like nucleation sites, where the chemistry occurs with highest proficiency – for higher and higher levels of complexity. The primary directive of this field should be to develop the theoretical tools to the point that it will be possible to extend what has been learned from experimental studies of a few model systems to all chemical processes.
The main point of this summary paper is to point out that there was a fundamental bit of physics that was missing. Chemistry is only transferrable from one molecular moiety to another if there is some self-similar process repeated over and over again for what are otherwise distinctly different many body systems. The first atomically resolved chemical processes have directly shown that there is an enormous reduction in dimensionality that occurs in the barrier crossing regions. The strong anharmonic mixing between high frequency and low frequency modes within a normal mode basis leads to these localized motions. The idea of key reaction modes is not new but to see it first hand to establish this as fact is. It is also inspiring to see the simplicity and beauty of this virtual orchestrated chemical dance. The very fact that we can now directly observe the key modes directing the chemistry establishes this phenomena as the missing bit of physics.
Here I wish to emphasize my most important point of this article. If one can identify the key modes, then it is possible to conceptually displace these modes with proper weighting to better approximate the nuclear configuration of the transition state region or critical point. This highly simplified view will empower chemists to better design molecular scaffolds to control barrier heights to achieve the desired chemistry. Chemistry is by definition a dynamical process by which matter interconverts from one form to another. The development of a reaction mode basis would properly capture the operating physics and would be no more complicated to implement than current methods based on “chemical intuition” and static structural end points. The more accurate depiction of the reaction saddle point within the context of the right physical picture for sampling this critical point would represent a major advance in conceptualizing chemistry. This in turn would translate to better control over barriers to direct the desired chemistry and scaling chemistry to higher levels of complexity. The current limits for de novo synthesis and imparting functions are well represented by the efforts in developing molecular motors.105 Chemistry is stuck on the nm scale at present. The proposed dynamic structural basis may provide the improved level of understanding needed to scale chemistry to greater complexity and the de novo creation of active matter with functionalities rivalling biological systems.
The problem with this prospect, as pointed out in the discussion at the meeting, is that even nominally very similar molecules sharing a common parent structure show significantly different excited state dynamics. There have been attempts to find general trends in molecular dynamics such as the energy gap law that ultimately have proven not to hold in general (see discussion by Dave Townsend, DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00092D). The basic argument, and one with which I agree, is that the best means to refine theory is to be able to account for the very details that make each molecule unique. Different molecules have different structures and compositions and hence different many body potentials and properties. The excitation of one molecule in reference to another leads to a different spatial distribution of electrons in the excited state and as a direct consequence a different excited state potential energy surface leading to different forces acting on the atoms. The excited state dynamics are never the same for two different molecules. Each excited state lifetime, each nonradiative relaxation pathway, represents a molecular finger print of the unique many body potential. The ultimate goal for theory is to be able to accurately treat these excited state surfaces to the point of being able to predict the dynamics for any given system. The problem, however, is that in the search for quantifying uniqueness we lose the generalities and the simple physics that guides chemistry and makes chemical concepts transferable. The full problem also requires significantly more resources and time to execute than theoretical methods that encompass more general trends. To help guide chemistry, we need to find these general features that will compete with “arrow pushing” now in common use. We need to reveal the trends that will help to conceptualize chemistry more generally.
Let me take a few cases in point to illustrate the approach I think is needed. Let's examine the breakdown in the energy gap law, given as an example in the discussion. This generalization was formulated based on experimental studies of nonradiative relaxation in which trends were easiest to observe and do controls for the annulene system.106–108 The larger the energy gap, the poorer the Franck–Condon (FC) overlap to assist internal conversion from the excited state to the ground state. This general observation for a given class of molecules helped formulate the need to conserve momentum in undergoing nonradiative relaxation. The momentum conservation condition is properly captured in the form of the overlap of the nuclear wavefunction probability distribution between different electronic surfaces (i.e., FC factors). This level of understanding heavily influenced synthetic chemistry in the development of photostable dyes for photography and dye laser applications,109 and solar energy conversion applications.110 It was realized by Drexhage that substituents used to shift the absorption band for colour tuning had to employ a means to keep a rigid in-plane structure and avoid low frequency modes that lead to FC resonances. The longer the lifetime, the higher the chance of radiative relaxation, as opposed to nonradiative relaxation leading to hot ground state chemistry and degradation. The result was a very large class of photostable dyes that were found through a better understanding of the physics leading to the energy gap law. This “law” does not hold in general with the most glaring exception being the nucleobases of DNA. The bases absorb well into the UV and by the energy gap law should be long lived excited states, prone to UV photochemical degradation. DNA is known to have short lived excited states based on fluorescence quantum yields and oscillator strengths.111 This breakdown in the energy gap law could be attributed to a high density of resonant FC modes as a result of a high DOS of low frequency modes to create resonant combinations. It is only now with much improved theory and experiment that we have found that this class of molecular systems have strongly coupled out of plane motions that create not just 1 but 2 conical intersections as a general feature in assisting very fast nonradiative relaxation.112 We see new excited state relaxation pathways yet again when these same nucleobases are incorporated into DNA. The specific details of the molecules matter in terms of the excited state dynamics. However, I would argue that within a given class of molecules it is possible to make very accurate predictions based on observed trends. The nucleobases all show excited state surfaces that involve out of plane coupling modes and formation of CIs. This can now be predicted as a general feature knowing something about the coupling of modes conserved in the nucleobase structure – and not present in rigidized annulenes. With a mode specific basis for understanding coupling to electronic surfaces, the basic trends controlling the excited state nonradiative relaxation dynamics could be predicted.
Let me take a more relevant example with respect to developing a reaction mode basis. Consider the case of the photoisomerization of acetylene as treated by Stolow et al. (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00117C) in the Discussion. This theoretical study connected the calculated reaction pathway to the XAS observable, pointing out that the reaction involves bond elongation, and torsional motion of the H(D) atoms and pyrimidalization en route to the photoisomer. This system is the smallest possible construct for isomerization. The primary step of vision involves the same photochemical process. The chromophore is retinal with 140 vibrational modes or degrees of freedom, which is bound within the opsin protein comprising over 350 amino acids. This system has well over 1000 dimensions in terms of possible arrangements of atoms potentially involved in the photoisomerization. How can this photoisomerization work within such a high degree of complexity? Here the beauty and power of reducing chemistry to its key reaction modes becomes apparent. For retinal itself there are 4 labile double bonds. The absorption of a photon excites an electron to an antibonding character excited state, which will lead to bond softening along any of the formal double bonds. For the protonated Schiff base of retinal in solution, all possible photoproducts are observed with quantum yields of only a few % to >10%.113 The non-rigid nature of retinal leads to a high density of low frequency resonances for large FC overlap between electronic states, which as we learned from the physics giving rise to the energy gap law, leads to very fast nonradiative relaxation back to the ground state. Vision had to evolve a means to direct the primary step of vision to compete with this inherently ultrafast process. Recent studies have shown that the excited state potential is so highly optimized that the initially excited FC modes are coupled to the three key modes involved in isomerization, i.e., bond elongation specifically at the C11C12 position, the localized torsion at this same bond, and hydrogen out of plane motion.99 The surrounding protein must create local fields that localize the node in the excited state wavefunction of the S1 state at the C11, C12 position, as well as provide repulsive terms to couple to the torsion at this location. Please note, the reaction is highly localized and reduces to the very same motions involved in the photoisomerization of acetylene. A 1000+ dimensional problem with proper engineering of the system has been reduced to 3 key modes to direct the chemistry faster than any other competing process. There is only one photoproduct with an overall quantum yield of 65%. The reaction mechanism involving isomerization along polyenes, of which acetylene is the simplest possible construct, all involve 3–4 key reaction modes in the barrier crossing region. The barrier can be manipulated by proper arrangement of surrounding atoms to create spatially distinct “hot” reaction sites for which the chemistry occurs at this site orders of magnitude faster than competing processes. It needs to borne in mind that the primary step of photoisomerization involved in vision is one of the most highly optimized reaction coordinates known, with exceptional evolution pressure to optimize the quantum yield. The primary step of vision had to be optimized against the inherently ultrafast competing channel of nonradiative relaxation in polyenes that occurs on 100 fs timescales. This reaction has been so highly optimized that the motion through the CI occurs within a half period of the principle torsion mode in a concerted fashion involving all three key modes, i.e. occurs ballistically.99 The reaction could not occur faster. This finding is marvellous to behold as there is no means to differentially lower the barrier of the desired process relative to the competing processes. The competing channel of nonradiative relaxation in this case is an intrinsic property of this class of molecules. The process had to be optimized to outrun nonradiative relaxation in polyenes. In conventional chemistry, the barriers of competing processes can be equally manipulated by increasing the barrier height in combination with the means used to lower the barrier for the desired process. Even relatively small differences in barriers between competing channels on the order of 0.1 eV can result in acceptable yields for synthetic chemistry.
I could cite other examples of optimized reaction coordinates in biological systems that involve complexity well beyond that encountered in current synthetic challenges. Irrespective of complexity, it is possible to have “hot” sites in the system for which the local barrier to a desired process can be made to be lowered relative to other competing processes. Theoretical methods need to be developed that focus on casting out the modes most strongly coupled to the reaction coordinate of interest. For example, the work of Olivucci et al. that led to an in silico analogue for vision was based on very detailed ab initio calculations.98 From the experimental studies, this same analogue could have been deduced by consideration of the key modes and molecular scaffold to minimize the barrier to these motions as discussed above, i.e. by taking a page out of the book written by nature.
The challenge is to develop theoretical tools that enable projecting out the principle reaction modes from within a critical volume element of a system of arbitrary complexity. Even in the limit we can rigorously solve the full problem, the methodology will not lend itself to a simple form that will enable synthetic chemists to readily plan reactions. The generalities will be lost in favour of rigour. Theoretical approaches need to be developed that take advantage of the fact that we have additional information on the reaction coordinate. From the atomically resolved reaction dynamics, it has now been established that there are only a few dominant reaction modes that direct the chemistry. We need to focus on the few systems that will be forthcoming from the different experimental methods discussed at this meeting to test more coarse grain theories that fully exploit this information. Mike Robb (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00067C) made an interesting suggestion to explore valence bond methods within this spirit to reduce the computation time to find the key modes and then refine from there. This theoretical approach can be benchmarked against the forthcoming atom resolved reaction dynamics and more rigorous theories in terms of properly predicting the key reaction modes and magnitude of displacements.
Here I have to emphasize the degree of accuracy does not have to conform to the accuracy of comparison to spectroscopic observables. Order of magnitude predictions of barrier distributions to project out preferred pathways is all that is needed to guide synthesis. We know this approach will work in seeing how far synthetic strategies have gone with comparatively no theory to guide them but so called chemical intuition and a highly localized depiction of reaction pathways based on static structures. This approach has led to the discovery of a wide variety of reaction mechanisms. The explicit inclusion of dynamic sampling of multiple pathways, even if not exhaustive, will represent a major advance in strategic planning reaction routes. We need to focus not on the absolute dynamics but relative dynamics. Otherwise, we risk “not being able to see the forest for the trees”. As long as we can identify the key modes most strongly coupled to a desired reaction coordinate, we will know a priori that the displacement of these modes will open up seams to the product surface. The systematic displacement of these modes within a given molecular construct will give a reasonable estimate of the critical point in the reaction surface. Chemical means to reduce this barrier, just as nature discovered in the case of vision, can then be employed to better direct chemistry. Here it has to be stressed that the absolute rates or dynamics may be well off from the most rigorous calculations but the effect on the barrier heights for the competing processes will similarly be off. It is the control of the differential barrier for the desired process in relation to competing processes that is most important. This approach would give synthetic chemistry new tools for manipulating barrier heights and potentially extend chemistry to new length scales and complexity.
I can well see a day in which we teach chemistry using a reaction mode basis for different classifications of chemical reactions and molecular systems. These reaction modes may need to be classified according to the type of molecular architecture that facilitates motion along these coordinates as in the case for the energy gap law for annulenes or isomerization modes for polyenes. The specific critical structures could be projected to enable chemists the means to think about lowering or raising this barrier. The pedagogical approach would be to explore different displacements of these modes using real time theoretical tools to approximate the potential energy surface. This approach would allow a more accurate conceptualization of the nuclear configurations comprising the transition state region and means to control barrier heights and thereby chemistry. For a given synthetic strategy, the desired pathway could be ranked according to predicted reaction rates/barriers for other possible competing pathways. At this point, higher level, more costly, computations could be justified.
If the above can be realized, we will have formulated a new conceptual basis for chemistry, one that bridges both the structural and dynamical aspects that form the foundation of chemistry. We will have finally resolved our long standing space-time conundrum in conceptualizing chemistry. It is here where I see a very bright future for atomically resolved reaction dynamics, the theme of this Faraday Discussion.
4. Summary and personal perspective of the status of the field
I would like to close with one last personal observation. I recall as a student first studying chemistry thinking that I had missed the most exciting times in science. I suspect many reading this article share this sentiment. In the Introduction, I highlighted the historical developments with respect to formulating a structural basis for chemistry and our fascination with going to higher and higher spatial and temporal resolution to understand chemistry. The development of quantum mechanics and extension to chemistry was occurring in parallel. It is hard to imagine the enormous clarity that emerged once the dual particle–wave nature of matter was discovered and could be so elegantly treated mathematically within quantum theory. However, there is never just one defining moment. Science is constantly going through major advances that oscillate between fields (the quantum revolution, the structure of DNA and molecular genetics, etc.). I feel we are at a similar turning point in chemistry. With the recent developments on both experimental and theoretical fronts, we are beginning to see with much greater clarity the primary processes directing chemistry. Most significantly, we have arrived at the fundamental space–time resolution needed to directly observe atomic motions during the very act of chemistry – the dream of every chemist.
We now have the opportunity to solve one of the most perplexing problems in science. Chemistry involves highly nonlinear, high dimensional, problems; yet of the myriad of possible rearrangements to interconvert from one form of matter to another, there seem to be a small subset of solutions. There is an enormous reduction in dimensionality in which only a few dominant modes define the barrier crossing region and direct the chemistry during a reactive crossing. It is this reduction in effective dimensionality that provides this “magic” of chemistry and makes chemical reaction mechanisms transferable to nearly any molecule of arbitrary complexity. We can now directly observe this process and as such have an opportunity to develop a reaction mode basis for chemistry, which explicitly bridges the importance of structure and dynamics to understanding chemical processes. The study of physical chemistry has progressed from simple systems with limited information to the study of systems as complex as proteins. We can now follow the chemistry at the atomic level of detail for systems relevant to chemistry and biology. We are no longer talking about few atom systems with little consequences for the practice of chemistry. These developments will undoubtedly influence how we conceptualize and execute chemistry.
At this point, my feeling is that we will still be thinking in terms of “balls-and-springs” in picturing chemical processes. We need to continually force ourselves to include the wave particle duality to the problem. If one considers the quantum aspects of the problem, the anharmonic coupling between high frequency and low frequency modes leads to localized motions precisely because of interference terms in the vibrational wavefunctions.
In the spirit of trying to summarize the operating physics in the simplest possible terms, Fig. 6 shows the distinctive difference in the motion of a heavy effective mass for equilibrium and far from equilibrium motions in sampling the highly anharmonic region of a barrier crossing. Only two reduced reaction coordinates are shown, which is not so different than the case found for many complex systems. The executed motion of this classical ball sampling the highly anharmonic region leads naturally to additional Fourier components in its motion. It is the curvature of the potential at this point that leads to coupling between high and low frequency modes—and which modes. Now, we need to include the wave properties into this picture. The balls really represent vibrational wavepackets for which you have to consider the relative phases of the mixed wavefunction at any instant in time. There will be constructive and destructive interference of the vibrational modes of this superposition state and this will lead to localized motions. The enormous reduction in complexity and localization of atomic motions is exactly what is observed for vibrational overtones,114–116 precisely at the typical vibrational energies corresponding to barrier positions. Given the enormous anharmonicity in the barrier region, it is difficult to imagine the wild interference effects that lead to chemistry at this point in nuclear configuration space. It is this basic physics that harbours promise to recast chemistry in a reduced reaction mode basis.
 Fig. 6  Anharmonic mode coupling and reduced dimensions. The red ball shown is executing motion (time trace in inset) within harmonic limits (dark grey potential). There are 3N-6 orthogonal eigenfunctions that describe all possible equilibrium fluctuations using a normal mode basis. The eigenfunctions are stationary states by definition and there is no prospect of chemistry. Anharmonicity is the spice of life in that it is this aspect of statistical sampling anharmonic regions that leads to chemistry. The blue ball shows anharmonic motion (inset: time traces of motion and Fourier transform to frequencies). It is the superposition of these motions that couple to the electronic states to create the Barrier region, which acts like a doorway to the product state. The interference between high and low frequency modes leads to localized motions, and thereby reduced dimensions to the problem. The lowest frequency modes act to both propagate the system and via the high DOS in this spectral region to dissipatively trap the motion on the product half space. It is the coupling of these motions to the electronic states that determines the potential energy surface to create these passageways by their very motion – which will be similar for locally similar many body potentials. 
Returning to the objective to bring the wave picture into our thinking, it is extremely difficult to imagine all the interference terms that must be occurring under the highly anharmonic conditions directing atomic motions in the barrier crossing region (local maximum in Fig. 6). It must be a wild ride. (I have spent countless hours observing interference of water waves with unusual landscapes and scattering obstacles to make this statement.) Most of this information is lost anyway in statistical averaging and classic pictures provide similar results. However, if the last technological hurdles to laser driven mode selective chemistry can be solved, the theoretically predicted reaction mode basis can be used to guide experiment. This will reduce the enormous experimental parameter space to lock onto the key modes to drive the chemistry in a form of dynamic refinement. This information is directly relevant to ground state chemistry and would provide precise information on mode coupling needed to deterministically manipulate barriers. In this scenario, it will be possible to explicitly play with the relative phase relationships to master barrier transmission – a purely quantum effect. There are also important problems in directing wavepackets near conical intersections, as a scattering problem, in which the accumulated phase changes lead to destructive and constructive inference through the CI, or “spooky” disappearance of reaction probability for certain momentum states.117,118 In short, we will be able to directly observe the “quantumness” of chemistry. We will enjoy the interference effects in how we observe the dynamics of matter waves. We are in for exciting times ahead.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank the Max Planck Society for support. I would like to thank in particular Marcos Alta, Xinxin Chen, Gastón Corthey, Stuart A. Hayes, and María S. Grigera for help in preparing this manuscript and providing the figures and movies.
References
R. J. D. Miller, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 583–604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2014, 343, 1108–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. D. Miller, Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Miller, Can. J. Chem., 2002, 80, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dwyer, C. T. Hebeisen, R. Ernstorfer, M. Harb, V. B. Deyirmenjian, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2006, 364, 741–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Armstrong, J. P. Ogilvie, M. L. Cowan, A. M. Nagy and R. J. D. Miller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 4990–4994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Walther, V. Raicu, J. P. Ogilvie, R. Phillips, R. Kluger and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20605–20611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eckert, Ann. Phys., 2012, 524, A83–A85 CrossRef .
W. H. Bragg and W. L. Bragg, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1913, 88, 428–438 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Atkins and J. de Paula, Atkins' Physical Chemistry, OUP, Oxford,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. Lonsdale, Nature, 1928, 122, 810 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Rocke, Ann. Sci., 1985, 42, 355–381 CrossRef .
L. Pauling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1931, 53, 1367–1400 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Gillespie and R. S. Nyholm, Q. Rev. Chem. Soc., 1957, 11, 339 RSC .
R. J. Gillespie, J. Chem. Educ., 2004, 81, 298 CrossRef CAS .
F. Scholz, D. Himmel, F. W. Heinemann, P. v. R. Schleyer, K. Meyer and I. Krossing, Science, 2013, 341, 62–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hänggi and M. Borkovec, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1990, 62, 251–341 CrossRef .
D. G. Truhlar, B. C. Garrett and S. J. Klippenstein, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 12771–12800 CrossRef CAS .
H. Frauenfelder, G. Chen, J. Berendzen, P. W. Fenimore, H. Jansson, B. H. McMahon, I. R. Stroe, J. Swenson and R. D. Young, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 5129–5134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. J. Morowitz, Beginnings of Cellular Life: Metabolism Recapitulates Biogenesis, Yale University Press, 1st edn,  2004 Search PubMed .
K. A. Dill and H. S. Chan, Nat. Struct. Biol., 1997, 4, 10–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. A. Smit, A. F. Bochkov and R. Caple, Organic Synthesis: The Science Behind the Art, Royal Society of Chemistry,  1998 Search PubMed .
G. Porter, Science, 1968, 160, 1299–1307 CAS .
M. Eigen, Nobel Lecture, 1967, 11, 1963–1979 Search PubMed .
M. P. Minitti, J. M. Budarz, A. Kirrander, J. S. Robinson, D. Ratner, T. J. Lane, D. Zhu, J. M. Glownia, M. Kozina, H. T. Lemke, M. Sikorski, Y. Feng, S. Nelson, K. Saita, B. Stankus, T. Northey, J. B. Hastings and P. M. Weber, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 255501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Dlott, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1986, 37, 157–187 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pearman and M. Gruebele, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 6561 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lanzafame, R. J. D. Miller, A. A. Muenter and B. A. Parkinson, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 2820–2826 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lanzafame, S. Palese, D. Wang, R. J. D. Miller and A. A. Muenter, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 11020–11033 CrossRef CAS .

Surface electron transfer processes, ed. R. J. D. Miller, VCH, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
J. Schnadt, P. A. Brühwiler, L. Patthey, J. N. O'Shea, S. Södergren, M. Odelius, R. Ahuja, O. Karis, M. Bässler, P. Persson, H. Siegbahn, S. Lunell and N. Mårtensson, Nature, 2002, 418, 620–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Nesbitt and R. W. Field, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 12735–12756 CrossRef CAS .
R. Henderson, Q. Rev. Biophys., 1995, 28, 171–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Ischenko, V. V. Golubkov, V. P. Spiridonov, A. V. Zgurskii, A. S. Akhmanov, M. G. Vabischevich and V. N. Bagratashvili, Appl. Phys. B: Photophys. Laser Chem., 1983, 32, 161–163 CrossRef .

          A. A. Ischenko, L. Schaefer and J. D. Ewbank, in Proceedings SPIE 1998, 3516, 580-587, ed. V. P. Degtyareva, M. A. Monastyrski, M. Y. Schelev and A. V. Smirnov,  1999 Search PubMed .

          A. A. Ischenko, L. Schafer and J. Ewbank, in Time-resolved Diffraction, ed. J. R. Helliwell and P. M. Rentzepis, Oxford University Press, New York,  1997, p. 323 Search PubMed .
S. Williamson, G. Mourou and J. C. M. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52, 2364–2367 CrossRef CAS .

          V. V. Golubkov, A. V. Zgursky, V. I. Petrov and A. A. Ischenko, Pulsed picosecond electron source, Proceedings of the 8th European Conference on Electron Microscopy, Budapest,  1984, pp. 61–62 Search PubMed.
S. A. Akhmanov, V. N. Bagratashvili, V. V. Golubkov, A. V. Zgurskii, A. A. Ischenko and V. G. Tunkin, Production of picosecond pulses of fast electrons by laser-induced photoemission in an EMR-100 electron diffractometer, Soviet J. Tech. Phys. Lett., 1985, 11, 63–64 Search PubMed .
J. C. Williamson, M. Dantus, S. B. Kim and A. H. Zewail, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1992, 196, 529–534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ihee, V. A. Lobastov, U. M. Gomez, B. M. Goodson, R. Srinivasan, C.-Y. Ruan and A. H. Zewail, Science, 2001, 291, 458–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Ruan, F. Vigliotti, V. A. Lobastov, S. Chen and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 1123–1128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Dudek and P. M. Weber, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 4167–4171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deb and P. M. Weber, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2011, 62, 19–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Charles Williamson and A. H. Zewail, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 209, 10–16 CrossRef .
G. D. Goodno, G. Dadusc and R. J. D. Miller, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1998, 15, 1791 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Maznev, T. F. Crimmins and K. A. Nelson, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 1378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Frigge, B. Hafke, V. Tinnemann, T. Witte and M. Horn-von Hoegen, Struct. Dyn., 2015, 2, 35101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2003, 302, 1382–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1643–1648 CrossRef CAS .
T. van Oudheusden, E. F. de Jong, S. B. van der Geer, W. P. E. M. O. 't Root, O. J. Luiten and B. J. Siwick, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 93501 CrossRef .
G. J. H. Brussaard, A. Lassise, P. L. E. M. Pasmans, P. H. A. Mutsaers, M. J. van der Wiel and O. J. Luiten, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 141105 CrossRef .
C. T. Hebeisen, R. Ernstorfer, M. Harb, T. Dartigalongue, R. E. Jordan and R. J. Dwayne Miller, Opt. Lett., 2006, 31, 3517–3519 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hada, D. Zhang, K. Pichugin, J. Hirscht, M. A. Kochman, S. A. Hayes, S. Manz, R. Y. N. Gengler, D. A. Wann, T. Seki, G. Moriena, C. A. Morrison, J. Matsuo, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3863 CAS .
C. Gerbig, A. Senftleben, S. Morgenstern, C. Sarpe and T. Baumert, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 43050 CrossRef .

          J. Hirscht, Dissertation, Universität Hamburg,  2015, p. 2015 .
T. Ishikawa, S. A. Hayes, S. Keskin, G. Corthey, M. Hada, K. Pichugin, A. Marx, J. Hirscht, K. Shionuma, K. Onda, Y. Okimoto, S. Koshihara, T. Yamamoto, H. Cui, M. Nomura, Y. Oshima, M. Abdel-Jawad, R. Kato and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2015, 350, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, Y. Jiang, G. H. Kassier and R. J. Dwayne Miller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 33503 CrossRef .
J. Cao, Z. Hao, H. Park, C. Tao, D. Kau and L. Blaszczyk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 1044 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo and A. J. Taylor, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 62, R11921–R11924 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kandyla, T. Shih and E. Mazur, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 214107 CrossRef .
K. Franjic, M. L. Cowan, D. Kraemer and R. J. Miller, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 22937–22959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Amini-Nik, D. Kraemer, M. L. Cowan, K. Gunaratne, P. Nadesan, B. A. Alman and R. J. D. Miller, PLoS One, 2010, 5, e13053 Search PubMed .
H. Petersen, F. Tavakoli, S. Kruber, A. Münscher, A. Gliese, N.-O. Hansen, S. Uschold, D. Eggert, W. D. Robertson, T. Gosau, S. Sehner, M. Kwiatkowski, H. Schlüter, U. Schumacher, R. Knecht and R. J. D. Miller, Lasers Surg. Med., 2016, 48, 385–391 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2011, 74, 96101 CrossRef .
R. Ernstorfer, M. Harb, C. T. Hebeisen, G. Sciaini, T. Dartigalongue and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2009, 323, 1033–1037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sciaini, M. Harb, S. G. Kruglik, T. Payer, C. T. Hebeisen, F.-J. M. zu Heringdorf, M. Yamaguchi, M. H. Hoegen, R. Ernstorfer and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2009, 458, 56–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eichberger, H. Schaefer, M. Krumova, M. Beyer, J. Demsar, H. Berger, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2010, 468, 799–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-R. T. Han, Z. Tao, S. D. Mahanti, K. Chang, C.-Y. Ruan, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 075145 CrossRef .
N. Erasmus, M. Eichberger, K. Haupt, I. Boshoff, G. Kassier, R. Birmurske, H. Berger, J. Demsar and H. Schwoerer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 167402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2011, 74, 96101 CrossRef .
B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Chem. Phys., 2004, 299, 285–305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. Lu, H. Jean-Ruel, L. C. Liu, A. Marx, K. Onda, S. Koshihara, Y. Nakano, X. Shao, T. Hiramatsu, G. Saito, H. Yamochi, R. R. Cooney, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2013, 496, 343–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jean-Ruel, M. Gao, M. A. Kochman, C. Lu, L. C. Liu, R. R. Cooney, C. A. Morrison and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 131031130346003 Search PubMed .
M. Irie, T. Fukaminato, K. Matsuda and S. Kobatake, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 12174–12277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jean-Ruel, R. R. Cooney, M. Gao, C. Lu, M. A. Kochman, C. A. Morrison and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13158–13168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Woerner, F. Zamponi, Z. Ansari, J. Dreyer, B. Freyer, M. Prémont-Schwarz and T. Elsaesser, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 64509 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Elsaesser and M. Woerner, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr., 2010, 66, 168–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Juvé, M. Holtz, F. Zamponi, M. Woerner, T. Elsaesser and A. Borgschulte, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 217401 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zamponi, P. Rothhardt, J. Stingl, M. Woerner and T. Elsaesser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5207–5212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Emma, R. Akre, J. Arthur, R. Bionta, C. Bostedt, J. Bozek, A. Brachmann, P. Bucksbaum, R. Coffee, F.-J. Decker, Y. Ding, D. Dowell, S. Edstrom, A. Fisher, J. Frisch, S. Gilevich, J. Hastings, G. Hays, P. Hering, Z. Huang, R. Iverson, H. Loos, M. Messerschmidt, A. Miahnahri, S. Moeller, H.-D. Nuhn, G. Pile, D. Ratner, J. Rzepiela, D. Schultz, T. Smith, P. Stefan, H. Tompkins, J. Turner, J. Welch, W. White, J. Wu, G. Yocky and J. Galayda, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 641–647 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Prokhorenko, A. Halpin, P. J. M. Johnson, R. J. D. Miller and L. S. Brown, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 85105 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. M. Barends, L. Foucar, A. Ardevol, K. Nass, A. Aquila, S. Botha, R. B. Doak, K. Falahati, E. Hartmann, M. Hilpert, M. Heinz, M. C. Hoffmann, J. Köfinger, J. E. Koglin, G. Kovacsova, M. Liang, D. Milathianaki, H. T. Lemke, J. Reinstein, C. M. Roome, R. L. Shoeman, G. J. Williams, I. Burghardt, G. Hummer, S. Boutet and I. Schlichting, Science, 2015, 350, 445–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Miller, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1991, 42, 581–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Goodno, V. Astinov and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 10630–10643 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pande, C. D. M. Hutchison, G. Groenhof, A. Aquila, J. S. Robinson, J. Tenboer, S. Basu, S. Boutet, D. P. DePonte, M. Liang, T. A. White, N. A. Zatsepin, O. Yefanov, D. Morozov, D. Oberthuer, C. Gati, G. Subramanian, D. James, Y. Zhao, J. Koralek, J. Brayshaw, C. Kupitz, C. Conrad, S. Roy-Chowdhury, J. D. Coe, M. Metz, P. L. Xavier, T. D. Grant, J. E. Koglin, G. Ketawala, R. Fromme, V. rajer, R. Henning, J. C. H. Spence, A. Ourmazd, P. Schwander, U. Weierstall, M. Frank, P. Fromme, A. Barty, H. N. Chapman, K. Moffat, J. J. van Thor and M. Schmidt, Science, 2016, 352, 725–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Corkum and F. Krausz, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 381–387 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kuthirummal and P. M. Weber, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 378, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zuo, A. D. Bandrauk and P. B. Corkum, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 259, 313–320 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wolter, M. G. Pullen, A.-T. Le, M. Baudisch, K. Doblhoff-Dier, A. Senftleben, M. Hemmer, C. D. Schröter, J. Ullrich, T. Pfeifer, R. Moshammer, S. Gräfe, O. Vendrell, C. D. Lin and J. Biegert, Science, 2016, 354, 308–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Arruda and R. J. Sension, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4439–4455 RSC .
S. Manz, A. Casandruc, D. Zhang, Y. Zhong, R. A. Loch, A. Marx, T. Hasegawa, L. C. Liu, S. Bayesteh, H. Delsim-Hashemi, M. Hoffmann, M. Felber, M. Hachmann, F. Mayet, J. Hirscht, S. Keskin, M. Hada, S. W. Epp, K. Flöttmann and R. J. D. Miller, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 177, 467–491 RSC .
L. Chen, Y. Zhao and Y. Tanimura, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3110–3115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Kroetz, A. Ruehl, G. Chatterjee, A.-L. Calendron, K. Muraria, H. Cankaya, F. X. Kärtnera, I. Hartl and R. J. D. Miller, High energetic and highly stable pulses from a Ho:YLF regenerative amplifier, Proc. SPIE 9726, Solid State Lasers XXV, ed. W. A. Clarkson and R. K. Shori,  2016, p. 97260S DOI:doi:10.1117/12.2212236.
M. Hada, D. Zhang, A. Casandruc, R. J. D. Miller, Y. Hontani, J. Matsuo, R. E. Marvel and R. F. Haglund, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 134101 CrossRef .
I. Schapiro, S. Fusi, M. Olivucci, T. Andruniów, S. Sasidharanpillai and G. R. Loppnow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 12243–12250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Briand, O. Bräm, J. Réhault, J. Léonard, A. Cannizzo, M. Chergui, V. Zanirato, M. Olivucci, J. Helbing and S. Haacke, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 3178 RSC .
M. Manathunga, X. Yang, H. L. Luk, S. Gozem, L. M. Frutos, A. Valentini, N. Ferrè and M. Olivucci, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2016, 12, 839–850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. M. Johnson, A. Halpin, T. Morizumi, V. I. Prokhorenko, O. P. Ernst and R. J. D. Miller, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 980–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Claessens, S. B. van der Geer, G. Taban, E. J. D. Vredenbregt and O. J. Luiten, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 164801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Saliba, C. T. Putkunz, D. V. Sheludko, A. J. McCulloch, K. A. Nugent and R. E. Scholten, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 3967–3974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, S. Karkare, L. Cultrera, A. Kim and I. V. Bazarov, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2015, 86, 73309 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cultrera, S. Karkare, H. Lee, X. Liu, I. Bazarov and B. Dunham, Phys. Rev. Spec. Top.--Accel. Beams, 2015, 18, 113401 CrossRef .
D. A. Wann, A. V. Zakharov, A. M. Reilly, P. D. McCaffrey and D. W. H. Rankin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 9511–9520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Conyard, K. Addison, I. A. Heisler, A. Cnossen, W. R. Browne, B. L. Feringa and S. R. Meech, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 547–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bixon and J. Jortner, J. Chem. Phys., 1968, 48, 715–726 CrossRef CAS .
R. Englman and J. Jortner, Mol. Phys., 1970, 18, 145–164 CrossRef CAS .
W. Siebrand, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Drexhage, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1972, 8, 526 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, J.-H. Yum, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, D. Di Censo, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16701–16707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Crespo-Hernández, B. Cohen, P. M. Hare and B. Kohler, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 1977–2020 CrossRef PubMed .
V. I. Prokhorenko, A. Picchiotti, M. Pola, A. G. Dijkstra and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4445–4450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Koyama, K. Kubo, M. Komori, H. Yasuda and Y. Mukai, Photochem. Photobiol., 1991, 54, 433–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Henry and H. G. Kjaergaard, Can. J. Chem., 2002, 80, 1635–1642 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jensen, Mol. Phys., 2000, 98, 1253–1285 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Henry, Acc. Chem. Res., 1977, 10, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Ryabinkin and A. F. Izmaylov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 220406 CrossRef PubMed .
I. G. Ryabinkin, L. Joubert-Doriol and A. F. Izmaylov, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 214116 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Movie 1 From R. J. D. Miller, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 583–604. Copyright © 2014, Annual Reviews. Movie 2 From M. Gao, C. Lu, H. Jean-Ruel, L. C. Liu, A. Marx, K. Onda, S. Koshihara, Y. Nakano, X. Shao, T. Hiramatsu, G. Saito, H. Yamochi, R. R. Cooney, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2013, 496, 343–346. Copyright © 2013, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. Movie 3 From T. Ishikawa, S. A. Hayes, S. Keskin, G. Corthey, M. Hada, K. Pichugin, A. Marx, J. Hirscht, K. Shionuma, K. Onda, Y. Okimoto, S. Koshihara, T. Yamamoto, H. Cui, M. Nomura, Y. Oshima, M. Abdel-Jawad, R. Kato and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2015, 350, 1501–1505. Used with permission from AAAS. See DOI: 10.1039/c6fd00241bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Dissecting a Chemist's brain. This figure shows the classic thought experiment all chemists are trained to execute in imagining the critical moment in space time when a chemical event occurs. Here, the particular case chosen is oxygen dissociation or release from myoglobin (my favourite part of the universe where I spend a lot of time thinking about these motions). The star-like objects are used to represent heavy atoms with the giant red star as the central Fe atom of the heme binding site. The bond breaking event is modeled as a super nova-like event with the dumbbell shaped diatomic O2 whisking out of the picture. The motions in this figure are derived using conventional transition state concepts. From the difference in static structure of the reactant and product states, it appears the motion is all along the normal to the heme-porphyrin ring in which highly sequential motions are envisaged transmitted along the proximal histidine in response to this force. The actual process involves coupling to collective modes of the protein and porphyrin ring as well as heme doming coordinates. The specific protein motions are still an open question. (Reproduced with permission from https://www.vecteezy.com © pauldizonr; inset modified from ref. 4; R. D. Miller, Can. J. Chem., 2002, 80, 1–24. © 2008 Canadian Science Publishing or its licensors. Reproduced with permission.	 

 	Fig. 2  Evolution in atom resolved structural dynamics. (a) shows the very grainy images from the first atomic movie, which appear much like the first Duguerre type images in the early days of photography.49 From B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2003, 302, 1382–1385. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. One can still see by eye that the onset of melting occurs within 1 ps between t = 2.5 and 3.5 ps. The time resolution and ability to clearly distinguish nonthermal from thermal structural changes is shown in (b).72 The corresponding real space transform is shown to the right and second row panels, giving the (c) colour coded unit cell and corresponding (d) time dependent motions of the relative atomic positions. Reprinted from B. J. Siwick, J. R. Dwyer, R. E. Jordan and R. J. D. Miller, Chem. Phys., 2004, 299, 285–305. Copyright (2003), with permission from Elsevier. The 3rd row shows dramatically improved diffraction quality in the study of the dynamics of collective phenomena associated with charge density waves (TaS2, left panel).68 (e) Source: WebElements [http://www.webelements.com/]. Adapted from M. Eichberger, H. Schäfer, M. Krumova, M. Beyer, J. Demsar, H. Berger, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2010, 468, 799–802. Copyright © 2010, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. The final row shows the extremely high spatial imaging quality for even poorly diffracting organic systems with diffraction well beyond 0.1 Å (reciprocal space).73 The SNR of just 2 diffraction orders are shown in the bottom right panel, comparable to a high quality all optical pump probe signal, to give an impression of the outstanding SNR now possible in the image contrast. There are hundreds of such diffraction orders of this quality to help constrain the inversion to real space atom resolved movies of chemistry. (g) Adapted from M. Gao, C. Lu, H. Jean-Ruel, L. C. Liu, A. Marx, K. Onda, S. Koshihara, Y. Nakano, X. Shao, T. Hiramatsu, G. Saito, H. Yamochi, R. R. Cooney, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2013, 496, 343–346. Copyright © 2013, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. (h) Adapted from H. Jean-Ruel, PhD Thesis, University of Toronto, 2014.	 

 	Fig. 3  Modal analysis of the key reaction modes involved in electrocyclization with conserved stereochemistry for diarylethene. The main mode is shown in the upper left panel, which corresponds to motion 3 in the second row. These theoretically generated classes of motions were used in structure refinement to provide a converged fit to the data with hundreds of diffraction orders for constraints. These are the key reaction modes and the time ordering leading to ring closing. There are no long lived intermediates that would allow torsional sampling and loss of stereochemistry, but rather a continual progression from a very fast inertial motion to bring the labile carbon atoms involved in bond formation to be within wavefunction overlap and torsions to click the bond formation into place to close the ring. (a) Adapted with permission from H. Jean-Ruel, R. R. Cooney, M. Gao, C. Lu, M. A. Kochman, C. A. Morrison and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 13158–13168. Copyright (2011) American Chemical Society. (b), (c) Adapted with permission from H. Jean-Ruel, M. Gao, M. A. Kochman, C. Lu, L. C. Liu, R. R. Cooney, C. A. Morrison and R. J. D. Miller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 15894–15902. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular movie of Pt(dmit)2. Frame by frame movie of the atomic motions involved in metal-to-metal electron transfer. The atomic positions are indicated as white circles, the largest brightest circles as the Pt atoms, and the other atoms are the sulphur atoms in the rings. The dotted yellow line is given as a reference to enable observation of the motions. The change in Pt motions can be discerned by eye and the tilting of the rings can be seen by the change in the projections of the sulphur atoms along this viewing axis.	 

 	Fig. 5  Quantifying the atomic motions: analysis of the Pt–Pt separation with photoinduced electron transfer. There are two different Pt–Pt dimers in the crystal depending on the spatially ordered charge state. The motion is schematically depicted for the ball-and-stick structure to the right showing the Pt atoms (large grey spheres), sulphurs in the ring (yellow spheres) and carbon atoms (black spheres). The upper curve is for the −2 dimer and the lower curve is the neutral dimer. The spatial resolution is sufficient to resolve minute changes in energetics as the system undergoes lattice reorganization, with the Pt distances being one of the dominant terms. There are 5 other key modes involved (see SOM ref. 57; Adapted from T. Ishikawa, S. A. Hayes, S. Keskin, G. Corthey, M. Hada, K. Pichugin, A. Marx, J. Hirscht, K. Shionuma, K. Onda, Y. Okimoto, S. Koshihara, T. Yamamoto, H. Cui, M. Nomura, Y. Oshima, M. Abdel-Jawad, R. Kato and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2015, 350, 1501–1505. Reprinted with permission from AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 6  Anharmonic mode coupling and reduced dimensions. The red ball shown is executing motion (time trace in inset) within harmonic limits (dark grey potential). There are 3N-6 orthogonal eigenfunctions that describe all possible equilibrium fluctuations using a normal mode basis. The eigenfunctions are stationary states by definition and there is no prospect of chemistry. Anharmonicity is the spice of life in that it is this aspect of statistical sampling anharmonic regions that leads to chemistry. The blue ball shows anharmonic motion (inset: time traces of motion and Fourier transform to frequencies). It is the superposition of these motions that couple to the electronic states to create the Barrier region, which acts like a doorway to the product state. The interference between high and low frequency modes leads to localized motions, and thereby reduced dimensions to the problem. The lowest frequency modes act to both propagate the system and via the high DOS in this spectral region to dissipatively trap the motion on the product half space. It is the coupling of these motions to the electronic states that determines the potential energy surface to create these passageways by their very motion – which will be similar for locally similar many body potentials.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Movie 1 From R. J. D. Miller, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 583–604. Copyright © 2014, Annual Reviews. Movie 2 From M. Gao, C. Lu, H. Jean-Ruel, L. C. Liu, A. Marx, K. Onda, S. Koshihara, Y. Nakano, X. Shao, T. Hiramatsu, G. Saito, H. Yamochi, R. R. Cooney, G. Moriena, G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, Nature, 2013, 496, 343–346. Copyright © 2013, Rights Managed by Nature Publishing Group. Movie 3 From T. Ishikawa, S. A. Hayes, S. Keskin, G. Corthey, M. Hada, K. Pichugin, A. Marx, J. Hirscht, K. Shionuma, K. Onda, Y. Okimoto, S. Koshihara, T. Yamamoto, H. Cui, M. Nomura, Y. Oshima, M. Abdel-Jawad, R. Kato and R. J. D. Miller, Science, 2015, 350, 1501–1505. Used with permission from AAAS. See DOI: 10.1039/c6fd00241b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
