Electrochemical construction of functional polymers and their application advances in lithium batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC05311F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05311F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 17182-17200Electrochemical construction of functional polymers and their application advances in lithium batteries

        
          
            Chen-Xing 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi-Lin 
            Mei
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xian-He 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Er-Tai 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chang-Jiang 
            Yao
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology, School of Mechatronical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: cjyao@bit.edu.cn
bBeijing Institute of Technology Chongqing Innovation Center, Chongqing, 401120, China
Received 
      14th September 2021
    , Accepted 8th November 2021First published on 11th November 2021AbstractElectrochemical methods are commonly used in the preparation of functional polymers on flexible conducting substrates to design and fabricate advanced electronic devices. The numerous merits of electrodeposited polymers including in situ growth of a free-standing bulk/framework, uniform deposition, well-designed porous structure, and abundant active sites have triggered the fast development of lithium batteries in recent years. Thus, the main focus of this review is the synthetic advantages and application progresses of electrochemically constructed polymer materials for lithium batteries. Firstly, the fundamentals of electropolymerization are introduced briefly. Secondly, the application progress of electropolymerized functional polymers in Li-ion and Li–S batteries is summarized according to their different functions, including active cathodes and hybrid anodes, coating layers, conductive hosts, separator modifier/functional interlayer and polymer electrolyte. Finally, some practical strategies and potential research directions are proposed. We expect that this review will provide novel design ideas to develop highly efficient polymer-containing lithium batteries.
Chen-Xing Zhang
Chen-Xing Zhang received her BS Degree from Nanjing Normal University in 2018, and MS Degree from Beijing Normal University. She is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Chang-Jiang Yao. Her research interests include the design and synthesis of novel organic polymeric materials for photocurrent conversion devices, oxygen reduction and lithium ions batteries.
Shi-Lin Mei
Shilin Mei received his PhD in 2017 with Prof. Matthias Ballauff at Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany. He worked on his postdoctoral research on energy storage materials in the Department for Electrochemical Energy Storage, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH from 2017. Since 2020 he has been an Associate Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests focus on functional hybrid nanomaterials for energy storage.
Chang-Jiang Yao
Chang-Jiang Yao obtained his PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), in 2013. Then he worked as an Assistant Professor in the same institute for two years. After research experience in Regensburg University (Germany), Wuerzburg University (Germany) and Nanyang Technology University (Singapore), he joined Beijing Institute of Technology as a Professor in 2019. His current research interest focuses on organic/polymer functional materials for energy and photo/electronic application.
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of global economy and society, the global demand for energy has sharply increased. At present non-renewable fossil fuel is the main source of energy, such as oil, coal and natural gas. However, the overconsumption of fossil fuels has resulted in a number of environmental issues, for instance serious environmental pollution, soil erosion, and global warming. Thus, the exploitation and utilization of clean and efficient renewable energy sources are urgently needed to replace traditional fossil fuels, such as solar power, wind power, hydraulic power, chemical energy and other resources.1 Among the various energy storage devices, electrochemical energy storage (EES) can be applied for the efficient utilization and storage of sustainable energy. Secondary batteries (including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), and other aqueous monovalent-ion batteries2) and supercapacitors (SCs) are the most promising EES devices nowadays. Supercapacitors (also known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors) hold an important and unique position, bridging the gap between conventional capacitors and batteries in terms of power density and energy density.3–8 However, lithium-ion batteries have attracted tremendous attention in portable electronic devices in a wide range of applications, ranging from small portable electronic devices to hybrid electric vehicles or electric vehicles, due to their high energy density, high working voltage and long cycle life.9 The energy density of state-of-the-art LIBs is about 150–300 W h kg−1, with limited power density (less than 2 kW kg−1) and poor cycle life (∼1000 cycles), which is far from satisfactory.10,11 Common inorganic-based cathode materials usually exhibit high specific areas and high activity, but their irreversible reactions with the electrolyte on the surface of the electrode are favoured, commonly leading to poor coulombic efficiencies.12 Moreover, the problems caused by traditional inorganic electrode materials, such as poor long-term cyclability, low safety and poor rate capability, still hinder the future application of Li-ion batteries.13 On the contrary, organic materials can overcome the limitations of inorganic materials due to their flexibility, light weight, structural tunability and chemical diversity. Organic materials are divided roughly into two classes with pure organic materials and metal organic materials. As their name suggests, metal–organic polymers describe materials with metal node centers bridged with ligands, including CPs,14,15 MOFs16 and Prussian blue.17–19 Thus far, the mainstream of pure organic materials can be classified into the following categories: conducting polymers, organic polymers, organosulfurs, organic salts, carbonyl compouds,20 non-conjugated or conjugated polymers, and nitroxide radicals. Organic carbonyl materials are redox-active compounds with carbonyl groups, which allow intercalation/deintercalation of lithium ions during the charge–discharge cycles.119 Since Diaz et al.21 obtained a homogeneous film for the first time via the electrochemical polymerization (EP) of pyrrole monomer, electrically conductive polymers (ECPs) have attracted attention of researchers, which are regarded as a type of promising material to solve the aforementioned problems on account of their high electron mobility inside the doped polymer chains, good thermal and chemical stability and fast electrochemical switching.13 Besides, ECPs also show unique advantages in other fields, such as photoelectric conversion device,22–25 biomedicine,26 and disease detection. ECPs such as polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), and polythiophene (PTh) have been explored for use in lithium batteries as early as the 1980s.27 The recent applications of ECPs used in Li-ion batteries and Li–S batteries are summarized in Fig. 1. The main methods for the preparation of ECP-based battery materials are spin coating,28,29 sol–gel coating,30 self-assembly,31–33 and electropolymerization.33–36 Compared with other synthetic methods, electropolymerization has several merits as follows:
 Fig. 1  Applications of electrochemical strategies used in Li-ion/Li–S batteries and the merits of electropolymerization. 
(1) Firstly, electropolymerization has the intrinsic features of being a one-step synthetic procedure, requiring simple and low-cost facilities and easily controlled conditions. Simultaneously, electropolymerization is less limited by the poor solubility of monomers and complexity of the reactants to form conductive polymers compared with common chemical methods, which hinder the wide practical application of ECPs in EES.
(2) Secondly, the thickness, quality and doping degree of conductive polymer materials can be well regulated by changing the parameters of electropolymerization (e.g., potential, current and electric quantity). Also, the composition of the electrolyte can also influence the structure of the conductive polymer films.
(3) Thirdly, most of the polymerization processes do not need external dopants, and the prepared polymer materials have high purity, ultrafast electron transfer and rapid reaction rate.
(4) Lastly, conductive polymer materials generally do not require additional post-processing, which is beneficial for the subsequent characterizations such as cyclic voltammetry and linear sweep voltammetry.
Electrochemical polymerization is usually carried out in the cell of a three-electrode system, including a working electrode, a reference electrode, an auxiliary electrode, and electrolyte containing monomer molecules and the supporting electrolyte37 (see Fig. 2). The working electrode, also known as the research electrode, refers to the electrode that generates the corresponding voltage–current (V–I) signal according to the electrochemical reaction. The general requirements of the working electrode are that it does not react with the electrolyte and is barely affected by the reaction occurring on the surface of the electrode. Furthermore, the surface of the working electrode should be smooth and reproducible to a similar degree of smoothness before testing. The working electrode can be either liquid (e.g., mercury and amalgam) or solid (e.g., glassy carbon, platinum, gold, silver and conductive glass). An auxiliary electrode, named the counter electrode, is essential to form a current loop with the working electrode. The main function of the auxiliary electrode is to maintain the pathway of the current circuit and ensure the reaction occurs smoothly. Auxiliary electrodes are generally required to have a large surface area and a small internal resistance. A reference electrode is an electrode that provides a reference comparison for applying the electrode potential. In general, the reference electrode is required to be reversible, difficult to polarize, possess excellent potential stability and conform to the Nernst equation. The common reference electrodes include Ag/AgCl electrode and saturated calomel electrode (SCE).
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the electropolymerization of an artificial or sacrificial protection layer over the working electrode in a standard three-electrode assembly.37 Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The electrochemical polymerization process is affected by many factors. The monomer concentration, polymerization potential, experimental temperature, electromagnetic field and humidity can affect the reactions. Hence, research on these influencing factors is helpful to better control the electrochemical polymerization process and realize the goal of controllable preparation of functional materials. Supposing that the growth rate of the (EP) films is linear, the relative growth rate of the films in each cycle (vg) can be calculated according to Formula (1), as follows:38 (1)where k, ipolpa, and n represent the proportional constant, the peak current of polymer anodization, and the number of cycles (n ≥ 2), respectively. In addition, vg is also affected by the scanning speed, monomer concentration and other parameters.
Besides the parameters of electropolymerization, many other factors may influence the properties of functional polymers. Recent reports indicate that the combination of intrinsically conductive polymers with some electroactive groups can effectively improve the morphology of polymers and enhance the electrochemical properties of the electrodes.33,39,40 In recent studies, the introduction of ferrocene and nitroxide free radical (TEMPO) groups on PPy, PANI, and polytriphenylamine (PTPA) was demonstrated as an effective way to obtain advanced organic cathode materials, which was attributed to the improved microscopic morphology and convenient charge transfer among the composite electrode materials.41–43 Furthermore, creating opening or porous structures can also be helpful to enhance the contact between the active sites and electrolyte, leading to improved electrochemical performances.44–47
In this review, we mainly introduce the fundamentals of electropolymerization, the synthetic advances of electropolymerizable polymers, and their various applications in Li-ion batteries and Li–S batteries, including active cathodes and hybrid anodes, coating layers, conductive hosts, separator modifier/functional interlayer and polymer electrolyte. The primary focus of this review is to provide novel routes for the design and fabrication of suitable organic polymer materials in EES.
2. Fundamentals of polymer formation on conducting surfaces
2.1 Mechanism: radical–substrate process (RSD) and radical–radical process (RRD); anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction
The widely accepted mechanisms to explain the electropolymerization procedure are the radical–substrate process (RSD) and radical–radical process (RRD). Diaz et al.48 first put forward the mechanism of the radical–radical process (RRD) to clarify the formation of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) in 1999. The electropolymerization of aromatic compounds such as aniline, pyrrole, and thiophene usually follows the RRD mechanism (electrochemical oxidation, chemical coupling, proton elimination and further electrochemical oxidation steps) on account of the formation of a relatively stable cation or anion structure (see Fig. 3). In a cascade of alternate electrochemical and chemical steps, the RRD mechanism initially involves the formation of oligomers, with subsequent nucleation and growth, leading to a polymer material.49 Here, polythiophene is employed as an example to illuminate the mechanism of RRD. During the process of electropolymerization, the electrochemical anodic oxidation of the thiophene monomer leads to the formation of radial cations, which are subsequently self-coupled via the elimination of protons at the α-position of the thiophene ring, forming neutral dimers. The newly formed electrochemically active oligomer is soluble in the electrolyte solution, allowing further electropolymerization and leading to a series of chain growth reactions. When the oligomer chain reaches a certain length, the product is deposited on the electrode surface due to its decrease in solubility.
 Fig. 3  Mechanism for the electrochemical polymerization of thiophene, where E′ and E′′ are the electrochemical steps and C′ and C′′ the chemical steps. SCE and Epa represent the saturated calomel electrode and the anodic peak potential, respectively.49 Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Some researchers50 have questioned the RRD mechanism and proposed another electropolymerization mechanism of the radical–substrate process (RSD), supposing that coulomb repulsion exists between the free radical cations, impeding the occurrence of a direct dimerization reaction. Shengshui Hu et al.51 deemed that free radical cations electrophilically attack neutral monomers or oligomers. However, a large amount of theoretical calculations and experiments have proven the RRD mechanism of a majority of conductive polymers.
From another perspective, the mechanism of electropolymerization can be divided into either anodic oxidation or cathodic reduction.37 The distinction of anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction is the oxidation peak or reduction peak, where the redox reaction occurs, respectively. The polymerization occurring in the oxidation process is named anodic oxidation. Conversely, that occurring in the reduction process is called cathodic reduction. The majority of conductive polymers electrochemically deposit on the substrate via anodic oxidation. The research on cathodic reduction usually focuses on the electropolymerization of vinyl-substituted compounds, which are believed to be anionically initiated, followed by radical–radical chain propagation.47,52 When applied as electroactive materials in EES, the structures, redox mechanisms, and conductivity are crucial factors determining their electrochemical performances. Some typical electroactive organics are classified as shown in Table 1. Polythiophene (PTh), polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PAn) and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) belong to p-type organics, conjugated carbonyl and organosulfide, (e.g., poly(5,8-dihydro-1H,4H-2,3,6,7-tetrathiaanthracene, PDTTA, poly(2,5-dimercapto) and PDMcT) are perceived as n-type organics, and polyacetylene (PAc) and polyparaphenylene (PPP) have been used as bipolar organics. In addition, the theoretical capacity of these conductive polymers also depends on their doping level.1
Table 1 Electrochemical performance parameters of typical electropolymeized polymers in electrochemical energy storage53,54




Polymer
Structure
Redox mechanism
Conductivity (S cm−1)
Classification
Ref.




PAc






200–1000
n/p

55 and 56



PPP






500
n/p

57



PTh






10–100
p

49



PPy






40–200
p

58



PEDOT






∼1000
p

59



PAn






1–100
p

60



PDMcT






∼10
n

61



PDTTA






∼10
n

62





2.2 Method: cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry, and chronopotentiometry
Electrochemical polymerization methods are mainly divided into three catalogues, chronoamperometry, chronopotentiometry and cyclic voltammetry (also known as potentiostatic method in some reports). The electrode is applied with a constant current or voltage in chronoamperometry and chronopotentiometry, while a periodic cycle of triangular wave potential in cyclic voltammetry. The thickness of the prepared membranes by chronoamperometry is determined by the time for appling the current.63,64 Alternatively, in the process of cyclic voltammetry electrochemical polymerization, the thickness of the electropolymerized films increases with the number of scanning potential cycles.1 Thin membranes prepared by cyclic voltammetry usually possess a flat surface and a small amount of doping degrees. Also, the thickness of the obtained electropolymerized film materials can be easily controlled by both the number of potential cycles and the potential scan rate.65 On the contrary, these film materials prepared by chronoamperometry and chronopotentiometry usually show a completely doped state and a rougher surface. The nucleation sites generated by electrochemical technology during the polymerization process will eventually lead to a difference in film morphology.
3. Applications of electropolymerized functional polymers in lithium batteries
3.1 Li-ion batteries

3.1.1 Organic cathode materials. 
Organic cathode materials are viewed as one of the competitive candidates for next-generation LIBs owing to their diverse structures, facile synthesis and environment friendliness. Moreover, the structures of organic materials can be programmed with different redox-active and inactive groups to tune their operation voltage and achieve high capacity.43 However, they often suffer from insufficient cycling stability caused by the dissolution problem. In addition, the poor conductivity of small organic molecules also leads to a poor rate performance. Among the organic cathode materials, conjugated polymers with good conductivity such as polythiophene, polypyrrole, polycarbazole, polyimide and polyaniline have been widely explored for LIBs as early as the 1980s. Electropolymerization has been proven to be a promising strategy to construct polymer cathodes with good conductivity and potential to prevent dissolution. The morphology, thickness and doping degree can also be well controlled by changing the parameters of electrochemical polymerization, which makes it easy to optimize the battery performance.
Early in 2005, Chang et al.66 prepared polythiophene (PTh), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and PTh-EDOT copolymers as cathode materials for LIBs. PTh-EDOT exhibited no change on the capacity from the 2nd to 10th cycles with a positive limit potential of 1000 mV, while PTh already showed signs of a rapid drop in capacity to 80%. Also, almost 100% recovery of the capacity was observed for the PTh-EDOT (1/1) copolymer, which is different from the 40% loss in PTh after 25 cycles. This is because the addition of EDOT can greatly change the polymerization feasibility and the electrochemical properties of the resulting polymers.
Pure organic materials are often far from satisfactory due to their limited interaction with the electrolyte, low specific capacity, low coulombic efficiency, poor cycling stability and self-discharge.1 An efficient strategy to handle these problems is the design of hybrid electrode materials, combining the merits of both organic and inorganic materials.
In 2006, Chang et al.13,67 prepared PEDOT/LiCoO2 composites via electrochemical polymerization. Compared with the LiCoO2 cathode, excellent stability was achieved for the PEDOT/LiCoO2 composites cathode, where the capacity fading was less than 2% after 60 cycles, which was attributed to the incorporation of the conductive PEDOT. Similarly, taking advantage of the good conductivity of PEDOT, Song et al.68,69 prepared nanobeam-shaped V2O5 and PEDOT composite films and used them as cathodes in LIBs via the galvanostatic method. The best specific capacity of the nanobeam-V2O5/PEDOT cathodes was 269 mA h g−1 and the degradation rate was only 8% after 100 consecutive cycles at 1C rate.
In 2012, Francisco Nacimiento et al.55,70 electrodeposited polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and cobalt-tin films on a titanium substrate as a cathode for LIBs. Reversible capacities of 4 mA h cm−2 and a coulombic efficiency of 80% in the first cycle were achieved for PAN-containing electrodes owing to the electropolymerized PAN by providing more stable interfaces and buffering the volume changes.
Through an in situ electrochemical polymerization method, Su et al.27 prepared composite electrodes based on a nitroxide free radical-containing pyrrole copolymer (PPy-co-PPy-C-TEMPO) on carbon fiber, which was prepared via the same method. The chemical structure of PPy-co-PPy-C-TEMPO is shown in Fig. 4. The specific capacity of PPy-co-PPy-C-TEMPO (4:1) was 70.9 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 between 2.5 and 4.2 V, which was higher than that of the pure PPy cathode of 41.0 mA h g−1 under the same conditions. In the same year, this group71 prepared polypyrrole/carbon fiber (PPy–CF) and polypyrrole/graphene oxide (PPy–GO) composite cathodes via cyclic voltammetry. The PPy–CF and PPy–GO composite cathodes exhibited a further improved specific capacity of 144.3 and 176.1 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 between 2.5 and 4.2 V, respectively. The better performances were attributed to the improved electrical conductivity and rough morphology of the composite cathode, which optimized the utilization of the active materials.
 Fig. 4  Chemical structure of Py-C-TEMPO, HQ-PEDOT, (TsONa)-PPy and Ni(CH3Salen).27,44,72,73 
In 2019, Arjomandi et al.42 prepared polyindole (PIn) nanocomposites containing γ-Al2O3 or γ-Fe2O3 (denoted as (Au/PIn/ClO4−@c-Al2O3 and Au/PIn/ClO4-@c-Fe2O3, respectively) via in situ electropolymerization on a gold electrode and used them as cathode materials for LIBs. Attributed to the embedded γ-Fe2O3 or γ-Al2O3 in the PIn matrix and the intermolecular interaction between nanoparticles and Pin, both nanocomposite cathodes exhibited a high discharge capacity (116–124 mA h g−1 at a discharge current density of 0.5 A m−2), good cycling stability (after 30–40 cycles with drops of around 3–6% after 20000 cycles, see Fig. 5) and enhanced electronic conductivity.
 Fig. 5  Cyclic property of Li/LiClO4 + ACN/Au-PIn, Li/LiClO4 + ACN/Au-PIn-γ-Al2O3, and Li/LiClO4 + ACN/Pin-γ-Fe2O3 cells at a charge and discharge current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 at 25 °C.42 Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
Martin Sjödin et al.72 reported the synthesis of a conducting redox polymer based on PEDOT with hydroquinone (HQ) pendant groups via electropolymerization. The chemical structure of HQ-PEDOT is shown in Fig. 4. The organic-based aqueous LIB with HQ-PEDOT as the cathode, Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) as the anode, and ca. 15 M DMC as the electrolyte yielded an output voltage of 1.35 V and high-rate capabilities of up to 500C. The quinone redox reaction occurs within the potential region where the polymer is conducting, accounting for the fast redox conversion, which involves lithium cycling during the redox conversion of the pendant group. This is the first report of a hybrid battery where water-in-salt electrolytes (WiSEs) were used together with an organic material.
Recently, Zhao et al.43 reported an organic compound, 4,4′-triazole-9-yl-triphenylamine (TCTA), in which carbazole groups served as the redox-active units and a polymerization agent under an electric field. As cathodes for LIBs fabricated via the in situ electropolymerization method, excellent electrochemical performance was demonstrated with a high reversible capacity of 92 mA h g−1, high discharge voltage of 3.95 V, ultrafast rate capability of 20 A g−1, and long cycle life of 5000 cycles at 1 A g−1. The morphology and long-term cycling performance of the TCTA cathodes are shown in Fig. 6. Electropolymerization of TCTA eliminated the dissolution of the active materials to enhance their cycling stability and also improved the morphology of the TCTA cathode to a nanosheet structure, which enhanced the kinetics, and thus improved the rate performance.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of pristine and cycled TCTA cathodes in different voltage windows of 3.0–3.9 V and 3.0–4.1 V (top). Long-term cycling performance of the TCTA cathodes at 1 A g−1 (bottom).43 Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Recently, Liu et al.74 reported electrochemically polymerized anthraquinone derivatives on conductive carbon nanotubes (poly-DAAQ-NT) as organic cathode materials for LIBs. A high capacity of up to 311 mA h g−1 and superior rate capability (capacities of 232–241 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 125–134 mA h g−1 at even 10 A g−1) were realized by effectively utilizing the bipolar charge storage mechanism (see Fig. 7). The bipolar mechanism consisted of the n-type doping/dedoping mechanism associated with Li+ binding near the redox-active carbonyls in the potential window of 1.5–3.0 V versus Li and the PF6−-involved p-type doping/dedoping mechanism of the secondary amine moiety in the backbone of AAQ and DAAQ polymers in the potential window of 3.0–4.5 V versus Li+.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of the discharge profiles of the AQ-NT and polymerized poly-DAAQ-NT films. The insets show the mechanism of AQ-NT and poly-DAAQ-NT during the charge–discharge procedure.74 Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Introduced in 1997 by Padhi et al.,75 olivine-structured LiFePO4 has emerged as a promising inorganic cathode material. LiFePO4 exhibits relatively inexpensive, environmentally benign and great cycle stability because of the strong covalent P–O bond inside the chemical structure.9 The blockage of low ionic and electronic conductivities match well with the strength of the electrically conductive polymers, indicating that hybrid LiFePO4/ECPs may be competitive candidate electrode materials for LIBs.
In 2014, LiFePO4 composite cathode materials with PEDOT were prepared by D. Cíntora-Juarez et al.76 through potentiostatic electropolymerization and blending methods. The LiFePO4/PEDOT composite obtained by direct electrodeposition was endowed with a reversible capacity of 110 mA h g−1 at 2C, a notable capacity retention at C/2 (125 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles) and low charge–discharge polarization. To further enhance the conductivity of the C/LiFePO4 composite cathode, a C/LiFePO4/multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT) composite was prepared by Qin et al.39,40via the combination of a hydrothermal progress and a facile electro-polymerization process of polyaniline (PANI) at a constant potential. The morphology and battery performance of hybrid cathodes are presented in Fig. 8. An interconnected carbon shell was gained on the surface of an LiFePO4/MWCNT composite after the carbonization of PANI. The effective continuous carbon network built a bridge between LiFePO4 particles, which enhanced the electronic conductivity in the secondary particles and formed good Li+ transport and electron transfer highways. The as-prepared cathode showed a high volumetric energy density, desirable rate performance (>135 mA h cm−2 at 20C) and excellent cycling stability (>95% capacity retention after 200 charge/discharge cycles).
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram (top left), charge/discharge curves (top right), SEM picture (bottom left) and long-term stability (bottom right) of C/LiFePO4/MWCNT sample.40 Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
Besides the conventional approach to apply electrochemical polymerization in a homogeneous aqueous or organic solution system, dynamic three-phase interline electropolymerization (D3PIE) is an interesting method to obtain conductive polymer materials. D3PIE uses a biphasic aqueous/organic system, where the electrode is immerged through its interface. The electrode is subjected to an oxidative over potential and the electron, ion and monomer transfer processes operate simultaneously around the electrode to form a polymer film at the aqueous/organic interface. The greatest merit of this technology is that the resultant polymer materials can be easily removed from the reactional medium. The horizontal size of the polymer is controlled by the reaction time at a constant potential. Schougaard et al.9 fabricated hybrid free-standing poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)–LiFePO4 composite films through D3PIE, and its synthetic method is shown in Fig. 9. The conductive polymer PEDOT provided mechanical support for the incorporated LiFePO4 particles. The as-prepared cathode displayed a discharge capacity of 160 mA h g−1, close to the theoretical value of 170 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the D3PIE method for the dynamic growth of LiFePO4 at the water/dichloromethane interface.9 Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
To face the challenge of all-climate application, ideal organic rechargeable batteries should hold the capability of efficiently operating at both high temperatures (>50 °C) and low temperatures (<−20 °C). However, the dramatic loss in the energy and power of LIBs at low temperatures hinders their applications in cold regions, mountain areas and in space. For instance, commercial LIBs retain only 10% of their room temperature capacity.77 This phenomenon is attributed to the kinetics of the electrode, especially the charge transfer kinetics, where the slow and common electrolyte may reach freezing point at low temperature. In addition, the polarization of the commercial graphite anode increases with a decrease in temperature. Recently, to achieve a reasonable low-temperature performance in LIBs, Elena Alekseeva et al.44 prepared a composite cathode material based on NiSalen-type polymer and single-wall carbon nanotubes (poly-Ni(CH3Salen)/SWCNT) through an electropolymerization method. The chemical structure of Ni(CH3Salen) is shown in Fig. 4. The cathode electrode could achieve a high capacity retention of 80% at temperatures as low as −40 °C owing to its porous structure without a rigid lattice (see Fig. 10). The structure can reversibly adopt deformation upon intercalation and deintercalation of the charge compensating ions, even at low temperatures.
 Fig. 10  (a) Charge–discharge curves of poly-Ni(CH3Salen) CC in 0.1 M LiClO4/AN at the current density of 0.16 A g−1 at various temperatures (20 °C, 0 °C, −20 °C, −40 °C). (b) Gravimetric capacitance as a function of temperature at charge rate of 0.16 A g−1).44 Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
Recently, to develop highly stable organic cathodes for electrochemical energy storage at high temperatures, functionalized porphyrin complex-based organic cathodes of 5,15-bis(ethynyl)-10,20-diphenylporphinato (DEPP) and CuDEPP were prepared by Feng et al.78via the in situ electropolymerization of the electrodes at elevated temperatures during electrochemical cycling. The as-prepared CuDEPP and DEPP cathodes both showed improved electrochemical performance in LIBs at a high operating temperature and delivered excellent long-term cycling stability (see Fig. 11). The excellent high-temperature performance was believed to result from the temperature-induced in situ electropolymerization of the ethynyl groups. Furthermore, the copper ion significantly stabilized the porphyrin molecule and participated in the redox reaction during the cycles, resulting in a higher reversible capacity of CuDEPP (249 mA h g−1) compared to DEPP (105 mA h g−1) after 1000 cycles at 50 °C, and a reversible capacity of 272 mA h g−1 with an average voltage of 2.8 V (vs. Li+/Li) after 2000 cycles at 50 °C.
 Fig. 11  (a) Electrochemical polymerization process of functionalized porphyrin complex: M = Cu, R1 = phenyl (CuDEPP) and M = 2H, R1 = phenyl (DEPP). (b) Charging process of M-DEPP cathodes with an LiPF6-based electrolyte. (c) Solubility of the as-prepared and the charged DEPP in THF. (d) Cycling performance of CuDEPP at different temperatures (25 °C, 40 °C, and 50 °C).78 Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 Hybrid anode materials. 
Graphite is a widely used commercial anode active material in LIBs. However, the easy formation of hazardous Li dendrites during the charge/discharge cycles limits its great application prospect in large-scale industrialization. Many alternative inorganic anode materials, for instance, Si-based materials, metal-based (Sn, Al, Ge, etc.), and transition metal oxides (MnO, CuO, ZnO, etc.) have been investigated.73 However, low-cost and environment-friendly anode materials are required to meet the urgent demand for clean and secure energy. Accordingly, conjugated polymers are inexpensive, flexible and designable. Meanwhile, they can be positive electrodes and negative electrodes in LIBs. The polymer layer can provide an effective path for both electronic and ionic transport, which can promote the rate capability.
Early in 2010, Maria Grzeszczuk et al.79 prepared two different nanocomposites of TiO2 with PPy or PEDOT via electrochemical polymerization as anode materials for LIBs. The electrode of TiO2 with PEDOT exhibited a higher degree of Li+ intercalation into TiO2 than TiO2 with PPy even for dense polymer films. This was due to the high porosity and/or a high solvent content of the PEDOT phase and the fast redox switching of this polymer. Two years later, Shichao Zhang et al.80 reported the synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticle-decorated PPy nanowires via electropolymerization. The morphology of the as-prepared PPy nanowires is shown in Fig. 12. When applied as anode materials for LIBs, SnO2–PPy delivered an improved Li+ storage performance with the first reversible capacity of 690 mA h g−1. This was derived from the reticular SnO2–PPy nanowires, which can increase the electrode/electrolyte interface and accommodate the volume variation of SnO2.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of the as-prepared PPy nanowires. (b) Low and high (c) magnification TEM images of the SnO2–PPy hybrid, respectively. The inset of (c) is the SAED image of the electrodeposited SnO2. (d) HRTEM image revealing nanocrystal SnO2 particles attached to the PPy nanowires.80 Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
In 2012, Du et al.81 fabricated a novel three-dimensional (3D) nanoarchitecture composed of PPy–Si core–shell nanofibers synthesized via constant voltage electropolymerization, followed by a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) procedure to deposit them on an Si substrate. The electropolymerized PPy nanofibers functioned as flexible backbones to support Si and facilitate charge delivery, while the nanoscale Si shells served as the Li+ storage host. The composite cathode showed a high reversible capacity above 2800 mA h g−1 with good cycling stability (∼91% capacity retained after 100 cycles). The reversible capacities were 3403, 3063, 2589, 2104, 1715, 1413 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, 0.5C, 1C, 2C, 3C and 4C rates, respectively.
Later in 2013, Jose L. Tirado et al.12 reported self-organized TiO2 nanotubes with a PAN coating by electropolymerization. The PAN coating layer could provide an effective path for both electronic and ionic transport, which eventually promoted the kinetics inside the LIBs. Consequently, the anode showed a reversible areal capacity of 0.5 mA h cm−2 and good cycling stability within a wide potential window (0.0–3.0 V).
At the same time, Xia et al.64 presented a facile strategy for the fabrication of Co3O4/PANI core/shell nanowire arrays with two different morphologies (coaxial and branched) through the galvanostatic method. The morphologies were tuned simply by controlling the deposition time, as shown in Fig. 13. The fabricated coaxial Co3O4/polyaniline core/shell nanowire arrays exhibited fairly good cycling stability, where the peak currents maintained ∼95% of the highest values after 5000 cycles without evident degradation.
 Fig. 13  Schematic of the fabrication of metal oxide/CP core/shell nanoarrays, exemplified by Co3O4 and PANI.64 Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. 
Hyuk-Sang Kwon et al.82 reported another three-dimensional porous network composed of SnO2–PPy hybrid nanowires, which was used as an LIB anode. Over 200 cycles, the hybrid nanowires showed superior cyclic performance and a charge capacity higher than 0.307 mA h cm−2. The authors speculated that the polypyrrole matrix effectively prevented the agglomeration of the SnO2 nanoparticles and elastically buffered the volumetric change in the nanoparticles during cycling. In 2017, the use of a binder-free composite of p-toluene sulfonate (TsONa)–PPy–Fe foil as an LIB anode was reported by Liao et al.73 The chemical structure of (TsONa)-PPy is presented in Fig. 4. Irregular microspherical particles of TsONa-doped PPy formed and combined tightly with the surface of Fe foil without a binder. Furthermore, the high lithium storage activity and high conductivity of the TsONa-doped PPy resulted in a satisfactory electrochemical performance (capacity retention of 105–115 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles).
In 2018, a bifunctional urchin-like WO3@PANI composite was fabricated successfully by Zhang et al.33via solvothermal and electropolymerization. Working as an anode in LIBs, the WO3@PANI composite exhibited an outstanding cycling stability (capacity retention of 516 mA h g−1 after 1200 cycles with a low average fading capacity of ca. 0.103 mA h g−1 and a fading cyclic rate of ca. 0.02% per cycle), which was attributed to the urchinlike morphology and large heterogeneous interface area of the as-prepared composite anode.
Recently, through a simple galvanostatic electrochemical polymerization method, Zhang et al.63 prepared a new composite anode of LIBs using a Cu foil current collector modified with PANI, as presented in Fig. 14. After cycling for 500 cycles at 1C, the discharge capacity of the PANI/Cu battery was 155.0 mA h g−1, higher than 137.6 mA h g−1 for the bare/Cu battery. The PANI layer played a crucial role in the enlarged contact area and enhanced the adhesion strength of the current collector to the electrode material, which was beneficial for the charge transfer process for electrochemical reactions, thereby improving the electrochemical performance of the batteries.
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the process of galvanostatic polymerization of PANI on a bare Cu foil surface.63 Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 


3.1.3 Surface modification of electrode interphases. 
In LIBs, electrolyte decomposition will continuously occur in the cell during the electrochemical charging/discharging processes, forming a new and independent interphase called a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI).34 The appearance of an SEI creates two interfaces, the electrode/SEI interface and SEI/electrolyte interface, preventing direct contact between the electrode and electrolyte. Once the decomposed adducts accumulate on the surface of the cathode, the migration of Li+ at electrolyte/cathode interfaces is hindered.83–85 Consequently, the overall performance of LIBs is closely related to the interphase between the electrode materials and electrolytes. The SEI layer may serve as a passivation layer to inhibit electrolyte decomposition and protect the electrodes from corrosion, and as a transport pathway for lithium ions. In addition, the SEI layer may accommodate electrode volume changes during cycling.85 Thus, engineering the SEI shows great promise in improving the performance of batteries.86 However, the formation of an SEI layer only occurs during electrochemical tests. Instead, artificial surface modification of electrode interphases has been devoted to stabilizing the electrode/electrolyte interface.
In 2016, Hongying Hou et al.87,88 reported the conformal electrodeposition of poly(phenylene oxide) (PPO) on 3D-oriented TiO2 or Ti3+/TiO2NT nanotube arrays (TiO2NT). The procedure for the fabrication of PPO/TiO2NT membrane/electrode is shown in Fig. 15. The PPO/Ti3+/TiO2NT membrane/electrode maintained a reversible discharge capacity of about 235 mA h g−1 at 2.4C and 165 mA h g−1 at 25C, higher than that of PE/Ti3+/TiO2NT and PE/TiO2NT (see Fig. 16). The reason to explain the electrochemical improvement was that the synergistic effects of Ti3+-doping and the loose PPO deposition on 3D-oriented TiO2NT, enhancing the electrochemical performances owing to the higher electrical conductivity, larger contact area of the membrane/electrode/electrolyte, and lower internal resistance and faster electronic/ionic transport.
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedures of PE/TiO2NT membrane/electrode and PPO/TiO2NT membrane/electrode.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Rate performances of three membrane/electrodes at 2.4C, 4.8C, 9.6C, 15C, 18C and 25C and (b) cyclic performance at 9.6C after the rate performances.88 Reprinted with permission ref. 88. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
In 2017, Malachi Noked et al.45 reported a hybrid organic/inorganic artificial solid electrolyte interphase (ASEI) deposited directly on the surface of Li metal via self-healing electrochemical polymerization and atomic layer deposition (ALD) (see Fig. 17). The Li metal protected by the hybrid protection layer gave rise to a very stable cycling performance for over 300 cycles at the current density of 1 mA cm−2 and over 110 cycles at a current density of 2 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 17  SEM images of bare Li metal and hybrid-protected Li metal (middle line) cycled in 1:1 EC:DEC for 100 cycles at the current density of 2 mA cm−2. Mechanistic schematic comparing bare lithium (top right) and hybrid elastomer/LiPON protection (bottom right) showing the Li metal surface layer evolution after cycling.45 Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
In the same year, Zhongyi Zhang et al.89 proposed a conformal nano-coating strategy via the in situ polymerization of poly(ethyla-cyanoacrylate) (PECA) on the surface of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (LNMO), as shown in Fig. 18. PECA acted as a high voltage polymer electrolyte, transition metallic ion blocking layer, and buffer layer against electrolyte erosion and particle cracks in LIBs. PECA could successfully decrease the polarization and enhance the capacity retention during the cycling of LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4. For the PECA-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4, there was little potential separation in the charging–discharging plateaus and capacity fading between the initial cycle and the 100th cycle. The capacity retention of the PECA-coated LNMO was 92.0% after 100 cycles, which was much higher compared to that of the bare LNMO electrode (74.7%).
 Fig. 18  Typical SEM images of (a) pristine and (b) PECA-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 electrodes after 100 cycles. Initial and 100th charge and discharge curves (c) and cycle performance (d) of the pristine and PECA-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li cells at 1C.89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 


3.1.4 Polymer electrolyte and electrolyte additives. 
The electrolyte is one of the essential components of LIBs acting as the ion transport pathway, which largely influences the capacity properties, working temperature range, safety issues and cyclability properties of cells.90 There are two general requirements for the electrolyte as follows: high bulk ionic conductivity and fast interfacial transport of Li ions, and mechanically stability and chemically inertness during battery cycling.91,92 Li dendrites are the main cause of internal short circuits, thermal runaway, and sometimes even catastrophic failure.93 In conventional liquid electrolyte, Li dendrites can be partially suppressed, but not completely eliminated by the introduction of additives. The replacement of conventional liquid electrolytes with a solid-state electrolyte is the most promising strategy. Polymer electrolytes are light weight, flexible and possess superior mechanical toughness and non-flammable property, and can compensate the volume changes in electrodes by elastic and plastic deformation, providing a feasible solution to the safety issues of LIBs.93 In addition, polymer electrolytes can also get the maximum contract area with electrodes, enhancing the ionic conductivity and stability.94 Various efforts have been reported in the literature to enhance the electrochemical and mechanical properties of solid-state polymer electrolytes. Hybrid polymer electrolytes prepared via physical mixing or by chemically tethering polymer chains to inorganic nanostructures with the addition of inorganic fillers can notably increase the room temperature ionic conductivity.91,95 Cross-linking polymer electrolytes via ultraviolet or thermal polymerization can balance their mechanical and electrochemical properties.96,97 Compared to other methods, the electrolyte prepared via in situ polymerization exhibits the advantages of liquids, such as low viscosity, easy handling and good interfacial adaptability.91,98
In 2011, Thierry Djenizian et al.99 reported a bottom-up approach to depose a copolymer electrolyte, poly(ethylene oxide)-functionalized methyl methacrylate (PMMA-PEO) on TiO2 nanotubes (TiO2nt) via the electropolymerization process for the first time. Compared to the as-formed TiO2nt, at constant currents of 5 μA (C/5) and 26 μA (1C), the copolymer-embedded TiO2nt revealed a higher capacity value (∼8%), which was very close to the maximum theoretical capacity (80 μA h cm−2 μm−1), as shown in Fig. 19. The capacity fading was minimal even after 50 cycles, showing that the electrodeposited copolymer electrolyte could bear the volume variations of the host electrode during cycling. This better electrochemical performance could be attributed to the better penetration of the polymer electrolyte into the nanotubes vs. classical liquid electrolyte with the formation of a larger TiO2nt/polymer interface area. Similarly, Thierry Djenizian et al.100 reported poly(poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether methacrylate) (P(MePEGMA)) as a polymer electrolyte coated on TiO2nts via electropolymerization using the cyclic voltammetry technique. The specific capacity of the polymer-coated TiO2nts against metallic Li foil was improved by 33% (from ca. 75 mA h g−1 to ca.100 mA h g−1) than bare on TiO2nts at 1C, as shown in Fig. 20. The better performance was due to the conformal coating of the polymer electrolyte, which increased the contact area between the electrode and electrolyte, eventually leading to better Li+ transport. In 2017, Maria Luisa Di Vona et al.18 reported poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS) on nanoarchitecture TiO2 electrodes (denoted as TiO2nt/PPS) as a solid electrolyte in LIBs prepared via cyclic voltammetry. The cycling behavior in half-cell batteries against Li metal was excellent, especially at high rates of up to 10C (see Fig. 21). The areal insertion capacity was up to 80 μA h cm−2 at C/5.
 Fig. 19  Areal specific capacity vs. cycle number in lithium cells for the as-formed and copolymer-embedded TiO2nt cycled at 1C and C/5.99 Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 20  TEM images of a single tube from the polymer-coated TiO2nts sample. TEM images of (a) single tube with conformal polymer coating and (b) enlarged view at the open end of the polymer-coated tube. (c) Specific capacity vs. cycle number of bare TiO2nts and polymer-coated TiO2nts at 1C between 1.4 to 3 V vs. Li/Li+.100 
 Fig. 21  Areal capacity values for various C-rates at 25 °C and Coulombic efficiency (×) for PSS made by galvanostatic deposition (I const). The TiO2nt length is ∼1.5 μm. The inset pictures are chemical structure of PPS and SEM of TiO2nt/PPS electrode.18 Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
The electropolymerization procedure in the aforementioned applications usually occurs during the preparation of electrode materials. However, electropolymerized membranes can also be formed within the cell during the charge/discharge cycles in terms of electrolyte additives. The function of these electrolyte additives is to form a uniform SEI film on the electrode for alleviating the undesirable electrolyte decomposition or providing protection against overcharge. The polymer layers are elastic, and therefore they can accommodate the volume changes of the electrodes during the electrochemical process and suffer much larger mechanical deformation than common inorganic SEI layers.101 To date, extensive efforts have been made in this direction.
As an early example, Shinichi Komaba et al.102 applied 2-vinyl-pyridine as an additive into the electrolyte in 2002 to suppress the degradation of C/(spinel Li–Mn–O) by dissolved Mn(II) based on the formation of an electropolymerized film of poly(2-vinyl-pyridine). In the next year, M. Winter et al.46,47 chose acrylic acid nitrile (AAN) as an electrolyte additive to form an SEI film via the cathodically induced polymerization of AAN. AAN showed a beneficial filming behavior on graphite even in combination with a propylene carbonate (PC)-based electrolyte, resulting in excellent anode cycling stability. Inspired by previous works, they also presented vinyl acetate (VA) as an additive.103 To further investigate the SEI film formation mechanism in the presence of isocyanate compound, the same team demonstrated the use of ethyl isocyanate (EtNCO) as an electrolyte additive.104 They also investigated several isocyanate compounds as film-forming electrolyte additives in PC and EC/EMC-based electrolytes.105
In 2009, Xiaohua Ma et al.106 reported xylene as a polymerizable electrolyte additive for overcharge protection in lithium ion batteries. A comparison of the voltage-time profiles with or without the electrolyte additive during overcharge is shown in Fig. 22. When the battery was under overcharging, xylene could be electropolymerized on the surface of the cathode electrode, forming a polymer film between the cathode and separator, which could consume the external charging current, and thus avoid an increase in the voltage. Moreover, xylene was found to have no adverse influence on the battery performance.
 Fig. 22  Voltage-time curves of Li//LiCoO2 cells during normal charge–discharge and overcharge in LiPF6/EC + DMC + EMC (1/1/1, w/w/w) without additive and with (b) 2.5 wt% xylene and (c) 5 wt% xylene.106 Reprinted with from permission ref. 106. Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons. 
In 2013, Zhen Zhou et al.107 proposed an effective method to coat Li3V2(PO4)3 with conducting polymers by adding an appropriate amount of thiophene (TPN) to conventional organic electrolytes (see Fig. 23). The formation of the PTh film not only suppressed the decomposition of the electrolyte, but also improved the electrical conductivity of Li3V2(PO4)3 significantly and decreased the ohmic polarization, given that PTh possesses a conjugated π network. After 40 cycles at 0.1C, the discharge capacity of Li3V2(PO4)3 in the electrolytes with or without thiophene was 134 and 82.1 mA h g−1, respectively.
 Fig. 23  HRTEM images of the cycled cathodes in the electrolyte with thiophene (left). Cyclic performance of Li3V2(PO4)3 cathodes in the different electrolytes at 0.1C (right).107 Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
In 2015, the conductive polymer N-methylpyrrole (MPL) was demonstrated as an electrolyte additive to improve the electrochemical performance of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode by Chen et al.108 The morphology of the LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode in MPL electrolyte after cycling is shown in Fig. 24. After 200 cycles at room temperature, the Li/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cell with 0.3% MPL exhibited a discharge capacity of 117.8 mA h g−1 with an improved capacity retention of 89.5%. When cycled at an elevated temperature (ca. 55 °C), the cell with MPL still maintained 87.4% of its initial discharge capacity after 200 cycles, compared to that of 59.1% without MPL. These improved electrochemical performances were attributed to the conductive cathode/electrolyte interphase film formed by the electrochemical polymerization of MPL in the initial charge process, which prevented direct contact between the LNMO surface and electrolyte, thus effectively alleviating the undesirable electrolyte decomposition. Similarly, 4-aminobenzoic acid (4-ABA) was also employed as an electrolyte additive to produce a protecting cathode material interface film on LLCs (Li1.2Ni0.2Mn0.6O2) through in situ polymerization by Qun Zhou et al.109 The capacity retention of LLCs with the addition of 0.25 wt% 4-ABA in the electrolyte increased from 61% to 94.4% after 100 cycles.
 Fig. 24  SEM images of fresh LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 electrode (a) and the electrodes after 200 cycles in blank electrolyte (b) and MPL-containing electrolyte (c).108 Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
A novel electrolyte additive of dopamine was explored by Hoogil Lee et al.110 in 2016, which could be electrochemically oxidized into polydopamine on the cathode surface for high-voltage and high-temperature operations in LIBs (see Fig. 25). By incorporating only 0.1 wt% of dopamine into the electrolyte, a polydopamine-containing layer, which is not only mechanically and electrochemically robust but also thermally stable, was formed on the cathode. The as-prepared LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2/artificial graphite cell exhibited an improved capacity retention from 136 to 147 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a rate of 1C and cut-off voltage of 4.5 V.
 Fig. 25  SEM images of (a) precycled cathodes with the reference electrolyte and (b) dopamine-containing electrolyte, and (c) high-voltage cycled cathodes with the reference electrolyte and (d) dopamine-containing electrolyte.110 Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
In 2018, Noriyoshi Matsumi et al.111 reported the boron-thiophene monomer, mesityldi(thiophen-2-yl)borane, as an additive in conventional electrolyte via in situ electropolymerization over carbon anodes. A drastic decrease was observed in the charge transfer resistance (10.98 Ω) after the in situ electropolymerization of boron–thiophene owing to the formation of a highly stable and boron-rich conductive interface, which was advantageous to the cyclability.
Recently, indole-3-carboxylic acid (InAc) was used as an additive in an LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) based cathode by Anothumakkool et al.34 in 2020 for releasing protons via the oxidative electropolymerization of InAc during cycling against lithium metal and silicon–graphite composite (Si–Gr) electrodes. As shown in Fig. 26, the produced H+ was used to form a cathode interphase, which could improve the Coulombic efficiency. The H+ had a more pronounced effect on the anode side when replacing lithium metal by Si–Gr due to the facile H+ reduction at the anode during charge, which modulated the SEI and the Si surface. The reduction of H+ at the anode was found to have a positive effect in mitigating the irreversible Li+ loss (10% capacity gain with 10% InAc) at the Si–Gr electrode over 100 cycles.
 Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the electropolymerization and subsequent electrochemical process occurring at the NCA cathode and Si–Gr anode in the full cell.34 Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.5 Other applications: corrosion protection of current collector. 
The current collectors of LIBs act as a carrier for electrode materials and collect the current during the electrochemical reaction. However, the current collectors are often corroded in organic electrolytes at room temperature during charge/discharge cycles, which is adverse to the capacity, coulomb efficiency, and service life of LIBs.112 Therefore, corrosion protection of the current collector is a valid way to elevate the battery performance.
A typical work of this type was reported in 2020, in which a PPy coating layer doped with oxalic acid was synthesized on a copper current collector by Jiang Chen et al.112via the cyclic voltammetry technique. After exposure to the electrolyte for up to 500 h, no obvious holes were observed in the PPy-coated electrode compared to the bare copper, implying the improvement in the corrosion resistance of the modified current collectors. All mentioned data in this part are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Electropolymerized functional polymeric electrode materials for LIBsa




Name

C
th (mA h g−1)

C
i (mA h g−1)

C
n (mA h g−1), cycle number
Discharge voltage (V)
Ref.





a 
C
th: theoretical capacity. Ci: initial discharge capacity. Cn: final capacity.
b TEMPO = nitroxide free radical containing.
c HQ = hydroquinone.
d TCTA = 4,4′-triazole-9-yl-triphenylamine.
e Poly-DAAQ-NT = polymerized anthraquinone derivatives on conductive carbon nanotubes.
f MWCNTS = multi-walled carbon nanotubes.
g SWCNT = single-wall carbon nanotubes; and.
h DEPP = 5,15-bis(ethynyl)-10,20-diphenylporphinato.
i PECA = ethyl-α-cyanoacrylate.





V2O5/PEDOT
170
269, 0.1C
247, 100
3.1/2.3/2.0

68 and 69



PPy-co-PPy-C-TEMPOb
—
71, 20 mA g−1
54, 20
3.5–3.8

27



PPy–GO
—
176, 20 mA g−1
129, 50
—

71



PPy–CF
—
144, 20 mA g−1
102, 50
—

71



Au/PIn/ClO4−@c-Al2O3 or Fe2O3,
—
116–124, 0.5 A m−2
∼110, 20000
3.5

72



HQ-PEDOTc
—
∼9 μA h cm−2
∼5 μA h cm−2, 50
3.1/1.4

42



TCTAd
27.7
92, 1 A g−1
48, 5000
3.9

43



Poly-DAAQ-NTe
—
311, 1 A g−1
184.5, 500
3.0/2.0

74



LiFePO4/PEDOT
170
110, 2C
125, 50, C/2
3.4

76



C/LiFePO4/MWCNTSf
—
135, 20C
∼130, 200, 20C
3.4

39 and 40



PEDOT–LiFePO4
170
160
∼55, 50, C/2
3.4

9



Poly-Ni(CH3Salen)/SWCNTg
—
105 (+20 °C) 83 (−40 °C), 0.16 A h g−1
—
0.6/0.1

44



CuDEPPh
187
∼210, 1 A g−1
272, 2000, 50 °C
2.8

78



SnO2–PPy
782
690
622, 80
1.4/0.005

80



PPy–Si nanofibers
4200
2800
∼2550, 100
1/0.02

81



PAN–TiO2 nanotubes
335
0.5 mA h cm−2
0.5 mA h cm−2,
1

12



TsONa-PPy-Fe foil
39
167, 50 mA g−1
105–115, 50
—

73



WO3@PANI
—
652
516, 1200
—

33



PANI/Cu
175
∼160
155, 500
1.5/1.46/1.08

63



PPO/Ti3+/TiO2NT
336
347
225, 200, 2.4C
1.0

88 and 113



PECA/LNMOi
148
∼120
∼110, 100
4.7

89





Table 3 Electropolymerized functional polymeric materials for Li–S batteriesa




Name

C
i (mA h g−1)

C
n (mA h g−1), cycle number
Discharge voltage (V)
Ref.





a 
C
th: theoretical capacity, Ci: initial discharge capacity, and Cn: final capacity.
b PMAn = poly(N-methylaniline) and.
c TCB = 1,3,5-tris(N-carbazolyl)benzene.





PPy-S/KB
823, 0.1 C; 354, 1C
—
2.4/2.0

117



PPy-S-PPy
790
383, 500
2.3/2.05/2.38

120



CMP-CNT-S
∼1000
870, 1000
2.4/2.0

121



PMAn@S/Cb
1224
780, 200
2.3/2.1

122



TCB/CNT/PPc
1210
920, 600, 0.2C
2.4/2.1

65






3.2 Li–S batteries
Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries are considered the most promising candidates for next-generation rechargeable lithium secondary batteries to satisfy the burgeoning power intensive storage industries due to their ultrahigh theoretical energy density (Li: 3860 mA h g−1 and S: 1675 mA h g−1), abundance in nature, low cost and environmental benignancy of S.114 The theoretical energy output of an Li–S cell approaches 2500 W h kg−1, far beyond that of the current C/LiCoO2 system (387 W h kg−1).115 However, Li/S batteries have crucial issues, restricting their further commercial development. Firstly, the active material sulfur is electrically insulating, and therefore it is essential to add conductive materials to form conductive electrodes. However, these additives often lose their functions due to the drastic volume expansion of the S cathode during cycling.116 Secondly, the dissolution of the intermediate product lithium polysulfides (Li2Sx, 4 ≤ x ≤ 8) in the electrolyte during the charge/discharge process, which is named “redox shuttle phenomena”, is one of the vital reasons leading to overcharge, low coulombic efficiency and rapid capacity fading. Therefore, the efficient immobilization of sulfur species inside the cathode is the current goal of several researchers.

3.2.1 Coating layer on the cathode. 
The approach of coating a conductive polymer on the S cathode has proven to be an efficient way to solve the aforementioned problems. Conductive polymers in situ deposited on the surface of S cathode can increase the ionic/electronic conductivity due to the π-electron delocalization effect of conjugated polymer systems. The polymer films are usually equipped with a uniform porous structure, flexibility and compactness, preventing the dissolution of polysulfides, suppressing electrolyte decomposition, relieving the volume expansion, and thus reducing the loss of active material, slowing the oxidation of polysulfide by lithium nitrate, eventually promoting the capacity retention, rate capacity and stability of Li–S batteries.
Tetsuya Osaka et al.117 modified the S cathode by coating with a polypyrrole (PPy) film via oxidative electropolymerization. The PPy film-coated S-based cathode was confirmed to have superior ability for inhibiting polysulfide dissolution. In a 1.0 M LiTFSI DME/DOL electrolyte, which is known to dissolve polysulfides easily, the PPy S/KB cathode exhibited capacities of 823 mA h g−1 and 354 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 1.0C, respectively. Similarly, Tokihiko Yokoshima et al.115 reported the deposition of a PPy film on an S/Ketjenblack cathode (PPy-S/KB). They found that the polymerization conditions including the bath composition and the polymerization potential were crucial in determining the film capability of preventing polysulfide dissolution and promoting Li+ permeability. Besides, PEDOT118 and poly-DOL119 were also reported as coating layers on the surface of S cathodes and demonstrated to be efficient in suppressing the polysulfide shuttle.
In 2019, Mohammad Rejaul Kaiser et al.120 reported a self-supporting thin film of PPy via oxidation electropolymerization. Then the free-standing PPy layer was attached to another self-supported, slurry-free, sulfur-containing electrode through mechanical pressing. The formed PPy–sulfur–PPy sandwiched electrode exhibited a capacity of 383 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles (an initial discharge capacity of 790 mA h g−1) and stable and high coulombic efficiency of around 94%. Recently, Yangxing Li et al.121 reported the fabrication of a microporous nanoskin composed of poly(1,3,5-tris(N-carbazolyl)benzene) via electropolymerization to create a closed system for a sulfur cathode. The micropores in the nanoskin efficiently blocked the diffusion of polysulfides from the cathode into the electrolyte. The Li–S batteries exhibited superior stability of ∼86% capacity retention under lean electrolyte conditions after 1000 cycles with a low electrolyte/sulfur ratio of 4 μL mg−1.
Besides pre-modified cathodes before battery assembly, conjugated monomers can also be added to the electrolyte as an additive to form porous films in situ on the surface of S cathodes under electric field conditions. Bo Hong et al.122 proposed N-methylaniline (MAn) as an electrolyte additive to form a PMAn coating film in situ via electrochemical oxidation for Li–S batteries. The battery with 0.5 wt% MAn rendered an initial discharge specific capacity of 1224 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 63.79% after 200 cycles.


3.2.2 Separator modifier/interlayer. 
A functional interlayer between the S cathode and separator can inhibit the diffusion of polysulfides. Common interlayers include metal carbides/nitrides/oxides, metal organic frameworks and carbonaceous particles.65 However, common inorganic interlayers can hardly avoid the leakage of polysulfides during long-term cycling due to the limited adsorption capacity of most inorganic materials. Thick inorganic interlayers may be significant in preventing the shuttling of polysulfides at the expense of an increase in cell resistance and deterioration in redox kinetics. Therefore, a trade-off between large polysulfide adsorption capacity and low interlayer loading always exists. In comparison to inorganic interlayers, conductive polymers stand out as an outstanding substitute due to their well-defined nanoporous structures, which can efficiently block polysulfide diffusion via size limitation. Besides, an ideal polymer interlayer should be thin enough to trap polysulfides without hampering the Li+ transport and inducing extra internal resistance, as well as be electron conductive to create a passage for charge transfer and redox reactions.65 The thickness of dense and conductive electropolymerized membranes can be facilely controlled via cyclic voltammetry of potential cycles and deposition time via the potentiostatic and galvanostatic methods.
For instance, Yangxing Li et al.65 reported a polycarbazole-type interlayer by via the in site electropolymerization of the 1,3,5-tris(N-carbazolyl) benzene (TCB) monomer on the CNT/PP substrate. The interlayers played a crucial role in suppressing polysulfide shuttling, facilitating Li diffusion and enhancing sulfur utilization (see Fig. 27). The Li–S batteries configured with this ultrathin, compact, and conductive microporous type of interlayer showed a reversible capacity of 920 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles at 0.2C and a high areal density of 10 mA h cm−2 at a sulfur loading of 11.2 mg cm−2.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the electropolymerization of polycarbazole on a PP separator. (a) and (b) structure of TCB monomer (carbon with red circle indicates the active polymerized sites) and the optimized elementary pore structure of the polymerized film. (c) Setup of the three-electrode electrochemical cell for the EP process. (d) CV profiles of EP recorded for 8 scan cycles at 50 mV s.65 Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 


3.2.3 Protecting layer on Li anode. 
Li metal has a low redox potential (−3.04 V vs. SHE) and an ultrahigh specific capacity of 3860 mA h g−1, nearly 10 times larger than that of commercialized graphite in LIBs. Nevertheless, its high reactivity with the liquid electrolyte, dendrite growth, and theoretically infinite volume change during cycling may initiate security issues caused by the transpiercing of the separators and short circuit.116 Accordingly, the preservation of the highly reactive Li anode in sulfur-containing electrolytes is a still challenge for Li–S batteries.
Chuan-Fu Lin et al.116 focused on controlling the electropolymerization of DOL to electrochemically grow a well-defined SEI layer on Li metal anode, as shown in Fig. 28. At 0.5C, LPE-50 promoted the specific capacity from 301 mA h g−1 to 557 mA h g−1. At 1.0C, the specific capacity of LPE-50 was improved from 138 mA h g−1 to 475 mA h g−1. Here, the Li anodes protected by a controlled elastomer were annotated as LPE and the numbers stand for the discharge–charge cycles.
 Fig. 28  Illustration of the morphology of Li anode with or without LPE polymer films after cycling at different C-rates (left). Comparison of the specific capacity of LPE-0, LPE-50, and LPE-100 at the 100th cycle at different C-rates (right).116 Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Tao Qian et al.35 reported lithium isopropyl-sulfide macromolecules on Li metal as an ion-selective interface (IS-Li) by electrochemically regulating the polymerization of allyl disulfide (ADS) in an ether-based electrolyte. The CV profiles and cycling performance of IS-Li are presented in Fig. 29. The IS-Li|S cell exhibited a reversible capacity of 671.6 mA h g−1, with a high-capacity retention of ∼78.8% even after 550 cycles of discharge/charge. Moreover, the IS-Li|S cell maintained excellent stability with a high specific capacity (initial capacity >700 mA h g−1) even when the S loading was as high as 5.3 mg cm−2.
 Fig. 29  (a) CV profiles of the IS-Li|S cell at 0.1 mV s−1 between 1.7 and 2.8 V. (b) Cycling performance comparison of bare Li|S and IS-Li|S cells at 1C rate. (c) Charging/discharging voltage curves of the IS-Li|S cell in different cycles. (d) Charging/discharging voltage curves of the IS-Li|S cell at different current rates from 0.1 to 3C. (e) Cycling performance of the IS-Li|S cell at a current rate of 0.1C.35 Reprinted with permission from tef. 35. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4 Cathode binder. 
In 2021, Yuning Li et al.123 reported the preparation of ePEDOT:H-PSS and ePEDOT:Li-PSS binders via in-cell electropolymerization, which were applied as cathode binders for Li–S batteries, as shown in Fig. 30. Compared to the analogous commercial cPEDOT:PSS binder, the cells with the ePEDOT:H-PSS and ePEDOT:Li-PSS binders showed much improved initial capacities of 1142 and 1147 mA h g−1 and cycling stability with the capacity retention of 62% and 56% after 100 cycles, respectively. The formation of tightly integrated interfaces between ePEDOT and other components in the sulfur cathode was demonstrated to be essential for the performance improvement rather than the enhancement of the electrical conductivity of PEDOT. All mentioned data in this part are summarized in Table 3.
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustrating the formation of ePEDOT in the sulfur cathode inside an Li–S battery by in-cell e-polymerization.123 

4. Summary
Functional organic polymers have attracted extensive attention to replace conventional inorganic materials in Li-ion batteries and Li–S batteries due to their high energy density, high power density, structural diversity, flexibility and sustainability. In this review, we provided an overview of functional organic polymers obtained via electrochemical polymerization methods, including the fundamental knowledge about electropolymerization and their practical applications in lithium batteries (LIBs) and lithium–sulfur batteries as active cathodes and hybrid anodes, coating layers, conductive hosts, separator modifier/functional interlayers and polymer electrolyte.
The process of an electroactive monomer reacting polymerically under the help of an electric field during electrochemical redox reactions in the electrolyte is considered electrochemical polymerization. In comparison with other synthetic methods, electropolymerization has unique merits, as follows. Firstly, electropolymerization has the intrinsic features of being a one-step synthetic procedure, simple and requiring low-cost facilities and easily controllable conditions. Secondly, the thickness, quality and doping degree of conductive polymer films can be regulated by changing the parameters of electropolymerization (such as potential, current and electric quantity). In addition, the composition of the electrolyte can also influence the structure of the conductive polymer films. Lastly, conductive polymer film materials do not require additional post-processing. The inherent properties of conductive polymers such as flexibility, high electron transfer rate, poor solubility, and good stability in organic electrolyte make them a competitive alternative to conventional inorganic electrodes materials for LiBs and Li–S batteries.
In LIBs, the most popular application of electropolymerization methods is to prepare organic electrode materials to solve problems such as reduced cycling stability caused by dissolution, which leads to poor rate performance. However, the synthesis of long-cycle stable electroactive conductive polymer materials remains a challenging task to date. The fabrication of porous nanostructures via the design of the monomer chemical structures and hybridization with inorganic materials is proven to be effective strategies to promote the battery performance. The flexible structures of organic polymer components can effectively relieve the volume changes in inorganic materials during long-time cycles. Meantime, the inorganic component guarantees high capacity. PPy, PEDOT and PANI are the most frequently used organic components, and the inorganic components include carbon, silicon and LiFePO4. The proportion of these hybrid cathode and anode materials synthesized via electropolymerization methods can be regulated and controlled by changing the parameters of electropolymerization to get better battery performances.
In addition, artificial surface modification of electrodes via electropolymerization before cycles has been devoted to form an SEI layer, which can stabilize the electrode/electrolyte interface and accommodate electrode volume changes during cycling. The artificial SEI layer may serve as a passivation layer to inhibit electrolyte decomposition and protect the electrodes from corrosion, and as a transport pathway for lithium ions. The electrode surface modified with such artificial electrode interphases is proven to exhibit improved long-term stability and excellent rate capability.
Besides electrodes, the resultant polymers can also act as other vital components of cells, such as electrolyte and electrolyte additives. Electropolymerized polymer electrolytes are endowed with light-weight, flexibility, non-flammable property, and the ability to compensate the volume changes in electrodes by elastic and plastic deformation, providing a feasible solution to the safety issues of LIBs. The maximum contact area with electrodes can also be created by a polymer electrolyte, which enhances the ionic conductivity and stability properties of LIBs. Moreover, the electropolymerization procedure can occur within the cell during the charge/discharge cycles and act as an electrolyte additive. The function of these electrolyte additives is to uniformly form an SEI film on the electrodes to alleviate the undesirable electrolyte decomposition or provide protection against overcharge. Besides, the electrodeposited polymers can also serve as protection layers against the erosion of the current collectors in organic electrolytes, leading to extended cycling life.
In the case of Li–S batteries, the electrochemical deposition of nanoporous polymers on the S cathode is proven to be an efficient way to prevent polysulfide dissolution, suppress electrolyte decomposition, and relieve volume expansion. Similarly, conductive polymers can also be deposited on the Li anode and work as protecting layers, which can effectively suppress the dendrite growth, accommodate the volume changes during cycling, and prevent the further erosion of the Li anode. Moreover, the electropolymerized polymers can also act as binders for electrode materials.
For fundamental insights and rational guidance for the development of materials, efficient and accurate analysis on their working mechanisms are highly demanded. True mechanistic understanding of electrochemically driven processes in polymer-based lithium batteries requires in situ or operando measurements, which have been proven to be powerful to gain deep insights into the charge/discharge processes of lithium batteries. As aforementioned, one of the attracting advantages of electrochemical deposition is the facile synthesis of a free-standing bulk/framework for use in batteries, which is favorable for operando analysis. The mainly used characterization methods include X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), which are powerful techniques for studying the crystal phase and atomic structure of materials relevant to electrochemical energy storage. For the cathode materials of Li–S batteries, XRD can be applied to test if all the sulfur atoms are bound to the polymer backbone of the cathode in the charged state or if they form crystalline particles. Furthermore, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and in situ small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) can be applied to distinguish between the confined and superficial sulfur. Other operando spectroscopic studies focusing on the evolution of electrode materials involve Raman, UV-vis, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). A time-resolve Raman study can answer what degree is sulfur attached or detached from the backbone of the polymer in the charge and discharge states, respectively. UV-vis spectra can give valuable information about unwanted side reactions such as the release of polysulfides from the cathode in Li–S batteries. XPS is mainly used to track the evolution of polymer materials during the lithiation/delithiation process in Li-ion batteries and judge the sulfur insertion in the polymer backbone for Li–S batteries. However, successful implementation into an operando setup is experimentally challenging. Besides, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurement is another important method to shed light on the charging and discharging processes in lithium batteries. Distinct charge transfer processes can be linked to capacity fading processes with this method. Finally, imaging methods such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray crystallography are suitable for the detection of macroscopic morphology changes in electrode materials such as the growth of lithium dendrites at the Li anode side and sulfur crystallization at the Li–S cathode side. Processes such as voltage-dependent movement of the electrolyte or the degree of cathode wetting can also be studied by X-ray crystallography.
Beyond Li-ion batteries and Li–S batteries, it is also expected that functional conductive organic polymers will show great potential in the development of other sustainable and versatile energy storage devices, such as sodium-ion batteries, potassium-ion batteries, and supercapacitors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22075027, 52003030), Starting Grant from Beijing Institute of Technology (3020012222019) and financial support from the State Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology (YBKT21-06).
References
M. E. Bhosale, S. Chae, J. M. Kim and J.-Y. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(41), 19885–19911 RSC .
J. Xie and Q. Zhang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100547 CrossRef .
Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, W. Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(15), 5181–5199 RSC .
Y. Z. Zhang, T. Cheng, Y. Wang, W. Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(26), 5242–5248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, L. Q. Yao, X. Li, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48(12), 3229–3264 RSC .
T. Cheng, Y. Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. L. Chen, S. Y. Gao, F. Wang, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(24), 2101303 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Yao, Z. Wu, J. Xie, F. Yu, W. Guo, Z. J. Xu, D. S. Li, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13(9), 2457–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Guo and Q. Zhang, Small Structures, 2021, 2100115 CrossRef .
N. D. Trinh, M. Saulnier, D. Lepage and S. B. Schougaard, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 284–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Xu, C. Li, K. Wang, X. Sun, F. Su, C. M. Chen, F. Liu, Z. S. Wu and Y. Ma, Batteries Supercaps, 2021, 4(3), 407–428 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, T. Li, L. Zhong and J. Lu, SmartMat, 2021, 2(2), 123–126 CrossRef .
F. Nacimiento, J. E. R. Gonźalez, R. Alćantara, G. F. Ortiz and J. E. L. Tirado, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(5), A3026–A3035 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Her, J.-L. Hong and C.-C. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161(2), 1247–1253 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fan, C. Zhang, Y. Chen, G. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Zou and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021 10.1039/d1tc03709a .
C. Zhang, K. Fan, Y. Chen, Y. Wu and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3(5), 1947–1958 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, D. Adekoya, X. Huang, M. J. Kiefel, J. Xie, W. Xu, Q. Zhang, D. Zhu and S. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(9), 12016–12026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Q. X. Lim, T. Wang, E. W. Y. Ong and Z. K. Tan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7(21), 2000853 CrossRef CAS .
M. Braglia, I. V. Ferrari, T. Djenizian, S. Kaciulis, P. Soltani, M. L. Di Vona and P. Knauth, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(27), 22902–22910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(9), 4259–4290 RSC .
H. Wang, C.-J. Yao, H.-J. Nie, K.-Z. Wang, Y.-W. Zhong, P. Chen, S. Mei and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(24), 11906–11922 RSC .
H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, A. G. MacDiarmid, C. K. Chiang and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1977, 578–580 RSC .
T. Yang, C.-X. Zhang, Y.-J. Li, Y.-H. Fu, Z.-H. Yin, L.-H. Gao and K.-Z. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6(12), 3518–3528 RSC .
H. Wang, H.-T. Sun, Y.-Y. Zhang, C.-C. Zhang, Q.-R. Cheng, S.-M. Hou, J.-H. Liao and K.-Z. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 298, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, T. Yang, K. Z. Wang, J. Tong and S. Y. Yu, Langmuir, 2019, 35(39), 12620–12629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, T. Yang, H.-J. Yin, L.-H. Gao and K.-Z. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 362, 137150 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Z. Yu, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Xiang, Z. Li and S. Wu, Mater. Des., 2018, 139, 351–362 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, P. Guo, H. He, N. Zhou, J. Ma, G. Wang, C. Zhang and C. Su, Ionics, 2017, 23(6), 1375–1382 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Luo, G. Wang, L. Li, B. Cheng, W. Kang and J. Ju, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166(16), A4088–A4096 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, X. Sang, Y. Chen, Y. Li, B. Liu, J. Sheng, Y. Feng, L. Li, H. Liu, X. Wang, C. Kuang and Y. Zhai, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 55(8), 3549–3560 CrossRef .
Y. H. Rho and K. Kanamura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151(1), A106–A110 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Guo, C. Chen, L. Shi, S. Yuan, L. Sun and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(5), 3314–3322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. Pan, X. Liu, C. Li, Y. Sun, D. Zeng and H. Cheng, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 507, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, N. Li, Y. Wang, X. Ma, J. Zhao, L. Qiang, S. Hou, J. Ji and Y. Li, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29(17), 14803–14812 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anothumakkool, F. Holtstiege, S. Wiemers-Meyer, S. Nowak, F. Schappacher and M. Winter, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(34), 12788–12798 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Cao, J. Zhou, M. Wang, H. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Sun, T. Qian and C. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(49), 54537–54544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kausar, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2018, 55(5), 440–448 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vijayakumar, B. Anothumakkool, S. Kurungot, M. Winter and J. R. Nair, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(5), 2708–2788 RSC .
H. Ma, Y. Chen, X. Li and B. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(33), 2101861 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qin, Q. Ma and C. Wang, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 257, 60–66 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qin, Q. Wu, J. Zhao, Q. Ma and C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 588–595 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Salian, C. Lebouin, A. Galeyeva, A. P. Kurbatov and T. Djenizian, Front. Chem., 2019, 6, 675 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Arjomandi, H. Soleimani, M. H. Parvin and E. Azizi, Polym. Composite, 2019, 40(2), 496–505 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, Z. Chen, W. Wang, P. Xiong, B. Li, M. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(29), 11992–11998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Alekseeva, T. Stelmashuk, V. Ershov and O. Levin, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 383, 138309 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Kozen, C.-F. Lin, O. Zhao, S. B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and M. Noked, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(15), 6298–6307 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Santner, K. C. Möller, J. Ivančo, M. G. Ramsey, F. P. Netzer, S. Yamaguchi, J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119-121, 368–372 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Möller, H. J. Santner, W. Kern, S. Yamaguchi, J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119-121, 561–566 CrossRef .
N. Sakmeche, S. Aeiyach, J.-J. Aaron, M. Jouini, J. C. Lacroix and P.-C. Lacaze, Langmuir, 1999, 15(7), 2566–2574 CrossRef CAS .
T.-P. Huynh, P. S. Sharma, M. Sosnowska, F. D'Souza and W. Kutner, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 47, 1–25 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deheryan, D. J. Cott, R. Muller, M. Timmermans, M. Heyns and P. M. Vereecken, Carbon, 2015, 88, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Geng, J. Xu and S. Hu, React. Funct. Polym., 2008, 68(8), 1253–1259 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Zhong, C.-J. Yao and H.-J. Nie, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257(7-8), 1357–1372 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(8), 2280 RSC .
P. Sengodu and A. D. Deshmukh, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(52), 42109–42130 RSC .
R. Huq and G. Farrington, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132(6), 1432 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kaner, S. Porter, D. Nairns and A. MacDiarmid, J. Chem. Phys., 1989, 90(9), 5102–5107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kvarnström and A. Ivaska, Synth. Methods, 1991, 43(1–2), 2917–2921 CrossRef .
O. Sadik, M. John, G. Wallace, D. Barnett, C. Clarke and D. Laing, Analyst, 1994, 119(9), 1997–2000 RSC .
L. V. Kayser and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(10), e1806133 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Akheel and K. D. Maravattickal, Talanta, 1991, 38, 8 Search PubMed .
N. Oyama, T. Tatsuma, T. Sato and T. Sotomur, Nature, 1995, 373(16), 598–600 CrossRef CAS .
S.-R. Deng, L.-B. Kong, G.-Q. Hu, T. Wu, D. Li, Y.-H. Zhou and Z.-Y. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51(13), 2589–2593 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. Xiao, X. Liao, Z. Ma, Y. Huang and Q. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7(13), 2896–2904 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, D. Chao, X. Qi, Q. Xiong, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(9), 4562–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, X. Li, F. Ming, Z. Zhou, H. Liu, M. N. Hedhili, V. Tung, H. N. Alshareef, Y. Li and Z. Lai, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104769 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chang, L.-J. Her and J.-L. Hong, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50(22), 4461–4468 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Her, J.-L. Hong and C.-C. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157(1), 457–463 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Yoo, S.-K. Hong, H.-M. Song, I.-H. Yeo and S.-I. Mho, ECS Trans., 2012, 41(11), 103 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Song, D. Y. Yoo, S. K. Hong, J. S. Kim, W. I. Cho and S. I. Mho, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23(9), 2094–2102 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nacimiento, R. Alćantara, J. E. R. Gonźale and J. E. L. Tirado, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159(7), A1028–A1033 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, H. He, L. Xu, N. Zhou, X. Zhu, G. Wang and C. Zhang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2017, 17(3), 1963–1969 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oka, C. Strietzel, R. Emanuelsson, H. Nishide, K. Oyaizu, M. Strømme and M. Sjödin, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 105, 106489 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liao, H. Hou, J. Duan, S. Liu, Y. Yao, Z. Dai, C. Yu and D. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134(24), 44935–44940 CrossRef .
T. Liu, K. C. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jin, M. J. Lee, M. Li, S. Noda, S. S. Jang and S. W. Lee, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(4), 3728–3735 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144(4), 1188 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cíntora-Juárez, C. Pérez-Vicente, S. Ahmad and J. L. Tirado, RSC
Adv., 2014, 4(50), 26108–26114 RSC .
G. Zhu, K. Wen, W. Lv, X. Zhou, Y. Liang, F. Yang, Z. Chen, M. Zou, J. Li, Y. Zhang and W. He, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 29–40 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, X. Chen, B. Ren, X. Wu, X. Huang, R. Ding, X. Sun, S. Tan, E. Liu and P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(6), 7178–7187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Dziewoński and M. Grzeszczuk, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55(9), 3336–3347 CrossRef .
Z. Du, S. Zhang, T. Jiang, X. Wu, L. Zhang and H. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao, R. Lin and T. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22(23), 11636 RSC .
D.-H. Nam, S.-J. Lim, M.-J. Kim and H.-S. Kwon, RSC Adv., 2013, 3(36), 16102 RSC .
H. J. Song, S. H. Oh, Y. Lee, J. Kim and T. Yim, J. Power Sources, 2021, 483, 229218 CrossRef CAS .
B.-J. Chae and T. Yim, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 214, 66–72 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu and X. Chen, Nano Res., 2017, 10(12), 4115–4138 CrossRef CAS .
R. May, Y. Zhang, S. R. Denny, V. Viswanathan and L. E. Marbella, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1(11), 100239 CrossRef .
J. Duan, H. Hou, X. Liu, Q. Liao, S. Liu, R. Meng, Z. Hao and Y. Yao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 29 CrossRef .
J. Duan, H. Hou, X. Liu, S. Liu, Q. Liao and Y. Yao, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42(15), 16611–16618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, P. Hu, J. Ma, B. Qin, Z. Zhang, C. Mou, Y. Yao and G. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 236, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
L. Long, S. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(26), 10038–10069 RSC .
Q. Zhao, X. Liu, S. Stalin, K. Khan and L. A. Archer, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4(5), 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, H. Sun, P. Hu, W. Huang and Q. Zhang, EcoMat, 2021, 3, 5 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, K. Liu, F. Ding and X. Liu, Nano Res., 2017, 10(12), 4139–4174 CrossRef .
A. Arya and A. L. Sharma, Ionics, 2017, 23(3), 497–540 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, X. Wang, J. Liu and J. D. Miller, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, D. Barbash, D. M. Smith, H. Qi, S. E. Gleeson and C. Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(22), 1701231 CrossRef .
J. Mindemark, L. Imholt, J. Montero and D. Brandell, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed., 2016, 54(14), 2128–2135 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, Q. Zeng, X. Liu, W.-Y. Lai and L. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(8), 3200–3207 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kyeremateng, F. Dumur, P. Knauth, B. Pecquenard and T. Djenizian, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13(8), 894–897 CrossRef CAS .
N. Plylahan, S. Maria, T. N. Phan, M. Letiche, H. Martinez, C. Courrèges, P. Knauth and T. Djenizian, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, H. Wu, J. Wan, M. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Chen, R. Wen and C. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 62, 172–178 CrossRef .
S. Komaba, T. Ohtsuka, B. Kaplan, T. Itabashi, N. Kumagai and H. Groult, Chem. Lett., 2002,(12), 1236–1237 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Santner, C. Korepp, M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard and K. C. Moller, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(2), 266–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Korepp, W. Kern, E. A. Lanzer, P. R. Raimann, J. O. Besenhard, M. Yang, K. C. Möller, D. T. Shieh and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174(2), 628–631 CrossRef CAS .
C. Korepp, W. Kern, E. A. Lanzer, P. R. Raimann, J. O. Besenhard, M. H. Yang, K. C. Möller, D. T. Shieh and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174(2), 387–393 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. Qiu, Y. Fu and X. Ma, Chin. J. Chem., 2009, 27(8), 1459–1463 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, J. Wei, L. Xing and Z. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 373–378 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Gao, C. Li, H. Zhang, J. Liu and Q. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhuang, Y. Lei, M. Guan, F. Du, H. Cao, H. Dai, Q. Zhou, J. Adkins and J. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135465 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, T. Han, K. Y. Cho, M. H. Ryou and Y. M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(33), 21366–21372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Joshi, K. Iwai, S. G. Patnaik, R. Vedarajan and N. Matsumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165(3), A493–A500 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2020, 15, 2667–2676 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Duan, H. Y. Hou, X. X. Liu, Q. S. Liao, S. Liu, R. J. Meng, Z. L. Hao and Y. Yao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 29 CrossRef .
W. P. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Chou, Y. X. Yin, Y. You, S. Xin and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11(2), 2000791 CrossRef .
N. Nakamura, Y. Wu, T. Yokoshima, H. Nara, T. Momma and T. Osaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(5), A683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. F. Lin, J. Rao, K. Gaskell, G. Rubloff and S. B. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(29), 24554–24563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nakamura, T. Yokoshima, H. Nara, T. Momma and T. Osaka, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 1263–1266 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, H. Noh, J. Lee, I.-W. Nah, W.-I. Cho and H.-T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 332, 72–78 CrossRef CAS .
A. La Monaca, F. De Giorgio, F. Soavi, G. Tarquini, M. Di Carli, P. Paolo Prosini and C. Arbizzani, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5(9), 1272–1278 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Kaiser, Z. Han and J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 437, 226925 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, X. Li, W. Wahyudi, C. Li, A. H. Emwas, M. N. Hedhili, Y. Li and Z. Lai, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 17163–17173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, B. Hong, X. Zhang, Q. Xiang, Z. Zhang, K. Zhang, J. Fang and Y. Lai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 871, 114312 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, C. Guo, Z. Ma, G. Xi, Y. Meng and Y. Li, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2(3), 974–984 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Chen-Xing Zhang
	Chen-Xing Zhang received her BS Degree from Nanjing Normal University in 2018, and MS Degree from Beijing Normal University. She is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Chang-Jiang Yao. Her research interests include the design and synthesis of novel organic polymeric materials for photocurrent conversion devices, oxygen reduction and lithium ions batteries.

Shi-Lin Mei
	Shilin Mei received his PhD in 2017 with Prof. Matthias Ballauff at Humboldt University of Berlin, Germany. He worked on his postdoctoral research on energy storage materials in the Department for Electrochemical Energy Storage, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH from 2017. Since 2020 he has been an Associate Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests focus on functional hybrid nanomaterials for energy storage.

Chang-Jiang Yao
	Chang-Jiang Yao obtained his PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS), in 2013. Then he worked as an Assistant Professor in the same institute for two years. After research experience in Regensburg University (Germany), Wuerzburg University (Germany) and Nanyang Technology University (Singapore), he joined Beijing Institute of Technology as a Professor in 2019. His current research interest focuses on organic/polymer functional materials for energy and photo/electronic application.

 	Fig. 1  Applications of electrochemical strategies used in Li-ion/Li–S batteries and the merits of electropolymerization.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the electropolymerization of an artificial or sacrificial protection layer over the working electrode in a standard three-electrode assembly.37 Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism for the electrochemical polymerization of thiophene, where E′ and E′′ are the electrochemical steps and C′ and C′′ the chemical steps. SCE and Epa represent the saturated calomel electrode and the anodic peak potential, respectively.49 Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

PAc	

	

	200–1000	n/p	
55 and 56

PPP	

	

	500	n/p	
57

PTh	

	

	10–100	p	
49

PPy	

	

	40–200	p	
58

PEDOT	

	

	∼1000	p	
59

PAn	

	

	1–100	p	
60

PDMcT	

	

	∼10	n	
61

PDTTA	

	

	∼10	n	
62


 	Fig. 4  Chemical structure of Py-C-TEMPO, HQ-PEDOT, (TsONa)-PPy and Ni(CH3Salen).27,44,72,73	 

 	Fig. 5  Cyclic property of Li/LiClO4 + ACN/Au-PIn, Li/LiClO4 + ACN/Au-PIn-γ-Al2O3, and Li/LiClO4 + ACN/Pin-γ-Fe2O3 cells at a charge and discharge current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 at 25 °C.42 Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of pristine and cycled TCTA cathodes in different voltage windows of 3.0–3.9 V and 3.0–4.1 V (top). Long-term cycling performance of the TCTA cathodes at 1 A g−1 (bottom).43 Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of the discharge profiles of the AQ-NT and polymerized poly-DAAQ-NT films. The insets show the mechanism of AQ-NT and poly-DAAQ-NT during the charge–discharge procedure.74 Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram (top left), charge/discharge curves (top right), SEM picture (bottom left) and long-term stability (bottom right) of C/LiFePO4/MWCNT sample.40 Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the D3PIE method for the dynamic growth of LiFePO4 at the water/dichloromethane interface.9 Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Charge–discharge curves of poly-Ni(CH3Salen) CC in 0.1 M LiClO4/AN at the current density of 0.16 A g−1 at various temperatures (20 °C, 0 °C, −20 °C, −40 °C). (b) Gravimetric capacitance as a function of temperature at charge rate of 0.16 A g−1).44 Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Electrochemical polymerization process of functionalized porphyrin complex: M = Cu, R1 = phenyl (CuDEPP) and M = 2H, R1 = phenyl (DEPP). (b) Charging process of M-DEPP cathodes with an LiPF6-based electrolyte. (c) Solubility of the as-prepared and the charged DEPP in THF. (d) Cycling performance of CuDEPP at different temperatures (25 °C, 40 °C, and 50 °C).78 Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM image of the as-prepared PPy nanowires. (b) Low and high (c) magnification TEM images of the SnO2–PPy hybrid, respectively. The inset of (c) is the SAED image of the electrodeposited SnO2. (d) HRTEM image revealing nanocrystal SnO2 particles attached to the PPy nanowires.80 Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of the fabrication of metal oxide/CP core/shell nanoarrays, exemplified by Co3O4 and PANI.64 Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the process of galvanostatic polymerization of PANI on a bare Cu foil surface.63 Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedures of PE/TiO2NT membrane/electrode and PPO/TiO2NT membrane/electrode.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Rate performances of three membrane/electrodes at 2.4C, 4.8C, 9.6C, 15C, 18C and 25C and (b) cyclic performance at 9.6C after the rate performances.88 Reprinted with permission ref. 88. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  SEM images of bare Li metal and hybrid-protected Li metal (middle line) cycled in 1:1 EC:DEC for 100 cycles at the current density of 2 mA cm−2. Mechanistic schematic comparing bare lithium (top right) and hybrid elastomer/LiPON protection (bottom right) showing the Li metal surface layer evolution after cycling.45 Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Typical SEM images of (a) pristine and (b) PECA-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 electrodes after 100 cycles. Initial and 100th charge and discharge curves (c) and cycle performance (d) of the pristine and PECA-coated LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/Li cells at 1C.89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Areal specific capacity vs. cycle number in lithium cells for the as-formed and copolymer-embedded TiO2nt cycled at 1C and C/5.99 Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  TEM images of a single tube from the polymer-coated TiO2nts sample. TEM images of (a) single tube with conformal polymer coating and (b) enlarged view at the open end of the polymer-coated tube. (c) Specific capacity vs. cycle number of bare TiO2nts and polymer-coated TiO2nts at 1C between 1.4 to 3 V vs. Li/Li+.100	 

 	Fig. 21  Areal capacity values for various C-rates at 25 °C and Coulombic efficiency (×) for PSS made by galvanostatic deposition (I const). The TiO2nt length is ∼1.5 μm. The inset pictures are chemical structure of PPS and SEM of TiO2nt/PPS electrode.18 Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Voltage-time curves of Li//LiCoO2 cells during normal charge–discharge and overcharge in LiPF6/EC + DMC + EMC (1/1/1, w/w/w) without additive and with (b) 2.5 wt% xylene and (c) 5 wt% xylene.106 Reprinted with from permission ref. 106. Copyright 2009, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 23  HRTEM images of the cycled cathodes in the electrolyte with thiophene (left). Cyclic performance of Li3V2(PO4)3 cathodes in the different electrolytes at 0.1C (right).107 Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  SEM images of fresh LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 electrode (a) and the electrodes after 200 cycles in blank electrolyte (b) and MPL-containing electrolyte (c).108 Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  SEM images of (a) precycled cathodes with the reference electrolyte and (b) dopamine-containing electrolyte, and (c) high-voltage cycled cathodes with the reference electrolyte and (d) dopamine-containing electrolyte.110 Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic representation of the electropolymerization and subsequent electrochemical process occurring at the NCA cathode and Si–Gr anode in the full cell.34 Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 


V2O5/PEDOT	170	269, 0.1C	247, 100	3.1/2.3/2.0	
68 and 69

PPy-co-PPy-C-TEMPOb	—	71, 20 mA g−1	54, 20	3.5–3.8	
27

PPy–GO	—	176, 20 mA g−1	129, 50	—	
71

PPy–CF	—	144, 20 mA g−1	102, 50	—	
71

Au/PIn/ClO4−@c-Al2O3 or Fe2O3,	—	116–124, 0.5 A m−2	∼110, 20000	3.5	
72

HQ-PEDOTc	—	∼9 μA h cm−2	∼5 μA h cm−2, 50	3.1/1.4	
42

TCTAd	27.7	92, 1 A g−1	48, 5000	3.9	
43

Poly-DAAQ-NTe	—	311, 1 A g−1	184.5, 500	3.0/2.0	
74

LiFePO4/PEDOT	170	110, 2C	125, 50, C/2	3.4	
76

C/LiFePO4/MWCNTSf	—	135, 20C	∼130, 200, 20C	3.4	
39 and 40

PEDOT–LiFePO4	170	160	∼55, 50, C/2	3.4	
9

Poly-Ni(CH3Salen)/SWCNTg	—	105 (+20 °C) 83 (−40 °C), 0.16 A h g−1	—	0.6/0.1	
44

CuDEPPh	187	∼210, 1 A g−1	272, 2000, 50 °C	2.8	
78

SnO2–PPy	782	690	622, 80	1.4/0.005	
80

PPy–Si nanofibers	4200	2800	∼2550, 100	1/0.02	
81

PAN–TiO2 nanotubes	335	0.5 mA h cm−2	0.5 mA h cm−2,	1	
12

TsONa-PPy-Fe foil	39	167, 50 mA g−1	105–115, 50	—	
73

WO3@PANI	—	652	516, 1200	—	
33

PANI/Cu	175	∼160	155, 500	1.5/1.46/1.08	
63

PPO/Ti3+/TiO2NT	336	347	225, 200, 2.4C	1.0	
88 and 113

PECA/LNMOi	148	∼120	∼110, 100	4.7	
89



PPy-S/KB	823, 0.1 C; 354, 1C	—	2.4/2.0	
117

PPy-S-PPy	790	383, 500	2.3/2.05/2.38	
120

CMP-CNT-S	∼1000	870, 1000	2.4/2.0	
121

PMAn@S/Cb	1224	780, 200	2.3/2.1	
122

TCB/CNT/PPc	1210	920, 600, 0.2C	2.4/2.1	
65


 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the electropolymerization of polycarbazole on a PP separator. (a) and (b) structure of TCB monomer (carbon with red circle indicates the active polymerized sites) and the optimized elementary pore structure of the polymerized film. (c) Setup of the three-electrode electrochemical cell for the EP process. (d) CV profiles of EP recorded for 8 scan cycles at 50 mV s.65 Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  Illustration of the morphology of Li anode with or without LPE polymer films after cycling at different C-rates (left). Comparison of the specific capacity of LPE-0, LPE-50, and LPE-100 at the 100th cycle at different C-rates (right).116 Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) CV profiles of the IS-Li|S cell at 0.1 mV s−1 between 1.7 and 2.8 V. (b) Cycling performance comparison of bare Li|S and IS-Li|S cells at 1C rate. (c) Charging/discharging voltage curves of the IS-Li|S cell in different cycles. (d) Charging/discharging voltage curves of the IS-Li|S cell at different current rates from 0.1 to 3C. (e) Cycling performance of the IS-Li|S cell at a current rate of 0.1C.35 Reprinted with permission from tef. 35. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustrating the formation of ePEDOT in the sulfur cathode inside an Li–S battery by in-cell e-polymerization.123	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
