Characterization of active sites, determination of mechanisms of H 2 S, COS and CS2 sorption and regeneration of ZnO low-temperature sorbents: past, c ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CP01227K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CP01227K
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3197-3209Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsCharacterization of active sites, determination of mechanisms of H2S, COS and CS2 sorption and regeneration of ZnO low-temperature sorbents: past, current and perspectives

        
          
            Alexander 
            Samokhvalov
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Bruce J. 
            Tatarchuk
          
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA
bDepartment of Chemistry, Rutgers University, 315 Penn St., Camden, NJ 08102, USA. E-mail: alexsam@camden.rutgers.edu
Received 
      17th July 2010
    , Accepted 16th November 2010First published on 21st January 2011AbstractThe intellectually and technically challenging pursuit of the emerging global environmentally “green” and energy-efficient infrastructure of the 21st century requires the development of a worldwide network of low- to medium-power fuel cell (FC) based portable electric power-generating devices and high-power biomass/clean coal “electric+chemical plants” with zero carbon footprint utilizing integrated coal gasification combined cycle with geologic carbon sequestration (IGCC-GCS) under energy-efficient low-temperature conditions. These emerging technologies require the deep and ultradeep desulfurization of gaseous feeds, since sulfur compounds, especially hydrogen sulfide H2S are highly corrosive and poisonous to both technological processes and the environment. Therefore, it is of crucial importance for both academic and industrial research communities to have a solid understanding of the atomic-level structures of active sites and molecular-level mechanisms of surface chemical reactions of the novel deep and ultradeep desulfurization materials, especially desulfurization sorbents. This review critically analyzes the recent literature (last ∼20 years) on the experimental determination of molecular and atomic-level nature of adsorption sites, effects of desulfurization promoters, mechanisms of chemical reactions of H2S, COS and CS2 and physical processes during and upon regeneration of “spent” low-temperature H2S sorbents based on ZnO that were developed for desulfurization of fuel reformates, syngas and similar streams. Recent trends in research on the ultradeep H2S sorbents are discussed with an impetus on real-time in situ and Operando techniques of instrumental chemical analysis, and the challenges of direct determination of the structure of active sites and of the experimental mechanistic studies in general are described.
Alexander Samokhvalov
Alexander Samokhvalov received his PhD degree in Chemistry at the Chemical Physics Department of the Weizmann Institute of Science (Rehovot, Israel). Since then, he spent a few years of postdoctoral training, with recent research performed with Prof. Bruce J. Tatarchuk at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Auburn University (Auburn, AL USA). Recently, he assumed the position of Assistant Professor of Physical Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry of Rutgers University (Camden, NJ USA). His research interests are in the applied surface science, mechanistic studies of the novel deep and ultradeep desulfurization materials and processes, and photocatalysis.
Bruce J. Tatarchuk
Bruce J. Tatarchuk is a Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering at Auburn University and the Director of the Center for Microfibrous Materials Manufacturing, CM3 (Auburn, AL, USA). He has received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin. His research interests are in heterogeneous reactive systems and catalysis, fuel reforming/processing, fuel cell systems, electrochemical systems and electrode materials, microfibrous materials manufacturing. He is the co-author of many patents and of more than 100 publications in peer-reviewed journals.
1. Introduction
Hydrogen sulfide H2S occurs naturally in air, water, natural gas, crude oil, industrial, urban and agricultural sewage.1 It is also a common chemical component of many gaseous streams of major industrial importance such as: natural gas2 and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), off-gases of industrial catalytic hydrodesulfurization (HDS)3 and of upgrading heavy petroleum and bitumen,4 off-gases of petroleum refining to naphthas, gasoline, diesel and jet fuels,5 gaseous streams of coal gasification and of “clean coal” technologies such as syngas from the IGCC,6,7 gaseous streams of co-gasification of biomass with coal,8 syngas for the industrial-scale organic synthesis such as gas-to-liquid (GTL) and Fischer–Tropsch (FT) processes, gaseous reformates for fuel cells (FCs) produced by reforming of liquid transportation fuels,9 “digester gases” formed upon anaerobic digestion of organic residues.10 Industrial gaseous streams may contain between <1 and ∼10000 ppm H2S.11Table 1 shows the typical concentration ranges of H2S in various gaseous streams of a major importance.
Table 1 Concentration of H2S in various gaseous streams




Stream
H2S content, ppmv
Ref.




Natural gas (sour)
50 ppmv–100 vol%

2



Natural gas (pipeline quality)
4–16

2



Raw syngas of IGCC
1700–14000

148



Biomass-derived raw syngas
20–600

8



Desulfurized syngas from IGCC-GCS plant

ca. 10

135



Syngas for industrial synthesis

ca. 0.06

149



Reformate from JP-5 jet fuel

ca. 300

150



Reformate from liquid propane gas (LPG)

ca. 0.5

151



Gas from anaerobic biodigester of organics
50–5000

10





Hydrogen sulfide is a strong corrosion agent and a major health hazard. Its characteristic strong and unpleasant odour is perceived by humans at concentrations as small as 0.5–2 ppb by volume.12 Hydrogen sulfide is known to be a major source of acid rain when oxidized in the atmosphere to SO2. Hydrogen sulfide damages many industrial materials, especially catalysts containing noble metals and nickel.
The US is the world's largest producer and consumer of natural gas,13 it has the world’s largest reserves of coal, and it is the world's second (after China) producer of coal. More than half of the electricity produced in the US and about 40% of the electricity produced worldwide is generated from coal.14 The increasing demand for “clean” electric energy will lead to the development of “clean coal” technologies both in the US and worldwide. The planned 80% reduction of CO2 emissions by 2050 in the E.U. countries15 will be achieved by IGCC-GCS plants producing syngas which needs to be deeply desulfurized. At least five IGCC prototype plants were in operation worldwide16—three in the US and two in Europe, with their energy efficiencies close to 50%. The ultradeep desulfurization of gaseous reformate stream is crucial for the sustainable development of portable “clean” energy sources of the future such as fuel cells FCs.17 Reformates produced from biofuels are of very low content of sulfur; however gasification of the bio-feedstock alone is not yet economically and logistically feasible, so biomass is proposed to be co-gasified with coal.8
The research on H2S adsorption has been active since the 19th century.18 In principle, H2S removal can proceed via sorption, catalysis or condensation, with sorption being the preferred method historically.19 The “high temperature” H2S sorbents that operate at ∼500–800 °C were extensively developed and studied for hot-gas desulfurization (HGD).20 Many metal oxides were considered as H2S sorbents based on criteria of both thermodynamics21 and kinetics,22 and zinc oxide ZnO was found to be the best. Zinc oxide is thermodynamically stable up to ∼1000 °C, both in its “bulk”23 and nanoparticulate24 forms, with dissociation of ZnO into Zn and O2 occurring at >1000 °C without forming “ZnO” molecules.23 Chemical and physical processes occurring on surface of zinc oxide were comprehensively reviewed recently.25 The main disadvantage of ZnO for the “high-temperature” H2S removal is its reduction by H2 to volatile metallic zinc; as a solution, zinc ferrites26 and zinc titanates27 were popular in the 1980s as “high-temperature” H2S sorbents, but they suffer from thermal instability.
Certain types of IGCC plants contain moving-bed gasifiers which can operate at rather low temperatures (425–600 °C). The promising technology is to convert syngas from such low-temperature gasifiers into the high-value chemicals (ammonia, methanol or synthetic FT fuels) rather than simply burning it in a combustion turbine.28 The temperature of syngas intended for organic synthesis does not need to be high, however syngas needs to be deeply (<1 ppm) desulfurized. The “mid-temperature” (300–500 °C) H2S sorbents29 were developed and studied since the 1990s. These sorbents were summarized in the recent review, with impetus on desulfurization of biomass- and coal-produced syngas.8
The “low temperature” (25−∼200 °C) H2S sorbents were studied since the early 1990s. Industrial-scale H2S removal at low temperatures is based on the reactive sorption by water solution of liquid amines (Girdler process),30 by liquid alkanolamines such as methyldiethanolamine MDEA (acid gas removal process, AGR)6 or by a solution of ammonia in water. Physical absorption of H2S from syngas is performed by refrigerated methanol (Rectisol® process by companies Lurgi and Linde AG) and by proprietary mixture of dimethyl ethers of polyethylene glycol (Selexol® process of Honeywell’s subsidiary UOP LLC). Non-reactive sorption of H2S was reported on various porous sorbents such as activated carbon,31 modified activated carbon10 and modified clay;32 however, such processes suffer from low sulfur uptake capacity.30 Bio-removal of H2S was of interest in recent decades, and it has been reviewed several times.33–35
The major advantage of ZnO is the favorable thermodynamics of the sulfudization reaction: ZnO(s) + H2S(g) → ZnS(s) + H2O(g)(1)The Gibbs free energy of the above reaction is ΔG = −91607.18 + 15.16 T (J mol−1).36,37 Therefore, conversion of ZnO to ZnS can easily take place at low temperatures, including room temperature. The equilibrium H2S concentration in contact with ZnO depends on the temperature and partial pressure of H2O and the phase of ZnO (wurtzite vs. zincblende). The equilibrium concentration of H2S for formation of sphalerite ZnS was recently reported38 and it was concluded that at <250 °C, H2S concentrations well below 100 ppb and the reasonable H2S sorption capacity could be achieved. Reactive H2S sorption converts ZnO to ZnS that then needs to be regenerated to ZnO and SO2 by oxidation with air or oxygen at high temperatures (∼350–800 °C).
The emerging “hydrogen economy”39 that is to be based on the FCs9,39,40 requires increasing amounts of gaseous hydrogen-containing fuel reformates. The principal scheme of the FC-based power generating system is shown in Fig. 1. The H2S impurity in fuel reformates is poisonous to both reforming catalysts of the portable fuel processing units41 (FPUs) of the “hydrogen vehicle” and electrodes of the FCs.9 Fuel reformates intended for the FCs need to contain <1 ppm40 or even <60 ppb of sulfur compounds. The FCs that consume methane rather than hydrogen, such as the solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) require “sweetening” i.e. deep desulfurization of natural gas to <100 ppb sulfur30 as well.
 Fig. 1  Principal scheme of fuel cell (FC) based electric power generating system. 
Research on the ZnO-based low temperature ultradeep H2S adsorbents has been especially active since the early 2000s. The projected “hydrogen economy” will include the extensive fleet of air, ground, naval vehicles, as well as the stationary power plants equipped with the FPUs that are to include H2S sorption units. A good example of the large-scale FCs is the military on-board power-generating systems that consume the “sulfur-free” hydrogen produced by reforming liquid logistic fuels that are typically produced from fossil sources.42 Scientific and engineering research for the needs of the US military43–48 creates novel technologies that can be used in the civil sectors of economy. The high power FCs and adsorptive desulfurizers that are the functional parts of the FPUs are being developed for civil non-transport applications as well, ranging from kilowatt49 to megawatt50 systems. The scheme of the low-temperature FC system that includes the FPU and sorptive desulfurizer unit is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Scheme of the low-temperature FC system including fuel processing unit (FPU) and sorptive desulfurizer. 
The “low temperature” ZnO-based H2S sorbents (operating at ca. 25–200 °C and 1 atm) offer several advantages for the emerging “clean fuel” technologies:
(1) Their temperature regimes are ideally matched to those of low-temperature (60–200 °C) fuel cells: polyelectrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), alkaline fuel cells (AFCs) and phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFCs);9,51
(2) The FPU based on the low-temperature adsorptive desulfurizer needs the minimal external supply of energy to provide the robust “cold-starts” of “hydrogen vehicle” and ensure its steady operation;
(3) They can be used in the IGCC, IGCC-GCS, bio-IGCC and bio-IGCC-GCS14 to desulfurize syngas at the energy-efficient temperatures below ∼300 °C, if the downstream process is the low-temperature catalytic organic synthesis proceeding at ∼150–300 °C, such as the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) reaction.
(4) They do not suffer from reduction of ZnO to metallic zinc and show minimal thermal sintering of ZnO that starts > ∼250 °C.52

Table 2 shows chemical composition of some low-temperature deep and ultradeep H2S sorbents and their sulfidation conditions. The performance of the ZnO-based low-temperature H2S sorbents can be increased by promoting (“doping”) them with compounds of transition metals. On the other hand, gaseous components of natural gas, syngas and fuel reformates such as CO, CO2, H2, H2O, CH4, COS, CS253,54 can inhibit the removal of H2S.
Table 2 Low-temperature H2S sorbents and sulfidation conditions




Type of sorbent
Sorbent composition
Sulfidation conditions
Feed
Inlet H2S, ppm
Outlet H2S (lowest), ppm
Ref.




Mixed metal oxides
Cu–Zn–Al–O
25–100 °C
H2S/N2
3000
<0.1

5



Unsupported ZnO
ZnO
250 °C
Syngas
100
<1

51



Supported ZnO
ZnO/SBA-15
25 °C
H2S/Air
1000
<0.1

66



Commercial ZnO
ZnO
60–400 °C
H2S/He
10000
—

19





In order to develop systematically the novel generations of the effective H2S sorbents in the predictive fashion, the molecular-level understanding of chemistry and physics of sorption/desorption processes is required, and systematization and critical analysis of available information is highly desired. The high-temperature (∼500–800 °C) and mid-temperature (∼300–500 °C) H2S solid state sorbents were reviewed recently, with some mechanistic details provided.8. Interestingly, the mechanisms of reactive H2S sorption by ZnO were investigated within the research on desulfurization of the liquid fuels by commercial sorbents based on Ni/ZnO such as Z-Sorb and TreND,6 since these processes include reactions of H2S with ZnO.55–57 To our knowledge, there was no review paper with the impetus on mechanistic studies of the ZnO-based H2S low- , mid- or high-temperature sorbents (25 to ∼500 °C). On the other hand, quantum chemistry techniques are quickly winning popularity in the academic community due to the continuing development of computational tools and models and the availability of the increasingly faster computers. Indeed, the multiple publications on application of quantum chemistry techniques to model ZnO-based materials of industrial interest are available: methanol synthesis catalysts,58 dehydrogenation and aromatization catalysts,59 dye-sensitized solar cells;60 however, no quantum chemical studies of ZnO-based H2S sorbents are available. The novel H2S sorbents and mechanistic studies thereof are mainly covered in this review that operate under “low temperatures”, namely between 25 and ∼200 °C and under pressures of 1 atm. Since the novel H2S sorbents are being developed and reported often, this review is not intended and cannot be comprehensive; rather, it offers the systematic critical overview of the existing achievements, trends and challenges.
2. Characterization of ZnO-based low-temperature H2S sorbents
The representative class of the low-temperature ZnO-based H2S sorbents includes mixed metal oxides.61–63 Sulfur removal at the equilibrium conditions and thermal stability of several metal oxides were determined21 up to 1500 °C. The concept of inclusion of the H2S-inert metal oxides into the H2S sorbents has pioneered with zinc titanates studied for high-temperature H2S removal.27 Examples of “additives” that do not directly interact with H2S are the following: alumina Al2O3,5 zirconia ZrO2,64 titania TiO2,61 silica SiO2 which was reported by us43,65 and ordered mesoporous silicas such as SBA-15.66
Standard (3D) phase diagrams67 could be insufficient to predict the sulfidation behavior of the low-temperature sorbents, due to the limited ionic and molecular mobility during reaction with H2S under the non-equilibrium conditions. The surface (2D) phase diagrams have been developed for several supported and unsupported binary oxide systems of major industrial importance, e.g. Ag–O catalysts for ethylene epoxidation.68 The 2D phase diagrams of the ZnO-based material systems are not available in the literature, to our knowledge. Alternatively, surface science studies may supply the needed fundamental knowledge of surface processes in which sulfur atoms could participate.69
“Dopants” or “promoters” are usually present in the sorbent at <10 or even <1 wt%. The promoter material itself does not need to react with H2S; rather, it can increase the rate or yield of sulfidation of ZnO due to: (i) a change of sulfidation mechanism;70 (ii) an increase of active surface area of ZnO;62 (iii) promoting diffusion of H2S, HS− and S2− into ZnO lattice.62 Popular promoters are cations of the 1st row transition metals (TMs); thermodynamics of sulfidation of many TM oxides is more favorable than that of ZnO itself.70
In recent years, supported low-temperature H2S sorbents have been extensively investigated; their major advantage is a very high degree of nano-dispersion of ZnO and therefore high yields of the surface sulfidation reaction. Nano-crystalline ZnO is expected to demonstrate the enhanced reactivity with H2S at the low temperatures as compared to “bulk” ZnO, due to (i) quantum size effects71 that could change thermodynamics or kinetics of sulfidation; (ii) high surface/volume ratio, with many Zn atoms being on the surface i.e. being directly available to the reaction with H2S; (iii) surface defects with the sulfidation-promoting behavior that could be present in the nanoparticles (NPs) of ZnO.29 Defects of crystalline lattice that could be present in ZnO were comprehensively reviewed recently.72 The high specific surface area of supported ZnO is expected to compensate the slower sulfidation kinetics expected at the low vs. high temperatures.
Desulfurization performance of the sorbent depends both on its nano-morphology and surface chemical composition. The standard techniques of structural characterization of the low-temperature desulfurization sorbents are transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM),73 the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method for determination of surface area,61 the Barret, Joyner and Halenda (BJH) method for determination of the pore volume and surface area,74 X-ray diffraction (XRD).66 The less common technique is small area X-ray scattering (SAXS) that is conceptually similar to XRD.66 The other family of the instrumental techniques provides information on oxidation and coordination states of chemical elements present in the low-temperature H2S sorbents based on ZnO: temperature-programmed reduction (TPR),11 UV–visible and near-infrared diffuse-reflectance spectroscopy (UV–vis-NIR DRS),63 Raman spectroscopy,61 transmission fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR),66 diffuse-reflectance fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (DRIFTS),75 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) a.k.a. electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA).61,65Table 3 lists the examples of typical types of the low-temperature H2S sorbents with respective characterization techniques.
Table 3 Experimental characterization of active sites in ZnO-based low-temperature H2S sorbents




Type of sorbent
Example
Characterization
Ref.




Unsupported ZnO
ZnO
XRD, BET, SEM, SEM-EDAX

51







TGA-DSC

19



Supported ZnO
ZnO/SBA-15
TEM, TEM-EDX, XPS, FTIR, XRD, SAXS

66



Unsupported ternary metal oxides
Co–Zn–Al–O
FTIR, XRD, UV–Vis-NIR DRS, TEM

63



Unsupported binary metal oxides
Co–Zn–O
XPS, EDX, EELS, FTIR

152



Supported ZnO in MFES Reactor
ZnO/SiO2 MFES
SEM, XRD

126





Spectroscopic techniques based on X-rays such as X-ray absorption (XAS),76 extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS), near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) and X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) are very powerful for characterization of sorbents and catalysts. One of their major advantages is the non-destructive behavior of the high energy (tens of keV) photons, as compared to low-energy (1–2 keV) X-rays utilized in, for instance, XPS77,78 and XRD. However, the sample damage was reported for XANES and EXAFS as well.77 These X-ray based techniques were never applied to study ZnO-based H2S sorbents; EXAFS was utilized for characterization of active sites of methanol synthesis catalyst Cu/ZnO.73 The solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is more readily available that the synchrotron X-ray based techniques, and it is not destructive due to very low energy per quantum. Nevertheless, NMR (1H, 13C, 17O, 33S) was never reported in the material characterization studies of H2S, COS or CS2 sorbents. Upon introducing the promoter ions into the lattice or onto the surface of ZnO, formation of defects such as oxygen vacancies is reported.79 Electron spin resonance (ESR) aka electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) is well-suited for detecting them80 and is non-destructive to the specimen. Utilization of ESR for characterization of the promoter sites of the low-temperature supported H2S sorbents was reported by us for the first time.65
The spatially-resolved spectroscopic imaging that was comprehensively reviewed recently81 would be very useful, yet it was never reported for characterization of H2S sorbents. Specifically, of a great interest would be experimental studies of the 3-dimensional “impregnation and calcination profiles”, i.e. the “uniform”, “egg-shell”, “egg-white” and “egg-yolk”82 distribution of the supported active material within the grain of the sorbent that is hundreds of microns to few millimeters in size. The spatially-resolved custom-designed fiberoptic DRS UV–vis microspectroscopy setup83 with spatial resolution of ∼100 micron was recently used to learn about spatial distribution of Co cations in Fischer–Tropsch Co/Alumina catalysts.84 The quantitative models are available that predict the 3D impregnation and calcination profiles of HDS catalysts such as Ni/Alumina;82 such studies were never reported for H2S sorbents.
2.1 Nano-morphology and active surface area
The high surface area nanocrystalline metal oxides including ZnO were compared with commercial ZnO as H2S sorbents at 25–100 °C.52 Yield of sulfidation is a factor of ∼13 higher for the nanocrystalline ZnO, due to both higher surface area and the higher “intrinsic reactivity” of the “surface” vs. “bulk” form of ZnO. The practical recommendation was to utilize commercial ZnO sorbents for H2S removal at >250 °C and the nanocrystalline ZnO at <100 °C. Nanoparticles of ZnO with sizes from 14.3 to 35.3 nm were prepared for H2S adsorption at the low temperatures and were characterized by TEM, TPR, XRD and XPS.29 Nanoparticles of ZnO demonstrate enhanced reactivity with H2S vs. commercial ZnO, with the lifetime of the nanocrystalline sorbent being a factor of ∼40 longer. ZnO nanoparticles are also shown to selectively oxidize H2S into elemental sulfur. ZnO nanoparticles supported on mesoporous material SBA-15 were prepared and characterized using ICP, XRD, FTIR, nitrogen adsorption, TEM and XPS. The ZnO/SBA-15 sorbent removes H2S from model gas stream to the ppb levels at 25 °C. The supported ZnO nanoparticles are well-dispersed as judged by the absence of wide-area (2θ = 10–70°) XRD peaks. An enhancement of H2S removal capacity was explained as being due to both the high surface area of the mesoporous material and the “excellent desulphurization properties of the supported ZnO nanoparticles”.66 It seems that one needs to distinguish more clearly between the improvement of desulfurization due to the enhanced surface area and the “reactivity” of either thermodynamic or kinetic origin, as well as to propose the quantitative approaches to study these parameters separately.
2.2 Nano-morphology and active sites in “promoted” ZnO sorbents
Several binary and ternary metal oxides of Zn/Fe, Zn/Ni, Zn/Mn, Zn/Cu, Zn/Al were prepared and tested for adsorptive removal of H2S from mixtures with H2 and N2 at room temperature.64 Adsorptive capacity of ZnO towards H2S is significantly enhanced by “doping” it with Mn, Co, Cu, Ti and Zr cations. “Doping” ZnO with TM cations produced microcrystalline metal oxides with ZnO of hexagonal (wurtzite) structure as found by XRD. The sulfidation yields of different mixed metal oxides were plotted against total surface area, and the dependence is found to be not linear. Therefore, the surface area of the mixed metal oxides is not the only factor determining the yield of sulfidation reaction at room temperature. The high surface area unsupported Cu–Zn–Al mixed metal oxides with variable metal molar ratios demonstrated the excellent H2S removal capacity at 25–100 °C: from 3000 ppm down to < 0.1 ppm.5 Incorporation of cations of Cu and/or Al was found to decrease the mean crystalline sizes of ZnO and CuO in mixed metal oxides as found by XRD. The high-surface-area Zn–Co–Al oxides have been prepared and tested for H2S uptake in a microreactor at 30 °C.63 In Zn–Co–Al oxides, ZnO and Co3O4 form solid solutions; the presence of Al3+ increases surface area, but does not lead to the significant increase of H2S uptake capacity. The low-temperature (<200 °C) H2S sorbents based on ZnO were prepared by adding small amounts (ca. 5%) of the first row TM cations to ZnO by impregnation of ZnO with a solution of TM salts in water or by co-precipitation and calcination of hydroxides of Zn and the respective TM70. The increase in H2S absorption on Zn–Co–O sorbent is less than that expected pro rata due to the increase in surface area. The Ce-doped nanosized ZnO material was prepared, characterized and studied for H2S sorbent at room temperature.85 Doping with Ce decreased the particle size of the nanosized ZnO as shown by TEM and XRD. We note that in the unsupported ZnO-based sorbents, the XRD peaks of ZnO are usually present, while in the supported ZnO sorbents XRD peaks are often absent.66
Sulfidation of Co1.2Zn4.8Al2O9.4 and Co3Zn3Al2O10 mixed metal oxides at 30 °C are accompanied by the reduction of octahedral Co3+ to tetrahedral Co2+ that substitutes tetrahedral Zn2+ sites as shown by UV–vis-NIR DRS.63 For sulfided forms of Co4.8Zn1.2Al2O10.6 and Co6Al2O11, only Zn and Co cations are found in the sulfide phase upon H2S uptake, while all Al3+ ions remain in the oxide phase. A novel Fe–Mn–Zn–Ti–O mixed metal oxide developed for the removal of H2S at 25–50 °C was studied using XPS. It was shown that the “calcined” sorbent (before H2S uptake) contains metals in the Fe3+ and Mn4+, Ti4+ and Zn2+ oxidation states.11 The amount of “labile lattice oxygen” was determined by temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) and it was shown to correlate with H2S capacity.
3. 
        In situ real-time and Operando mechanistic studies of sorption of H2S, COS and CS2
Many instrumental techniques are well-suited to study the changes of dispersion, oxidation and coordination state of Zn2+ and promoter ions in the ZnO-based H2S sorbents in situ86 real-time. Operando is defined as such real-time in situ experiment when “catalytic performance is measured simultaneously with the spectroscopic or structural property”.86 The available instrumental techniques for studying homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts under Operando87 conditions are listed in the excellent paper, with time resolution and the types of physicochemical information to be obtained.88

Fig. 3 shows the conceptual setup for Operando studies of heterogeneous gas–solid materials systems that combines the (chemisorption) reactor with the suitable array of the in situ real-time non-destructive instruments of chemical analysis. GC-TCD is gas chromatograph with thermal conductivity detector; GC-PFPD is gas chromatograph with pulsed flame photometric detector; TSA is the total sulfur analyzer; MFC is mass flow controller. An excellent recent paper89 reported the in situ real time study of the surface mechanism of sulfidation and the multi-cycle performance of the high-temperature (800 °C) H2S sorbent based on rare earth metal oxides. Only the surface of the sorbent was utilized in both sulfidation and regeneration, due to very high space velocities at the short (millisecond) gas–solid contact times; H2S removal to the sub-ppm levels is reported. This paper represents the “golden standard” of chemical and engineering thinking due to the combination of: (i) a well-designed process scheme addressing the conceptual working elements of the engineering infrastructure of the “hydrogen economy”, i.e. adsorptive desulfurizer as part of the FPU combined with the FC, (ii) careful reaction engineering by optimizing the contact time, and (iii) the well-thought mechanistic study by the multiple complementary in situ real-time instrumental techniques. Similar studies would be very welcome in the emerging field of low-temperature H2S sorbents.
 Fig. 3  Conceptual setup for Operando studies of gas–solid catalytic and sorptive systems. 
Caution should be exercised in spectroscopic Operando studies of the surface intermediates, since the spectrally active “spectator species” need to be distinguished from the “true”, i.e. reactive intermediates that lead to the desired reaction products. This problem was recognized in mechanistic Operando studies of catalytic systems.90 The standard test for the “true intermediate” is to measure its transient concentration vs. the overall rate of catalytic chemical reaction.91 We are not aware of similar studies performed on gas–solid material systems that undergo reactive chemisorption. Further, the real-time capabilities of spectroscopic imaging were never reported to study the mechanisms of H2S sorption and for characterization of dynamics of propagation of the “reaction front” within the sorption reactor.
3.1 Real-time, in situ and Operando techniques for studying Zn and S sites
One of the major tasks of spectroscopic study is to identify the instrumental technique(s) that is (are) both selective and sensitive to the element(s) of interest. As pertinent to studies of H2S sorbents based on ZnO, sites of Zn and S are of the major interest.
Zn2+ cation has the electronic configuration [Ar] 4s0 3d10. Both ZnO and ZnS in their “bulk” form are broad bandgap semiconductors; their band gaps Eg are 3.4 eV92 (365 nm) and 3.7 eV93 (335 nm), respectively. Not only are bandgaps of ZnO and ZnS of the close values; but in the nanocrystalline form, both ZnO and ZnS exhibit strong blue shifts in electronic spectra due to quantum size effect. Therefore, the Operando optical absorption spectroscopy (UV–vis transmission or UV–vis DRS) is not a good technique for the study of unpromoted supported or unsupported ZnO sorbents. On the other hand, luminescence spectroscopy was reported to be useful, for instance, for characterization of electronic materials that contain ZnO94 embedded into the matrix of SiO2. This materials system is very similar to certain supported H2S sorbents based on ZnO. Operando fluorescence spectroscopy of the sulfidation of ZnO low-temperature sorbents was never reported.
Electronic states of Zn2+ can be directly probed by photoelectron spectroscopy that is based on external photoeffect (XPS aka ESCA). XPS can be very useful in distinguishing between Zn2+ in the reactant ZnO and in the product ZnS. The XPS Zn 2p band is not very useful for distinguishing between Zn2+ in ZnO and in ZnS: BE of Zn2+ in ZnO is ca. 1022 eV,95 and BE differs only by ca. 0.5 eV for ZnS.78 However, the Auger parameter96 (AP) that is routinely measured by XPS differs significantly for Zn in ZnO and ZnO: namely, APZn is ca. 2010.2 eV for ZnO65,94vs. 2011.4 eV for ZnS.97 The main problem of XPS is that it requires high vacuum that is usually not compatible with the Operando conditions of sulfidation or regeneration reaction. Another problem of implementing Operando XPS of the ZnO-based H2S adsorbents is the highly corrosive effect of H2S onto the walls of the HV chamber.98 On the other hand, the recent developments of the “high-pressure”99 and real-time XPS100 should allow the Operando XPS of the oxidative regeneration of the “spent” ZnS form, under the partial pressure of oxygen up to ca. 10−3 atm, with SO2 being the main gaseous product. To our knowledge, such experiment was never reported for H2S sorbents, even though the application of the in situ temperature-programmed XPS (TPXPS) for studies of oxidative regeneration of “spent” desulfurization sorbents for liquid fuels was reported recently.101,102
Instrumental techniques based on measurement of spin states of ions may be very useful for Operando studies of sulfudation or regeneration reactions of H2S sorbents, due to being intrinsically non-destructive to the specimen, since photon energy is very small. However, Zn2+ cation with electronic configuration [Ar] 4s0 3d10 is diamagnetic; therefore, electron spin resonance methods such as ESR and electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) do not allow to detect Zn2+ cation directly. Naturally occurring Zn is composed of five stable isotopes: 64Zn, 66Zn, 67Zn, 68Zn and 70Zn, with 64Zn being the most abundant one (48.6%). The only isotope of Zn that has nuclear spin (5/2) is 67Zn. Unfortunately, 67Zn is of a low abundance (4.10%), of a rather low NMR sensitivity, and it yields broad NMR lines. Nevertheless, the 67Zn solid-state NMR was reported for studies of many inorganic compounds of Zn2+, including ZnO and ZnS.103 The 67Zn solid-state NMR seems useful for Operando studies of H2S sorbents with high concentration of Zn, i.e. non-supported sorbents; however, 67Zn solid-state NMR of H2S sorbents has never been reported.
Sulfur in H2S and ZnS is in the formal oxidation state −2. Operando UV–vis spectroscopy is not useful in determining changes in oxidation and coordination state of sulfur. On the other hand, XPS is useful in speciation of molecular forms of sulfur: BE is ca. 168 eV for S+6 in sulfates and sulfones,104 164 eV for S0e.g. in thiophene,105 161–162 eV for S2− in inorganic sulfides.106 Determination of molecular forms of sulfur in the H2S sorbents by Operando high-pressure XPS could be very informative and elegant, yet is a technically challenging method; it is awaiting for the interested and motivated researcher.
Interaction of sulfur atom of H2S with the ZnO-based materials can be measured in Operando mode by the Xray based photoelectron spectroscopic techniques that probe electronic K edge of sulfur atom. For instance, sulfur K-edge XAFS was used for determination of sulfur-containing surface species107 formed during exposure of copper to a humid atmosphere containing SO2. Sulfur K-edge XANES spectra were measured for several sulfur-organic compounds, and spectra were simulated with density functional theory (DFT).108
The only isotope of sulfur that has nuclear spin (3/2) is 33S that is the low sensitivity nucleus with a low natural abundance that yields very broad spectral lines. Recently, the 33S NMR spectrum of liquid and gaseous COS was measured for the first time at 323 K.109 This temperature is within the “operating range” of the low-temperature desulfurization sorbents based on ZnO. This opens up the number of interesting possibilities of Operando NMR, i.e. determination of adsorption geometry of COS on metal oxides including ZnO. Partial pressure of COS needs to be sufficiently high; the example of such gaseous stream could be the sulfur-rich tailgas of the Claus process53 or the H2S-rich “sour” natural gas.2
3.2 Real-time, in situ and Operando techniques for sites other than Zn and S
Optical spectroscopy such as UV–vis-DRS is very useful in studies of the sulfidation promoters such as TM cations, since many TM compounds have the distinct optical absorption spectra. The modern versions of UV–vis-DRS including the portable fiberoptic-based setups83 allow the in situ real-time and Operando studies inside both large and mini-size sulfidation/regeneration reactors, but these were never reported, to our knowledge. The infrared spectroscopy DRIFTS was used in real-time to characterize the reaction of ZnO with H2S at low temperatures.75
Thermo gravimetric and differential scanning calorimetric analysis (TGA-DSC) that is intrinsically destructive to the specimen was useful in the in situ real-time studies of thermal oxidative regeneration of the “sulfided” ZnO sorbent.19 XPS and XRD could impose the significant specimen damage due to radiative heating as a result of the absorption of X-rays77 that could be amplified when the specimen is intentionally heated, e.g. during thermal oxidative regeneration of the “sulfided” sorbent.
Recently, instrumental developments have allowed the Operando ESR110,111 of heterogeneous catalytic reactions.112 Operando ESR and ENDOR would be very useful for studies of temporal behavior of the popular kind of desulfurization promoters—cations of the first row transition metals (TMs). To our knowledge, Operando ESR102 has never been reported for studies of H2S adsorption.
EXAFS, XANES, NEXAFS and Mössbauer spectroscopy that use the high energy X-ray photons with penetration depth in air of millimeters are well-suited for studies of sorbents in pellets and in mini-reactors. These techniques can easily be set up for the in situ real-time and Operando measurements. To our knowledge, only one paper describes in situ Mössbauer spectroscopy of H2S sorbents: study of Fe–ZnO binary metal oxides during adsorption of H2S at high temperature (700 °C) from fuel gas that is supplied to the high temperature molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC).113
The Fe impurity is nearly always present in industrial-grade adsorption and catalytic materials. Since Mössbauer spectroscopy is extremely sensitive to the details of coordination environment of Fe cation and its oxidation state, it can be very useful to monitor the changes of the local structure of Fe impurity (“spectroscopic probe”)—during oxidative, reductive, thermal or even mechanical stress. The other highly sensitive spectroscopic technique of ESR was successfully applied to use paramagnetic NO molecules strongly adsorbed in TiO2 oxide as “spin probes” to learn about redox transformations of the whole solid material during adsorptive desulfurization of liquid fuels and regeneration of “spent” sorbent.102,114,115 Nevertheless, application of Operando ESR to monitor the paramagnetic “spin probe” present in the H2S sorbents has never been reported. We note that the applications of the in situ real time and Operando techniques for studies of adsorption and catalysis phenomena that utilize the fundamental chemical concepts such as the “probe specie” are rather seldom in the literature, apparently due to the challenges of the inter-disciplinary dialogue between chemists and chemical engineers.
3.3 Determining kinetics and mechanisms of surface vs. bulk H2S sorption
Mechanistic studies of sorption of H2S on zinc oxide have been performed since the 1970s.116 It was found that kinetics of reaction between H2S and ZnO at 300–800 °C followed the first order with respect to H2S and obeyed the Arrhenius equation. Mechanism of H2S sorption onto ZnO consists of several steps.70 The initial reaction step in absorption of H2S by an ionic solid such as ZnO is the dissociation of H2S into H+ and HS−, followed by diffusion of HS− into the oxide lattice and migration of oxide and water to the surface. Fig. 4 shows the general mechanism of the surface reaction of H2S with ZnO; this mechanism requires diffusion of S2− and HS− ions into the bulk of ZnO.62 The (rare) example of the in situ real-time mechanistic study of the sorbent is using the in situ X-ray microprobe analyzer117 to investigate sulfidation of ZnO. Absorption of H2S by ZnO at room temperature is found to be autocatalytic and is promoted by water.75 Hydrogen sulfide is converted into ZnS by successive proton transfers to the chemisorbed OH groups present on the Zn- and O-polar hexagonal faces, as found by DRIFTS. It was shown that at the low temperatures, reaction of H2S with ZnO is essentially the surface reaction occurring within the topmost 0.6 monolayer of ZnO.70
 Fig. 4  Mechanism of surface reaction of H2S with ZnO. 
An interesting quantum chemistry paper was published recently that predicts that sulfur impurities at the surface of ZnO nanoparticles would increase the HOMO–LUMO gap.118 The latter effect could, in principle, modify chemical reactivity of ZnO towards H2S. The recent study119 reports using DFT method to compute thermodynamics of initial interaction of Zn4O4 and Zn6O6 clusters with several sulfur-containing molecules, including H2S. The Brønsted acids such as H2S react with Zn4O4 cluster with proton transfer to one of the oxygen atoms forming surface OH groups. Proton transfer reaction is highly exothermic, ca. 245 kJ mol−1. Interestingly, the 1H NMR could be useful in Operando studies of acid-base interactions of H2S with ZnO, since it is the standard method to learn about surface Brønsted acidity of oxides.120
Diffusion limitations due to internal mass transfer51 could prevent the measurement of chemical kinetics of the surface chemical reactions of H2S with the active sites of the sorbents. Several pure zinc oxide materials prepared by different techniques were investigated at the low temperature (250 °C) desulfurization of several gaseous streams, including syngas.51 The rate of sulfidation of the ZnO pellet is limited by the internal mass-transfer resistance, and only external layers of the grain of the sorbent are sulfided. The effects of mass and energy transfer on the time-dependent dynamics of reaction of ZnO-based sorbents with H2S in batch reactors are outside the scope of this review. We just briefly note that both the nanostructure of the pores and the microstructure of the grain of sorbent are of importance. The optimization of the nanostructure is performed by increasing zeolite pore sizes,121 decreasing its nanocrystallite size, development of the novel mesoporous materials122 such as MCM-41 etc. The mass transfer within the desulfurization reactor on the micro-scale is optimized by using the suitable micro-structured inert carriers such as monoliths,123 carbon nanofiber networks124 and the microfiber networks integrated with the sorbents to form the micro fiber-entrapped sorbents (MFES) reported by us.125,126
The “old-fashioned way” to bypass mass and heat transfer artifacts and study the fundamental surface phenomena in adsorption and catalysis is to utilize the “model materials systems”. Model systems can be, tentatively, separated into two types. The model sorbents and catalysts of the “first type” are single crystals25 and thin films of polycrystalline metals and metal oxides prepared and studied in UHV or HV.127 The model sorbents and catalysts of the “second type” are those that are prepared outside of the vacuum system, i.e. under the “realistic” conditions.128 Model sorbents and catalysts of either type conveniently allow utilization of the variety of techniques of instrumental chemical and surface analysis that employ photoelectrons, electron beams and X-ray photons and that operate under HV and UHV. Model materials systems of the first type are well known in catalysis and surface science, and studies of them are historically regarded very successful as applicable to understanding mechanisms of solid–gas reactions.129,130 The widespread use of the model materials systems was in 1970, 80s and early 90s when the Operando techniques that can be used with the “real” sorbents and catalysts were not developed yet. One difficulty in interpreting the results of Operando experiments on “real” sorbents and catalysts is that the latter are intrinsically very heterogeneous systems (from both chemical and structural viewpoints). Specifically, “real” sorbents and catalysts possess a wide distribution of sizes of nanocrystallites and coordination and oxidation states of the elements. The Operando spectrum will therefore contain contributions from all these states, and its interpretation requires the known spectrum-structure relationships of the pure “reference” materials. Chemical composition and surface structure of the model sorbents and catalysts of the second type are closer to these of the “real” sorbents and catalysts; therefore, the former are the good reference materials, specifically, for studies of mechanisms of sulfidation/regeneration under the “process” conditions.131 The role of the proper model materials system in finding the optimal combination of compositional and structural complexity vs. performance of the solid state material was recently convincingly illustrated132 for methanol synthesis catalyst Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 that is chemically similar to ZnO-based H2S sorbents.
3.4 Effects of H2O, H2, CO2, CO, COS, CS2 on H2S sorption
Water vapors present in gaseous fuel reformates reversibly inhibit the low-temperature H2S sorption at 300–400 °C by shifting equilibrium:133 ZnO + H2S → ZnS + H2O(2)We note that it seems possible to design and use the supports with the strong “desiccant” effects such as silica and alumina that would adsorb water vapors from gaseous feed, while the supported ZnO would remove H2S. Indeed, ZnO supported on silica was reported by us to be the good H2S sorbent for fuel reformates at room temperature.43
Apparent kinetics of adsorption of H2S by ZnO in the presence and absence of H2 was studied by TGA between 200 to 320 °C.134 The high concentrations (>10%) of H2 increase the reaction rate between ZnO and H2S that was explained by the change of alkalinity of ZnO surface in presence of H2. Adsorptive removal of H2S from model reformates on ZnO at 150–250 °C was examined134 in the presence of CO that is shown to lead to the formation of COS which, unlike H2S, is not adsorbed by ZnO. Formation of CO at 150–250 °C proceeds by the following reaction: H2S + CO → H2 + COS(3)Indirect evidence was also obtained for formation of COS via the reaction: H2S + CO2 → COS + H2O(4)that can occur when CO2 is present in fuel reformate, but neither H2O nor CO is.
Carbonyl sulfide COS and carbon disulfide CS2 are present in few gaseous streams of major industrial importance; for instance, the total concentration of COS and CS2 in the tailgas of Claus process could be as high as up to 50% of all sulfur-containing compounds.53 The development of the “clean” and energy-efficient IGCC-GCS technology requires solving the problem of deep removal of COS, H2S and CS2 from coal-derived raw syngas.135 Research papers on sorption and interaction of COS and CS2 with ZnO-based materials are very rare. Since the pioneering article in Science,136 it is generally believed that COS is chemically inert at room temperature, and only its hydrolysis product H2S can directly interact with both metals and metal oxides. Hydrolysis of COS could occur either in the gas phase or on the surface of the solid: COS + H2Oads → H2S + CO2(5)Hydrolysis of COS on ZnO, ZrO2, Al2O3 and TiO2 was experimentally investigated by the in situ FTIR and theoretically by the semi-empirical GEOMOS quantum chemistry package.137 Both techniques have found the formation of surface monothiocarbonate, rather than hydrogen thiocarbonate. Adsorption of COS onto ZnO leads to the formation of a few types of surface species: physisorbed CS2, surface hydrogen thiocarbonate (HCSO2)− and surface dithiocarbonate or xanthate (CS2O2)2−. ZnO was reported to be the least reactive towards the hydrolysis of COS as compared to ZrO2, Al2O3 and TiO2. It was suggested137 that hydrolysis of COS can be used as the “probe” reaction to investigate the basicity of surface hydroxyl groups. It was noted recently138 that no reports of the effects of CS2 onto desulfurization of syngas were found in the literature. Hydrolysis of CS2 on alumina at 127–427 °C was reported to occur via surface hydrogen thiocarbonate intermediates.139 CS2 is kinetically much more difficult to hydrolyze on metal oxides than COS, and the same order of reaction rate for CS2 hydrolysis was reported as for COS hydrolysis: ZrO2 > CeO2 > TiO2 > Al2O3 ≫ ZnO. Therefore, ZnO is the most basic oxide, and it is the least reactive towards the hydrolysis of CS2. Adsorption of CS2 at 25 °C onto the coordinatively unsaturated oxygen sites on surface of ZnO was investigated by transmission FTIR.53 FTIR during co-adsorption of CS2 and CO2 indicates that CS2 interacts with the basic O2− sites of the O2−M2+ ion pair, i.e. with the same sites responsible for reaction with CO2.
4. Mechanistic studies of sorbent regeneration
Mechanistic studies of sorbent regeneration are of a fundamental importance, since those determine the usable lifetime of the sorbent, its operational cost per lifetime and the practical aspects of the process scale-up for the anticipated pilot- and industrial-scale applications. Indeed, in heterogeneous catalysis, the problem of the (fast) catalyst deactivation is of a major importance.140,141 In the systematic attempts to design from the “first principles” the novel efficient low-temperature H2S sorbents with the high temporal stability over the multiple adsorption-regeneration cycles, one should note that solid state phase diagrams needed for predicting the behavior of the “spent” sorbents upon thermal (oxidative) regeneration are to include sulfur.67 For instance, Ce–O–S phase diagram142 is reported useful for designing sorbents for the high-temperature FC applications. The 2D phase diagrams of the materials used as the low-temperature H2S sorbents that contain sulfur have not been reported, to our knowledge.
Since many low-temperature H2S sorbents are the supported sorbents, the thermally induced interaction of the active material (ZnO or ZnS) with the presumably inert support are of a great interest and importance. The multi-cycle sorption-regeneration experiments should be performed in situ, without ever exposing the sorbent bed to air or other sources of potential contaminants. It was reported by few groups89,143 that even with the well-designed in situ sorption-regeneration routines,89 the plot of sulfur capacity vs. number of cycles follows the non-trivial trend: sulfur capacity could “oscillate” rather than steadily increase or decrease vs. number of cycles “sulfidation-regeneration”. The reasons for such “oscillations” were not provided in the literature. The obvious explanation is the “hysteretic” effect when the materials system does not achieve the thermodynamic equilibrium by the beginning of the sorption step upon the (fast) cooling to the low temperature after the previous regeneration step performed at the elevated temperature. Such hysteretic effects could seriously affect the performance of the regenerable sorbents during the anticipated pilot-scale tests.
Regeneration of the “sulfided” ZnO sorbents is usually performed by air with oxygen as a gaseous reactant and SO2 as the main gaseous reaction product. The proposed remediation of SO2 is its catalytic oxidation to sulfuric acid or to elementary sulfur via Claus process. It is worth noting that the portable ZnO-based H2S sorption units within FPUs would require the portable SO2 scrubbers; we are not aware of the publications addressing them. In addition to sulfur dioxide, metal sulfites and sulfates and SO3 are also formed as reaction intermediates: ZnS + 2O2 → ZnO + SO3(6) ZnS + 2O2 → ZnSO4(7) ZnSO4 → ZnO + SO3(8) ZnS + 3/2O2 → ZnO + SO2(9) ZnS + 3/2O2 → ZnSO3(10) ZnSO3 → ZnO + SO2(11)Formation of stable metal sulfates has the negative effect on the H2S capacity in the following sulfidation cycle.62 In addition, if chemisorbed water is present in the “sulfided” sorbent, the stage wise formation and decomposition of the surface and bulk crystallo-hydrates is possible: ZnSO4·X H2O → ZnSO4·(X − 1) + H2O(12) ZnSO4·(X − 1) H2O → ZnSO4·(X − 2) + H2O, etc.(13) Interaction of ZnS with oxygen at low partial pressures was studied at 550, 600 and 650 °C using FTIR.144 At 550 °C and oxygen pressures ca. 7 × 10−6 – 5 × 10−5 atm, the main products were adsorbed sulfur dioxide and metal sulfite, while at oxygen pressures greater than 5 × 10−5 atm, metal sulfate was the most prominent species. From the practical perspective, such studies model the industrial-scale regeneration processes performed under the “deficiency” of oxygen, due to either non-optimal choice of flow rate of air or the diffusion-controlled oxidation reaction within the mass-transfer limited regions of the “sulfided” sorbent. The in situ XRD was applied to study thermal oxidative regeneration of the “spent” unsupported commercial ZnO sorbent at 500 °C upon sulfidation with H2S at 400 °C.19 Gradual conversion of both sphalerite (cubic) and wurtzite (hexagonal) forms of ZnS to ZnO were observed, but even after isothermic oxidation at 600 °C for 1 hr in air, weak XRD reflections from the non-oxidized ZnS still remained. These data were consistent with the TGA-DSC study of the “sulfided” sorbent in air, with the loss of weight observed up to ∼680 °C. The systematic approach for finding the optimal regeneration temperature, temperature ramp rate and air flow rate would be to plot concentration of SO2 product vs. time and/or temperature; such detailed study was published on regeneration of zinc titanate high-temperature H2S sorbents.145
Thermal decomposition of commercial ZnSO4·XH2O was comprehensively investigated by XPS, SEM, DRIFTS, XRD and TGA.146 Initial decomposition was observed at ∼700 °C, with a sharp decrease of weight at ∼800 °C, and an additional decrease of weight between 800 and 862 °C. There is no formation of zinc sulfite, contrary to formation of sulfites of Cu2+, Fe2+, Fe3+, Ni2+; the oxy-sulfate that was reported for Cu2+ is not observed for Zn2+. This report seems complementary to the study147 of thermal decomposition of the anhydrous ZnSO4 that begins to convert to oxysulfate ZnO·2ZnSO4 at 590 °C, with complete decomposition at 712 °C.
Formation of sulfates in the regenerated low-temperature H2S sorbent Fe–Mn–Zn–Ti–O as found by XPS was attributed to oxidizing effect of Mn.61 The interesting aspect of this finding is the reported potential of using Fe–Mn–Zn–Ti–O mixed-metal oxides as catalysts for oxidation of H2S to elementary sulfur. This report is also a good illustration of the principle that the increased chemical complexity of the composite material132 could lead to the unexpected phenomena that do not necessarily allow achieving the desired functional properties.
5. Conclusions
The low-temperature (25–200 °C) deep and ultradeep sorptive removal of H2S from gaseous streams of the emerging “clean energy” technologies of the 21st century is the new and rapidly emerging field of research that is far from maturity. To the best of our knowledge, this review is the first attempt to systematically summarize and critically evaluate available knowledge, trends, intellectual and “technical” challenges of experimental mechanistic studies on the low-temperature H2S adsorbents based on ZnO.
Analysis of the recent literature has revealed several trends. From the materials science point of view, there is the increasing interest towards synthesis and studies of chemically and structurally more complex “composite sorbents” that are based on unsupported ternary and quaternary metal oxides. The increasing compositional and structural complexity of these materials is not always justified in terms of their desulfurization performance. On the other hand, the supported sorbents with the highly dispersed nanocrystalline ZnO are of the increasing interest as well. The researchers are more interested in studying and improving the long-term performance of the low-temperature H2S sorbents over many sulfidation-regeneration cycles that could indicate the gradual “transition of technology” from the research laboratory to potential application niches. As pertinent to mechanistic studies of these sorbents, we note the surprisingly small number of reports on real-time in situ and Operando experimental determination of changes in the nano-morphology and atomic-level structure of adsorption-active sites and molecular mechanisms of H2S adsorption and sorbent regeneration. This is in striking contrast with extensive work performed by Operando techniques in heterogeneous catalysis in general in the last ∼15 years. The development of the non-destructive in situ real-time and Operando techniques is progressing; the good candidates are instrumental techniques based on magnetic (nuclear and electron) spin resonance and Operando UV–vis-NIR DRS. The appealing opportunity is using the suites of instrumental techniques simultaneously in the single chemical reactor; this approach, if systematically realized, is expected to improve significantly the current understanding of atomic-level processes in the complex composite functional materials and to provide the fine details of evolution of active sites of “real sorbents” under the “real process” conditions of reactive chemisorption of H2S and possibly of COS and CS2. These advanced Operando studies may not directly lead to formulations of the new sorbents of an outstanding performance, but they would definitely strongly contribute to accumulation of a fundamental knowledge that is to be beneficial to academic, industrial research and engineering communities and beyond. Yet another observation is that the study of the desulfurization material needs to discuss the array of possible applications, e.g. the low-, mid- vs. high-temperature FCs, bio-IGCC vs. IGCC etc.; the intellectual links between chemical engineers and chemists could and should be stronger. Yet another observation is the surprisingly small number of publications on the model H2S sorbents. Mechanistic studies of the low temperature H2S sorbents by quantum chemistry studies are rare, in contrast to computational studies of methanol synthesis catalysts which are structurally and chemically very similar to the low-temperature promoted ZnO sorbents.
Acknowledgements
Authors thanks the US Army (TACOM LCMC Contract W56HZV-05-C-0686) for financial support of this work.
References

          W. L. Orr, Advances in Organic Geochemistry, ed. J. G. R. Campos, Empressa Nacional Adaro de Investigaciones Mineras, Madrid,  1977, pp. 571–597 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Kidnay and W. R. Parrish, Fundamentals of natural gas processing, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA,  2006 Search PubMed .
S. T. Sie, Fuel Process. Technol., 1999, 61, 149–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yui, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2008, 51, 1–13 Search PubMed .
D. Jiang, L. Su, L. Ma, N. Yao, X. Xu, H. Tang and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 3216–3223 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schmidt, A. Tsang, J. Cross, C. Summers and B. Kornosky, Fuel Process. Technol., 2008, 89, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verma, A. D. Rao and G. S. Samuelsen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 417–427 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheah, D. L. Carpenter and K. A. Magrini-Bair, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 5291–5307 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Haji, K. A. Malinger, S. L. Suib and C. Erkey, in Fuel Cell Technology, ed. N. Sammers, Springer, London,  2006, pp. 165–211 Search PubMed .
A. Bagreev, S. Katikaneni, S. Parab and T. J. Bandosz, Catal. Today, 2005, 99, 329–337 CrossRef CAS .
K. Polychronopoulou and A. M. Efstathiou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 4367–4372 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gabriel and M. A. Deshusses, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 6308–6312 CrossRef CAS .
EIA—International Energy Outlook 2010.
J. R. Katzer, Chem. Eng. Prog., 2008, 104, 15–22 Search PubMed .

          C. Björkqvist, International Colloquium on Environmentally Preferred Advanced Power Generation (ICEPAG), February 9–11, 2010, Costa Mesa, California.
E. Shoko, B. McLellan, A. L. Dicks and J. C. D. da Costa, International Journal of Coal Geology, 2006, 65, 213–222 CAS .
J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, Catal. Rev., 2004, 46, 247–270 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Swisher, M. Jhunjhunwala, L. D. Gasper-Galvin, T. H. Gardner and K. Hammerbeck, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 1996, 5, 247–255 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Garces, H. M. Galindo, L. J. Garces, J. Hunt, A. Morey and S. L. Suib, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 127, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Gangwal, R. Gupta and W. J. McMichael, Heat Recovery Syst. CHP, 1995, 15, 205–214 Search PubMed .
P. R. Westmoreland and D. P. Harrison, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1976, 10, 659–661 CAS .
P. R. Westmoreland, J. B. Gibson and D. P. Harrison, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1977, 11, 488–491 CAS .
D. F. Anthrop and A. W. Searcy, J. Phys. Chem., 1964, 68, 2335–2342 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Makarov, S. G. Zbezhneva, V. V. Kovalenko and M. N. Rumyantseva, Inorg. Mater., 2003, 39, 705–709 .
C. Wöll, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2007, 82, 55–120 CrossRef .

Development and Testing of Regenerable Hot Coal-Gas Desulfurization Sorbent. US DOE, Morgantown Energy Technology Center, 1981.
S. Lew, K. Jothimurugesan and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1989, 28, 535–541 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Katzer, The Future of Coal: Options for a Carbon-Constrained World, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, USA,  2007 Search PubMed .
R. B. Slimane and J. Abbasian, Adv. Environ. Res., 2000, 4, 147–162 CrossRef .
X. Xu, I. Novochinskii and C. Song, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19, 2214–2215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Elsayed, M. Seredych, A. Dallas and T. J. Bandosz, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 155, 594–602 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nguyen-Thanh, K. Block and T. J. Bandosz, Chemosphere, 2005, 59, 343–353 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Jensen and C. Webb, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1995, 17, 2–10 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Kleinjan, A. deKeizer and A. J. H. Janssen, Top. Curr. Chem., 2003, 230, 167–188 CAS .
M. Syed, G. Soreanu, P. Falletta and M. Béland, Canadian Biosystems Engineering, 2006, 48 Search PubMed  , 2.1–2.14.

          I. Barin and O. Knacke, Thermochemical Properties of Inorganic Substances, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1973 Search PubMed .

          I. Barin, O. Knacke and O. Kubaschewski, Thermochemical Properties of Inorganic Substances, Supplement, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1977 Search PubMed .
L. Li and D. L. King, Catal. Today, 2006, 116, 537–541 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013–4029 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, Catal. Today, 2002, 77, 17–49 CrossRef CAS .
T. Aicher, B. Lenz, F. Gschnell, U. Groos, F. Federici, L. Caprile and L. Parodi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 154, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, R. T. Yang and J. M. Heinzel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .

          B. J. Tatarchuk, H. Yang and P. Dhage, US Patent WO 2008/137463 A2,  2008 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, R. Sothen, D. R. Cahela and B. J. Tatarchuk, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 10064–10070 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Lu and B. J. Tatarchuk, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 302–311 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, N. Sathitsuksanoh, H. Y. Yang, B. K. Chang, A. P. Queen and B. J. Tatarchuk, ACS Symp. Ser., 914, 406–422 Search PubMed .
A. Samokhvalov, E. C. Duin, S. Nair and B. J. Tatarchuk, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 3226–3232 CrossRef CAS .

          P. P. Dhage, V. Gaur and B. J. Tatarchuk, Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society,  2008.
S. Yoon, J. Bae, S. Kim and Y.-S. Yoo, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
L. Magistri, M. Bozzolo, O. Tarnowski, G. Agnew and A. F. Massardo, J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 2007, 129, 792–797 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rosso, C. Galletti, M. Bizzi, G. Saracco and V. Specchia, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 1688–1697 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Carnes and K. J. Klabunde, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1806–1811 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sahibed-Dine, A. Aboulayt, M. Bensitel, A. B. M. Saad, M. Daturi and J. C. Lavalley, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 162, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pieplu, O. Saur, J.-C. Lavalley, O. Legendre and C. Nedez, Catal. Rev., 1998, 40, 409–450 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ito and J. van Veen, Catal. Today, 2006, 116, 446–460 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ryzhikov, I. Bezverkhyy and J.-P. Bellat, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 766–772 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bezverkhyy, O. V. Safonova, P. Afanasiev and J.-P. Bellat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17064–17069 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meyer and D. Marx, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2004, 69 Search PubMed .
A. L. Yakovlev, A. A. Shubin, G. M. Zhidomirov and R. A. van Santen, Catal. Lett., 2000, 70, 175–181 CrossRef CAS .
F. Labat, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 044708 CrossRef .
K. Polychronopoulou, F. C. Galisteo, M. L. Granados, J. L. G. Fierro, T. Bakas and A. M. Efstathiou, J. Catal., 2005, 236, 205–220 CrossRef CAS .
K. Polychronopoulou, J. L. G. Fierro and A. M. Efstathiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 57, 125–137 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baird, K. C. Campbell, P. J. Holliman, R. Hoyle, D. Stirling and B. P. Williams, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1995, 91, 3219–3230 RSC .
M. Xue, R. Chitrakar, K. Sakane and K. Ooi, Green Chem., 2003, 5, 529–534 RSC .
P. Dhage, A. Samokhvalov, D. Repala, E. C. Duin, M. Bowman and B. J. Tatarchuk, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 8388–8396 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, T. Sun, J. Yang, L. Zhao and J. Jia, Chem. Eng. J., 2008, 142, 48–55 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Lin, D. C. Hu and Y. A. Chang, Metall. Trans. B, 1978, 9 Search PubMed .
W.-X. Li, C. Stampfl and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 256102-1–1256102-4 .
M. Bech, J. B. Simonsen, B. Handke, Z. Li and P. J. Møller, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 3375–3381 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baird, P. J. Denny, R. Hoyle, F. McMonagle, D. Stirling and J. Tweedy, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1992, 88, 3375–3382 RSC .
H. Zhou, A. Hofstaetter, D. M. Hofmann and B. K. Meyer, Microelectron. Eng., 2003, 66, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. McCluskey and S. J. Jokela, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 071101–12 CrossRef .
A. A. Khassin, V. V. Pelipenko, T. P. Minyukova, V. I. Zaikovskii, D. I. Kochubey and T. M. Yurieva, Catal. Today, 2006, 112, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Barret, L. G. Joyner and P. H. Halenda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1951, 73, 373–380 CrossRef .
J. M. Davidson and K. Sohail, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 3675–3677 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Hayter, J. M. Corker, J. Evans and R. J. Oldman, Journal De Physique IV, 1997, 7, 521–522 Search PubMed .
S. Suezer, Appl. Spectrosc., 2000, 54, 1716–1718 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Riviere and S. Myhra, Handbook of Surface and Interface Analysis: Methods for Problem-Solving, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York,  1998 Search PubMed .
J.-D. Grunwaldt, A. M. Molenbroek, N.-Y. Topsoe, H. Topsoe and B. S. Clausen, J. Catal., 2000, 194, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nakamura, N. Negishi, S. Kutsuna, T. Ihara, S. Sugihara and K. Takeuchi, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 161, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Weckhuysen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4910–4943 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. G. Khinast and B. J. Glasser, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2008, 63, 4517–4530 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. A. van de Water, J. A. Bergwerff, T. A. Nijhuis, K. P. de Jong and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5024–5025 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. A. van de Water, G. L. Bezemer, J. A. Bergwerff, M. Versluijs-Helder, B. M. Weckhuysen and K. P. de Jong, J. Catal., 2006, 242, 287–298 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fen, Y. Bo, Z. Jie, J. Anxi, S. Chunhong, K. Xiangji and W. Xin, J. Rare Earths, 2007, 25, 306–310 CrossRef .

          J. F. Haw, In Situ Spectroscopy in Heterogeneous Catalysis, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2002 Search PubMed .
B. M. Weckhuysen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 4351–4360 RSC .
S. J. Tinnemans, J. G. Mesu, K. Kervinen, T. Visser, T. A. Nijhuis, A. M. Beale, D. E. Keller, A. M. J. van de Eerden and B. M. Weckhuysen, Catal. Today, 2006, 113, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, M. Sakbodin and Z. Wang, Science, 2006, 312, 1508–1510 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama and W. Li, Top. Catal., 1999, 8, 75–80 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Bravo-Suárez, K. K. Bando, J. Lu, M. Haruta, T. Fujitani and S. T. Oyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1115–1123 CrossRef CAS .
K. Moazzami, T. E. Murphy, J. D. Phillips, M. C.-K. Cheung and A. N. Cartwright, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2006, 21, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Guo, S. Lin, B. Chen and D. Zheng, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2009, 152, 1–5 Search PubMed .
Z. Fu, B. Yang, L. Li, W. Dong, C. Jia and W. Wu, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2003, 15, 2867–2873 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Islam, T. B. Ghosh, K. L. Chopra and H. N. Acharya, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 280, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Briggs, J. T. Grant, Surface Analysis by Auger and Electron Spectroscopy, IM Publications and Surface Spectra Ltd, Trowbridge,  2003 Search PubMed .
J. W. L. Wong, W. D. Sun, Z. H. Ma and I. K. Sou, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2001, 113, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bondzie, S. J. Dixon-Warren and Y. Li, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 10670–10680 CrossRef CAS .
D. Teschner, A. Pestryakova, E. Kleimenov, M. Hävecker, H. Bluhma, H. Sauer, A. Knop-Gericke and R. Schlögl, J. Catal., 2005, 230, 186–194 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baraldia, G. Comelli, S. Lizzit, M. Kiskinova and G. Paolucci, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 49, 169–224 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samokhvalov, E. C. Duin, S. Nair and B. J. Tatarchuk, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2010, 42, 1476–1482 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samokhvalov, E. C. Duin, S. Nair, M. Bowman, Z. Davis and B. J. Tatarchuk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4075–4085 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Mroue and W. P. Power, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 324–335 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kelemen, G. N. George and M. L. Gorbaty, Fuel, 1990, 69, 939–944 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Lindberg, K. Hamrin, G. Johansson, U. Gelius, A. Fahlmann, C. Nordling and K. Siegbahn, Phys. Scr., 1970, 1, 286–298 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Marco, R. W. Cattrall, J. Liesegang and G. L. Nyberg, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 595–598 .
I. Song, B. Rickett, P. Janavicius, J. H. Payer and M. R. Antonio, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 1995, 360, 634–641 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mijovilovich, L. G. M. Pettersson, S. Mangold, M. Janousch, J. Susini, M. Salome, F. M. F. de Groot and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 2750–2756 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jackowski, W. Makulski and W. Kozminski, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2002, 40, 563–565 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Banares, Catal. Today, 2005, 100, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brueckner, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1761–1763 RSC .
U. Bentrup, A. Brueckner, C. Ruedinger and H.-J. Eberle, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 269, 237–248 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sihao and W. Youqing, Science in China, 1996, 39, 245–254 Search PubMed .
S. Livraghi, M. C. Paganini, M. Chiesa and E. Giamello, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2007, 33, 739–747 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chiesa, E. Giamello and M. Che, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 1320–1347 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Wood, W. E. Isakson and H. Wise, Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev., 1980, 19, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Davidson, C. H. Lawrie and K. Sohail, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 2981–2989 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Botello-Méndez, F. López-Urías, M. Terrones and H. Terrones, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 492, 82–88 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steudel and Y. Steudel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 8589–8602 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Arean, M. R. Delgado, V. Montouillout, J. C. Lavalley, C. Fernandez, J. J. C. Pascual and J. B. Parra, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 67, 259–264 CrossRef .
M. E. Davis, C. Saldarriaga, C. Montes, J. Garces and C. Crowder, Nature, 1988, 331, 698–699 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710–712 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Novochinskii, C. Song, X. Ma, X. Liu, L. Shore, J. Lampert and R. J. Farrauto, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 584–589 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Chinthaginjala, K. Seshan and L. Lefferts, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 3968–3978 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Cahela and B. J. Tatarchuk, Catal. Today, 2001, 69, 33–39 CrossRef CAS .
B.-K. Chang, Y. Lu, H. Yang and B. J. Tatarchuk, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2006, 15, 439–441 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Khan, A. Uhl, S. Shaikhutdinov and H.-J. Freund, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 1849–1853 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wodiunig, J. M. Keel, T. S. E. Wilson, F. W. Zemichael and R. M. Lambert, Catal. Lett., 2003, 87, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Somorjai, R. L. York, D. Butcher and J. Y. Park, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3500–3513 RSC .
G. Ertl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3524–3535 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Repala, A. Samokhvalov and B. J. Tatarchuk, Proceedings of the AIChE Annual Meeting, Nashville, TN, USA,  2009.
T. Ressler, B. L. Kniep, I. Kasatkin and R. Schloegl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4704–4707 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Novochinskii, C. Song, X. Ma, X. Liu, L. Shore, J. Lampert and R. J. Farrauto, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 576–583 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huiling, L. Yanxu, L. Chunhu, G. Hanxian and X. Kechang, Fuel Processing Technology, 2002, 81, 91–96 .
D. Fiaschi and L. Lombardi, Int. J. Applied Thermodynamics, 2002, 5, 13–247 Search PubMed .
T. E. Graedel, G. W. Kammlott and J. P. Franey, Science, 1981, 212, 663–665 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aboulayt, F. Mauge, P. E. Hoggan and J. C. Lavaley, Catal. Lett., 1996, 39, 213–218 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quinn, T. A. Dahl and B. A. Toseland, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 272, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Huisman, P. Vanderberg, R. Mos, A. J. Vandillen and J. W. Geus, Appl. Catal., A, 1994, 115, 157–171 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Moulijn, A. E. van Diepen and F. Kapteijn, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 212, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Vogelaar, P. Steiner, T. F. van de Zijden, A. D. van Langeveld, S. Eijsbouts and J. A. Moulijn, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 318, 28–36 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ferrizz, R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 43, 273–280 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Ryu, N. K. Park, C. H. Chang, J. C. Kim and T. J. Lee, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 1466–1471 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Siriwardane and S. Woodruff, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 699–702 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jothimurugesan and S. K. Gangwal, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1998, 37, 1929–1933 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Siriwardane, J. A. Poston Jr., E. P Fisher, M.-S. Shen and A. L. Miltz, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 152, 219–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mu and D. D. Perimutter, Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 1981, 20, 640–646 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Meng, W. D. Jong and A. H. M. Verkooijen, Environ. Prog. Sustainable Energy, 2009, 28, 360–371 Search PubMed .
J. A. Kritzinger, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 307–318 CrossRef CAS .

Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells 9, Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ,  2009.

Solid Acid Fuel Cell Stack for APU Applications, US DOE FY 2009 Annual Progress Report.
T. Baird, K. C. Campbell, P. J. Holliman, R. W. Hoyle, M. Huxam, D. Stirling, B. P. Williams and M. Morris, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 599–605 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

Alexander Samokhvalov
	Alexander Samokhvalov received his PhD degree in Chemistry at the Chemical Physics Department of the Weizmann Institute of Science (Rehovot, Israel). Since then, he spent a few years of postdoctoral training, with recent research performed with Prof. Bruce J. Tatarchuk at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Auburn University (Auburn, AL USA). Recently, he assumed the position of Assistant Professor of Physical Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry of Rutgers University (Camden, NJ USA). His research interests are in the applied surface science, mechanistic studies of the novel deep and ultradeep desulfurization materials and processes, and photocatalysis.

Bruce J. Tatarchuk
	Bruce J. Tatarchuk is a Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering at Auburn University and the Director of the Center for Microfibrous Materials Manufacturing, CM3 (Auburn, AL, USA). He has received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Wisconsin. His research interests are in heterogeneous reactive systems and catalysis, fuel reforming/processing, fuel cell systems, electrochemical systems and electrode materials, microfibrous materials manufacturing. He is the co-author of many patents and of more than 100 publications in peer-reviewed journals.

Natural gas (sour)	50 ppmv–100 vol%	
2

Natural gas (pipeline quality)	4–16	
2

Raw syngas of IGCC	1700–14000	
148

Biomass-derived raw syngas	20–600	
8

Desulfurized syngas from IGCC-GCS plant	
ca. 10	
135

Syngas for industrial synthesis	
ca. 0.06	
149

Reformate from JP-5 jet fuel	
ca. 300	
150

Reformate from liquid propane gas (LPG)	
ca. 0.5	
151

Gas from anaerobic biodigester of organics	50–5000	
10

ZnO(s) + H2S(g) → ZnS(s) + H2O(g)	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Principal scheme of fuel cell (FC) based electric power generating system.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of the low-temperature FC system including fuel processing unit (FPU) and sorptive desulfurizer.	 

Mixed metal oxides	Cu–Zn–Al–O	25–100 °C	H2S/N2	3000	<0.1	
5

Unsupported ZnO	ZnO	250 °C	Syngas	100	<1	
51

Supported ZnO	ZnO/SBA-15	25 °C	H2S/Air	1000	<0.1	
66

Commercial ZnO	ZnO	60–400 °C	H2S/He	10000	—	
19


Unsupported ZnO	ZnO	XRD, BET, SEM, SEM-EDAX	
51


	
	TGA-DSC	
19

Supported ZnO	ZnO/SBA-15	TEM, TEM-EDX, XPS, FTIR, XRD, SAXS	
66

Unsupported ternary metal oxides	Co–Zn–Al–O	FTIR, XRD, UV–Vis-NIR DRS, TEM	
63

Unsupported binary metal oxides	Co–Zn–O	XPS, EDX, EELS, FTIR	
152

Supported ZnO in MFES Reactor	ZnO/SiO2 MFES	SEM, XRD	
126


 	Fig. 3  Conceptual setup for Operando studies of gas–solid catalytic and sorptive systems.	 

 	Fig. 4  Mechanism of surface reaction of H2S with ZnO.	 
ZnO + H2S → ZnS + H2O	(2)
H2S + CO → H2 + COS	(3)
H2S + CO2 → COS + H2O	(4)
COS + H2Oads → H2S + CO2	(5)
ZnS + 2O2 → ZnO + SO3	(6)
ZnS + 2O2 → ZnSO4	(7)
ZnSO4 → ZnO + SO3	(8)
ZnS + 3/2O2 → ZnO + SO2	(9)
ZnS + 3/2O2 → ZnSO3	(10)
ZnSO3 → ZnO + SO2	(11)
ZnSO4·X H2O → ZnSO4·(X − 1) + H2O	(12)
ZnSO4·(X − 1) H2O → ZnSO4·(X − 2) + H2O, etc.	(13)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
