Lead-free hybrid perovskite photocatalysts: surface engineering, charge-carrier behaviors, and solar-driven applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA01170K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01170K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 12296-12316Lead-free hybrid perovskite photocatalysts: surface engineering, charge-carrier behaviors, and solar-driven applications

        
          
            Yunqi 
            Tang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chun Hong 
            Mak
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Guohua 
            Jia
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kuan-Chen 
            Cheng
          
        
      *defi, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Jung 
            Kai
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Wei 
            Hsieh
          
        
      hi, 
      
        
          
            Fanxu 
            Meng
          
        
      j, 
      
        
          
            Wenxin 
            Niu
          
        
      k, 
      
        
          
            Fang-Fang 
            Li
          
        
      l, 
      
        
          
            Hsin-Hui 
            Shen
          
        
      m, 
      
        
          
            Xunjin 
            Zhu
          
        
      n, 
      
        
          
            Hao Ming 
            Chen
          
        
      *o and 

        
          
            Hsien-Yi 
            Hsu
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Energy and Environment, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, S.A.R. 999077, P. R. China. E-mail: sam.hyhsu@cityu.edu.hk
bShenzhen Research Institute of City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518057, P. R. China
cCurtin Institute of Functional Molecules and Interfaces, School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA 6845, Australia
dGraduate Institute of Food Science Technology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: kccheng@ntu.edu.tw
eInstitute of Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
fDepartment of Optometry, Asia University, 500, Lioufeng Rd, Wufeng, Taichung 41354, Taiwan
gDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, China
hDepartment of Food Science and Biotechnology, National Chung Hsing University, 145 Xingda Rd, South Dist., Taichung City 402, Taiwan
iDepartment of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
jCenter of Characterization and Analysis, Jilin Institute of Chemical Technology, Chengde Street No. 45, Jilin, 132022, P. R. China
kState Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5625 Renmin Street, Changchun, Jilin 130022, P. R. China
lState Key Laboratory of Materials Processing and Die & Mould Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
mDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
nDepartment of Chemistry, Hong Kong Baptist University, Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong, P. R. China
oDepartment of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: haomingchen@ntu.edu.tw
Received 
      13th February 2022
    , Accepted 13th April 2022First published on 13th April 2022AbstractLead-based hybrid perovskites have sparked substantial research interest due to the immense progress in the fields of optoelectronics and photocatalysis. However, owing to the environmental issues of lead toxicity, lead-free hybrid perovskites (LFHPs) with non-toxic metal elements, such as bismuth, strontium, etc., have attracted considerable attention. LFHPs have been recognized as potential photocatalysts because their electronic structures can be easily adjusted by tuning their chemical compositions, crystal structures, and surface morphology. In recent years, the investigation of charge-carrier behaviours on surface-engineered LFHP photocatalysts has been spurting from solar-to-fuel conversion (e.g., hydrogen evolution and CO2 reduction to CO or CH4) to some organic reactions (e.g., organic synthesis and dye degradation). Therefore, in this Review, photocatalytical fundamentals and surface engineering to enhance the charge transport and separation of available photocatalysts are firstly introduced. Synthetic methods of hybrid perovskites with resultant material properties are then discussed. Finally, the performance of LFHPs in solar-driven applications is described. According to the results achieved, current challenges and future research directions in the development of lead-free hybrid perovskites for enhancing photocatalytic efficiency and stability are summarized.
1. Introduction
The last century has experienced a rapid increase in the energy demand due to the increase in population growth and expansion of industrialization worldwide.1 Most of the energy is well known to be obtained from fossil fuels, such as coal, oil and natural gas. However, one of the serious issues related to the consumption of these non-renewable energy sources is their depletion in the near future. Another drawback associated with the consumption of these primary energy sources is the production of carbon dioxide, intensifying the greenhouse effect. These severe consequences have compelled humans to decrease their dependence on fossil fuels by switching to renewable energy resources. In addition, an efficient strategy to reduce the greenhouse effect needs to be developed.2–9 In this regard, a sustainable energy system with emphasis on renewable power would become the dominant strategy in the future. Especially, hydrogen as a completely clean energy (only H2O as the combustion product) has already been reported to be an essential energy source. The next few decades will experience a sustainable increase in its consumption.
To deal with the aforementioned issues, photocatalysis reactions using renewable solar energy as the light source have become vital for hydrogen generation and CO2 recycling.10,11 In addition, photocatalysis can be used to deal with some other environmental problems such as the degradation of organic pollutants as well as benefit some complex reactions under mild conditions such as photocatalytic organic synthesis.12–14
In this Review, in addition to fundamental mechanisms and material syntheses, photophysical and photo(electro)catalytic characteristics, e.g., exciton formation, charge generation, charge separation, and catalytic activity, of environmentally friendly lead-free hybrid perovskites (LFHPs) designed by surface engineering are described. Recent research progress of LFHP-based photocatalysts, such as photodegradation, CO2 reduction reaction (CRR), H2 evolution reaction (HER), and photocatalytic organic synthesis, is emphasized, along with significant strategies for enhancing photocatalytic performance. At the end of this review, current challenges and future development for LFHP-based photocatalysts are discussed.
2. Reaction mechanism and surface engineering
2.1. Photocatalytic routes
Photocatalysis refers to reactions that use photonic energy (derived from a light source) as the driving force to achieve chemical transformations. It generally includes photocatalytic and photosynthetic reactions representing energetically downhill and energetically uphill reactions, respectively.15–18
In a photocatalytic reaction, a photocatalyst, serving as a light harvester, is excited by a light source to produce photo-induced charge carriers, such as electrons and holes; these charge carriers migrate to the surface for redox reactions. A previous study has reported that the entire photocatalytic reaction can be divided into six steps as follows: (1) light absorption, (2) exciton separation after photon absorption, (3) carrier diffusion, (4) carrier transport, (5) catalytic efficiency, and (6) mass transfer of reactants and products.15 Water splitting has been taken as an example to explain the six photocatalytic steps occurring on different time scales (Fig. 1a).19
 Fig. 1  (a) Parameters associated with photocatalysis. Overall water splitting is only successful for high efficiencies of all six gears depicted in the scheme. The different time scales of the reactions are also displayed. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2017, Springer International Publishing. (b) Band alignment in type I, II, and III heterojunctions. 
To achieve high efficiency, promising strategies have been pursued in parallel. One of the effective strategies focuses on the lifetime optimization of the photoexcited charge carriers. Prolonging the lifetime of photoexcited charge carriers by reducing their recombination has been reported to be beneficial for the further oxidation or reduction of the photogenerated charges.20–22
2.2. Heterojunction construction
Heterojunction construction is known to be a widely applied method for enhancing charge carrier separation.23 Thereinto, heterojunctions represent a type of a semiconductor comprising more than one material or crystal structure.24 Therefore, constructing a heterojunction structure is beneficial for charge separation, consequently decreasing the recombination possibility of excited electrons and holes. Furthermore, the photocatalytic activity can be improved due to the long lifetime of the photo-induced electron–hole pairs.18,25–28
Generally, there are three main heterojunction architectures (Fig. 1b) in the literature, where A and B correspond to two semiconductors or components.29–31 In a type I heterojunction, also known as a straddling gap junction, the conduction band (CB) position of B is more negative than that of A, and the valence band (VB) position of B is more positive than that of A. Hence, electrons and hole tend to transfer to, and accumulate in, A.32,33 In a type II heterojunction, also known as a staggered gap junction, the CB and VB of A are at a position higher than those of B, leading to the transformation of photoexcited electrons from B to A and the movement of holes in the opposite direction. This transfer mode of charge carriers is conducive to charge separation and photocatalytic activity. In a type III heterojunction, band gaps are not overlapped (broken gap); hence, photoinduced electrons and holes cannot transfer between their band alignments.34 As a result, a type II heterojunction is the most effective heterojunction for optimizing the photocatalytic efficiency.
2.3. Element doping
With advantages such as optimizable intrinsic optical and electronic properties, broader light-responsive range and enhanced charge separation, element doping is considered to be a unique method for photocatalytic efficiency improvement.35–37 With regards to the composition of hybrid perovskites, Cl, Br, I, and/or metal elements can be used for element doping to optimize the properties of perovskites.38–42 Chen et al.43 have doped Mn2+ and Yb3+ into the perovskite structure, which has been reported to help induce additional dopant-related emission bands, leading to dual emissions.44–46
The halide doping strategy can be employed to tune the bandgap value of perovskites.47,48 Chen et al.49 have reported that Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 LFHPs with Sb doping can effectively reduce the ratio of Bi3+ on the CB, further weakening the Bi vacancy contribution to the band structure. In addition, compared with that in their undoped counterparts, fewer mid-gap states are present in the Cs3Bi2xSb2−xI9 band alignment, and optical absorption is enhanced, incredibly benefitting the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).
2.4. Morphology engineering
To investigate the potential of the unique morphology or structure-dependent properties of morphology-controlled photocatalysts, their development has enhanced significance for photocatalytic performance.50 First, to control the morphological dimension of photocatalysts, comprising 3D (powders, thin films and bulk crystals), 2D (micro/nanoplates), 1D (micro/nanorods) and 0D (quantum dots and other nanocrystals), the future development of diverse photocatalysts for different types of solar-to- fuel production has been broadened.51,52 Moreover, porosity is another crucial structural aspect for photocatalysts, which enables the solution to be absorbed for redox reactions and provides an increased number of active reaction sites.
2.5. Dimension control

2.5.1. 3D photocatalysts. 
Thermodynamic constraints and kinetic limitations are well known to be the main decisive factors for whether reactions can occur efficiently. In detail, the separation and migration of charge carriers as well as surface reaction processes are regarded as rate-determining steps in the entire fundamental processes of photocatalytic reactions, possibly leading to a low quantum efficiency. To resolve these two problems, the use of photocatalysts with a 3D network structure is a good choice. From a structural viewpoint, 3D photocatalysts are broadly divided into two categories. The first category includes a loaded-type photocatalyst, where supporting materials with a 3D structure are used as a framework. Actual photocatalysts are loaded on this 3D framework. The second category includes an unloaded-type photocatalyst, where the photocatalyst already exhibits a 3D framework structure. As mentioned above, several photocatalysts exhibit a 3D network structure as well as a relatively high specific surface area, which is beneficial for the adsorption and further promotes photocatalytic reactions. On the other hand, surface photocatalytic reactions are accelerated due to the exposure of the reactive sites. These advantages of 3D photocatalysts are remarkably effective for the liquid-phase degradation of environmental pollutants due to the synergistic effect of adsorptive enrichment and photocatalysis.53


2.5.2. 2D photocatalysts. 
Since the discovery of graphene, 2D materials have been exponentially used for several applications.54–61 Photocatalysts with a 2D structure are expected to be extensively used in several applications due to their excellent physicochemical properties such as good crystallinity, rich host–guest species selection, better charge carrier separation and large surface-active sites. On account of the above merits, in the last decade, a number of 2D-material-based photocatalysts, including monolayer graphene, graphene oxide and carbon nitride, have been developed for various photocatalytic applications.62


2.5.3. 1D photocatalysts. 
Besides the above structures, materials with 1D nanostructures also can be used as photocatalysts. Compared to bulk materials, photocatalysts with 1D nanostructures can render some unique benefits. (i) The 1D framework can enhance rapid and long-distance electron transport. (ii) In general, 1D nanostructures exhibit a higher specific surface area and pore volume compared with those of the corresponding bulk materials. (iii) Owing to the high length-to-diameter ratio of 1D nanostructures, light harvesting and scattering are expected to be remarkably enhanced.63


2.5.4. 0D photocatalysts. 
Compared to their bulk-phase counterparts, materials with 0D structures exhibit favourable surface species, which are deemed to exhibit excellent photocatalytic activity. The effective quantum efficiency of 0D semiconductors has been enhanced due to the increased surface area in the photocatalyst systems.64 The improved quantum efficiency may be related to the interaction of excitons with charged surface states.65 Besides, with the decrease in the particle size, the quantum confinement effect becomes prominent, leading to the increase in the emergence of discrete energy levels at the band edges of the CB and VB and subsequently enhancing the redox potential of photogenerated electrons and holes.66,67

2.6. Porous design
According to the above discussion, one of the reasons why materials with different dimensional structures can be good candidates for photocatalytic reactions is their porous properties and high specific surface areas.68 By using porous materials in a photocatalytic system, substrate molecules can be adsorbed and enriched on the photocatalyst surface for further catalytic conversion.69
A porous structure is well known to increase the specific surface area of semiconductors as well as the number of surface-active sites. In addition, electron donors (serving as the recombination sites of photogenerated electrons) in the structures of these materials are reduced due to the presence of a porous structure. Hence, a porous structure promotes the separation of photogenerated carriers and solves the rapid recombination of the photogenerated carriers of materials.70–72
In addition, the porous structures can be divided into different structural levels. Hierarchically structured porous materials integrate multiple levels of porosity and structures, exhibiting a porous structure on more than one length scale from micro (<2 nm), meso (2–50 nm), to macropores (>50 nm).73 The multiple levels of pore sizes usually comprise bimodalities such as micro–meso, meso–macro, micro–macro or even trimodalities such as micro–meso–macro and meso–meso–macro.74 Owing to their variety, in recent years, hierarchically porous structures have attracted considerable research interest as virtual functional materials.75,76 Generally, hierarchically porous materials also exhibit a highly porous as well as a high surface area, sizeable accessible space, low density, variable chemical compositions, and interconnected hierarchical porosity on different length scales, which are extremely favourable for light harvesting, electron and ion transport, as well as mass loading and diffusion; these characteristics endow them with technological importance in photocatalysis and some other applications.77–79
3. Crystal structure and material characteristics of LFHPs
3.1. Perovskite structure
Generally, hybrid perovskites exhibit a universal structure with the formula ABX3.80,81 The A site is occupied by a monovalent cation (e.g. methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+) or Cs+), which is located at the vertices of a unit cell. At the B site, a divalent metal cation is at the centre of [BX6]4− octahedra, bonding with six X anions, where X is a halide anion (e.g. Cl, Br or I) (Fig. 2a).80,82
 Fig. 2  (a) Depiction and crystal structure of perovskites with different phases. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Local structure of the Bi2I93− anion, and crystal structure of MA3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Ideally, radii of the ions on these three sites play a vital role in the hybrid perovskite structure. Hence, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) is summarized as an indicator to assess the stability and distortion of hybrid perovskite crystal structures, which is described by eqn (1): (1)where rA, rB and rX are the radii of the ions located at the A, B and X sites, respectively.83 Previous studies have reported that the cubic symmetry can be maintained only if the Goldschmidt tolerance factor ranges from 0.813 to 1.107. However, if t > 1, in which the A ion is extremely large or the B ion is extremely small, the structure undergoes distortion to hexagonal symmetry, and if t < 0.8, the A ions are extremely small to fit into the interstices of the B ions, often leading to alternative structures.
Besides, the octahedral factor (μ) is used as the other semiempirical geometric parameter to access the octahedral stability of [BX6]4−, which is expressed by eqn (2): (2)
For a stable octahedral structure, μ should be between 0.44 and 0.895. The t and μ values for perovskites comprising A and X sites and the divalent IVA group metal at the B site play a crucial role in the formation of a stable perovskite with a cubic structure. Nevertheless, the cubic perovskite structure can be converted into other phases under certain conditions such as thermal or stress conditions.84–86 Different from the 3D cubic structure, Bi-based hybrid perovskites can be considered as another series of lead-free halide hybrids. Generally, typical Bi-based halide hybrid perovskites are expressed by the formula A3Bi2X9.87 Among these perovskites, A3Bi2I9, where X = I, has been widely investigated, and it comprises face-sharing octahedral [Bi2I9]3− clusters with a 0D crystal structure (Fig. 2).88–91
3.2. Site effect

3.2.1. A-site. 
In hybrid perovskite materials, when an organic cation occupies the A-site, these materials are referred to as organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, but their stability is a serious issue. To improve the stability of perovskites, organic A-site cations can be converted into inorganic cations such as Cs+, referred to as all-inorganic hybrid perovskites.92 The selection of the A-site cation is confirmed to be a dominant factor in the phase stability of hybrid perovskites.93 Besides, the cations on the A-site are well known to exert a limited effect on the performance optimization of hybrid perovskites due to their indirect participation in band-gap construction.94


3.2.2. B-site. 
The ions at the B-site are crucial for the control of the optical and photophysical properties of perovskites.95 Lead-based perovskites are on the top site of hybrid perovskites for optoelectronic applications.96 Removing Pb from perovskites is inevitable due to environmental concerns. For this reason, tin (Sn) is regarded as one of the best substitutes for Pb due to its ionic radius and chemical properties being similar to those of Pb2+.97 In contrast, bismuth (Bi)-based hybrid perovskites can be another alternative to Pb for photocatalytic applications due to the nontoxicity and chemical stability of Bi.98 Recently, perovskites with double metals at the B-site, referred to as double perovskites, generally having the formula A2M(I)M(III)X6, have been widely investigated as another stable and green alternative to lead hybrid perovskites.99 Creutz et al. and Locardi et al. were the first to report the syntheses of double perovskite nanocrystals with structures of Cs2AgBiCl6 and Cs2AgInCl6, respectively.100,101 Accordingly, some lead-free double perovskites with a uniform morphology, controllable sizes, and superior properties have been reported.102–109 Furthermore, these double perovskites have been employed in some state-of-art-applications, including solar cells,102 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),109 light or X-ray detectors,38,110 and photocatalysis.39111–113


3.2.3. X-site. 
X always refers to the halide anion site, viz. Cl−, Br− or I−.114 Besides, previous studies have confirmed that dihalogen perovskites exhibit better properties (such as better thermal stability and controllable band structure, etc.) than their single halogen counterparts.115,116

3.3. Bandgap structure
As mentioned above, the A-site cations rarely affect the VB or CB; hence, the bandgap of hybrid perovskites can be controlled by the optimization of the cations at the B− and X− sites.118,119 Owing to the tunable bandgap structure of hybrid perovskites, a target for high efficiency of various applications can be achieved by tuning the energy band edge. In addition, as discussed above, the B-site cation plays a key role in the control of the optical properties of perovskites. Let us take Bi-based hybrid perovskites as an example. In these perovskites, Bi-6p and X comprise the CB and VB-(3, 4, 5p), respectively. Thus, the selection of the B-site is crucial for bandgap, which is a virtual parameter for perovskites as a photocatalyst.120 As such, low-toxicity metals such as Bi, Ag, Sn, and their mixtures are typically used as B-site metals. Owing to their nontoxicity and excellent air-stable properties, Bi-based hybrid perovskites have been considered a good alternative for lead-based hybrid perovskites. Moreover, due to its similar electron structure to that of lead, as well as the insert-pair effect of the 6s orbit, Bi is a good replacement for lead at the B-site of perovskites.48,121 Although tin-based perovskites exhibit a bandgap in the range from 1.2 to 1.4 eV, which is less than that of Bi-based perovskites, their stability is still a serious issue.122 To improve their stability, the regulation of A-site cations has been considered recently.123–125 In addition, the halogen anion at the X-site exerts a strong influence on the VB position of the perovskite. Yu et al. have reported that by the introduction of Br in Cs3Bi2I9, the bandgap of Cs3Bi2I9−xBrx is broadened with the increase in the Br concentration compared to pure Cs3Bi2I9, and the optoelectronic properties of Cs3Bi2I9 can be further improved (Fig. 3a).126 Jellicoe and co-workers have reported that the bandgap of CsSnX3 (X = Cl, Cl0.5Br0.5, Br, Br0.5I0.5, I) perovskite NCs can be adjusted from 2.8 to 1.3 eV by compositional optimization and spatial confinement, thereby spanning its response range from the visible to the near-infrared region.117Fig. 3b shows the band structures of some popular LFHP photocatalysts.
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorbance and steady-state PL of nanocrystals containing pure and mixed halides. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Band structure of some reported LFHP photocatalysts. 
3.4. Charge carriers
Lifetime and diffusion length of carriers are inevitably used to evaluate the dynamics of charge carriers. These two parameters represent the average lifetime or length of carriers from their generation to their annihilation. In other words, if the carrier lifetime and diffusion length are sufficiently long, their recombination rate is low.127 After excitation, excitons can undergo relaxation in three ways: first is the radiative recombination of excitons with fluorescence emission, second is non-radiative relaxation via electron or hole trap assistance, and the third is non-radiative recombination of excitons via energy transfer (Fig. 4a).120
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the charge carrier dynamics of photoluminescence in bismuth-based perovskites. (b) Illustration of charge-carrier mobility. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2016, Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Considerable efforts have been focused on prolonging the carrier diffusion length of perovskites. The presence of Cl− has been confirmed to affect the density of trap states with more medium for charge transfer and reduce the VB, thereby dominating carrier recombination.62 Yi and co-workers have employed theoretical calculations and reported that Cs3Sb2Br9 exhibits a suitable band structure and that the mobilities of electrons and holes are different,128 indicative of the highly efficient charge separation.94 Liu et al. have demonstrated that after Mn doping, the optical and photophysical properties of the host perovskite are enhanced due to the inhibition of reduction of the traps by the Mn2+ dopant, therefore giving rise to prolonged electron lifetime.129
In fact, charge carrier mobility (μ) is also a vital factor, but its basic information is still not available (Fig. 4b). Experimental measurements have revealed that a CH3NH3SnI3 system exhibits high electron mobility (μe ∼ 2320 cm2 V−1 s−1), which is greater than that of CH3NH3PbI3 (μe ∼ 66 cm2 V−1 s−1). The ratio of the charge carrier mobility to the recombination rate critically affects the charge-carrier diffusion length.130 Some studies have reported that when Cl is partially replaced by I in hybrid perovskites, the carrier lifetime and charge mobility are enhanced with the restrained recombination.131 Furthermore, a long diffusion length for the charge carrier, in addition to the lifetime of perovskites, also contributes immensely to their photocatalytic performance due to the efficient utilization of photo-induced electrons and holes.
3.5. Ligand effect
Use of different structures of ligands for perovskite nanocrystal synthesis has been reported to exert different effects on perovskites, such as stability, particle scale and optical and electrical properties. In particular, steric hindrance between the bulky ligands plays a role in the surface coverage of perovskites.133 First, optical properties of nanocrystals considerably rely on the surface state, and surface defects exert adverse effects on optical properties.134,135 In addition, the uncovered site on the nanocrystal surface tends to aggregate, leading to the transformation of the perovskite crystal structure.136 On the other hand, long ligands are detrimental to the electrical properties of nanocrystals due to the low migration efficiency of the charge carriers in the ligands.137–140
3.6. Dimensional effect

3.6.1. 3D bulk perovskites. 
Hybrid perovskites with a 3D structure have been used as an efficient photocatalyst by their dispersion in an HX solution to initiate photocatalysis.141,142 However, some harmful defects or structural disorder on the surface of these micrometre-sized bulk perovskites are observed, possibly leading to reduced photocatalytic performance.143 In comparison with polycrystalline structures, perovskite single crystals show lower trap states, longer exciton diffusion lengths, and more vital stability under moisture conditions or light irradiation due to the presence of fewer grain boundaries in single crystals, exerting positive effects on the photocatalytic performance.144–147 On the other hand, compared with those in nanomaterials, photoinduced charge carriers of 3D bulk perovskites have to migrate to longer distances to initiate redox reactions on the surface-active sites; hence, perovskites with a 3D structure can render an increased recombination probability and a decreased reaction rate.


3.6.2. 2D perovskites. 
Compared with that of bulk materials, the surface state in a nanoscale perovskite dominates the nanomaterial properties as a result of its high surface-to-volume ratio. 2D perovskite structures, such as micro/nanosheets and micro/nanobelts (Fig. 5), can be constructed via the Z-scale reduction of the 3D perovskite materials. Typical 2D perovskite nanoplatelets (NPLs) display anisotropic carrier transport, uniform crystal facets and ordered surface atoms. Because of the quantum confinement effect, low-dimensional perovskite nanomaterials exhibit superior physical and chemical characteristics compared with 3D perovskite structures.148 Specifically, 2D perovskite nanostructures can strongly limit the electrons and holes in two dimensions, leading to a large exciton binding energy.149 The 2D nanomaterials controlled with few-unit-cell thicknesses can reveal excellent photophysical properties with high photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs).149,150
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of halide perovskites with different dimensionalities from 3D to 0D at the (a) molecular level and morphological level. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) Model diagram and TEM images of MHPs with different shapes. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


3.6.3. 1D perovskites. 
In addition to a high aspect ratio and an enclosed surface, 1D perovskites such as nanorods or nanowires also exhibit much higher anisotropy compared to their 2D perovskite counterparts, thereby leading to decreased grain boundaries, effective charge transport and strong quantum-size effects.151–153 Compared with 3D perovskite nanostructures, 1D nanostructures generally manifest high crystal quality with dimension-dependent light-trapping properties, giving rise to attractive optical and electrical performance.154 Owing to their aspect-ratio-dependent properties, 1D nanostructures with short charge diffusion length are recognized as effectual building blocks for the advancement of solar-driven catalytic technologies.155,156


3.6.4. 0D perovskites. 
As perovskites with actually low morphological dimensionality, zero-dimensional perovskite nanocrystals (NCs) such as quantum dots exhibit extraordinary intrinsic properties, including broadened optical absorption, enhanced quantum yield, extended exciton diffusion lengths and significantly improved stability.157 Compared to other perovskite structures, 0D perovskite NCs with high surface-to-volume ratio and strong quantum confinement have been developed as one of the most efficient photocatalysts. Diverse perovskite NCs with different morphological dimensionalities have been reported and successfully used in electronic and optoelectronic devices. However, the morphology and dimensionality of low-dimensional photocatalysts (e.g. 1D NWs) have not yet been investigated considerably.

4. Synthesis of perovskite photocatalysts
The ingenious design and synthesis of photocatalysts based on hybrid perovskite nanomaterials play an essential role in their photocatalytic activity.158 Ligand-capped perovskite NCs in nonpolar solutions have been intensively studied in the field of photocatalysis159,160 using compositional engineering. The bandgap of perovskite NCs can be tuned into the visible spectrum ranging from 2.0 to 1.7 eV. Notably, the construction of a heterojunction between perovskite NCs and other typical semiconductors exhibits outstanding chemical and physical properties, therefore extending a wide range of photocatalytic applications. In this part, the recent studies on practical synthetic methods are summarized.
4.1. Ligand modification strategy
Nanoscaled hybrid perovskite photocatalysts can be designed by various typical synthetic approaches, comprising hot injection and room-temperature synthesis, etc.161
Su et al. have utilized silver and bismuth to synthesize Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs via hot injection. In general, Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs were formed by the rapid injection of Cs oleate into a high-boiling organic solvent containing BiBr3 and AgNO3 with oleic acid (OA) and oleylamine (OAm) at a high temperature (Fig. 6a). Small ligands (e.g. OAm and OA) make a significant contribution to the dissolution of BiBr3 and the stabilization of perovskite NCs. Different from the analogous hot-injection approach of CsPbBr3; noticeably, a small amount of a hydrobromic acid (HBr) additive (i.e. addition of 100 μL of HBr into 6 mL of the precursor) was crucial in the synthesis due to the possibility of ensuring the total ionization of Ag+, thereby preventing the formation of AgBr impurity in the final product. In addition, the injection temperature in this synthesis reaction was another critical issue due to the insolubility of the BiBr3 precursor at 160 °C, whereas undesired impurities such as BiBr and BiBr3 with a broad size distribution were observed at higher temperatures of greater than 230 °C. Therefore, to ensure high crystallinity and purity, an optimal injection temperature of 200 °C is selected. Of note, only bulk Cs2AgBiBr6 was obtained in the absence of OA, while without OLA, the BiBr3 precursor was not dissolved. In other words, Cs2AgBiBr6 NC cannot be obtained in the sole presence of OLA and OA ligands, highlighting the synergistic effect on the crystallization control of Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs by OLA and OA because OLA can serve as a complexing agent for Bi3+, whereas the OA ligand can suppress crystal growth.162,163 In addition, owing to the rapid nucleation and growth via an ion metathesis reaction, the entire evolution of Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs occurred within ∼10 s.39 Liu et al. have also employed this method to synthesize lead-free Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl, Br and I) double perovskite nanoplatelets and discussed the effect of reaction temperature (Fig. 6b).150 To develop perovskite NCs with high crystallinity, the hot-injection synthesis at a high temperature is considered as one of the most efficient strategies. Nevertheless, it is difficult to manipulate the mixed precursor solution at a high temperature, leading to low reproducibility rates for the commercialization of photocatalytic applications.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the solution phase synthesis of Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (hot-injection route). Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Preparation procedure of the Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of lead-free Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite 2D NPLs. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustrations for the preparation processes of Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
In contrast to the high-temperature process, Liu et al. have employed ligand-assisted reprecipitation at room temperature to fabricate all-inorganic Cs3Bi2I9 perovskite NCs (Fig. 6d).164 During the room-temperature synthesis, a polar solvent with the precursor was added drop by drop into a nonpolar solvent. The precursors with different ligands were dissolved by the polar DMF solvent, while inorganic salts were reprecipitated by the nonpolar toluene for the formation of perovskite NCs.
4.2. Ligand-free methods
Besides the ligand modification strategy, ligand-free perovskite-based microcrystals or single crystals are explored as competent photocatalysts for solar-driven catalytic reactions. To produce a micro-sized perovskite-based crystals, co-evaporation of organic and/or inorganic precursor salts has been reported.165–167
Due to the moisture sensitivity of hybrid perovskites, concentrated solutions of hydrogen halides, e.g., HI, HBr, were used to enhance the stability for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution. The hydrogen halide solution not only provides H+ for photocatalytic H2 evolution but also serves as a medium to undergo dynamic equilibrium for the recrystallization of hybrid perovskite photocatalysts. Jiang et al. have prepared precipitated Cs2AgBiBr6 photocatalysts in an acidic solution for photoinduced hydrogen generation (Fig. 6c).168 The formation of perovskite-based photocatalysts arises from the precipitation of ionic crystals in the solution when the concentration of ions is higher than their solubility limits. In general, excess precursors at a high temperature result in dynamic equilibrium, followed by the formation of hybrid perovskite-based precipitates in a supersaturated solution by cooling the whole system to room temperature.169
4.3. Solvothermal methods
Typically, solvothermal methods are employed for the synthesis of perovskite-based single crystals. Briefly, hybrid perovskite single crystals could be formed by the dissolution of organic–inorganic perovskite precursor solutions in an HX solvent with ethanol. Furthermore, to obtain pure single crystals, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) syringe filters are typically used to purify the precursor solution. To achieve better crystallinity, the reaction time should be long, and the temperature should be high. Liu et al. have employed a solvothermal method to synthesize a lead-free hybrid perovskite with enhanced long-term stability, viz. EtbtBi2I10 single crystal. The as-prepared EtbtBi2I10 crystals were synthesized with a yield of 42%.170
5. Photocatalytic applications of lead-free hybrid perovskites
In recent years, lead-free hybrid perovskites (LFHPs) have been widely investigated as catalysts in several photocatalytic reactions, such as CO2 reduction,99,121 hydrogen production,49,171 organic reaction,94 and pollutant degradation.172
LFHPs with an intense response in the visible-light range and an appropriate electronic band structure satisfy the thermodynamic requirements of the above-mentioned photocatalytic reactions. However, some other decisive kinetic factors need to be considered for designing photocatalysts, such as charge separation and migration, active sites and stability. Thus far, tremendous efforts have been focused on the design of LFHP-driven photocatalytic systems with the aim of enhancing the stability and improving the efficiency.
To enhance the LFHP photocatalytic performance and stability, several efforts have been focused, including (i) element doping in LFHPs,173 (ii) composite or heterojunction design to enhance the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes or migration174 and (iii) use of inorganic ions such as Cs+ to replace organic ions.34,121
5.1. CO2 reduction reaction
Conversion of CO2 into chemicals or fuels by a photocatalytic strategy demonstrates promise to solve the global energy shortage and environmental pollution issues.56,175,176 Theoretically, the routes for CO2 reduction reactions are as follows: CO2 + e− → CO2, E0 = −1.9 V(3)
On the other hand, if excess electrons are emitted from the reaction coupled with proton transfer, the reaction potential can be substantially reduced; hence, various chemical species can be produced via CO2 reduction (eqn (3)–(8)) (vs. RHE, at pH = 7):177 CO2 + H+ + 2e− → HCOOH, E0 = −0.61 V(4) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O, E0 = −0.53 V(5) CO2 + H+ + e− → HCHO + H2O, E0 = −0.48 V(6) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O, E0 = −0.38 V(7) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + H2O, E0 = −0.24 V(8) 2H+ + 2e− → H2, E0 = −0.41 V(9)
Recently, LFHPs have attracted significant attention in photocatalytic CO2 reduction due to their distinct optoelectrical properties. However, as photocatalysts, pristine LFHPs exhibit serious challenges such as few active sites, low charge separation and instability under moisture conditions. To enhance the photocatalytic performance, LFHPs have been designed by various strategies such as morphology control, element doping, combination with semiconductor materials, etc.Table 1 summarizes recent studies on LFHPs for CO2 reduction.
Table 1 Summary of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance over LFHPs




Sample
Light source
Light intensity
Solution
CO, μmol g−1
CH4, μmol g−1
Ref.




MA3Bi2I9
UV lamp (32 W, 305 nm)
80.38 μW cm−2
Gas–solid reaction system
7.2 (10 h)
9.8 ± 0.6 (10 h)

121



Cs3Bi2I9
UV lamp (32 W, 305 nm)
80.38 μW cm−2
Gas–solid reaction system
77.6 (10 h)
14.9 ± 0.8 (10 h)


Rb3Bi2I9
UV lamp (32 W, 305 nm)
80.38 μW cm−2
Gas–solid reaction system
18.2 (10 h)
17.0 ± 1.6 (10 h)


Cs2AgBiBr6 NPLs
405 nm laser diode
40 mW cm−2
Ethyl acetate
∼38 (6 h)
∼25 (6 h)

99



Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (unwashed)
AM 1.5G
150 mW cm−2
Ethyl acetate
5.5(6 h)
0.65 (6 h)

39



Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (washed)
AM 1.5G
150 mW cm−2
Ethyl acetate
14.1 (6 h)
9.6 (6 h)


Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (bulk)
AM 1.5G
150 mW cm−2
Ethyl acetate
—
—


Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4-82%
AM 1.5G
150 mW cm−2
Ethyl acetate + methanol
0.6/h
1.5/h

183



Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4-10%
AM 1.5Ga
150 mW cm−2
Ethyl acetate + methanol
1.8/h
0.2/h


Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6
Xe lamp
100 mW cm−2
Gas–solid reaction system
66 μmol g−1 (9 h)
—

164



Cs3Sb2Br9 NCs
AM 1.5
100 mW cm−2
Octadecene + high purity water
510 μmol g−1 (4 h)
—

184





According to previous studies and demonstration, in a perovskite structure, the A-site cation should exhibit an appropriate size and a positive charge because it serves as a structural template and helps to maintain charge electroneutrality. Hitherto, only MA+, FA+ and Cs+ have been comprehensively investigated as A-site ions to stabilize the perovskite structure, making the perovskite suitable for photovoltaic applications.178 Therefore, the engineering of A-site cations is regarded as one of the hot topics for LFHP photocatalyst design.179 Diau and co-workers have reported Pb-free Bi-based hybrid perovskite-based nanocrystals (PeNCs) as the photocatalyst for CO2 reduction to solar fuels.121 First, they synthesized three bismuth-based PeNCs by a new top-down approach coupled with ultrasonication, with the general chemical formula of A3Bi2I9; these PeNCs comprise different A sites including Rb, Cs or CH3NH3 (MA). As shown in Fig. 7, bulk crystal growth of hybrid perovskites occurred by directly grinding the perovskite precursors in dimethylformamide (DMF), followed by transferring it to a falcon tube with OA and OLA ligands. The nanocrystal structure can be obtained by the fragmentation under the ultrasonication of bulk perovskites. Hence, as-obtained PeNCs are protected by the small molecular ligands from the perovskite precursor solution. Owing to the uncontrollably abnormal breaking during ultrasonication, the final PeNCs were produced, exhibiting a wide range of sizes on the nanoscale with the average diameters ranging from 6.2 to 12.6 nm.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the top-down method to fabricate bismuth-based perovskite nanocrystals and their application in the solid–gas photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the Cs2AgBiBr6 NPL photocatalyzed CO2 reduction reaction. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of Rb3Bi2I9 (green), Cs3Bi2I9 (red), and MA3Bi2I9 (blue) under illumination for 1 h in the absence (solid curves) or presence (dashed curves) of CO2 and H2O. The vertical dashed lines show the corresponding g-factor values. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Diffuse-reflectance infrared spectra of Rb3Bi2I9 (green), Cs3Bi2I9 (red), and MA3Bi2I9 (blue).121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
To investigate the stability of PeNCs under humid and light conditions, XRD patterns were recorded before proceeding with the photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide. Fresh samples were confirmed to be stable under ambient conditions with an RH of 70% for 7 days and then treated by a UV lamp for 12 h. Hence, these PeNC photocatalysts can be used stably during the solar-driven CO2 reduction.
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) measurements have been conducted at low temperature under irradiation with/without CO2 and H2O vapour to clarify interfacial charge transfer and trapping. EPR results revealed that Cs3Bi2I9 exhibits the most EPR-active holes under illumination and that MA3Bi2I9 is in the third position without CO2 and H2O. By the addition of CO2 and H2O vapour during the photocatalytic reaction, the CO2 reduction without H2O vapor could continuously quench the EPR-active holes. The results indicated that Cs3Bi2I9 reveals an outstanding ability for the production of photoinduced excitons while compared with the other PeNCs. Generally, lead-free bismuth-based perovskite materials can have defect-tolerant electronic structures with the formation of the CB and VB by antibonding orbitals.180 Additionally, the excited electrons and holes can be stabilized by Bi3+ and Bi4+ ions in the Bi-based perovskites. Notably, a similar effect has also been observed in lead-based perovskite materials.181
In addition, EPR spectra were measured without the addition of ligands to determine whether EPR signals were produced by the active holes under illumination. EPR signals of BiI3 and bulk perovskites have not been observed. Importantly, only MA3Bi2I9 can be clearly detected, suggesting that ligand-free Rb3Bi2I9, Cs3Bi2I9 and BiI3 have been quickly quenched during the EPR measurements.98 By contrast, the MA3Bi2I9 hybrid perovskite possesses a trapped organic cation; hence, it exhibits stronger EPR signals corresponding to ˙CH + NH3+ radicals, representing holes.181 The hyperfine splitting of the EPR spectrum signals was observed, indicating the presence of unpaired electrons on the oxygen ions of OA.182 Different from Rb3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9, where Bi4+ and oxygen ions efficiently stabilize holes, the holes are stabilized by Bi4+, ˙CH2NH3+ and oxygen anions in MA3Bi2I9. The quenching of the EPR signal of the MA-based PeNC revealed that the hole transformation into water is thus inefficient. As a result, the photocatalytic performance of MA3Bi2I9 is much inferior compared with other PeNCs, which is in agreement with the results obtained from the photocatalytic test.
In contrast, the Cs3Bi2I9 perovskite photocatalyst exhibited the strongest performance due to the effective charge generation and transportation with the existence of CO2 and H2O. Besides, the increased photocatalytic activity attributes to the crystal structure of Cs3Bi2I9. Noticeably, the crystal structure of Rb3Bi2I9 perovskites with a distorted-defect perovskite-type variant could reduce every third M layer of the perovskite structures in the facet [001].185 Because bismuth serves as the active site of the perovskite-based photocatalysts, the reduction of bismuth in Rb3Bi2I9 could decrease the catalytic activity while compared to Cs3Bi2I9 photocatalysts. To investigate photocatalytic processes of CO2 reduction for these PeNCs, the authors measured the diffuse-reflectance infrared spectra. Free OH vibrations can only be observed in the spectra of Rb3Bi2I9 due to its layer-defect crystal structure.
After photocatalytic CO2 reduction, the surfaces of these PeNCs are covered by hydroxyl groups, rendering hydrophilic properties. As depicted in Fig. 7d, the photocatalytic reaction can be evidently proved by the presence of the intermediate species. From the IR spectra of Rb3Bi2I9 in Fig. 8a, the dioxycarbon anion and formate should act as the intermediates of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction through the monodentate channel. On the other hand, the intermediates of Cs3Bi2I9, including the bridge carbonate, monodentate carbonate and bidentate carbonate, are formed in the case of CO2 photoreduction via a bidentate channel (Fig. 8b). For both monodentate and bidentate channels, the formate acts as the dominant intermediate for the solar-driven catalytic reaction from the reduction of CO2 to the formation of CO and methane. Methane can be produced from CO2 through an eight-electron process. As shown in the reaction process of Fig. 8c, the formate is converted to methane. The decreasing order of the intensity for formate species in the IR spectra is Rb3Bi2I9 > Cs3Bi2I9 > MA3Bi2I9, which is in agreement with the yield of the methane product. We can observe the side reactions in Fig. 8d during the production of formic acid, formaldehyde, and methanol via two-electron, four-electron, and six-electron processes. In the crystal structure of Bi-based perovskite materials, there are corner-sharing BiI6 octahedra located at the surface of perovskite crystals. The general formula of the compound is ABX3 (conventional perovskites and their polytypes). Trivalent cations form A3M2□X9 (□ represents a vacancy) structures with 2/3 occupancy of the M sites of the A3M3□X9 perovskite. The small Bi3+ cation produces an insignificant distortion of the close-packed structure. Thus, the stacking sequence of the {AX3} layers (cubic or hexagonal) is changed, and the Bi3+ occupies the octahedral sites.186,187
 Fig. 8  Plausible mechanism of photoreduction of CO2via Bi-based PeNC catalysts, (a) monodentate channel, (b) bidentate channel, (c) formation of methane from formate and (d) side reaction – (i) formic acid, (ii) formaldehyde, (iii) methanol, (iv) water. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The donor–acceptor complex can be constructed by reacting BiI6 with CO2, which results in CO2 adsorption from the oxygen side in the chemical process. Through either the monodentate or bidentate channel in Fig. 8a, the primary product, CO, is produced through a two-electron process. The photocatalytic activity of Cs3Bi2I9 is the strongest, which is in agreement with the excellent product yield of CO (up to 77.6 μmol g−1) (Fig. 9b), revealing that the photocatalytic performance of Cs3Bi2I9 is considerably higher in comparison to P25 TiO2 under the same experimental conditions. In the case of Cs3Bi2I9, CO and methane are mainly formed via the bidentate channel. Thus, the authors infer that most of the CO is probably generated through the monodentate channel via the dioxycarbon radical bypass channel (Fig. 8a). This interpretation arises from the occurrence of the dioxycarbon anion; Cs3Bi2I9 perovskites show less intensity in comparison to Rb3Bi2I9. From the high yield of CO in the case of Cs3Bi2I9, it can be concluded that the generation of CO is induced by monodentate and bidentate channels. Moreover, methane with the highest yield of up to 17.0 ± 1.6 μmol g−1 is obtained in the case of Rb3Bi2I9 PeNCs (Fig. 9a and b).
 Fig. 9  (a) Product yields of methane production and (b) the comparison of production of methane and carbon monooxide in 10 h. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of the as-prepared Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs and washed NCs and (d) time course of CO and CH4 evolution. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) CO (red) and CH4 (blue) product yield evolution and (f) histogram of the total photocatalytic electron consumption in 6 h. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
As a conventionally used ligand, OAm has been investigated in light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and solar cells. Owing to the absence of a conjugation bond in the carbon chain of OAm and its weak interaction with the NC surface, the electrical conductivity and stability of PeNCs are low. To further investigate its influence in photocatalysis, Kuang and coworkers have compared the photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction performance of as-prepared Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs and washed Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs. They confirmed that the photocatalytic performance of Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs for R(CO) and R(CH4) evolution can be enhanced to 14.1 and 9.6 μmol g−1, respectively, by washing with absolute ethanol to remove the ligands on the Cs2AgBiBr6 NC surface (Fig. 9c and d).39 Accordingly, they concluded that few ligands on the Cs2AgBiBr6 NC surface lead to a high photoconversion efficiency.
While the organic ligands are coated on the surface of NCs, the shell is regarded as an obstacle that restricts the transport of charge carriers from photocatalysts and further inhibits the photocatalytic performance. In addition, the ligand shell serves as a trap to accumulate the photoconversion products and intermediates, leading to catalyst poisoning and reducing the catalytic activity.188,189 Therefore, decreasing the ligand density on the NC surface helps to enhance the photoconversion efficiency via the improvement in the transfer efficiency of charge carriers and photoconversion products. They examined the photocatalytic performance of bulk Cs2AgBiBr6 and further confirmed that nanostructured particles are desirable to enhance the photocatalytic performance.
Morphology engineering of perovskite NCs is also one of the crucial strategies to optimize the catalytic performance of perovskites.190–192 Morphologies with different dimensions have been extensively reported to exhibit distinct chemical and physical properties.193–196 For example, on account of the high surface area and excellent stability, the photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of perovskite materials can be enhanced via the size minimization of nanostructured perovskite materials.
Liu et al. have synthesized Cs2AgBiX6 nanoplatelets and applied them for CO2 reduction.99 In their study, Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Cl, Br, I) was synthesized as mono-octahedral-layer cluster-based nanosheets to multilayer nanoplatelets. 2D NPLs were synthesized by a new synthetic route involving the room-temperature injection of the precursor followed by solution heating. Furthermore, the authors revealed that the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of Cs2AgBiBr6 nanoplatelets is better than that of their nanocube counterparts. The total electron consumption of the Cs2AgBiBr6 NPLs during a 6 h reaction is 255.4 μmol g−1, which is far more than that of Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (30.8 μmol g−1); this value is greater than the 8-fold enhancement (Fig. 9e and f) reported in an ethyl acetate system using a 405 nm laser diode as the light source. This excellent performance of Cs2AgBiBr6 NPLs is related not only to the anisotropically confined charge carriers but also to the longer diffusion length of the NPLs than that of their NC counterparts (Fig. 7b).197,198
To further improve the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance, Lu and co-workers have constructed a Z-scheme heterojunction Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6 by an in situ controlled growth strategy. They confirmed that the contact strength and electron coupling between the two composites (viz. Cs3Bi2I9 and Bi2WO6, respectively) can be enhanced by the co-sharing of the Bi atom, effectively promoting the interfacial charge transfer between them via the construction of a Z-scheme pathway. The photocatalytic activity of the Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6 heterojunction is significantly improved. The CO produced by Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6via CO2 reduction is ∼66 μmol g−1, which is more than 4-fold greater than that of pure Cs3Bi2I9.164 In addition, Xu and coworkers have constructed two junctions of Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4 in different solutions via an in situ assembly strategy. A Z-scheme system of Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4 is formed in toluene with a Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4 type-II heterojunction structure in a CH2Cl2 solution (Fig. 10). The authors reported that after the loading of g-C3N4 on the Cs2AgBiBr6/RGO composite (CABB), the composite with the junction exhibits better CO2 reduction activity than those of pure CABB and g-C3N4, with a production rate of up to 2.0 μmol g−1 h−1. Especially, CABB@g-C3N4-82% with a type-II heterojunction structure exhibits a CH4 selectivity of greater than 70% for CO2 conversion.183
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic pathway for the fabrication of CABB@C3N4-82% and CABB@g-C3N4-10%. (b) Energy level diagrams and charge transfer routes in CABB@C3N4-10% type-II (orange arrows) and CABB@C3N4-82% Z-scheme heterojunction (red arrow). Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. 
Lu et al. have synthesized Cs3Sb2Br9 perovskite NCs with superior photocatalytic CO2 reduction activity, which can be regarded as an excellent alternative to CsPbBr3 NCs. After 4 h reaction, 510 μmolCO gcat.−1 is obtained; hence, the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of Cs3Sb2Br9 NCs is 10 times greater than that of CsPbBr3 NCs. Furthermore, density functional theory (DFT) result revealed the presence of abundant exposed Sb on the Cs3Sb2Br9 surfaces, benefitting the reactivity.184
5.2. Hydrogen production reaction
As a type of an ultra-clean and renewable fuel, hydrogen is an extremely advantageous candidate for the development of energy and environment in the future. Solar-energy-induced hydrogen production using photocatalysts as an intermediary is considered to be a widely studied green technique. As a good light harvester with low toxicity, LFHPs have been examined for photocatalytic HER. Guo et al. have already employed lead-free (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 perovskite as the photocatalyst for the HER in an HI solution. The photocatalytic rate for H2 evolution is ∼169.21 μmol g−1 h−1 using Pt as the cocatalyst, affording 14 times enhancement compared with that of the pristine one and a solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency of up to 0.48%.171
For further improving the photocatalytic HER performance of bismuth-based perovskites, Chen et al. have prepared a Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 (CBSI-x) photocatalyst by co-precipitation. The diffraction peaks of the XRD pattern steadily shift to high 2θ values with the decrease in x (i.e. with the increase in the amount of Sb in CBSI-x). This is expected because Sb3+ is smaller than Bi3+. No additional diffraction peaks are observed in the profile, confirming that CBSI-x retains the hexagonal structure at different values (x = 0–1).
The HER rate of Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9 reaches 92.6 μmol h−1 under 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5 illumination with Pt nanoparticles as the cocatalyst (Fig. 11c). To investigate the effect of Bi3+ in photocatalytic HER, the Bi2I93− concentration of the HI solution was changed. Photocatalytic H2 evolution was evaluated in an HI solution saturated with Cs3Bi2I9 (CBI) (solution 1). CBI exhibits a low photocatalytic activity (1.12 μmol h−1). The presence of Bi3+ in solution is speculated to limit the catalytic activity of CBI. After CBI is dissolved in an aqueous HI solution, some (Bi2I9)3− are expected to undergo ionization, i.e. (Bi2I9)3− → 2 Bi3+ + 9I−, producing some Bi3+. According to the standard electrode potential table, Bi3+/Bi(s) is 0.308 eV. Compared to H+/H2 (g, 0 eV), Bi ions are more likely to accept electrons in the standard state.199 As photogenerated electrons can be captured more easily by Bi3+ than by protons H+, the presence of Bi3+ would hinder H2 evolution. To further enhance the photocatalytic activity, Cs2CO3 is added into solution 1 to increase the Cs+ concentration; hence, the (Bi2I9)3− concentration decreases due to the solubility product between Cs+ and (Bi2I9)3− in the resulting solution (solution 2). To obtain experimental support for this reasoning, the authors noted that Bi3+ would become elemental Bi after capturing electrons, i.e., Bi3+ + 3e− → Bi. The colour of the CBI catalyst before the HER is red, and it becomes slightly darker after the reaction in solution 1, suggesting that the CBI powder surface is covered with elemental Bi. Bi3+ in solution is reduced to elemental Bi, which is attached to the catalyst particle surface; hence, the catalyst particle becomes slightly darker, and elemental Bi peaks are observed in the XPS profile. To solve this problem, the authors added Cs+ into solution 1 to obtain solution 2. Owing to the solution equilibrium between Cs+ and (Bi2I9)3−, the Bi3+ concentration of solution 2 is considerably less than that of solution 1, considerably reducing the carrier consumption by Bi3+. Finally, the authors concluded that the presence of Bi3+ would hinder H2 evolution due to the higher possibility of bismuth ions gaining electrons (0.31 eV vs. NHE) than that of H+ (0 eV vs. NHE) in the standard state. Sb can replace a part of Bi to reduce the contribution of Bi3+ on the CB of Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9, further decreasing the impact of Bi vacancy on the band structure and subsequently enhancing the HER performance.49
 Fig. 11  (a) Proposed energy band diagrams of the Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C–Th (Th hydrothermal temperatures) photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) edges of g-C3N4 and DMASnBr3. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) H2 evolution activity of CBSI-0.3 in solution 2 for the first five consecutive cycles of reactions. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Long-term stability test of the Pt/TiO2-EtbtBi2I10-rGO system for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) Hydrogen evolution rate from HBr aqueous solution of Cs2AgBiBr6 and the Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C–Th composites under visible light irradiation and (f) stability test of Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C-140 with prolonged visible light irradiation for six cycles. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the separation and migration of charge carriers are momentous for photocatalytic HER. In some cases, nitrogen-doped carbon (N–C) materials can serve as a cocatalyst to promote electron transfer and charge carrier separation. Jiang et al. first synthesized Cs2AgBiBr6 combined with N–C materials by a facile one-pot method. The optimal HER performance of the photocatalyst composite Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C-140 (i.e., the mixture of Cs2AgBiBr6 and N–C synthesized under hydrothermal temperatures at 140 °C) could reach 380 μmol g−1 h−1 under visible-light irradiation.168 The high surface area of N–C not only serves as an inhibitor to suppress the aggregation of Cs2AgBiBr6 NPs but also provides an increased number of pathways for the migration of photoinduced carriers. In addition, the nitrogen dopant of N–C helps to enhance the transfer of photoinduced electrons from Cs2AgBiBr6 to N–C, leading to the separation of electrons and holes in a different direction with prolonged electron time and considerably enhancing the photocatalytic performance (Fig. 11a, e and f).
Reduced graphene oxide (RGO) is known as an outstanding charge carrier mediator. Wang et al. have used a Cs2AgBiBr6/RGO composite (CABB/RGO) for the HER in an HBr solution. The CABB/2.5%RGO sample exhibits the best HER performance, reaching up to 380 μmol g−1 in 10 h.183
Although the stability of LFHPs under air or moisture conditions is better than that of lead-based perovskites, the tolerance of LFHPs in water is another issue that must be overcome. To resolve this issue, some researchers have developed a method to improve the water tolerance of the LFHPs. Zhao et al. have prepared a bismuth hybrid perovskite by mixing with a dimethylammonium iodide (DAI) solution without other decorations; its formula is [(CH3)2NH2]3[BiI6] (DA3BiI6), and it is stable for at least 2 weeks in water. By the combination of DA3BiI6 with PtCl4 as the cocatalyst to construct Pt-DA3BiI6 materials, its visible-light-induced photocatalytic HER performance reaches 5.7 μmol h−1 from HI in a DAI solution, and the apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) reaches 0.83% at 535 nm.200 Romani et al. have also reported water-stable PEA2SnBr4/g-C3N4 with an HER rate of 1600 μmol g−1 h−1. PEA is a type of a hydrophobic group with a long chain, and it can link with a single inorganic slab in the perovskite form, providing a tight and water-proof area; such an area can restrain the inorganic layer and tin from undergoing oxidation by water.201
Later, they have reported that a water-stable LFHP, viz. DMASnBr3, was synthesized by the ball-milling of the precursors, DMABr and SnBr2. The perovskites have been directly added in water to evaluate the moisture stability. In addition to observable perovskite powders, the XRD patterns of the recovered perovskite powders have been recorded, illustrating the identical crystal structure of hybrid perovskites after the test of material stability. To examine the possible leaching of tin elements in H2O, the authors have characterized the amount of tin contained in the water by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) analysis. Based on the ICP-OES results, they demonstrated that the leached amount of tin metals is smaller than 0.5% for Sn-based hybrid perovskite in H2O after a stirring time of 4 h. Under the same experimental conditions, a time-dependent leaching evaluation at longer stirring times has been conducted to confirm the water stability of the perovskite materials. They noticed that the highest leaching amount of Sn is approximately 5% after this extended test. This result indicated that there is no change in its chemical and physical properties after soaking the perovskite materials in H2O for 32 h. Eventually, a decisive material characterization by using XPS was carried out for DMASnBr3 to estimate the stability of hybrid perovskites in H2O. The XPS spectrum of this perovskite overlapped well with that after soaking in the water, obviously demonstrating that DMASnBr3 shows excellent moisture stability compared with other Sn-based perovskite counterparts.202
Furthermore, DMASnBr3 was coupled with g-C3N4 to exploit the optimal photophysical properties. The as-prepared samples have been fabricated by mechanochemically mixing DMABr with SnBr2 and g-C3N4. Hydrogen production efficiencies of the co-catalyst-free DMASnBr3@g-C3N4 composites have been examined with the addition of a typical sacrificial agent (i.e., triethanolamine). The authors have confirmed that the DMASnBr3@g-C3N4 composite with 33 wt% hybrid perovskites exhibits the highest photocatalytic performance.
The further increased amount of loaded perovskites could not improve hydrogen photogeneration, while a general reduction (<14 mmol g−1 h−1) has been detected probably because of the limited active sites and/or light absorption in g-C3N4. After photocatalytic evaluation, DMASnBr3@g-C3N4 with a 33 wt% perovskite composite exhibits remarkable H2 evolution (∼1730 mmol g−1 h−1); this experimental result renders this material with ultra-high HER performance.204 Notably, such outstanding performance has been reached by a composite with a relatively low surface area, thus leaving abundant space to employ mesoporous and/or analogous NC-based composites that may achieve even higher photogeneration rates. In addition, under these experimental conditions (i.e. with the Pt cocatalyst), the actual synergic effect of the composite is evident, i.e. the HER of g-C3N4 = 620 μmol g−1 h−1 (for a surface area 7-times greater compared with its composite) and the HER rate of DMASnBr3 is ∼6 μmol g−1 h−1.204 Besides, the hydrogen generation kinetics for the composite has been examined (Fig. 11b), revealing a considerably linear increase in hydrogen evolution as a function of time.
Both g-C3N4 and DMASnBr3 materials are active absorbers at visible frequencies. Importantly, the bandgap alignment of DMASnBr3@g-C3N4 perovskite composite indicated that the electrons can efficiently move from the CB of g-C3N4 to that of the perovskite. Simultaneously, holes can be transferred from the VB of DMASnBr3 to that of g-C3N4. Therefore, this alignment leads to effective photoinduced charge separation and transport, possibly hindering charge recombination drastically. Furthermore, as the rate of non-adiabatic charge transfer exhibits an inverse exponential dependence on the energy difference between the initial and final states, the lower energy difference between the CB edge of DMASnBr3 and H+/H2 produces a kinetically more favourable alignment.205 Based on identical photophysical and photocatalytic concepts, the aligned energy level of g-C3N4 and the TEOA/TEOA+ redox couple could make an important contribution to the enhancement of the oxidation reaction. Bi-based LFHPs are well known to be sensitive to water due to the presence of easily protonated aliphatic or aromatic cations in their structure, which in turn can easily link with external water molecules to form strong hydrogen bonds and subsequently lead to structure destruction.206 Li and co-workers have synthesized a zero-dimensional (3-ethylbenzo[d]thiazol-3-ium)4Bi2I10 (EtbtBi2I10) with alkylated counter cations instead of the traditional protonated counter cations. They confirmed that EtbtBi2I10 exhibits excellent stability in distilled water, moisture, acid solution and UV-light irradiation. Furthermore, to enhance the HER performance of EtbtBi2I10, they have constructed a Pt/TiO2–EtbtBi2I10–rGO system, exhibiting efficient photocatalytic activity (80 μmol in 5 h) in an HI solution.49Table 2 summarizes the photocatalytic hydrogen production performances from previously reported studies.
Table 2 Summary of photocatalytic HER performances over LFHPs




Composite
Irradiation
Solution
H2 production (μmol)
Stability (h)
Ref.




(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9

λ ≥ 400 nm, 300 W Xe-lamp
HI
169.21/g h−1
70

171



Pt/TiO2–EtbtBi2I10–rGO
300 W Xe lamp
HI
83.8 in 5 h
5

49



Cs2AgBiBr6/RGO

λ ≥ 420 nm, 300 W Xe lamp
HBr
48.9/g
10

159 and 168


Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9
AM 1.5
HI
926/g h−1
50

49



PEA2SnBr4/g-C3N4

λ ≧ 420 nm, 300 W Xe-lamp
Triethanolamine
1600/g h−1
—

201



Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C

λ ≥ 420 nm, 300 W Xe-lamp
HBr
380/g h−1
24

168



Pt–DA3BiI6
LED lamp
HI
216/g h−1
5

200



DMASnBr3/g-C3N4
500 W Xe-lamp
Glucose solution
925/g h−1
7

203





5.3. Photocatalytic organic reactions
It is a type of a vital reaction that involves the selective oxidation of sp3 C–H bonds by O2 to afford fine chemicals, pharmaceuticals or some other valuable chemicals as the final products.207
Photocatalytic organic reactions using perovskites as the light absorbers are one of the greenest approaches that are conducted under mild reaction conditions using solar energy as the driving force, which are an attractive research topic. Bresolin et al. have reported Cs3Bi2I9 anchoring on the TiO2 photocatalyst for the photocatalytic oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde (HCHO) under visible-light irradiation. The HCHO production reaches ∼105 μM in 60 min under 455 nm visible-light irradiation.208 Dai et al. first employed Cs3Bi2Br9 as the catalyst for the photocatalytic ring-opening reaction. The transfer of epoxides to b-alkoxy alcohol is selected as a model system due to its requirement for energy-intensive conditions as well as the use of strong acids for conventional synthesis. Cs3Bi2Br9/TiO2, synthesized by in situ alcoholysis of epoxide, exhibits excellent visible-light photocatalytic performance, which reaches 100% conversion in 6 h with >86% selectivity for b-alkoxy alcohols. The authors explained that the outstanding photocatalytic performance is related to the presence of suitable Lewis acid centres on the bismuth hybrid perovskite photocatalyst surface (Fig. 12a).209
 Fig. 12  (a) Proposed photocatalytic cycle for epoxide alcoholysis reaction. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Time dependence of toluene photo-oxidation over 10 wt% Cs3Bi2Br9/SBA-15. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Band positions of Cs3Bi2Br9 nanoparticle and (d) possible catalytic mechanism of Cs3Bi2Br9. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2020, Published by John Wiley and Sons. (e) Photocatalytic activity of toluene oxidation with CsxMA3−xSb2Br9 NP and (f) possible mechanism of A-site effect on C(sp3)–H bond activation. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (g) Geometry optimized configuration of DMASnI3 crystal and (h) relative energy profile for water infiltration into the (101) surface of the DMASnI3 crystal. Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Shortly after, the authors have reported a novel class of ordered mesoporous SBA-15 silica-supported hybrid perovskite photocatalysts (referred to as Cs3Bi2Br9/SBA-15). Cs3Bi2Br9/SBA-15 can be used as a photocatalyst for the oxidation of hydrocarbons, with a conversion of up to 32900 mmol gcat−1 h−1, a selectivity of >99% toward aldehydes and ketones under visible-light irradiation, and a quantum efficiency (QE) of 11% under 1 sun illumination (Fig. 12b). They stated that electrons and holes are separated on the Cs3Bi2Br9 nanoparticles and further reduce O2 or H+ and dominate the oxidation of the C(sp3)–H bonds, generating an alkyl radical intermediate. Before illumination, the H atoms of methyl and Br atoms can simultaneously work as active points of oxidation on the perovskite, further promoting the activation of C(sp3)–H bonds (Fig. 12c and d).210
Similar to Bi-based perovskites, Sb-based perovskites can also be used as photocatalysts for C–H bond activation. Zhang et al. have investigated the A-site effect of lead-free A3Sb2Br9 perovskites for photocatalytic C–H bond activation. They reported that the photocatalytic toluene oxidation activity of A3Sb2Br9 NPs can be enhanced by increasing the amount of Cs+ instead of MA+ at the A-site (Fig. 12e). Notably, the electronic properties of X-site ions are affected by different cations at the A-site due to the distorted octahedron, further affecting electron transfer. Meanwhile, the Br− on the X site dominates the hole generation, and it is responsible for C–H bond dissociation.210 Hence, the photocatalytic toluene oxidation activity is affected by the electronic properties of the surface Br atoms (Fig. 12f).94
Besides the above organic reaction, Ju et al. have reported that DMASnIxBr3−x (DMA = CH3NH2CH3+) can be further used in an aqueous solution for the regeneration of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). DFT calculations revealed that the water-resistance of DMASnI3 perovskites can be ascribed to a higher water surface adsorption energy, higher water osmotic energy barrier and a smaller intralayer spacing inside DMASnI3 structures compared with those of its Pb-based counterpart (Fig. 12g and h). In addition, DMASnIxBr3−x exhibits excellent performance for NADH production, reaching 100%, in addition to a formic acid yield of 320 μM from CO2.211
5.4. Photocatalytic dye degradation
With the rapid development of industrialization, an increasing number of contaminants are emitted into the environment, adversely threatening the human-dependent ecological environment. However, the effective removal of these pollutants is still a considerable challenge. Recently, LFHPs have achieved impressive progress for the photocatalytic degradation of pollutants (Table 3).
Table 3 Summary of photocatalytic organic reactions over LFHPs




Sample
Light source
Light intensity
Solution
1st product
2nd product
Ref.




UV100-0.1 (10% Cs3Bi2I9 on TiO2)
Solar simulator (300 W)
67.8 mW cm−2
100 mM methanol aqueous solution
105 μM HCHO (1 h)
9.8 ± 0.6 (10 h)

208



Cs3Bi2Br9
Xe-lamp (300 W)
—
0.1 mmol styrene oxide in isopropanol
Alcoholysis of epoxide 100% (6 h)
—

209



Cs3Bi2Br9
Xe-lamp (300 W > 420 nm)
—
Pure toluene
12600 μmol g cat−1 h−1
—

210



Cs2AgBiBr6 NPLs
Xe-lamp (>420 nm)
150 mW cm−2
Pure toluene
1.98 mmolbenzaldehyde g−1 h−1
0.54 mmolbenzyl alcohol g−1 h−1

94



DMASnIxBr3−x
Blue LED lamp (450 nm)
—
1 mM NAD+ aqueous solution
NADH yield 100% (<30 min)
—

211





Xu and coworkers have performed a pioneering study in this field. They reported that Cs2AgBiBr6 is stable in an alcohol-based photocatalytic system for dye degradation under visible-light irradiation. The degradation mechanism using Cs2AgBiBr6 follows pseudo-zeroth-order reaction kinetics. They explained that the pseudo-zeroth-order reaction was due to the large adsorption equilibrium constant of dyes on the catalyst. In addition, the Ag or Bi sites on the perovskite surface can promote the activation of dye molecules and accelerate the photocatalytic reaction. By conducting the photocatalytic degradation of different organic dyes, they developed a complete dye mineralization process controlled by the superoxide radical (O2−).173
Subsequently, Sillanpää and coworkers have reported the use of (CH3NH3)3Bi2I9 for the degradation of different dyes. It exhibits excellent photocatalytic activity, degrading RhB into a colourless solution in 180 min.212 A detailed trapping agent experiment suggests that free holes (h+) and hydroxyl free radicals (˙OH) are the primary active species in the photodegradation reaction of RhB. The degradation pathways accomplished by ˙OH lead to CO2 and H2O as the final products. Besides, the de-ethylation intermediates were formed by the reaction involving electron transfer from RhB to the holes on the catalyst surface. Such intermediates can be further oxidized by ˙OH.
Bresolin et al. have decorated Cs3Bi2I9 nanoparticles on g-C3N4 (Cs3Bi2I9/g-C3N4). When the g-C3N4:Cs3Bi2I9 ratio reached 10:0.1 w%, Cs3Bi2I9/g-C3N4 as a photocatalyst exhibits the best efficiency and stability for the degradation of organic pollutants in water under visible-light irradiation. The heterogeneous photocatalyst was prepared by a facile self-assembly synthesis through their electrostatic interactions. The formed Cs3Bi2I9/g-C3N4 heterojunction suppresses charge recombination and efficiently enhances charge transfer.213 The heterojunction effectively boosted the RhB degradation by 1-fold, where the 100% RhB dye was eliminated within 150 minutes. In addition, the mixture of MB and MO can be photodegraded within 180 minutes under LED-visible light irradiation. The authors suggested that the degradation pathways of MO and MB underwent band–band transfer and Z-scheme respectively.
6. Conclusion and perspectives
LFHP materials are regarded as promising candidates in photocatalytic applications due to their excellent properties consisting of suitable electrical structures, efficient optical properties, facile synthesis, low toxicity as well as various structures and morphologies. In this Review, the state-of-the-art advances of LFHPs with their applications in photocatalysis are introduced and discussed. First of all, the fundamental mechanism of photocatalysis and surface engineering strategies to enhance the photocatalytic performance are presented. Moreover, the structure, synthesis and influencing factors of LFHPs are emphasized, providing an insight into the design of excellent LFHPs with suitable optical and electrical properties for photocatalytic applications. According to the current research progress, rapidly increasing studies on photocatalytic applications based on LFHPs have been reported, including photocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction, photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and photocatalytic organic reactions (ring opening, C–H activation and organic contaminant degradation).
Considerable efforts have been focused on LFHP-based materials for photocatalytic applications, but several significant challenges still exist that need to be further improved. First, LFHP photocatalysts are intrinsically unstable as a result of poor atmospheric stability, air stability, photostability, and thermal stability. To achieve the long-term durability of photocatalysts, the nature of the electric structure of LFHPs, which constitutes the most severe barrier, must be overcome to achieve practical applications in photocatalysis and other research fields. Although dynamic equilibrium of HX splitting has been confirmed for photocatalytic hydrogen production, the utilization of strong acids may raise other environmental issues. Second, chemical feedstocks and fuels are desiderated by photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Nevertheless, according to the published literature, CO evolution generally occurs by CO2 reduction using perovskite photocatalysts. Currently, it is quite challenging to produce value-added multi-carbon molecules by perovskite-based photocatalysis. Third, lead-based hybrid perovskite materials have demonstrated potential in photoelectrochemical applications. However, there are few studies on the use of LFHPs in photoelectrocatalytic applications. Hence, the use of LFHPs in photoelectrocatalysis should be explored with enhanced catalytic performance for future practical applications. Fourth, unsatisfactory redox abilities of LFHPs have been demonstrated because of their narrow bandgaps, for example, poor oxidation ability arising from the small bandgap of perovskite materials.
To deal with the aforementioned issues, it is crucial to develop highly stable LFHPs with enhanced catalytic performance for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical systems. As mentioned in our Review, several investigations of LFHPs with their applications in photocatalytic reactions have been reported. To achieve commercially viable photo(electro)catalytic applications of hybrid perovskite materials, future research strategies have been identified, but not limited to, the following directions: (1) first, the synthetic strategies of LFHPs are required to be further explored because surface engineering of LFHPs for photocatalytic reactions renders different performances. Additionally, the correlation among material structure, photophysical properties, and photo(electro)catalytic activities has to clarified for the optimal design of high-performance LFHPs. (2) Second, functionalized LFHPs by the integration of compositional engineering, dimensionality engineering, and/or heterojunction engineering are suggested to be utilized for promoting charge-carrier separation, charge-carrier transfer, redox ability, long-term stability, and photocatalytic efficiency in an aqueous system. For example, the A-site of perovskite materials has been confirmed to have a positive impact on the stability of LFHPs; hence, exploring the ideal ions on the A site is a promising method to improve the intrinsic stability of the LFHPs. Furthermore, heterostructured photocatalysts with suitable energy levels and optimized bandgap alignment can be reached, giving rise to the suppression of charge-carrier recombination. (3) Thus far, there have been few literature studies on LFHPs with porous structures as well as their applications in photocatalysis or photoelectrochemistry. On the basis of the advantages of porous structures introduced, porous LFHPs with considerably increased active sites are required to be designed for conquering inferior photocatalytic efficiencies. (4) Last but not least, in-depth investigations of photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical reaction mechanisms need to be carried out systematically. It is because interfacial interactions of perovskite/perovskite (solid/solid) and perovskite/solution (solid/liquid) interfaces play a significant role in the energy conversion efficiency and long-term stability of LFHPs.
In summary, we should focus more attention on the improvement of the fundamental properties, the enhancement of material stability, the clarification of photophysical behaviours, and the verification of interfacial dynamics. With the development of LFHPs, the diversity of their applications is necessitated to be further expanded. By combining theories, models, and experiments, it is expected to build the basic principles and reaction mechanisms of lead-free perovskite-based photo(electro)catalysis. With the consecutive progress in this commercially potential research field, LFHPs with outstanding photocatalytic properties and competent surface morphologies are conceived to be further optimized as a high-efficiency energy harvester. Consequently, the advances of lead-free perovskite-based photocatalysts can absolutely open up an avenue to design next-generation solar-to-fuel semiconductors for practical applications in the emerging field of energy-generation technology.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through the contributions of all authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (grant no. CityU 21203518, HKBU 12304320, F-CityU106/18 and 9048121), City University of Hong Kong (grant no. 9667229, 7005289, 7005580, 7005720, 9680208, 9667213, 9680331 and 9052029), and Shenzhen Science Technology and Innovation Commission (grant no. JCYJ20210324125612035, R-IND12303 and R-IND12304), Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DE160100589), as well as the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 21974131, 22071070).
Notes and references
R. Lee, Science, 2011, 333, 569–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Inglesi-Lotz, Energy Econ., 2016, 53, 58–63 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, H. Yin, T. Lim, H. Xie, H.-Y. Hsu, F. Forouzan and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, D506–D514 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Hsu, L. Ji, M. Du, J. Zhao, T. Y. Edward and A. J. Bard, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H.-Y. Hsu, M. Arca and K. S. Schanze, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 119, 7198–7209 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Hsu, H.-H. Hsieh, H.-Y. Tuan and J.-L. Hwang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cell., 2010, 94, 955–959 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, Y. Wang, H. Wang, C. S. K. Lin, H.-Y. Hsu and S.-Y. Leu, Energy Proc., 2019, 158, 918–925 CrossRef CAS .
I. Constantinou, T. H. Lai, H. Y. Hsu, S. H. Cheung, E. D. Klump, K. S. Schanze, S. K. So and F. So, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500167 CrossRef .
A. J. Chapman, B. C. McLellan and T. Tezuka, Appl. Energy, 2018, 219, 187–198 CrossRef .

          V. Dusastre, Materials for Sustainable Energy: a Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles from Nature Publishing Group, World Scientific,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Cheng, Y. Mu, L. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Su, G. Dong, M. Zhang and T. Lu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 1845–1852 CrossRef CAS .
U. I. Gaya and A. H. Abdullah, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2008, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Romero and D. A. Nicewicz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10075–10166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, C. H. Mak, J.-J. Kai, M. Du, L. Ji, M. Yuan, X. Zou, H.-H. Shen, S. P. Santoso, J. C. Colmenares and H.-Y. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26628–26649 RSC .
H.-Y. Hsu, L. Ji, C. Zhang, C. H. Mak, R. Liu, T. Wang, X. Zou, S.-Y. Leu and E. T. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11552–11560 RSC .
S. Zhu and D. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700841 CrossRef .

          K. Takanabe, Solar Energy for Fuels,  2015, pp. 73–103 Search PubMed .

          H. Tüysüz, C. K. Chan and H. Tüysüz, Solar Energy for Fuels, Springer,  2016 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, C. H. Mak, X. Han, Y. Tang, G. Jia, K.-C. Cheng, H. Qi, X. Zou, G. Zou and H.-Y. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 23803–23811 RSC .
Y. Tang, C. H. Mak, R. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Ji, H. Song, C. Tan, F. Barrière and H. Y. Hsu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2006919 CrossRef CAS .
R. Marschall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2421–2440 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Marschall, Solar Energy for Fuels,  2015, pp. 143–172 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, X. Zhang, P. Sun and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20555–20564 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Mak, X. Han, M. Du, J.-J. Kai, K. F. Tsang, G. Jia, K.-C. Cheng, H.-H. Shen and H.-Y. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4454–4504 RSC .
C. H. Mak, X. Huang, R. Liu, Y. Tang, X. Han, L. Ji, X. Zou, G. Zou and H.-Y. Hsu, Nano Energy, 2020, 104752,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104752 .
X. Zou, L. Ji, H.-Y. Hsu, K. Zheng, Z. Pang and X. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12724–12732 RSC .
Y. Zhu, T. Wan, X. Wen, D. Chu and Y. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 814–822 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schuettfort, A. Nish and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3871–3876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, Y. Hwang and Y.-C. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7163–7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 RSC .
T.-H. Lai, I. Constantinou, C. M. Grand, E. D. Klump, S. Baek, H.-Y. Hsu, S.-W. Tsang, K. S. Schanze, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2433–2440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, W. Zhang, H. Yang, Q. Fan, F. Xiong, S. Liu, D.-S. Li and B. Liu, EcoMat, 2021, 3, e12079 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xiong, W. Cen, Y. Zhang and F. Dong, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2462–2472 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, P. Niu, C. Sun, S. C. Smith, Z. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11642–11648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6178–6180 RSC .
G. Pan, X. Bai, D. Yang, X. Chen, P. Jing, S. Qu, L. Zhang, D. Zhou, J. Zhu and W. Xu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 8005–8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. F. Xu, B. X. Chen, D. B. Kuang and C. Y. Su, Small, 2018, 14, 1703762 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Mak, R. Liu, X. Han, Y. Tang, X. Zou, H. H. Shen, Y. Meng, G. Zou and H. Y. Hsu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2001023 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Yin, Y. Wang, H. Wang, M. Lu, Z. Li, Z. Gu and W. Y. William, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10101–10105 RSC .
T. Cai, H. Yang, K. Hills-Kimball, J.-P. Song, H. Zhu, E. Hofman, W. Zheng, B. M. Rubenstein and O. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 7079–7084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chen, T. Cai, W. Li, K. Hills-Kimball, H. Yang, M. Que, Y. Nagaoka, Z. Liu, D. Yang, A. Dong, C.-Y. Xu, R. Zia and O. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16855–16863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Q. Lin, H. Li, K. Wu, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14954–14961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Kroupa, J. Y. Roh, T. J. Milstein, S. E. Creutz and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2390–2395 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, M. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Guo, G. Xing, T. C. Sum and W. Huang, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Calcabrini, A. Genç, Y. Liu, T. Kleinhanns, S. Lee, D. N. Dirin, Q. A. Akkerman, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Arbiol and M. Ibáñez, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 581–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, Q. Zhang, G. Liu, Z. Zhang, D. Wang, B. Qu, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902496 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, P. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, Q. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Dai and B. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. R. Anusuyadevi, C. Aymonier, R. Luque and S. Marre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3868–3902 RSC .
A. Feng, X. Jiang, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, W. Zheng, O. F. Mohammed, Z. Chen and O. M. Bakr, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 7602–7617 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, J. Li, Z. Wen, R. Lu, Q. Zhang, H. Jin, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2004002 Search PubMed .
W. Jiang, Y. Zhu, G. Zhu, Z. Zhang, X. Chen and W. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5661–5679 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander III, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu and Y. Yan, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, P. Chen, X. Li, Y. Tong, H. Ding, X. Wu, W. Chu, Z. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rao, X. Zou, S. Wang, T. Shi, Y. Lu, L. Ji, H.-Y. Hsu, Q. Xu and X. Lu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, D427 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, H. Deng, W. Zhu, Z. Yu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1704–1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Dai, J. Zhao, C. Wu, D. Li, L. Zhang, W. Ning, M. Tian, X. C. Zeng and Y. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 157202 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Kannan, D. J. Late, H. Morgan and C. S. Rout, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13293–13312 RSC .
B. Luo, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6904–6920 RSC .
B. Weng, S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12685–12700 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson and T. Edvinsson, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10298–10305 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, S. Viarbitskaya, E. Mukhtar and T. Edvinsson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13849–13857 RSC .
C. B. Ong, L. Y. Ng and A. W. Mohammad, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 536–551 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Chen, T. Xiong, C. Zhou and X. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4135–4165 RSC .
J. Wang, A. Heerwig, M. R. Lohe, M. Oschatz, L. Borchardt and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13911–13913 RSC .
Y. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Xu and J. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1956–1969 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Hu, H. Ji, L. Zhang and F. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 304–312 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, H. Pan, M. Murugananthan, J. Gong and Y. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 232, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Li, H. Zhang and Q. Xiang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 765–786 RSC .

          B.-L. Su, C. Sanchez and X.-Y. Yang, Hierarchically Structured Porous Materials: from Nanoscience to Catalysis, Separation, Optics, Energy, and Life Science, John Wiley & Sons,  2012 Search PubMed .
W. G. Bae, H. N. Kim, D. Kim, S. H. Park, H. E. Jeong and K. Y. Suh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 675–700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, C. Xue, Z. Zhang and X. Hao, Prog. Chem., 2014, 26, 1924 CAS .
D. Bradshaw, S. El-Hankari and L. Lupica-Spagnolo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5431–5443 RSC .
B. Fang, J. H. Kim, M.-S. Kim and J.-S. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1397–1406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Yang, A. Léonard, A. Lemaire, G. Tian and B.-L. Su, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2763–2786 RSC .
M.-H. Sun, S.-Z. Huang, L.-H. Chen, Y. Li, X.-Y. Yang, Z.-Y. Yuan and B.-L. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3479–3563 RSC .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shamsi, A. S. Urban, M. Imran, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3296–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 310–350 RSC .
W. Travis, E. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. Scanlon and R. Palgrave, Sci, 2016, 7, 4548–4556 CAS .
T. Baikie, N. S. Barrow, Y. Fang, P. J. Keenan, P. R. Slater, R. O. Piltz, M. Gutmann, S. G. Mhaisalkar and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9298–9307 RSC .
S. Pang, H. Hu, J. Zhang, S. Lv, Y. Yu, F. Wei, T. Qin, H. Xu, Z. Liu and G. Cui, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1485–1491 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, X. Zhu, J. S. Martin, Y. Lin, S. Spears and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4005–4025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang and P. Gao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700331 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Eckhardt, V. Bon, J. Getzschmann, J. Grothe, F. M. Wisser and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3058–3060 RSC .
C. Ni, G. Hedley, J. Payne, V. Svrcek, C. McDonald, L. K. Jagadamma, P. Edwards, R. Martin, G. Jain and D. Carolan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, K. Wang and B. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1612–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 604–610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Knight, J. Borchert, R. D. J. Oliver, J. B. Patel, P. G. Radaelli, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 799–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, L. Yang, Q. Li, L. Chen and D. Xu, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 18293–18296 CrossRef .
W. F. Yang, F. Igbari, Y. H. Lou, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902584 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Cao and S. Huang, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 3773–3794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Xue, Q. Yao, N. Li, C. J. Brabec and H. L. Yip, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000183 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, J. Chen, F. Hong, X. Mao, K. Zheng, S. Yang, Y. Li, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 12645–12649 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, K. Hills-Kimball, T. Cai, P. Wang, A. Tang and O. Chen, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1620–1627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1118–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Locardi, M. Cirignano, D. Baranov, Z. Dang, M. Prato, F. Drago, M. Ferretti, V. Pinchetti, M. Fanciulli and S. Brovelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12989–12995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Greul, M. L. Petrus, A. Binek, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19972–19981 RSC .
B. Yang, J. Chen, S. Yang, F. Hong, L. Sun, P. Han, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 5457–5461 CrossRef .
Y. Bekenstein, J. C. Dahl, J. Huang, W. T. Osowiecki, J. K. Swabeck, E. M. Chan, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3502–3508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-G. Zhao, J.-H. Yang, Y. Fu, D. Yang, Q. Xu, L. Yu, S.-H. Wei and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Dahl, W. T. Osowiecki, Y. Cai, J. K. Swabeck, Y. Bekenstein, M. Asta, E. M. Chan and A. P. Alivisatos, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3134–3143 CrossRef CAS .
G. Volonakis, A. A. Haghighirad, R. L. Milot, W. H. Sio, M. R. Filip, B. Wenger, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 772–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Shah, F. L. Deepak and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7962–7969 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Niu, L. Yao, Y. Fu, L. Gao and Q. Dong, Nature, 2018, 563, 541–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, S. Li, H. Wu, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, K. Li, F. Yi and G. Niu, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tan, J. Li, C. Zhang, Z. Li, Q. Hu, Z. Xiao, T. Kamiya, H. Hosono, G. Niu and E. Lifshitz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801131 CrossRef .
N. Chen, T. Cai, W. Li, K. Hills-Kimball, H. Yang, M. Que, Y. Nagaoka, Z. Liu, D. Yang and A. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 16855–16863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Rong, M. Li, M. S. Molokeev, J. Zhao and Z. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11634–11640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Nat. Energy,  2019, 4, 1 Search PubMed.
S. Park, W. J. Chang, C. W. Lee, S. Park, H.-Y. Ahn and K. T. Nam, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16185 CrossRef .
T. C. Jellicoe, J. M. Richter, H. F. J. Glass, M. Tabachnyk, R. Brady, S. E. Dutton, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, D. Credgington, N. C. Greenham and M. L. Böhm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2941–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. V. Le, K. Hong, H. W. Jang and S. Y. Kim, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800335 CrossRef .
J. Liang, P. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, L. Ma, J. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14009–14012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Huynh, D. L. T. Nguyen, V. H. Nguyen, D. V. N. Vo, Q. T. Trinh, T. P. Nguyen, S. Y. Kim and Q. V. Le, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2020, 95, 2579–2596 CAS .
S. S. Bhosale, A. K. Kharade, E. Jokar, A. Fathi, S.-m. Chang and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20434–20442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-N. Liu, R.-Y. Zhao, B. Xu, Y. Sun, X.-M. Jiang, X. Hu and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 54694–54702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Schelhas, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, A. Goyal, P. Kairys, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, K. H. Stone, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanovic and J. J. Berry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1341–1348 RSC .
W. Jian, R. Jia, H.-X. Zhang and F.-Q. Bai, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1741–1749 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Z.-G. Chen, W. Zhou, S. Jiang, J. Zou and Z. Shao, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2249–2254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-B. Yu, M. Liao, J. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Zhu, X. Zhang, T. Duan, W. Yao, S.-H. Wei and Z. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8818–8825 RSC .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Liu, C.-L. Yang, M.-S. Wang, X.-G. Ma and Y.-G. Yi, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 4732–4741 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, H. Ali-Löytty, A. Hiltunen, E. Sarlin, S. Qudsia, J.-H. Smått, M. Valden and P. Vivo, Small, 2021, 17, 2100101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-J. Wu, Y.-Q. Zhao, C.-W. Chen, L.-Z. Wang, B. Liu and M.-Q. Cai, Chin. Phys. B, 2016, 25, 107202 CrossRef .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Anderson, P. E. Chen, A. K. Buckley, J. De Roo and J. S. Owen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7199–7205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey and A. Fischer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Krieg, S. T. Ochsenbein, S. Yakunin, S. Ten Brinck, P. Aellen, A. Süess, B. Clerc, D. Guggisberg, O. Nazarenko and Y. Shynkarenko, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, L. Xu, T. Wang, J. Song, J. Chen, J. Xue, Y. Dong, B. Cai, Q. Shan and B. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603885 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, J. Li, L. Xu, J. Li, F. Zhang, B. Han, Q. Shan and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-H. Kim, G.-H. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, C. Wolf, H. J. Yun, W. Kwon, C. G. Park and T.-W. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, J. Puthussery, S. Gaik, R. Ihly, H. W. Hillhouse and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1960–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, A.-y. Lee, J. C. Yu, Y. S. Nam, Y. Choi, J. Park and M. H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8428–8435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119, 3193–3295 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. Ye, W. Wang, C. Ma, S. Wang, Q. Liu, T. Lian, J. Huang and Z. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, R. Wang and Y. Yang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 809–827 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, W. Bi, A. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Kang and Q. Dong, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lei, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Yan, S. Lee, Y. Yu, H. Tsai, W. Choi and K. Wang, Nature, 2020, 583, 790–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-D. Wang, Y.-H. Huang, J.-F. Liao, Z.-F. Wei, W.-G. Li, Y.-F. Xu, H.-Y. Chen and D.-B. Kuang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Leng, W. Fu, Y. Liu, M. Chhowalla and K. P. Loh, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 482–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Weidman, A. J. Goodman and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5019–5030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, K. Hills-Kimball, T. Cai, P. Wang, A. Tang and O. Chen, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1620–1627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, Y. Zheng, Z. Du, W. Liu, Z. Yang, F. Gao, L. Wang, K.-C. Chou, X. Hou and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1611–1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, H. Zou, A. C. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Yu, C. Lan, Q. Liu, Z. L. Wang, T. Lian and J. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14942–14949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, S. Pan, Z. Lin and J. Peng, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 7910–7915 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qiu, Y. Hu, F. Xu, Z. Yan, F. Bai, G. Jia and S. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20963–20989 RSC .
J. Liu, O. Margeat, W. Dachraoui, X. Liu, M. Fahlman and J. Ackermann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6029–6037 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, J. Zhang, X. Li, S. Guan, M. Dai and S. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2005051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Brown, B. Damodaran, L. Jiang, J. N. Tey, S. H. Pu, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001349 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, X. Zhu, J. S. Martin, Y. Lin, S. Spears and Y. Yan, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13 Search PubMed .
F. Xu, K. Meng, B. Cheng, S. Wang, J. Xu and J. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Rosa-Pardo, C. Casadevall, L. Schmidt, M. Claros, R. E. Galian, J. Lloret-Fillol and J. Pérez-Prieto, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5026–5029 RSC .
X. He, Y. Qiu and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700775 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12527–12535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bu, Z. Chen, F. Chen and J. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12176–12185 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Liu, R.-R. Liu, Y.-F. Mu, Y.-X. Feng, G.-X. Dong, M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2000691 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, K. Li, W. Luo, C. Zhu, H. Guan, H. Wang, L. Wang, K. Deng, H. Zhou and H. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12931–12937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hong, W. K. Chong, A. Y. R. Ng, M. Li, R. Ganguly, T. C. Sum and H. S. Soo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3456–3460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schünemann, M. van Gastel and H. Tüysüz, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2057–2061 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, K. Li, X. Wu, M. Zhu, H. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. P. Loh, Y. Shi and Q.-H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10037–10046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, P. Wang, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Zou, Y. Dai, M. H. Whangbo and B. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704342 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Liu, B. Sun, X. Tan, H. Ye, J. Zhou, Z. Tang, T. Shi and G. Liao, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000260 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, G. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Lou, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15080–15085 CrossRef CAS .
B.-M. Bresolin, C. Günnemann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Sillanpää, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Liang, H. Huang, X. Liu, Q. Li, L. Chen and D. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7263–7267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-D. Wang, Y.-H. Huang, J.-F. Liao, Y. Jiang, L. Zhou, X.-Y. Zhang, H.-Y. Chen and D.-B. Kuang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13434–13441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5674–5687 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2791–2802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, C. Chen, C. Ran, H. Zheng, H. Dong, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000794 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Lee, T. N. Huq, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and R. L. Hoye, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 084502 CrossRef .
I. A. Shkrob and T. W. Marin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1066–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Murphy, K. Stevens, N. Garces, M. Moldovan, N. Giles and L. Halliburton, Radiat. Eff. Defects Solids, 1999, 149, 273–278 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Huang, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Li and D. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119570 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, D. S. Itanze, A. G. Aragon, X. Ma, H. Li, K. B. Ucer, C. Hewitt, D. L. Carroll, R. T. Williams, Y. Qiu and S. M. Geyer, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2987–2991 RSC .
A. J. Lehner, D. H. Fabini, H. A. Evans, C.-A. Hébert, S. R. Smock, J. Hu, H. Wang, J. W. Zwanziger, M. L. Chabinyc and R. Seshadri, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7137–7148 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. McCall, C. C. Stoumpos, S. S. Kostina, M. G. Kanatzidis and B. W. Wessels, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4129–4145 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Peresh, V. Sidei, O. Zubaka and I. Stercho, Inorg. Mater., 2011, 47, 208–212 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yui, A. Kan, C. Saitoh, K. Koike, T. Ibusuki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2594–2600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7485–7527 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, H. S. Shin, K. P. Loh and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 1–17 CrossRef .
Y. Tong, B. J. Bohn, E. Bladt, K. Wang, P. Müller-Buschbaum, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13887–13892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, A. Dutta, R. Xie, W. Yang and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2014–2020 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dutta, S. K. Dutta, S. Das Adhikari and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Bekenstein, Y. Yu, N. A. Gibson, A. B. Wong, S. W. Eaton, N. Kornienko, Q. Kong and M. Lai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7236–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dang, B. Dhanabalan, A. Castelli, R. Dhall, K. C. Bustillo, D. Marchelli, D. Spirito, U. Petralanda, J. Shamsi and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1808–1818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Barbagiovanni, D. J. Lockwood, P. J. Simpson and L. V. Goncharova, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1, 011302 Search PubMed .
G. Zhang, A. Chaves, S. Huang, F. Wang, Q. Xing, T. Low and H. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9977 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Bratsch, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1989, 18, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, K. Chordiya, P. Leukkunen, A. Popov, M. U. Kahaly, K. Kordas and S. Ojala, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1116–1125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Romani, A. Bala, V. Kumar, A. Speltini, A. Milella, F. Fracassi, A. Listorti, A. Profumo and L. Malavasi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9189–9194 RSC .
L. Hou, Y. Zhu, J. Zhu and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 31279–31285 CrossRef CAS .
L. Romani, A. Speltini, F. Ambrosio, E. Mosconi, A. Profumo, M. Marelli, S. Margadonna, A. Milella, F. Fracassi, A. Listorti, F. De Angelis and L. Malavasi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3611–3618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M.-Z. Wu and Y.-P. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Gao, Y. Georgievskii and R. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 3358–3369 CrossRef CAS .
G.-N. Liu, R.-Y. Zhao, R.-D. Xu, Q. Liu, B. Xu, Y.-Y. Wang, Q. Wu, J.-N. Wang, Y. Nie and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7700–7707 RSC .
L. Kesavan, R. Tiruvalam, M. H. Ab Rahim, M. I. bin Saiman, D. I. Enache, R. L. Jenkins, N. Dimitratos, J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, S. H. Taylor and D. W. Knight, Science, 2011, 331, 195–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-M. Bresolin, N. O. Balayeva, L. I. Granone, R. Dillert, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Sillanpää, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 204, 110214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai and H. Tüysüz, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2587–2592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, C. Poidevin, C. Ochoa-Hernández, A. A. Auer and H. Tüysüz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5788–5796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ju, G. Lin, H. Xiao, Y. Zhang, S. Su and J. Liu, Solar RRL, 2020, 4, 2000559 CrossRef CAS .
B.-M. Bresolin, S. B. Hammouda and M. Sillanpää, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 376, 116–126 CrossRef CAS .
B.-M. Bresolin, P. Sgarbossa, D. W. Bahnemann and M. Sillanpää, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 251, 117320 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Parameters associated with photocatalysis. Overall water splitting is only successful for high efficiencies of all six gears depicted in the scheme. The different time scales of the reactions are also displayed. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2017, Springer International Publishing. (b) Band alignment in type I, II, and III heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Depiction and crystal structure of perovskites with different phases. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Local structure of the Bi2I93− anion, and crystal structure of MA3Bi2I9 and Cs3Bi2I9. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorbance and steady-state PL of nanocrystals containing pure and mixed halides. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Band structure of some reported LFHP photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the charge carrier dynamics of photoluminescence in bismuth-based perovskites. (b) Illustration of charge-carrier mobility. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2016, Chinese Physical Society and IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of halide perovskites with different dimensionalities from 3D to 0D at the (a) molecular level and morphological level. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) Model diagram and TEM images of MHPs with different shapes. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the solution phase synthesis of Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (hot-injection route). Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Preparation procedure of the Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of lead-free Cs2AgBiBr6 double perovskite 2D NPLs. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustrations for the preparation processes of Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 
CO2 + e− → CO2, E0 = −1.9 V	(3)
CO2 + H+ + 2e− → HCOOH, E0 = −0.61 V	(4)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O, E0 = −0.53 V	(5)
CO2 + H+ + e− → HCHO + H2O, E0 = −0.48 V	(6)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O, E0 = −0.38 V	(7)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + H2O, E0 = −0.24 V	(8)
2H+ + 2e− → H2, E0 = −0.41 V	(9)

MA3Bi2I9	UV lamp (32 W, 305 nm)	80.38 μW cm−2	Gas–solid reaction system	7.2 (10 h)	9.8 ± 0.6 (10 h)	
121

Cs3Bi2I9	UV lamp (32 W, 305 nm)	80.38 μW cm−2	Gas–solid reaction system	77.6 (10 h)	14.9 ± 0.8 (10 h)
Rb3Bi2I9	UV lamp (32 W, 305 nm)	80.38 μW cm−2	Gas–solid reaction system	18.2 (10 h)	17.0 ± 1.6 (10 h)
Cs2AgBiBr6 NPLs	405 nm laser diode	40 mW cm−2	Ethyl acetate	∼38 (6 h)	∼25 (6 h)	
99

Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (unwashed)	AM 1.5G	150 mW cm−2	Ethyl acetate	5.5(6 h)	0.65 (6 h)	
39

Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (washed)	AM 1.5G	150 mW cm−2	Ethyl acetate	14.1 (6 h)	9.6 (6 h)
Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs (bulk)	AM 1.5G	150 mW cm−2	Ethyl acetate	—	—
Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4-82%	AM 1.5G	150 mW cm−2	Ethyl acetate + methanol	0.6/h	1.5/h	
183

Cs2AgBiBr6@g-C3N4-10%	AM 1.5Ga	150 mW cm−2	Ethyl acetate + methanol	1.8/h	0.2/h
Cs3Bi2I9/Bi2WO6	Xe lamp	100 mW cm−2	Gas–solid reaction system	66 μmol g−1 (9 h)	—	
164

Cs3Sb2Br9 NCs	AM 1.5	100 mW cm−2	Octadecene + high purity water	510 μmol g−1 (4 h)	—	
184


 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the top-down method to fabricate bismuth-based perovskite nanocrystals and their application in the solid–gas photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the Cs2AgBiBr6 NPL photocatalyzed CO2 reduction reaction. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of Rb3Bi2I9 (green), Cs3Bi2I9 (red), and MA3Bi2I9 (blue) under illumination for 1 h in the absence (solid curves) or presence (dashed curves) of CO2 and H2O. The vertical dashed lines show the corresponding g-factor values. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Diffuse-reflectance infrared spectra of Rb3Bi2I9 (green), Cs3Bi2I9 (red), and MA3Bi2I9 (blue).121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Plausible mechanism of photoreduction of CO2via Bi-based PeNC catalysts, (a) monodentate channel, (b) bidentate channel, (c) formation of methane from formate and (d) side reaction – (i) formic acid, (ii) formaldehyde, (iii) methanol, (iv) water. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Product yields of methane production and (b) the comparison of production of methane and carbon monooxide in 10 h. Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Comparison of photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance of the as-prepared Cs2AgBiBr6 NCs and washed NCs and (d) time course of CO and CH4 evolution. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) CO (red) and CH4 (blue) product yield evolution and (f) histogram of the total photocatalytic electron consumption in 6 h. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic pathway for the fabrication of CABB@C3N4-82% and CABB@g-C3N4-10%. (b) Energy level diagrams and charge transfer routes in CABB@C3N4-10% type-II (orange arrows) and CABB@C3N4-82% Z-scheme heterojunction (red arrow). Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Proposed energy band diagrams of the Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C–Th (Th hydrothermal temperatures) photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) Valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) edges of g-C3N4 and DMASnBr3. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (c) H2 evolution activity of CBSI-0.3 in solution 2 for the first five consecutive cycles of reactions. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Long-term stability test of the Pt/TiO2-EtbtBi2I10-rGO system for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (e) Hydrogen evolution rate from HBr aqueous solution of Cs2AgBiBr6 and the Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C–Th composites under visible light irradiation and (f) stability test of Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C-140 with prolonged visible light irradiation for six cycles. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

(CH3NH3)3Bi2I9	
λ ≥ 400 nm, 300 W Xe-lamp	HI	169.21/g h−1	70	
171

Pt/TiO2–EtbtBi2I10–rGO	300 W Xe lamp	HI	83.8 in 5 h	5	
49

Cs2AgBiBr6/RGO	
λ ≥ 420 nm, 300 W Xe lamp	HBr	48.9/g	10	
159 and 168
Cs3Bi2xSb2−2xI9	AM 1.5	HI	926/g h−1	50	
49

PEA2SnBr4/g-C3N4	
λ ≧ 420 nm, 300 W Xe-lamp	Triethanolamine	1600/g h−1	—	
201

Cs2AgBiBr6/N–C	
λ ≥ 420 nm, 300 W Xe-lamp	HBr	380/g h−1	24	
168

Pt–DA3BiI6	LED lamp	HI	216/g h−1	5	
200

DMASnBr3/g-C3N4	500 W Xe-lamp	Glucose solution	925/g h−1	7	
203


 	Fig. 12  (a) Proposed photocatalytic cycle for epoxide alcoholysis reaction. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Time dependence of toluene photo-oxidation over 10 wt% Cs3Bi2Br9/SBA-15. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Band positions of Cs3Bi2Br9 nanoparticle and (d) possible catalytic mechanism of Cs3Bi2Br9. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2020, Published by John Wiley and Sons. (e) Photocatalytic activity of toluene oxidation with CsxMA3−xSb2Br9 NP and (f) possible mechanism of A-site effect on C(sp3)–H bond activation. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (g) Geometry optimized configuration of DMASnI3 crystal and (h) relative energy profile for water infiltration into the (101) surface of the DMASnI3 crystal. Reproduced with permission.211 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

UV100-0.1 (10% Cs3Bi2I9 on TiO2)	Solar simulator (300 W)	67.8 mW cm−2	100 mM methanol aqueous solution	105 μM HCHO (1 h)	9.8 ± 0.6 (10 h)	
208

Cs3Bi2Br9	Xe-lamp (300 W)	—	0.1 mmol styrene oxide in isopropanol	Alcoholysis of epoxide 100% (6 h)	—	
209

Cs3Bi2Br9	Xe-lamp (300 W > 420 nm)	—	Pure toluene	12600 μmol g cat−1 h−1	—	
210

Cs2AgBiBr6 NPLs	Xe-lamp (>420 nm)	150 mW cm−2	Pure toluene	1.98 mmolbenzaldehyde g−1 h−1	0.54 mmolbenzyl alcohol g−1 h−1	
94

DMASnIxBr3−x	Blue LED lamp (450 nm)	—	1 mM NAD+ aqueous solution	NADH yield 100% (<30 min)	—	
211


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
