Unconventional singlet fission materials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01433H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01433H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 3485-3518Unconventional singlet fission materials

        
          
            Tobias 
            Ullrich
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Dominik 
            Munz
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Dirk M. 
            Guldi
          
          
        
      *a
aFriedrich-Alexander-Universität (FAU) Erlangen-Nürnberg, Department für Chemie und Pharmazie, Egerlandstr. 1–3, 91058 Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: tobias.ullrich@fau.de; dirk.guldi@fau.de
bSaarland University, Inorganic Chemistry: Coordination Chemistry, Campus C 4.1, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. E-mail: dominik.munz@uni-saarland.de
Received 
      12th November 2020
    First published on 26th January 2021AbstractSinglet fission (SF) is a photophysical downconversion pathway, in which a singlet excitation transforms into two triplet excited states. As such, it constitutes an exciton multiplication generation process, which is currently at the focal point for future integration into solar energy conversion devices. Beyond this, various other exciting applications were proposed, including quantum cryptography or organic light emitting diodes. Also, the mechanistic understanding evolved rapidly during the last year. Unfortunately, the number of suitable SF-chromophores is still limited. This is per se problematic, considering the wide range of envisaged applicability. With that in mind, we emphasize uncommon SF-scaffolds and outline requirements as well as strategies to expand the chromophore pool of SF-materials.
Tobias Ullrich
Tobias Ullrich was born in 1995 in Bad Windsheim. He received his BSc (2016) and MSc (2018) in chemistry from the Friedrich-Alexander-University in Erlangen-Nürnberg. In the same year, he joined the research group of Prof. Dirk M. Guldi at the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg as a PhD student. His scientific interests primarily focus on singlet fission in novel intermediate open-shell molecular systems.
Dominik Munz
Dominik Munz is professor of Inorganic Chemistry at Saarland University. He obtained his PhD with Thomas Strassner in Physical Organic Chemistry (TU Dresden). After postdoctoral work with T. Brent Gunnoe (University of Virginia) in homogeneous catalysis with transition metals, and with Guy Bertrand in p-block chemistry (UC San Diego) he joined FAU Erlangen from 2016 to 2020 as an independent junior group leader hosted by Karsten Meyer (Inorganic Chemistry). His research focuses on the isolation and investigation of biradicals and zwitterions directed at organic materials for energy conversion and the activation of strong bonds in catalysis.
Dirk M. Guldi
Dirk M. Guldi completed both his undergraduate studies (1988) and PhD (1990) at the University of Cologne (Germany). Following postdoctoral appointments at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (USA), the Hahn-Meitner Institute Berlin (1992), and Syracuse University, he joined the faculty of the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory in 1995. Since 2004, he has been Full Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy at the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen-Nuremberg (Germany). Since 2018, Dirk M. Guldi has been the Co-Editor in Chief of Nanoscale and Nanoscale Horizons and he has been named among the world's Highly Cited Researchers by Thomson Reuters.
Introduction – motivation and applications
The construction of efficient light harvesting optoelectronic devices, which convert sunlight as one of the most promising renewable energy sources into utilizable electric energy, remains one of the grand challenges in materials science.1–4 A central issue for conventional semiconductors is that every photon exceeding the bandgap will be subject to rapid intra-band relaxation towards the edge of the conduction band.5 As such, the excess energy is lost in the form of dissipating heat. This aspect amongst others limits the maximum attainable thermodynamic power conversion efficiency for a photovoltaic device to around 33%, better known as the Shockley–Queisser limit.6 To push the performance of single junction solar cells beyond their thermodynamic efficiency limit, the strategy of implementing semiconducting materials, which are capable of multiple exciton generation, has attracted tremendous scientific interest.7–11 It is, in essence, one of the potential ways of engineering the next generation photovoltaic devices.12 Singlet fission (SF), the molecular analogue of the multiple exciton generation process, has received a lot of attention ever since the path-breaking report in 2006 by Hanna and Nozik in which the impact of carrier multiplication on the efficiency of solar cells was revisited.13,14 In the simplest description, the SF process may be denoted as the following two consecutive steps:15 First, an initially formed singlet excited state descends towards a correlated triplet pair 1(T1T1) intermediate. The latter state represents two triplets, which are coherently coupled with overall spin-zero angular momentum. In the second step, decorrelation into two separate and independent triplet states (T1 + T1) may be accomplished. As a result, two excitons are formed upon photoexcitation by only one photon.
In order to exceed the efficiency limit of a conventional photovoltaic device, a SF-material could be implemented as a charge carrier multiplier together with, for example, conventional organic semiconductors to reduce thermal loss effects.16 By means of this concept, it is conceivable to surpass the Shockley–Queisser limit and, hence, to achieve a theoretical thermodynamic efficiency of up to 42%.13,17,18 Accordingly, chemical stability, high absorptivity, long triplet lifetimes, good triplet as well as charge carrier transport properties and maximized triplet quantum yields near 200% constitute the general preconditions for optimal device performance.19,20 In general, quantitative 1(T1T1) pair dissociation into long-lived independent triplet monomers T1 + T1 is desired. Furthermore, to be suitable for light harvesting devices, sufficiently high triplet energies of the corresponding singlet fission chromophores are required for efficient charge carrier injection into a semiconducting material. In the case of silicon, the triplet energy should exceed an energy of 1.11 eV.21–23 Beyond the integration of SF-chromophores in photovoltaic devices, various other potential application areas were invoked during the last few years. While efficient triplet separation is crucial for implementation in solar energy conversion devices, the opposite is true for the recently discussed applications in quantum information technology.24–26 Kinetic stabilization of the 1(T1T1) quantum entangled state renders SF-molecules exciting candidates for quantum computing even at room temperature.27
In addition, organic SF-materials are utilizable as non-linear optical materials in, for example, ultrafast optical switching or data storage.28–30 It was outlined theoretically and, recently, experimentally confirmed that SF enhances third-order non-linear responses by several orders of magnitude.31–34 Thus, SF-induced non-linear response materials have the potential to replace conventional non-linear optical materials in the future. Moreover, SF might revolutionize the field of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).35–37 In analogy to photovoltaic devices, SF based OLEDs could break the efficiency barrier of 100%.38 Here, a formal maximum efficiency of 200% under electrical excitation could be achieved by combination of SF chromophores with thermally activated delayed fluorescence emitters and phosphorescence emitters. Consequently, near-infrared light emitting devices with high intensity could be constructed, which would be of use in photonics, in general, and in vivo imaging, in particular. Last, but not least, it was demonstrated that SF has tremendous potential for developing photo-detectors with hitherto unrivaled efficiency.39,40
Initially, the incentive for highly efficient solar cells reignited the interest in SF, which was considered, at the time, an exotic photophysical deactivation process. Such a specialized interest transcended, in the last decade, into a wealth of intriguing mechanistic insights. Despite the remarkable progress in the elucidation of the underlying mechanism, the pool of SF-chromophores is still quite limited and most SF-materials are built around the molecular platform of linear acenes, namely tetracene and pentacene.41–46 By virtue of the numerous and diverse areas of applications outlined above, it is of utmost importance to broaden the pool of SF-materials to also address the consequently largely varying molecular and photophysical requirements. Eventually, the experimental investigation of novel SF-chromophores will assist in gathering new mechanistic insights into SF, which is still not completely understood.
Indeed, from what we know today, it is fair to say that the interconversion in SF is highly complex. A full mechanistic description of SF by means of elucidating every facet in detail is, therefore, far beyond the scope of this review. Instead, it is mostly dedicated to recent trends and “unconventional” SF-materials. We will, therefore, start with a brief overview of the mechanistic background in Section 1 to provide a general understanding of the discussed photophysical processes. We will then elaborate in Section 2 on computational strategies for the identification of “novel” SF-materials and round it off with Section 3, which focuses on “unconventional”, emerging SF-materials and molecules.
1. Mechanistic overview
We consider SF as four consecutive steps: S0 + hν ⇌ S1(1) S1 ⇌ 1(T1T1)(2) 1(T1T1) ⇌ 2S+1M(T1T1)(3) 2S+1M(T1T1) ⇌ T1 + T1(4)In the simplest case, SF is operative between two interacting equivalent chromophores, i.e. homofission. Light–matter interaction ensures photon absorption by the ground (S0) state and affords the first singlet excited (S1) state (eqn (1)). According to Kasha's rule, the excitation into higher excited singlet (Sn) states leads usually to the rapid internal conversion towards S1.47 However, in rare cases, SF may also proceed from Sn rather than S1.48 Once formed, the interconversion from S1 to the spin-entangled, correlated triplet pair 1(T1T1) state occurs (eqn (2)).49–55 By virtue of its singlet nature, no spin–orbit coupling is required in the spin conserving 1(T1T1) population.56 As a result, 1(T1T1) is typically formed on ultrafast timescales, that is, from sub-picosecond to picosecond domains, with formal triplet quantum yields of up to 200%.54,57–59 The 1(T1T1) state stands in equilibrium with the corresponding states of higher multiplicity (eqn (3)), which ultimately may give two independent excited triplet states (eqn (4)).
This description is, however, a vast oversimplification of the complexity behind the second SF-step and neglects several important aspects. Discussions regarding intrinsic rate equation calculations based on non-adiabatic transitions serve as a good starting point.
1.1 Incoherent singlet fission rate models
A first-order kinetic reaction, such as the SF-rate kSF (second SF-step), is described by Fermi's golden rule within the Franck–Condon approximation as60 (5)where h is the Planck constant, V the overall electronic coupling between the initial and final state, which can be perturbatively expanded, and FCWD the Franck–Condon weighted density of states, ensuring conservation of energy in the transition process. In the high temperature regime, where the quantum nature of phonons is due to kBT ≫ ħω neglected, the FCWD term transforms into (6)This is well-known from the classically derived Marcus-theory of non-adiabatic electron transfer.61–63 Here, λ is the reorganization energy, kB the Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, and ΔG0 Gibb's free energy difference between the initial and final states of an underlying transition. The Marcus-approach was previously applied to explore the relationship between crystal packing and SF-rate in perylenediimides (PDIs).64 Moreover, it was used to elucidate the role of charge transfer (CT) states as well as excimer states in the SF-mechanism in various diketopyrrolopyrroles (DPPs) and rylenes.65
The classical Marcus-theory is, however, inappropriate if the considered process is placed in the Marcus-inverted regime. In the latter, ΔG0 is significantly larger than λ. Under these circumstances, quantum-mechanical tunneling from the initial to the final potential energy surface is considered. This is done in the context of the Marcus–Levich–Jortner rate equation formalism, where FCWD transforms into66 (7)with n representing the manifold of vibrations in the final state. Here, in this semi-classical extension of the Marcus theory, the reorganization energy features two contributions: on the one hand, it is the outer reorganization energy λo, which classically treats intermolecular low frequent phonons (system–bath interaction, kBT ≫ ħωo). On the other hand, it is the inner reorganization energy λi, which is described by a single (averaged) intramolecular high frequency vibrational mode (kBT ≪ ħωi). Tunneling proceeds via the latter high frequency vibrational mode. In such case, the resulting electronic–vibrational coupling is quantified by the Huang–Rhys factor Si, defined as67 (8)Stokes shift ΔEStokes between absorption and fluorescence allows for an approximate, yet experimental determination of the dimensionless Huang–Rhys factor. Note that in the case of Si = 0, FCWD is given by eqn (6) rather than eqn (7). The Marcus–Levich–Jortner formulation was applied to calculate the incoherent SF-rate constants for pristine tetracene, pentacene as well as hexacene.68 These were found to be in sound agreement with the observed S1 decay rates.
SF as a special form of non-radiative decay of excited electronic states is usually accompanied by weak environmental perturbations and charge redistributions. Therefore, SF-rate constants may be modeled using non-adiabatic transitions as given by the Landau–Zener formulism with the Stueckelberg extension to account for the quantum-mechanical tunneling.69 This model together with multi-reference electronic calculations was applied to determine the S1-to-1(T1T1) transition probabilities for pentacene.49,70 It was concluded that the non-adiabatic transitions are mediated by intermolecular motions by means of conical intersections between the potential energy surfaces of S1 and 1(T1T1).
Another strategy is to calculate SF-rate constants within the framework of Förster theory for energy transfer. Here, FCWD as part of Fermi's golden rule expression is substituted by the overlap integral J.71 Accordingly, Fermi's golden rule transforms into (9)where fD(E) and fA(E) are the density of states weighted by the vibrational Franck–Condon factors of energy donor and acceptor, respectively. This approach within the fragment spin difference scheme was employed to calculate the SF-rate for pentacene in good agreement with the experimental results.72
Fermi's golden rule links SF-rate constants to the electronic coupling. It is, however, only valid if the electronic coupling is weaker than the coupling to phonon modes. Electronic coupling between two diabatic states Vi≠j determines the strength of interactions and is defined as73 Vi≠j = ψi|Hel|ψj(10)where both diabats, that is, ψi and ψj, are coupled through the electronic Hamiltonian operator Hel. Sets of diabatic states depend only on the electron coordinates. The corresponding electronic states are constructed from single configurations with frozen nuclear coordinates.
The simplest scenario infers that these configurations relate to the population of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of an equivalent pair of molecules in the minimal four electrons/four orbitals picture.74 In turn, the electronic Hamiltonian matrix Hel (matrix is Hermitian) is postulated in the approximated basis set of constructed diabatic states as Hel = [ψi|Hel|ψj]i,j∈{1,2,…n}(11)Diabatic states are not eigenstates of the electronic Hamiltonian and, thus, do not diagonalize the electronic Hamiltonian. Here, the off-diagonal entries of the electronic Hamiltonian matrix correspond to the electronic coupling between two diabats (eqn (7)) and diagonal entries to the energies of the corresponding diabats. By applying first-order perturbation theory, the SF-rate constant is expressed as (12)The first-order expansion of Fermi's golden rule reveals the simplest case of the “direct SF-pathway” (cf.Fig. 1, middle). Here, the SF-rate constants depend exclusively on the state-to-state transition coupling term 〈S1S0|Hel|T1T1〉/〈S0S1|Hel|T1T1〉 also referred to as SF-coupling. Direct coupling is only described by two-electron transfer integrals, which relate to the overlap densities between interacting monomers.75 By applying quasi-degenerate second-order perturbation theory, the next order expansion is obtained and the SF rate is now expressed as76 (13)In this formalism, the electronic couplings to virtual transitions of “m” intermediate states are considered. These do not directly participate in the state-to-state interconversion between S1 and 1(T1T1). Implicit is involvement of a charge transfer (CT) state.77–85 If the off-diagonal diabatic coupling terms Vjm and Vmi are significant and the energy difference between S1/1(T1T1) and CT states is considerably small (denominator in eqn (13)), the transition is mediated by these CT states without, however, their population. Hence, the underlying SF-mechanism is referred to as “mediated mechanism” (also known as “superexchange mechanism”, Fig. 1, top). Such intermediate couplings to CT states are dictated by one-electron transfer integrals and are typically found to be several orders of magnitude larger than the direct SF-coupling term (see Section 2 for a more detailed discussion). In the absence of diabatic coupling to CT states, that is, the magnitude of electronic coupling strength is weak, and too high interstate energy gaps for CT states, the mediating coupling term in eqn (13) becomes negligible and SF proceeds via the direct mechanism instead.86 In a different scenario, CT states may participate directly in the 1(T1T1) formation by means of “real” populated intermediates in a two-step mechanism (Fig. 1, bottom).87,88 This is, however, rarely observed and often detrimental with respect to the 1(T1T1) quantum yield. Instead, such intermediates give access to non-radiative deactivation channels, which compete with SF.89,90
 Fig. 1  Direct (middle), mediated (top), and two-step (bottom) mechanism of SF. 
If the electronic couplings are weak, SF is best described as a non-adiabatic transition within the framework of Fermi's golden rule. The situation changes, however, if the electronic couplings are larger and/or on the same order of magnitude as the coupling to the phonon bath. Then, the transition is better described by the transition on a mixed adiabatic electronic potential energy surface.91,92 Adiabatic states are eigenstates of the electronic Hamiltonian Hel and, thus, diagonalize the electronic Hamiltonian matrix (eqn (11)). They are real time-dependent observables. Other than diabatic states, the adiabatic basis depends explicitly on the nuclear coordinates. These adiabatic states evolve from suitable combinations of diabatic configurations. In accordance with the aforementioned, the adiabatic S1 and 1(T1T1) and the “real” CT states are considered as mixtures of “pure” diabatic basis states and may contain substantial contributions from e.g. admixed 1(S1S0), CT states, and 1(T1T1) diabats.93
Both weak and strong coupling regimes are unified in the rate expression for electron transfer by Bixon and Jortner, accounting for the solvent dynamics:94,95 (14)where (15) (16)In the adiabatic limit, that is, when the overall electronic coupling V between the initial and final state is large, the SF-rate constant is governed by the adiabatic timescale τad. It refers in solution to the solvent reorganization time and is independent of the electronic coupling (Fig. 2, left). In contrast, for weak (direct) electronic couplings, eqn (14) is equivalent to Fermi's golden rule expression (Fig. 2, right). Yost et al. applied the transferable Bixon–Jortner approach to predict SF-rate constants for a series of different acene derivatives.96 Indeed, they documented that the SF-rate constants are insensitive to V within the adiabatic limit. Moreover, they emphasized the role of CT states in the mediated super-exchange mechanism.
 Fig. 2  In the adiabatic limit (left) the SF rate is independent of the electronic coupling and the transition proceeds continuously from S1 and 1(T1T1) on the mixed adiabatic potential energy curve. In the non-adiabatic limit (right, decreased coupling) the SF rate is proportional to the square of the absolute value of V and the transition occurs suddenly from the S1 to 1(T1T1) electronic diabatic state. 
As indicated by the Bixon–Jortner relation for electron transfer, electronic couplings tend to vanish in the adiabatic regime. Instead, non-adiabatic interactions between two adiabatic states ΨI and ΨJ are driven by the vibronic coupling vector/electron–phonon coupling:97,98 (17)It relates to the interactions between electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom. Here, EI and EJ are the corresponding adiabatic energies. In the adiabatic context, when SF is considered dynamically, the SF-rate constant is proportional to the product of vibronic coupling and motion of nuclei:99 (18)It should be noted that this relationship is only valid if the nuclear motion is treated classically. It highlights the impact of both nuclear degrees of freedom and vibronic coupling on the SF-rate constant. Vibronic coupling is inversely proportional to the energy difference between both adiabatic states. Vibronic coupling is substantial in the region of a near-avoided crossing and approaches infinity near a conical intersection, even when the coupling matrix element is small.100,101 A more detailed discussion on how the involvement of vibrational quanta impacts SF will be given later within this review.
1.2 Vibronic quantum coherent mechanism
In eqn (2), the oversimplified description neglects any potential “quantum coherence mechanism”.102–104 Photoexcitation creates a coherent quantum superposition of 1(T1T1) and S1. In some cases, additional coherent mixing to CT states occurs, as demonstrated by Mandal et al.105 Coherent quantum superposition between excited electronic states is enabled by strong electronic coupling typically mediated by CT states and/or substantial vibronic coupling. It is, however, incoherent when the population of the 1(T1T1) potential energy surface is either adiabatic or non-adiabatic. In such cases, a state transition is imagined as a step-wise “hopping” from S1 to 1(T1T1). In turn, it is much slower than the coherent 1(T1T1) formation. Unlike coherent pathways, it is promoted by thermal activation. The coherent mechanism was first invoked to explain the simultaneous rise of S1 and 1(T1T1) in the time-resolved two-photon photoemission (2PPE) spectra of tetracene and pentacene studied by Chan et al. (Fig. 3).50 This mechanism together with an entropic driving force provides a rationale for an ultrafast, barrierless SF in, for example, tetracene.107 At this point, the formation rates cannot anymore be modeled by conventional incoherent rate equation approaches. Instead, quantum dynamic simulations of SF are required, in which the time-evolution within the Liouville–von Neuman density matrix formalism was described: (19)where ρ(t) is the corresponding time-dependent density matrix, H(t) the model Hamiltonian matrix and D a tensor accounting for system–bath interactions. The diagonal elements of the density matrix ρii correspond to the probability that the system exists in state i, while the off-diagonal entries ρij represent the coherence between two states i and j. The latter is manifested by time-dependent oscillations of the former probability with the approximate frequency: (20)in which the numerator contains the energy gap between the corresponding eigenstates. To simulate the time-dependent laser excitation and the evolution of the coherent quantum superposition (Fig. 3), a simple model Hamiltonian matrix was constructed based on a three state model:106 (21)The diagonal entries contain the corresponding energies, V indicates the electronic coupling, and μE(t) is the electromagnetic field of the exciting laser pulse. It was found that 200 and 330 meV electronic coupling is required to model the underlying kinetics of the time-resolved 2PPE experiments. In other words, strong electronic coupling is required for the quantum coherent mechanism. Since direct coupling is typically found to be rather weak, CT states are expected to play a critical role in the quantum coherent mechanism.
 Fig. 3  Pseudocolor plots of time-resolved 2PPE spectra of tetracene (a) and pentacene (b) thin films excited at hν1 = 2.32 and 2.15 eV, respectively, and probed with an ionization photon of hν2 = 4.65 eV. The energetic positions of the S1, ME (1(T1T1)), and 2 × T1 (1(T1⋯T1)) states are indicated. The lower panels show the normalized 2PPE intensities of the S1 (red dots) and the ME (1(T1T1))/2 × T1 (1(T1⋯T1)) states (blue dots) for tetracene (c) and pentacene (d), respectively. The solid curves are simulations from the three-state model with electronic coupling V of 200 and 330 meV, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2013. 
We like to emphasize the importance of quantum dynamical approaches, which contributed significantly to today's mechanistic understanding of SF. Not only were quantum master equation calculations successful in describing the ultrafast dynamics, but these approaches also provided fundamental mechanistic insights: the role of CT states, vibronic coupling, and the importance of energy resonance conditions.77,87,108–113 We focus herein on the identification of novel SF-materials and not on the underlying mechanism per se. In turn, we will not go further into details and refer the interested reader to recently published theoretical reviews, extensively discussing dynamic exciton theories and their application to SF.114,115
In early work, the coherent mechanism was postulated based on pure electronic couplings.50 The coherent mechanism was already postulated in early work based on pure electronic coupling. Albeit a matter of debate,81,96 it is now referred to as the vibronic quantum coherent mechanism. First experimental evidence for vibrational modes came from ultrafast impulsive vibrational pump–probe as well as pump–dump–probe experiments on triisopropylsilyl (TIPS) decorated pentacene performed by Musser et al.116 Their results revealed a vibrational coherence transfer from the potential energy surfaces of S1 to 1(T1T1) through a conical intersection.
Shortly afterwards, Bakulin et al. followed with an ultrafast two-dimensional electronic photon-echo spectroscopy study on pentacene and two derivatives.117 Here, high frequency vibrational modes meet the energy resonance condition and enable ultrafast SF in agreement with time-resolved 2PPE experiments. This happened despite rather weak electronic couplings. The vibronic quantum coherent mechanism was further corroborated by Monahan et al., who performed both transient absorption and time-resolved 2PPE experiments on hexacene single crystals, supported by quantum dynamical simulations.68 The authors came to the conclusion that both coherent and incoherent channels are active. On the one hand, the initial delocalized S1 transforms vibronically in a quantum superposition with 1(T1T1) with a time constant of less than 50 fs. On the other hand, in a parallel deactivation channel, the vibrationally relaxed S1 deactivates via an incoherent process to afford 1(T1T1) with a lifetime of around 180 fs. Co-existence of coherent and incoherent SF pathways was found in rubrene crystals by Miyata et al. by impulsive vibrational pump–probe spectroscopy and later confirmed by Breen et al. using two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy.118,119
In 2017, Stern et al. applied transient absorption spectroscopy together with time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy to study the deactivation of disordered and polycrystalline thin-films of TIPS-tetracene with time delays ranging from 10 fs to 100 μs.120 The quantum superposition does not evolve instantaneously after photoexcitation. Instead, it is driven by vibrational modes from the initial Franck–Condon position at the S1 potential energy surface towards the 1(T1T1) potential energy surface on the sub-300 fs timescale. Ultrafast 1(T1T1) population mediated by vibronic coupling is temperature independent, whereas 1(T1T1) dissociation was found thermally activated. In 2019, Schnedermann et al. constructed a molecular movie for ultrafast vibronically coherent SF.121 They used a directly connected orthogonal DP-Mes pentacene dimer and combined impulsive vibrational pump–probe spectroscopy and tree-tensor network state simulations.122 Such a powerful approach allowed disclosing the time-dependent interplay of both tuning and coupling vibrational modes.
Moreover, coherent and incoherent channels from a “real” CT state en-route towards 1(T1T1) may even be traced as was demonstrated by Alvertis et al. for an orthogonally positioned tetracene dimer through the change of solvent polarity by means of symmetry breaking interactions.123 It was demonstrated by both experiment and calculations that intramolecular motion around the dihedral angle Φ (low frequency vibrational motion of 39.6 cm−1) enables the mixing of CT and 1(T1T1) adiabatic potential energy surfaces in dependence of solvent polarity. In a solvent of low polarity and at room temperature, 1(T1T1) does not mix with CT states in the orthogonal position and, thus, remains pure. Incoherent SF is made possible by the large dihedral distortion. Here, crossing is avoided if enough excess energy is taken up. Intermediate-polarity solvents destabilize CT states relative to 1(T1T1). Consequently, mixing between both potential energy surfaces sets in. It is maximized by small inter-chromophore angles Φ. The latter allows for a vibronic coherent SF transition between CT and 1(T1T1) state. By further increasing the solvent polarity, the energy of the CT state rises above that of 1(T1T1). Now, mixing between both adiabatic potential energy surfaces is reduced to a minimum. Once again, SF proceeds incoherently. This solvent dependency was reflected in the experimentally observed SF-rate constants (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Top: Molecular structure with indicated dihedral angle Φ of the directly connected tetracene dimer Mes-DT. Bottom: Adiabatic potential energy surfaces along the dihedral angle Φ and the solvent dielectric constant, showing their CT (blue) and TT (red) character. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2019. 
1.3 Correlated pair states
So far, our discussion missed the nature of the correlated triplet pair state.124–128 Consider a dimer model composed of two equivalent chromophores A and B within the minimal 2 × 2 active space, that is, four electrons in four orbitals plus HOMO and LUMO are on each molecule. In the absence of any significant spin–orbit coupling, the entire adiabatic wave-function of the coupled pair system is given by the following product ansatz: |ΨI〉 = A|ΦI〉|XI〉(22)where |ϕI〉 is the spatial wave-function, |XI〉 the total spin function, and A the antisymmetrizing operator that permutes spatial and spin functions. The spatial wave-function term for the correlated pair state is a combination of diabatic electronic configurations including the primary configuration together with configurations representing CT states.129 Here, we will treat the correlated pair state wave-function purely diabatically as |ψi〉 = A|ϕA(1,2)〉|ϕB(3,4)〉|Xi(1,2,3,4)〉(23)with the corresponding primary electronic configuration, where each of the four electrons occupies one of the HOMOs and LUMOs, respectively.130 It should be noted that this assumption is only an approximate. As shown by Feng et al., the contribution of other diabatic configurations to the overall adiabatic wave-function of the correlated triplet pair state can be in the range of 10%.93 For a four electron system, 16 different products of single electron spin functions |α〉 and |β〉 corresponding to the 16 possible distributions |αααα〉, |αααβ〉, …, |ββββ〉 exist.131 The resulting 16 primitive electron spin functions are not eigenstates of the total spin angular momentum operator S2. By linear combination of the primitive electron spin functions, the total spin angular momentum matrix S2 is diagonalized. As a result, 16 pure spin eigenstates |Xi(1,2,3,4)〉 are obtained, which are combined with the spatial part of the wave-function |ϕA(1,2)〉|ϕB(3,4)〉. For the correlated pair states, two states with singlet multiplicity (S = 0, MS = 0), three times three with triplet multiplicity (S = 1, MS = 0, ±1) and one times five quintet states (S = 2, MS = 0, ±1, ±2) are overall obtained (Fig. 5).124,127 According to Scholes, the correlated pair state with singlet multiplicity, which is lowest in energy, corresponds to the correlated triplet pair 1(T1T1) state. The other correlated pair state, which is higher in energy, represents a correlated singlet pair 1(S1S1) state. It should be noted that this description neglects potential mixing due to configuration interactions or magnetic dipole–dipole couplings.132,1331(T1T1) is the key intermediate of SF, whereas 1(S1S1) was proposed by Casanova as an intermediate state in the bright fission process.134 Bright fission corresponds to the photophysical down-conversion of a single S2 into two S1 states. Notably, this intriguing down-conversion remains basically unexplored so far. The only experimental evidence was published by Klein and Voltz in 1975 when probing anthracene crystals.135 Ever since, no follow-up studies have been, to the best of our knowledge, carried out lacking any reproduction or contradiction of these results.
 Fig. 5  Energy diagram in units of the exchange energy J0 showing the relative excitation energies of the triplet pair states predicted by the “sixteen spin representation” according to Scholes. The isoergic SF case is assumed, where E(S1) = 2 × E(T1). Adapted from ref. 124 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2015. 
Two of the three triplet correlated pair states 3(T1T1) are of mixed triplet and singlet–triplet pair character, whereas the third correlated pair state with an overall triplet spin quantum number represents a correlated singlet–triplet pair state 3(T1S1). Lastly, the quintet state is described as the correlated triplet pair 5(T1T1) state and is degenerate with 1(T1T1).
In a more simplified description, the electron spin properties of the correlated triplet pair state are understood as the linear combination of the spin angular momenta of both isolated triplet entities, yielding overall one singlet, three triplet, and nine quintet spin eigenstates 2S+1(T1T1).15,136,137 Here, in the absence of any interaction, the antisymmetrizer permutes on electrons only within a single isolated chromophore and all energy levels of different spin multiplicities remain degenerate. Per se, the correlated triplet pair constitutes a coherent superposition of all spin sub-levels with entangled spin. The “nine spin state” approach derived by Merrifield in 1968 works excellent in cases of mixed spin states without significant inter-triplet interactions.136 This is found, for example, in the absence of substantial electronic coupling between the two triplets that evolved from SF and lost their electronic inter-triplet interaction (e.g. in the case of tetracene); the same is true for the microscopic reversal, namely triplet–triplet annihilation.133,138–142 In stark contrast, the “nine spin state” model fails when inter-triplet interactions are important, which is the case for strong spin dipolar coupling and/or substantial orbital overlap.132,133,143 Now, inter-triplet interactions cannot be neglected anymore and the “sixteen spin state” representation, here within a 2 × 2 active space, affords a much better description.126,127,144,145
In principle, two different correlated triplet pair states play a role: one, in which inter-triplet electronic coupling (orbital overlap) is present, and one, in which the correlated triplet pair is free of electronic inter-triplet interactions and the wave-functions do not overlap considerably any more. Consequently, Scholes proposed a notation, where 1(T1T1) is described as a triplet pair with electronic inter-triplet interaction as well as spin coherence. 1(T1⋯T1), on the other hand, has lost its inter-triplet electronic coupling, but still maintains its spin coherence.124 In this context, the correlated triplet pair with inter-triplet interaction 1(T1T1) may be formed via either a coherent or an incoherent pathway (Fig. 6).146 In the case of a coherent mechanism, dephasing of the quantum coherent superposition induces a population transfer towards 1(T1T1) within the SF-rate expression given in eqn (18).99 In a subsequent step, electronic inter-triplet interactions may incoherently be lost. Decisive is the coupling to electronic and/or vibrational degrees of freedom of the environment.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of coherent and incoherent pathways in SF. Adapted from ref. 146 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2019. 
1.4 Spectroscopic properties of the correlated triplet pair states
Time-resolved 2PPE spectroscopy (Fig. 3) assisted in corroborating the existence of 1(T1T1) and 1(T1⋯T1) in pentacene single crystals.50,1021(T1T1) was confirmed by a high-energy feature, which relaxes by 0.11 eV with a time constant of 260 ± 50 fs to yield 1(T1⋯T1). Assignment of the conversion from 1(T1T1) to 1(T1⋯T1) was forwarded by Miyata et al. Independent evidence for the existence of two intermediate correlated triplet pair states came from by Pensack et al.147 They studied solid-state samples of pentacene derivatives by time-resolved transient absorption in the visible and near-infrared (near-IR) spectral regions. Here, the correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1) revealed a featureless transient absorption plateau in the near-IR region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The latter was absent for the non-interacting 1(T1⋯T1) (Fig. 7). In short, distinct differences in the vibronic progression between both correlated triplet pair states suggest changes in the excitonic interactions. Subsequent time-resolved transient IR experiments revealed that the triplet vibrational dynamics coincide with the observed evolution of the correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1) to 1(T1⋯T1) affording two distinct electronic intermediate states.148,149
 Fig. 7  Top: Schematic representation of SF as a three step process. Bottom left: Evolution of the correlated triplet pair state from interacting (1(T1T1)) to non-interacting (1(T1⋯T1)) pair state upon spatial dissociation. Bottom right: Transient absorption signature of the interacting correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1) (red) and non-interacting correlated triplet pair state 1(T1⋯T1) (blue) of Cl4-TIPS pentacene.147 
In the weak coupling regime, the direct incoherent formation of a non-interacting or weakly interacting spin-entangled 1(T1⋯T1) is yet another possibility. Such an incoherent population of 1(T1⋯T1) was found for rubrene and hexacene crystals, where coherent as well incoherent mechanisms were the modus operandi.68,150
To this date, the loss of electronic coupling remains not well explored, being experimentally difficult to study and hence not well understood.41,151–154 Accordingly, it is often impossible to distinguish the spectroscopic signatures of 1(T1T1) and 1(T1⋯T1) (as well as independent triplets). In most cases, it remains unclear if inter-triplet interactions are preserved during the transitions or eliminated. In the following, we will not differentiate between these two intermediate correlated triplet pair states. Instead, we denote the correlated triplet pair as 1(T1T1), independent of the electronic inter-triplet interactions.
Likewise, it is often challenging to differentiate the transient absorption characteristics of 1(T1T1) from those of a pair of independent triplets (T1 + T1). Sometimes, distinct differences from that of free triplets, which are generated by, for example, triplet–triplet sensitization experiments, are discernible.155–157 Crucial is again, in this context, the degree of inter-triplet couplings and configuration interaction contributions. Accordingly, 1(T1T1) absorption maxima may be considerably shifted in reference to those of T1 or may exhibit additional markers in the near-IR spectral region.44,158–160 A prominent example is end-connected pentacene dimers with varying spacer length, for which different transient absorption characteristics were demonstrated by Trinh et al.155 The spectrum of the directly connected dimer was unambiguously different from the sensitized triplet spectrum. In contrast, the 1(T1T1) transient absorption spectrum of the dimer linked by two phenyl groups revealed almost identical transient absorption properties. A rationale is based on weaker inter-triplet interactions in 1(T1T1) as the inter-pentacene distance increases. Of great value is also the examination of the mid-IR regime. It assists in elucidating the excited state dynamics of 1(T1T1) by means of tracking specific vibrational frequencies and their underlying shifts.148,161 In the case of weakly interacting 1(T1⋯T1), these transient absorption features are absent and, thus, indifferent from independent triplet states.
Beyond that, 1(T1T1) is an electronic dark state with zero oscillator strength.49 It is inaccessible by direct one-photon excitation as well as indirect energy transfer and is typically non-emissive. Nevertheless, it may acquire a weak oscillator strength via the Herzberg–Teller mechanism and, thus, exhibit fluorescence.120,157,163 In such cases, vibronic coupling to the optically bright S1 induces symmetry breaking and the radiative recovery of the electronic ground state is activated.164 The same mechanism is of course viable under opposite conditions and leads to a weakly allowed ground state transition to 1(T1T1) as demonstrated by two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy.117 The course of 1(T1T1) formation and decay is then tractable in time-resolved photoluminescence experiments. Fluorescence due to excimer formation was unambiguously excluded due to the well-resolved vibronic progression of the 1(T1T1) emission. Emission maxima were always found to be slightly smaller in energy than 2 × E(T1). In other words, 1(T1T1) is bound with respect to the independent triplets T1.
An indirect way to corroborate SF and to probe the 1(T1T1) dynamics is based on delayed S1 fluorescence (biexponential decay).133,162,165,166 In particular, triplet–triplet annihilation must afford the bright S1 state, if SF is endothermic or isoenergetic. On a similar note, photoluminescence quantum beating due to delayed S1 emission is notable in, for example, tetracene single crystals (see Fig. 8a).54,55,88,144,167 These oscillations in the time-delayed fluorescence signal stem from the relative quantum phase acquisition, leading to constructive and destructive interference during the triplet fusion process.138 The obtained quantum beating frequency relates to the energy spacing between the spin sublevels and, further, indicates the coherent quantum superposition of the correlated triplet pair spin states (Fig. 8b). This observation provides clear evidence for the presence of the 1(T1T1) state generated upon singlet fission. Furthermore, this points at the admixture of the 1(T1T1) state in the presence of a small singlet–quintet energy gap (vide infra).
 Fig. 8  Top: Time resolved photoluminescence decay of a tetracene single crystal (black) along with corresponding simulation (red). Bottom: Quantum beating frequencies extracted by Fourier transformation (black) along with simulation using a density matrix approach (red). Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2012. 
By considering the exchange coupling J, which is connected to the orbital overlap, 1(T1T1) as well as 3(T1T1) are stabilized with respect to 5(T1T1).127,133,168 Therefore, the three correlated triplet pair states, which are degenerate in the Merrifield “nine-spin state” model, are separated in energy by 2J and 4J, respectively (Fig. 9, top). If, in fact, the exchange couplings are substantial and, moreover, dominate over the spin dipole–dipole couplings, admixing is prevented. Under these conditions, the correlated triplet pair spin states remain pure.140,169 The exchange coupling term J is distance dependent and decays exponentially with increasing separation. In turn, the correlated triplet pair states approach once again degeneracy at larger and larger distances. Spin-pure 1(T1T1)s were corroborated by means of magnetic field dependent emission experiments.168,170–172 For example, the dependence of the delayed fluorescence intensity of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene crystals in a varying magnetic field was investigated (Fig. 9, bottom). Initially, the delayed fluorescence intensity decreased until the applied magnetic field reached the range of spin dipole–dipole interactions. Then, the intensity increased again until saturation was reached at around 1 T. Magnetic field effects at <1 T are explained within the standard Merrifield model for triplet–triplet annihilation.52,137,141,173 Going beyond 1 T, three distinct local minima in the fluorescence intensity are observable. They correspond to the three level crossings, where the exchange coupling gap is canceled due to Zeeman splitting of the correlated triplet pair spin states. Thus, mixing between the corresponding spin states is allowed and the fluorescence intensity is reduced. Overall, the probability of fluorescence relates directly to the singlet contribution of the overall wave-function. Time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) studies suggested that the initially spin-pure 1(T1T1)s transform into strongly exchange-coupled 5(T1T1)s.174–177
 Fig. 9  Top: Magnetic field dependencies of the energy of 1(T1T1) (S, red line), 3(T1T1) (T, green line), and 5(T1T1) (Q, blue line) states of a moderate separated triplet pair. It is assumed that the sign of J is negative. Bottom: Magnetic field effects of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene crystals on the yield of the singlet excited state calculated by using the stochastic Liouville equation (black line) together with the experimentally observed MFE (red line). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2015. 

Eqn (3) implies that 1(T1T1) might convert into various 2S+1(T1T1) states. Decisive is the spin dipole–dipole term of the spin dependent part of the interaction Hamiltonian. The role and emergence of pure 3(T1T1)/5(T1T1) in SF are under controversial debate.178–182 It remains unclear if 5(T1T1) is a crucial step towards decorrelation. Strong spin dipole–dipole interactions are generally recognized as SF-preconditions. But, it is poorly understood which structural parameters promote 5(T1T1) formation and which factors determine its lifetime.
The application of SF-materials in quantum information science was invoked by the potential formation of spin pure 5(T1T1).27,157 Several desirable features are obvious: First, SF-materials are tolerant to the “tyranny of low temperatures”; spin entanglement is preserved over a wide range of time- and temperature-scales. Second, entangled triplet pair states need to be pure spin states. By virtue of optical HOMO–LUMO gaps, which are much larger than the thermal energy kBT, thermal fluctuations will not mix any triplet pair states with the electronic ground states. In short, quantum data gate operations of the optical pumped spin polarized system seem feasible by magnetic resonance, as state selective interconversion between 1(T1T1) and 5(T1T1) occurs.183
1.5 Separation of the correlated triplet pair state
In the last step of SF, that is, eqn (4), the correlated triplet pair state loses its spin coherence and forms two independently acting triplet excited states (T1 + T1).46,120,154,184–188Per se, this may be considered as the elementary SF-step. Assuming non-interacting triplet pair excitations and, at the same time, pure spin states, the total spin wave-function |χi〉 of 1(T1T1) is well described by Merrifield's “nine spin state” approach as (24) represents the independent triplet microstates with local magnetic spin quantum number ms of the corresponding chromophore X (A or B). To understand spin decoherence of the correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1), the time evolution of the initial spin density matrix ρ(0) needs to be taken into consideration.189ρ(0) is written here as the outer product (“ket bra”) of eqn (24) resulting in a 9 × 9 (in principle 3 × 3) density matrix as124 (25)It contains all possible combinations of triplet pair states, with combinations of TA,+11TB,−11, TA,−11TB,+11 as well as TA,01TB,01 in the first three columns/rows (other entries represent combinations with singlet and quintet pairs). As mentioned above, diagonal entries ρii of the density matrix correspond to the probability that the system exists in state i. The off-diagonal elements ρij indicate the quantum coherence/spin entanglement (sum of products between isolated triplet entities). Decreasing the distance between the SF-monomers causes minimization of the exchange couplings and admixture of the triplet pair states of higher spin multiplicities to 1(T1T1). The latter is rationalized by the spin dependent Breit-Pauli part of the interaction Hamiltonian. At the same time, mixing with other configurations is prevented. The probability for spontaneous spin-flips, which relates to spin–orbit coupling, leads to decoherence of the correlated triplet pair state. Interactions with the environment such as coupling to the phonon bath, nuclear spins, temperature, or energetic disorder promote the spin-flips. Eventually, the spontaneous spin transitions lead to independent triplets and spin coherence cancels as indicated by off-diagonal elements of each zero. As spin mixing proceeds, all diagonal elements of the density matrix approach 1/9. In turn, spin coherence disappears, and mixed states of independent triplet pairs are left behind.
The two triplets in 1(T1T1) were corroborated as bound relative to (T1 + T1) with the help of optical spectroscopy.46,157,163,174,190,191 Thus, the 1(T1T1) binding energy (EB) is given by92 EB = 2·E(T1) − E(1(T1T1))(26)Considering that the energy gap between 1(T1T1) and 5(T1T1) relates directly to the triplet–triplet separation step (“inter-triplet binding energy”) and that 5(T1T1) is not further stabilized, the energy of 5(T1T1) is twice that of the monomer triplet excited state T1.114 Here, admixing of 1(T1T1) to 3(T1T1) is typically neglected, since mixing only occurs by breaking the particle exchange symmetry.171 An immediate consequence is that the inter-triplet binding energy can be approximated with EB ≈ E(5(T1T1) − E(1(T1T1))(27)In thin films of SF-materials, the triplets are likely to diffuse apart via triplet energy transfer between neighboring entities, i.e. triplet hopping.154,157,192 As demonstrated, the triplet hopping rate is modeled within the framework of the Marcus theory.154,193 This, in turn, decreases the electronic coupling of the triplet pair state and simultaneously decreases the 1(T1T1)–5(T1T1) energy gap. Thereby, the inter-triplet binding energy is reduced until, finally, full triplet decorrelation is realized, at which the binding energy approaches zero. As a matter of fact, triplet separation is observed as a rather slow and thermally activated process.120,154,157 It is important to emphasize that the spatial separation between triplets is not necessarily linked to spin decoherence. Triplet energy transfer does not change the total spin wave-function of the correlated triplet pair state.124 But, it affects the magnitude of the exchange coupling term J. Importantly, spin coherence is maintained during the spatial triplet pair separation. This stands in contrast to the spatial part of the correlated triplet pair wave-function, which changes as a function of separation. Accordingly, the rate determining step for triplet decorrelation is either the ability of triplet hopping or the binding energy of 1(T1T1) itself.194 Thermal activation will be governed by one or both, depending on which one is the more limiting factor for a certain molecular SF system. In summary, the triplet pair state is able to retain its spin coherence over a large spatial distance and triplet energy transfer reduces the binding energy of 1(T1T1), which is approximated by the energy gap between 1(T1T1) and 5(T1T1).46,174,176,191
It is rather challenging to investigate the decorrelation step from either a theoretical or an experimental point of view. Marcus and Barford published a pioneering theoretical study on a uniform Heisenberg spin chain to model decoherence of the correlated triplet pair state.195 For the dephasing interaction with the environment they used the Lindblad master equation, considering the effects of spin–orbit coupling. They defined spin decoherence in SF as the decay of both spin entanglement and coherence and connected these quantum effects to the magnetization of the system and total spin as experimental observables.
The above outlined SF-mechanism is just a scratch on the surface of what is known today about this intriguing photophysical deactivation. Several aspects were not even touched on, such as inter alia the central role of excimers or the impact of delocalization effects.81,196–200 For a more detailed discussion, the interested reader is referred to several excellent reviews on SF, in general,15,19,115,200,201 as well as the nature of the correlated triplet pair state or theoretical simulation of SF,101,114,146,194,202 in particular.
2. The search for singlet fission chromophores
Hand-in-hand with the elucidation of the mechanism that drives SF, the discovery of new SF-materials is a very active field of current research.115,203 The number of unconventional SF-materials remains, nevertheless, rather limited. But how can we identify novel SF active molecules? This chapter presents general design guidelines and strategies towards the discovery of new SF-building blocks. The search for SF-materials is largely driven by computational approaches, which are based on the so-called energy matching conditions.
Such energy matching conditions were established as the basic requirements for SF-chromophores by Michl and co-workers.15,201,204 In particular, the energy of S1 should be at least equal to twice the energy of T1 in order to be able to subsequently generate two triplets: E(S1) ≥ 2·E(T1)(28)This requirement is often referred to as the first energy level matching condition. It is necessary to enable the exothermic population of the triplet pair state, on the one hand, and to suppress the undesired re-fusion of two (T1)s back to a singlet (S1) by triplet–triplet annihilation.
Some important points should be made here. First, SF is also seen to proceed at slightly endothermic conditions, since entropic contributions are likely compensating the slightly positive enthalpy.59,102,205,206 Second, the two triplets in 1(T1T1) are found to be bound with respect to the free triplets in (T1 + T1) and, thus, stabilized and lower in energy (vide supra).120,157,163 Moreover, electronic coupling is likely to shift the energetic landscape considerably.45,201 For example, the energy of S1 of a dimer might be significantly lower in energy than anticipated by just considering the excited state energies of the monomers. The same is applicable for true vibronic coupling, as it modulates the energies of all excited states relevant to SF. Lastly, the energy resonance condition can be fulfilled also due to electronic band formation.
In order to prevent triplet–triplet recombination into the second triplet excited state (T2), the second energy level matching condition is important: E(T2) > 2·E(T1)(29)These two energy-matching conditions relate only to thermodynamic considerations and neglect of course kinetic considerations. For efficient deactivation via SF, any other photophysical process which evolves from (S1) needs to be evidently kinetically outcompeted. Most notable undesired deactivation pathways are arguably the radiative as well as non-radiative populations of (S0) or (T1) by, for example, intersystem crossing.
In addition to these thermodynamic and kinetic aspects, high charge carrier mobility, large extinction coefficients, and chemical-, photo- as well as thermal stability constitute important factors for device engineering amongst others.19 Going beyond these considerations, cost-effective and non-toxic materials are desired.
The energy matching conditions may be evaluated by directly computing the energies of the relevant states (Fig. 10). Per se, this remains the most common strategy, despite the considerable computational demand. Consequently, other approximate methodologies have been developed, which allow one to estimate the energy matching conditions.207–210 Arguably the most important is the calculation of the ground state diradical character as diradical and tetraradical indices proved to be very helpful.211,212 A high diradical character indicates low-lying singlet- and triplet excited states.213 Also, the aromaticity of the ground- and excited states is helpful.214 An aromatic molecule with a high diradical index will feature a comparably low degree of aromaticity in the ground state and as well an energetically low-lying triplet excited state. Calculations of the energies of the frontier orbitals are another approximate for the vertical transitions into the low-energy excited states.215 Surprisingly, this straight-forward approach has not yet found widespread application.
 Fig. 10  The energy matching conditions are the central guideline to evaluate singlet fission candidates. 
In terms of computational methodology (Fig. 11), density-functional theory (DFT) allows one to predict the energies of the S0 and T1 states, whereas time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) may be used to estimate the vertical energies of the excited singlet and triplet states. DFT methods are comparably fast, especially if combined with geometry optimization at the semi-empirical or molecular mechanics level and if only looking at the energies of monomers. It is very important to note that energies of diradicaloid states as obtained from unrestricted calculations are unreliable and heavily depend on the degree of exact exchange admixture.216 A routine tool, which at times improves the agreement with experiments, is spin-decontamination procedures.217–220 That said, TD-DFT calculations using local hybrid functionals may afford also an accuracy of 0.2 eV for the calculation of excited state energies and also mixed-reference spin–flip time-dependent density functional theory gives reliable results.221,222 Spin–flip approaches have also proven to be useful to obtain fairly low-cost, yet accurate ground-state and excitation energies with wave-function based methods.223,224 Conversely, computationally more demanding multi-configurational methods are arguably better to treat the strongly correlated systems in SF. This is particularly true for doubly excited states and dimers, which are not well treated at the classic DFT level. Wave-function based methods such as MRCI or CASSCF/PT2 dominate currently,225,226 although multi-configuration pair-density functional theory seems to be an excellent and computationally efficient choice as well.227–231 Eventually, we would like to highlight that the calculation of adiabatic energies and dimers as well as their coupling strongly enhances the accuracy and validity of the computational predictions at the expense of strongly increased computational demand. The same is true for the calculation of various conformers of dimers. A leading example is the relevance of slip-stacking in polyacenes.
 Fig. 11  Computational approaches and crude classification. 
2.1 Excited state energies
Upon considering eqn (5), Paci et al. postulated two parent structures as the starting point for SF.204 From exchange interactions between the frontier orbitals, either alternant closed-shell hydrocarbons or open-shell diradicals were proposed (Fig. 12). By chemical and structural modifications of the parent systems, the energetic landscape can be adjusted to fulfill the first energy level matching conditions. More specifically, they proposed, among others, perylene (1), isobenzofulvene (2) and xylylene (3 and 4) derivatives as promising platforms for the experimental verification of SF (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 12  Energy levels of closed (left) and open-shell (right) parent structures. Structural perturbation changes the energy landscape towards energy level matching conditions (middle). Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2010. 
 Fig. 13  Lead structures for SF-materials proposed by Paci et al.204 
High-throughput computational screening procedures using computationally efficient density functional theory (DFT) methods have been very successfully used to assess the energy matching conditions. Perkinson et al. investigated a search space of 4482 compounds with high-energy triplet excited states by a high-throughput virtual screening method.232 As a result, 88 SF-candidates based on anthracene emerged. For two of them, the deactivation via SF was later experimentally confirmed. In a study by Padula et al., a computational screening approach was applied to a part of the Cambridge Structural Database.233,234 213 SF-candidates fulfilled the energy level matching conditions. Entirely new structural motives were found among them including azo-benzene dioxides (5), Pechmann dyes (6) and disilenes (7) (Fig. 14). Interestingly, some of these SF-materials lack diradical resonance structures, indicating an unexplored structure–SF relationship.
 Fig. 14  Identified SF-molecules by Padula et al.233 
2.2 Diradical character
Nakano and co-workers pointed out that the above discussed thermodynamic requirements (eqn (5) and (6)) correlate with the multiple diradical characters y0 and y1.211,212 Here, y0 and y1 correspond to the occupation numbers of the lowest unoccupied natural orbital (LUNO) and the second lowest unoccupied natural orbital (LUNO+1), respectively.235–238 These indices are directly connected to the effective bond order as well as aromaticity of the electronic ground state.239,240 They describe the degree of electron correlation within a molecular system. In the case of a pure closed-shell system, the diradical character y0 as well as the tetraradical character y1 is zero. The other limiting scenario constitutes open-shell systems. There, a pure diradical is indicated by y0 ≈ 1 and y1 ≈ 0, while for a pure tetraradical both indices are one. An imperfect diradical, namely a diradicaloid, stems from weak interactions of both unpaired electrons.241,242 For such intermediate open-shell systems, the diradical character y0 scales from zero to one.
In spin-unrestricted U-HF or U-DFT calculations,243,244 the exact value depends on the overlap between the two corresponding magnetic orbitals as usually obtained from a broken-symmetry calculation.245,246 More precisely, the multiple diradical character yi is defined as (30)where Ti indicates the orbital overlap between HONO−i (HONO: highest occupied natural orbital) and LUNO+i (LUNO: lowest unoccupied natural orbital), which relates to the occupation number n of the natural orbitals: (31)
Multi-configurational CASSCF or more generally CI calculations intrinsically include the population of the LUNO and LUNO+1 and the depopulation of the HONO and HONO–1, respectively. They provide by the minimal 4 electrons in 4 orbitals picture an intuitive access to the multiple diradical characters y0 and y1. A very crude way to estimate the diradical character is the fractional occupation number weighted density (FOD) analysis.247–249 FOD makes use of finite-temperature DFT, where “hot” electrons are smeared over a molecule's molecular orbitals according to the Fermi–Dirac distribution. Although it has so far only found little use, it has been proposed as a surprisingly robust and computationally cheap way to investigate SF-chromophores.250–252
Minami et al. used a minimum four hydrogen atom chain model with D∞h symmetry representing a “4 electrons in 4 orbitals” case to tune the nature of the electronic ground state by varying the interatomic distances as shown in Fig. 15a.211 As a consequence, all scenarios, that is starting from a pure closed-shell up to a pure open-shell (diradical as well as tetraradical), were established. With this at hand, the excitation energies were calculated and related to the two multiple diradical indices y0 and y1. Based on their computational results, the authors formulated important guidelines for the discovery of SF-materials. First, a slight diradical character is required for any material to undergo SF. A purely closed-shell system with y0 ≈ 0 will fail to satisfy the first energy matching condition of eqn (28). With increasing diradical index y0 a larger exothermicity of SF impacts the energy conversion efficiency due to the loss of excess energy in the form of heat. Notable is that for tetraradicaloids, where y0 ≈ y1, the first thermodynamic requirement is not fulfilled. In general, the tetraradical index should therefore be kept small. Further, a high tetraradical index also dissatisfies the second energy matching condition according to eqn (29). On the basis of the multiple diradical indices, the authors concluded a joint view on alternant hydrocarbons as well as diradicals and deduced an efficiency map as a function of y0 and y1, depicted in Fig. 15b. In short, in the simplest formulation, every singlet fission chromophore is a diradicaloid.
 Fig. 15  (a) H4 model according to Nakano et al. (top).240 By variation of the interatomic distance, the diradical indices change towards a pure diradical and tetraradical, respectively. (b) Diradical character efficiency map obtained by calculating the excitation energies of the H4 model (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2012. 
Besides the aforementioned, the multiple diradical indices provide information regarding the classification of SF-materials. Such classifications were proposed earlier by Michl and Smith by reviewing the electronic nature of (S1).15,201 Most SF-materials such as tetracene and pentacene fall into the category Class I. Here, the excited state configuration is understood as a classic Kasha-allowed HOMO → LUMO transition. In contrast, S1s of Class II are better described as a linear combination of HOMO → LUMO+1 and HOMO–1 → LUMO excitations. Accordingly, (S1) excitations are one-photon forbidden. Their population is based on, for example, internal conversion starting from higher singlet excited states. Although theoretical predictions for Class II exist, little is known about this class and the role of the corresponding excited state configurations in the SF-mechanism remains to be elucidated.253,254 Class III molecules resemble Class II, with the exception that (S1) is mainly characterized by a HOMO,HOMO → LUMO, LUMO doubly excited electronic configuration. Likewise, in this case, the direct one-photon excitation to afford the doubly excited state with Ag symmetry is typically forbidden. Access to this state is made possible by fast internal conversion from a bright π–π* Bu transition. Its existence was already invoked by calculations on trans-butadiene and applied to explain the unusual absorption and fluorescence of polyenes.255,256 In short, the 21Ag dark state is best described as a superposition of singly excited configurations as well as two triplets localized on each ethylene sub-unit. Accordingly, the underlying two-electron excited state can be interpreted as a 1(T1T1) and SF may proceed intramolecularly within a single chromophore. Here, due to the spatial proximity within the conjugated π-system, 1(T1T1) is strongly bound with respect to each other. Examples of known, experimentally investigated SF-materials of Class III are extended polyenes such as carotenoids and conjugated polymers.257–260
We would like to point out that the multiple diradical indices allow for differentiating between Class I, Class II, and Class III chromophores. Increasing y1 favors the stabilization of the 21Ag dark state until it finally becomes the lowest singlet excited state. Additionally, the introduction of a tetraradicaloid character may transform a congener of Class I to Class III and/or even to Class II.
The experimental determination of the T1 energy level is tedious. Likewise, the experimental determination of y0 for a molecule is far from trivial,261 which hence explains why the search for new singlet fission chromophores is largely dominated by quantum chemical calculations.114,202 In this context, diradical stabilization inspired numerous studies, where small SF-materials are at the forefront by virtue of reasonable computational costs. In addition, small molecules ensure in principle high exciton densities in optoelectronic devices. Eventually, they could be integrated as core structures in SF-monomers and, in this way, further thermodynamically and kinetically stabilized. By computing the diradical indices for several rylenes, Minami et al. discovered terrylenes and quaterrylenes as potential SF-platforms (see Fig. 15b).262,263 Rylene derivatives undergo SF, a fact that was proven in subsequent experimental studies.89,178,264–269 Today, the family of rylenes is arguably the most well-established representative for SF-materials next to acenes.
Beyond that, Nakano and co-workers revisited isobenzofulvene (2).212 Moreover, they identified in further studies non-Kekulè heteroacenes (8) as core structures for SF (Fig. 16).254 As demonstrated recently by Li et al., higher non-Kekulè heteroacenes of this type incorporating four nitrogen atoms (9) could act as potential SF switches upon hydrogen migration.270 Typically, closed-shell structures serve as starting points for the search of SF-diradicaloids. Another strategy is the use of two interacting radicals as shown for dimers of the phenalenyl radical (10).271 These so-called pancake-bonded systems (the minimal SF-system constitutes phenalenyl tetramers) are predicted to have high SF-rates as well as high charge carrier mobility, which is an often-neglected material property important for later construction of SF-based devices. Accordingly, these molecular systems could tackle the trade-off between SF-efficiency and charge carrier mobility, usually observed for conventional SF-molecules. In another study, it was showcased that the strong open-shell character of bisanthene (11) can be weakened by twisting the planarity or by attaching aromatic rings and, in turn, SF is isoergic rather than strongly exothermic.272 The same approach was used in an experimental work on perylene diimide model systems.273 Additional computational works with a focus on diradical indices were performed by Sandoval-Salinas et al. on spiroconjugated dimers (12) and López-Carballeira et al., where 10 SF-candidates, including 13, with intermediate y0 values were identified out of 206 quinone and methylene derivatives.252,274 An interesting strategy for the stabilization of open-shell centers is the captodative effect which is the appropriate balance between electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups.253,275 Here, 14 and 15 are lead examples. This successful concept was later extended to azaborines (16).276–278
 Fig. 16  Theoretically proposed SF-candidates based on their diradical character.254,270–278 
2.3 Aromaticity
An increase in y0 in conjugated molecules is typically associated with a decrease of aromatic stabilization and vice versa.207,210 Hence, tuning the ground state aromaticity is yet another strategy in the search for novel SF-materials. Aromaticity of molecular building blocks is conveniently assessed by computational methods. Most popular (beyond structural considerations such as alternating bond lengths) is the calculation of the nucleus-independent chemical shift (NICS).279–282 It refers to the NMR-shift of a dummy atom positioned in the π-system of a planar, conjugated ring, thereby assessing the magnetic shielding due to the aromatic ring current. Alternatively, aromaticity may be estimated by topological wave-function analysis. Prominent examples include the analysis of the electron density by the Quantum Theory in Molecules (QTAIM),283 the Electron Localization Function (ELF),284–287 as well as the Anisotropy of Current Induced Density (ACID) methods.288,289
Anti-aromatic systems such as antiaromatic condensed-ring polycyclic hydrocarbons with 4n π-electrons serve as starting points.290 Amongst the investigated antiaromatic systems, 17 is one that satisfies the two energy level matching conditions given by eqn (5) and (6) (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Theoretically proposed SF-candidates based on anti-aromaticity and Baird aromaticity rules.290,291 
Fallon and co-workers applied the concept of aromaticity to triplet excited states.291 Hückel's rule predicts stability of (S0) for cyclic systems with 4n + 2 π-electrons. The situation changes in the excited state, where cyclic systems with 4n π-electrons undergo stabilization.292–294 This is known as Baird's rule of excited state aromaticity. In their work, they tuned the (T1) aromaticity of Cibalackrot derivatives by substituting them with different chemical functionalities. It should be noted here that the indigoid structure still follows the idea of diradical stabilization. This goal is achieved upon planarization by ring fusion towards a strongly stabilized diradicaloid. With that strategy at hand, the authors demonstrated that the energy of (T1) is reduced as its aromaticity increases, while the energy of (S1) remains unaffected. They also identified out of 9960 theoretically constructed Cibalackrot-based structures 2616 SF-candidates. In subsequent work, El Bakouri et al. utilized both Hückel and Baird aromaticity rules.214
By plotting, for instance, the energies of (S1), (T1) and (T2) of a compound family substituted with different functionalities versus an aromatic or anti-aromatic index, shown in Fig. 18, they were able to determine an aromaticity threshold. Importantly, the aromaticity threshold determines whether the first energy level matching conditions are met or not. This approach is, however, linked to several conditions. First, it is only applicable if the (S1)s and (T1)s are described by singly HOMO → LUMO excitation configuration like in Class I.
 Fig. 18  Relative energy response of the involved electronic states by variation of the ground and excited state aromaticity within a particular compound family.214 Compounds within the orange region satisfy the energy level matching conditions. 
Second, HOMO and LUMO should keep the same symmetry. Third, the spatial localization of HOMO and LUMO should exhibit no shifts over the regarded chromophore family. If all of these requirements are fulfilled, the energy landscape is tunable by chemical functionalization with electron withdrawing and/or donating groups or by benzannulation.
This concept has been proven to be a powerful tool in predicting new families of SF-materials like 18.291
Eventually, topological wave-function analysis has also been used to assess computationally the degree of conjugation in cumulenes in analogy to the aromaticity in planar rings in the context of SF.295
2.4 Frontier molecular orbitals
Blaskovits et al. investigated the relation between the adiabatic and vertical energy landscape and the energy of the frontier molecular orbitals.215 This study was inspired by the search for an efficient computational screening protocol to identify electron donor-acceptor-type co-polymers suitable for intramolecular SF. The CT character was found to provide a cost-effective screening protocol. Out of a library of overall 81 copolymers, the authors identified four promising candidates, two of which had already been experimentally validated. Accordingly, it was predicted that this approach should also be successful in the high-throughput screening of much larger databases.
2.5 Electronic coupling and crystal packing
As discussed in Section 1, SF-rate constants depend on electronic couplings (eqn (5)). As a matter of fact, even if the energy matching conditions are fulfilled, substantial electronic coupling is required for SF to proceed and to outcompete other photophysical deactivations. Importantly, electronic couplings relate to the orbital overlap densities at adjacent SF-monomers and, in turn, are found to be sensitive to the molecular conformation and, in the solid state, to the crystal packing. The impact of crystal arrangement on electronic couplings, SF-rate constants, and triplet quantum yields is well known from theoretical as well as experimental studies.141,265,296–300 To evaluate and demonstrate the underlying configuration dependency, Michl and co-workers considered the stacking of a parallel ethylene dimer model,74,201,301 separated by 3.5 Å in the z-direction, while changing the deflection in x- and y-directions. Within the minimal 2 × 2 diabatic active space (two chromophores A and B, HOMO (hX) and LUMO (lX), neglecting doubly excited configuration) the off-diagonal matrix elements that indicate electronic couplings are written as (32) (33) (34) (35) (36)assuming zero differential overlap. Here, the Fock operators F account for the ground state configuration, the two-electron integrals 〈aXbX|e2/r12|cXdX〉 represent electronic attraction and repulsion forces between overlap densities of SF-monomers, and CA and AC indicate CT excitations. For a full description including orbital overlap terms we refer to the publication of Buchanan et al.74
The reason for this is, on the one hand, that more two-electron integrals are involved than what eqn (32) suggests. On the other hand, one-electron integrals (matrix elements of the Fock operator) are included in the mediating coupling terms. Considering the direct coupling term only in the first order approximation, electronic coupling will be maximized in the completely slip-stacked configuration along the direction of the transition moment of the HOMO to LUMO transition. In contrast, eqn (32) will approach zero in the case of the completely stacked dimers, since the two-electron integrals vanish due to symmetry. By considering the second order perturbation term, the mediated pathways (eqn (33)–(36)) become relevant and Fermi's golden rule rate expression in eqn (13) transforms into (37)Here, the matrix element 〈CA|Hel|S1S0〉 from eqn (33) has a positive maximum for perfectly stacked ethylene dimers (see Fig. 19). As the slipping distance along the y-direction increases, eqn (33) will approach a minimum and, subsequently, reach zero. Turning to the matrix element 〈AC|Hel|S1S0〉, a minimum of eqn (34) evolves for the fully stacked molecular configuration. It increases towards zero when the slip direction y becomes larger. In contrast, 〈1(T1T1)|Hel|CA〉 of eqn (35) is strictly zero in the completely stacked case. It will, however, increase towards a positive extreme, which relates to the slip-stacked configuration, and will arrive at zero again by an additional increase of y. For 〈1(T1T1)|Hel|AC〉, the same trend and magnitude is obtained as for 〈1(T1T1)>|Hel|CA〉, albeit with opposite signs. Hence, these two terms approximately cancel each other. All four electronic matrix elements appear in eqn (37) in the numerator as the sum of two products. Accordingly, the numerator will be zero for completely stacked ethylene dimers, at which point the mediating term vanishes. Indeed, the electronic coupling, and thus the SF-rate constant, is maximized for a slip-stacked molecular configuration along the HOMO to LUMO transition dipole moment and accordingly is likely dominated by the mediating coupling term (depending on ΔE(CT)) as illustrated in Fig. 19. Very recently, Sandoval-Salinas and Casanova extended the ethylene dimer model by consideration of the doubly excited state.302 On the one hand, their electronic coupling calculations together with simulation of SF dynamics suggested that SF may proceed directly from this electronic dark state. This possibility was already invoked for pentacene, though experimental as well as subsequent electronic structure calculations localized the doubly excited state below the bright singlet excited state. On the other hand, the authors showed that the doubly excited state may mediate the SF process in a super-exchange mechanism fashion, maximized in slip-stacked conformations. Many aromatic hydrocarbons adopt slip-stacked molecular configurations as crystal packing structures, though other crystal dispositions may also result in SF such as the tilted orientation in the herringbone-type structure of tetracene and pentacene.45 Slip-stacking is deemed the optimal intermolecular arrangement for efficient SF. Nevertheless, ideal crystal configurations are of course system dependent. In practice, optimal electronic coupling can be achieved by crystal engineering. Alternatively, monomers may be covalently connected via molecular bridges to ensure ideal electronic communication.
 Fig. 19  SF-interaction matrix elements for slip-stacked ethylene molecules as a function of slip in directions x and y: (a) 〈CA|Hel|S1S0〉, (b) 〈AC|Hel|S1S0〉, and (c) 1(T1T1)|Hel|CA〉. (d) The sum (light blue) of direct (dark blue) and mediated (red) contributions assuming a 50 kcal mol−1 difference E between the energy of the initial and final states and the energy of CT states. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Annual Reviews, Inc., copyright © 2013. 
It is very important to consider in this regard that vibrational degrees of freedom (viz. vibronic coupling or non-adiabatic coupling) may have a dramatic influence on the energetics and the couplings. Electron–phonon coupling is very important in the solid state and affects the excited state electronic energies dynamically, resulting in fluctuations of the energy gaps between S1 and 1(T1T1) and higher intermediate states.303,304 Accordingly, vibronic coupling of course also causes dynamic fluctuations in electronic couplings in solution.305,306 An impressive demonstration is SF in rubrene crystals, where an antisymmetric symmetry breaking vibrational mode is responsible for a non-zero electronic coupling that enables SF via a vibronic quantum coherent mechanism.118 Incoherent SF may occur on longer time scales if the thermal activation is accompanied with such a symmetry breaking vibrational mode. For instance, Feng calculated the electronic structure of tetracene dimers with various distances and found that simple diabatization procedures are not applicable to understand the underlying electronic changes such as the charge transfer character.93 Vallett reported a DFT study on a series of bridged tetracene dimers and investigated the influence of the bridge on the inter-fragment electronic coupling.307 Thereby, the authors suggested understanding the Davydov splitting as a proxy for the interchromophore electronic coupling between the two tetracene subunits. Another important aspect is delocalization, resulting in electronic band formation.81 Consequently, a simple dimer model is only a crude approximation for a crystalline system.
3. Experimental studies on unconventional singlet fission chromophores
In recent years, the pool of potential SF-candidates has increased considerably. Still, acenes and acene derivatives are the most studied family of SF-materials. Linear acenes were tuned by several strategies to expand the structural and functional diversity. First, at least two linear acenes are linked to each other (homo- as well as hetero-fission chromophores) with different spacers to evaluate intramolecular SF.186,203,308–311 Second, heteroatom incorporation and electron-withdrawing addition are applied to, inter alia, change the excited state energetics and enhance their stability by lowering HOMO and LUMO levels.41,157,312,313 Besides linear acenes, also rylenes,187,265,314–318 diketopyrrolopyrroles,319–322 polyenes/carotenoids, and conjugated polymers have been well-established as SF-materials.257,323–328 In the following, we examine what is known beyond these established SF-families and explore experimental studies on “unconventional” SF-diradicaloids.
3.1 1,3-Diphenylisobenzofuran derivatives
SF was incidentally discovered in 1965 when investigating anthracene crystals.329 It took until 2010 for the first experimental proof of a previously theoretically proposed SF-candidate, that is, 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran as a Class I chromophore (19, Fig. 20).330,331 Inspecting the structure of 19, it is evident that it is derived from the diradical parent o-quinodimethane 3. It is stabilized by ring closure towards an oxygen-containing, five-membered heterocycle and two additional phenyl groups. 19 was found to be unstable in oxygen-saturated solutions.332 For 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran, the triplet formation stemmed from an isoergic SF due to the fast interconversion, the ground state bleaching recovery, and the sum of triplet and fluorescence quantum yields exceeding 100%.331 In the solid state at 77 K, a remarkable triplet quantum yield of formally 200 ± 30% was determined. In subsequent work, two different crystal morphologies, referred to as α and β, were identified for 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran.333,334 The α- and β-polymorphs differ strongly in terms of their SF-behavior. Efficient SF with a triplet quantum yield of around 140% was recorded for the α-polymorph. The more stable and compact β-polymorph showed only a moderate yield of ≈10%. It is the long-range order not the slip-stacked arrangement that differs in the two polymorphs. The authors concluded that SF is inhibited by a fast excimer formation and trapping in accordance with the fluorescence behavior seen for both polymorphs. In the α-modification the time constant of SF is in the range of 10 to 30 ps and independent of thermal activation. Singlet–singlet annihilation turned out to be the dominant loss channel. Still, trapping was found to be significant above 180 K. Also, SF from higher excited singlet states (Sn) is faster than from (S1). The authors concluded that even small variations in the π–π stacking interactions or changes in the long-range order influence the electronic coupling and, in turn, the SF-efficiency. A later study, where different sterically demanding alkyl groups were introduced in 20 to 22, further corroborated this conclusion.335 Bulky substituents systematically disturb the slip-stacked arrangement and lead to highly amorphous films. All of the aforementioned factors have of course a crucial impact on the triplet quantum yields. One methyl group at the phenyl ring evokes a triplet quantum yield of 75%, while the bulkier tert-butyl substituents reduced the triplet quantum yield to 55%. Following this trend, the addition of a second tert-butyl group at the opposing phenyl group decreased the triplet quantum yield further to 35%. Dron et al. inferred that with weaker electronic coupling, excimer formation as a competitive deactivation pathway becomes more and more favored. To test the impact of weak perturbations, three fluorinated derivatives of 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (23–25), in which one, five, or ten fluorine atoms were placed onto the phenyl rings, were investigated.336 In a comparison of theory and experiment, the authors concluded that dimer based calculation models may not be sufficient to elucidate the effect of chromophore packing in the solid state. Instead, Buchanan et al. proposed higher oligomers as model systems to be applied. Besides side group engineered 1,3-diphenylisobenzofurans, three covalently coupled molecular dimers (26–28) were reported.184 All of them exhibited low triplet quantum yields, which was rationalized by weak electronic coupling. For the directly connected dimer 26, it was shown that the localized and delocalized (S1) excitation co-exists and the coexistence is heavily influenced by the solvent environment.337 Here, the interconversion to 1(T1T1) is supported by localized excitations, whereas singlet delocalization is detrimental. Ultimately, 19 as well as 29 with an aliphatic carboxylic anchor was successfully implemented into a dye-sensitized solar cell.338 As a semiconductor, mesoporous TiO2 coated with ZrO2 was used and for 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran, internal quantum efficiencies of around 70% together with power conversion efficiencies of 1.1% were demonstrated.
 Fig. 20  Experimentally investigated 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran derivatives. 
3.2 Tetracyanoquinodimethane
1,3-Diphenylisobenzofuran is a derivative of the o-quinodimethane diradical. Tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ, 30) is formally a diradicaloid derived from the parent p-quinodimethane and constitutes another example for Class I chromophores (4) (Fig. 21). TCNQ is also a prominent electron acceptor, which has been integrated into charge transfer co-crystals. The first example of SF in charge transfer co-crystals was found in phenazine and fluorene TCNQ 1:1 co-crystals in 1991 by Frankenvich et al., followed by work by Gundel et al.339,340 Magnetic-field dependent fluorescence measurements as a function of temperature and excitation flux proved very useful in these studies. Shortly afterwards, deactivation via SF in the phenazine TCNQ 1:1 complex was further underscored by time-resolved EPR measurements focusing on the initial optical spin polarization.341 Two years later, Agostini et al. contributed work on substituting the earlier utilized electron donors with biphenyl and, in addition to conventional TCNQ, they turned to tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ, 31) as well.342 Again, they could unambiguously verify triplet population through thermally activated SF by zero-field optically detected magnetic resonance experiments. Recently, Ni and co-workers investigated binary co-crystals composed of perylene and TCNQ (3:1 stoichiometry) by time resolved photoluminescence and transient absorption spectroscopy.343 Upon excitation with high energy photons in higher excited states SN (4.96 eV), they observed a branching deactivation pathway between SF and internal conversion towards charge separation. Importantly, TCNQ remains passive here and SF occurs between two stacked perylene units. In contrast, for direct excitation with lower energies into CT states, no SF was detected. Instead, instant charge separation occurred, and ion pair recombination resulted in triplet population via spin–orbit CT enhanced intersystem crossing.
 Fig. 21  Experimentally investigated TCNQ-co-crystals. 
3.3 Quinoidal thiophenes
Structurally related with TCNQ is tetracyanoquinodimethane bithiophene (32), where a polyene backbone is embedded into the overall quinoidal thiophene (Fig. 22). Important is the presence of the electron-withdrawing, cyano-substituted termini, which should, on the one hand, assist in localization of the two triplet excitations and, on the other hand, add CT character to the optically bright state.344,345 Quinoidal oligothiophenes exhibit substantial diradicaloid character and high photostability, which drew attention to 32 as a potential SF-material (Fig. 22).346–348 Indeed, it was demonstrated by Varnavski et al. that, after photoexcitation, tetracyanoquinodimethane bithiophene deactivates ultrafast on the sub-picosecond timescale to interconvert the bright 11Bu to the 21Ag state through a conical intersection near the Franck–Condon region.349,350 This is in line with predictions by Di Motta et al., who suggested a low-lying doubly excited state for 32.351
 Fig. 22  Experimentally investigated quinoidal-thiophene derivatives. 
Accordingly, 21Ag constitutes an intramolecularly formed, strongly electronically coupled 1(T1T1). According to the classification of Michl et al. discussed in Section 2, this family of SF-molecules belong to Class III type of SF-systems.15 The interconversion efficiency was quantified with a triplet quantum yield as high as 180%. Appreciable (T1) formation by, for example, intersystem crossing was excluded due to negligible spin–orbit coupling. The 57 μs lifetime for the doubly excited 21Ag state is remarkable. Internal conversion paths towards the electronic ground state are suppressed by the rigidity of the polyene backbone. Note that in conventional, flexible polyenes the decay proceeds within a few picoseconds via conical intersections located at nearby nuclear geometries.260,352 Limiting and associated with the rigidity of this system is the substantial energy barrier of 1.76 eV to reduce the 0.43 eV triplet binding energy. Although triplet separation could be in principle feasible, an enormous energy barrier (i.e. 1.76 eV) needs to be overcome in order to reduce the triplet binding energy (i.e. 0.43 eV) by geometrical distortion and, thus, to ensure triplet dissociation. Consequently, both (T1)s of the intramolecularly formed 1(T1T1) state remain bound with respect to each other. Kim et al. demonstrated in a subsequent study a remarkable electron transfer efficiency of 83–103% originating from the strongly coupled 1(T1T1) of tetracyanoquinodimethane bithiophene (32) to a two-electron accepting anthraquinone.353 The electron transfer mechanism is based predominantly on a two-electron pathway, which could open a new approach for efficient light harvesting in photovoltaic devices.
In 2016, Kawata et al. used three different quinoidal thiophenes (33–35) in bilayered, solar energy conversion devices containing electron accepting C60 or N,N′-1H,1H-perfluorobutyl dicyanoperylenecarboxydiimide.354 SF was unambiguously proven through the magnetic field dependency of the photocurrent. Unfortunately, the power conversion efficiency was only <1.1%. With alkylbithiophene substituted 9,9’-bifluorenylidene (36) and [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester, the power conversion efficiency increased to 1.3%.355
3.4 Zethrenes
In 2017, Lukman and co-workers explored SF in seven different zethrenes, namely 37–43 (Fig. 23).163 Taking inspiration from diradicaloid stabilization, networks of fused six-membered ring-systems varying from six (hexazethrene) to eight (octazethrene) and, beyond that, phenalenofluorene (38) with an incorporated five-membered ring were probed. Variable side groups, namely phenylethynyl, triisopropylsilylethynyl, mesityl or fluorinated mesityl, were added to ensure chemical stability as well as to control the molecular stacking. Triisopropylsilylethynyl revealed to be the least sterically demanding, thus, allowing for a more compact packing arrangement in the solid state and, in turn, affording stronger electronic coupling. The biradical indices y0 of these compounds span a large range from y0 = 0.05 in 38 to 0.43 in 43, which leads to optical band gaps between 1.4 and 1.9 eV. In cases of strong open-shell character, such as in 41–43, a low-lying doubly excited state, close in energy to the one-photon allowed excitation, was theoretically predicted. The presence of this doubly excited state was then experimentally corroborated by weak absorption onsets in the red regions of the electromagnetic spectra. According to Negri et al., this is a common feature observed for these molecules with low-lying dark states.356 Time resolved spectroscopic measurements failed, however, to testify direct transitions into this forbidden doubly excited state. In consequence, the investigated zethrenes represent examples for Class I members. 37–47 are subject to temperature-independent spin-entangled 1(T1T1) formation. In contrast, triplet decorrelation requires temperature exceeding 50 K due to strong inter-triplet bindings, which needs to be overcome by sufficient activation energy. Nevertheless, the experimentally derived values deviated significantly from the calculated energies in opposition to what had been found for TIPS-pentacene or F2-TES ADT.157,357 Triplet hopping turned out to be the limiting factor for the successful triplet separation. Interestingly, a Herzberg–Teller mechanism allows the generally dark 1(T1T1) to decay radiatively via fluorescence. The two fluorescent species, which were found in time resolved fluorescence experiments, were assigned to (S1) and 1(T1T1). The latter fluoresces red-shifted relative to the former. Moreover, the 1(T1T1) fluorescence decay is overlaid by three distinct quantum beating frequencies. Considering that triplet–triplet annihilation is inoperative in the (S1) repopulation, the relative quantum phase acquisition of 1(T1T1) modulates the singlet character of the triplet pair periodically over time. Spectroscopic analyses prompted to 1(T1T1)s that are bound with respect to free (T1) as well as (S1). As such, even endothermic SF is enabled in 37, 38, and 41. Furthermore, the emissive 1(T1T1) state together with the observed phosphorescence (Fig. 24), determined in sensitization experiments with platinum octaethylporphyrin, allowed for the calculation of the inter-triplet binding energy EB = 2E(T1) − E(1(T1T1)). Compared to independent (T1)s, unique shifts of the spectral 1(T1T1) signatures evolved in the near-IR region of the transient absorption spectra (vide supra).358 With these results at hand, Lukman et al. correlated the red-shifted transient absorption features (ΔEPIA) with the binding energies of 1(T1T1) and a linear dependency was discovered, which is shown in Fig. 24d.
 Fig. 23  Experimentally investigated zethrene derivatives. 
 Fig. 24  Transient absorption spectra for bound 1(T1T1) and independent triplets (T1) for (a) 38 (PF-M) and 37 (Z-P), (b) 43 (OZ-M) and 42 (OZ-T) as well as (c) 41 (HZ-M), 40 (HZ-F) and 39 (HZ-T). (d) Binding energy of 1(T1T1) versus transient absorption maxima shifts reveals a linear dependency with a slope of 1.163 
This dependency followed an almost one-to-one relationship between energy shifts of the NIR peak and corresponding binding energies. Musser and Clark generalized this trend in their review to SF-materials beyond zethrenes.194 As exemplified for 21Ag in β-carotene, which complies with their findings, a close similarity exists between the 21Ag doubly excited state and the 1(T1T1) state involving two singlet fission monomers, e.g. pentacene. Even if the binding energy may not be directly obtained, such excited state absorption shifts provide a rough approximation for the 1(T1T1) binding energies.
3.5 Baird/anti aromaticity and indigo based singlet fission materials
In 2017, a SF-material based on an antiaromatic core structure was experimentally investigated by Wu et al.359 Following the strategy of Ito et al.,290 a dibenzopentalene center with 4n π-electrons was utilized with attached styryl substituents to provide an extension of the π-conjugated system (Fig. 25, 44). Although Ito et al. predicted, in non-compliance with eqn (28), SF to be unfeasible for dibenzopentalene, effective side group engineering rendered SF feasible for 44.
 Fig. 25  Molecular structure of the experimentally investigated dibenzopentalene based structure. 
In any case, the SF-generality for this SF-family, which belongs to Class III, was successfully confirmed within this study. Like for TCNQ bithiophenes, antiaromatic 44 decays in diluted solutions to an optical dark doubly excited (S1),349 which relates to a strong electronic coupled 1(T1T1) state, via internal conversion from the initially populated bright S2 state. A lifetime of 15.8 ± 0.6 ps was determined for the intramolecularly formed 1(T1T1). Geminate triplet–triplet recombination was corroborated to be one of the major deactivation paths. Turning to vapor-deposited polycrystalline thin-films, 14.8 ps- and 15.6 μs-lived 1(T1T1) and (T1) states, respectively, were detected for 44. The modus operandi is exciton diffusion of 1(T1T1) to disfavor triplet–triplet recombination and to favor triplet dissociation into long-lived, independent (T1)s. A triplet quantum yield of 142 ± 10% was achieved in thin films. A SF mechanism, which switched from intra- to intermolecular, was earlier invoked in a study by Trinh et al.360 Here, a series of diphenyl-dicyano-oligoenes were investigated in solution as well as thin films. Overall, the observations were in line with those made with antiaromatic 44. While in solution an intramolecular 1(T1T1) pair was populated, intermolecular interaction in the solid state paved the way for intermolecular triplet transfer yielding two long-lived (T1)s on adjacent singlet fission monomers. In 2019, Liu et al. extended the chromophore pool of SF active dibenzopentalene chromophores by three more derivatives, where dibenzopentalene was substituted by phenylethynyl groups (45, 46 and 47).361 Again, an intra- to intermolecular SF-mechanism was found for all three SF systems. The introduction of functional groups to the phenyl rings led to different intermolecular distances, variable dihedral angles as well as changes in the longitudinal and transversal displacements. Interestingly, differences in the intermolecular molecular arrangements did not influence the decorrelation of the intramolecularly formed correlated triplet pair state. In fact, a separation yield near unity was shown for all chromophores.
The exploitation of Baird's aromaticity rule has attracted considerable attention within the SF-community. In the work by Fallon et al., Cibalackrot indigoids with varying H-, F-, Cl-, Br- and CN-substituents (Fig. 26, 48–53) were characterized.291 The various substitution patterns allowed one to tune the absorption from 602 to 650 nm and to improve the photostability. For example, 80% of CN-substituted Cibalackrot (53) could be recovered after one month under ambient conditions. Although the concept of triplet stabilization comes at the expense of ground state aromaticity, the overall photostability of these SF-materials is remarkable. Overall, this corroborates the indubitable power of a design approach based on (T1) anti-aromaticity towards highly stable SF chromophores. To investigate the deactivation of these compounds, transient absorption and time resolved EPR experiments were performed. Their photophysical investigations point towards spectroscopic characteristics known for Class I chromophores. For 52 and 53, a spectral triplet feature was detected throughout the μs time regime. All other materials exhibited triplet population with lifetimes in the sub-μs regime, except for H-substituted Cibalackrot 48, which lacked any triplet formation at all. For thin films of 52 and 53, the spin polarization pattern demonstrated the presence of 1(T1T1) and the exclusion of intersystem crossing. This together with the 2 to 3 ps rise of the triplet excited state absorption substantiated SF in 49–53. Interestingly, the following trend of the relative triplet exciton yield was found: 48 (H-) < 49 (F-) < 50 (Cl-) ∼ 52 (CNBr-) < 51 (Br-) < 53 (CN-). At first glance, this appears counterintuitive as the triplet quantum yield increases with increasing SF-exothermicity.362 However, the trend seems to be due to the degree of intermolecular electronic coupling, which is in accordance with the absorption shifts of the thin films.
 Fig. 26  Experimentally investigated scaffolds based on Baird aromaticity. 
Shortly after this study, Ryerson et al. reported on parent Cibalackrot (54), igniting a controversial debate on SF within this family.363 Cibalackrot (54) is a long known industrial dye, which was already proposed in 2013 as a potential SF-material. The authors identified two crystalline polymorphs, designated as α and β, as well as an amorphous phase. This rendered, however, the photophysical characterization challenging. It was shown that SF based on a direct or super-exchange mechanism competes with a fast excimer and CT population. Hence, direct or super-exchange SF-mechanisms are unlikely or, if present, minor in triplet contribution. Accordingly, only a two-step SF-mechanism with a real CT intermediate seems reasonable as the main SF-channel. Because the triplet quantum yield was limited to only 60%, the ultimate SF-proof, that is a triplet quantum yield exceeding 100%, remains to be reported. Increasing the CT character led to higher triplet quantum yields, suggestive of an intermediate CT governing the triplet population. It is not entirely proven that triplet formation occurs via SF rather than intersystem crossing with or without a CT intermediate. It was outlined that the same spin polarization pattern, as seen in the time-resolved EPR spectrum by Fallon et al., may also stem from intersystem crossing between a CT and (T1).291 In addition to this work of Ryerson et al., different packing geometries were calculated. These shed light on whether SF could be enhanced or not. Indeed, they found promising stacking motifs, which could be achieved by suitable functionalization of Cibalackrot.
Recently, Wang et al. adopted the design strategy of (T1) stabilization using Baird's aromaticity and applied it to dipyrolonaphthyridinediones (55).364 Like for Cibalackrots, the adaptive aromaticity guarantees outstanding chemical stability. In a stability test under air and light exposure over 50 days, 91% of the initial absorbance was maintained for thin films of 55. With the help of steady state fluorescence and phosphorescence of 55, (S1) and (T1) energies of around 2.2 and 1.2 eV were determined.
Only in the solid state, a rapidly formed and long-lived triplet excited state absorption emerged and, in turn, corroborated the endothermic SF. The (T1) spectral features decayed multi-exponentially with lifetimes of 87 ± 3 ns and 1.566 ± 0.065 μs. More importantly, a triplet quantum yield of 173 ± 30% was determined by the singlet depletion method. This study strikingly underscores the power of the design concept utilizing both Hückel and Baird aromaticity to identify novel and chemically stable SF-materials beyond the Cibalackrot scaffold.
In 2020, Wang et al. examined the photophysics of isoindigos 56 and 57.364 Previously, the isoindigo scaffold was integrated as part of a SF-active co-polymer. Although isoindigos are subject to ultrafast non-radiative internal conversions, 56 and 57 revealed efficient intramolecular SF. Again, an intra- to intermolecular SF-mechanism was observed in thin films. In solution, no long-lived species associated with independent triplets was found and the dominant deactivation proceeded via triplet–triplet annihilation. In the solid state, long-lived triplet absorption was detected. Here, the intramolecularly formed 1(T1T1) is allowed to diffuse apart and to dissociate into free triplets. Fluence dependent measurements revealed non-geminate recombinations between free colliding T1s as a major deactivation path in thin films of 56 and 57. The quantum yield of independent triplets was calculated as 10% and 181% for 56 and 57, respectively. This large discrepancy regarding the triplet quantum yield between the non-functionalized and thiophene-decorated isoindigo was rationalized by different crystal packing structure, that is, face-to-face versus slip-stacked configuration, as well as the shorter 1(T1T1) lifetimes in 56.
3.6 Carbene derived diradicaloids
In 2018, Hansmann et al. synthesized diradicaloids with exceptional strong open-shell character and high stability by utilization of terminal and super-bulky cyclic (alkyl)(amino)carbene (CAAC) end groups (Fig. 27).365,366
 Fig. 27  Molecular structures of the experimentally investigated carbene derived diradicaloids. 
Changing the distance between the two open-shell centers by integrating different spacers led to varying diradical characters y0. Inspired by this work and further synthetic achievements in the area of carbene stabilized diradicaloids,367,368 Messelberger et al. theoretically investigated two series of carbene derived diradicaloids with a focus on the electronic ground state multiple diradical characters.250 As a result, they identified several new potential SF-molecules. Beyond that, for most structures a significant tetraradical character y1 was recognized, indicating potential Class III SF chromophores with an accessible low-lying doubly excited state. Following their calculations, bisCAAC diradicaloids with incorporated phenyl-(58), naphthalene-(59) and biphenyl-(60) molecular bridges and y0's ranging from 0.28 for 58 to 0.79 for 60 were investigated by Ullrich et al.369 At room temperature, transient absorption measurements revealed for 58–60 a transition from the initially populated S2 towards the optical dark state (S1). Interestingly, this channel was shut down at 80 K, at which the lifetime of S2 was substantially prolonged (Fig. 28A and B).
 Fig. 28  (A) Transient absorption heat map of 60 at low concentrations (5 × 10−6 M), obtained upon photoexcitation at 670 nm. (B) Corresponding absorption-time profiles illustrating the excited state dynamics. The inset shows single wavelength kinetics at 575 (red) and 655 nm (blue) as well as global fit to data (black line). (C) Transient absorption heat map established for increased concentrations (1 × 10−3 M). (D) Corresponding absorption-time profiles illustrating the excited state dynamics. The inset shows single wavelength kinetics at 470 (orange), 560 (red), and 690 nm (blue) as well as global fit to data (black line). (E) Transient absorption heat map obtained by change of the pump wavelength to 850 nm, corresponding to the characteristic absorption band maximum formed at high concentration (1 × 10−3 M). (F) Corresponding absorption-time profiles illustrating the excited state dynamics. The inset shows single wavelength kinetics at 470 (orange), 560 (red), and 690 nm (blue) as well as global fit to data (black line). Reproduced from ref. 369 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright © 2020. 
In nitrogen-cooled, diluted matrices the only deactivation paths were given by either radiative or non-radiative ground state relaxation. At higher concentrations, as reflected in the femtosecond transient absorption spectra shown in Fig. 28C and D, a different picture evolved: in this case, ultrafast 1(T1T1) population was observed for 59 and 60. Hereby, a slower SF rate was derived for 60, which is rationalized by its stronger exothermicity compared to 59. This is in sound agreement with studies on heteroacenes and hexacene, which postulated that the SF-efficiency decreases with increasing exoergicity.58,362 In contrast to cryogenic temperatures, no changes and consequently no SF were found at room temperature and at higher concentrations. Phenylene bridged diradicaloid (58) did not show any concentration dependency at all, even at low temperatures. The self-assembly of 59 as well as 60 at cryogenic temperatures is a likely rationale, whereas the sterically demanding carbene groups in 58 prohibit such π-stacking. Due to steric hindrance, the interaction via the spacers is limited to 59 and 60. A direct and exclusive excitation of 60 was possible with an excitation wavelength of 850 nm that matches the absorption of the self-assembled ground state complex. Again, the transient absorption spectrum altered dramatically (see Fig. 28E and F). Now, S2 decays, 1(T1T1) rises, and the near-IR fluorescence pattern was quenched. Moreover, a ground state recovery became visible. Inspection of the ground state bleaching revealed Davydov splitting and no shift of the minima in the visible spectral region, which is in contrast to the transient absorption spectrum obtained upon 670 nm photoexcitation. Here, a shift and subsequent broadening go hand in hand with the S2 decay. The only reasonable explanation is the simultaneous photoexcitation of interacting and non-interacting SF-materials. Interestingly, although theoretically possible for Class III, no evidence for an intra- to intermolecular SF-mechanism like in 58 was gathered even at high concentrations.359,360 Arguably, this might be due to the absence of S1 at cryogenic temperatures (Fig. 28A and B, vide supra). Accordingly, 1(T1T1) is initially formed between two monomers. On longer timescales, 1(T1T1) deactivates multi-exponentially. Here, the lifetimes are substantially longer for 59 than for 60, which is in line with the energy gap law of non-radiative decay. The adherence of the energy gap law for SF-materials had been demonstrated previously by Sanders et al. on a series of acene dimers.370 Last but not least, further stabilization of these structures could be achieved by the captodative effect via e.g. fluorination, as pointed out by Japahuge et al.221
3.7 Miscellaneous singlet fission chromophores
Beyond the above discussed experimental studies on non-traditional SF-materials, SF was also detected in earlier studies on thin films of benzophenone (61),371 tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline)aluminium (62),372 and p-hexaphenyl (63).373 All of them (Fig. 29) share that SF was initialized from higher excited singlet states (SN), while belonging to Class I SF materials. In 2018, Montero et al. studied the photophysics of a directly connected orthogonal boron dipyrromethene (BODIPY) dimer (64) by femto- and nanosecond transient absorption spectroscopy.374 A strong dependency on solvent polarity was found for 64, which led to the interpretation of a CT-mediated SF. Triplet formation was absent in non-polar cyclohexane. Quantum yields for 1(T1T1) were, however, up to 132% (140%) and 160% (199%) in more polar chloroform and acetonitrile, respectively.
 Fig. 29  Experimentally investigated compounds, which do not belong to a particular SF-chromophore family discussed above. 
Values well beyond 100% together with fast 1(T1T1) formation prompt to SF in this Class I molecular dimer. Interestingly, triplet quantum yields determined by singlet oxygen sensitization experiments revealed high T1 yields in chloroform and much lower ones in acetonitrile. Accordingly, branching between triplet decorrelation and ground state deactivation is solvent dependent. A subsequent time-resolved EPR study inferred that the spin–orbit CT intersystem crossing mechanism acts as a competitive triplet formation channel.375 The co-existence of triplet states on one of the subunits in 64 was confirmed by temperature dependent measurements. It was found that the triplet energy for the horizontal sub-unit is slightly higher than that for the vertical sub-unit. The spin polarization pattern excluded radical pair intersystem crossing as well as spin–orbit induced intersystem crossing. Spin–orbit CT intersystem crossing rather than SF was corroborated at temperatures as low as 20 K. Very recently, ab initio molecular dynamics studies with 64 questioned this conclusion.376 SF is controlled by the thermodynamic driving force and the kinetic barrier. Even if 64 formally fails to meet the energy level matching criterion, structural/vibrational fluctuations in combination with solvent interactions enable SF. In addition, the synergy of vibrational dynamics and solvent governs the CT energy as a means to remove the kinetic barrier and to meet the kinetic criterion ΔE(CT – S1) ≤ 0. Both criteria are only fulfilled in polar solvents. This is in sound agreement with studies on cyclohexane. It is important to note that not all structural changes are suitable for SF. It was found that only deformations along the connecting C–C bond and/or resonant structural changes within the B–N bond, which are assisted by dihedral twisting of the BODIPYs, govern SF.
In 2019, Bae et al. examined the photophysics of anthanthrone (65) and two anthanthrenes (66 and 67) as potential Class I SF systems.377 Side-group functionalization altered singlet and triplet energies as well as their photophysical deactivation behavior. 66 (E(S1) = 2.51 eV, E(T1) = 1.30 eV) and 67 (E(S1) = 2.46 eV, E(T1) = 1.23 eV) meet the first energy level matching conditions. 65 exhibits a far higher triplet energy (E(S1) = 2.25 eV, E(T1) = 2.01). Fluorescence quantum yields of 65 ± 5% and 55 ± 4% were found for 66 and 67, respectively. Contrarily, only a yield of 9 ± 2% was determined for 60. The opposite trend was found for the triplet quantum yields, measured in singlet oxygen emission measurements: 65 revealed the highest triplet quantum yields of 50 ± 8%, followed by 66 with 20 ± 4% and 67 with 14 ± 3%. The higher triplet and lower fluorescence quantum yields of 65 were attributed to a faster intersystem crossing. Responsible are the n–π* character of the S1 excitation and the smaller singlet–triplet energy gap. By time-resolved EPR experiments, the mechanism of triplet formation was elucidated. Spin polarization patterns revealed that T1 population proceeds via spin–orbit induced intersystem crossing. At 85 K and at high concentrations of 67, the triplet EPR spectrum featured significant contributions from a non-Boltzmann population of the ms = 0 spin sublevel. This is, however, indicative for SF. The best fit was obtained by a linear combination of SF intersystem crossing (47%) and spin–orbit induced intersystem crossing (53%). In contrast, at a high concentration of 66 the triplet EPR spectrum was fit exclusively using the spin–orbit induced intersystem crossing mechanism. The authors concluded that 66 may not form any small aggregates favoring SF under these conditions, while 67 can do. Eventually, we would like to highlight that singlet diradicaloid electronic structures are a well-established area of research in inorganic p-block chemistry (Fig. 30).378–387 In particular four- (68–72), but as well to some extent five-membered ring structures with very high diradicaloid character have received a lot of attention from the synthetic community. Nevertheless, none of these systems seems to have been linked with SF or even explored in this context according to our knowledge.
 Fig. 30  Selected examples for diradicaloid inorganic compounds embedded in four-membered rings. 
4. Conclusions
Until now, the research of SF is largely dominated by investigations with acenes, rylenes, diketopyrrolopyrroles and conjugated polyenes. Only few studies were dedicated to other SF-materials as outlined in Section 3. This is, however, surprising considering the numerous breakthroughs already achieved based on computational predictions and the large number of unexplored, computationally identified candidates (Section 2). We conclude that the experimental research of SF has only scratched the surface of a large field and much awaits to be unraveled.
Although mechanistic studies on “conventional” SF-platforms (i.e. acenes and their analogues) gave tangible insights into the generally encountered SF-dynamics, more experimental and computational effort will be necessary to unravel the concrete SF-mechanism as well as the interplay of participating electronic states for a particular SF-system. Here, the identification of novel SF chromophores is often just the first step towards a full understanding of the underlying electronic structure and SF mechanism.
Synthetic accessibility and experimental scrutiny of new classes of SF-materials constitute the major driving force for upcoming innovation in the field: first, an extension to hitherto unknown SF-materials will expand our basic understanding of the SF-mechanism. Second, so far unknown SF-materials will likely outperform existing ones in solar energy conversion. Third, SF is also relevant for other optoelectronic devices: quantum computing technology, photodetectors, OLEDs or applications associated with third order non-linear optical behavior. Any of the aforementioned applications are likely to require various families of SF-materials and the limited choice of SF-molecules constitutes a central bottleneck here. This status quo needs to be changed in our point of view.
Eventually, we would like to emphasize practical aspects in the synthesis of SF-materials. Can those SF-materials, which were theoretically proposed, also be synthesized? What modification does it take to make typically reactive diradicaloids air-stable to be incorporated into photovoltaic devices with a reasonable lifetime? Here, the presented dyes 48 to 57 exploiting Baird and Hückel aromaticity with their outstanding photostability and concurrently high T1 energy are definitively interesting starting points. Also, much progress has been made in recent decades to advance synthetic methodologies. Transient intermediates were, for example, isolated by kinetic stabilization with sterically encumbering substituents, the elegant exploitation of the captodative effect, or harnessing heteroatom effects. Here, the study of carbene-derived diradicaloids, which feature exceptional high diradical character, yet are entirely photo-stable under inert conditions, might give guidelines for future work. Crucial is, in this context, the interplay between steric protection, on the one hand, and sufficient intermolecular electronic couplings, on the other hand, to gain control over the deactivation via SF. Equally important is tuning of SF-materials by means of covalent dimerization, heteroatom substitution, or probing various packing structures by chemical decoration. In summary, SF is a dynamic and truly exciting area of research and the discovery of new SF-materials will be crucial for moving towards the various envisioned applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
D. M. G. gratefully acknowledges the Emerging Fields Initiative “Singlet Fission” supported by FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg. D. M. acknowledges support by the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie im Verband der chemischen Industrie e.V. (Liebig Fellowship) and the Boehringer-Ingelheim Foundation (Exploration Fellowship) as well as the continuous support by K. Meyer. T. U. would like to thank Marcel Krug, Dominik Thiel, Christoph M. Schüßlbauer and Alexander Probst for helpful discussions.
Notes and references
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–4 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef .
H. J. Queisser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1927–1930 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Böhm, T. C. Jellicoe, M. Tabachnyk, N. J. L. K. Davis, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, C. Ducati, B. Ehrler, A. A. Bakulin and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7987–7993 CrossRef .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. L. K. Davis, M. L. Böhm, M. Tabachnyk, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, T. C. Jellicoe, C. Ducati, B. Ehrler and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8259 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1239–1241 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2001, 9, 123–135 CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
D. L. Dexter, J. Lumin., 1979, 18–19, 779–784 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Nelson, N. R. Monahan and X. Y. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3508–3519 RSC .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, A. A. Gray-Weale and T. W. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2749–2754 CrossRef CAS .
By considering endothermic SF, efficencies up to 45% are possible.
A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17063 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Jianlong Xia, S. N. Sanders, W. Cheng, J. Z. Low, J. Liu and L. M. Campos, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 29, 1601652 Search PubMed .
M. Einzinger, T. Wu, J. F. Kompalla, H. L. Smith, C. F. Perkinson, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, D. N. Congreve, A. Kahn, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nature, 2019, 571, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Macqueen, M. Liebhaber, J. Niederhausen, M. Mews, C. Gersmann, S. Jäckle, K. Jäger, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, T. W. Schmidt, B. Rech and K. Lips, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1065–1075 RSC .
T. C. Wu, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, E. Hontz, S. R. Yost, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 193901 CrossRef .
T. D. Ladd, F. Jelezko, R. Laflamme, Y. Nakamura, C. Monroe and J. L. O’Brien, Nature, 2010, 464, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
T. Koshiba, Handb. Nat. Comput., 2012, 3–4, 1521–1543 Search PubMed .
G. Tao, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 074305 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Smyser and J. D. Eaves, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 18480 CrossRef CAS .
D. Day, M. Gu and A. Smallridge, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1005–1007 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata and Y. Kawata, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1777–1788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao, T. Miyagoe, A. Maeda, H. Matsuzaki, H. Ohtsu, M. Hasegawa, S. Takaishi, M. Yamashita and H. Okamoto, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2707–2710 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tonami, T. Nagami, K. Okada, W. Yoshida and M. Nakano, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 16181–16190 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Zhang, R. Wang, B. Zhang, Z. Tan, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6222–6226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, K. Liu, Y. D. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. G. Li, Y. L. Song and H. L. Zhang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 619–624 RSC .
T. Tonami, T. Nagami, K. Okada, W. Yoshida, H. Miyamoto and M. Nakano, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 084304 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O. Brian, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234–238 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di, L. Yang, J. M. Richter, L. Meraldi, R. M. Altamimi, A. Y. Alyamani, D. Credgington, K. P. Musselman, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605987 CrossRef .
R. Nagata, H. Nakanotani, W. J. Potscavage and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–6 CrossRef .
J. Lee, P. Jadhav and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033301 CrossRef .
V. Sukhovatkin, S. Hinds, L. Brzozowski and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2009, 324, 1542–1544 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alagna, J. Han, N. Wollscheid, J. L. P. Lustres, J. Herz, S. Hahn, S. Koser, F. Paulus, U. H. F. Bunz, A. Dreuw, T. Buckup and M. Motzkus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8834–8845 CrossRef CAS .
R. Casillas, M. Adam, P. B. Coto, A. R. Waterloo, J. Zirzlmeier, S. R. Reddy, F. Hampel, R. McDonald, R. R. Tykwinski, M. Thoss and D. M. Guldi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1802221 Search PubMed .
A. T. Gilligan, E. G. Miller, T. Sammakia and N. H. Damrauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5961–5971 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Korovina, S. Das, Z. Nett, X. Feng, J. Joy, R. Haiges, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 617–627 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, J. Lee, M. W. B. B. Wilson, T. Wu, D. P. McMahon, R. R. Parkhurst, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, A. Rao, K. Johnson, M. Y. Sfeir, M. G. Bawendi, T. M. Swager, R. H. Friend, M. A. Baldo and T. Van Voorhis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Folie, J. B. Haber, S. Refaely-Abramson, J. B. Neaton and N. S. Ginsberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2326–2335 CrossRef CAS .
K. Michael, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1950, 9, 14–19 RSC .
W. Ni, G. G. Gurzadyan, J. Zhao, Y. Che, X. Li and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2428–2433 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Zimmerman, Z. Zhang and C. B. Musgrave, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 648–652 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Chan, M. Ligges, A. Jailaubekov, L. Kaake, L. Miaja-Avila and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2011, 334, 1541–1545 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Stern, A. J. Musser, S. Gelinas, P. Parkinson, L. M. Herz, M. J. Bruzek, J. Anthony, R. H. Friend and B. J. Walker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 7656–7661 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Johnson and R. E. Merrifield, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 896–902 CrossRef .
J. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1978, 39, 1207–1209 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett, D. Gosztola and C. J. Bardeen, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 214508 CrossRef .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, R. G. C. R. Clady and T. W. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14797–14805 RSC .
T. J. Penfold, E. Gindensperger, C. Daniel and C. M. Marian, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6975–7025 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, J. Clark, R. S. S. Kumar, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11830–11833 CrossRef CAS .
E. Busby, T. C. Berkelbach, B. Kumar, A. Chernikov, Y. Zhong, H. Hlaing, X. Y. Zhu, T. F. Heinz, M. S. Hybertsen, M. Y. Sfeir, D. R. Reichman, C. Nuckolls and O. Yaffe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10654–10660 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, K. Johnson, S. Gélinas, R. Di Pietro, J. Clark and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16680–16688 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1927, 114, 243 CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 966–978 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. R. A. Marcus, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265–322 CrossRef .
N. Renaud, P. A. Sherratt and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1065–1069 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Miller, M. R. Wasielewski and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 10345–10350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jortner, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 4860–4867 CrossRef CAS .
M. De Jong, L. Seijo, A. Meijerink and F. T. Rabouw, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16959–16969 RSC .
N. R. Monahan, D. Sun, H. Tamura, K. W. Williams, B. Xu, Y. Zhong, B. Kumar, C. Nuckolls, A. R. Harutyunyan, G. Chen, H. L. Dai, D. Beljonne, Y. Rao and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 9, 341–346 CrossRef .
C. Wittig, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8428–8430 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Zimmerman, F. Bell, D. Casanova and M. Head-Gordon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19944–19952 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Masters, Eur. Phys. J. H, 2014, 39, 87–139 CrossRef .
C. H. Yang and C. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1925–1929 CrossRef CAS .
T. Van Voorhis, T. Kowalczyk, B. Kaduk, L. P. Wang, C. L. Cheng and Q. Wu, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2010, 61, 149–170 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Buchanan, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, Adv. Quantum Chem., 2017, 75, 175–227 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Fuemmeler, S. N. Sanders, A. B. Pun, E. Kumarasamy, T. Zeng, K. Miyata, M. L. Steigerwald, X. Y. Zhu, M. Y. Sfeir, L. M. Campos and N. Ananth, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 316–324 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shavitt and L. T. Redmon, J. Chem. Phys., 1980, 73, 5711–5717 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen and D. R. Reichman, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 114103 CrossRef .
P. E. Teichen and J. D. Eaves, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 11473–11481 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, H. Yamagata, J. L. Brédas, F. C. Spano and Y. Olivier, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 226402 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zeng, R. Hoffmann and N. Ananth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5755–5764 CrossRef CAS .
N. Monahan and X.-Y. Zhu, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 601–618 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1290–1299 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen and D. R. Reichman, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 114102 CrossRef .
T. C. Berkelbach, M. S. Hybertsen and D. R. Reichman, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 141, 074705 CrossRef .
P. M. Zimmerman, C. B. Musgrave and M. Head-Gordon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1339–1347 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Parker, T. Seideman, M. A. Ratner and T. Shiozaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12700–12705 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Greyson, J. Vura-Weis, J. Michl and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14168–14177 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett and C. J. Bardeen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1312–1320 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Margulies, C. E. Miller, Y. Wu, L. Ma, G. C. Schatz, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 1120–1125 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Margulies, J. L. Logsdon, C. E. Miller, L. Ma, E. Simonoff, R. M. Young, G. C. Schatz and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 663–671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsika, X. Feng, A. V. Luzanov and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 11943–11955 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Kolomeisky, X. Feng and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5188–5195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, A. V. Luzanov and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3845–3852 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bixon and J. Jortner, J. Chem. Phys., 1968, 48, 715–726 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jortner and M. Bixon, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 88, 167–170 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, J. Lee, M. W. B. Wilson, T. Wu, D. P. McMahon, R. R. Parkhurst, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, A. Rao, K. Johnson, M. Y. Sfeir, M. G. Bawendi, T. M. Swager, R. H. Friend, M. A. Baldo and T. Van Voorhis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 1061–1071 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Subotnik, E. C. Alguire, Q. Ou, B. R. Landry and S. Fatehi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1340–1350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fatehi, E. Alguire, Y. Shao and J. E. Subotnik, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 234105 CrossRef .
M. S. Schuurman and A. Stolow, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2018, 69, 1–24 CrossRef .
H. Kim and P. M. Zimmerman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 30083–30094 RSC .
W. L. Chan, M. Ligges and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamura, M. Huix-Rotllant, I. Burghardt, Y. Olivier and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 107401 CrossRef .
W. L. Chan, T. C. Berkelbach, M. R. Provorse, N. R. Monahan, J. R. Tritsch, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, J. Gao and X. Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mandal, M. Chen, E. D. Foszcz, J. D. Schultz, N. M. Kearns, R. M. Young, M. T. Zanni and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17907–17914 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Chan, T. C. Berkelbach, M. R. Provorse, N. R. Monahan, J. R. Tritsch, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, J. Gao and X.-Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Chan, M. Ligges and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagami, T. Tonami, K. Okada, W. Yoshida, H. Miyamoto and M. Nakano, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 134302 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tempelaar and D. R. Reichman, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 174704 CrossRef .
W. L. Chan, T. C. Berkelbach, M. R. Provorse, N. R. Monahan, J. R. Tritsch, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, J. Gao and X.-Y. Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamura, M. Huix-Rotllant, I. Burghardt, Y. Olivier and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 107401 CrossRef .
X. Xie, A. Santana-Bonilla, W. Fang, C. Liu, A. Troisi and H. Ma, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 3721–3729 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakano, S. Ito, T. Nagami, Y. Kitagawa and T. Kubo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 22803–22815 CrossRef CAS .
D. Casanova, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7164–7207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. Nagami and M. Nakano, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2018, 34, 85–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Musser, M. Liebel, C. Schnedermann, T. Wende, T. B. Kehoe, A. Rao and P. Kukura, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 352–357 Search PubMed .
A. A. Bakulin, S. E. Morgan, T. B. Kehoe, M. W. B. Wilson, A. W. Chin, D. Zigmantas, D. Egorova and A. Rao, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, Y. Kurashige, K. Watanabe, T. Sugimoto, S. Takahashi, S. Tanaka, J. Takeya, T. Yanai and Y. Matsumoto, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
I. Breen, R. Tempelaar, L. A. Bizimana, B. Kloss, D. R. Reichman and D. B. Turner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11745–11751 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Stern, A. Cheminal, S. R. Yost, K. Broch, S. L. Bayliss, K. Chen, M. Tabachnyk, K. Thorley, N. Greenham, J. M. Hodgkiss, J. Anthony, M. Head-Gordon, A. J. Musser, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1205–1212 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schnedermann, A. M. Alvertis, T. Wende, S. Lukman, J. Feng, F. A. Y. N. Schröder, D. H. P. Turban, J. Wu, N. D. M. Hine, N. C. Greenham, A. W. Chin, A. Rao, P. Kukura and A. J. Musser, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4207 CrossRef .
F. A. Y. N. Schröder, D. H. P. Turban, A. J. Musser, N. D. M. Hine and A. W. Chin, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1062 CrossRef .
A. M. Alvertis, S. Lukman, T. J. H. Hele, E. G. Fuemmeler, J. Feng, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham, A. W. Chin and A. J. Musser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17558–17570 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 12699–12705 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett, G. B. Piland and C. J. Bardeen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 585, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kollmar, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 7210–7228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kollmar, H. Sixl, H. Benk, V. Denner and G. Mahler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 87, 266–270 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yago and M. Wakasa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2018, 695, 240–244 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Harcourt, G. D. Scholes and K. P. Ghiggino, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 10521–10525 CrossRef CAS .
R. McWeeny, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1959, 253, 242–259 CAS .
J. E. Grabenstetter, T. J. Tseng and F. Grein, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1976, 10, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and R. D. Harcourt, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 5054–5061 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8602 CrossRef CAS .
D. Casanova, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2015, 11, 2642–2650 CrossRef CAS .
G. Klein and R. Voltz, Int. J. Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1975, 7, 155–174 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Merrifield, Acc. Chem. Res., 1968, 1, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Suna, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 1716–1739 CrossRef .
G. B. Piland, J. J. Burdett, R. J. Dillon and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2312–2319 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Keevers and D. R. McCamey, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 045210 CrossRef .
R. J. Dillon, G. B. Piland and C. J. Bardeen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17278–17281 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Groff, R. E. Merrifield and P. Avakian, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1970, 5, 168–170 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, R. D. Harcourt and K. P. Ghiggino, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 9574–9581 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett, G. B. Piland and C. J. Bardeen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 585, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 12699–12705 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, F. S. Conrad-burton, F. L. Geyer and X. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 4261–4292 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, E. E. Ostroumov, A. J. Tilley, S. Mazza, C. Grieco, K. J. Thorley, J. B. Asbury, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2370–2375 CrossRef CAS .
C. Grieco, E. R. Kennehan, H. Kim, R. D. Pensack, A. N. Brigeman, A. Rimshaw, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, N. C. Giebink, G. D. Scholes and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 2012–2022 CrossRef CAS .
C. Grieco, E. R. Kennehan, A. Rimshaw, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5700–5706 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, Y. Kurashige, K. Watanabe, T. Sugimoto, S. Takahashi, S. Tanaka, J. Takeya, T. Yanai and Y. Matsumoto, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, A. J. Tilley, C. Grieco, G. E. Purdum, E. E. Ostroumov, D. B. Granger, D. G. Oblinsky, J. C. Dean, G. S. Doucette, J. B. Asbury, Y. L. Loo, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6240–6259 RSC .
N. Wollscheid, B. Günther, V. J. Rao, F. J. Berger, J. L. P. Lustres, M. Motzkus, J. Zaumseil, L. H. Gade, S. Höfener and T. Buckup, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 7857–7868 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alagna, J. L. P. Lustres, A. Roozbeh, J. Han, S. Hahn, F. J. Berger, J. Zaumseil, A. Dreuw, U. H. F. Bunz and T. Buckup, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 9163–9174 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Lee, Y. L. Lin, H. Kim, R. D. Pensack, B. P. Rand and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4087–4095 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tuan Trinh, A. Pinkard, A. B. Pun, S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, M. Y. Sfeir, L. M. Campos, X. Roy and X. Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700241 CrossRef .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. T. Trinh, B. Choi, J. Xia, E. J. Taffet, J. Z. Low, J. R. Miller, X. Roy, X. Y. Zhu, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8965–8972 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Yong, A. J. Musser, S. L. Bayliss, S. Lukman, H. Tamura, O. Bubnova, R. K. Hallani, A. Meneau, R. Resel, M. Maruyama, S. Hotta, L. M. Herz, D. Beljonne, J. E. Anthony, J. Clark and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khan and S. Mazumdar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5943–5948 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng and A. I. Krylov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7751–7761 RSC .
S. Khan and S. Mazumdar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4468–4478 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. J. Bae, C. M. Mauck, A. Mandal, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9184–9192 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett and C. J. Bardeen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8597–8607 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lukman, J. M. Richter, L. Yang, P. Hu, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham and A. J. Musser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18376–18385 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Avila Ferrer, V. Barone, C. Cappelli and F. Santoro, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2013, 9, 3597–3611 CrossRef CAS .
I. Z.-G. M. Chabr, U. P. Wild and J. Fünfschilling, Chem. Phys., 1981, 57, 425 CrossRef .
F. Anger, J. O. Oss, U. Heinemeyer, K. Broch, R. Scholz, A. Gerlach and F. Schreiber, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 054701 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bardeen, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 127–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wakasa, M. Kaise, T. Yago, R. Katoh, Y. Wakikawa and T. Ikoma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25840–25844 CrossRef CAS .
H. Benk and H. Sixl, Mol. Phys., 1981, 42, 779–801 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yago, K. Ishikawa, R. Katoh and M. Wakasa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 27858–27870 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Bayliss, L. R. Weiss, A. Mitioglu, K. Galkowski, Z. Yang, K. Yunusova, A. Surrente, K. J. Thorley, J. Behrends, R. Bittl, J. E. Anthony, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, P. Plochocka, P. C. M. Christianen, N. C. Greenham and A. D. Chepelianskii, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5077–5082 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishikawa, T. Yago and M. Wakasa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 22264–22272 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jang, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 5135–5146 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Weiss, S. L. Bayliss, F. Kraffert, K. J. Thorley, J. E. Anthony, R. Bittl, R. H. Friend, A. Rao, N. C. Greenham and J. Behrends, Nat. Phys., 2016, 1, 1–5 Search PubMed .
S. L. Bayliss, L. R. Weiss, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, A. D. Chepelianskii and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 1–7 CrossRef .
D. Lubert-Perquel, E. Salvadori, M. Dyson, P. N. Stavrinou, R. Montis, H. Nagashima, Y. Kobori, S. Heutz and C. W. M. Kay, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4222 CrossRef .
H. Nagashima, S. Kawaoka, S. Akimoto, T. Tachikawa, Y. Matsui, H. Ikeda and Y. Kobori, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5855–5861 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Bae, X. Zhao, M. D. Kryzaniak, H. Nagashima, J. Strzalka, Q. Zhang and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 9822–9833 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, M. D. Krzyaniak, J. N. Nelson, Y. J. Bae, S. M. Harvey, R. D. Schaller, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 8178–8183 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Basel, J. Zirzlmeier, C. Hetzer, B. T. Phelan, M. D. Krzyaniak, S. R. Reddy, P. B. Coto, N. E. Horwitz, R. M. Young, F. J. White, F. Hampel, T. Clark, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski, M. R. Wasielewski and D. M. Guldi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef .
S. Matsuda, S. Oyama and Y. Kobori, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 2934–2942 RSC .
Y. Matsui, S. Kawaoka, H. Nagashima, T. Nakagawa, N. Okamura, T. Ogaki, E. Ohta, S. Akimoto, A. Sato-Tomita, S. Yagi, Y. Kobori and H. Ikeda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 18813–18823 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, M. D. E. Forbes, N. L. Frank, K. Kowalski, G. D. Scholes, J. Yuen-Zhou, M. A. Baldo, D. E. Freedman, R. H. Goldsmith, T. Goodson, M. L. Kirk, J. K. McCusker, J. P. Ogilvie, D. A. Shultz, S. Stoll and K. B. Whaley, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 490–504 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, A. Akdag, M. Zamadar, X. Chen, A. F. Schwerin, I. Paci, M. B. Smith, Z. Havlas, J. R. Miller, M. A. Ratner, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 4680–4695 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herz, T. Buckup, F. Paulus, J. U. Engelhart, U. H. F. Bunz and M. Motzkus, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 6602–6610 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Pun, A. Asadpoordarvish, E. Kumarasamy, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, D. Niesner, D. R. McCamey, S. N. Sanders, L. M. Campos and M. Y. Sfeir, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 821–828 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender and S. T. Roberts, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4922–4928 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Jadhav, P. R. Brown, N. Thompson, B. Wunsch, A. Mohanty, S. R. Yost, E. Hontz, T. Van Voorhis, M. G. Bawendi, V. Buloviä and M. A. Baldo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6169–6174 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Zurek, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2003, 75, 715–775 CrossRef .
V. K. Thorsmølle, R. D. Averitt, J. Demsar, D. L. Smith, S. Tretiak, R. L. Martin, X. Chi, B. K. Crone, A. P. Ramirez and A. J. Taylor, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 017401 CrossRef .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, L. M. Campos, M. Y. Sfeir and D. R. McCamey, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 182–188 Search PubMed .
N. V. Korovina, J. Joy, X. Feng, C. Feltenberger, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10179–10190 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, E. Hontz, S. Yeganeh and T. Van Voorhis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17369–17377 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Musser and J. Clark, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2019, 70, 323–351 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marcus and W. Barford, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 102, 35134 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharifzadeh, P. Darancet, L. Kronik and J. B. Neaton, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2197–2201 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, A. J. Tilley, S. R. Parkin, T. S. Lee, M. M. Payne, D. Gao, A. A. Jahnke, D. G. Oblinsky, P. F. Li, J. E. Anthony, D. S. Seferos and G. D. Scholes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6790–6803 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, K. N. Schwarz, R. W. MacQueen, M. Dvořák, A. W. C. Lam, K. P. Ghiggino, D. R. McCamey, T. W. Schmidt and G. J. Conibeer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. Zhou, B. T. Phelan, C. M. Mauck, J. F. Stoddart, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14265–14276 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1957–1968 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 64, 361–386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Japahuge and T. Zeng, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 146–182 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Krishnapriya, A. J. Musser and S. Patil, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 192–202 CrossRef CAS .
I. Paci, J. C. Johnson, X. Chen, G. Rana, D. Popović, D. E. David, A. J. Nozik, M. A. Ratner and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16546–16553 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Korovina, C. H. Chang and J. C. Johnson, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 391–398 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender, D. H. Arias, D. E. Cotton, J. C. Johnson and S. T. Roberts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 814–826 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, X. Shi, C. Chi, J. T. López Navarrete, J. Casado and J. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6578–6596 RSC .
Y. Yang, E. R. Davidson and W. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E5098–E5107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bendikov, H. M. Duong, K. Starkey, K. N. Houk, E. A. Carter and F. Wudl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7416–7417 CrossRef CAS .
A. Konishi, K. Horii, D. Shiomi, K. Sato, T. Takui and M. Yasuda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10165–10170 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, S. Ito and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stuyver, B. Chen, T. Zeng, P. Geerlings, F. De Proft and R. Hoffmann, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11291–11351 CrossRef CAS .
O. El Bakouri, J. R. Smith and H. Ottosson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5602–5617 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Blaskovits, M. Fumanal, S. Vela and C. Corminboeuf, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 6515–6524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reiher, O. Salomon and B. A. Hess, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2001, 107, 48–55 Search PubMed .
N. Ferré, N. Guihéry and J. P. Malrieu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 14375–14382 RSC .
J. P. Malrieu and G. Trinquier, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 8226–8237 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamanaka, T. Kawakami, H. Nagao and K. Yamaguchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 231, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
L. Noodleman, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 74, 5737–5743 CrossRef CAS .
A. Japahuge, S. Lee, C. H. Choi and T. Zeng, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 234306 CrossRef .
A. I. Krylov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 338, 375–384 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Chien and P. M. Zimmerman, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 014103 CrossRef .
D. Casanova and A. I. Krylov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 4326–4342 RSC .
B. O. Roos, P. R. Taylor and P. E. M. Siegbahn, Chem. Phys., 1980, 48, 157–173 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Szalay, T. Müller, G. Gidofalvi, H. Lischka and R. Shepard, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 108–181 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sharma, V. Bernales, S. Knecht, D. G. Truhlar and L. Gagliardi, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1716–1723 RSC .
S. J. Stoneburner, D. G. Truhlar and L. Gagliardi, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 148, 064108 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, P. Verma, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and D. G. Truhlar, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7249–7292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, C. J. Cramer, D. G. Truhlar and L. Gagliardi, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 2741–2750 RSC .
L. Gagliardi, D. G. Truhlar, G. L. Manni, R. K. Carlson, C. E. Hoyer and J. L. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Perkinson, D. P. Tabor, M. Einzinger, D. Sheberla, H. Utzat, T. A. Lin, D. N. Congreve, M. G. Bawendi, A. Aspuru-Guzik and M. A. Baldo, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 121102 CrossRef .
D. Padula, O. H. Omar, T. Nematiaram and A. Troisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2412–2416 RSC .
Ö. H. Omar, D. Padula and A. Troisi, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 5223–5229 CrossRef .
M. Head-Gordon, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 372, 508–511 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakano, R. Kishi, T. Nitta, T. Kubo, K. Nakasuji, K. Kamada, K. Ohta, B. Champagne, E. Botek and K. Yamaguchi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 885–891 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakano, R. Kishi, S. Ohta, H. Takahashi, T. Kubo, K. Kamada, K. Ohta, E. Botek and B. Champagne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 1–4 CrossRef .
D. Döhnert and J. Koutecky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 1789–1796 CrossRef .

          M. Nakano, Excitation Energies and Properties of Open-Shell Singlet Molecules, Springer International Publishing, Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. Nakano, Chem. Rec., 2017, 17, 27–62 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Gopalakrishna, W. Zeng, X. Lu and J. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2186–2199 RSC .
M. Abe, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 1–3 CrossRef .
J. Gräfenstein, E. Kraka, M. Filatov and D. Cremer, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2002, 3, 360–394 CrossRef .
F. Neese, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2004, 65, 781–785 CrossRef CAS .
R. Caballol, O. Castell, F. Illas, I. D. P. R. Moreira and J. P. Malrieu, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 7860–7866 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Davidson and W. T. Borden, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 4783–4790 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimme and A. Hansen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12308–12313 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Bauer, A. Hansen and S. Grimme, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 6150–6164 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Mermin, Phys. Rev., 1965, 137, 1–3 CrossRef .
J. Messelberger, A. Grünwald, P. Pinter, M. M. Hansmann and D. Munz, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6107–6117 RSC .
G. Salvitti, F. Negri, Á. J. Pérez-Jiménez, E. San-Fabián, D. Casanova and J. C. Sancho-García, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 3590–3600 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Sandoval-Salinas, A. Carreras, J. Casado and D. Casanova, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 204306 CrossRef .
A. Akdag and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14624–14631 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 148–157 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schulten and M. Karplus, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1972, 14, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Hosteny, T. H. Dunning, R. R. Gilman, A. Pipano and I. Shavitt, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 62, 4764–4779 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and M. J. Tauber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13988–13991 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Gradinaru, J. T. M. Kennis, E. Papagiannakis, I. H. M. van Stokkum, R. J. Cogdell, G. R. Fleming, R. A. Niederman and R. van Grondelle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 2364–2369 CrossRef CAS .
T. Polívka and V. Sundström, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 477, 1–11 CrossRef .
M. R. Antognazza, L. Lüer, D. Polli, R. L. Christensen, R. R. Schrock, G. Lanzani and G. Cerullo, Chem. Phys., 2010, 373, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kamada, K. Ohta, A. Shimizu, T. Kubo, R. Kishi, H. Takahashi, E. Botek, B. Champagne and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 937–940 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, S. Ito and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2719–2723 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagami, S. Ito, T. Kubo and M. Nakano, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 5095–5103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Liu, C. Cook, B. Schatschneider and N. Marom, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 148, 184101 CrossRef .
S. W. Eaton, L. E. Shoer, S. D. Karlen, S. M. Dyar, E. A. Margulies, B. S. Veldkamp, C. Ramanan, D. A. Hartzler, S. Savikhin, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14701–14712 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, N. E. Powers-Riggs, A. F. Coleman, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 2791–2798 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Eaton, S. A. Miller, E. A. Margulies, L. E. Shoer, R. D. Schaller and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 4151–4161 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Farag and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25753–25763 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Hartnett, S. M. Dyar, E. A. Margulies, L. E. Shoer, A. W. Cook, S. W. Eaton, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 402–411 RSC .
Q. Li, Y.-H. Kan, H.-L. Xu and Z.-M. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11791–11803 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. Nagami and M. Nakano, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5737–5745 RSC .
S. Ito, T. Nagami and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3925–3930 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Conrad-Burton, T. Liu, F. Geyer, R. Costantini, A. P. Schlaus, M. S. Spencer, J. Wang, R. H. Sánchez, B. Zhang, Q. Xu, M. L. Steigerwald, S. Xiao, H. Li, C. P. Nuckolls and X. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13143–13147 CrossRef CAS .
D. López-Carballeira, D. Casanova and F. Ruipérez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 30227–30238 RSC .
J. Wen, Z. Havlas, J. Michl, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zeng and P. Goel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1351–1358 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4405–4412 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zeng, N. Ananth and R. Hoffmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12638–12647 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stanger, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 3120–3127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, C. S. Wannere, C. Corminboeuf, R. Puchta and P. von Ragué Schleyer, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 3842–3888 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. R. Schleyer, C. Maerker, A. Dransfeld, H. Jiao and N. J. R. Van Eikema Hommes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6317–6318 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gershoni-Poranne and A. Stanger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6597–6615 RSC .
R. F. W. Bader, A. Streitwieser, A. Neuhaus, K. E. Laidig and P. Speers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 4959–4965 CrossRef CAS .
B. Silvi and A. Savin, Nature, 1994, 371, 683–686 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Chesnut and L. J. Bartolotti, Chem. Phys., 2000, 253, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Santos, W. Tiznado, R. Contreas and P. Fuentealba, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 1670–1672 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Santos, J. Andres, A. Aizman and P. Fuentealba, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2005, 1, 83–86 CrossRef .
D. Geuenich, K. Hess, F. Köhler and R. Herges, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 3758–3772 CrossRef CAS .
R. Herges and D. Geuenich, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 3214–3220 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. Minami and M. Nakano, J. Phys.
Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19729–19736 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Fallon, P. Budden, E. Salvadori, A. M. Ganose, C. N. Savory, L. Eyre, S. Dowland, Q. Ai, S. Goodlett, C. Risko, D. O. Scanlon, C. W. M. Kay, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, A. J. Musser and H. Bronstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13867–13876 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Baird, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 4941–4948 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ottosson, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 969–971 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosenberg, C. Dahlstrand, K. Kilså and H. Ottosson, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5379–5425 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pinter and D. Munz, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 10100–10110 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, M. Hashimoto, A. Takahashi, Y. Sonoda, T. Yago and M. Wakasa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 25666–25671 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, A. B. Kolomeisky and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19608–19617 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zang, Y. Zhao and W. Liang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5105–5112 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mirjani, N. Renaud, N. Gorczak and F. C. Grozema, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14192–14199 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Lindquist, K. M. Lefler, K. E. Brown, S. M. Dyar, E. A. Margulies, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14912–14923 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zaykov, P. Felkel, E. A. Buchanan, M. Jovanovic, R. W. A. Havenith, R. K. Kathir, R. Broer, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17729–17743 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Sandoval-Salinas and D. Casanova, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 1–13 Search PubMed .
S. Ito, T. Nagami and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4972–4977 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fujihashi and A. Ishizaki, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Alguire, J. E. Subotnik and N. H. Damrauer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 299–311 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Damrauer and J. L. Snyder, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4456–4462 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Vallett, J. L. Snyder and N. H. Damrauer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10824–10838 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hetzer, D. M. Guldi and R. R. Tykwinski, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 8245–8257 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3373–3377 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kumarasamy, S. N. Sanders, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, A. Asadpoordarvish, T. J. H. Hele, E. G. Fuemmeler, A. B. Pun, L. M. Yablon, J. Z. Low, D. W. Paley, J. C. Dean, B. Choi, G. D. Scholes, M. L. Steigerwald, N. Ananth, D. R. McCamey, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12488–12494 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamakado, S. Takahashi, K. Watanabe, Y. Matsumoto, A. Osuka and S. Saito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5438–5443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, L. Shen and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 5700–5708 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagami, K. Okada, H. Miyamoto, W. Yoshida, T. Tonami and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 11800–11809 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagarajan, A. R. Mallia, V. S. Reddy and M. Hariharan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8443–8450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Aulin, K. M. Felter, D. D. Günbas, R. K. Dubey, W. F. Jager and F. C. Grozema, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 230–238 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schierl, A. Niazov-Elkan, L. J. W. Shimon, Y. Feldman, B. Rybtchinski and D. M. Guldi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20147–20154 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. Kim, W. Kim, C. Kaufmann, H. Kim, F. Würthner and D. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7845–7857 CrossRef CAS .
I. Papadopoulos, D. Gutiérrez-Moreno, P. M. Mccosker, R. Casillas, P. A. Keller, Á. Sastre-Santos, T. Clark, F. Fernández-Lázaro and D. M. Guldi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 5727–5736 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mukhopadhyay, A. J. Musser, B. Puttaraju, J. Dhar, R. H. Friend and S. Patil, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 984–991 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mauck, Y. J. Bae, M. Chen, N. Powers-Riggs, Y.-L. Wu, M. R. Wasielewski, M. R. W. Catherine, M. Mauck, Y. J. Bae, M. Chen, N. Powers-Riggs, Y.-L. Wu, M. R. W. Catherine, M. Mauck, Y. J. Bae, M. Chen, N. Powers-Riggs, Y.-L. Wu, C. M. Mauck, Y. J. Bae, M. Chen, N. Powers-Riggs, Y.-L. Wu, M. R. Wasielewski, M. R. W. Catherine, M. Mauck, Y. J. Bae, M. Chen, N. Powers-Riggs and Y.-L. Wu, ChemPhotoChem, 2018, 2, 223–233 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Hartnett, E. A. Margulies, C. M. Mauck, S. A. Miller, Y. Wu, Y.-L. Wu, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 1357–1366 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mauck, P. E. Hartnett, E. A. Margulies, L. Ma, C. E. Miller, G. C. Schatz, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11749–11761 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kingma, R. van Grondelle and L. N. M. Duysens, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1985, 808, 363–382 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lanzani, G. Cerullo, M. Zavelani-Rossi, S. De Silvestri, D. Comoretto, G. Musso and G. Dellepiane, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 187402 CrossRef .
G. Lanzani, S. Stagira, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, D. Comoretto, I. Moggio, C. Cuniberti, G. F. Musso and G. Dellepiane, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 313, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wohlgenannt, W. Graupner, R. Österbacka, G. Leising, D. Comoretto and Z. V. Vardeny, Synth. Met., 2002, 101, 267–268 CrossRef .
N. A. Pace, W. Zhang, D. H. Arias, I. McCulloch, G. Rumbles and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6086–6091 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lukman, K. Chen, J. M. Hodgkiss, D. H. P. P. Turban, N. D. M. M. Hine, S. Dong, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham and A. J. Musser, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, W. J. Jones, W. Siebrand, B. P. Stoicheff and W. G. Schneider, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 42, 330–342 CrossRef CAS .
J. Michl, A. J. Nozik, X. Chen, J. C. Johnson, G. Rana, A. Akdag and A. F. Schwerin, Toward singlet fission for excitonic solar cells, Proc. SPIE 6656, Organic Photovoltaics VIII, 2007, 66560E Search PubMed .
J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik, J. Michl, J. M. Justin, C. Johnson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16302–16303 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Mendenhall and J. A. Howard, Can. J. Chem., 1975, 53, 1971–1973 Search PubMed .
J. L. Ryerson, J. N. Schrauben, A. J. Ferguson, S. C. Sahoo, P. Naumov, Z. Havlas, J. Michl, A. J. Nozik and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12121–12132 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Schrauben, J. L. Ryerson, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7363–7373 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. Dron, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 8596–8603 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Buchanan, J. Kaleta, J. Wen, S. H. Lapidus, I. Císařová, Z. Havlas, J. C. Johnson and J. Michl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1947–1953 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Schrauben, A. Akdag, J. Wen, Z. Havlas, J. L. Ryerson, M. B. Smith, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 3473–3483 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Schrauben, Y. Zhao, C. Mercado, P. I. Dron, J. L. Ryerson, J. Michl, K. Zhu and J. C. Johnson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2286–2293 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Frankevich, A. N. Chaban, M. M. Triebel, J. U. von Schütz and H. C. Wolf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 177, 283–286 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gundel, J. Frick, J. Krzystek, H. Sixl, J. U. von Schütz and H. C. Wolf, Chem. Phys., 1989, 132, 363–372 CrossRef CAS .
C. Corvaja, L. Franco, L. Pasimeni and A. Toffoletti, Appl. Magn. Reson., 1992, 3, 797–813 CrossRef CAS .
G. Agostini, C. Corvaja, G. Giacometti and L. Pasimeni, Chem. Phys., 1993, 173, 177–186 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ni, G. G. Gurzadyan, L. Ma, P. Hu, C. Kloc and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 13894–13901 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kubo, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 111–122 CrossRef .
T. Takahashi, K. Matsuoka, K. Takimiya, T. Otsubo and Y. Aso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8928–8929 CrossRef CAS .
J. Casado, R. P. Ortiz and J. T. L. Navarrete, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5672–5686 RSC .
R. Ponce Ortiz, J. Casado, V. Hernández, J. T. López Navarrete, P. M. Viruela, E. Ortí, K. Takimiya and T. Otsubo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 9057–9061 CrossRef .
N. Elfers, I. Lyskov, J. D. Spiegel and C. M. Marian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 13901–13910 CrossRef CAS .
O. Varnavski, N. Abeyasinghe, J. Aragó, J. J. Serrano-Pérez, E. Ortí, J. T. López Navarrete, K. Takimiya, D. Casanova, J. Casado and T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1375–1384 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Chien, A. R. Molina, N. Abeyasinghe, O. P. Varnavski, T. Goodson and P. M. Zimmerman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28258–28268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Di Motta, F. Negri, D. Fazzi, C. Castiglioni and E. V. Canesi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3334–3339 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tavan and K. Schulten, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 4337–4358 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, B. Keller, R. Ho-Wu, N. Abeyasinghe, R. J. Vázquez, T. Goodson and P. M. Zimmerman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7760–7763 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, Y. J. Pu, A. Saito, Y. Kurashige, T. Beppu, H. Katagiri, M. Hada and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1585–1590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, J. Furudate, T. Kimura, H. Minaki, A. Saito, H. Katagiri and Y. J. Pu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4909–4914 RSC .
F. N. Sofia Canola and J. Casado, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 36, 217–226 Search PubMed .
T. S. Lee, Y. L. Lin, H. Kim, R. D. Pensack, B. P. Rand and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4087–4095 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng and A. I. Krylov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7751–7761 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Chen, G. Zhang, J. Yao, D. Zhang and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9400–9404 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Trinh, Y. Zhong, Q. Chen, T. Schiros, S. Jockusch, M. Y. Sfeir, M. Steigerwald, C. Nuckolls and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1312–1319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Wu, L. Wang, L. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1037–1043 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, K. Liu, J. W. Chen, J. J. Cao, C. Zhang, H. Fu and H. L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6739–6745 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Ryerson, A. Zaykov, L. E. Aguilar Suarez, R. W. A. Havenith, B. R. Stepp, P. I. Dron, J. Kaleta, A. Akdag, S. J. Teat, T. F. Magnera, J. R. Miller, Z. Havlas, R. Broer, S. Faraji, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 184903 CrossRef .
L. Wang, L. Lin, J. Yang, Y. Wu, H. Wang, J. Zhu, J. Yao and H. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 10235–10239 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hansmann, M. Melaimi, D. Munz and G. Bertrand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2546–2554 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hansmann, M. Melaimi and G. Bertrand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2206–2213 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rottschäfer, J. Busch, B. Neumann, H. G. Stammler, M. van Gastel, R. Kishi, M. Nakano and R. S. Ghadwal, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 16537–16542 CrossRef .
D. Rottschäfer, B. Neumann, H. G. Stammler, D. M. Andrada and R. S. Ghadwal, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4970–4976 RSC .
T. Ullrich, P. Pinter, J. Messelberger, P. Haines, R. Kaur, M. M. Hansmann, D. Munz and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7906–7914 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, K. J. Fallon, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 1079–1084 RSC .
R. Katoh, M. Kotani, Y. Hirata and T. Okada, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 264, 631–635 CrossRef CAS .
S. Watanabe, A. Furube and R. Katoh, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 10173–10178 CrossRef CAS .
S. De Silvestri and G. Leising, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 14336–14341 CrossRef .
R. Montero, V. Martínez-Martínez, A. Longarte, N. Epelde-Elezcano, E. Palao, I. Lamas, H. Manzano, A. R. Agarrabeitia, I. López Arbeloa, M. J. Ortiz and I. Garcia-Moreno, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 641–646 CrossRef CAS .
Y. E. Kandrashkin, Z. Wang, A. A. Sukhanov, Y. Hou, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, V. K. Voronkova and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4157–4163 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue, X. Song, Y. Feng, S. Cheng, G. Lu and Y. Bu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17469–17479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jue Bae, M. D. Krzyaniak, M. B. Majewski, M. Desroches, J. F. Morin, Y. L. Wu and M. R. Wasielewski, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 1432–1438 CrossRef .
D. Scheschkewitz, H. Amii, H. Gornitzka, W. W. Schoeller, D. Bourissou and G. Bertrand, Science, 2002, 295, 1880–1881 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su and R. Kinjo, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 352, 346–378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, K. C. Mondal and H. W. Roesky, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 357–369 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Schoeller, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 1495–1506 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nied and F. Breher, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3455–3466 RSC .
M. Abe, J. Ye and M. Mishima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3808–3820 RSC .
T. Beweries, R. Kuzora, U. Rosenthal, A. Schulz and A. Villinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8974–8978 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Yildiz, K. I. Leszczyńska, S. González-Gallardo, M. Zimmer, A. Azizoglu, T. Biskup, C. W. M. Kay, V. Huch, H. S. Rzepa and D. Scheschkewitz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15087–15092 CrossRef CAS .
S. Demeshko, C. Godemann, R. Kuzora, A. Schulz and A. Villinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2105–2108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takeuchi, M. Ichinohe and A. Sekiguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12478–12481 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Tobias Ullrich
	Tobias Ullrich was born in 1995 in Bad Windsheim. He received his BSc (2016) and MSc (2018) in chemistry from the Friedrich-Alexander-University in Erlangen-Nürnberg. In the same year, he joined the research group of Prof. Dirk M. Guldi at the Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-Nürnberg as a PhD student. His scientific interests primarily focus on singlet fission in novel intermediate open-shell molecular systems.

Dominik Munz
	Dominik Munz is professor of Inorganic Chemistry at Saarland University. He obtained his PhD with Thomas Strassner in Physical Organic Chemistry (TU Dresden). After postdoctoral work with T. Brent Gunnoe (University of Virginia) in homogeneous catalysis with transition metals, and with Guy Bertrand in p-block chemistry (UC San Diego) he joined FAU Erlangen from 2016 to 2020 as an independent junior group leader hosted by Karsten Meyer (Inorganic Chemistry). His research focuses on the isolation and investigation of biradicals and zwitterions directed at organic materials for energy conversion and the activation of strong bonds in catalysis.

Dirk M. Guldi
	Dirk M. Guldi completed both his undergraduate studies (1988) and PhD (1990) at the University of Cologne (Germany). Following postdoctoral appointments at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (USA), the Hahn-Meitner Institute Berlin (1992), and Syracuse University, he joined the faculty of the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory in 1995. Since 2004, he has been Full Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy at the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen-Nuremberg (Germany). Since 2018, Dirk M. Guldi has been the Co-Editor in Chief of Nanoscale and Nanoscale Horizons and he has been named among the world's Highly Cited Researchers by Thomson Reuters.
S0 + hν ⇌ S1	(1)
S1 ⇌ 1(T1T1)	(2)
1(T1T1) ⇌ 2S+1M(T1T1)	(3)
2S+1M(T1T1) ⇌ T1 + T1	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
Vi≠j = ψi|Hel|ψj	(10)
Hel = [ψi|Hel|ψj]i,j∈{1,2,…n}	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 1  Direct (middle), mediated (top), and two-step (bottom) mechanism of SF.	 
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 2  In the adiabatic limit (left) the SF rate is independent of the electronic coupling and the transition proceeds continuously from S1 and 1(T1T1) on the mixed adiabatic potential energy curve. In the non-adiabatic limit (right, decreased coupling) the SF rate is proportional to the square of the absolute value of V and the transition occurs suddenly from the S1 to 1(T1T1) electronic diabatic state.	 
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)

 	Fig. 3  Pseudocolor plots of time-resolved 2PPE spectra of tetracene (a) and pentacene (b) thin films excited at hν1 = 2.32 and 2.15 eV, respectively, and probed with an ionization photon of hν2 = 4.65 eV. The energetic positions of the S1, ME (1(T1T1)), and 2 × T1 (1(T1⋯T1)) states are indicated. The lower panels show the normalized 2PPE intensities of the S1 (red dots) and the ME (1(T1T1))/2 × T1 (1(T1⋯T1)) states (blue dots) for tetracene (c) and pentacene (d), respectively. The solid curves are simulations from the three-state model with electronic coupling V of 200 and 330 meV, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2013.	 

 	Fig. 4  Top: Molecular structure with indicated dihedral angle Φ of the directly connected tetracene dimer Mes-DT. Bottom: Adiabatic potential energy surfaces along the dihedral angle Φ and the solvent dielectric constant, showing their CT (blue) and TT (red) character. Reproduced from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2019.	 
|ΨI〉 = A|ΦI〉|XI〉	(22)
|ψi〉 = A|ϕA(1,2)〉|ϕB(3,4)〉|Xi(1,2,3,4)〉	(23)

 	Fig. 5  Energy diagram in units of the exchange energy J0 showing the relative excitation energies of the triplet pair states predicted by the “sixteen spin representation” according to Scholes. The isoergic SF case is assumed, where E(S1) = 2 × E(T1). Adapted from ref. 124 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2015.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of coherent and incoherent pathways in SF. Adapted from ref. 146 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  Top: Schematic representation of SF as a three step process. Bottom left: Evolution of the correlated triplet pair state from interacting (1(T1T1)) to non-interacting (1(T1⋯T1)) pair state upon spatial dissociation. Bottom right: Transient absorption signature of the interacting correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1) (red) and non-interacting correlated triplet pair state 1(T1⋯T1) (blue) of Cl4-TIPS pentacene.147	 

 	Fig. 8  Top: Time resolved photoluminescence decay of a tetracene single crystal (black) along with corresponding simulation (red). Bottom: Quantum beating frequencies extracted by Fourier transformation (black) along with simulation using a density matrix approach (red). Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2012.	 

 	Fig. 9  Top: Magnetic field dependencies of the energy of 1(T1T1) (S, red line), 3(T1T1) (T, green line), and 5(T1T1) (Q, blue line) states of a moderate separated triplet pair. It is assumed that the sign of J is negative. Bottom: Magnetic field effects of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene crystals on the yield of the singlet excited state calculated by using the stochastic Liouville equation (black line) together with the experimentally observed MFE (red line). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2015.	 
	(24)
	(25)
EB = 2·E(T1) − E(1(T1T1))	(26)
EB ≈ E(5(T1T1) − E(1(T1T1))	(27)
E(S1) ≥ 2·E(T1)	(28)
E(T2) > 2·E(T1)	(29)

 	Fig. 10  The energy matching conditions are the central guideline to evaluate singlet fission candidates.	 

 	Fig. 11  Computational approaches and crude classification.	 

 	Fig. 12  Energy levels of closed (left) and open-shell (right) parent structures. Structural perturbation changes the energy landscape towards energy level matching conditions (middle). Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2010.	 

 	Fig. 13  Lead structures for SF-materials proposed by Paci et al.204	 

 	Fig. 14  Identified SF-molecules by Padula et al.233	 
	(30)
	(31)

 	Fig. 15  (a) H4 model according to Nakano et al. (top).240 By variation of the interatomic distance, the diradical indices change towards a pure diradical and tetraradical, respectively. (b) Diradical character efficiency map obtained by calculating the excitation energies of the H4 model (bottom). Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright © 2012.	 

 	Fig. 16  Theoretically proposed SF-candidates based on their diradical character.254,270–278	 

 	Fig. 17  Theoretically proposed SF-candidates based on anti-aromaticity and Baird aromaticity rules.290,291	 

 	Fig. 18  Relative energy response of the involved electronic states by variation of the ground and excited state aromaticity within a particular compound family.214 Compounds within the orange region satisfy the energy level matching conditions.	 
	(32)
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)

 	Fig. 19  SF-interaction matrix elements for slip-stacked ethylene molecules as a function of slip in directions x and y: (a) 〈CA|Hel|S1S0〉, (b) 〈AC|Hel|S1S0〉, and (c) 1(T1T1)|Hel|CA〉. (d) The sum (light blue) of direct (dark blue) and mediated (red) contributions assuming a 50 kcal mol−1 difference E between the energy of the initial and final states and the energy of CT states. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Annual Reviews, Inc., copyright © 2013.	 

 	Fig. 20  Experimentally investigated 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 21  Experimentally investigated TCNQ-co-crystals.	 

 	Fig. 22  Experimentally investigated quinoidal-thiophene derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 23  Experimentally investigated zethrene derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 24  Transient absorption spectra for bound 1(T1T1) and independent triplets (T1) for (a) 38 (PF-M) and 37 (Z-P), (b) 43 (OZ-M) and 42 (OZ-T) as well as (c) 41 (HZ-M), 40 (HZ-F) and 39 (HZ-T). (d) Binding energy of 1(T1T1) versus transient absorption maxima shifts reveals a linear dependency with a slope of 1.163	 

 	Fig. 25  Molecular structure of the experimentally investigated dibenzopentalene based structure.	 

 	Fig. 26  Experimentally investigated scaffolds based on Baird aromaticity.	 

 	Fig. 27  Molecular structures of the experimentally investigated carbene derived diradicaloids.	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) Transient absorption heat map of 60 at low concentrations (5 × 10−6 M), obtained upon photoexcitation at 670 nm. (B) Corresponding absorption-time profiles illustrating the excited state dynamics. The inset shows single wavelength kinetics at 575 (red) and 655 nm (blue) as well as global fit to data (black line). (C) Transient absorption heat map established for increased concentrations (1 × 10−3 M). (D) Corresponding absorption-time profiles illustrating the excited state dynamics. The inset shows single wavelength kinetics at 470 (orange), 560 (red), and 690 nm (blue) as well as global fit to data (black line). (E) Transient absorption heat map obtained by change of the pump wavelength to 850 nm, corresponding to the characteristic absorption band maximum formed at high concentration (1 × 10−3 M). (F) Corresponding absorption-time profiles illustrating the excited state dynamics. The inset shows single wavelength kinetics at 470 (orange), 560 (red), and 690 nm (blue) as well as global fit to data (black line). Reproduced from ref. 369 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright © 2020.	 

 	Fig. 29  Experimentally investigated compounds, which do not belong to a particular SF-chromophore family discussed above.	 

 	Fig. 30  Selected examples for diradicaloid inorganic compounds embedded in four-membered rings.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
