Covalently-linked polyoxometalate–polymer hybrids: optimizing synthesis, appealing structures and prospective applications  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NJ01257K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NJ01257K
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 886-897Covalently-linked polyoxometalate–polymer hybrids: optimizing synthesis, appealing structures and prospective applications

        
          
            Han 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hai-Kuan 
            Yang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Synthetic Soft Materials, Key Laboratory of Functional Polymer Materials of Ministry of Education and Institute of Polymer Chemistry, and Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. E-mail: weiwang@nankai.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry, North University of China, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030051, China
Received 
       (in Montpellier, France) 
      19th May 2015
    , Accepted 31st August 2015First published on 3rd September 2015AbstractPolyoxometalates (POMs) are a class of polyanions that have fixed metal–oxygen frameworks composed of early transition metals in high oxidation states (most commonly VV, MoVI and WVI). The diversity in composition and configuration endows POMs with fascinating chemical and physical properties, as well as prospective applications in photochromic or electrochromic materials, catalysts, nano-structural materials, medicines and so on. In order to develop more advanced materials based on POMs, a lot of effort has been devoted to the exploration of new types of POMs and combining POMs with other functional units through non-covalent modifications or covalent bonding. Among these delicate studies, integrating inorganic POMs with organic polymers into diverse hybrids through covalent linking is a quite interesting field. We present here a perspective review on the synthesis of POM–polymer hybrids (PPHs) based on covalent modifications, their hierarchical structures and potential applications.
Han Wu
Han Wu received his BS degree in Material Chemistry at Nankai University in 2011 and has been a PhD student in Polymer Chemistry and Physics in Prof. Wei Wang's group since then. His current research interests focus on the manipulation of the self-assembling process of shape amphiphiles through adjusting the solvent environment. He also works on synthesizing complicated multicomponent polyoxometalate–polymer hybrids and exploring their functionalities.
Hai-Kuan Yang
Hai-Kuan Yang received his BS degree in Chemistry at Northwest University in 2008. He received his PhD degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics under the supervision of Prof. Wei Wang at Nankai University in 2014. He has joined North University of China since then. His research interests focus on the efficient synthesis of organic–polyoxometalate hybrids through various click chemistry methods. He is also interested in fabricating functional organic–inorganic hybrid gels and understanding their supramolecular properties.
Wei Wang
Wei Wang obtained his PhD degree in Polymer Physics Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Welheim Ruland at Philipps-University of Marburg in 1993. Then he moved to Kyoto University to take up a postdoctoral research on the fundamental physics of liquid crystalline polymers with Prof. Takeji Hashimoto. After working as a research fellow in Toray Industries (Japan) and Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (Singapore), he started his independent academic career in 2002 when he joined Nankai University as a distinguished professor. He places his research emphasis on the fabrication of novel hybrid materials through the bottom-up constructing strategy.
Introduction
Polyoxometalates (POMs), a class of polyanionic clusters, possess intriguing properties in catalysis, novel materials and chemical biology.1,2 Aiming at improving and creating more functionalities based on these intriguing clusters, many researchers have done a large amount of innovative studies on the organic modification of POMs.3,4 In general, the modification methods of POMs can be divided into two main categories, i.e. non-covalent (electrostatic, hydrogen bond or van der Waals interaction) modification and covalent modification.5 For the former type, numerous achievements have been accomplished through crystal engineering and supramolecular cooperation.6,7 The covalent modification of POMs, by contrast, started much later and has limited successful outcomes. In recent years, embedding inorganic POMs into organic or inorganic matrices has received significant attention as a robust way to fabricate novel composite materials.8,9 The fabrication methods of composite materials also can be roughly sorted into non-covalent and covalent types. Simply blending or dispersing functional POM components in silica resins, zeolites or polymer resins is relatively convenient compared to covalent embedding and the resulting performance is adequate for basic applications of POM like catalysis.10–12 However, there are some inevitable drawbacks of these non-covalently fabricating materials like the leakage of POM components and the imprecise anchoring sites, which profoundly influence the sophisticated application of POMs as nanomaterials.
On the other hand, in covalently-linked POM–polymer hybrids (PPHs), POMs are firmly fastened on the polymer matrix and anchoring sites can be precisely programmed through reasonable molecular design.13,14 These characteristics determine the distinctive features of covalent PPHs different from those of non-covalent blends. Several strategies have been developed to synthesize PPHs including direct polymerization like free radical polymerization, atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) or post-polymerization grafting methods. With multiple synthetic routes, various PPHs containing different POM clusters with diverse structures have been obtained and can be roughly sorted into four categories according to their chain configurations. The first kind is crosslinked PPHs, in which bifunctional or multifunctional POMs are tethered to organic networks through covalent bonds. Crosslinked PPHs are mainly obtained by the free radical copolymerization of organic monomers and POM based crosslinkers. The second kind is side-chain PPHs, in which POMs are placed at the side-chains. These types of PPHs are obtained primarily through the polymerization of POM based monomers with only one polymerizable unit other than those of POM based crosslinkers. The third kind is backbone PPHs, with POMs embedded in the polymer backbones. These types of PPHs are generally synthesized by condensation polymerization methods or stepwise click reactions. And the last kind is relatively simple from the view of molecular structure and synthetic strategy, which is composed of a POM head and one or more polymer tails. Hence we nominate the fourth kind hybrid as head–tail PPHs (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Four categories of covalent PPHs according to their chain configurations: (a) crosslinked PPHs, (b) side-chain PPHs, (c) backbone PPHs and (d) head–tail PPHs. The yellow ellipsoids and the blue chains represent the POM clusters and organic polymers respectively. 
As a unique class of nano-building blocks, POMs always possess strong oxidizing properties, intensive charge effects and concrete structures. Although these intrinsic characters endow POMs with distinctive and outstanding properties in fabricating novel functional materials, they set up a series of obstacles in the synthesis and characterization of PPHs on the other hand.15–20 Especially due to the nucleophilic character of the oxygen atoms on the surface, the intrinsic anionic nature and the relatively large size of POMs, it is hard to modify POMs with required functionalities without disturbing the interesting features of inorganic POMs. Hence it is quite challenging to choose appropriate polymerization or hybridization methods to fabricate covalent-type PPHs compared to those of non-covalent blending POM/polymer composites. But considering the inherent drawbacks of non-covalent modification like inevitable leakage of toxic elements or undesired macroscopic phase separation,21–23 the painstaking exploration of PPHs with a firm connection between inorganic components and organic matrices appears to be significantly important. The intensive contrast in electron density between POMs and organic composition together with the robustly fixed shapes of POM clusters greatly benefit the study of the fundamentals of the self-assembling process as we can observe the microscopic structures directly by using a transmission electron microscope without any detrimental staining.24–27 Moreover, the flexible adjustability in chain structures, organic components and peripheral counterions endow PPHs with nearly infinite possibility in constructing novel organic–inorganic hybrid composites. Other than the attractive self-assembled structures, the potential applications of PPHs in proton conducting membranes, heterogeneous catalysis and nanofabrication have also received a lot of attention. Here, we will briefly review the evolution of synthetic methods, intriguing self-assemblies and prospective applications of four types of PPHs based on covalent modifications.
Crosslinked PPHs
Just as their name implies, crosslinked PPHs are mainly composed of copolymerizing organic monomers with POM based crosslinkers through the free radical polymerization method.
The first report of crosslinked PPHs was in 1992, Judeinstein demonstrated the polymerization of four types of POM based monomers into SiW11SiR kind polymers based on lacunary [SiW11O39]4−, which is also the first reported covalently bonded PPHs.28,29 He then examined the effect of polymerization conditions (like solvents, catalysts and temperature) on all four monomers and found out that the styryl-derived monomer displayed relatively higher polymerization activity in polar solvents like propylene carbonate and DMSO. After confirming the structure integrity and the preservation of electrochemical properties of POM clusters by NMR, IR and cyclic voltammetry (CV) spectra, he claimed successful syntheses of the first PPHs. According to the results of quasi-elastic light scattering (QELS) measurements, he proposed two structure models of the hybrid polymers (Fig. 2). Although the linear structure (Fig. 2b) seems reasonable to some degree if we take the intensive steric effect of POM clusters into consideration, we still believe that branched structure is more realistic for those poorly controlled and randomly crosslinked PPHs considering the essence of radical polymerization.
 Fig. 2  (a) Structure of the [SiW11Si-styryl]4− monomer; proposed structures of SiW11SiR polymers (b) linear and (c) branched.28 Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (1992) American Chemical Society. 
Following the pioneering work done by Judeinstein, Mayer, Thouvenot and their coworkers developed several crosslinking agents based on a divacant polyanion [γ-SiW10O36]8− unit (see an example in Fig. 3a).30,31 Then, they copolymerized these polymerizable POMs with other organic monomers like acrylamide or ethyl methacrylate into hybrid covalent networks with POM clusters hanging on them. Such copolymers can form organogels or hydrogels on account of different peripheral counterions around the POM clusters. More interestingly, they also reported the incorporation of magnetic nanoparticles (γ-Fe2O3) into the hybrid networks based on POMs and polyacrylamide as shown in Fig. 3b. The entrapped nanoparticles maintained the rotational mobility in the hybrid network and displayed a size-determined fractional release during the swelling process. A detailed study on the effect of the ratio of POM based crosslinkers was also described clearly. Moreover, by introducing an ammonium salt ([(Me)3N+C2H4OC(O)C(CH3)CH2]) bearing a polymerizable methacrylate group, the crosslinking ability can be further improved and resulted in the decrease of gel solvation.32
 Fig. 3  (a) Polyhedral representation of a POM crosslinker [γ-SiW10O36(RSiO)4]4− (R = C3H6OC(O)C(CH3)CH2) and (b) swelling test of a hybrid POM gel loading magnetic particles.30 Adapted from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Recently, analogous studies have been reported by Herring and coworkers on investigating proton-conductive membranes based on the copolymerization of POM derived crosslinkers. Through copolymerizing divinylsilyl-11-silicotungstic acid (H5[SiW11O40{Si(CHCH2)}2]) with butyl acrylate and 1,6-hexanediol diacrylate, they obtained novel proton-exchange membranes with various POM loading amounts for fuel-cell applications. The immobilization of the proton conducting components, which are POM clusters with H+ as counterions, in the membrane through robust covalent bonds can avoid the leakage of functional water-soluble components. Fast proton transport in these hybrid materials was facilitated by as few as three water molecules per proton. Some of these hybrid photon-conductive membranes even demonstrated higher proton conductivities than the commercially produced perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) polymers.33,34
Carraro, Bonchio and their coworkers also utilized multifunctional POMs as crosslinkers in fabricating various sustainable oxidation catalyses. They designed and synthesized three different POM crosslinkers with two or four polymerizable octenyl tails covalently attached on each other as shown in Fig. 4a. They further copolymerized these three POM monomers, respectively, with methyl methacrylate (MMA) and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EDM) in mixed solvent with 1,4-butanediol/2-propanol = 1/2 as a porogenic agent. After confirming the successful polymerization of crosslinked PPHs and intact POM structures by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), they estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) that about 65% of multifunctional POMs had been cross-linked within the final polymeric materials which display a catalytically favoured porous architecture (Fig. 4b). These immobilized heterogeneous catalysts can activate hydrogen peroxide in various solvent environments. The firm anchoring of catalytically activated POMs ensured good recyclability of these heterogeneous catalysts. As demonstrated by their recycling experiment, hydrogen peroxide conversion can reach satisfactory levels with recovered catalysts and the FT-IR spectra did not show obvious differences. Especially, these hybrid polymeric materials can catalyse the two-step oxidation of dibenzothiophene, which demonstrated their potential in fuel oxydesulfurization.35
 Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structures of three octenyl-derived POM crosslinkers TBA3H [{CH2CH(CH2)6Si}2O(α-SiW11O39)] (1), TBA3H [{CH2CH(CH2)6Si}2O(γ-SiW10O36)] (2), and TBA3H [{CH2CH(CH2)6Si}4O3(α-SiW9O34)] (3), TBA is the abbreviation for counterion tetrabutyl ammonium and (b) SEM image of hybrid polymers synthesized by copolymerizing a POM crosslinker (2), MMA, EDM.35 Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Inspired by the work done by Carraro et al., we proposed another convenient way to immobilize catalytically active POMs by utilizing classical click chemistry. A D380 macroporous benzylamine resin was selected as the polymeric matrix and modified by pent-4-ynoic acid. A monovacant polytungstate was chosen as an active inorganic component and reasonably derived to be equipped with two azide groups (the formula is (TBA)6[α2-P2W17O61(SiC6H4CH2N3)2O]). The click reaction was conducted in DMF solution at 45 °C for 48 h. The intact framework of POMs and efficient covalent bonding can be confirmed by FT-IR characterization. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results also validated that the tungsten of POMs is in its fully oxidized state. Furthermore, the catalytic efficiency and selectivity of this POM-decorated macroporous resin was evaluated in the oxidation of tetrahydrothiophene (THT), a well-known gasoline contaminant. Other than high efficiency and selectivity, this POM-decorated macroporous resin can be recycled and reused continuously for many times without any detectable loss of catalytic activity and leakage of inorganic components.36
Zhang and coworkers modified the heteropolymolybdate with methacrylic anhydride through the amino group thereby successfully synthesizing an Anderson-type POM with two alkenyl groups. They further copolymerized it with methyl methacrylate (MMA) with 1,1′-azobis(cyclohexanecarbonitrile) (ABCN) as an initiator in acetonitrile. Considering the intrinsic multilevel redox character of Anderson POMs, the resulting crosslinked PPHs were carefully studied for their potential as ternary resistance switching memory devices. The multilevel memory devices fabricated by such PPHs exhibited rewriteable switching properties, good endurance with distinct operation windows and long retention time.37
Yin, Liu and coworkers designed and synthesized a hybrid amphiphile with chemical formula K3PW9O37(SiC7H11O2)4. This hybrid amphiphile was easily obtained by modifying trivacant Keggin clusters with a silane-coupling agent under acidic conditions. They utilized this polymerizable hybrid as a stabilizing surfactant and a crosslinking agent in the emulsion polymerization of styrene. The obtained hybrid latex exhibits a typical core–shell structure with a PS core and a POM shell. This POM decorated latex can be used as heterogeneous catalysts, which can be conveniently recycled through centrifugation or other simple operations.38
In conclusion, synthesizing crosslinked PPHs is the earliest example for the fabrication of covalent PPHs. The synthetic method used to obtain crosslinked PPHs so far is still confined to free radical polymerization. With this approach, it is very difficult to control the loading amount and the anchoring site of functional POMs. Nevertheless, crosslinked PPHs initiated a new area in constructing hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposites. The hybrid networks of crosslinked PPHs are suitable for catalytic applications. With robust linking between POM clusters and organic networks, crosslinked PPHs can be recycled without obvious decrease in catalytic activity and detrimental loss of inorganic components. As the realization of crosslinked PPHs or other covalent PPHs is closely related to the development of the covalent modification methods of POMs, we can definitely anticipate the incorporation of more complicated and powerful POM clusters into crosslinked PPHs. Composing hierarchical nanocomposites through embedding other functional components like metal nanoparticles, bioactive molecules etc. into the PPH networks will be interesting too. More fundamentally, finding ways to control the loading amount and the overall distribution of POM clusters also deserves our attention.
Side-chain PPHs
Side-chain PPHs are composed of pure organic backbones and inorganic POM pendants. Compared to crosslinked PPHs, side-chain PPHs are more regular in structure. The first side-chain PPH was reported by Maatta and coworkers. They took an imido derived way to organically modify Lindqvist hexamolybdate. Through the reaction of TBA2[Mo6O19] with Ph3PNC6H4CNCH2 in pyridine solution at 90 °C, the styrylimido–hexamolybdate hybrid can be obtained in satisfactory yield. Similar to the cornerstone work done by Judeinstein, this styryl modified organic–inorganic hybrid can readily undergo conventional free radical induced copolymerization with 4-methylstyrene in 1,2-dichloroethane and using azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) as an initiator. They hence claimed the successful synthesis of POM grafted PPHs merely with IR and NMR characterization of the final PPHs. Based on the NMR signal intensity, they suggested that the ratio of the hybrid monomer to organic monomer was about 1/3 (Fig. 5).39
 Fig. 5  Idealized representation of a segment within the side-chain PPH synthesized by Moore et al.39 Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, there are no further results reported on these side-chain PPHs, even they declared that further characterization and studies on a variety of other polymerizable organoimido systems were underway at the end of the paper. Therefore we have sufficient reason to believe that such copolymerization is not very controllable and may result in some more complex branched polymers rather than simple linear polymers.
Peng's group also make critical contributions in designing and realizing side-chain PPHs based on conjugated organic backbones through imido modification of Lindqvist hexamolybdates. Peng and his coworkers made their first attempt on synthesizing four side-chain PPHs with POMs tethering to a poly(phenylene ethynylene) (PPE) backbone as pendants through rigid conjugated or flexible alkyl bridges respectively. The difference in covalent attachment led to the variance in optical properties, that conjugated tethering polymers had a higher fluorescent quenching effect than those with flexible alkyl bridges, which indicates a dominant through-bond photoinduced electron transfer mechanism. Aside from the condensation polymerization process, one-pot hybridization/polymerization was also confirmed to be feasible in constructing such photoactive side-chain hybrid polymers. Other than traditional NMR determination on the successful synthesis, gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements, to the best of our knowledge, were applied in the detection of molecular weights of PPHs at the first time. Due to the quite rigid backbone structure of PPE and bulky substituent POMs, the average molecular weights presented by the GPC method based on PS calibration obviously deviated from the real values. Hence they also conducted light-scattering experiments to determine the real molecular weight of such side-chain PPHs and gave a confident data. With the average molecular weight and elemental analysis results, they could roughly estimate the grafting degree as four to five POMs on each polymer chain.40,41
Although above-mentioned side-chain PPHs had demonstrated certain potential in photovoltaic materials with POM clusters as electron acceptors and organic π-conjugated segments as electron donors, their photovoltaic performances turned out to be not very attractive. As high efficiency photovoltaic materials require not only effective photo-induced charge transfer but also sufficient and separate charge transporting pathways for charge carriers, appropriate microphase separation is often favoured in fabricating superior photovoltaic devices. Thereafter, Peng and coworkers dedicated vast efforts to synthesize diblock photoactive copolymers of side-chain PPHs in order to further improve the power conversion efficiency of conjugated PPHs. The first reported POM-containing diblock copolymers were obtained by post-polymerization hybridization through grafting inorganic POM clusters to poly(2,6-dimethyl-4-vinyl aniline)–poly(phenylene vinylene), which is a block copolymer precursor with amino reactive sides settled in the polystyryl-like flexible block. Such block copolymers with POMs as functional pendants displayed two absorption bands owing to the ligand-to-metal charge transfer transition of imido-functionalized POM clusters and the π–π* transition of poly(phenylene vinylene) backbone respectively. However, the attachment of POM clusters had not brought effective phase separation into the films cast from those side-chain block copolymer type PPHs. They further translated the rigid block, i.e. the poly(phenylene-vinylene) block, into a poly(3-hexylthiophene) block, which shows more intensive tendency in microphase separation with polystyryl-type blocks. Although the spin-cast films of such improved polymers displayed worm-like conducting domains with a general width lower than 50 nm, their power conversion efficiencies are still believed to be not very high.42–44
Concluded from the above-mentioned results, both post-polymerization hybridization and one-pot hybridization/polymerization are currently incapable to well control the grafting numbers and positions of POM components on the side-chain PPHs. To address this problem, we introduced ring opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) into the preparation of side-chain PPHs, which is a living and controllable polymerization method. Since then, we have propelled the synthesis of side-chain PPHs to a precisely regulated stage that was never reached by traditional polymerization or hybridization means. In detail, we first synthesized a POM based hybrid monomer with a norbornene-type polymerizable unit through a simple three-step organic reaction. In order to create a robust connection between the inorganic component and the organic backbone, we applied the highly-efficient esterification modification of V3-capped Wells–Dawson-type POMs ([P2W15V3O62]9−, abbreviated as V3POMs). By modification with the tris(hydroxylmethyl)-type derivative of norbornene, the obtained hybrid monomer can readily undergo polymerization (as illustrated in Fig. 6a) under the activation of Grubbs catalyst (ruthenium N-heterocyclic carbine). This polymerization process yielded well-defined linear side-chain PPHs with relatively high molecular weights and low polydispersities as demonstrated by the size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) results (as shown in Fig. 6b).
 Fig. 6  The ROMP process of V3POM-based monomers. (a) The illustration of the ROMP process and (b) the SEC results demonstrating the well-controlled ROMP method.45 Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Such linear polymers with V3POM pendants can be cast into thin films from their acetonitrile solutions. The catalytic abilities of these side-chain PPHs were also carefully evaluated in the oxidation of THT and demonstrated high catalytic efficiencies as well as excellent durability in recycling.45 As a controllable living polymerization method, ROMP is also feasible in synthesizing well-defined block copolymers with inorganic POMs covalently located in independent segments. Such studies and further study on functional applications are smoothly ongoing in our group.46
Pradeep, Gonsalves and coworkers also had tentatively attempted to fabricate functional PPHs and focused on their potentials for nanolithography. They designed and synthesized a hybrid monomer by modifying V3POMs with trihydroxymethyl-derived methacrylamide. They further tried to copolymerize the hybrid monomer (the chemical formula is [P2V3W15O59{(OCH2)3CNHCO(CH3)CCH2}]6−) with photoactive monomers like (methacryloyloxy)phenyldimethylsulfonium triflate (MAPDST) or methylmethacrylate (MMA). Although they claimed successful synthesis of such polymer/POM hybrids with covalent linking, the characterization results were not adequate to verify their statement. Moreover, they attributed the TGA residual mass to the presence of about 0.3 or 0.5 POM clusters per polymer chain respectively, which further revealed poor control on the polymerization process.47 They also modified Mn-Anderson POMs in a similar way to give a bifunctional hybrid monomer with chemical formula (TBA)3[MnMo6O18{(OCH2)3(CNH)}2(CO(CH3)C]CH2)2]. Through copolymerizing this hybrid monomer with the organic monomer MAPDST using free radical polymerization, they claimed that a new radiation sensitive polyoxometalate/polymer hybrid was obtained. However, their GPC characterization was very disappointing and the TGA results still indicated that not every polymer chain was attached with POMs.48
In conclusion, side-chain PPHs are more regular in the molecular structure compared to crosslinked PPHs. Especially, the introduction of the ROMP method dramatically promoted the synthetic strategy of covalent PPHs. The side-chain PPHs obtained by ROMP can possess high degree of polymerization together with narrow molecular weight distribution as confirmed by SEC equipped with a light-scattering detector. While we designed the hybrid monomer for the realization of ROMP in synthesizing PPHs, a long flexible linker was selected to reduce the steric influence of bulk POM clusters. It will be interesting to further investigate the effect of the organic linker between the polymerizable unit and POM clusters on the polymerization process. In addition, ROMP can be applied in fabricating block copolymers of PPHs too. With delicate molecular design and precise control in the polymerization process, advanced performance or novel properties may have aroused in more complicated side-chain PPHs. Moreover, copolymerizing POMs with other functional inorganic building blocks like polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS), fullerenes (C60) into block copolymers or multiblock copolymers will be very meaningful. The synergistic effect of various blocks with diverse functionalities in catalysis, photonics, bioactivity and so on may result in some unexpected innovations.
Backbone PPHs
Stepwise polymerization is mainly adopted in the construction of backbone PPHs, which fundamentally determines the uncontrollable nature of such kinds of hybrid polymers. On the other hand, the unique physical and chemical properties of inorganic POM clusters significantly influence the activity of the functional group modified on POMs and further affect the post-functionalization process. Moreover, the steric hindrance of POM clusters seriously impedes the chain propagation of backbone PPHs. Hereafter, only a few results have been reported on the synthesis and functional study of backbone PPHs.
The incorporation of POM clusters into conductive polymers with the purpose of creating functional composites for energy conservation, energy storage or multi-responsive sensors by utilizing the multi-redox ability of POMs and charge transfer effects have received extensive attention.49 Aside from the utilization of the nucleophilicity of lacunary anions, Peng and coworkers developed a relatively precise derivation method based on Mo–N–C imido bonds.50,51 This particular method allows the selective synthesis of bifunctionalized hexamolymbdate products by using the tetrabutylammonium (TBA+) salt of the α-octamolybdate ion, [α-Mo8O26]4− as the starting material. By deriving aforementioned POMs with 4-iodo-2,6-bis(1-methylethyl)benzenamine, a polymerizable monomer with two iodo functional groups can be readily obtained with over 60% yield. By condensing this bifunctional monomer with 2,5-di(2,2-dimethylpropoxy-1,4-diethynylbenzene) under the catalysis of palladium, a backbone type PPH can be obtained (Fig. 7).52 Such poly(phenylene ethynylene) (PPE) supported PPHs can be used to fabricate simple single-layer solar cells with efficiencies up to 0.15%, which may be not very impressive. But their experiment still explored a new way to engage POMs into photovoltaic materials. Considered that PPE only has limited absorption in the visible range and relatively poor charge-transporting properties, Peng and his coworkers further developed a more efficient backbone type conjugated PPH based on polythiophene. This polythiophene bridged PPH showed absorptions in the 400–550 nm range in dilute solutions and extended beyond 700 nm in thin films. Simple single-layer photovoltaic cells fabricated by this polythiophene based PPH harvested a power conversion efficiency of 0.24%.53 In addition, this bifunctionalized monomer can copolymerize with other diiodo monomers to give fascinating copolymers.54
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of a POM-containing conjugated polymer through Sonogashira coupling.52 Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Moreover, Peng and coworkers also demonstrated a coordinated POM-containing hybrid polymer based on organoimido derivative POMs, in which POM clusters and transition-metal complexes are linked through an extended π-conjugated bridge.55
Another condensation polymerization to achieve a POM-polyimide copolymer was carried out by Yang, Lu and coworkers using diamine modified divacant lacunary decatungstosilicate with chemical formula TBA3H[γ-SiW10O36(NH2CH2CH2CH2Si)2O]. With robust imide bonds, the inorganic component can be firmly integrated into the organic backbone, which significantly improves the thermal and mechanical properties of the resulting polymer films. Moreover, the covalent embedding of POM clusters not only reserved the transparency of the polymer films, but also opened up a new approach to develop ultra-low dielectric constant (κ) hybrids or other functional materials. In their experimental results, the κ value can be as low as 1.22 with a 10 wt% load content of inorganic POM clusters.56
Anderson-type heteropolymolybdate is another widely studied POM cluster, its symmetrical structure as well as convenient organic modification endows it with excellent ability in the self-assembly process. In particular, the tris-(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS) derivative of Anderson POMs is often used as a multifunctional platform for covalent post-functionalization. With two active amino groups on each side, such organic–inorganic hybrids can serve as versatile building blocks to construct novel functional materials.
Song and coworkers have done an interesting work based on TRIS derivative modified Mn-Anderson clusters.57 They designed and synthesized a photosensitive organic–inorganic hybrid with two coumarin moieties on both sides. After thorough determination of this hybrid compound, they carried out a reversible polymerization by utilizing the characteristic ability of coumarin that it can form photoinduced cyclobutane dimers. By exposing the acetonitrile solution of coumarin derived Anderson POMs under UV irradiation at 365 nm, obvious colour change was observed from light-yellow to deep-brown. Such a colour change revealed a photoinduced polymerization of coumarin modified POMs, which led to C–(A–C–C)n–A–C type backbone PPHs with an average molecular weight (Mw) of 337.38 kDa and a polydispersity value of 1.60. Moreover, upon irradiation with shorter wavelengths like 254 nm, the photoinduced cyclobutane linkage can be broken. Therefore, the photoinduced polymerization process of the coumarin modified hybrid monomer is reversible (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the reversible photopolymerization process of coumarin derived Mn-type Anderson POMs.57 Adapted from ref. 57 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Classical Cu-catalysed alkyne–azide cycloaddition (CuAAC click chemistry) was also applied in the synthesis of backbone oligomers embedded with Mn-Anderson type POMs. The strategy proposed by Cronin and coworkers is strictly step-by-step. In order to achieve a higher degree of polymerization, thorough functionalization of lower-grade oligomers is a prerequisite. They reported four monodisperse oligomeric Mn-Anderson hybrids, from a dimer to a pentamer. Theoretically, polymers with higher molecular weight can also be obtained with monodispersion, but actually the decrease in solubility of hybrid monomers and the activity of end groups will definitely increase the synthetic difficulty.58
Overall, from the pioneering work done by Peng to the recently developed photoinduced polymerization of Anderson-type monomers, limited ways to achieve backbone PPHs have been explored. Only stepwise polymerization has been proved to be valid in synthesizing various backbone POM-based hybrid materials. However, due to the steric effect and the electronic effect of POMs, it is not quite easy to obtain linear PPHs with narrow dispersion in molecular weight. Besides, as a class of rigid clusters, POM-implanting backbone PPHs have intrinsic poor solubility even in strong polar solvents. This directly leads to a hindrance in precise determination of molecular weight. The solubility problem may be addressed by wrapping POMs with longer and more flexible organic cations. The uncertainty in polymerization degree and the wide polydispersity severely restrict further development of backbone PPHs in applications as polymer materials. Hence, it is of fundamental importance to find a more controllable way to synthesize backbone PPHs.
Head–tail PPHs
As implied by a lot of experimental results, their unique physical and chemical properties tremendously influence the organic modification and self-assembly process of POM clusters. The fact that POMs are quite different from both small molecules and polymers lead to invalidation of empirical and theoretical principles that guide the compositional or constructing operation of ordinary building blocks. And the uncertainty of the chain structure, the grafting number and the modification position are often encountered in cases of other three types of PPHs due to the poor control of polymerization or hybridization, which further complicates the POM-engaged processes. Therefore, some genuine propaedeutics should be understood first if we want to reveal the underlying facts of more complex POM based systems. Taking into consideration of the well-defined structure and composition, the head–tail PPHs turn out to be ideal research objects for such purposes.
As the name implies, head–tail PPHs are composed of a rigid POM head and one or more flexible polymer tails that are combined by covalent bonds. To the best of our knowledge, we proposed and successfully synthesized the first head–tail PPH with a V3POM head and a polystyrene tail.59 In addition, we first introduced atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) into the synthesis of PPHs. V3POMs were modified by a trishydroxyl-derived bromoisobutyramide into a macroinitiator, which can initiate the ATRP of polystyrene into a head–tail PPH with definite one terminal POM on each polymer chain. With a well-defined structure, this head–tail PPH can be an ideal model for the study of the POM participating self-assembly process. By simply replacing the peripheral TBA+ cations around POMs with protons through ion exchange, V3POM–PS hybrids can assemble into vesicles in DMF solution. Moreover, the self-assembly behaviour of this head–tail PPH can be tuned by carefully controlling the annealing process. Upon adding an H+-resin, the POM head gradually turned hydrophilic but insoluble in DMF and the resulting giant amphiphile immediately assembled into imperfect vesicles with some small reverse micelles trapped in them. Such assemblies were considered to be in a metastable state and so subsequent thermal annealing was conducted to drive them toward the thermodynamic stable state. After annealing at 70 °C, the size of vesicles obviously increased and the reverse micelles were eliminated as the tiny dark spots on the TEM image disappeared. The enlarged flawless assemblies displayed a common appearance of conventional vesicles, however the thickness was larger than the value estimated by the equation of Azzam and Eisenberg. This phenomenon was caused by the rigid and incompressible essence of POM clusters, which forced the PS chain to take a more outstretched configuration.60 Continuing the annealing process of large vesicles at ambient temperature further led to more intriguing morphological evolution, where the large vesicles were observed to gradually decompose meanwhile more thermodynamic stable tubular assemblies grew up little by little (Fig. 9).61
 Fig. 9  A molecular model of a V3POM–PS hybrid and schematic demonstration of its self-assembly process.59–61 Adapted with permission from ref. 59–61. 
The impact of POM clusters on the bulk property of hybrid polymers was further studied with another head–tail PPH. Through directly modifying V3POMs with a trihydroxyl-derived poly(ethylene-glycol) chain, we obtained a head–tail PPH which retains the crystallization behaviour of the PEG block.
More interestingly, the incorporation of POMs led to a microphase separation in the PEG matrix which results in the hybrid lamellae consisting of alternatively arranged POMs and PEG layers. The hybrid lamellae further organized into the spherulitic superstructures that can be intuitively observed using a polarizing microscope and TEM. In addition, the strong electrostatic interaction between POM clusters significantly improved the thermostability of such superstructures. We can directly recognize from the optical photographs that the spherulitic structures were well reserved even at the temperature much higher than the melting point of the PEG chain (Fig. 10a).62 This hierarchical constructing strategy was further developed to design and fabricate new hybrid materials. A bottom-up strategy was applied to tailor the polymer properties. In detail, we blended pure PEG with different amounts of PEG–POM hybrids in aqueous solutions. Then water in the mixed solutions was evaporated to give the nanocomposites with a different doping proportion. The shear storage moduli of nanocomposites are adjustable over many orders of magnitude at temperatures above the PEG melting point (Fig. 10b). Detailed analysis of the TEM results revealed an intriguing evolution of a microstructure based on four nano-architectures, which were hybrid self-assembled nanosheets, PEG crystallized lamellae, PEG/hybrid cocrystallized lamellae, and hybrid crystallized lamellae. Because of the strong interaction among POM clusters as well as the good miscibility between the PEG block of the head–tail PPH and the PEG matrix, these nano-architectures can act as nano-enhancers in the material forming process.63
 Fig. 10  (a) PLM micrographs demonstrating the strengthening effect stemming from the electrostatic interactions between POM clusters62 and (b) the hierarchical strategy of self-assembled nano-enhancer to tailor the performance of hybrid nanocomposites.63 Adapted with permission from ref. 62 and 63. 
After having a general understanding of head–tail PPHs with only one polymer tail, we moved one step further to pursue PPHs with one POM head and two same type polymer tails. We chose copper-catalysed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC click), a convenient and efficient method to synthesize such twin-tailed PPHs. A monovacant Wells–Dawson polytungstate was chosen as the POM head and poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) was selected as the polymer tail. As shown in Fig. 11, the monovacant polytungstate was modified by sodium azide to give a bifunctional hybrid cluster, which was a white powder and stable in air. Then the propargyl-terminated PCL chains were quantitatively clicked onto the bifunctional POM to generate well-defined head–tail PPHs. As the resulting PCL–polytungstate–PCL PPHs were freely soluble in THF, the determination of molecular weights and molecular weight distributions were easily carried out on GPC with polystyrene calibration. The molecular weights of PCL–polytungstate–PCL PPHs were almost twice than those of PCL precursors and their polydispersity indexes were around 1.1, which were similar to those of PCL precursors. Along with other analysis results, GPC measurements also demonstrated that such conventional click chemistry is well adapted to the post-polymerization hybridization of POMs.64
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the preparation of PCL–polytungstate–PCL hybrids via click chemistry.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Among various potential applications of POMs, their potent antiviral, antibacterial and antitumor activities draw permanent attention. Although it has been reported that POMs show certain curative effects on human diseases such as cancers, there is still no POM-based medicine developed for clinical experiments. The main obstacle in the exploration of POM-based medicines is the strong and indiscriminate toxicity of these metal–oxygen clusters. Covalent hybridization with appropriate organic moieties is considered as a valid way to decrease the toxicity of POMs. Hence we proposed to hybridize the antitumoral Anderson-type polymolybdate by biodegradable and nontoxic PCL chains. The synthesis procedure was carried out by deriving a [α-Mo8O26]4− cluster using pentaerythritol to obtain a Mn-Anderson hybrid with two hydroxyl groups on each side and then ring opening polymerization was implemented with 4,4′-(dimethylamino)pyridine to activate ε-caprolactone monomers. Four head–tail PPHs were synthesized in quantity with precisely one [MnMo6O18]3− cluster embedded in the middle. Other than careful confirmation of successful preparation, a detailed study was also conducted on the crystallization behaviour and self-assembly in solution of all four PPHs. Generally, crystallization rate decreases with the increase of molecular weight due to the elevation of viscosity and deceleration of chain mobility. However, we found a completely opposite trend in the crystallization process of PCL–polymolybdate–PCL hybrids. We ascribe such an abnormal phenomenon to the hindrance of POM clusters, which may aggregate together during the crystallization process and act as crosslinkers or like anchors to delay the movement and rearrangement of polymer chains. These PCL–polymolybdate–PCL hybrids self-assembled into spherical structures in acetonitrile/chloroform (CHCl3: 5 wt%) mixed solvent. As the POM heads were solvophilic, they overspread on the surface of assemblies meanwhile the PCL blocks piled up in the spheres. On the spheres assembled by PCL–polymolybdate–PCL PPHs with shorter polymer chains, we observed multiple concaves on the surface. But those assemblies formed by PCL–polymolybdate–PCL PPHs with longer polymer chains all exhibited as solid spheres without any visible concaves. We assume that along with the elongation of polymer chains, the inner space of spherical aggregates was filled up gradually and grew more and more solid, which in turn constructed more rigid assemblies.65
Rieger, Hasenknopf, Lacôte and coworkers also make great contributions to the exploration of novel head–tail PPHs with specific focus on thermoresponsive properties. The first thermoresponsive POM-based polymer was prepared by grafting poly(N,N-diethylacrylamide) (PDEAAm), a thermoresponsive polymer, onto an activated organo-derived lacunary heteropolyanion, α2-[P2W17O61SnCH2CH2C(O)]6−. By attacking the mono-oxoacylated polyoxotungstate with primary-amine-terminated polymer chains, an amide post-functionalization method they reported previously, the well-controlled structural characteristics of PDEAAm based on RAFT polymerization was directly inherited by the resulting PDEAAm–polytungstate hybrid. More importantly, by substituting surrounding ammoniums with the TBA+ cations, they obtained a water-soluble PPH, which exhibited a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of 38 °C.66 However this post-polymerization hybridization method inevitably suffers a problem that the achievable length of the polymer chain was limited, so they further investigated the possibility of in situ RAFT polymerization on the same cluster. The organotin-substituted polytungstate was covalently modified by a trithiocarbonate group through click reaction. Analogous to our ATRP procedure, the derived POM (TBA7[α1-P2W17O61{Sn(CH2)2C(O)NH(CH2)3(N3C2H)CH2OC(O)C(CH3)2SC(S)SC12H25)} can serve as a hybrid macroinitiator for RAFT polymerization.67 Despite the strong oxidative power of POM clusters, there was no profound influence on the RAFT mechanism. A series of head–tail PPHs with PDEAAm chains were synthesized in a controlled way and the length of the polymer block can be easily tailored between 10 and 100 kg mol−1.
In addition, the photocatalytic activity of the parent POM was retained and the synthesis of silver nanoparticles under UV irradiation stated finer and more homogeneous harvest mediated by the resulting hybrids (Fig. 12).68 The temperature induced phase transition of aqueous solutions of these head–tail PPHs was also studied carefully and revealed a strong influence of POM's counterions on both the aggregation mechanism and size.69 By applying the same POM-based RAFT agent, they further developed a radical emulsion polymerization method to prepare polystyrene–polytungstate composite latexes in water medium. The trithiocarbonate modified organotin-substituted Dawson amphiphile (with ammonium as counterions) played dual roles in the polymerization process, i.e. RAFT initiator and emulsion stabilizer. After removing any possible residual POM in serum by four successive centrifugation, the remaining photoactive clusters were exclusively located near the surface of PS latexes with covalent attachment. Ag nanoparticles can readily form at the periphery of PS latexes with small and homogeneous sizes compared to other reports. With strong covalent linking, this immobilization strategy not only prevents possible leakage of POM units but also recycles supported catalysts conveniently in aqueous medium.
 Fig. 12  (a) HAADF image. (b–d) X-ray mapping allowing the detection of silver (b), carbon (c), and tungsten (d), realized on the same area as the HAADF image of the PS–polytungstate latex after UV irradiation in the presence of 0.16 mM Ag2SO4 and 0.13 M propan-2-ol.68 Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
We can conclude that the head–tail type PPH is the most controllable PPH whether the synthetic strategy or the final molecular structure is considered. The well-defined structures and straightforward synthetic routes endow head–tail PPHs with unrivalled superiority in fabricating hierarchical functional materials based on the bottom-up strategy. Thinking of the studies reported by Pradeep and coworkers, in retrospect, if they adopted precisely synthesized head–tail PPHs instead of arbitrarily hybridized materials, the final result would be more solid and convincing. The future research on head–tail PPHs will still concentrate on their fascinating self-assembling behaviours and their applications in micro/nano device design and fabrication. In order to enrich the library of 2D or 3D structures formed by head–tail PPHs, further exploration on constructing novel head–tail PPHs with different polymer tails or block copolymer tails is predictably necessary.
Conclusions and perspectives
This review has almost entirely summarized all the studies on polymer–POM hybrids with covalent linking between inorganic POM clusters and organic polymer chains. Successful examples of all four types of PPHs are still limited. During the last few decades, indeed, the research was mainly focused on non-covalent organic–inorganic POM hybrids. On the other hand, the intrinsic properties of POMs like strong electronic effects and steric hindrance tremendously impede the pursuit of covalent modification of these versatile clusters.
Although an arbitrary and simple approach of blending POM clusters with organic components can satisfy basic functional demands, the latent leakage of toxic heavy metals and macroscopic phase separation are inevitable in non-covalent modification and processing. Meanwhile, the development of covalent modification methods allows us to design and construct more complex and sophisticated organic–inorganic hybrids based on POMs. On the aspect of covalent-building PPHs, we also witness the advances in the synthetic methods from arbitrary radical polymerization to well-controllable ATRP, RAFT and ROMP. Likewise, the configuration of PPH chains evolves from a random or linear/branched mixture to well-defined homopolymers or block copolymers. The material performance on photochromics, photovoltaics, catalysis and so on has been preliminarily studied in several covalent PPHs. Maybe the outcomes or efficiencies of these hybrid materials have not reached a dramatic level, the underlying ideas and creativity to produce novel materials are still more than inspiring.
In the next few years, we anticipate a bloom in fabricating and studying covalent-based PPHs. Following the development of covalent modification strategies of POMs, we have enough confidence to predict that more and more kinds of POMs will be integrated in novel PPHs. Especially with those PPHs containing POMs with larger sizes and multiple modification sites, there may be some unexpected changes in the final functionalities. On the other hand, as we are growing familiar with POM's impact on the preparation progress and overall functionality, more detailed and accurate design of PPHs will be feasible. Considering that novel advanced materials are mostly fabricated through a bottom-up approach, it is natural to conclude that the well-defined structure is of significant importance to the overall performance of PPHs. Hence detailed restudy on the existing PPHs from the aspect of the molecular structure and manufacturing process (like the solvent effects) will be interesting. Besides, synthesizing more complicated PPHs with diverse organic blocks or other functional polymeric components by applying available polymerization or hybridization methods will never stop and we particularly look forward to the precisely designed and synthesized block copolymers by utilizing ROMP. Other than controlling and improving the molecular structure of PPHs, increased attention should be paid on the final functions. We should always keep in mind that the ultimate goal of designing and fabricating PPHs with complex structures is to achieve novel hybrid materials with promoted performances or new functions stemming from synergistic effects.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China for grants (Grant NSFC 21274069 and 21334003).
Notes and references
M. T. Pope and A. Müller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1991, 30, 34 CrossRef PubMed .
D. L. Long, E. Burkholder and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 105 RSC .
H. N. Miras, J. Yan, D. L. Long and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7403 RSC .
M. P. Santoni, G. S. Hanana and B. Hasenknopf, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 281, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dolbecq, E. Dumas, C. R. Mayer and P. Mialane, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sanchez, G. J. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C. R. Mayer and V. Cabuil, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3061 CrossRef CAS .
E. Coronado, C. Giménez-Saiz and C. J. Gómez-García, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qi and L. X. Wu, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Carraro and S. Gross, Materials, 2014, 7, 3956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Q. Liu and Z. Y. Tang, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Proust, B. Matt, R. Villanneau, G. Guillemot, P. Gouzerha and G. Izzeta, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7605 RSC .
Y. F. Song and R. Tsunashima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7384 RSC .
Y. H. Ren, M. Y. Wang, X. Y. Chen, B. Yue and H. Y. He, Materials, 2015, 8, 1545 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Lan, S. L. Li, K. Z. Shao, X. L. Wang and Z. M. Su, Dalton Trans., 2008, 3824 RSC .
C. L. Hill, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gouzerh and A. Proust, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Long, R. Tsunashima and L. Cronin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. T. Pope and A. Müller, Polyoxometalate chemistry from topology via self-assembly to applications, Springer Science & Business Media,  2001 Search PubMed .
A. Dolbecq, P. Mialane, F. Sécheresse, B. Keitab and L. Nadjo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8299 RSC .
M. H. Yang, B. G. Choi, S. C. Jung, Y. K. Han, Y. S. Huh and S. B. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, B. Zhang, Y. Z. Wang, L. Yue, W. Li and L. X. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Yang, T. F. Liu, M. N. Cao, H. F. Li, S. Y. Gao and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2429 RSC .
C. Cannizzo, C. R. Mayer, F. Sécheresse and C. Larpent, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wang, Y. Yan, B. Li, L. H. Bi and L. X. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 4273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Coronado and C. J. Gómez-García, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. An, E. B. Wang, D. R. Xiao, Y. G. Li, Z. M. Su and L. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Judeinstein, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 4 CrossRef CAS .
P. Judeinstein, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 1994, 2, 147 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer, V. Cabuil, T. Labot and R. Thouvenot, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3672 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer and R. Thouvenot, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4433 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer, R. Thouvenot and T. Lalot, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 257 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Horan, A. Genupur, H. Ren, B. J. Sikora, M. C. Kuo, F. Q. Meng, S. F. Dec, G. M. Haugen, M. A. Yandrasits, S. J. Hamrock, M. H. Frey and A. M. Herring, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Horan, A. Lingutla, H. Ren, M. C. Kuo, S. Sachdeva, Y. Yang, S. Seifert, L. F. Greenlee, M. A. Yandrasits, S. J. Hamrock, M. H. Frey and A. M. Herring, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 135 CAS .
M. Carraro, G. Fiorani, L. Mognon, F. Caneva, M. Gardan, C. Maccato and M. Bonchio, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, D. Chen, N. Ma, Z. Y. Hou, M. B. Hu, C. H. Wang and W. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21544 RSC .
B. L. Hu, C. Y. Wang, J. X. Wang, J. K. Gao, K. Wang, J. S. Wu, G. D. Zhang, W. Q. Cheng, B. Venkateswarlu, M. F. Wang, P. S. Lee and Q. C. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3404 RSC .
X. Y. Chen, H. Li, P. C. Yin and T. B. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6104 RSC .
A. R. Moore, H. Kwen, A. M. Beatty and E. A. Maatta, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1793 RSC .
B. B. Xu, M. Lu, J. H. Kang, D. G. Wang, J. Brown and Z. H. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2841 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Yin, L. Jin, D. Li, P. Cheng, D. V. Vezenov, E. Bitterlich, X. Wu, Z. H. Peng and T. B. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 6754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakraborty, A. Keightley, V. Dusevich, Y. Wang and Z. H. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3995 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chakraborty, L. Jin, Y. Li, Y. C. Liu, T. Dutta, D. M. Zhu, X. Z. Yan, A. Keightley and Z. H. Peng, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 1799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Haso, R. X. Wang, P. C. Yin, J. Zhou, L. Jin, Z. H. Peng and T. B. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 4589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Miao, Y. K. Yan, X. L. Wang, Y. Xiao, L. J. Ren, P. Zheng, C. H. Wang, L. X. Ren and W. Wang, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 211 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Miao, A. Yi, Y.-K. Yan, L.-J. Ren, D. Chen, C.-H. Wang and W. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2015 10.1039/c5py00855g .
V. Kalyani, V. Satyanarayana, V. Singh, C. P. Pradeep, S. Ghosh, S. K. Sharma and K. E. Gonsalves, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kalyani, V. S. V. Satyanarayana, A. S. Sarkar, A. Kumar, S. K. Pal, S. Ghosh, K. E. Gonsalves and C. P. Pradeep, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 36727 RSC .
S. Herrmann, C. Ritchie and C. Streb, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 7092 RSC .
Y. G. Wei, B. B. Xu, C. L. Barnes and Z. H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4083 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wei, M. Lu, C. F. Cheung, C. L. Barnes and Z. H. Peng, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5489 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, M. Lu, B. B. Xu, Y. G. Wei, Z. H. Peng and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4129 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Wang, Y. Li, K. Shetye, T. Dutta, L. Jin, S. H. Li and Z. H. Peng, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, B. H. Xie, J. H. Kang, F. C. Chen, Y. Yang and Z. H. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 402 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kang, B. B. Xu, Z. H. Peng, X. D. Zhu, Y. G. Wei and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Chen, L. Xie, H. B. Lu and Y. L. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1258 RSC .
U. S. Tong, W. Chen, C. Ritchie, X. T. Wang and Y. F. Song, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 1500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Macdonell, N. A. B. Johnson, A. J. Surman and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Han, Y. Xiao, Z. J. Zhang, B. Liu, P. Zheng, S. J. He and W. Wang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6543 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, Y. K. Han, N. Xia, M. B. Hu, P. Zheng and W. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Han, Z. J. Zhang, Y. L. Wang, N. Xia, B. Liu, Y. Xiao, L. X. Jin, P. Zheng and W. Wang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2011, 212, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, W. Yu, M. B. Hu, Y. Xiao, X. G. Wang, L. J. Ren, P. Zheng, W. Zhu, Y. M. Chen and W. Wang, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 1455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, C. Ma, X. Y. Li, L. J. Ren, H. Wu, P. Zheng and W. Wang, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2723 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Hu, N. Xia, W. Yu, C. Ma, J. Tang, Z. Y. Hou, P. Zheng and W. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 617 RSC .
N. Xia, W. Yu, Y. L. Wang, Y. K. Han, P. Zheng, W. Wang, G. Sakaguchi, K. Matsuda, K. Saijo, M. Takenaka and H. Hasegawa, Polymer, 2011, 52, 1772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rieger, T. Antoun, S. H. Lee, M. Chenal, G. Pembouong, J. de la Haye, I. Azcarate, B. Hasenknopf and E. Lacôte, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. de la Haye, P. Beaunier, L. Ruhlmann, B. Hasenknopf, E. Lacôte and J. Rieger, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 250 CrossRef PubMed .
J. de la Haye, J. Guigner, E. Marceau, L. Ruhlmann, B. Hasenknopf, E. Lacôte and J. Rieger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 2948 CrossRef PubMed .
J. de la Haye, A. da Costa, G. Pembouong, L. Ruhlmann, B. Hasenknopf, E. Lacôte and J. Rieger, Polymer, 2015, 57, 173 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2016
Table Content:

Han Wu
	Han Wu received his BS degree in Material Chemistry at Nankai University in 2011 and has been a PhD student in Polymer Chemistry and Physics in Prof. Wei Wang's group since then. His current research interests focus on the manipulation of the self-assembling process of shape amphiphiles through adjusting the solvent environment. He also works on synthesizing complicated multicomponent polyoxometalate–polymer hybrids and exploring their functionalities.

Hai-Kuan Yang
	Hai-Kuan Yang received his BS degree in Chemistry at Northwest University in 2008. He received his PhD degree in Polymer Chemistry and Physics under the supervision of Prof. Wei Wang at Nankai University in 2014. He has joined North University of China since then. His research interests focus on the efficient synthesis of organic–polyoxometalate hybrids through various click chemistry methods. He is also interested in fabricating functional organic–inorganic hybrid gels and understanding their supramolecular properties.

Wei Wang
	Wei Wang obtained his PhD degree in Polymer Physics Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Welheim Ruland at Philipps-University of Marburg in 1993. Then he moved to Kyoto University to take up a postdoctoral research on the fundamental physics of liquid crystalline polymers with Prof. Takeji Hashimoto. After working as a research fellow in Toray Industries (Japan) and Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (Singapore), he started his independent academic career in 2002 when he joined Nankai University as a distinguished professor. He places his research emphasis on the fabrication of novel hybrid materials through the bottom-up constructing strategy.

 	Fig. 1  Four categories of covalent PPHs according to their chain configurations: (a) crosslinked PPHs, (b) side-chain PPHs, (c) backbone PPHs and (d) head–tail PPHs. The yellow ellipsoids and the blue chains represent the POM clusters and organic polymers respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Structure of the [SiW11Si-styryl]4− monomer; proposed structures of SiW11SiR polymers (b) linear and (c) branched.28 Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright (1992) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Polyhedral representation of a POM crosslinker [γ-SiW10O36(RSiO)4]4− (R = C3H6OC(O)C(CH3)CH2) and (b) swelling test of a hybrid POM gel loading magnetic particles.30 Adapted from ref. 30 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structures of three octenyl-derived POM crosslinkers TBA3H [{CH2CH(CH2)6Si}2O(α-SiW11O39)] (1), TBA3H [{CH2CH(CH2)6Si}2O(γ-SiW10O36)] (2), and TBA3H [{CH2CH(CH2)6Si}4O3(α-SiW9O34)] (3), TBA is the abbreviation for counterion tetrabutyl ammonium and (b) SEM image of hybrid polymers synthesized by copolymerizing a POM crosslinker (2), MMA, EDM.35 Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  Idealized representation of a segment within the side-chain PPH synthesized by Moore et al.39 Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  The ROMP process of V3POM-based monomers. (a) The illustration of the ROMP process and (b) the SEC results demonstrating the well-controlled ROMP method.45 Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of a POM-containing conjugated polymer through Sonogashira coupling.52 Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the reversible photopolymerization process of coumarin derived Mn-type Anderson POMs.57 Adapted from ref. 57 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  A molecular model of a V3POM–PS hybrid and schematic demonstration of its self-assembly process.59–61 Adapted with permission from ref. 59–61.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) PLM micrographs demonstrating the strengthening effect stemming from the electrostatic interactions between POM clusters62 and (b) the hierarchical strategy of self-assembled nano-enhancer to tailor the performance of hybrid nanocomposites.63 Adapted with permission from ref. 62 and 63.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of the preparation of PCL–polytungstate–PCL hybrids via click chemistry.64 Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) HAADF image. (b–d) X-ray mapping allowing the detection of silver (b), carbon (c), and tungsten (d), realized on the same area as the HAADF image of the PS–polytungstate latex after UV irradiation in the presence of 0.16 mM Ag2SO4 and 0.13 M propan-2-ol.68 Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2016
