Atomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B514779B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B514779B
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20, 1398-1424Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials

        
          
            Andy S. 
            Fisher
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Phill S. 
            Goodall
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael W. 
            Hinds
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Denise M. 
            Penny
          
        
      d
aSchool of Earth, Ocean and Environmental Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AA
bBNFL Sellafield, Seascale, Cumbria, UK CA20 1PG
cRoyal Canadian Mint, 320 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G8
dShell Research and Technology Centre, Thornton, P.O. Box 1, Chester, UK CH1 3SH
Received 
      18th October 2005
    First published on 2nd November 2005Contents1 Metals1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys2 Chemicals2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids2.4 Nuclear materials3 Advanced materials3.1 Polymeric materials and composites3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials3.3 Glasses3.4 Ceramics and refractories3.5 Catalysts4 Glossary of termsReferencesAbstract
This atomic spectrometry update is the latest annual review under the title ‘Industrial Analysis’ and follows on from last year’s.1 In addition to this review, the reader is also directed to the other reviews in the series.2–6 In accordance with the last few years, there has been increasing interest in methods capable of direct analysis of solid materials. This means that laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS) and laser ablation techniques have found an increased number of applications, whilst X-ray based techniques are also still thriving. The LIBS analyses have found considerable use for bulk analysis in the metals industry as well as in the analysis of inorganic chemicals and ceramics. In the petroleum industry, there is intense interest in determining not only total sulfur, but also performing speciation analysis, because during the de-sulfurisation process, not all S species are removed. There has been substantial interest in the preparation of certified materials for speciation analysis. Similarly, the stability of many of the species during extraction or storage has also been a subject that has received considerable interest. There has been a noticeable increase in the use of AMS for analysis in the nuclear industry. Similarly, the use of chemometrics for maximizing the amount of information derived from atomic spectrometric data has also found increased usage, especially for provenance studies of ancient ceramics and other archaeological artifacts.

1 Metals
For all types of metals and alloys, the most interesting developments continue to centre on solid sample analysis methods. Laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS), in particular, appears to be of interest.
1.1 Ferrous metals and alloys
A review of LIBS applications was written by Lee et al.,7 which included metallurgical materials. The review focused on more recent applications based on the developments of fiber optic technology and portable instrumentation. The real time effects of high temperature conditions on protective anti-corrosive layers of steel were studied by using LIBS at a distance of 10 meters.8 An open light path design was used and the results were comparable to off-line thermogravimetric measurements. Palanco et al.9 built a similar open light path LIBS system to monitor the composition of hot-solid steel and molten steel. The linear range was reported to be 0.1–21.2 w/w% for Cr and 0.2–14.6 w/w% for Ni. Real time monitoring of the change in Ni concentration in the melt during addition was demonstrated. In another report, the concentrations of Cr, Mn and Ni, ratioed to Fe emission lines, were monitored in liquid steel under reduced ambient pressure by LIBS.10 This was demonstrated for steel melted in a vacuum-degassing vessel and a vacuum induction melting vessel, both with an integrated open path LIBS instrument. Good results were reported for Cr and Ni in steels. However, Mn showed poor correlation between 0.2–0.4% which may be because of spectral interferences from retained slag components. Changes in concentration of Ti in a molten nickel alloy from additions of Ti under vacuum were also demonstrated, in real time.
LIBS enabled the analysis of residual surface dirt on manufactured steel plates.11 At low laser fluences (between 0.05 and 0.30 J cm−2), only the surface dirt was ablated and no contribution from the steel substrate was observed. The results showed that fine particles of Fe were distributed in a layer of grease and soaps. Sturm and co-workers12 used a laser pulse to remove the surface scale from low-alloy steel samples then used a second laser pulse for LIBS analysis of the bulk material. Results from this approach were compared with determinations from arc/spark atomic emission with conventional surface preparation (milling or grinding). The agreement for the concentration determined by the two methods was very good for the elements studied (C, Mn, and Si).
Anfone and Marcus13 compared three modes of calibration in Radio frequency-Glow Discharge-optical emission spectrometry (rf-GD-OES): normal, internal standard and sputtering rate for the determination of Al, C, Fe, P and Si in various reference materials. In general, the internal standard method was found to give better accuracy and precision with and without dc-bias potential correction. Two models for correcting variable backgrounds in rf-GD-OES were compared.14 Both methods measured backgrounds during calibration but not during sample analysis. One method estimated the background signal according to the material type being analysed in bulk analyses or according to the metal layer being analysed during depth profiling. The second method involved calculating the background as spectral interference. Both methods gave similar results for the analysis of bulk tool steel and the depth profile analysis of titanium dioxide and titanium nitride coatings on steel. These measurements were reported to be better than measurements made with a constant background.
Some novel solution ICP-OES applications have been developed. Molybdenum in steel was determined by ICP-OES, after separation and pre-concentration on nanometer-sized titanium dioxide packed in a micro-column.15 The retained Mo was eluted with a 0.5 M NaOH solution flowing to an ICP-OES instrument. The reported detection limit was 0.14 μg l−1 and measurement of 50 μg l−1 Mo resulted in an RSD of 1.8%
					(n
					= 11). The application of the optimum approximation algorithm with ICP-OES determination of Al, Fe, Si and Zn gave the coating composition of colour coated steel plates with 55% aluminium–zinc alloy.16 The results from this approach were reported to be in agreement with those from X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and GD-OES measurements.
Laser ablation ICP-MS was used to characterize inclusions in clean steels.17 Procedures were developed for rapid inclusions testing and elemental mapping with a UV laser (Nd:YAG). The main inclusion types identified in clean steels were Mn–S, Mg–Al, and Mg–Al–Ca–Ti–Si. Coedo et al.18 compared laser ablation (LA) and dried solution aerosol sampling systems with ICP-MS detection for certified carbon steel samples. The relative sensitivity factors (de-solvated aerosol response/ablated solid response) were nearly unity for Co, Cr, Ni, V and W; 1.3 for Mo, and 1.7 for As, Mn and P. The application of these response factors to the analysis of steel samples by LA with calibration by dried aerosol solutions gave good agreement with certified element concentration values. The same group19 compared different sample introduction techniques for the determination of B by ICP-MS. Spark ablation and LA were the solid sampling techniques compared, with detection limits at the μg g−1 range. Solution techniques included continuous nebulization (LOD 0.6 μg g−1), flow injection (FI)
					(LOD 0.15 μg g−1), FI with off-line matrix removal by aceylacetone-chloroform and isotope dilution (ID) calibration (LOD 0.02 μg g−1), and FI with on line electrolytic matrix separation (LOD 0.05 μg g−1).
A number of papers were written about the dating of ancient cast iron artifacts from carbon extracted from the iron then using C-14 accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) data to establish the age of the specimens.20–23
Li and Houk,24 studied the concentration of elements dissolved by varied concentrations of nitric acid applied in the same manner to steel surfaces. A magnetic sector ICP-MS instrument was used to determine the element concentrations including Fe. A plot of amount of element dissolved against concentration of HNO3 had the same linear response for At, Mn, W and Fe. For Nb and Ta, the plot had two linear regions and the determined concentrations did not correspond to certified values. LA-ICP-MS and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) indicated that these elements were associated with refractory grains and were not dissolved to the same extent as Fe.
The group led by Goltz25 studied the different aspects of metal dissolution by electroerosion for spectrometric analysis. In this process, a large current (2.5–10 A cm−2) was applied between two halves of the same metal sample in a conductive aqueous solution. The composition of the solution did not appear to influence erosion when NaCl, NaF, NaBr and NaI were used. It was observed that erosion rates varied from 27 μg g−1
					(steel) to 770 μg g−1
					(aluminium), which suggested that metal composition is the most important factor determining erosion rates.
From this reviewer’s observations of the literature and discussions with XRF vendors, portable XRF analysis has been growing steadily more popular. A review of portable XRF instrumentation was published by Hou, He, and Jones.26 Rapid screening for a wide variety of materials including metals and alloys was the predominant application for portable XRF spectrometers.
The uncertainties and traceability of a low alloy steel and an Al-Ti-Nb-W aerospace alloy, analysed by XRF with borate fusion sample preparation, have been discussed.27 Borate fusion permits preparation of calibration standards from traceable solution standards. The relative expanded uncertainty estimates were 1% or better.
Synchrotron based micro XRF and micro-X-ray absorption spectrometry have been used to obtain spatially resolved elemental composition, trace element distribution, chemical speciation, oxidation state and mineral phases within historical iron artifacts.28 This information was used to ascertain the raw materials and metal processing techniques used in iron manufacture from the Iron Age to the Middle Ages.
In many cases, a combination of methods, are required to provide sufficient information. Corrosive layers and protective coatings on steels and Ti-Al alloys were studied by multiple techniques: Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), SEM, electron probe microanalysis (EPMA), and X-ray diffraction (XRD).29 High resolution SEM and SIMS were used to study the effect of MnS inclusions in several stainless steels.30 The distribution of B31 and P32 in powder metallurgical steels were studied using a variety of methods. The concentration of the elements were determined by EPMA (at elevated levels) and the distribution characterized by SIMS at normal concentrations. The microstructure of isothermally aged SAF 2507 stainless steel was studied by SEM with EDXRF spectrometry and electron backscattered diffraction.33 The techniques of ICP-OES and XRD were used to study changes to the deposition parameters of electrodeposited NiFe alloy films.34 Changes to the Fe concentration were determined by ICP-OES, and XRD verified that the films have a face centered cubic structure. Coatings of (Cr, Me)N deposited in a vacuum furnace on a ferrochromium alloy were analysed by XRD, GD-OES and EPMA to characterize the chemical and phase compositions and the lattice parameters.35
1.2 Non-ferrous metals and alloys
A LIBS experiment for mapping the 2 dimensional surface composition of aluminium alloys in air was reported.36 A lateral resolution of 10 μm was used in the experiment. The alloy compositions of Al–Mg–Fe–Mn and Al–Cu–Mg were confirmed by EPMA measurements. The LIBS experiment led to the formation of a 1 μm aluminium oxide layer on the scanned regions.
An instrument was developed for simultaneous LIBS and LA-ICP-MS experiments.37 The system was designed to measure the characteristics of the laser induced plasmas such as lifetime of ions in the plasma and the laser power dependence of mass resolution for solid samples. The samples studied were gadolinium plate, gadolinium coated steel plate, and Ni-Cu alloy (NIST C-1248). There was approximately a 100 fold increase in threshold laser energy for LIBS compared with ICP-MS measurements. The required increase in laser energy for LIBS measurements severely deteriorated ICP-MS measurements. To this reviewer, it confirms the view that LIBS experiments are truly bulk measurements whereas LA-ICP-MS measurements can be used to study the bulk material or differences within a sample (heterogeneity sampling), depending on the size of the heterogeneous zones.
The synchronization of a double pulse LIBS (366 nm) experiment with a UV cleaning laser (266 nm) appears to be a diagnostic tool for indicating when the metal surface has been cleaned.38 The synchronized LIBS measurements indicate when the underlying metal is exposed by the higher metal matrix signal. The authors also note that the low invasiveness of LIBS techniques is very applicable to materials of cultural significance such as ancient bronzes.
The group led by Hubert39 compared LIBS and Spark-OES for the determination of elements in aluminium. Both instruments had the same spectrometers and used the same wavelengths. Similar results were reported for most elements (Fe, Mg, Mn, Ni, Si and Zn), however Ti concentrations had a low bias using LIBS. The reason for this bias was not known. The RSD values for LIBS measurements were about 2 times better than Spark OES values. Another group studied the element LODs from LIBS measurements of different matrices.40 It was concluded that the induced plasma temperature and the electron densities have the greatest effect on determining the spectral characteristics of each element. The authors also indicated that the LODs for a given LIBS experiment could be optimized from studying the element with the lowest LOD.
Ortiz et al.41 developed a LIBS method for estimating the minimum assured value for gold in jewellery alloys. A partial least squares calibration model was used with 17 gold alloys and was validated by the measurement of 90 samples determined by an approved method.
Depth profiling of Ni-P plating on aluminium–magnesium alloy hard disks by rf-GD-OES was reported by Luesaiwong and Marcus.42 Diamond stylist profilometry was employed to measure the crater depths and sputtering rates obtained over a wide range of discharge conditions. SEM, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and EDX were used to examine the physical structure of the layer interfaces. It appears that the interface breadth between the two layers was limited by the roughness of the aluminium alloy disk prior to plating.
Palladium was determined in a platinum matrix by in situ separation on a chelating resin YPA(4)
					(polythioether backbone modified with a diaminoisopropylmercaptane group) followed by selective vaporization by electrothermal vaporization (ETV)-ICP-OES.43 Trace Pd and Pt were adsorbed by the resin in solution and then introduced into the electrothermal vaporiser via slurry sampling. The Pd vaporized at a lower temperature (1800–1900 °C), whereas Pt vaporized at 2600 °C. The LOD for Pd was estimated to be 60 pg and the RSD was 5.6% at 0.2 μg ml−1
					(n
					= 9). Dental archwires, made of two different titanium alloys and stainless steel, were characterized by SEM and XRF as well as mechanical tests in a paper by Krishnan and Kumar.44
Halback and Welzl45 determined Hg from dental amalgams by in situ sampling of mercury vapours by Zeeman atomic absorption spectrometry. The sampling apparatus consisted of a pump, magnetic valves and an electronic controller. This technique was described as a comparative technique for determining Hg vapours from dental fillings in situ and from amalgam specimens in vitro. Electrolytic manganese was analysed for its Ni content using graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS) following separation and concentration on Chromosorb-170 resin packed in a syringe.46 The sample solution was drawn through the syringe and discharged manually at a constant rate. The Ni was retained quantitatively and was eluted by drawing and discharging 3 M HNO3. The method was validated by analysis of a reference material and by recovery studies (98.3–103.5%).
Becker and co-workers wrote two articles involving LA-ICP-MS analysis with ultrasonic nebulizer (USN) solution calibration. The analytes Ag, Pb and Tl were determined in platinum by LA-ICP-MS with simultaneous addition of the dry aerosol from an USN enriched isotope spiked solution.47 The method was validated, by analysing a platinum reference material. Good agreement was found between the measured concentrations and the reference values. Limits of detection varied from 6 ng g−1
					(Ag) to 90 ng g−1
					(Pb). In the second paper, USN solution calibration was used with LA-ICP-MS for the determination of trace elements in brass, gold and platinum samples.48 Fractionation was reduced when the dry laser aerosol was mixed with the wet USN aerosol. On this occasion, LODs ranged from 0.6 ng g−1
					(Ho, Lu, Pr and Tl) to 4 μg g−1
					(Al).
Both modern and Roman gold coins were sampled by rubbing with diamond lapping film that removed a very small amount of material from the artifact. The film was analysed by LA-ICP-MS (trace elements) and LA-ICP-OES (major elements).49 Sampling metals with diamond lapping film allows solid samples to be taken with minimal surface disruption and can be done at selected locations that are easily concealed or less visible. This technique is particularly applicable to ancient metal artifacts such as gold coins. Calibration was accomplished using carbon steel reference materials sampled by the lapping method. Limits of detection for trace elements ranged from 0.004 μg g−1
					(Mo) to 1.2 μg g−1
					(Ni). Lead isotope ratios were also measured with acceptable precision. The origin of ancient copper coins was traced by measuring the isotope ratios of Cu and Pb in the coins by multi-channel ICP-MS and comparing the measured ratios to the ratios obtained from known ore bodies mined at the same time period.50
Depth profiling of a Ti coating by LA-ICP-MS using two different ablation cells was studied.51 The small cell (15 cm3) may cause memory effects whereas the larger cell (20 cm3) was found to be useful for depth profiling by continuous single hole drilling.
Several GD-MS applications have been published. Trace elements and Nb were determined in Zr-Nb alloys by GD-MS.52 Relative sensitivity factors for the analytes were calculated from the analysis of zirconium reference materials. The method was validated through the determination of impurities in zirconium based alloy reference materials. Typical precision values were reported for elements: 1% RSD at the mg kg−1 levels, 10% RSD at μg kg−1 levels, and 0.05% RSD for zirconium matrix and Nb alloying element. In a similar experiment, elements in nickel super-alloys were determined by GD-MS with the relative sensitivity factors generated from certified iron matrix reference materials.53 Concentration values from GD-MS were in agreement from values obtained by wet chemical techniques. GD-MS was also applied to the trace element determination and depth profiling of thin copper films.54 The problem of the Cu film being deposited on a non-conductive substrate was overcome by covering the edge of the film with aluminium foil to make electrical contact. The mechanism of Hf dopant incorporation into an aluminide coating of a single crystal nickel alloy was studied by Kim and co-workers using GD-MS.55
Zwicky and Lienemann56 compared quantitative and “semi-quantitative” methods on a laboratory wavelength dispersive (WD)XRF spectrometer and a portable EDXRF spectrometer for 28 nickel based alloy reference materials. Deviations from certified values mainly occurred because of line interferences and inaccurate matrix corrections. It was concluded that semi-quantitative laboratory WD-XRF determinations could be accepted as quantitative determinations. The portable ED-XRF measurements were less accurate but sufficed for field investigations. Jones and co-workers26 reviewed the latest advances in portable XRF instrumentation (80 references), for many different sample types, including metals. In general, the advantages of the portable XRF spectrometers were the portability of the instrument and the fast screening capabilities for different materials.
A quantitative high-energy particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) application was described using a special software package to analyse metal samples.57 The method was validated by the measured element concentration agreeing with the values of metal alloy reference materials at two different proton energies.
Studies employing multiple techniques have been reported and many publications involved the analysis of historical metal artifacts. The techniques of EDXRF, SEM/EDX (energy dispersive X-ray analysis) and PIXE were applied to the analysis of medieval silver coins.58 Trace element determination enabled researchers to assign coins to the mint of origin. The advantages and disadvantages of the X-ray methods were discussed. In another study, SEM/EDX and PIXE were used to examine the silver surface enrichment in silver-copper alloys in ancient coins.59 Ancient gold artifacts were examined by a variety of proton beam techniques including PIXE-XRF to determine an elemental fingerprint that was used to identify the origin of the materials.60
Gold-platinum nanoparticles were characterized utilizing direct current plasma (DCP)-OES, TEM, XRD, and Fourier transform-infra red (FT-IR) spectroscopy.61 The composition of nanoparticles varied from 4 to 90% Au and particle sizes ranged from 2 to 8 nm.
The role of SIMS, in studying materials of historical and cultural significance, was discussed by Dowsett and Adriaens.62 Examples of different qualitative SIMS experiments were given which included both metallic and non-metallic materials. SIMS was utilized in studying the implantation of Cu ions (at 72 keV) into nickel63 and the characterization of hydrogen defects formed in aluminium.64
2 Chemicals
2.1 Petroleum and petroleum products
The interest in particulate material whether generated from the burning of coal or from diesel car exhausts has continued into the 2005 review period. More emphasis has been made on the understanding of the factors that influence the partitioning of metal species. The determination of low-level S in fuel and speciation also features. The main interest in the lubricant field has been in the characterisation of the boundary layers between moving parts. Overall more investigative and characterisation analysis has been reported in this review period.

2.1.1 Petroleum products. 
Low-level determination of S in fuel is definitely a topic that is here to stay; the European and other regulatory bodies continue to reduce the S specification for gasoline and diesel. One of the problems associated with obtaining accurate results for this type of analysis is the absence of CRMs. Previous work had demonstrated the use of microwave digestion followed by ID-HR ICP-MS analysis. In this review period this analysis route was validated further by work reported by Hearn and colleagues to compare three different aspects of the analysis: sample digestion, instrumental measurement and isotope dilution strategies.65 Traditionally, TIMS detection following high-pressure asher (HPA) or Carius tubes digestion has been the route used for the analysis. The report concluded that the faster less laborious technique of ICP-MS in combination with microwave digestion is equally capable. Results showed excellent agreement for fuels containing S concentrations in the range 11–200 μg g−1, leading to the ICP-MS technique being used to prepare certified materials for the industry. A second paper66 reported the determination of S in gasoline and related fuel samples using ID-ICP-MS with a direct injection high efficiency nebulizer (DIHEN). For the direct injection, a micro-emulsion consisting of the corresponding organic sample and an aqueous 34S enriched spike solution with additions of tetrahydronaphthalene and Triton X-100 was prepared. The ICP-MS parameters were optimised with respect to high S ion intensities, low mass bias values and high precision of S-32/34 ratio measurement. The analysis was validated using reference materials and an alternative sample preparation route (microwave-assisted digestion). The results compared well with reference values and between the different sample preparation/introduction routes. One point to note is that the RSD for the DIHEN-ICP-IDMS analysis was approximately a factor of two higher at concentration levels above 100 μg g−1. The source of this imprecision was identified to be inhomogeneities of the micro-emulsion causing plasma instabilities. Detection limits of 4 and 18 μg g−1 were obtained for the ICP-IDMS microwave sample preparation and DIHEN sample introduction, respectively, the limiting factor for both analyses being the S background of the Milli-Q water.
The reduction of sulfur in fuel brings along with it other issues, since it is known that some sulfur compounds do not hydro-treat and as such the industry may well be left with fuels meeting the specific sulfur regulations, but containing aggressive sulfur compounds, albeit at low levels, which could be potentially problematic in the field. Bouyssiere et al.67 proposed an on-line capillary GC-ICP-MS system incorporating a collision cell to investigate the S speciation in petroleum products. Using this coupling, they were able not only to attain speciation of S compounds, but also to achieve an absolute detection limit in the region of 0.5 pg for a 1 μl sample injected in the splitless mode.
The direct analysis of volatile samples such as gasoline and naphtha has always been difficult. Two papers discussed the use of emulsion and modifier technology, with ETAAS and ETV-ICP-MS as detection techniques. The first paper68 reported the direct determination of As and Sb in naphtha by ETAAS. Two surfactants were used to form micro-emulsions, Triton X-100 and Brij-35, along with different chemical modification strategies. Triton X-100 was the better emulsifying agent and Ir as a permanent modifier was found to be the best when compared with W-Ir permanent and Pd modifiers for this analysis. The second paper69 detailed the analysis protocols for several elements including Cd, Cu, Fe, Pb and Tl in gasoline. In this work the emulsified sample was analysed against external aqueous standards, standard addition and ID calibration techniques, using ETV-ICP-MS without a modifier. The initial results indicated that the recovery was not acceptable for the external calibration whereas the ID and standard addition calibrations were fine for all analytes, except Fe. The analysis was repeated with the addition of a 10 mg l−1 Pd solution as a modifier. With this change, all results were acceptable, for all analytes regardless of analytical route. The LOD for the analytes by standard addition or isotope dilution were better than 5 μg l−1. A third paper70 advocating micro-emulsions, reported the determination of V in diesel and asphaltene as detergentless micro-emulsions. Here instead of the usual detergent i.e. Triton X-100, the samples were dissolved and stabilised with a mixture of propan-1-ol and nitric acid. The solid asphaltene oil fraction was separated and dissolved in dichloromethane before mixing. Using ETAAS with wall atomisation and no modifier, it was reported that aqueous standards were used successfully for the calibration for diesel samples but that matrix matching was required for the asphaltene samples. Linear ranges up to 200 μg l−1 were observed and LODs of 5 and 4 μg l−1 for diesel and asphaltene, respectively were reported.
Combustion processes are the most important source of metals in the atmosphere and need to be better understood to improve flue gas treatment and health impact studies. Pavageau et al.71 designed a combustion experiment to study metal partitioning and metal speciation in the gaseous and particulate phases. A light fuel oil was enriched with 15 organometallic compounds of the following elements: As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Hg, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sb, Se, Sn, Tl, V and Zn. The resulting mixture was burnt in a pilot-scale fuel combustion boiler under controlled conditions. After filtration of the particles, the gaseous species were sampled in the stack through a heated sampling tube simultaneously by standardized washing bottles-based sampling techniques and cryogenically. The cryogenic samples were collected at −80 °C for further speciation analysis by low temperature/GC-ICPMS. Three species of Se and two of Hg were observed as volatile species in the flue gas. Thermodynamic predictions and experimental results suggest the following volatile metal species to be present in the flue gas: H2Se, CSSe, CSe2, SeCl2, Hg0 and HgCl2. Quantification of volatile metal species in comparison between cryogenic techniques and the washing bottle-based sampling method is also discussed. Concerning metal partitioning, the results indicated that under these conditions, at least 60%
						(by weight) of the elements Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sb, Sn, Tl, V and Zn mixed with the fuel were found in the particulate matter. For As and Se, 37 and 17%, respectively, were detected in the particles, and no particulate Hg was found. Direct metal speciation in particles was performed by XPS allowing the determination of the oxidation state of the following elements: CdII, CoII, CrIII, CuII, MnIV, NiII, SbV, TlIII, VVI and ZnII. Water soluble species of inorganic As, Cr and Se in particulate matter were determined by HPLC-ICP-MS and identified in the oxidation state AsV, CrIII and SeIV.
The addition of oxygenates to diesel fuel can reduce particulate emissions, but the underlying chemical pathways for the reductions are not well understood. While measurements of particulate matter (PM), unburned hydrocarbons (HC), and carbon monoxide (CO) are routine, determining the contribution of carbon atoms in the original fuel molecules to the formation of these undesired exhaust emissions has proven difficult.72 Renewable bio-derived fuels (ethanol or biodiesel) containing a universal distribution of contemporary carbon are easily traced by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). These measurements provide general information about the emissions of bio-derived fuels. Another approach exploits synthetic organic chemistry to place C-14 atoms in a specific bond position in a specific fuel molecule. The highly labelled fuel molecule-is then diluted in C-14-free petroleum-derived stock to make a contemporary petroleum fuel suitable for tracing. The specific C-14 atoms are then traced through the combustion event to determine whether they reside in PM, HC, CO, CO2 or other emission products. This knowledge of how specific molecular structures produce certain emissions can be used to refine chemical-kinetic combustion models and to optimize fuel composition to reduce undesired emissions. The high sensitivity of the technique and the lack of appreciable C-14 in fossil fuels enabled the fuels for AMS experiments can be labelled with modern levels of C-14 and still produce a strong signal. Since the fuel is not radioactive, emission tests can be conducted in any conventional engine lab, dynamometer facility, or on the open road.


2.1.2 Fuel. 
Mercury emission in combustion flue gases is a significant environmental concern because of its toxicity and high volatility. The problem is particularly severe for elemental Hg in the vapour phase since it cannot be removed effectively using current air pollution control devices. Activated carbon adsorption is a technology, which could have great potential in this field. Yan et al.73 outlined the results of a parametric study conducted with a bench scale fixed bed, on the capture of trace Hg vapour from a simulated flue gas using activated carbons. Five commercially available carbons were studied, and the parameters of carbon loading, reaction temperature, inlet mercury concentration and particle size studied. A full screening of the physical properties of the five carbons using BET, SEM, XRF and XRD facilitated a better understanding of the nature of the adsorption. The experimental data suggested that adsorption of mercury is greatly dependant on the operating conditions, with both physical and chemical processes being involved. The paper will serve as a good reference for screening commercial carbon candidates. Further Hg speciation analysis associated with airborne particulate matter has been reported by Feng and co-workers.74 This method reported the use of a mini-sampler for sample collection and analysis, thermal desorption for separating the species and ICP-MS for identification and quantification of Hg. Coal fly ash spiked with different Hg compounds (e.g. Hg0, HgCl2, HgO and HgS) was used for qualitative calibration. A standard reference material with a certified Hg concentration was used to evaluate the method. When the temperature of the furnace was programmed at a linear rate of increase of 50 °C min−1, different Hg compounds could clearly be separated. Three airborne particulate matter samples were collected in parallel and analysed using this method. Reproducible results were obtained and Hg0, HgCl2, HgO, and HgS species from these samples were detected. As well as Hg, As is another element which is heavily evaluated in emissions from coal fired power plants. An emissions study for As was conducted at a 300 MW coal-fired plant that was equipped with an electrostatic precipitator (ESP).75 The input and output streams, such as coal, slag, ESP ash and flue gas that contained the post-ESP particulates, were collected. Gaseous As was sampled using United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) Method 29 and the As concentrations in the samples were determined using ICP-AES. The mass balance recovery of As estimated in this study was 87.2%. Approximately 0.53% of the coal-derived As was incorporated into slag, 84.6% was found on the fly ash that was collected by the ESPs, and 2.16% was found in the vapour phase. The relationship between As concentration and ash particle size was also assessed and As was found to be concentrated largely within the small-sized particles. The modes of occurrence of As in ash samples were studied using a modified sequential chemical extraction method. The extractable fraction was 13.8%–25.3% of the total As in the fly ash particles, from the four ESP hopper samples. The As concentrations found in the different extraction fractions were as follows: 74.7–86.2% in the residue; 11–19% in carbonate-bound, surface oxide-bound ions; 2.7–6.0% in readily extractable ions and 0.076–0.27% in a water-extractable form. There were no appreciable differences in the arsenic solubility fractions between the different particle sizes of fly ash.
Arsenic speciation in coal has also been studied76 where the forms and pyrolysis behaviour of As in three Chinese coals was studied. The As in the coals and the coal- derived pyrolysis chars were characterized into five forms using a sequential extraction method where a series of solutions with increasing acidity and oxidizability were used. The five As forms were named as ion exchangeable, bound to carbonates, bound to Fe-Mn oxides, bound to organic matter and remained in residue. XRD, SEM-EDX and ToF-SIMS techniques were also used to characterize the coals and the chars. Results showed that bleeding ratio of As in the three coals increased with increasing pyrolysis temperature. The type of coal and the As distribution in the coal had a significant effect on the pyrolysis behaviour of the analyte. The different volatility of As was attributed to its chemical stability and thermal stability. Ion exchangeable As and the As bound to carbonates were not present in the three coals. Other As forms undergo chemical transformation during the pyrolysis. The main As species remaining in the residue may have included resistant sulfides.
Co-combustion of sewage sludge and coal has been tried by various coal fired plants and, as with many combustion processes, the effect on the metal behaviour gathers interest. This has been investigated experimentally by Miller et al.77 in a bench-scale suspension-firing reactor, at temperatures representative of commercial fluidized bed combustors. The emphasis has been on the study of the behaviour of potentially the most harmful metals present in the raw fuels in trace quantities. Data for As, Cd, Cr, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pb, Se, V and Zn were reported. Metal concentrations were quantified using ICP-MS and ICP-OES, plus an atomic absorption-based method for Hg. Interpretation of these data was facilitated by the use of a thermodynamic equilibrium model, based on Gibbs free energy minimization; Metallurgical and Thermo-chemical Databank (MTDATA). The addition of sewage sludge to coal combustion was seen to lead to increased emissions of Cd and Hg from the system, which was attributed to the significantly higher content of these in the raw sludge and the failure of combustion ashes to retain them in appreciable quantities. However, some benefit has been observed in the cases of As, Pb and Se, where the addition of sewage sludge was seen to improve retention of these elements in the combustion ash. In the case of the other five elements studies, addition of sludge appears neutral in terms of potential metal loss to the atmosphere.
With ever growing technique sophistication and the interest in the metal speciation contained within individual particulates, much more information can be gleaned. Esaka et al.78 demonstrated the capability of SIMS for measuring Pb isotope ratios in individual particles. Three kinds of environmental CRMs: urban particulate matter, vehicle exhaust particulates and coal fly ash were analysed. After mounting of the sample onto a glassy carbon carrier, the particles containing Pb were identified and located by an electron probe micro-analyzer equipped with wavelength dispersive X-ray spectrometers. The isotope ratios of Pb-207/Pb-206 and Pb-208/Pb-206 for the individual particles on the carrier were determined by SIMS. The relative standard deviations of the Pb isotope ratios were better than 1.6% for all particles measured. It was demonstrated that the results of the Pb isotope ratios were clearly distinguishable between the three samples. Moreover, the particles in the vehicle exhaust particulate sample were classified into two groups according to Pb isotope ratios. The results indicated that the present SIMS technique can provide detailed information with regard to the origin and the transportation of individual particles, which is difficult to obtain by conventional bulk analysis techniques such as ICP-MS and TIMS.
Online measurements of individual alkali-containing sub-micrometer particles in a circulating fluidized bed (CFB) combustion facility have been presented.79 A recently developed particle beam mass spectrometer based on a surface ionization technique was demonstrated and its performance during a field campaign in a 12 MW CFB reactor operating under atmospheric conditions was discussed. The boiler was fired with a biomass fuel consisting of a mixture of wood chips and pellets. During part of the campaign K2CO3, HCl, and SO2 were also added to the fuel to investigate their influence on alkali-related processes. Size-selected particles with diameters of 50–300 nm in general had high K content, while Cs, Na and Rb were present as minor constituents. Particles formed by re-condensation of compounds evaporated during the combustion process could be distinguished from fly ash particles on the basis of their K and Na contents. The number of alkali-containing particles increased when the K, Cl and S fluxes into the boiler increased, and the trend was confirmed by independent measurements of the total particle concentrations in the flue gas. The concentration of K bound to sub-micrometer particles was found to be in the range 0.8–13 mg/m3 under the studied operating conditions. When the facility was instead fired with bituminous coal as a fuel, the relative concentration of Na compared with K was higher, and a larger fraction of the alkali compounds were found in fly ash particles. The particle beam mass spectrometer was concluded to provide accurate online information on particle-bound alkali concentrations under the conditions typically prevailing at a commercial-size boiler. The possibilities for future research and technical development were also discussed.


2.1.3 Oils. 
The main topics of interest in the oil review have been the push to understand both the composition of the lubricating oil film deposition and also the interaction between base oil and additives.
Boundary lubricating films are critical in effective lubrication of engine components. The molecular structure interaction of the base oils and additives is not fully understood. Hsu and Gates80 examined the base oil molecular structures and their influence on the reaction rates, leading to the formation of high molecular weight organometallic compounds. Three base oils were separated into saturates, aromatics and polar molecules by liquid chromatography. The organometallics were detected by coupled gel permeation chromatography–AAS. The polar molecules showed the highest organometallic compound formation and the saturates the lowest. Similar compounds were detected in films from worn engine components. When combined with reaction films such as zinc dialkyl dithiophosphate (ZDDP), the soft organometallic compounds provide an easily shearable sacrificial layer and the inorganic phosphate glassy structure provides the load carrying capacity. The resultant boundary film is stronger and more durable. Further investigation into reaction films has been reported by Hershberger et al.81 Reaction films were formed on flats of polished steel; these were formed both thermally and mechanically. The Zn content was determined by grazing-incident XRF. This was used to quantify the area density of Zn and to verify that the measured fluorescence arose from the reaction film and not debris or residual oil. The concentration of Zn in the films generally increased with increasing concentration of ZDDP. It was also noted that films formed thermally were found to contain higher Zn concentrations than those formed mechanically. Possible explanations of this phenomenon were discussed in the paper. Characterization of surfaces and interfaces was explored further by Gunst and colleagues.82 The interaction of moving counterparts with lubricant generates tribosurfaces and tribointerfaces and the characteristics of these are important for the lifetime of sliding roller bearings. The properties of these structurally and chemically untailored surfaces are of interest to the design of long-life lubricants and high hardness, wear resistant surfaces. ToF-SIMS is a means of characterizing the lubricants, the elemental and molecular surface compositions of tribological boundary layers, especially related to depth and lateral chemical distributions. ToF-SIMS was used to investigate lubricants for high speed applications, as well as for the tribosurface characterization of high speed rolling element bearings. It was reported that ToF-SIMS was a very useful surface diagnostic tool; the measured surface spectra and lateral and depth distributions correlate with tribological models and gave insight into tribological mechanism at micro- and nanoscopic levels.
In the crude oil domain trace metals and S speciation are reported, the latter being of interest in the refining world, since the petroleum industry is well aware that not all S compounds can be hydro-treated to attain the demanding low concentration requirement imposed today and in the future. Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography with a chemiluminescence detection method has been developed for S speciation in crude oil.83 The target S compounds and their groups were identified based on group separation feature and structured retention of comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography as well as standard substances. Various S-containing compounds and their groups were analysed with one direct injection where 3620 peaks were identified. This therefore illustrates just how powerful comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography can be. Total S was determined using an XRF technique.
Several sample preparation methods have been investigated for the direct determination of Ni in crude oil using GFAAS.84 Xylene was found to be unsuitable as a solvent because of the poor long-term stability of the solutions and the resulting contamination of the equipment. Conversely, isobutyl methyl ketone (IBMK) solutions exhibited better stability, but there were still stability problems with the nickel standard salt used. An oil-in-water emulsion using Triton X-100 as surfactant gave the best results. Using a high–resolution continuum source (HR-CS) GFAAS instrument, it was observed that up to 50% of the Ni in crude oil, most likely to be low molecular weight Ni porphyrins, was lost at pyrolysis temperatures >400 °C, whereas the rest of the Ni, including that in the standards, was stable up to >1300 °C. The Ni absorption at a secondary line at 232.138 nm was recorded simultaneously with that of the primary line at 232.003 nm, expanding the dynamic working range by an order of magnitude. The LOD was approximately 0.07 μg g−1 based on an emulsion of 2 g of oil in 10 ml of solvent. The accuracy of the procedure was verified by analysing certified materials.

2.2 Organic chemicals and solvents
There have been several fairly important developments in the analysis of organic chemicals in this review period. Some of the developments concern the use of new instrumentation, whereas others involve the preparation or characterization of certified species for speciation analysis. One paper that falls into the former category has been produced by Kaski et al.85 These authors described the use of laser induced plasma spectroscopy with a gas-purged spectrograph and an intensified charge coupled device detector for the determination of Cl/C and Br/C ratios in pure solid organic materials. The C lines measured in the vacuum UV region were used as an internal standard. Guchardi and Hauser used a miniature capacitively coupled plasma detector to determine seven analytes in organic compounds.86 The new microplasma consisted of a simple arrangement of two cylindrical electrodes placed on a fused silica capillary, which carry an ac voltage of 20 kHz and 20kV to sustain the discharge. A fiber optic transmitted the emitted light to the line isolation device and detector. Helium was used as carrier gas. The analytes Br, Cl, F, I, P, S and Se were determined at the wavelengths 827.24 nm, 837.59 nm, 685.60 nm, 804.37 nm, 956.40 nm, 921.28 nm and 888.50 nm, respectively, yielding LODs (in units of pg s−1) of 0.3, 0.1, 20, 158, 1805, 6.6 and 153, respectively. The instrument was applied to the determination of environmentally relevant halogenated volatile organic compounds and pesticides. Newman and Mason described the coupling of GC with fast flow glow discharge mass spectrometry (GC-FF-GD-MS).87 The low power (<5 W) dc FF-GD ion source was used for the detection of halogenated hydrocarbons. After optimization of the GC separation stage and the coupling, which consisted of a simple and robust interface design, the signals were also optimized. The instrument was capable of yielding both atomic (i.e. elemental detection) or, by changing the operating parameters, molecular or structural information. The source pressure, power and discharge gas flow rate were all found to have a significant effect on the relative fragment ions produced. Using detection at 35Cl+, 79Br+ and 127I+, LODs for the four volatile compounds ranged between 0.3 and 66.5 pg. The direct introduction of ethanol into a nitrogen–oxygen mixed gas microwave induced plasma (MIP) that used an Okamoto cavity has been described by Maeda and Wagatsuma.88 Although the mixed gas plasma had a lower excitation temperature compared with an all nitrogen plasma (5100 K as opposed to 5650 K), which decreased the sensitivity of the determinations, the mixed gas plasma was found to be far more stable during the introduction of the organic solvent. The authors hypothesized that this could be because the organic solvent was being burned completely in the oxygen containing plasma. The excitation temperature was almost independent of the ethanol content of the sample solutions, indicating that the analytical performance was less affected by the introduction of organic solvent samples. Hu and co-workers studied the effects of organic solvents on signal intensity in ICP-MS measurements.89 Enhancement or suppression of the signal in the presence of methanol or acetone depended on the volatility and concentration of the solvent as well as the mass and ionization potential of the analytes and the instrumental operating conditions. Low concentrations of the solvents enhanced sensitivity, especially for analytes at the lower mass range. This was attributed to the spatial shift of the zone of maximum ion density and hence, a change of extraction efficiency of ions from the plasma. A change in nebulisation and sample transport efficiency through the sample introduction assembly was discounted as a cause for the enhancement through conducting an experiment that involved the carry-over effect. Higher concentrations of the solvents led to plasma cooling and hence signal depression. The presence of the solvents was also found to decrease the level of oxide-based interferences.
Snell and co-workers have reported the preparation and certification of ERM-AE670, a 202Hg enriched methylmercury isotopic reference material.90 The material would facilitate the use of ID speciation analyses. The material was prepared by using 202Hg enriched mercury oxide and then reacting this with a Grignard reagent. After this, the dimethyl mercury was mixed with mercury(II) chloride and a comproportionation reaction allowed to take place. The procedure was optimised to minimize the contamination from Hg with a natural isotopic abundance and to minimize the production of other organometallic species. The product was characterized by GC-ICP-MS, with only methylmercury and inorganic mercury (at a concentration of <2%) being found. A rapid method for the synthesis of phenyltin species based on the phenylation of tin iodide has been developed by Kumar et al.91 Using enriched 124Sn, monophenyltin (MPT), diphenyltin (DPT) and triphenyltin (TPT) were produced. These enriched Sn species were then used to evaluate various extraction procedures from sediments. The species were spiked into the CRM BCR 646, extracted using different procedures and then measured using GC-ICP-MS with species specific isotope dilution calibration. It was found that, in general, degradation of the phenyl tin species was matrix dependent, but occurred in most of the extraction methods investigated. This is obviously undesirable, since extraction of the species in a representative and unchanged way is a pre-requisite for successful speciation analyses. Kumar and co-workers did however discover that for both water standards and for BCR 646, extraction with methanol combined with dichloromethane or methanol combined with acetic acid gave no species degradation when applied with less than 20 minutes of ultra-sonication. Unfortunately, these two extraction methods led to poor extraction efficiency for DPT and MPT. The same research group also studied the re-distribution of butyl- and phenyltin species during storage in methanol.92 On this occasion, the instrumental techniques of GC-quartz furnace AAS, GC-ICP-MS and GC-MS were used. The authors stored the butyl- and phenyltin species individually and as mixtures (at concentrations of 10 μg g−1) at three different temperatures (−20, +4 and +22 °C) and for different time periods. The butyltin species were found to be stable, even in admixture. The single TPT standard was also stable, whereas MPT and DPT were unstable. The MPT was found to re-distribute to inorganic Sn and DPT, whilst the DPT re-distributed to MPT and TPT. In a mixture of both butyl- and phenyltin species, the DPT reacted significantly with the MBT giving a yield of 73% monobutylmonophenyltin and MPT.
The rest of the relevant papers in this review section are applications based, although some are interesting and will be commented upon. There is continued interest in the use of organized assemblies/micelles/cloud point extraction. Although the vast majority of these are pretty much minor variations on the same theme and tend to be used to determine analytes in environmental waters, comment should be made on a couple of the more novel or useful ones. Burguera and Burguera have produced an overview of such techniques and have speculated about possible future directions.93 The review contains 35 references and would be a good source of information for a new worker in the field. In an interesting application, Zhu and co-workers used cloud point preconcentration and GFAAS detection for the determination of Cr species in cigarettes and cigarette ash.94 Various different extractant solutions were tested including tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH), disodium hydrogen phosphate, sodium carbonate/sodium hydroxide, sodium hydroxide and water. The TMAH was found to have the best extraction efficiency. Once extracted, the cloud point preconcentration could be performed and total Cr as well as the species CrIII and CrVI determined. Overall, the authors found that CrIII was the dominant species in cigarettes, but that this could be partially oxidized to CrVI during smoking.
The analysis of wines and alcoholic beverages is still a big business because of the potential health effects and the effects on the taste associated with the presence of trace metals. Again, many of these papers are unremarkable. Pyrzynska has however produced an extensive review of methods used for the determination of trace metals in wine.95 The review discussed the most widely used analytical methods as well as some of the problems associated with sample preparation and method validation. Many of the other, more interesting, applications for the analysis of alcoholic beverages have combined the use of atomic spectrometric analysis with chemometric analysis of the data produced so that provenance studies or differentiation of similar products can be achieved. An example by Jos et al. used ICP-OES to determine 12 analytes (Al, Ba, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, Sr and Zn), GFAAS to determine Cd, Ni and Pb and HGAAS to determine As; followed by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA) treatment of the data to differentiate between 18 samples of Cava and 17 samples of Champagne.96 The use of such chemometric techniques gave no false positives or negatives, indicating perfect discrimination between the two types of sparkling wine. The provenance and authenticity of wines has also been studied by Thiel et al.97 and Gomez et al.98 The former paper determined 19 analytes by ICP-MS and a further 16 by ICP-OES before conducting a multivariate statistical analysis. A successful prediction rate of 88.6% was achieved. In the latter paper, 13 analytes were determined by sector field ICP-MS using In as an internal standard in wines from four regions in Germany. Discriminant analysis and classification trees were applied to the data. Using eight analytes (B, Cs, Fe, Li, Mg, Pb, Sr and Zn) data and quadratic discriminant analysis, a discrimination accuracy of 83% was achieved, although the prediction ability for a new sample was only 76%. The classification tree method had a discrimination accuracy between the four regions of Germany of 84% when data from only four analytes (Li, Mg, Sr and Zn) was used. The prediction ability here was only 74%. In both papers, a simple dilution of the wine was necessary for sample preparation. The final application of wine analysis to be discussed described the determination of Cu, Fe, Mo, Ni, Pb, V and Zn in red and white wines from different regions of Brazil.99 Sample preparation consisted of analyte chelation using ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (APDC) and filtration through a 0.45 μm filter. Analysis of the filter was achieved directly by EDXRF using a miniaturized low power (2.25 W) X-ray tube and a Si(Li) detector. The metal concentrations were found to be generally lower than those found in the literature, with the exception of Mo, which was present at elevated levels.
One of the largest areas of interest has again been the biomedical/pharmaceutical industry, although there appears not to be a focus on any one particular topic. A paper by Pohl described the analytical procedures for AA and ICP techniques that have to be used to obtain a license to sell drugs in the USA.100 Method validation characteristics, e.g. accuracy, precision, linearity, LOD etc. were all discussed. Time factors, quality of documentation, operating costs and the consequences for laboratory personnel were also discussed. Hann et al. described the HPLC separation of Pt-based drugs on a novel pentafluorophenylpropyl functionalized silica gel followed by on-line ICP-MS detection.101 The Pt species cisplatin, monoaquacisplatin, diaquacisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin were determined in waters containing different concentrations of chloride in an attempt to study their stability. Carboplatin was found to be stable in waters containing a chloride concentration of up to 1.5 mol l−1, whereas the oxaliplatin was found to be degraded proportionally in the presence of increasing chloride. Measurement of Pt species in the urine of a patient being prescribed oxaliplatin indicated that 17 different reaction products were formed, demonstrating the extensive bio-transformation of the compound. Using a 3 μl injection volume the LODs were 0.09, 0.10 and 0.15 ng ml−1 for cisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin, respectively. Several other papers have also described the coupling of chromatography with atomic spectrometric detectors. Marshall and co-workers described various aspects of liquid chromatography separation of species prior to ICP-MS detection.102 Four application areas were highlighted including (1) the use of derivatization agents that make “the invisible visible”, e.g. the derivatization of amines and carboxylic acids with either Cu or Fe; (2) profiling content in human plasma which enables the metabolism of Br-labeled peptides to be studied; (3) the analysis of materials derived from single, solid-phase beads used in combinatorial chemistry and (4) the use of LA-ICP-MS for the determination of protein phosphorylation on electrophoresis gel blots. A modular Gd-tagged contrast agent for use in magnetic resonance imaging has been characterized using mass spectrometry in a paper by Kruger et al.103 The contrast agent consisted of three modules; (1) a diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA) module for complexation with the Gd3+; (2) a peptide nucleic acid sequence and (3) a peptide transmembrane transport module. The whole molecule has a RMM of approximately 8kDa, which was determined by nano-electrospray mass spectrometry. Size exclusion chromatography was coupled with high resolution ICP-MS to determine the Gd saturation. The instrument determined 32S+, 34S+ and 157Gd+ simultaneously, with the S being monitored as a marker element in the organic part of the molecule, and Gd/S ratios providing a measure of Gd saturation. This was found to be in the range 55–85%. Yanes and Miller-Ihli speciated Co containing compounds using LC-ICP-MS.104 Cyanocobalamin, hydroxocobalamin, methylcobalamin and 5’-deoxyadenosylcobalamin (various forms of vitamin B12) as well as cobinamide dicyanide were separated on a C18 column using a methanol gradient. Issues associated with dead volume were overcome and the total analysis time was 52 minutes. Column to column variability was evaluated and found to be typically 9%, which led the authors to conclude that the method was sufficiently rugged and was easily transferable to other laboratories. The enantiomeric separation of amino acids on a chiral crown ether column using an aqueous perchloric acid mobile phase buffered to pH 1.9 has been used prior to the detection of the C emission using ICP-OES.105 Seven un-derivatized amino acids were separated and the ICP-OES enabled an average LOD of 2.5 ng of C to be obtained. The sensitivity was nearly identical for any compound with a comparable C composition. The chiral crown ether column resolved compounds with a primary amino group near the chiral centre by forming a complex between the crown ether and an ammonium ion moiety from the analyte. The D form amino acids were found to elute faster than the L forms for all the amino-acids tested.
Other pharmaceutical applications have not relied on a chromatographic separation of different species. Lam and Salin used LA-ICP-MS and LA-ICP-OES for the study of pharmaceutical tablets (10% and 20% Neusilin).106 For both techniques, Al and Mg were used as analytes. For LA-ICP-OES the precision for spot analysis was 12–31%, but this improved to 1–6% when the ratio of the analytes was used. For continuous scanning, precision was 1–7%. For LA-ICP-MS, weaker laser conditions were required, however precision was substantially worse with an RSD of 47–61% being obtained which improved slightly to 29% when signal ratios were used. Under un-optimized conditions, LODs were 70 μg g−1 Al and 20 μg g−1 Mg for ICP-OES and 40 μg g−1 Al and 6 μg g−1 Mg for LA-ICP-MS. The authors concluded that LA was a perfectly feasible means of sample introduction for pharmaceutical tablets. A solid sampling GFAAS method for the determination of Mn in vitamin and mineral tablets has been proposed by Coskun and Akman.107 These authors compared the three calibration techniques of conventional calibration against aqueous standards, standard additions calibration by spiking aqueous calibrants onto the solid sample and calibration against solid certified materials. After optimization of the calibration procedure and of the temperature programme, the results obtained were compared with those obtained following an acid digestion of the sample. The results for the different methods were found to be in good agreement.
The other big area of work in this section concerning organic chemicals and solvents has been the analysis of historical artifacts such as paintings, inks, varnishes and pigments. Many of the procedures used in these applications have necessarily been sample non-destructive. Hence, the various forms of XRF have found common usage. One of the most common themes has been the use of portable XRF instrumentation. The recent advances in this technique have been reviewed by Hou et al.26 The principles and instrumentation were discussed briefly, but much of the review described the applications that have been undertaken. These applications include the analysis of environmental samples (e.g. rocks, dusts, soils and waters), archaeological artifacts (as well as works of art), metals, alloys and forensic samples. Although the authors admit that the technique does not have the accuracy or LOD of other conventional analytical techniques, they claim that its portability has given it a niche in the analytical market. The use of portable XRF has been demonstrated further by Uda, who characterized ancient plaster and pigments on tomb walls in Egypt108 and by Szokefalvi-Nagy and co-workers who analysed paintings.109 In the latter paper, the presence of Ti in a white pigment on a specific painting demonstrated that it was, in fact, a fake. A comparison of total reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF), static EDXRF and portable EDXRF instrumentation for the analysis of art and archaeological artifacts has been made by Ardid and colleagues.110 These authors also found that the portable EDXRF instrumentation was most useful for in situ or on-line analyses, whilst the static EDXRF instrument was most applicable to the analysis of paper and metal pieces. Unsurprisingly, the TXRF was most applicable to applications where trace analysis was required from micro-samples. Historical varnishes have been analysed using TXRF111 and by EDXRF.112 In the former paper, microsamples of varnish (50–100 μg) were removed from artifacts and digested in acid. After addition of an internal standard, the digests were analysed directly for the analytes As, Ba, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mn, Ni, Pb, Sr, Ti and Zn. In the latter paper, varnishes from historical violins from the collection at the Musee de la Musique in Paris were analysed, without any sampling or destructivity. Analytes such as Fe, Hg and Pb, that can be related to siccatives or pigments, were determined. The results were compared with old formulae or traditional recipes of violin varnishes. Kanngiesser et al. used micro XRF and micro-X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES) to study the oxidation and migration process of inorganic compounds in ink corroded manuscripts.113 The correlation of minor elements in the ink to the major element Fe was investigated. The micro-XANES was used for the oxidation state study. It was found that Cu was also an important element in the paper degradation process arising from gall ink corrosion. The process of iron gall ink corrosion on mediaeval manuscripts has also been studied by Wagner and Bulska who used LA-ICP-MS to investigate the migration of Cu, Fe and Mn from the ink through the paper.114 These authors acknowledged that these three analytes are the most catalytically active elements for the degradation and undertook experiments that were designed to prevent the migration. An aqueous solution of diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) at a concentration of 0.005 mol dm−3 and at a pH of 8.6 was found to work the best. Analysis by GFAAS is generally regarded as being sample destructive. However, Goltz and co-workers used the technique for the non-destructive analysis of painted surfaces.115 Pigment was removed from the surface of the painting by gentle rubbing with a cotton swab. Only about 1 μg of pigment was removed and there was no visible damage to the paint surface. The cotton swab was then digested in nitric acid prior to GFAAS analysis. Using Cd as the test element, the reproducibility of sampling a paint surface was approximately 13% in either a water or an oil medium. With Raman spectroscopy providing complimentary information, it was possible to identify some pigments present in some of the paintings. For instance, GFAAS detected Cu in a green pigment, but Raman was necessary for its full identification as phthalocyanine green. Similarly, both techniques were necessary for identification of ZnO as a white pigment.
The three dimensional analysis of solid paint has been described in three papers, two of which used micro-XRF.116,117 In the latter example, a focused narrow beam of 21 keV synchrotron radiation induced fluorescence that was detected by a Si(Li) detector equipped with a polycapillary X-ray lens in con-focal geometry. Scanning of the sample was achieved by use of an x-y-z motorized stage that was capable of 30 pm resolution. The former paper used a table-top setup and discussed the sensitivity obtained in comparison with a synchrotron-based setup. The third example of layer analysis in paint used LA-ICP-MS to determine Pb isotope ratios.118 A sector field instrument was used to detect 204Pb, 206Pb, 207Pb and 208Pb as well as 202Hg and 204Hg to correct for isobaric interference on the 204Pb isotope. Ablation of the sample was achieved by using a Nd:YAG laser operating at 213 nm. Substantial Pb concentrations were found in four of the six layers of the paint chip, whilst Hg was found to be present at an appreciable concentration in one of these. The three layers where no isobaric interference was present yielded standard deviations of 0.492–1.347, 0.494–1.653 and 1.214–3.643 for 206Pb/204Pb, 207Pb/204Pb and 208Pb/204Pb, respectively. One layer had a radiogenic signature similar to that of the Mississippi Valley type lead–zinc mines, whereas the adjacent layer had a less radiogenic signature similar to that of the lead–zinc–silver mines of Sierra Madre in Mexico. The third layer had a non-radiogenic Pb signature. Shimizu and co-workers described the first example of depth profiling analysis by RF-GD-OES of a layer of sub-nanometer thickness.119 The example selected was a monolayer of thiourea adsorbed on a mirror-polished copper substrate. The authors claimed that as well as simply detecting the C, H, N and S, they could also elucidate the orientation of the thiourea molecules. The positioning of the analyte peaks on a temporal basis indicated that N was detected before S, i.e. the S moiety of the molecule was in more intimate contact with the copper.
There is always a need to extend the applicability of instrumentation so that it can detect either analytes that are normally detected by another means or to derivatize a sample type that, under normal circumstances, cannot be detected using this method of detection. An example of the latter has been the tagging of maleic, sorbic and fumaric carboxylic acids with P and then detecting this by HPLC-SF-ICP-MS.120 The derivatization agent used was tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine (TMPP). Although the efficiency of the derivatization was estimated as being only 10–20%, impressive LODs of around 0.25 nmol were obtained for a 5 μL injection. The sensitive and simultaneous determination of Br, Cl, I, P and S containing pesticides in environmental samples by GC-ICP-MS has been reported by Profrock et al.121 The GC separation was optimized to give good separation efficiency in as short a time as possible and this was then coupled using a commercial interface with an ICP-MS instrument equipped with an octopole reaction cell. Helium and nitrogen were added to the plasma in an attempt to improve the sensitivity of the analysis. It was possible to identify pesticides by the retention time combined with the elemental composition data for each of the peaks. Detection limits for the pesticides ranged from the low ppb down to the ppt level and precision for retention times and peak areas were 0.8 and 8%, respectively. The method was applied to the detection of pesticides in extracts from different fruits. The coupling of GC with a simultaneous detection ICP-MS instrument utilizing a Mattauch-Herzog mass spectrometer has been reported for the determination of some organometallic and some halogenated hydrocarbon species.122 The spectrometer was equipped with a novel detector array that was termed the “focal plane camera”, which was capable of monitoring up to 15 mass to charge ratios simultaneously. The authors reported absolute LODs in the range of tens to hundreds of femtograms. Helfrich and Bettmer have described the HPLC-ICP-SF-MS detection of phytic acid and its degradation products.123 A mass resolution (m/Δm) of 4000 was necessary to separate the 31P+ signal from polyatomic interference ions. Separation of the six species was achieved by a gradient elution using tetrabutylammonium hydroxide as the ion pairing reagent. The LOD for the phytic acid parent compound was 230 ng g−1. The method was applied to a number of real samples, e.g. nuts, but the most interesting application was for malt and for beer. The brewing process was found to degrade phytic acid completely into two inositol phosphate compounds (IP2 and IP3). The association of 15 analytes with different fractions of fulvic acids has been determined using size exclusion chromatography (SEC)-ICP-MS.124 In addition to using ICP-MS as a detector, the authors also used UV, so that the fulvic acid fractions could be detected. A study of the effect of gastric digestion on the association of the analytes with fulvic acids in a dietary supplement was also undertaken. In general, it was found that the fulvic acid complexes were of low molecular weight and that the digestion process changed the chromatographic profile of many of the analytes.
The final few relevant papers in this section of the review are very much application based and involve the preconcentration of analytes from natural waters and fruit juices. The water soluble polymer poly(vinyl pyrrolidinone) has been used to preconcentrate Co and Ni125 and Cu, Mn and Pb126 prior to GFAAS detection. The samples and polymer were mixed and then the complexes were precipitated by pouring the mixture into acetone. The precipitate was then collected by decantation and re-dissolved with de-ionised water before being detected by GFAAS. The method provided a rapid way of preconcentrating analytes whilst effectively removing the sample matrix. Other advantages were described as the methods simplicity, precision, low blank values and that it was inexpensive. Quantitative recovery was reported in both papers.
2.3 Inorganic chemicals and acids
The use of techniques capable of analyzing solid materials directly, hence decreasing the likelihood of contamination and analyte loss and also circumventing the need for lengthy dissolution or digestion procedures, is still growing in popularity. The technique that appears to be growing the most rapidly is LIBS. This has been gaining in popularity over the last few years and its use is now expanding into new areas and sample types. An overview of LIBS that described recent applications in solid, liquid and gaseous materials has been prepared by Lee et al.7 The review concentrated especially on recent applications that have used fiber optic technology and portable instrumentation. Operational parameters such as the laser system used and analytical performances were tabulated for materials as diverse as metallurgical samples, liquid and colloid samples, aerosols and gases, environmental samples, non-metallic solids and advanced materials. Two papers have discussed the use of LIBS for the analysis of solutions. In one by De Giacomo,127 a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser was used to generate a plasma directly in aqueous solutions of aluminium chloride, sodium chloride, calcium carbonate and lithium fluoride. The basic mechanisms influencing the emission signals and the techniques used for the optimization of the detection mode were both discussed. The second paper, by Huang and co-workers, used LIBS to investigate the influence of matrix salts on the liquid droplets formed by an electrospray.128 A sequence of single-shot, time-resolved LIBS emission signals was detected. Signal intensity slopes increased linearly with concentration and appear to be independent of different matrix salts. Each matrix salt contained potassium as a cation, but with different anions. The laser operated at 355 nm with an energy of 23 ± 1 mJ. A LOD for Na of 1.0 mg l−1 was achieved.
De Giacomo et al. used a duel pulse laser source to analyse solid materials submerged in seawater.129 The fundamental aspects of the plasma formed underwater as well as the effects of the first and second laser pulses were discussed. The confinement effect of the surrounding environment generated by the first laser pulse was also studied using the electron number density. A titanium target was analysed for Cu, Pb, Sn, Ti and Zn. Another novel application of LIBS has been for H leak detection.130 Two different configurations were compared. One used a 100 mJ laser pulse to form a plasma in the gas stream directly, whereas the other used a 55 mJ laser pulse to form a laser induced plasma on a solid surface, with the expanding plasma sampling the gas stream. Various substrates were used as candidate solid surfaces including aluminium, copper, molybdenum, stainless steel, titanium and tungsten, with stainless steel proving to be the most appropriate. The system was applied to binary gas mixtures of nitrogen and hydrogen. Both of the configurations generated comparable H emission signals at the 656.28 nm line and exhibited excellent signal linearity. The LOD was approximately 20 ppm for both methodologies, although the plasma initiated off the solid yielded a marginally superior value. It was concluded that LIBS was a perfectly viable technique for H-sensing that offered high sensitivity. Meissner and co-workers compared LA-ICP-MS and LIBS as methods of detecting trace metals in samples of solid potassium bromide and two oxides and noted the relative strengths and weaknesses of both techniques.131 Most problems arising from the use of LIBS were associated with matrix effects and self-absorption, with the oxidation state having a direct effect on the LOD of the analytes. In addition, LA-ICP-MS was also found to produce data that was more precise and to have superior LODs.
The use of LA for the analysis of powdered samples has also been demonstrated by Boulyga and Heumann.132 These authors compared a commonly used LA system (a UP213) with a specialist one capable of very high ablation rates (a LINA-Spark Atomiser). Both systems had similar performance for the analytes Cu, Fe, Pb and Zn in the concentration range 10−2–10−6 g g−1, but the LINA-Spark Atomiser had substantially better performance at the sub μg g−1 concentration range. The sensitivity of this system was superior by two orders of magnitude when compared with the commonly used system and hence LODs were improved. The authors also discovered that the use of ID-MS as a detection method enabled better precision to be obtained for both LA systems when compared with non-matrix matched calibration. Overall, it was concluded that the LINA Spark Atomiser was a more suitable technique for the analysis of less homogeneous samples. The use of LA-ICP-MS combined with chemometric analysis (Principle Component Analysis) of the data has been used by Aeschliman et al. for source attribution and as a preliminary diagnosis of fractionation.133 The techniques circumvented the need for time-consuming and destructive sample dissolution procedures and were capable of providing a “fingerprint” composition that could be used for source matching of forensic materials.
Another traditional method of direct solids analysis is that of XRF. Two papers are of especial interest. In one by Carpanese et al. the deposition kinetics of hafnium oxide and aluminium oxide on different pre-treated substrates was studied.134 The two materials being deposited were high k-materials that may, in the future, be used in micro-electronic devices. Both XRF and TXRF were used for the determinations and, as well as giving information on the initial growing cycles of deposition, they were also capable of indicating the extent of C and Cl inclusion in the film. The XRF signal was found to correlate linearly with the layer thickness for both materials. In the other paper, Zawisza and Sitko determined trace metals in ZnS-Ag+ and ZnS-Cu+ luminophore materials.135 The materials were digested in an excess of 12% sodium hydroxide and then the analytes Ag, Co, Cr, Cu and Fe were precipitated on a carrier of manganese oxide/manganese hydroxide. After collection on membrane filters, the precipitate was analysed directly by XRF. Good agreement between the data obtained from this technique and from those obtained by ICP-OES and AAS was found.
Glow discharge has also been used for the analysis of solid materials. An overview of radio frequency (RF) GD with -AAS, -OES and -MS detection systems has been prepared by Pisonero and co-workers.136 A description of the principles of operation and attempts at modeling the discharges were also given. Instrumentation developed both commercially and in research laboratories were also described, as were the practical examples for bulk and for depth-profile analysis. The same research group has also described the RF-GD-OES and DC-GD-OES determination of analytes in metallurgical grade silicon.137 According to the authors, soft electrical conditions (600 V and 10–12 mA) had to be selected for the DC-GD-OES so as to avoid instabilities. Unfortunately, this also led to poor sensitivity. However, the results for RF-GD-OES showed a much higher performance. Using this technique, the authors discovered that samples with thickness <2 mm acted as a conductor, whilst those that were >2 mm acted as an insulator. The RF-GD-OES system was used to determine Al, B, Ca, Fe and Ti successfully and the authors concluded that the technique would be useful for the rapid and convenient analysis of this material.
The subject of slurry nebulisation still attracts some interest, although the overall number of papers that describe their application appears to be decreasing. Mokgalaka and colleagues described a method whereby platinum group metals (PGMs) and Au were determined in slurries of converter matte.138 Material was reduced with tin(II) chloride in hydrochloric acid medium and then heated on a hotplate. After filtration to remove concomitant materials, the precipitated PGMs and Au were collected, transferred to a micronizing ball mill and ground for 30 minutes. After dilution in water to 1000 ml, and ultrasonic agitation to ensure homogeneity, an aliquot was taken and diluted further, yielding a slurry concentration of 0.005% m/v suspended in 5% hydrochloric acid and 1% Triton X-100. This was nebulised directly into an ICP-OES instrument for the determination. The method was validated by the use of standard additions and by the use of alternative techniques, i.e. a standard dissolution procedure. The procedure was described as having the advantages of speed (60% of the time required for the standard procedure) and of minimizing contamination.
Sahayam and colleagues have described methods whereby analytes may be determined in high purity arsenic139 and in high purity germanium and selenium.140 In the former paper, in situ generated HCl vapours distilled 98% of the arsenic matrix away from the analytes in the form of arsenic(III) chloride, whilst generating extremely low experimental blanks. A total of 10 analytes were determined and recoveries from spike experiments were in the range 95–104%. Determination by ICP-OES yielded LODs at the ng g−1 range and precision of between 2 and 10%. The latter paper was similar, but on this occasion, vapours of HCl and HNO3 were used in the microwave assisted vaporization of the analytes.140 Aqua regia vapours were sufficient to volatilize 98.7% of the germanium, whereas a 72∶1 ratio of HCl∶HNO3 was required to volatilize 99.2% of the selenium. Recoveries of 12 analytes were in the range 91–107%. The determination was performed using ICP-MS and to overcome the isobaric interferences 35Cl16O1H+ on 52Cr+, 40Ar16O+ on 56Fe+ and 40Ar74Ge+ on 114Cd+; a dynamic reaction cell was used with ammonia as the reagent gas. Again, experimental blanks were very low and LODs were in the low ng g−1 region.
Many of the remaining papers relevant to this section of the review are simple applications, although some are fairly interesting. In one review paper, Nobrega and co-workers discussed the use of matrix modifiers with metal atomizers in ETAAS.141 The authors recognized that the chemical processes occurring in these atomizers are very different from those in graphite ones and also that there is no ‘universal modifier’ that can be used. The review, containing 62 references, highlighted many of the modifiers used to date. Noroozifar and co-workers described a flow injection method for the indirect determination of cyanide in industrial waste waters.142 A 25% m/m suspension of cadmium carbonate was attached to silica gel beads and then, using sodium hydroxide at pH 10 as eluent, the cyanide in the sample reacted with the cadmium carbonate forming cadmium cyanide. The Cd was then measured on-line by FAAS. The linear range extended to 15 mg l−1, the LOD was 0.2 mg l−1, sampling rate was 72 per hour and precision was reported to be better than 1.22%. A standard material of europium oxide has been developed and analysed for trace impurities of 13 other rare earth elements (REEs).143 Using ICP-MS and Rh or Ga as internal standards, the authors determined the analytes in a way that overcame the matrix effects. The LODs were 0.013–0.018 ng ml−1, recoveries of spikes were 80–108% and precision (n
					= 11) was 0.9–3%. Comparison of data from 10 other laboratories using various techniques indicated that the ICP-MS procedure proposed was accurate and reliable. Amorim and Ferreira proposed a method whereby Cd and Pb were preconcentrated simultaneously from table salt and then determined sequentially by FAAS.144 After dissolution of the salt in water, a two level fractional factorial design was used to optimize the preconcentration. Dithizone was used to complex with the analytes and these complexes were then extracted into isobutylmethyl ketone (IBMK). After separation, the organic phase was aspirated directly into a FAAS instrument. Variables such as pH, dithizone mass, shaking time after the addition of dithizone and the shaking time after the addition of the organic solvent were all found to be insignificant. Overall, LODs were 0.3 and 4.2 ng g−1 for Cd and Pb, respectively, whilst precision (n
					= 10) was between 1.1 and 5.6% for concentrations of 200 ng g−1 and below. The method of standard additions indicated that there were no matrix interferences.
Nukatsuka and co-workers determined Tl in potassium chloride and electrolyte replenishers.145 The analyte was extracted from the solutions that had been acidified to pH 1.6 by hydrochloric acid by retaining it as its ammonium pyrrolidine carbodithioate complex on particles of a cellulose nitrate resin. These particles were then collected on a membrane filter, re-suspended in 1 ml of 10 mM nitric acid and injected directly into the cuvette of a GFAAS instrument. No chemical modifier was required and the extraction was successful for solutions containing up to 2 mol l−1 chloride. The preconcentration factor was 50 (for 50 ml of sample), LOD was 1 ng (20 pg ml−1) and precision (n
					= 5) at the 30 ng level was 4.9%. A comparison of FAAS and ICP-OES methods of detection for the analytes Al, B, Cr, Dy, Er, Mo, Y and Yb in yttrium aluminium borate crystals has been made by Bencs and co-workers.146 The sample preparation protocol, which was the same for both detection methods, used a fusion of the crystals with lithium metaborate at 950 °C in a platinum crucible. The melt was then dissolved in 6 M hydrochloric acid. Although efficient, this preparation procedure obviously led to difficulties during the determination of B. For FAAS, a nitrous oxide – acetylene flame was used in conjunction with cesium chloride as an ionization buffer and lanthanum chloride as a releasing agent (0.1 and 0.2%, respectively). Agreement between the results of the two techniques was described as being “fairly good”. The last paper in this section of the review described the determination of trace impurities in cerium oxide.147 After dissolution of the cerium oxide, the analytes were separated from the bulk matrix by passing sample through 2-ethylhexyl hydrogen 2-ethylhexylphosphate (P-507) resin. The analytes (Cu, La, Mn and Ni) were eluted with dilute nitric acid. The separation process was complete within 30 minutes. The eluate was then preconcentrated by evaporation and then analysed by ETV-ICP-OES using 6% PTFE as a modifier. The authors reported satisfactory recoveries.
2.4 Nuclear materials
The period covered by this review is notable for the relatively large number of papers dealing with AMS both in terms of review/discussion and applications papers. The status of actinide measurements by AMS at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was discussed by Marchetti and co-workers, particularly with reference to the recent commissioning of a heavy isotope beam line.148,149 The focus of the initial work was on the measurement of Pu isotopes and background levels of ca. 105 atoms were observed during routine Pu-239 and Pu-240 measurements. The rejection of U-238 (approximately 1013 atoms) during Pu-239 measurements was ca. 107. Measurements of known materials and the results of an externally organized round-robin exercise suggested that Pu-239 determinations were accurate and precise at the level of 106 atoms Pu-239 (a μBq level of Pu-239). The range of materials analysed by AMS included bioassay and environmental samples where quantification was obtained against a Pu-242 spike. The investigation of other nuclides such as U-236 and Np-237 was also reported. Similarly, the system at Vienna150 was designed with magnets powerful enough to bend all isotopes. This capability was only realized after a near complete re-build of the high-energy analyzer that has allowed the successful measurement of Hf-182, U-236 and Pu-244. The application of AMS in the marine environment has been reviewed and includes long-lived heavier isotopes such as Tc-99, I-129, U-236 and other actinides.
The use of mass spectrometry for Pu bioassay has received significant attention and the results of the second of a series of laboratory inter-comparison tests for the determination of Pu-239 in urine were reported.151 This study involved the determination of Pu-239 at the 4–56 μBq l−1 level by AMS (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory) and by TIMS (Los Alamos National Laboratory). Comparative determinations were provided by fission track analysis (FTA) by the University of Utah. This study demonstrated that the two mass spectrometric methodologies had similar limits of quantitation (LOQs). Results were also compared, in terms of bias and precision, with the relevant American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards.
The use of mass spectrometry for Pu isotopic analysis has developed to such an extent that it has become a method of choice for bioassay. However, this statement can only be regarded as true for exposure to weapons grade material derived from short irradiation fuel; i.e., majority dose from Pu-239 and Pu-240. This situation does not hold true for civilian Pu where long irradiation times means that Pu-238 contributes significantly and, in extreme cases of high burn-up fuel, dominates the dose estimate. The determination of Pu-238 by mass spectrometry is challenging because of the direct interference from U-238 and wet chemical separations may not be robust or reliable enough for a routine, high throughput bioassay or environmental monitoring program. In highly significant papers for Pu dosimetry, ICP-MS was shown to be capable of resolving Pu-238 from U-238 and Pu-241 from Am-241 by the use of reactive gases in a collision/reaction cell.152,153 This offers the promise of direct analysis of biomedical and environmental materials where Pu-238 might be expected to provide a significant contribution to any dose estimate. The use of ammonia gas152 provided resolution at mass-238 by selective conversion of U to form UNH2+ and UN2H4+. Detection limits of 0.25, 0.09, 0.27 and 0.24 ng l−1 where obtained for Pu-238, Pu-239, Pu-240 and Pu-242, respectively in a urine spiked with 10 μg l−1 U. Note, a LOD of 0.25 ng l−1 Pu-238 corresponds to ∼160 Bq l−1 and pre-concentration would still be required for many applications. Alternative chemistries for the resolution of Pu-238 from U-238 (ethylene), selective reaction with U+ and UH+
					(CO2) and Am from Pu (NO) where also reported yielding similar LODs.153
Two studies by the same research group, with a similar aim of resolving Pu-238 and U-238, were reported for TIMS.154,155 These studies suggested that the different formation rates of atomic and oxide ions, under different heating conditions of the vaporization and ionization filaments, could be used to derive inter-element corrections allowing the determination of Pu-238.
Collision/reaction cells were also used to resolve isobaric interferences on the determination of I-129156 and Sr-90.157 The determination of I-129, introduced as a vapor, was facilitated by the use of an oxygen/helium reaction gas that attenuated the interference from Xe-129.156 Limits of detection of 0.4 pg g−1 I-129 were obtained and the methodology was applied to the determination of I-129 in contaminated sediments and a CRM. The determination of Sr-90 by radio-analytical techniques is time consuming and involves chemical separation followed by grow-in of Y-90 prior to radiometric counting. Mass spectrometry has an obvious appeal and the use of oxygen in a reaction cell to remove the Zr-90 isobaric interference was reported with a limit of detection of 2 ng l−1.157 Much improved instrumental limits of detection were obtained with ICP-SF-MS (3 pg l−1) by the use of a cool plasma and medium mass resolution. The required LOD for Sr-90 in urine was established at 0.02 pg l−1 necessitating pre-concentration. The Sr was separated from the urine matrix by extraction chromatography and achieved a simultaneous ×200 pre-concentration factor. The high levels of stable Sr in the separated sample (1 mg l−1), degraded the method performance due to the relatively low abundance sensitivity of the mass spectrometer (ca. 6 × 10−7). This resulted in a method LOD of 0.4 pg l−1, i.e. a factor of 27 poorer than predicted from the instrumental LOD and a factor of 20 poorer than the required limit.
The continued investigation of reactive gases in collision/reaction cell has obvious attractions and its potential has been clearly demonstrated for actinides, I-129 and Sr-90. It is hoped that continuing developments in this area will prove fruitful.
Table 1 Nuclear materials




Element
Matrix
Technique
Method/comment
Ref.




Cl-36
Environmental
AMS
Isobaric interference from S-36 attenuated by chemical separation using a barium cation exchange column. Sample preparation time reduced significantly compared with traditional method (6 h) with recovery ca. 90%.

158



H3
Carbon
AMS
A dedicated system for depth profiles of H3 in carbon cut from walls of fusion reactors was developed.

159



Ni-63
Copper
AMS
Ni-63 used for neutron dosimetry as activation product of Cu-63. Samples of copper from Hiroshima. Ni-63/Ni ratios in blank samples up to 2 × 10−13
										(∼104 atoms Ni-63/g Cu).

160



Pu
Urine
ICP; SFMS
Pu separated from 1 ml sample by SPE without preliminary digestion or co-precipitation. Desolvating nebulizer used. LOD Pu-239 = 0.16 fg ml−1 in sample spiked with ca. 1 ng ml−1 depleted uranium. Method conforms to Los Alamos National Laboratories target values for Pu bioassay.

161



Pu
Urine
ICP-MS; SFMS
Pu separated from sample (1 dm3) by co-precipitation on Ca3(PO4)2 followed by purification on TEVA resin. Chemical recovery ∼70%. Two nebulizers used, PFA-100 and DIHEN. LOD (DIHEN)
										=1 ag ml−1 Pu-239.

162



Pu
Urine
TIMS
Comparison of Pu purification methods including co-precipitation, extraction chromatography, electro-deposition and strong anion exchange chromatography. LOD ∼ 0.6 ag ml−1 Pu-239 (1.3 nBq ml−1).

163



Pu
Ice cores
AMS
Atmospheric Pu fallout reconstructed from ice cores from Belukha glacier (Siberia).

164



Pu
Marine sediments
AMS
Samples collected from Novaya Zemlya and Kara Sea. LOD < 1 fg Pu (∼2 μBq). Pu-240/Pu-239 ratio measurements from sediments at Novaya Zemlya deviated from global fallout ratios.

165



Pu-239
Aqueous
ICP; SFMS
UH+ production limited by use of D2O as solvent. UH+/U+ improved from 1.3 × 10−5 to 2.6 × 10−7. LOD Pu-239 = 0.58 pg ml−1 in presence of 10 μg ml−1 U.

166



Pu and U
Environmental
AMS
Samples obtained downstream of Mayak. Isotope ratios used to characterize inputs to two geographical locations (Reservoir 11 and Asanov Swamp).

167



Pu and U
Water, urine
FI; ICP; SFMS
Nano-volume flow injection. Small volumes (54 nl) injected into carrier stream (7 μl min−1) using a nanovolume injector.

168



 
 
 
LOD Pu ∼ 6 ag ml−1. NIST U350 used for method validation.
 


Tc-99
Seawater
AMS
Measurements obtained from 250 ml seawater. Chemical separation of Tc from Ru. Tc-99m used as tracer.

169



U
Swipe samples
ETV; ICP; MS
Influence of instrumental parameters on isotope ratio accuracy determined.

170



U, Th
Human body fluids
LA; ICP; quadrupole MS
Sample dried onto slide. Matrix matched synthetic standards prepared by spiking with Th-230 (IRMM 60), natural U and highly enriched U (NIST- 930) at ng l−1 level. Recovery = 91–104%.

171



U, Th
Human body fluids
FI; ICP; quadrupole MS
Samples microwave digested. Th, U separated on-line using extraction chromatography resin. LOD for Th-232, U-235 and U-238 were 0.06, 0.0014 and 0.05 ng l−1, respectively. Precision of isotope ratio measurement for U-235 ∶ U-238 = 1.8%.

172



U-236/U-238 ratio
Aqueous
ICP; SFMS
UH+ production limited by use of D2O as solvent and a desolvating nebulizer.

173



Xe
Irradiated fuel
SIMS
Xe depth profiles obtained. Peaks corresponded to bubbles observed using EPMA and SEM mappings. The “non-zero” baseline corresponded to Xe included in the UO2 matrix.

174



Actinides
Urine
HPLC; ICP; MS
Direct injection in 3 mol dm−3 nitric acid onto TRU resin packed column. Separation obtained with various concentrations of HCl and oxalic acid. LOD ∼ 0.01–2 pg ml−1. Separation time ∼ 25 minutes for Am, Np, Pu, Th and U.

175



Actinides
Urine
HPLC; ICP; quadrupole MS
Pre-concentration and matrix separation achieved on chelation column. Separation of actinides on cation exchange resin.

176



Fission products and actinides
Fuel
HPLC; ICP; MS ICP; MS
Lanthanides determined using HPLC-ICP-MS

177





3 Advanced materials
3.1 Polymeric materials and composites
The analysis of polymers and composites has been a relatively quiet area of research in this review period, although several papers of interest have been published. Two general papers have discussed the capabilities of TXRF for such materials. In one,178 TXRF capabilities in the analysis of high-viscosity polymer dispersions was discussed. Methods of drying the samples so that uniformly deposited films were produced were discussed at length. Difficulty was found in obtaining a homogeneous mixture between the sample and an internal standard, so the author discussed the use of Compton incoherent scattering as an alternative procedure for trace quantification in these highly viscous systems where a mixing process was unnecessary. In the other paper, by the same research group,179 TXRF data obtained from the analysis of up to 1%
					m/m polymer solutions were analysed further by the chemometric techniques of principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis in order for a classification of the polymers to be made.
Several papers have been published in the general bio-medical area. Included in these is one that has analysed silicone breast implant material.180 Maharaj used ICP-MS to determine Pt in silicone gel (for n
					= 15 a concentration range of 0.26–48.90 μg g−1was obtained), elastomer (n
					= 7, range = 3.05–28.78 μg g−1), double lumen (n
					= 7, range = 5.79–125.27 μg g−1), foam (n
					= 2, values were 5.79 and 8.36 μg g−1) and the capsular tissue (n
					= 15, range = 0.003–0.272 μg g−1). The author concluded that, since these synthetic materials contained such high levels, they could be a significant source of Pt for individuals with such implants. Another paper discussed the implementation of a poly(methyl methacrylate) coating electro-synthesized from aqueous monomer solutions on titanium orthopaedic implants.181 These polymer coatings are designed to minimize the ion leaching and hence corrosion of such implants. The coating synthesized using an electro-reductive process was characterized using FTIR and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The effect of an annealing treatment on the morphology of the coating with respect to uniformity and porosity was studied using SEM. Sheets of titanium-based material coated in the films were subject to leach tests and the ions released were determined by ICP-MS. There has been interest over the last few years in the use of silver compounds or alloys as coatings for orthopaedic implants, but these have had variable success. A paper by Furno and co-workers have impregnated silicone with nano-particulate Ag metal.182 Disks of the polymers were coated in plasma protein conditioning film and the bacterial adherence and rate of kill measured. Release of Ag into the plasma solution was measured by ICP-MS. It was found that washing the polymer with de-ionised water decreased the activity, although there was continued release of Ag. This release was not blocked by the conditioning film and hence the authors claimed that, for the first time, polymers impregnated (rather than coated) with Ag can act as an anti-microbial agent. Leaching studies of Ba and Sr from glass particle/resin matrix dental composites have been performed by Zhou et al.183 Three different dental composites were exposed for periods of four and eight months to humid air, artificial saliva, water and 50% ethanol. The surface of the composites were then analysed using SIMS and wavelength dispersive X-ray spectrometry. The artificial saliva was found to be the most abrasive of the leaching agents for all of the composites tested, although the amount of leaching differed markedly between samples. The saliva solution also led to deposition of crystallites on the surface of the composites. The authors postulated that this could actually be a self-repair system. Although more of a clinical application than an industrial one, note should be made of a publication that demonstrated severe lead poisoning in workers in the plastics industry.184 Lead sulfate and lead stearate powders are added as stabilizers to many plastics types used in electrical devices. As well as blood Pb levels being measured, non-invasive XRF was used to measure Pb in bone. The blood Pb levels for each of three workers was 159, 114 and 108 μg dl−1. For the worker that had the highest exposure, the Pb levels in the tibia, calcaneous and patella were 102, 219 and 182 mg kg−1, respectively.
Resano and colleagues reported the use of a solid sampling ETAAS method for the direct determination of Si in polyamide at the 10 μg g−1 level.185 The authors compared the use of palladium and platinum as matrix modifiers for both the solid samples and for aqueous standards. It was concluded that the platinum offered equivalent performance to the palladium, but at a greatly reduced concentration (1 rather than 20 μg) and that the proposed method enabled aqueous standards to be used for calibration, consumed only a few milligrams of sample, had a relatively high sample throughput (3 per hour) and a low detection limit (0.1 μg g−1). In addition, there was a low risk of contamination and analyte loss and the precision, at 6% RSD, was fit for purpose. Many polymers and composites are difficult to get either into solution or into a state where they may be analysed more readily. Two papers have studied protocols to achieve this. Sun and Ko developed a closed microwave digestion system as a means of sample destruction prior to the determination using ICP-MS of trace impurities in polymer-based photoresist samples.186 Parameters such as acid, heating temperature and heating time were all studied and the optimal conditions were found to be 0.25 ml of photoresist material being digested with 5 ml of nitric acid for 10 minutes at 180 °C. Results from this method were found to be comparable to those obtained using instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA). In a paper by Krushevska and co-workers, an ashing procedure was developed to enable the determination of P in several polymeric systems including catalysts, thermal stabilizers and flame retardants.187 To prevent the volatilization of organo-P compounds, a pre-oxidation using periodic acid was used, which enabled ashing in the presence of magnesium acetate whilst maximizing the weight to volume ratio. Factorial design was used to optimize the experimental parameters of ashing temperature, time and the amount of reagents required. Additional pre-treatment with ammonia solution was found to improve the recovery from some reactive samples. The method was validated by comparison with other established methods.
Three other papers have described the determination of components of flame retardants. Radivojevic and colleagues determined Br in thermoplasts from consumer electronics using the technique of laser induced plasma spectroscopy (LIPS).188 These workers utilized two different experimental setups that were dependent upon which area of the electromagnetic spectrum was being used for the determination. In the vacuum ultra violet (VUV) region, the detection was complicated by the presence of molecular oxygen in the plasma that interfered with the Br wavelength at 130.99 nm. This was overcome by purging the optical path with argon. Once the potential interference had been overcome, the determination in the VUV led to considerable improvements in LOD when compared with those in the near infra red (NIR). The thermal behaviour and degradation mechanism of phosphate di/triacrylate used for UV curable flame retardant coatings has been studied by Liang and Shi.189 Tri(acryloyloxyethyl) phosphate and di(acryloyloxyethyl)ethyl phosphate were synthesized from phosphorus oxychloride and hydroxylethyl acrylate and then their thermal behaviour monitored using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Three degradation regions corresponding to the decomposition of phosphate, thermal pyrolysis of the acrylate side chains and the decomposition of unstable structures were identified. The analytical techniques of FTIR, direct pyrolysis-mass spectrometry and ICP-OES were used to monitor the degradation pathway. The mechanism of flame retardation was proposed to be the formation of an intumescent char. The other paper in this research area analysed a flame retardant poly(vinylchloride) material,190 which is used as a coating for wires and cables. As well as several electrical properties, including the conductivity, permittivity, dielectric loss and positron annihilation lifetime being measured over the temperature range 30–140 °C, XRF was used to determine the Cl content. The flame retardant PVC was found to have 5% more Cl than standard PVC. The material was still found to have good electrical insulation properties, but only at temperatures below 100 °C.
Several papers have reported the use of methods of analyte preconcentration. Two papers by Tokman and co-workers have used a water soluble polymer to preconcentrate Co and Ni125 and Cu, Mn and Pb.126 In both cases, the aqueous sample and the water soluble polymer poly(vinyl pyrrolidinone) were mixed and the analytes allowed to bind to the polymer. On pouring the mixture into acetone, the polymer was precipitated, separated by decantation and then re-dissolved in water. The preconcentrated analytes were then determined by ETAAS. The method was applied to mineral waters, seawater and fruit juice and in the cases of Cu, Mn and Pb, it was validated by analysis of digests of the certified material NIST 1577b bovine liver. The preparation, characterization and analytical applications of a polymeric-inorganic composite for use as a cation exchange fiber have been reported by Khan et al.191 The preparation involved the mixing of polypyrrole into the fibrous inorganic precipitate of thorium(IV) phosphate. The composite was found to be highly stable, selective for Pb retention, reproducible and to have a high cation exchange capacity. The composite was characterized using the techniques of AAS, ICP-MS, elemental analysis, UV-Vis, FTIR, thermogravimetric analysis, XRD, differential thermal analysis (DTA) and SEM. The material also exhibited a DC electrical conductivity in the range 10−6 to 10−4 S cm−1 so was used as a membrane for a Pb ion selective electrode.
An assortment of applications has been reported. Among the more interesting ones has been a study of the leaching behaviour of Ge and Sb from polyethylene terephthalate (PET), a polymer commonly used in the food industry.192 The PET products were soaked in a 4% acetic acid solution (2 ml cm−2) for 30 min at 60 °C and at 95 °C and the leachates then analysed using ICP-MS. The authors reported recoveries of 100 and 101% and precisions (n
					= 10) of 2.2 and 1.7% for Ge and Sb, respectively. It was concluded that no interferences existed in this analysis and that the overall procedure was simple, rapid, safe and did not require the use of any hazardous solvents such as carbon tetrachloride. Scale inhibitors based on phosphinepolycarboxylic acid are used in off-shore oil production for preventing deposition of barium and strontium sulfates. Rocha and co-workers have described a method by which the P from this material was determined in production waters by ICP-MS.193 The acidified inhibitor solution was adsorbed on a C18 reversed phase column and then eluted with 0.025 mol l−1 borate solution, thus ensuring matrix separation. Using a 3.5 ml sample volume, an on-line method of analysis enabled nine samples per hour to be analysed, whereas an off-line method enabled this figure to increase to 17. Using a cross flow nebuliser and a Ryton spray chamber, the LOD of P in the borate solution was 0.2 μg l−1, with recoveries in the range 90–100% and a precision of typically 5% RSD. The authors applied their method for monitoring scale inhibitor concentrations to laboratory and field squeeze tests. The development of in-house reference materials for the determination of inorganic polysulfides in water has been described by Rizkov et al.194 The materials were synthesized in the form of dimethylated polysulfides containing between 4 and 8 S atoms. The structures of the products were confirmed by NMR and by the dependence of the HPLC retention time on the number of S atoms in the molecule. Total S in the reference materials was determined by oxidation of the product using perchloric acid in a high pressure bomb and subsequent determination by ICP-OES. Once dissolved in carbon tetrachloride, the reference materials were found to be stable at −20 °C for two weeks; whereas when they were dissolved in a mixture of acetonitrile and formic acid (1 ∶ 1) they were stable for three weeks, even at +5 °C. A series of copolymers has been synthesized using N-vinylcarbazole and Eu-complexed 4-vinylbenzoate.195 The resulting copolymers were then characterized using an assortment of techniques including FTIR, UV-Vis, proton and C-13 NMR, elemental analysis and ICP-MS. They were found to exhibit good solubility as well as thermal stability and high glass transition temperatures. The co-polymers were found to possess photoluminescence properties with two bands of radiation being produced, one in the region 340–550 nm and the other at around 612 nm. This corresponded to the pi*
					→ pi transitions of the carbazole moieties and the f–f transitions of the Eu ions, respectively. However, in the solid state, emission from the carbazole groups was suppressed and an almost monochromatic red emission was produced when a switch on voltage of 8 volts was applied. The polymer was therefore of use for the preparation of light emitting diodes (LEDs).
Polymer-based coatings are frequently used to protect steel from corrosion. For maximum protection to occur, it is necessary for the coating to adhere to the steel surface very strongly. One paper has reported the use of a silane promoter ((3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane) at different concentrations added to the polyamide 11 powder stock prior to coating on a steel substrate.196 Once coated, the samples underwent salt spray testing and the extent of de-lamination determined using Auger emission spectrometry. The extent of de-lamination was found to decrease for all the coatings in which the aminosilane was incorporated. The mechanism by which the presence of the aminosilane increased adhesion was studied using ToF-SIMS, which indicated the presence of Fe–O–Si+ ions, i.e. a covalent style of bonding between the steel and the coating. The synthesis of superparamagnetic nanocomposites based on gamma iron(III) oxide and sulfonated polystyrene has been optimized.197 Doping of Co in the range of 1–10% was achieved in situ and the levels of Co and Fe present determined by AAS. The magnetization and the coercivity were both dependent upon a combination of the cycling of the ion exchange and the incorporation of Co. Finally, Prissanaroon and co-workers have prepared two papers that described the electro-polymerisation of pyrrole on copper198 and on stainless steel and copper.199 In both cases, the polypyrrole films, that can be used in the micro-contact printing process to form electroactive devices, were produced by electrochemical oxidation of pyrrole in an aqueous dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid medium. The films were characterized by cyclic voltammetry, XPS and ToF-SIMS. In one paper198 it was found that the copper was passivated by a layer of copper(I) oxide which helped reduce copper dissolution. Both papers reported that there was also a S rich layer, indicating the presence of dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid. The papers were reported as offering fundamental understanding of polypyrrole/copper interfaces which could lead to an improvement in the production of the adherent films.
3.2 Semiconductors and conducting materials
As always, this has proved to be a very popular area of research with numerous papers describing assorted different applications of atomic spectrometry. Many however describe the characterization of a new material and do not discuss the atomic spectrometry in any detail. These papers will therefore not be discussed in this review. As with many of the other sections of this review, the application of solid sampling analysis techniques has proved to be of increased popularity. Presumably this too is a reflection of the difficulty in digesting materials grown on or incorporated into silicon wafers and also because it is preferable to avoid time-consuming or hazardous digestions where contamination or potential analyte loss are inherent problems. The analysis of solar cells has again been an area of intense research. A review of the analytical techniques most commonly used to analyse thin film solar cells has been prepared by Durose and co-workers.200 The review is very long (40 pages), contains 187 references and describes techniques such as scanning probe microscopy (SPM), XRD, ellipsometry, transmission electron microscopy, Auger electron spectroscopy SIMS, XPS, photoluminescence, time resolved photoluminescence, electron beam induced current and light beam induced current. For each method the particular applicability to thin film solar cells was highlighted. The sample types included in the review were chalcopyrite, cadmium telluride and silicon systems as well as III–V materials (i.e. gallium arsenide, indium phosphide etc.). Other examples of the analysis of solar cells include papers by Oladeji and Chow201 and by Palm et al.202 In the former paper the synthesis and characterization of cadmium sulfide/zinc sulfide multi-layers was described. The cadmium sulfide/zinc sulfide multi-layers were prepared by chemical bath deposition and then Cd1−xZnxS thin films were obtained by low temperature chemical and thermal activated diffusion. Depth profiling analysis of the thin films by SIMS indicated that Cd diffused into zinc sulfide layers more readily than Zn diffused into the cadmium sulfide ones. The overall approach was useful in that it enabled the authors to improve the spectral response of cadmium telluride based solar cells. The latter paper by Palm et al.202 described the preparation and characterization of second generation solar modules that are promising candidates for reducing the cost of photovoltaics well below the cost of crystalline silicon. A multinary copper (indium, gallium)(sulfur, selenium)2
					(abbreviated as CIGSSe) formation was prepared by a novel technique entitled “stacked elemental layer rapid thermal processing”. The authors reported that the process has recently been scaled up from initial laboratory sized mini-modules to full sized power modules. The paper described the in situ and ex situ techniques used to characterize the material. Thin film calorimetry and XRD yielded fundamental insights and accelerated the optimization process. Meanwhile, the depth distribution of Ga and S obtained by using different selenization and sulfurization techniques was determined by SIMS. The techniques of XRF and Raman spectroscopy were used for stoichiometric monitoring, whilst photoluminescence lifetime mapping and thermographic imaging were used to monitor large area uniformity and reproducibility.
An edition of the journal Spectrochimica Acta has concentrated on the use of XRF techniques, especially TXRF in the semiconductor industry. Hellin and co-workers studied the well known combination of vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection (VPD-DC) and TXRF.203 Although well established, the efficiency of the methodology is not fully understood and, through a study of systematic recovery rate, this paper aimed to identify the sources of error during the process. It concluded that VPD-DC is an efficient method for collecting impurities from silicon wafers, but that a TXRF saturation effect on the micro-droplet residue limited the accuracy of quantification to the levels below 3 × 1013 atoms of a metallic contaminant. On a 200 mm wafer this would represent a homogeneous single element surface contamination of 1 × 1011 atoms per cm2. This finding could have serious implications for larger wafers or if more serious, multi-element contamination is present. The authors discussed the origin of this saturation effect and evaluated potential solutions to it. Mori and co-workers described the detection of unknown localized contamination on silicon wafer surfaces using the technique of sweeping TXRF.204 Previously the technique had been used to accumulate spectra so that an average concentration over the wafer surface could be estimated. In the current paper, this was also performed but in addition, individual spots on the wafer were analysed. The individual integration time for each spot analysed was only 4–8 s, but this still enabled a LOD of 1010 atoms cm−2 at each location. The authors demonstrated that their method was capable of analyzing particulate contaminants on silicon wafers. The authors reported that dedicated software for sweeping TXRF was under development, but that it was already capable of analyzing a 200 mm wafer in 30 minutes and a 300 mm wafer in 50 minutes. Miller et al. compared nanoliter droplet methodology with the more conventional VPD.205 The droplets (10 to 50 nl) of Fe solutions in different matrices were deposited onto native silicon oxide wafer surfaces and dried in air in a period of typically 20 s to 2 minutes, depending on the volume deposited. This compared very favourably with VPD methodology, which can take from tens of minutes to several hours to dry. In both cases, there was a linear response from TXRF analysis between Fe intensity and mass deposited. Variable angle experiments showed that both nanoliter and VPD deposits were film-like in character for simple aqueous solutions, but that more complex matrices with higher mass loadings produced residues that were more particulate in nature. For the experimental conditions used (30 kV, 100 mA), comparable LODs between the different methods were obtained and these were calculated to be in the picogram range or 1 × 1010 atoms cm−2 for a 0.8 cm2 X-ray excitation beam. The overall advantage of the technique was that the faster drying time enabled a greater sample throughput than conventional VPD methodology. The characterization of high k-gate dielectric and metal gate electrode semiconductor samples using TXRF has been reported by Sparks and colleagues.206 These authors commented that TXRF has a well-found place in the analysis of silicon wafers but that it was not used routinely for the characterization of thin films. They therefore examined the possibility that it could be used to monitor the growth of such thin films on silicon wafers. They found that it was possible to convert the signal obtained into a film thickness by correlating the data with those obtained from TEM. In addition, it was possible to glean information about the interface between the deposited high-k layer and the silicon substrate. This was achievable by correlating TXRF data with those obtained using SIMS monitoring of Cl at the interface. Another paper in this edition of Spectrochim. Acta was by Iijima and Tazawa, who applied total reflection X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (TRXPS) to the determination of the bonding state of B and P on silicon wafer surfaces.207 The inelastic scattering electrons that form a strong background photoelectron spectrum are reduced significantly using TRXPS, enabling the measurement of small amounts (<1012 atoms cm−2) of B and P. Results indicated the formation of SiB4. Organic P compounds and P2O5 were also observed. Microfocus X-ray systems for fluoroscopic analysis and computed tomography produce high sensitivity and is non-destructive. Consequently, it is becoming more widely used in industrial fields such as for semiconductors. Hirakimoto and co-workers described a novel microfocus system containing a lanthanum hexafluoride electron gun that was capable of a resolution of 0.4 μm with a maximum voltage capability of 160 kV.208 The authors reviewed the current status and performance of such microfocus fluoroscopic and tomographic systems.
According to Hoffmann et al. glow discharge mass spectrometry has become the industry standard for the determination of trace analytes in metals and semiconductors.209 These authors reviewed the history and the current status of the technique as well as making predictions as to where the future may lie. Applications were also summarized, which included depth-resolved analysis and non-conductor analysis. Also included were the recent developments such as “fast flow” sources and pulsed glow discharges. The review contained 166 references.
There have been several interesting applications published. Gruhl and co-workers described the LA-ICP-MS analysis of luminous zinc sulfide selenide (ZnS1−xSex) crystals.210 Reference standard crystals were synthesized by chemical vapour transport reaction and were then characterized by micro-XRF, SEM, PIXE, Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) and solution ICP-MS. The data from these different techniques were then combined to describe the concentration in the standard crystals. These crystals were then used for calibration during the LA-ICP-MS analyses. A concentration gradient in the zinc sulfide selenide crystals of up to 30% difference in Se content within an 800 μm distance was found. The authors concluded that LA-ICP-MS showed promise for elemental quantification when resolution at the μm level is required. A dissolution method for the perovskite-type niobium oxide (LixKCa2Na2Nb5O16) superconducting material prior to ICP-OES analysis has been described by Ishikuro.211 Compounds such as these are usually decomposed by using different types of fusion. However, many fluxes contain sodium or potassium, which would preclude their use when Na or K are to be determined. The authors developed an acid dissolution procedure using an acid mixture of HF–HNO3–H2SO4. The digestion was assisted by microwave irradiation. Attempts at digestion using only H2SO4 or the binary mixture of HF–HNO3 proved unsuccessful. A different approach to sample destruction was taken by Sahayam and co-workers, who used aqua regia vapours at 210 °C to digest high purity gallium arsenide prior to determination of ultra-trace impurities by ICP-MS.212 Near quantitative volatilization of the gallium arsenide (99.8%) was achieved within 45 minutes, and recoveries of the analytes Ba, Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb and Zn after the volatilization of the matrix were in the range 94–101%; although at 80%, Ag and Cr recoveries were lower. The matrix free residues were then analysed by ICP-MS utilizing a dynamic reaction cell with ammonia as the reaction gas to overcome polyatomic interferences arising from 40Ar12C+ on 52Cr+ and 40Ar16O+ on 56Fe+. Detection limits were at the sub ng g−1 level, and the results were compared with those from TXRF and from sector field ICP-MS. Fujiwara et al. described the use of methanolic cyanide solution to remove surface contaminants of Cu and Ni from silicon surfaces.213 After washing, the levels of the contaminants were reduced to below the LODs obtainable using TXRF. Analysis of the methanolic cyanide solutions using UV spectrophotometry indicated that the most common of the complexes formed with the analytes was Cu(CN)43−.
A popular area of analysis has been the use of SIMS for depth profiling or diffusion studies. Although there have been numerous studies in this area, the majority are fairly routine and use SIMS as a tool. As such, there is very little new or novel in the way of atomic spectrometry. Despite this, mention will be made of a few examples so that the reader can obtain a general view of the area into which the subject is moving. The diffusion of V in vanadium-doped gallium arsenide layers grown by metal organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD) has been studied using SIMS.214 Alternative layers of doped and un-doped gallium arsenide were sandwiched together and the V diffusion measured. The diffusion coefficient was found to be independent of concentration, but measurements at three different temperatures (550, 615 and 680 °C) indicated that there was a temperature dependence. The authors suggested that diffusion occurred via interstitial sites. The use of silicon-germanium substrates for strain in the silicon channel presents many challenges for complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) integration, including maintaining the channel strain and the effect on shallow source/drain junctions. Low energy SIMS has been used to study B and As diffusion behaviour in strained silicon and silicon germanide.215 The diffusion of Ge from the relaxed silicon germanide layer into the strained silicon layer was discussed in relation to source/drain implant and annealing. In addition, experimental SIMS data were compared with theoretical simulation results. Ber and co-workers studied the possibility of using polyatomic ions (oxygen clusters) as the primary projectile particles for the depth profiling of solid heterostructures of the GaAs/delta-AlAs/GaAs/… type.216 It was found that high resolution depth profiles could be obtained from the materials using a magnetic sector mass spectrometer using a primary beam of O−3+ ions with a specific energy of 1 keV per oxygen atom. The experimental data were compared with results from a computer simulation.
The preparation and characterization of new materials is also commonplace. Semiconductor nanorods of the Cd0.9Mn0.1S type were prepared successfully by the hydrothermal reaction of cadmium chloride pentahydrate and manganese chloride pentahydrate with diammonium sulfide in aqueous solution.217 The Mn content was determined by AAS and the materials were characterized using other techniques such as XRD, TEM, UV-Vis and photoluminescence. The product showed almost total rod-like morphology and extremely similar diameter (approximately 20 nm) and length (200 nm). A new type of CRM, called BAM-L002, the “nanoscale strip pattern for length calibration and testing of lateral resolution” in surface analysis has been prepared.218 It is an embedded cross-section of epitaxially grown layers of AlxGa1−xAs and InxGa1−xAs on GaAs substrate and provides a surface of a flat pattern with strip widths of 0.4–500 nm. The authors used SIMS to demonstrate the feasibility of the CRM for lateral resolution analysis. Wenger et al. investigated the use of Pr2O3 as a high k-material during the manufacture of metal-insulator-metal (MIM) capacitors.219 The thickness of the layers of Pr2O3 and the bottom electrode material were varied and the layers then characterized using XPS, XRD, TEM and SIMS. It was shown that these capacitors can provide higher capacitance densities than conventional Si3N4 MIM capacitors, whilst maintaining comparable voltage coefficients of capacitance.
3.3 Glasses
As usual there has been considerable research into the atomic spectrometric analysis of glass. Anderson and co-workers have produced an overview that discussed the use of ToF-SIMS for the analysis of surfaces of insulating samples such as glass, glass-ceramics and other special materials.220 The technique has a lateral and depth resolution at the nanometer scale and can be used to measure the material components or diffusion of analytes through the matrix. The technique can therefore be used to determine the microscopic material behaviour which, in turn, enables a greater understanding of the processes occurring and hence assists in the fields of development and production. Takeda used SIMS to determine the effects of diffusion of 18O2 on the thermal properties of float glass.221 It was found that the diffusion of O led to phase separation and subsequent degradation of the optical properties of the glass. The same paper also determined the effects of O diffusion in a film of tin oxide. The results enabled the author to make conclusions about the effect of O on the electrical properties of the sample. A method of measuring the depth profile of H in soda-lime glass, as a means of determining the presence of water, has been described by Lenzen and colleagues.222 Using both SIMS and elastic recoil detection analysis (ERDA), the authors managed to obtain absolute H concentrations with a good spatial resolution.
Much interest has been focused on the analysis of archaeological glasses, which although very interesting, in most cases does not really advance the knowledge of atomic spectrometry. Therefore only a few of the many applications will be discussed in any great detail. Inevitably, the analysis of historic artifacts tends to try to be as non-destructive as possible. Hence, many of the techniques used have been either LA, X-ray or ion beam-based. A paper by Schultheis and co-workers characterized ancient and Art Nouveau glasses using Pb isotope ratio measurements obtained using LA-ICP-SF-MS.223 The LA and ICP-MS parameters were tuned so as to obtain accurate data with minimal uncertainty whilst inflicting minimum damage on the sample. No laser induced mass bias effects were observed. Analysis of Art Nouveau glasses demonstrated that the material from single layers originated from different glass sources. Meanwhile analysis of archaeological glasses from an archaeological site in Ephesos in Turkey demonstrated that although the overall Pb level was low, it was still possible to use the Pb ratios to differentiate between different sources of glass. Nakai et al.224 described the development and then application of a portable XRF instrument to the field analysis of glass samples at an excavation site in Egypt. The spectrometer enabled determination of analytes as low in mass as Na by using two monochromatic X-ray sources. Detection limits ranged from 0.31% for Al down to the ppm level for other analytes. The instrument was used to analyse 222 glass objects as well as pottery sherds, pigments and metallic objects. Fredrickx and co-workers have described the use of EPMA and micro-synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence (μ-SRXRF) to analyse Roman glass fragments for major, minor and trace element composition.225 Using these techniques, five classes of mono-coloured glass could be discerned. The technique of EDXRF has been used to determine the metallic composition of glass mosaic tesserae from a glass deposit in Milan.226 In addition, optical stimulated luminescence (OSL) and thermally stimulated luminescence (TSL) were used in an attempt to elucidate information on traps and luminescence centres. The tesserae had luminescent characteristics similar to that of quartz.
A popular area of research has been that of glass corrosion. A paper that discussed corrosion in Roman glasses that had been sunken on the seabed has been prepared by Dal Bianco et al.227 The surfaces of the glasses were examined using optical microscopy and techniques such as SIMS, RBS and SEM. Three types of weathering were observed, depending on the type of glass. Glossy glasses were characterized by peeling layers of nearly pure silica glass, whereas white glasses showed different abundance of characteristic elements. A third type of glass exhibited growth rings centered around points rich in Ti or Sb compounds, with the rings having a similar composition. The authors hypothesised as to the origin of these compounds. Schalm and co-workers described the use of electron probe X-ray micro-analysis for the analysis of window and artifact glass fragments from Raversijde, a medieval fishing village in Belgium.228 Comparisons with French and German glasses as well as urban glass from Belgium were made. In general, it was found that glasses made from wood ash dominated although there were some Na rich pieces, which were thought to have been either imported from Venice or to have been made later in Antwerp where Facon de Venice glass manufacturing was established. The role of SIMS in cultural heritage studies and on corrosion studies has been reviewed by Dowsett and Adriaens (29 references).62 The authors stated that the technique offers ppm or even ppb sensitivity while consuming very little of the sample. It has several configurations, e.g. static SIMS may be used to map the surface layer whereas dynamic SIMS may be used for depth-profiling. The overview went on to discuss the use of ultra-low energy SIMS which has only recently been applied to analysis of cultural heritage materials. Low energy SIMS has also been used by Fearn and colleagues to investigate the corrosion of glass stored in museums.229 The aim of the paper was to use low energy SIMS for depth profiling purposes in an attempt to find a suitable environment for the safe storage of the glass objects. The techniques of SIMS and XPS have also been used for depth-profiling studies of Roman glass fragments that had been submerged in seawater for over 1800 years.230 Particular attention was paid to determining the oxidation states of the analytes and for determining the O to Si ratio. The analytes for the study were Al, C, Ca and Mg. Acid solutions are known to corrode glass matrices and it is not simply the concentration of the H+ ion that is the rate-determining factor. The anion associated with the acid moiety is also known to play a crucial role in the de-stabilisation process. Jones and Betz hypothesised that chloride ions form complexes with FeIII which may accelerate the process.231 They therefore tested the corrosion effects of different concentrations of hydrochloric acid on glass fibres. This was achieved by measuring the strength of the fibres before and after exposure. In addition, AAS was used to test the solutions for the cations leached from the glass. Takagi and colleagues used RBS to measure the effect on the elemental depth profile of soaking radioactive waste glass in solutions of humic acid.232 In pure water, multivalent ions such as Fe and Zr accumulated near the surface, whereas in the presence of 100 ppm humic acid, these accumulations did not exist. This was attributed to the possible formation of water soluble metal complexes. The dissolved ions were determined by ICP-OES. Leaching studies from glasses has been another popular topic. Leaching of Ba and Sr from aged glass particles/resin matrix dental composites for 4 and 8 months in humid air, artificial saliva, water and 50% ethanol has been measured by Zhou et al. by analysing the surfaces of the material using SIMS and X-ray wavelength dispersive spectrometry.183 The artificial saliva was found to cause the greatest leaching whilst also leaving crystalline deposits on the material. The authors proposed three different mechanisms for the leaching. Bertoncello and co-workers immersed lead silicate glass (43.5% lead oxide) in dilute nitric acid (pH = 2) at 90 °C for different times and then studied the surfaces of the glass using techniques such as RBS, SEM-EDS and XPS.233 In addition, the solutions were also analysed for Pb as well as other metallic ions using ICP-OES. Results indicated that the leached layer, which was hundreds of nanometres thick, was depleted of Pb and alkaline ions. The thickness of the leached layer was approximately 10 times thinner than that obtained on a glass that was more rich in Pb (66% lead oxide). The kinetics of the leaching process were, however, exactly the same.
Several other interesting applications have been described. The application of XRF with a pyroelectric X-ray generator to the analysis of glass and ceramics has been described.234 The power of the device was several orders of magnitude lower than a conventional tube but, despite this, Ba, Ca, Cr, Fe, K, Pb, Si, Sr, Ti and Zn were determined. Lighter elements, e.g. Al, Mg and Na were not detected because of the low fluorescent yield and because of the absorption of fluorescent X-rays in the air. The advantage of this device was that it has no dimensional limitations, hence it may be used to analyze large objects that cannot be put into ordinary XRF spectrometers. A radiofrequency GD ion source coupled with a commercial ToF-MS instrument has been developed for the direct analysis of glass samples.235 Several configurations were used including with and without a sampler cone. It was found that higher sensitivity was obtained in the absence of the sampler cone. Different homogeneous glasses (up to 6 mm thick) were analysed for both major and minor analytes. Isotope ratio accuracies of ±1% and a mass resolving power of 700 were achieved. Moakes et al. described the doping of glass with Li ions, by exposing it to a solution of organic solvent containing a soluble Li salt such as LiBr and a small amount of water.236 Under these conditions, the activity of Li is extremely high and this causes it to partition into the hydrated glass surface. The partitioning between the glass surface and the organic phases was measured using LIBS and AAS, respectively. Bingham and Hand have described the preparation and analysis of durable phosphate glasses formed by vitrifying waste filter cakes from two metal finishing operations.237 The authors used the techniques of EDXRF and an ICP technique to analyse dried, heat-treated and vitrified samples. It was found that heat treatment or vitrification decreased the hydrolytic dissolution by up to three orders of magnitude, to a level that, in some cases, was better than borosilicate glass. The authors attributed this to the high levels of Fe and Zn in the wastes, which gave the glasses their durability. The authors concluded that the compositions and performance of some of the vitrified waste glasses were comparable to those of glasses that are under consideration for immobilisation of toxic and nuclear wastes. Interactions of gaseous nitric acid, at concentrations of between 46 ppb and 4 × 103 ppm in water vapour at room temperature, with surfaces of borosilicate glass, quartz and Teflon have been studied by Dubowski et al.238 Analysis of the surfaces using ToF-SIMS, XPS, FTIR and AFM indicated that the presence of the nitric acid led to the uptake of far more water than in its absence. On the glass, exposure to the nitric acid-water mixture resulted in surface segregation of trace metal oxides and their nitrates formed from reaction with the nitric acid. The majority of these oxides could be removed by simple rinsing with water, although the oxide of Zn remained on the surface.
3.4 Ceramics and refractories
Sinclair and colleagues have published an overview paper that commented on recent developments on the nano-characterization of materials.239 Included in the discussion was the development of a back-scattered diffraction capability and improved resolution for SEM, focused ion beam (FIB) instruments that provide in situ etching and deposition capability as well as ion and electron imaging. Image resolution of 0.1 nm may be obtained by TEM and the development of surface analysis techniques such as Auger electron spectroscopy that has a resolution of 10 nm, SIMS that has a resolution of 50 nm and XPS that has a resolution of 5–10 μm were also said to have found a place in a well-equipped materials characterization laboratory. An overview of the surface and depth-profiling capabilities of ToF-SIMS has been prepared by Andersen et al.240 These authors highlighted the relative merits of the technique stating that since it can provide analytical information about the chemical matrix at the near surface region with a depth and lateral resolution at the nm level, it is of especial use for determining corrosion, contamination, interaction with the environment or diffusion of material components.
Two independent research groups have re-discovered the relative merits of slurry sample introduction to plasma instrumentation.241,242 In the former paper, Wang and co-workers used sedimentation tests, SEM and zeta potential measurements to characterize slurries of aluminium nitride. The zeta potential of the interface between the particle and the medium can be controlled by careful pH adjustment and by introducing polyethylene imine (PEI). For slurries whose particles were in the nm range, 2.0% PEI was necessary, but for μm range particles, this could be reduced to 0.8%. Resultant slurries were analysed by ICP-OES using aqueous solutions as calibrants. The results were compared with those obtained by using a fusion method to bring the samples into solution. Quantitative recovery was reported for analytes from particles in the nm range, but the slurries of larger particle size yielded less reliable results, with analytes such as Cu, Fe, Mg, Mn etc. producing adequate data, but the more refractory analytes, e.g. Si, Y etc. exhibiting significant deviation from reference values. The other paper described an ultrasonic internecine grinding technique for the preparation of sintered zirconia—alumina ceramic materials.242 Sample was ground with the same pestle fixed on an ultrasonic horn along with the same sample coarsely crushed in water for 10 mins. Between 10 and 20 mg of sample was ground into a mean particle size of 0.5–0.7 μm and, once the pH had been raised to 12 by the addition of tetramethylammonium hydroxide, this produced a stable slurry that was capable of being nebulised yielding similar sensitivity to aqueous standards.
Several applications concerning the analysis of biomedical-based ceramics have been reported, although these applications are usually published in bio-medical type journals and rarely discuss the results of the atomic spectroscopy in detail. Many of these types of ceramic are used as coatings for orthopaedic implants in an attempt to prevent corrosion and must therefore undergo leaching tests to establish the extent to which they are successful. An example of this type of application has been described by Duran and co-workers who prepared and then characterized sol-gel formed coatings for stainless steel (ASTM F138), cobalt alloy (ASTM F75) and titanium alloy (ASTM F67) implant materials.243 As well as preventing degradation, these materials should also promote the formation of hydroxyapatite layers on its surface, which would permit the natural bonding to living tissues. In this paper, coating materials formed from glass-ceramic particles in hybrid methyl-triethoxysilane and tetraethylorthosilicate acidic solution were soaked in simulated body solutions for a period of up to a year. The material was then monitored for hydroxyapatite formation and the ions released into solution were measured by ICP-MS. A paper by Padilla et al. described the preparation of hydroxyapatite pieces, also by the gel-casting method.244 The rheological properties of slurries made from hydroxyapatite calcined at 1200 °C and at 1100 °C were tested and these were found to determine the mechanical properties of the final products. It was found that the hydroxyapatite samples calcined at 1100 °C or lower were not suitable for forming concentrated slurries. The raw and calcined hydroxyapatite pieces were characterized using techniques such as XRD, XRF, elemental analysis and FTIR. Bio-medical ceramic applications also include dental composites. Diopside ceramic pellets with a nominal composition of 55.5% silica, 25.9% calcium oxide and 18% magnesium oxide were soaked in human parotid saliva over different time intervals to determine the effects on the materials of soaking in a solution of high protein content.245 Again, hydroxyapatite layers were formed and these were found to be compact, continuous and composed of many small crystallites with a structure similar to that of natural cortical bone and dentine. The morphology, structure and composition of the hydroxyapatite layers formed were investigated using the techniques of SEM and TEM combined with X-ray dispersive spectrometry, whilst changes in the ionic concentration were measured using ICP-OES. Sarkar and co-workers characterized the interactions of mineral trioxide aggregate with a synthetic tissue fluid composed of neutral phosphate buffer saline solution, and root canal dentin in extracted human teeth.246 The techniques of SEM, X-ray dispersive spectroscopy, XRD and ICP-OES were used for the characterization. Again, soaking at 37 °C for two months led to the formation of hydroxyapatite layers. The authors concluded that Ca was the material most likely to be released from the aggregate, which then reacted with the phosphates in the synthetic tissue fluid forming the hydroxyapatite.
A whole series of papers describing the analysis of raw materials or the preparation and characterization of new ceramic types has been published. Gazulla and co-workers used XRF, potentiometry, coulometry, ICP-OES and AAS to characterize the raw materials used during the manufacture of traditional ceramic tiles, frits, glazes and pigments.247 Among the samples analysed were silica sand, clay and kaolin, feldspars, calcium and magnesium carbonates, sodium and calcium borates and zirconium silicates. The methods were validated by analysis of a large range of reference materials. It was found that XRF was capable of determining most of the elements within the samples, although some of the lighter ones, e.g. Li, F and B had to be determined by ICP-OES/AAS, potentiometry and potentiometry/ICP-OES, respectively. The same group has also used several techniques for the chemical, mineralogical and thermal characterization of natural and synthetic borates used as raw materials in the ceramics industry.248 Four natural borates (three colemanites and one ulexite) and two synthetic borates (a boric acid and a borax pentahydrate) were analysed using XRF (for Al, As, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Na, S, Si Sr and Ti), ICP-OES (for B), potentiometry, XRD, thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis. Another paper that has described the preparation and characterization of B containing ceramics has been produced by Gu et al.249 Nanocrystalline boron carbide (B4C) was prepared by a solvothermal reduction of carbon tetrachloride using metallic lithium in the presence of amorphous boron powder at 600 °C in an autoclave. The product powder was characterized by XRD, Raman spectroscopy, ICP-OES and TEM. The last technique indicated that the B4C nanocrystallites were slightly agglomerated, with particle size of approximately 15–40 nm. Biomorphic silicon carbide ceramics are a new class of material that are prepared by several complex steps including pre-processing (shaping, drying and high temperature pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere) and reaction with liquid silicon.250 Since the properties of the ceramics are dependent on the content of certain elements, the ceramics formed from wood were characterized using the techniques of XPS, LIBS and FT-IR as well as ICP-MS and ETAAS. The optimized dissolution of the samples was undertaken by an acid attack utilizing microwave irradiation under high pressure. Unsurprisingly, XPS and FT-IR was suitable for determining SiC, whereas XPS and LIBS were capable of determining the trace analytes. Ultra-trace analytes were best determined using ICP-MS or ETAAS. In all cases, the major components were found to be Al, B, C, Na, S and Si. Wank and co-workers have used atomic layer deposition in a fluidized bed reactor to form a coating of alumina on fine nickel particles251 and on boron nitride particles.252 In the former paper, trimethylaluminium and water were used as reagents in the fluidized bed reactor using nitrogen as the fluidizing gas. The reactions were conducted at 450 K and it was found that alumina films could be constructed with thicknesses controllable to the nm level for the 150 μm sized particles. The techniques of XPS, ICP-OES, TEM and particle size distributions were used to characterize the particles. In the latter example,252 similar analytical techniques were used to characterize the coatings. It was found in this instance that the coating thickness could be controlled to the angstrom level and that every boron nitride particle was coated uniformly with the alumina. The coated material was found to be 25% stronger than the uncoated particles and the thermal conductivity decreased by 17%. A study by Kirby et al. investigated several methods of producing oxalate precursors for subsequent thermal decomposition to high quality barium zirconate ceramics.253 The most favourable system used barium acetate, ammonium oxalate and zirconium oxychloride. Unlike other reported oxalate processes, this system allowed near stoichiometric precipitation without requiring a large excess of the barium reagents, elevated temperature or the slow addition of reagents. The phase purity, particle size and surface area of the powdered ceramics can be adjusted by variation of the stoichiometry, and calcinations temperature. The products were characterized by XRF, XRD, nitrogen BET adsorption, DTA/TGA and TEM. This type of ceramic is capable of holding melts of the Y2O3–BaCuO2–CuO (YBCO) superconductors for up to seven days. An oxalate precursor route has also been reported for the preparation of barium strontium titanate.254 A simple one stage cation-exchange reaction between stoichiometric solutions of ammonium titanyl oxalate and barium hydroxide + strontium nitrate at room temperature was investigated for the formation of the precursor molecule barium-strontium titanyl oxalate. This reaction was found to be quantitative, with reaction yields equal to or greater than 99%. Pyrolysis of this precursor at 730 °C for four hours produced the desired ceramic. Both the final product and the precursor molecule were characterized by XRD, XRF, TGA, DTA, FTIR and SEM. These tests indicated that the ceramic powder produced was cubic, highly pure, stoichiometric and sub-micron in size; with all the particles being nearly uniform in both size and shape. Lead lanthanum zirconate titanate (PLZT) ceramics have received attention this year because of their photostrictive properties in microactuation processes.255 These authors differed the sintering periods in an attempt to explore the intrinsic photostrictive effect in the PLZT system by obtaining PLZT ceramics with the same grain size but different compositions. The compositions of the ceramics were determined using XRF. Epitaxial layers of aluminium nitride have been grown at temperatures between 1900 and 2400 °C via sublimation recondensation of polycrystalline sintered aluminium nitride in a radio frequency heated graphite furnace.256 Maximum growth rate occurred at 2400 °C and XRD examination of the surface morphology demonstrated the hexagonal symmetry of the seed. SIMS indicated that there was very low C incorporation into the films. The authors managed to propose a correlation between the growth conditions and the properties of the ceramic. The technique of SIMS has also been used to determine the O diffusivity in polycrystalline mullite ceramics.257 Two ceramic materials were tested, i.e. a low alumina mullite (72% alumina, 28% silica) and a high alumina one (78% alumina, 22% silica). The tests were conducted in an atmosphere enriched in 18O and its diffusion into the ceramics determined by SIMS. For both types of ceramic, diffusion through the grain boundaries were several orders of magnitude greater than through the bulk volume of the ceramic.
As always, there has been substantial interest in the analysis of archaeological or ancient ceramics. Many of these are simple routine applications and will therefore not be commented upon. There is still a growing propensity to use chemometric studies of the analytical data obtained from the analyses so that further information of its history may be gleaned. As with all historical or precious samples, minimal damage must be inflicted and therefore techniques such as laser ablation (LA) sample introduction or XRF are common. Several examples of this type of application have been published and includes one by Hall258 who used EDXRF to analyse pottery sherds from the late Jomon period and then used PCA and Cluster Analysis to treat the analytical data. The author discovered two basic clusters and these corresponded to local sedimentary raw materials near the sites of manufacture. A similar paper has been published by Bakraji, who determined 18 analytes in ancient pottery from Tel Al Baharia using radioisotope XRF.259 The analytical results were then treated by the techniques of Factor Score and Cluster Analysis. It was confirmed that the pottery was made from at least four different clay sources. Fermo’s group produced a series of papers in this review period, the most interesting of which used multivariate analysis of data obtained from the analysis of ancient Etruscan ceramics.260 In an attempt to determine their provenance and to acquire knowledge about the ceramic production technology, about 100 sherds from the VIII to IV centuries B.C. were analysed by ICP-OES and FAES and the data obtained treated by PCA and Kohonen Artificial Neural Networks. It was found that most of the sherds had been produced from the same area and that there was a continuity of both materials and technology throughout. Papadopoulou and co-workers compared the use of a portable micro-XRF instrument with ICP-OES for the analysis of 7th to 5th century B.C. ancient ceramic sherds.261 The XRF data was obtained in two different ways, i.e. directly, with no sample pretreatment other than surface cleaning, as well as after pressing the sample into a pellet. For the ICP-OES analysis, the samples were dissolved using microwave assisted decomposition within pressurized vessels. The reference material SARM 69 was used to calibrate the XRF instrument and other CRMs were used for method validation, for all three techniques. The results obtained were treated by correlation analysis and the Student’s T-test. James and co-workers compared LA-ICP-MS and INAA for the multi-elemental analysis of archaeological artifacts and then used cluster analysis to treat the data.262 For the LA-ICP-MS study, the matrix element Al was used as an internal standard to normalize for variations in the sample density and sample mass ablated. The authors concluded that absolute accuracy and precision of the LA-ICP-MS data was inferior to those of the INAA analysis. However, the multivariate statistical data treatment demonstrated that there was a high degree of comparability, with cluster analysis assignments between the two techniques differing in only 4 out of 86 cases.
3.5 Catalysts
As always, the preparation and characterization of new catalysts has proved to be the most common area of research in this review period. Unfortunately, many of these papers concentrate very much on either the synthesis or the actions of these catalysts and tend to mention only the atomic spectrometric characterization briefly. Despite this, mention will me made of some of the broad areas of research in the fields of catalysts. Of the different types of catalysts investigated, the most common has been those based on modifications of zeolites. The most frequently modified zeolite has been ZSM-5. De Lucas and co-workers studied the influence of the binder on the properties and performance of palladium containing zeolite catalysts in n-octane hydroisomerization.263 As well as ZSM-5, the catalysts mordenite and beta, both with and without binder were also tested. Characterization was achieved using the techniques of atomic absorption, ICP-OES, the chemisorption of hydrogen, surface area measurements, the temperature programmed desorption of ammonia and Al-27 NMR. The binder was found to affect the zeolite acidity and its porosity, both of which affected the catalytic performance. The presence of the binder caused the catalysts to agglomerate and this led to a decrease in the strong acidity of the zeolites, which caused a decrease in the catalytic performance for mordenite (from 90.5% to 53.8% conversion) and for ZSM-5 (from 78.4 to 71.2%). Conversely, the activity of the beta zeolite increased from 22.9 to 88.7%. This was attributed to the formation of extra-framework aluminium species formed during the agglomeration process. Zeolites with the structure code MFI were used to prepare ZSM-5 catalysts with different Si to M ratio (where M is either Ga or Al).264 The catalysts formed were characterized using XRD, nitrogen adsorption at −196 °C, TEM, XPS and ICP-OES; and were found to be of the composition 0.10% Pt/H{Ga}ZSM-5, 0.50% Pt/H{Ga}ZSM-5, 1.0% Pt/H{Ga}ZSM-5 and 1.0% Pt/H{Al}ZSM-5. The XPS analysis indicated that there was extra-structural Ga in those catalysts of the Pt/H{Ga}ZSM-5 type and that it was probably present as Ga2O3. In addition, there was also evidence of an increase in surface Ga when the Pt concentration in the solid Pt/H{Ga}ZSM-5 increased. All of the catalysts formed were tested under standard conditions for the acetone transformation reaction and it was found that the initial activity of 1.0% Pt/H{Al}ZSM-5 was four times that of the 1.0% Pt/H{Ga}ZSM-5 and that the former had a selectivity for the desired product (IBMK) three times higher than the latter. Another paper reported the preparation, characterization and catalytic activity for methanol dehydrogenation of a number of Fe containing ZSM-5 catalysts, e.g. HFeAlZSM-5 and HFeZSM-5 prepared by hydrothermal synthesis and Fe-modified ZSM-5 prepared by solid-state ion exchange.265 Techniques such as XRD, ICP-OES, FTIR and electron spin resonance (ESR) were used for the characterization. It was found that the Fe containing zeolites had greater selectivity for dimethyl ether and caused least carbon dioxide production. Two papers by Kollmer and co-workers discussed the use of di-ammonium silicon hexafluoride modified ZSM-5 as catalysts for the hydroxylation of benzene with nitrous oxide.266,267 The reagent was used to de-aluminate the catalysts by three different procedures, namely aqueous treatment in a buffered solution, isomorphous substitution in the solid state at moderate temperatures and removal of aluminium fluoro-complexes by thermal decomposition subsequent to the isomorphous substitution procedure. The materials were characterized by ICP-OES, physisorption of nitrogen, XRD, FTIR, pyrolysis FTIR and various modes of NMR. Catalytic activity was greatest for the third method of modification, whereas method one led to very little benzene hydroxylation.266 Zhai et al. studied the same reaction/catalysts and theorized that the greatest cause of deactivation of the catalyst was by carbon deposition blocking the mouths of the pores.268 These workers modified the catalyst by chemically depositing silicon on the surface and then they measured the effect this deposition had on the catalytic activity. The products were characterized by XRF, EPS, XRD, TEM and nitrogen adsorption. The characterization confirmed that a uniform SiO2 membrane was formed on the crystal surface which covered the acid centres of the catalysts thereby inhibiting the coking effect. Optimum conditions for formation of this inhibiting membrane were: 4% load of the silanizing agent, 15 ml volume of reagent to 1 g of catalyst and a 16 h treatment time. Compared with the non-modified catalyst, the product can increase phenol productivity by 14% over 3 h and by 41% over 6 h. Different types of zeolites (transition metal modified NaX and CaA types) have been compared for the catalytic combustion of hexane.269 The transition metals Co2+, Fe2+ and Mn2+ were used for the ion exchange and ICP-MS was used to determine the percentage of ion exchanged. This figure was found to vary between 39 and 98%, depending on the ion and the type of zeolite used. Parent and modified catalysts were characterized by a range of techniques including XRD, nitrogen physisorption, temperature programmed reduction (TPR), oxygen and ammonia programmed desorption and inverse gas chromatography. As a general trend, the CaA zeolites showed higher activity than the NaX ones, and the Mn-modified CaA zeolite had the greatest activity for hexane oxidation of all.
Another large area of interest has been the use of mesoporous catalytic materials (MCM), the most popular of which has been MCM-41. Numerous studies have made modifications to this material and then characterized the products using an assortment of techniques, including atomic spectrometric measurements. Bhargava and Akolekar compared a number of mesoporous catalysts of type Al-MCM-41 containing transition metal ions such as Co, Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn for adsorption of NO and CO.270 The materials were characterized using the techniques of FTIR, ICP-MS, XPS and XRD. The XPS data indicated that the transition metal particles were located within the bulk or pore channels of the support. The FTIR was used to determine the level of adsorption and disproportionation of the CO and NO. Vinu and co-workers prepared highly ordered mesoporous Mg-Al-MCM-41 materials with different n(Si)/n(Mg and Al) ratios using magnesium acetate, sodium aluminate and sodium silicate as the source of Mg, Na and Al.271 The materials obtained were characterized by XRD, nitrogen adsorption, Al-27 NMR and AAS analysis. It was found that the wall thickness and pore diameter can be controlled by varying the Mg content in the synthesis gel. The Al was found to occupy the tetrahedral sites in the calcined product. The catalytic activity of the materials was investigated by the iso-propylation of m-cresol using isopropyl alcohol. For the products labeled MgAl-MCM-41(X), where X is the molar n(Si)/n(Mg)
					+
					n(Al) ratio, the product MgAl MCM-41(20) showed higher catalytic activity and greater specificity than did MgAl MCM-41(23). Metal (Co and Mn) impregnated MCM-41 and Al-MCM-41(with Si/Al of 99 and 158) and Si-MCM-41 and Al-MCM-41 (Si/Al of 99) have been prepared and characterized and then the catalytic activity for the vapour phase oxidation of ethylbenzene272 and isopropylbenzene273 measured. Methods used to characterize the materials were XRD, AAS, diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS)-UV-Vis and electron spin resonance (ESR). The loading of Mn was greater than that for Co in both examples. Carbon dioxide free air was used at temperatures of between 200 and 300 °C273 and at 250, 300, 350 and 375 °C272 for the vapour phase oxidation studies. The conversion of isopropylbenzene to cumene hydroperoxide increased with increasing temperature to 300 °C, but was found to decrease at 325 °C. The Co and Mn catalysts were found to have approximately the same activity for this reaction. For the ethylbenzene however, in which acetophenone was the major product, with minor amounts of benzaldehyde and styrene; the order of activity was Mn,Co-MCM-41 > Mn,Co-Al-MCM-41(158) > Mn-MCM-41 > Mn-Al-MCM-41(99) > Mn-Al-MCM-41(158) > Co-MCM-41 > Co-Al-MCM-41(99) > Co-Al-MCM-41(158). Wang and co-workers described the preparation (using a temperature controlled reduction method) and characterization of Ni2Mo3N derivatives of MCM-41 for the catalytic hydrogenation of aromatics.274 As usual a range of techniques were used to characterize the product, including ICP-OES. The Ni2Mo3N-MCM-41 catalyst was found to have greater activity than either the Ni-MCM-41 or the Mo2N catalyst for the hydrogenation of p-xylene and naphthalene. Another similar paper, in which Mn-MCM-41 and Zr-Mn-MCM-41 analogues were prepared, characterized and used during the epoxidation of trans-stilbene has been reported.275 Subrahmanyam et al. compared V-MCM-41 with V-MCM-48 and a V substituted mesoporous aluminophosphate for the oxidation of toluene to aldehyde and benzoic acid when 70% tert-butyl hydroperoxide was used as the oxidant.276 If 30% hydrogen peroxide was used as oxidant, cresols were found to be formed. The mesoporous aluminophosphate was characterized using ESR, XPS, DRS-UV-Vis and ICP-OES. Vapour phase synthesis of epsilon caprolactam via a Beckmann rearrangement of cyclohenanone-oxime has been described by Chang and Ko in two papers using two different mesoporous molecular sieves. In one Si-MCM-48 and Al-MCM-48 with different Si/Al ratios were used between 300 and 400 °C and at atmospheric pressure in a fixed-bed, continuous flow reactor.277 Again, the catalysts were characterized using assorted techniques, including XRD, TEM, ICP-OES and both Al-27 and Si-29 NMR. A Si/Al of 10 gave excellent catalytic performance, whilst using ethanol and 1-hexanol as solvents enhanced the catalyst’s stability. In the other paper,278 the mesoporous sieve ALSBA-15(X), where X denotes the Si to Al ratio, was used at 300–400 °C in a fixed-bed, integral flow reactor. The same techniques were used for the characterization of the catalyst. On this occasion, the activity was found to correlate with the catalyst’s acidity.
Other examples of the preparation and characterization of catalysts include the physical vapor deposition (PVD) of multi-component Mo/V/Nb/Te oxide catalysts onto silicon wafers or honeycomb cordierites279 and several that have utilized precious metals or their alloys.280–282 In the first of these examples, the PVD prepared catalysts were deposited in different metal sequences and then calcined at different temperatures.279 The products obtained were characterized using XPS, SIMS and near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS). The catalytic properties depended on the calcinations temperature, calcinations environment (air or nitrogen) and on the sequence of the metal deposition. Supported gold catalysts have drawn worldwide interest because of their novel properties and their potential applications in industry. However, the origin of the catalytic activity in gold nano-particles is not properly understood. A study by Fu and co-workers used ToF-SIMS to investigate the nature of the Au in Au(1.8 wt%)/gamma – alumina and Au(2.8 wt%)/titania.280 The SIMS spectrum indicated the presence of AuO−, AuO2− and AuOH− ion clusters, which was direct evidence of oxidized Au on supported gold catalysts. Kawazu et al. described the preparation of gold-titania hybrid nano-particles.282 The preparation was described in detail and the product was characterized using EDXRF. It was found that the properties of the catalysts changed, depending on whether the titania was supplied as nano-particles (with a mean diameter of 7 nm) or as titanium tetraisopropoxide chelated by acetyl acetone. However, there was no effect on the formation of the gold-titania nano-particles, which averaged 23 nm in diameter for both preparation methods. Multi-layered polyelectrolyte film containing palladium nano-particles have been synthesized, characterized and applied to the selective hydrogenation of allyl alcohol.283 The material was synthesized by alternating immersions of a substrate in PdCl42− and polyethyleneimine solutions, followed by chemical reduction of the Pd(II) with sodium tetrahydroborate. The characterization used TEM (which confirmed the formation of particles with a diameter of 1–4 nm), XPS (which demonstrated that 70% of the Pd was in the elemental form) and atomic emission, which demonstrated that very little Pd was leached from the film during the deposition of the polymer. Wang and co-workers described the synthesis and characterization of a copper substituted mesoporus silica (Cu-SBA-15) catalyst, that could be used for the hydroxylation of phenol using hydrogen peroxide.284 Characterization was again achieved using XRD, ICP-OES, FT-IR and nitrogen adsorption/desorption experiments. The Cu was found to be incorporated into the framework position of the catalyst forming a new type of active site, which raised the phenol conversion to 62.4%. The catalyst had better performance than microporous titanium silicate zeolites. Yttrium stabilized zirconia has been used by two groups to partially oxidize methane to synthesis gas. In one publication, XRF and low energy ion scattering (LEIS) were used to characterize the catalyst; and the effect of calcination temperature, yttria content and the impurities (CaO, TiO2 and Na2O) on catalytic performance was determined.285 The authors concluded that the addition of yttria created active sites and hence, improved performance of the catalyst. In the other paper, SIMS was used to visualize the distribution of the active sites for the decomposition of methane or for the adsorption of reformed gases (hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide).286
Some papers described simple applications in which atomic spectrometric techniques were used to determine impurities or sometimes the main elements in the catalysts. Bichinho et al. described an XRF method for determining Mg and Ti in Ziegler Natta catalysts.287 The catalyst could not be analysed directly because of its instability, but after calcinations the resultant Mg and Ti oxides could be determined. Since no certified material was available, the authors used high purity MgO and TiO2 to calibrate. Samples and standards were mixed and compressed with high purity boric acid flux prior to analysis. Linear calibration was achieved and the results compared well with those obtained from independent techniques (complexometric titration for Mg and UV-Vis spectrophotometry for Ti). The techniques of XRF and RBS have been used to analyse supported zirconocenes.288 A series of zirconocenes was prepared by grafting sequentially Cp2ZrCl2 and (n-butyl Cp)2 ZrCl2
					(where Cp = cyclopentadienyl) onto silica. Electron probe microanalysis indicated that the metal distribution in the catalyst surface was more uniform for the mixed compounds when compared with grafting only from (n-butyl Cp)2ZrCl2. Wu and co-workers have established a technique whereby Pd may be separated from a platinum matrix within an electrothermal vaporizer by using different vaporization temperatures.43 Sample (including the auto catalyst NIST SRM 2557) was dissolved and diluted so that it contained 0.5 M nitric acid. A chelating resin (YPA(4)), that is a polythioether backbone modified with a diaminoisopropylmercaptane chelating group, was then added, and the Pd and Pt retained. The resin was then slurried and introduced to the electrothermal vaporizer. The Pd was found to vaporize at 1800–1900 °C, whereas the Pt was not vaporized until 2600 °C. Based on these different vaporization temperatures, the authors managed to determine the Pd in a large excess of platinum by using ICP-OES as a means of detection. Rojas and co-workers have determined Rh in different sample types including environmental matrices and catalysts by preconcentrating it on a micro-column of 1,5-Bis(2-pyridyl)-3-sulfophenyl methylene thicarbonohydrazide immobilized on Dowex 1 X8.289 The micro-column of resin was placed in the autosampler arm of a GFAAS instrument. Elution was by a small volume of nitric acid (4 M) that was placed directly into the atomizer. The effects of various parameters, e.g. pH of retention, volume and concentration of eluent, sample loading time and flow rate and potential interferences were all investigated. The procedure, which was describes as being highly selective, fairly sensitive, simple, rapid and economical, yielded a LOD of 0.3 ng ml−1, a linear range of 0–50 ng ml−1 and a precision of 1.8% RSD at 10 ng ml−1.
4 Glossary of terms



AAS
Atomic absorption spectrometry


AMS
Accelerator mass spectrometry


ANSI
American National Standards Institute


APDC
Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate


BCR
Bureau of Community Reference


CFP
Circulating fluidized bed


CMOS
Complimentary metal oxide semiconductor


CRM
Certified reference material


DCP
Direct current plasma


DPT
Diphenyl tin


DRS
Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy


DTA
Differential thermal analysis


DTPA
Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid


EDX
Energy dispersive X-ray analysis


EDXRF
Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence


EPMA
Electron probe microanalysis


ERDA
Elastic recoil detection analysis


ESP
Electrostatic precipitator


ESR
Electron spin resonance


ETAAS
Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry


ETV
Electrothermal vaporisation


FF
Fast flow


FI
Flow injection


FIB
Focused ion beam


FTA
Fission track analysis


FT-IR
Fourier transform-infra red


GC
Gas chromatography


GD
Glow discharge


GFAAS
Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy


HPLC
High performance liquid chromatography


IBMK
Isobutylmethyl ketone


ICP
Inductively coupled plasma


ID
Isotope dilution


INAA
Instrumental neutron activation analysis


LA
Laser ablation


LDA
Linear discriminant analysis


LED
Light emitting diode


LEIS
Low energy ion scattering


LIBS
Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy


LIPS
Laser induced plasma spectroscopy


LOD
Limit of detection


LOQ
Limit of quantitation


MIM
Metal insulator metal


MOCVD
Metal organic chemical vapour deposition


MPT
Monophenyl tin


MS
Mass spectrometry


Nd∶YAG
Neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet


NEXAFS
Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure


NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology


NMR
Nuclear magnetic resonance


OES
Optical emission spectrometry


OSL
Optical stimulated luminescence


PCA
Principle component analysis


PET
Polyethyleneterephthalate


PGM
Platinum group metals


PIXE
Particle induced X-ray emission


PVD
Physical vapour deposition


RBS
Rutherford backscattering spectrometry


REEs
Rare earth elements


RF
Radio frequency


RMM
Relative molecular mass


RSD
Relative standard deviation


SEM
Scanning electron microscopy


SF
Sector field


SIMCA
Soft independent modelling of class analogy


SIMS
Secondary ion mass spectrometry


SPM
Scanning probe microscopy


SRM
Standard reference material


SRXRF
Synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence


TEM
Transmission electron microscopy


TGA
Thermogravimetric analysis


TMAH
Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide


TMPP
Tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine


ToF
Time of flight


TPT
Triphenyl tin


TSL
Thermally stimulated luminescence


TRXPS
Total reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy


TXRF
Total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry


USN
Ultra sonic nebuliser


UV
Ultra violet


VPD-DC
Vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection


VUV
Vacuum ultra violet


WDXRF
Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence


XANES
X-ray absorption near edge spectrometry


XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy


XRD
X-ray diffraction


XRF
X-ray fluorescence



5 References
A. Fisher, P. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. N. Nelms and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1567–1595 RSC .
O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(2), 130–157 RSC .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 323–369 RSC .
P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, J. Marshall, C. Streli, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1397–1419 RSC .
J. R. Bacon, J. C. Greenwood, L. Van Vaeck and J. G. Williams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 1020–1057 RSC .
E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, A. Fisher, W. J. Price, C. M. M. Smith and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 775–812 RSC .
W. B. Lee, J. Y. Wu, Y. I. Lee and J. Sneddon, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2004, 39(1), 27–97 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Garcia, J. M. Vadillo and J. J. Laserna, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(11), 1347–1352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Palanco, S. Conesa and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 462–467 RSC .
J. Gruber, J. Heitz, N. Arnold, D. Bauerle, N. Ramaseder, W. Meyer, J. Hochortler and F. Koch, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(4), 457–462 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. O. Orzi and G. M. Bilmes, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(12), 1475–1480 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sturm, J. Vrenegor, R. Noll and M. Hemmerlin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 451–456 RSC .
A. B. Anfone and R. K. Marcus, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 333–344 RSC .
R. Payling, T. Nelis, M. Aeberhard, J. Michler and P. Seris, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(10), 1384–1391 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liang, Y. Liu and L. Guo, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 1006–1009 RSC .
W. Y. Song, P. Y. Zhong, J. Liang, Z. K. Zhang, J. G. Zheng and Y. Li, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 32(7), 861–865 CAS .
C. Dubuisson, A. G. Cox, C. W. McLeod, I. Whiteside, R. Jowitt and H. Falk, ISIJ Int., 2004, 44(11), 1859–1866 Search PubMed .
A. G. Coedo, I. Padilla and M. T. Dorado, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(12), 1481–1487 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Coedo, M. T. Dorado and I. Padilla, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 73–79 CrossRef .
J. S. Park and T. Nakamura, Met. Mater.-Int., 2004, 10(3), 245–251 Search PubMed .
H. Enami, T. Nakamura, H. Oda, T. Yamada and T. Tsukamoto, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 219–230 CAS .
A. Scharf, W. Kretschmer, G. Morgenroth, T. Uhl, K. Kritzler, K. Hunger and E. Pernicka, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 175–180 CAS .
C. M. Huls, P. M. Grootes, M. J. Nadeau, F. Bruhn, P. Hasselberg and H. Erlenkeuser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 709–715 CrossRef .
F. Li and R. S. Houk, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(7), 776–783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boileau, D. Goltz and M. Hinds, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(3), 185–192 CAS .
X. D. Hou, Y. H. He and B. T. Jones, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2004, 39(1), 1–25 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Sieber, L. L. Yu, A. F. Marlow and T. A. Butler, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grolimund, M. Senn, M. Trottmann, M. Janousch, I. Bonhoure, A. M. Scheidegger and M. Marcus, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1627–1635 CrossRef .
H. Nickel, L. Niewolak, J. Zurek and W. J. Quadakkers, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 148(3–4), 241–249 Search PubMed .
Q. Meng, G. S. Frankel, H. O. Colijn and S. H. Goss, Corrosion, 2004, 60(4), 346–355 Search PubMed .
D. Krecar, V. Vassileva, H. Danninger and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(4), 605–609 CAS .
D. Krecar, V. Vassileva, H. Danninger and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(4), 610–618 CAS .
J. Dobranszky, P. J. Szabo, T. Berecz, V. Hrotko and M. Portko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1781–1788 CrossRef .
H. Kockar, M. Alper and H. Topcu, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2004, 42(4), 497–501 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shishkov, I. Dermendjiev, M. Peev, W. Kwasny and A. Kriz, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2004, 157–58, 410–414 CrossRef .
I. V. Cravetchi, M. Taschuk, Y. Y. Tsui and R. Fedosejevs, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1439–1450 CrossRef .
K. Song, D. Kim, H. Cha, Y. Kim, E. C. Jung, I. Choi, H. S. Yoo and S. Oh, Microchem. J., 2004, 76(1–2), 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
F. Colao, R. Fantoni, V. Lazic, L. Caneve, A. Giardini and V. Spizzichino, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 502–504 RSC .
F. R. Doucet, T. F. Belliveau, J. L. Fortier and J. Hubert, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 499–501 RSC .
M. A. Ismail, H. Imam, A. Elhassan, W. T. Youniss and M. A. Harith, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 489–494 RSC .
M. C. Ortiz, L. Sarabia, A. Jurado-Lopez and M. D. L. de Castro, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 515(1), 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luesaiwong and R. K. Marcus, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 345–353 RSC .
Y. W. Wu, Z. C. Jiang, B. Hu, C. M. Xiong and Y. J. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 148(3–4), 279–284 Search PubMed .
V. Krishnan and K. J. Kumar, Angle Orthod., 2004, 74(6), 825–831 Search PubMed .
S. Halbach and G. Welzl, Toxicol. Mech. Methods, 2004, 14(5), 293–299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, Y. Liu, Y. Tuo, F. Q. Zhou, J. G. Zhang, Y. Xiao, S. H. Xiao and Z. Z. Tan, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(5), 267–270 CAS .
J. S. Becker, C. Pickhardt and W. Pompe, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 237(1), 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Boulyga, C. Pickhardt and J. S. Becker, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(2), 53–63 CAS .
D. Talib, R. L. Ma, C. W. McLeod and D. Green, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(3), 156–165 CAS .
S. Klein, Y. Lahaye, G. P. Brey and H. M. Von Kaenel, Archaeometry, 2004, 46, 469–480 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kanicky, H. R. Kuhn and D. Guenther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 218–226 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shekhar, J. Arunachalam, G. R. Krishna, H. R. Ravindra and B. Gopalan, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(4), 157–164 CAS .
R. Shekhar, J. Arunachalam, N. Das and A. M. S. Murthy, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(5), 203–210 CAS .
J. W. Lim, K. Mimura and A. Isshiki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 227(1–4), 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Kim, L. M. He, J. D. Meyer, A. Quintero, J. A. Haynes and W. Y. Lee, Met. Mater. Trans. A, 2004, 35(11), 3581–3593 Search PubMed .
C. N. Zwicky and P. Lienemann, X-Ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(4), 294–300 CrossRef CAS .
A. Denker, J. Opitz-Coutureau, J. L. Campbell, J. A. Maxwell and T. Hopman, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 130–135 CrossRef .
R. Linke, M. Schreiner and G. Demortier, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
L. Beck, S. Bosonnet, S. Reveillon, D. Eliot and F. Pilon, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Guerra, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 185–198 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Njoki, J. Luo, L. Y. Wang, M. M. Maye, H. Quaizar and C. J. Zhong, Langmuir, 2005, 21(4), 1623–1628 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dowsett and A. Adriaens, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 38–52 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Tsai, J. H. Liang, J. J. Kai and G. L. Kulcinski, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 228, 151–155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rozenak, E. Sirois, B. Ladna, H. K. Birnbaum and S. Spooner, J. Alloy. Compd., 2005, 387(1–2), 201–210 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hearn, M. Berglund, M. Ostermann, N. Pusticek and P. Taylor, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 532(1), 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heilmann, S. F. Boulyga and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 190–197 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bouyssiere, P. Leonhard, D. Profrock, F. Baco, C. L. Garcia, S. Wilbur and A. Prange, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 700–702 RSC .
R. J. Cassella, B. Barbosa, R. E. Santelli and A. T. Rangel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(1), 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Saint’Pierre, L. F. Dias, S. M. Maia and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(4), 551–558 CrossRef .
R. Q. Aucelio, A. Doyle, B. S. Pizzorno, M. L. B. Tristao and R. C. Campos, Microchem. J., 2004, 78(1), 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Pavageau, A. Morin, F. Seby, C. Guimon, E. Krupp, C. Pecheyran, J. Poulleau and F. X. Donard, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(7), 2252–2263 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Buchholz, C. J. Mueller, G. C. Martin, A. S. Cheng, R. W. Dibble and B. R. Frantz, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 837–841 CrossRef .
R. Yan, D. T. Liang, L. Tsen, Y. P. Wong and Y. L. Lee, Fuel, 2004, 83(17–18), 2401–2409 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Feng, J. Y. Lu, D. C. Gregoire, Y. J. Hao, C. M. Banic and W. H. Schroeder, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(4), 683–689 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, C. G. Zheng and M. H. Xu, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18(6), 1822–1826 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Guo, J. L. Yang and Z. Y. Liu, Fuel Process. Technol., 2004, 85(8–10), 903–912 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Miller, R. Kandiyoti and D. R. Dugwell, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18(4), 1093–1103 CrossRef CAS .
F. Esaka, K. Watanabe, M. Magara and S. Usuda, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(2), 103–114 CrossRef CAS .
M. Svane, M. Hagstrom and J. B. C. Pettersson, Energy Fuels, 2005, 19(2), 411–417 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Hsu and R. S. Gates, Tribol. Int., 2005, 38(3), 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hershberger, O. O. Ajayi and G. R. Fenske, Tribol. Int., 2005, 38(3), 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
U. Gunst, W. R. Zabel, G. Poll and H. F. Arlinghaus, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(8), 1231–1235 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Hua, J. H. Wang, H. W. Kong, J. Liu, X. Lu and G. W. Xu, J. Sep. Sci., 2004, 27(9), 691–698 Search PubMed .
M. G. R. Vale, I. C. F. Damin, A. Klassen, M. M. Silva, B. Welz, A. F. Silva, F. G. Lepri, D. L. G. Borges and U. Heitmann, Microchem. J., 2004, 77(2), 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaski, H. Hakkanen and J. Korppi-Tommola, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 474–478 RSC .
R. Guchardi and P. C. Hauser, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 945–949 RSC .
K. Newman and R. S. Mason, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1134–1140 RSC .
T. Maeda and K. Wagatsuma, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 81–87 CrossRef .
Z. C. Hu, S. H. Hu, S. Gao, Y. S. Liu and S. L. Lin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1463–1470 CrossRef .
J. P. Snell, C. R. Quetel, L. Lambertsson and J. Qvarnstrom, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1315–1324 RSC .
S. J. Kumar, S. Tesfalidet, J. P. Snell, D. N. Van and W. Frech, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 368–372 RSC .
D. N. Van, R. Lindberg and W. Frech, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 266–272 RSC .
J. L. Burguera and M. Burguera, Talanta, 2004, 64(5), 1099–1108 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Zhu, B. Hu and Z. C. Jiang, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(12), 927–934 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pyrzynska, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2004, 34(2), 69–83 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jos, I. Moreno, A. G. Gonzalez, G. Repetto and A. M. Camean, Talanta, 2004, 63(2), 377–382 CrossRef CAS .
G. Thiel, G. Geisler, I. Blechschmidt and K. Danzer, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378(6), 1630–1636 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. M. Gomez, I. Feldmann, N. Jakubowski and J. T. Andersson, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2004, 52(10), 2962–2974 CrossRef .
M. J. Anjos, R. C. Barroso, R. T. Lopes, E. F. O. de Jesus, S. M. Simabuco and C. R. F. Castro, X-Ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(6), 407–409 CrossRef .
B. Pohl, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2004, 9(8), 503–506 Search PubMed .
S. Hann, Z. Stefanka, K. Lenz and G. Stingeder, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(2), 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Marshall, B. Leavens, O. Heudi and C. Ramirez-Molina, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1056(1–2), 3–12 Search PubMed .
R. Kruger, K. Braun, R. Pipkorn and W. D. Lehmann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 852–857 RSC .
E. G. Yanes and N. J. Miller-Ihli, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(6), 891–899 CrossRef .
H. L. Peters, A. C. Davis and B. T. Jones, Microchem. J., 2004, 76(1–2), 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lam and E. D. Salin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 938–940 RSC .
N. Coskun and S. Akman, Talanta, 2004, 64(2), 496–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Szokefalvi-Nagy, I. Demeter, A. Kocsonya and I. Kovacs, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 226(1–2), 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ardid, J. L. Ferrero, D. Juanes, J. L. Lluch and C. Roldan, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1581–1586 CrossRef .
A. von Bohlen, Anal. Lett., 2004, 37(3), 491–498 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Echard, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1663–1667 CrossRef .
B. Kanngiesser, O. Hahn, M. Wilke, B. Nekat, W. Malzer and A. Erko, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1511–1516 CrossRef .
B. Wagner and E. Bulska, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1325–1329 RSC .
D. M. Goltz, J. Coombs, C. Marion, E. Cloutis, J. Gibson, M. Attas, L. P. Choo-Smith and C. Collins, Talanta, 2004, 63(3), 609–616 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kanngiesser, W. Malzer, A. F. Rodriguez and I. Reiche, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 41–47 CrossRef .
Z. Smit, K. Janssens, K. Proost and I. Langus, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 219–20, 35–40 CrossRef .
A. M. Ghazi and J. R. Millette, Environ. Forensics, 2004, 5(2), 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu, R. Payling, H. Habazaki, P. Skeldon and G. E. Thompson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 692–695 RSC .
A. J. Cartwright, P. Jones, J. C. Wolff and E. H. Evans, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(2), 75–80 RSC .
D. Profrock, P. Leonhard, S. Wilbur and A. Prange, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 623–631 RSC .
J. H. Barnes, G. D. Schilling, R. P. Sperline, M. B. Denton, E. T. Young, C. J. Barinaga, D. W. Koppenaal and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 751–756 RSC .
A. Helfrich and J. Bettmer, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1330–1334 RSC .
T. D. Grant, R. G. Wuilloud, J. C. Wuilloud and J. A. Caruso, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1054(1–2), 313–319 Search PubMed .
N. Tokman, S. Akman and Y. Bakircioglu, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 146(1), 31–34 Search PubMed .
N. Tokman, S. Akman and C. Ozeroglu, Talanta, 2004, 63(3), 699–703 CrossRef CAS .
A. De Giacomo, M. Dell’Aglio and O. De Pascale, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79(4–6), 1035–1038 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Huang, C. B. Ke and K. C. Lin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(3), 321–326 CrossRef .
A. De Giacomo, M. Dell’Aglio, F. Colao and R. Fantoni, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1431–1438 CrossRef .
A. J. Ball, V. Hohreiter and D. W. Hahn, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(3), 348–353 CrossRef CAS .
K. Meissner, T. Lippert, A. Wokaun and D. Guenther, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 453–54, 316–322 CrossRef .
S. F. Boulyga and K. G. Heumann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1501–1503 RSC .
D. B. Aeschliman, S. J. Bajic, D. P. Baldwin and R. S. Houk, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(11), 3119–3125 CrossRef CAS .
C. Carpanese, B. Crivelli and T. Caniatti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1183–1187 CrossRef .
B. Zawisza and R. Sitko, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 995–999 RSC .
J. Pisonero, J. M. Costa, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(1), 17–29 CAS .
A. Menendez, N. Bordel, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(3), 233–235 RSC .
N. S. Mokgalaka, T. Wondimu and R. I. McCrindle, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1493–1497 RSC .
A. C. Sahayam, R. K. Mishra, G. Venkateswarlu and S. C. Chaurasia, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(6), 263–266 CAS .
R. L. Ueng, A. C. Sahayam, S. J. Jiang and C. C. Wan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 681–684 RSC .
J. A. Nobrega, J. Rust, C. P. Calloway and B. T. Jones, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1337–1345 CrossRef .
M. Noroozifar, M. Khorasani-Motlagh and S. N. Hosseini, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 528(2), 269–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Zhang, X. S. Liu and W. Zhang, Eur. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 10(5), 589–598 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. C. Amorim and S. L. C. Ferreira, Talanta, 2005, 65(4), 960–964 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nukatsuka, R. Horiguchi, H. Seitoh, K. Ohzeki and F. Miyashita, J. AOAC Int., 2004, 87(4), 986–990 CAS .
L. Bencs, V. Horvath, I. Varga, E. Beregi and T. Kantor, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(12), 1851–1859 CrossRef .
W. Ruth, B. Hu, Z. C. Jiang, Y. C. Qin, M. He and H. Pei, J. Rare Earths, 2004, 22(2), 197–200 Search PubMed .
T. A. Brown, A. A. Marchetti, R. E. Martinelli, C. C. Cox, J. P. Knezovich and T. F. Hamilton, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 788–795 CrossRef .
A. A. Marchetti, T. A. Brown, C. C. Cox, T. F. Hamilton and R. E. Martinelli, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 483–487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Steier, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, C. Vockenhuber and S. Winkler, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 67–71 CrossRef .
D. McCurdy, Z. Lin, K. G. W. Inn, R. Bell, S. Wagner, D. W. Efurd, R. Steiner, C. Duffy, T. F. Hamilton, T. A. Brown and A. A. Marchetti, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 447–455 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vais, C. S. Li and J. Cornett, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tanner, C. S. Li, V. Vais, V. I. Baranov and D. R. Bandura, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(11), 3042–3048 CrossRef CAS .
D. Alamelu, P. S. Khodade, P. M. Shah and S. K. Aggarwal, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 239(1), 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Aggarwal and D. Alamelu, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 241(1), 83–88 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Izmer, S. F. Boulyga, M. V. Zoriy and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1278–1280 RSC .
A. P. Vonderheide, M. V. Zoriy, A. V. Izmer, C. Pickhardt, J. A. Caruso, P. Ostapczuk, R. Hille and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(5), 675–680 RSC .
S. S. Jiang, Y. X. Lin and H. Y. Zhang, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 318–322 CrossRef .
M. Friedrich, W. Pilz, N. Bekris, M. Glugla, M. Kiisk and V. Liechtenstein, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 21–25 CrossRef .
G. Rugel, A. Arazi, K. L. Carroll, T. Faestermann, K. Knie, G. Korschinek, A. A. Marchetti, R. E. Martinelli, J. E. McAninch, W. Ruhm, T. Straume, A. Wallner and C. Wallner, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 776–781 CrossRef .
R. S. Pappas, B. G. Ting and D. C. Paschal, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(6), 762–766 RSC .
M. V. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt, P. Ostapczuk, R. Hille and J. S. Becker, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 232(3), 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. LaMont, C. R. Shick, P. Cable-Dunlap, D. J. Fauth and T. R. LaBone, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 477–481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Olivier, S. Bajo, L. K. Fifield, H. W. Gaggeler, T. Papina, P. H. Santschi, U. Schotterer, M. Schwikowski and L. Wacker, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(24), 6507–6512 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Oughton, L. Skipperud, L. K. Fifield, R. G. Cresswell, B. Salbu and P. Day, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2004, 61(2–3), 249–253 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vais, C. S. Li and J. Cornett, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1281–1283 RSC .
P. Borretzen, W. J. F. Standring, D. H. Oughton, M. Dowdall and L. K. Fifield, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39(1), 92–97 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schaumloffel, P. Giusti, M. V. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt, J. Szpunar, R. Lobinski and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 17–21 RSC .
L. Wacker, L. K. Fifield and S. G. Tims, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 185–189 CrossRef .
C. G. Lee, K. Iguchi, K. Esaka, M. Magara, F. Esaka, S. Sakurai, K. Watanabe and S. Usuda, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 517(1–2), 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Becker, M. Burow, M. V. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt, P. Ostapczuk and R. Hille, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(5), 197–202 CAS .
S. Y. Tolmachyov, J. Kuwabara and H. Noguchi, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 261(1), 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Zoriy, L. Halicz, M. E. Ketterer, C. Pickhardt, P. Ostapczuk and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 362–367 RSC .
J. Lamontagne, J. Noirot, L. Desgranges, T. Blay, B. Pasquet and I. Roure, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 145(1–4), 91–94 Search PubMed .
W. Hang, L. W. Zhu, W. W. Zhong and C. Mahan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 966–972 RSC .
W. Hang, C. Mahan, L. W. Zhu and E. Gonzales, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 467–475 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Wolf, D. L. Bowers and J. C. Cunnane, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(3), 581–586 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vazquez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1215–1219 CrossRef .
S. Boeykens and C. Vazquez, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1189–1192 CrossRef .
S. V. M. Maharaj, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(1), 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
E. De Giglio, S. Cometa, L. Sabbatini, P. G. Zambonin and G. Spoto, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(3), 626–633 CrossRef CAS .
F. Furno, K. S. Morley, B. Wong, B. L. Sharp, P. L. Arnold, S. M. Howdle, R. Bayston, P. D. Brown, P. D. Winship and H. J. Reid, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 2004, 54(6), 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhou, J. L. Drummond and L. Hanley, Dent. Mater., 2005, 21(2), 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Coyle, M. J. Kosnett and K. Hipkins, Am. J. Ind. Med., 2005, 47(2), 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Resano, M. Aramendia, A. B. Volynsky and M. A. Belarra, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(4), 523–531 CrossRef .
Y. C. Sun and C. J. Ko, Microchem. J., 2004, 78(2), 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Krushevska, J. Klimash, J. F. Smith, E. A. Williams, P. J. McCloskey and V. Ravikumar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1186–1191 RSC .
I. Radivojevic, R. Niessner, C. Haisch, S. Florek, H. Becker-Ross and U. Panne, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(3), 335–343 CrossRef .
H. Liang and W. F. Shi, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2004, 84(3), 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mostafa, M. Mohsen, S. Rashad, A. Aiob and E. Salem, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2005, 96(3), 638–644 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khan, Inamuddin and M. M. Alam, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40(2), 289–305 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kakimoto, K. Ikebe and S. Hori, J. Food Hyg. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 45(5), 264–269 Search PubMed .
A. A. Rocha, N. Miekeley, M. C. M. Bezerra and I. L. Kuchler, Microchem. J., 2004, 78(1), 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rizkov, O. Lev, J. Gun, B. Anisimov and I. Kuselman, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2004, 9(7), 399–403 Search PubMed .
Q. D. Ling, Q. J. Cai, E. T. Kang, K. G. Neoh, F. R. Zhu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14(18), 2741–2748 RSC .
M. Guichenuy, J. F. Watts, M. L. Abel, A. M. Brown, M. Audenaert and N. Amouroux, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(8), 685–688 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Nair, M. Mathews, P. A. Joy, S. D. Kulkarni and M. R. Anantharaman, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2004, 283(2–3), 344–352 CrossRef CAS .
W. Prissanaroon, N. Brack, P. J. Pigram and J. Liesegang, Synth. Met., 2004, 142(1–3), 25–34 CrossRef CAS .
W. Prissanaroon, N. Brack, P. J. Pigram and J. Liesegang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2004, 4(2–4), 163–166 Search PubMed .
K. Durose, S. E. Asher, W. Jaegermann, D. Levi, B. E. McCandless, W. Metzger, H. Moutinho, P. D. Paulson, C. L. Perkins, J. R. Sites, G. Teeter and M. Terheggen, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12(2–3), 177–217 CAS .
I. O. Oladeji and L. Chow, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 474(1–2), 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
J. Palm, V. Probst and F. H. Karg, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77(6), 757–765 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hellin, J. Rip, S. Arnauts, S. De Gendt, P. W. Mertens and C. Vinckier, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1149–1157 CrossRef .
Y. Mori, K. Uemura, H. Kohno, M. Yamagami, T. Yamada, K. Shimizu, Y. Onizuka and Y. Iizuka, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1277–1282 CrossRef .
T. C. Miller, C. M. Sparks, G. J. Havrilla and M. R. Beebe, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1117–1124 CrossRef .
C. M. Sparks, M. R. Beebe, J. Bennett, B. Foran, C. Gondran and A. Hou, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1227–1234 CrossRef .
Y. Iijima and T. Tazawa, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1273–1276 CrossRef .
A. Hirakimoto, S. Ohnishi, H. Maeda, T. Kishi, T. Shiota, T. Tamura, M. Ukita, S. Fujita and M. Kamegawa, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1101–1106 CrossRef .
V. Hoffmann, M. Kasik, P. K. Robinson and C. Venzago, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(1), 173–188 CrossRef .
S. Gruhl, C. Vogt, J. Vogt, U. Hotje and M. Binnewies, Microchim. Acta, 2005, 149(1–2), 43–48 Search PubMed .
M. Ishikuro, Bunseki Kagaku, 2004, 53(2), 127–130 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Sahayam, S. J. Jiang and C. C. Wan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(3), 407–409 RSC .
N. Fujiwara, Y. L. Liu, T. Nakamura, O. Maida, M. Takahashi and H. Kobayashi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 235(3), 372–375 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bchetnia, M. Soulssi, A. Rebey and B. El Jani, J. Cryst. Growth, 2004, 270(3–4), 376–379 CrossRef CAS .
E. Duda, S. F. Lu, C. L. Liu, Z. X. Jiang, J. Lerma, A. Barr, A. Thean, M. Orlowski, T. White and B. Y. Nguyen, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2004, 22(1), 327–331 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Ber, A. P. Kovarsky, D. Y. Kazantsev, Y. V. Trushin, E. E. Zhurkin, A. A. Schmidt and S. F. Belykh, Tech. Phys. Lett., 2004, 30(10), 836–838 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Wang, Z. D. Xu, Q. L. Nie, L. H. Yue, W. X. Chen and Y. F. Zheng, Solid State Commun., 2004, 130(9), 607–611 CrossRef CAS .
M. Senoner, T. Wirth, W. Unger, W. Osterle, I. Kaiander, R. L. Sellin and D. Bimberg, Surf. Interface Anal., 2004, 36(10), 1423–U1429 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wenger, J. Dabrowski, P. Zaumseil, R. Sorge, P. Formanek, G. Lippert and H. J. Mussig, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process, 2004, 7(4–6), 227–230 CrossRef CAS .
O. Anderson, V. Scheumann, U. Rothhaar and V. Rupertus, Glass Sci. Technol., 2004, 77(4), 159–165 Search PubMed .
S. Takeda, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 864–867 CrossRef .
M. Lenzen, R. E. Collins and K. Prince, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351(4), 317–322 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schultheis, T. Prohaska, G. Stingeder, K. Dietrich, D. Jembrih-Simburger and M. Schreiner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 838–843 RSC .
I. Nakai, S. Yamada, Y. Terada, Y. Shindo and T. Utaka, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fredrickx, I. De Ryck, K. Janssens, D. Schryvers, J. P. Petit and H. Docking, X-Ray Spectrom., 2004, 33(5), 326–333 CrossRef .
A. Galli, M. Martini, C. Montanari and E. Sibilia, Radiat. Meas., 2004, 38(4–6), 799–803 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dal Bianco, R. Bertoncello, L. Milanese and S. Barison, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 343(1–3), 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schalm, D. Caluwe, H. Wouters, K. Janssens, F. Verhaeghe and M. Pieters, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(10–11), 1647–1656 CrossRef .
S. Fearn, D. S. McPhail and V. Oakley, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 510–514 CrossRef .
F. Barbana, R. Bertoncello, L. Milanese and C. Sada, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2004, 337(2), 136–141 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Jones and D. Betz, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39(18), 5633–5637 CrossRef CAS .
I. Takagi, T. Sasaki, K. Asahara, T. Kawasaki, T. Ishidera and H. Moriyama, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 2004, 41(8), 837–842 Search PubMed .
R. Bertoncello, L. Milanese, A. Bouquillon, J. C. Dran, B. Mille and J. Salomon, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79(2), 193–198 CrossRef .
H. Ida and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2004, 20(8), 1211–1215 CAS .
J. Pisonero, J. M. Costa, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(4), 658–667 CAS .
G. Moakes, L. A. Bottomley and J. Janata, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(4), 1106–1110 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Bingham and R. J. Hand, J. Hazard. Mater., 2005, 119(1–3), 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dubowski, A. L. Sumner, E. J. Menke, D. J. Gaspar, J. T. Newberg, R. C. Hoffman, R. M. Penner, J. C. Hemminger and B. J. Finlayson-Pitts, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6(14), 3879–3888 RSC .
R. Sinclair, H. Li, J. Risner, U. Kwon, J. U. Huh, R. W. Chin and K. H. Min, J. Ceram. Process. Res., 2004, 5(1), 5–9 Search PubMed .
T. Andersen, W. L. Griffin and A. G. Sylvester, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(11), A676–A676 .
Z. Wang, Z. M. Ni, D. R. Qiu, G. Y. Tao and P. Y. Yang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 315–319 RSC .
H. Isoyama, T. Uchida, T. Nagashima and O. Ohira, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1370–1374 RSC .
A. Duran, A. Conde, A. G. Coedo, T. Dorado, C. Garcia and S. Cere, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14(14), 2282–2290 RSC .
S. Padilla, M. Vallet-Regi, M. P. Ginebra and F. J. Gil, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25(4), 375–383 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. De Aza, Z. B. Luklinska and M. Anseau, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2005, 73(1), 54–60 Search PubMed .
N. K. Sarkar, R. Caicedo, P. Ritwik, R. Moiseyeva and I. Kawashima, J. Endod., 2005, 31(2), 97–100 Search PubMed .
M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, A. Barba and M. Orduna, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 203–212 Search PubMed .
M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, M. Orduna and G. Silva, Bol. Soc. Esp. Ceram. Vidrio, 2005, 44(1), 21–31 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Gu, L. Y. Chen, Y. T. Qian, W. Q. Zhang and J. H. Ma, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88(1), 225–227 CAS .
J. M. C. Pavon, E. V. Alonso, M. T. S. Cordero, A. G. de Torres and J. M. Lopez-Cepero, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 528(1), 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Wank, S. M. George and A. W. Weimer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87(4), 762–765 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Wank, S. M. George and A. W. Weimer, Powder Technol., 2004, 142(1), 59–69 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Kirby, A. Van Riessen, C. E. Buckley and V. W. Wittorff, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40(1), 97–106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Khollam, S. B. Deshpande, H. S. Potdar, S. V. Bhoraskar, S. R. Sainkar and S. K. Date, Mater. Charact., 2005, 54(1), 63–74 CrossRef CAS .

          D. M. Cheng and J. F. Li, in High-Performance Ceramics Iii Pts. 1 and 2,  2005, vol. 280–283, pp. 235–238 Search PubMed .
M. Beshkova, Z. Zakhariev, M. V. Abrashev, E. Birch, A. Kakanakova and R. Yakimova, Vacuum, 2004, 76(2–3), 143–146 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fielitz and G. Borchardt, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87(12), 2232–2236 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Hall, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2004, 31(10), 1439–1450 Search PubMed .
E. H. Bakraji, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(3), 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fermo, F. Cariati, D. Ballabio, V. Consonni and G. B. Gianni, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79(2), 299–307 CrossRef .
D. N. Papadopoulou, G. A. Zachariadis, A. N. Anthemidis, N. C. Tsirliganis and J. A. Stratis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part. B, 2004, 59(12), 1877–1884 CrossRef .
W. D. James, E. S. Dahlin and D. L. Carlson, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(3), 697–702 CrossRef CAS .
A. de Lucas, J. L. Valverde, P. Sanchez, F. Dorado and M. J. Ramos, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43(26), 8217–8225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diaz, L. Melo, M. Mediavilla, A. Albornoz and J. L. Brito, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2005, 227(1–2), 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Xia, D. S. Mao, B. Zhang, Q. L. Chen and Y. Tang, Catal. Lett., 2004, 98(4), 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kollmer, H. Hausmann and W. F. Holderich, J. Catal., 2004, 227(2), 398–407 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kollmer, H. Hausmann and W. F. Hoelderich, J. Catal., 2004, 227(2), 408–418 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Zhai, L. Q. Wang, C. H. Liu and S. C. Zhang, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2005, 13(1), 37–42 Search PubMed .
E. Diaz, S. Ordonez, A. Vega and J. Coca, Appl. Catal. B, 2005, 56(4), 313–322 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bhargava and D. B. Akolekar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 281(1), 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, K. Ariga, S. Saravanamurugan, M. Hartmann and V. Murugesan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 76(1–3), 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vetrivel and A. Pandurangan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44(4), 692–701 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vetrivel and A. Pandurangan, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2005, 227(1–2), 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Wang, W. Li, M. H. Zhang and K. Y. Tao, Catal. Lett., 2005, 100(1–2), 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
M. Selvaraj, P. K. Sinha, K. Lee, I. Ahn, A. Pandurangan and T. G. Lee, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 78(2–3), 139–149 CrossRef CAS .
C. Subrahmanyam, B. Louis, B. Viswanathan, A. Renken and T. K. Varadarajan, Appl. Catal. A, 2005, 282(1–2), 67–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Chang and A. N. Ko, Catal. Today, 2004, 97(4), 241–247 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Chang and A. N. Ko, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2004, 83(2), 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gaffney, S. Chaturvedi, M. B. Clark, S. Han, D. Le, S. A. Rykov and J. G. Chen, J. Catal., 2005, 229(1), 12–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, N. Q. Wu, J. H. Yang, F. Qu, D. L. Johnson, M. C. Kung, H. H. Kung and V. P. Dravid, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(9), 3704–3706 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pawelec, A. M. Venezia, V. La Parola, E. Cano-Serrano, J. M. Campos-Martin and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 242(3–4), 380–391 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawazu, M. Nara and T. Tsujino, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 31(1–3), 109–112 CAS .
S. Kidambi and M. L. Bruening, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(2), 301–307 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Wang, A. G. Kong, B. Chen, H. M. Ding, Y. K. Shan and M. Y. He, J. Mol. Catal. A, 2005, 230(1–2), 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Zhu, J. G. van Ommen, A. Knoester and L. Lefferts, J. Catal., 2005, 230(2), 291–300 CrossRef CAS .
T. Horita, K. Yamaji, T. Kato, N. Sakai and H. Yokokawa, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 172(1–4), 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Bichinho, G. P. Pires, J. H. Z. dos Santos and C. R. Wolf, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 131–134 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Loureiro, F. Silveira, G. P. Pires, M. D. Alves, F. C. Stedile, J. H. Z. dos Santos, K. M. Bichinho and T. Teranishi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(2), 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Rojas, C. B. Ojeda and J. M. C. Pavon, Anal. Lett., 2004, 37(13), 2685–2700 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:

Cl-36	Environmental	AMS	Isobaric interference from S-36 attenuated by chemical separation using a barium cation exchange column. Sample preparation time reduced significantly compared with traditional method (6 h) with recovery ca. 90%.	
158

H3	Carbon	AMS	A dedicated system for depth profiles of H3 in carbon cut from walls of fusion reactors was developed.	
159

Ni-63	Copper	AMS	Ni-63 used for neutron dosimetry as activation product of Cu-63. Samples of copper from Hiroshima. Ni-63/Ni ratios in blank samples up to 2 × 10−13
										(∼104 atoms Ni-63/g Cu).	
160

Pu	Urine	ICP; SFMS	Pu separated from 1 ml sample by SPE without preliminary digestion or co-precipitation. Desolvating nebulizer used. LOD Pu-239 = 0.16 fg ml−1 in sample spiked with ca. 1 ng ml−1 depleted uranium. Method conforms to Los Alamos National Laboratories target values for Pu bioassay.	
161

Pu	Urine	ICP-MS; SFMS	Pu separated from sample (1 dm3) by co-precipitation on Ca3(PO4)2 followed by purification on TEVA resin. Chemical recovery ∼70%. Two nebulizers used, PFA-100 and DIHEN. LOD (DIHEN)
										=1 ag ml−1 Pu-239.	
162

Pu	Urine	TIMS	Comparison of Pu purification methods including co-precipitation, extraction chromatography, electro-deposition and strong anion exchange chromatography. LOD ∼ 0.6 ag ml−1 Pu-239 (1.3 nBq ml−1).	
163

Pu	Ice cores	AMS	Atmospheric Pu fallout reconstructed from ice cores from Belukha glacier (Siberia).	
164

Pu	Marine sediments	AMS	Samples collected from Novaya Zemlya and Kara Sea. LOD < 1 fg Pu (∼2 μBq). Pu-240/Pu-239 ratio measurements from sediments at Novaya Zemlya deviated from global fallout ratios.	
165

Pu-239	Aqueous	ICP; SFMS	UH+ production limited by use of D2O as solvent. UH+/U+ improved from 1.3 × 10−5 to 2.6 × 10−7. LOD Pu-239 = 0.58 pg ml−1 in presence of 10 μg ml−1 U.	
166

Pu and U	Environmental	AMS	Samples obtained downstream of Mayak. Isotope ratios used to characterize inputs to two geographical locations (Reservoir 11 and Asanov Swamp).	
167

Pu and U	Water, urine	FI; ICP; SFMS	Nano-volume flow injection. Small volumes (54 nl) injected into carrier stream (7 μl min−1) using a nanovolume injector.	
168

 	 	 	LOD Pu ∼ 6 ag ml−1. NIST U350 used for method validation.	 
Tc-99	Seawater	AMS	Measurements obtained from 250 ml seawater. Chemical separation of Tc from Ru. Tc-99m used as tracer.	
169

U	Swipe samples	ETV; ICP; MS	Influence of instrumental parameters on isotope ratio accuracy determined.	
170

U, Th	Human body fluids	LA; ICP; quadrupole MS	Sample dried onto slide. Matrix matched synthetic standards prepared by spiking with Th-230 (IRMM 60), natural U and highly enriched U (NIST- 930) at ng l−1 level. Recovery = 91–104%.	
171

U, Th	Human body fluids	FI; ICP; quadrupole MS	Samples microwave digested. Th, U separated on-line using extraction chromatography resin. LOD for Th-232, U-235 and U-238 were 0.06, 0.0014 and 0.05 ng l−1, respectively. Precision of isotope ratio measurement for U-235 ∶ U-238 = 1.8%.	
172

U-236/U-238 ratio	Aqueous	ICP; SFMS	UH+ production limited by use of D2O as solvent and a desolvating nebulizer.	
173

Xe	Irradiated fuel	SIMS	Xe depth profiles obtained. Peaks corresponded to bubbles observed using EPMA and SEM mappings. The “non-zero” baseline corresponded to Xe included in the UO2 matrix.	
174

Actinides	Urine	HPLC; ICP; MS	Direct injection in 3 mol dm−3 nitric acid onto TRU resin packed column. Separation obtained with various concentrations of HCl and oxalic acid. LOD ∼ 0.01–2 pg ml−1. Separation time ∼ 25 minutes for Am, Np, Pu, Th and U.	
175

Actinides	Urine	HPLC; ICP; quadrupole MS	Pre-concentration and matrix separation achieved on chelation column. Separation of actinides on cation exchange resin.	
176

Fission products and actinides	Fuel	HPLC; ICP; MS ICP; MS	Lanthanides determined using HPLC-ICP-MS	
177

AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
ANSI	American National Standards Institute
APDC	Ammonium pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
BCR	Bureau of Community Reference
CFP	Circulating fluidized bed
CMOS	Complimentary metal oxide semiconductor
CRM	Certified reference material
DCP	Direct current plasma
DPT	Diphenyl tin
DRS	Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
DTPA	Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid
EDX	Energy dispersive X-ray analysis
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ERDA	Elastic recoil detection analysis
ESP	Electrostatic precipitator
ESR	Electron spin resonance
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV	Electrothermal vaporisation
FF	Fast flow
FI	Flow injection
FIB	Focused ion beam
FTA	Fission track analysis
FT-IR	Fourier transform-infra red
GC	Gas chromatography
GD	Glow discharge
GFAAS	Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectroscopy
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
IBMK	Isobutylmethyl ketone
ICP	Inductively coupled plasma
ID	Isotope dilution
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
LA	Laser ablation
LDA	Linear discriminant analysis
LED	Light emitting diode
LEIS	Low energy ion scattering
LIBS	Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy
LIPS	Laser induced plasma spectroscopy
LOD	Limit of detection
LOQ	Limit of quantitation
MIM	Metal insulator metal
MOCVD	Metal organic chemical vapour deposition
MPT	Monophenyl tin
MS	Mass spectrometry
Nd∶YAG	Neodymium: yttrium aluminium garnet
NEXAFS	Near edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NMR	Nuclear magnetic resonance
OES	Optical emission spectrometry
OSL	Optical stimulated luminescence
PCA	Principle component analysis
PET	Polyethyleneterephthalate
PGM	Platinum group metals
PIXE	Particle induced X-ray emission
PVD	Physical vapour deposition
RBS	Rutherford backscattering spectrometry
REEs	Rare earth elements
RF	Radio frequency
RMM	Relative molecular mass
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF	Sector field
SIMCA	Soft independent modelling of class analogy
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SPM	Scanning probe microscopy
SRM	Standard reference material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation induced X-ray fluorescence
TEM	Transmission electron microscopy
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
TMAH	Tetramethyl ammonium hydroxide
TMPP	Tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl) phosphonium propylamine
ToF	Time of flight
TPT	Triphenyl tin
TSL	Thermally stimulated luminescence
TRXPS	Total reflection X-ray photoelectric spectroscopy
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry
USN	Ultra sonic nebuliser
UV	Ultra violet
VPD-DC	Vapour phase decomposition-droplet collection
VUV	Vacuum ultra violet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge spectrometry
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
