Rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries: developments and prospects  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA06433H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA06433H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18708-18734Rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries: developments and prospects

        
          
            Huaisheng 
            Ao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yingyue 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenlong 
            Cai
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaotan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongchun 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Yitai 
            Qian
          
          
        
      ab
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, 96 JinZhai Road, 230026, Hefei, China
bHefei National Laboratory for Physical Science at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China
Received 
      16th June 2019
    , Accepted 19th July 2019First published on 19th July 2019AbstractDue to low cost, environmental friendliness, good safety, superior power density and ease of operation, rechargeable aqueous ion batteries can meet the technical requirements of large-scale energy storage. Compared with aqueous single ion batteries, rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries (RAHBs) have been receiving extensive interest owing to their higher operating voltage and energy density. In this review, we briefly describe the developments and challenges of rechargeable aqueous ion batteries in energy storage and systematically introduce the merits and progress of various rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries. The major issues of different combinations in aqueous hybrid ion batteries along with effective solving strategies are discussed, providing a new perspective for the design and construction of high performance aqueous ion batteries. Ultimately, the challenges and prospects of RAHBs are summarized for future research.Huaisheng AoHuaisheng Ao received his B.S. degree from the Beijing University of Chemical and Technology in 2016. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Yitai Qian at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research focuses on rechargeable aqueous ion batteries for energy storage.Yingyue ZhaoYingyue Zhao received her B.S. degree from Shandong University in 2016 and M.S. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2019 under the supervision of Professor Yitai Qian. Her research focuses on the design of cathode materials in aqueous and nonaqueous ion batteries for energy storage.Yongchun ZhuYongchun Zhu is currently an Associate Professor working with Prof. Yitai Qian in the Department of Applied Chemistry and Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale at USTC. She received her PhD under the supervision of Prof. Yitai Qian at USTC in 2006. Her research interests mainly include the design of novel systems for green and high energy density batteries for energy storage, especially for rechargeable aqueous/nonaqueous metal-ion batteries and the fundamental mechanisms.Yitai QianYitai Qian received his B.S. in Chemistry from Shandong University in 1962. He was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1997. He presently is a full Professor at the University of Science and Technology of China. In 2008, he became a Fellow of the RSC. Professor Qian, as a corresponding author, has published more than 800 refereed journal publications including Science, J. Am. Chem. Soc., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., and Adv. Mater. with citations by important international journals exceeding 20000 times. He has active research programs in solid state chemistry and the synthesis of nanomaterials for energy storage.
1. Introduction
1.1 Rechargeable aqueous ion batteries for energy storage
With the rapid development of renewable energy such as solar energy and wind energy, it is particularly important to be able to absorb renewable energy generation and realize energy-optimized management and efficient use of large-scale energy storage technologies.1 At present, secondary battery technology has received widespread attention due to its simplicity, flexibility, and efficiency.2–4 However, it is always difficult for existing secondary battery systems to meet the application requirements of large-scale energy storage. Traditional lead–acid and cadmium–nickel batteries contain a large amount of harmful heavy metal elements, which is not conducive to large-scale energy storage applications; it is also difficult for nickel–hydrogen and all-vanadium flow batteries to meet the requirements of large-scale energy storage due to a limitation of cost.3,5,6 Although the state of the art lithium-ion battery has become the new favorite of the energy storage market, the abundance and distribution of lithium resources on the earth is still a huge challenge in the face of the demand for new energy electric vehicles and large-scale energy storage.7–11 In principle, a secondary battery system for large-scale energy storage should be characterized by abundant resources, low cost, environmental friendliness, safety and reliability; meanwhile the electrochemical performance requirements such as cycle life, power density and energy density should be taken into account.
Rechargeable aqueous metal-ion batteries (RAIBs) as potential alternatives have recently attracted considerable interest for large-scale energy storage, due to their several advantages such as low cost, environmental friendliness, good safety and high power density, as well as little reliance on battery management systems at module or pack levels.12,13 To be specific, electrode materials and electrolytes of RAIBs comprise non-toxic and low-cost raw materials, while the electrolytes use water as a solvent, and an inorganic salt such as sodium sulfate as a solute, which are low-cost and environmentally friendly.13,14 In addition, RAIBs have no special maintenance requirements during storage and operation and do not require regular charge because of low self-discharge.15
Aquion Energy, the first company in the world to produce aqueous ion batteries, has provided a new direction for the secondary battery energy storage market. They claimed that their aqueous ion batteries, using MnO2, Na2SO4 and NaTi2(PO4)3 composites as the main raw materials, receive an environmental certification that considers products, materials and processes in a number of ways to assess whether it is harmless to humans and the environment.
In a word, aqueous ion batteries are suitable for fixed application environments with a long charging and discharging time (≥4 h), especially appropriate for large-scale energy storage applications with high safety and reliability requirements, frequent charge and discharge, and high operation and maintenance costs.
1.2 Development and challenges of aqueous ion batteries
The fundamental mechanism of RAIBs is similar to that of commercial rechargeable ion battery systems based on organic electrolytes, which transfers electrons through an external circuit between two electrodes and metal ions (such as Li+, Na+ and Zn2+) through the electrolytes. In addition, insertion/extraction (or deposition/dissolution) in the electrode material is accompanied by the occurrence of a redox reaction, and charge transfer occurs at the interface between the electrode material and the electrolyte. In 1994, Dahn et al.16 reported the first work of a VO2//LiMn2O4 RALB (Rechargeable Aqueous Lithium-ion Battery) based on an insertion/extraction mechanism, which opens the prelude to the development of rechargeable aqueous ion batteries. This system could operate at an average voltage up to 1.5 V and exhibits a capacity retention of 80% after 100 cycles, and the electrochemical reaction can be expressed as follows:LiMn2O4 ↔ Li1−xMn2O4 + xLi+ + xe−VO2(B) + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixVO2(B)
Subsequently, many researchers studied other RAIB systems.17–21 Typically, aqueous electrolytes (LiNO3 or Li2SO4 solution) and inorganic intercalation compounds (LiMn2O4,22,23 LiCoO2,24 MnO2 (ref. 25) or LiV3O8 (ref. 26)) as the cathode and anode were chosen to be assembled into a full cell. Unfortunately, the evident capacity fading of RAIBs is very serious, which becomes a major obstacle to the development of RAIBs. Therefore, little progress has been made in this area in the next 15 years. Until 2010, Xia et al.27 greatly improved the cycle performance of aqueous lithium ion batteries by adjusting the pH value and removing dissolved oxygen in the aqueous electrolyte. They extensively analyzed the stability of the electrode material in aqueous solution, and found for the first time that in the presence of oxygen, a lithium ion intercalation compound as the anode material in the discharge state will react with water and oxygen. The aqueous lithium ion battery can maintain a capacity of 90% after 1000 cycles by deoxidizing and adjusting the pH of the solution, as well as coating the battery material with carbon. However, the cost per unit of electricity is the most important factor that affects the practical application of RAIBs for large base station energy storage components. Thus, researchers study a more abundant sodium element instead of lithium to develop an inexpensive rechargeable aqueous sodium ion battery. Whitacre et al.28 firstly proposed that Na4Mn9O18 with a tunnel structure could be used as a cathode material for aqueous sodium-ion batteries. The material exhibits a capacity of 45 mA h g−1, and the full cell displays an energy density of 17 W h kg−1 when this cathode matches with an activated carbon anode. Based on this, they made a series of industrial explorations to promote the practical application of RAIBs for energy storage.29–32
As a matter of fact, the narrow electrochemical stability window of water solvent limits the operating voltage, which causes the low energy density of RAIBs. Hence, Wang et al.33 reported a new class of aqueous superconcentrated “water-in-salt” electrolytes (WiSEs) that breached this upper limit, and the voltage window was widened to 3.0 V and their later upgraded derivatives can support the various systems of battery chemistries. Then, they published a series of studies on improving the operating voltage, energy density and cycle performance of full cell systems.34–38 In their recent publication,39 they introduced a novel energy storage concept on the basis of halogen conversion–intercalation chemistry by using a graphite cathode with a “water in bisalt” electrolyte, thus enabling the high reversible transformation of a graphite intercalation compound (GIC), which exhibits an average discharge potential of 4.2 V versus Li/Li+ and an observably high specific capacity of 243 mA h g−1 for the graphite cathode.40 Despite the impressive improvement in the electrochemical window for the WiSE system, economic and environmental obstructions for real-world applications remain unresolved due to the unavailability of expensive and toxic lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) salt, an important part of the WiSE electrolyte.41 Therefore, rechargeable aqueous multivalent metal-ion (Zn2+ and Mg2+) batteries have gradually attracted great attention because of low-cost and eco-friendly metals with high stability and theoretical capacity. In comparison with the high activity of Li and Na, the utilization of these polyvalent metal anode eliminates significant safety concerns. Up till now, many advanced cathode materials based on conversion or intercalation reaction mechanisms have been favored by researchers in rechargeable aqueous multivalent metal-ion batteries.
In addition, the construction of aqueous full cell systems is also a significant challenge for practical application in energy storage. As shown in Fig. 1, we briefly summarized the electrochemical performance of current typical full-cell systems of rechargeable aqueous single-ion batteries.8,13,16,27,33,37,38,41–59 Furthermore, many reviews have systematically summarized the electrochemical performance of aqueous single ion batteries, such as aqueous lithium,60–62 sodium63–65 and zinc66–68 ion batteries.
 Fig. 1  The electrochemical performance of current typical full-cell systems of rechargeable aqueous single-ion batteries (*: energy density of full cells was calculated based on the total mass of the active electrode materials, while the others were based on the weight of the anode materials or cathode materials). RALBs: rechargeable aqueous lithium ion batteries; RASBs: rechargeable aqueous sodium ion batteries; RAKBs: rechargeable aqueous potassium ion batteries; RAZBs: rechargeable aqueous zinc ion batteries; RAMBs: rechargeable aqueous magnesium ion batteries; RACBs: rechargeable aqueous calcium ion batteries. 
However, rechargeable aqueous ion batteries still face many challenges that affect their energy density and cycle performance. The main challenges are as follows:
(I) The widening of the voltage window and suppression of hydrogen/oxygen evolution.
In principle, the electrochemical redox reaction in aqueous ion batteries should be strictly limited to the decomposition voltage of water of 1.23 V, otherwise the H2O will be electrolyzed with hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution. Thus, those materials whose working potential is located between the hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution potentials are likely to be potential electrode candidates for rechargeable aqueous ion batteries. It is worth noting that the pH value of the electrolyte significantly affects the potential of hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution. Although the thermodynamic stability window of water is narrow, it is possible to broaden the voltage window by suppressing the kinetics of water decomposition. Many approaches to widen the voltage window of aqueous electrolytes can be applied: (1) employing a superconcentrated electrolyte to decrease the number of free water molecules, and even bind all free water molecules to inhibit the decomposition of water; (2) introducing an electrolyte additive to form an in situ passivation layer to delay water decomposition; (3) constructing electrode surface coating layers that conduct ions without electrons to prevent the water molecules from coming into contact with the active material. However, determining the clear mechanism of the widening of the voltage window and suppression of hydrogen/oxygen evolution by employing high-concentration salts, additives and protective layers remains a significant challenge and requires further exploration.
(II) The choice of electrode materials and the dissolution or reaction of electrode materials in electrolytes.
Most of the electrode materials (such as LiCoO2 and graphite) that are widely used in the state of the art organic ion batteries are excluded due to the limitation of the aqueous electrolyte voltage window. When the voltage window is widened, more electrode materials that can be utilized in suitable aqueous electrolytes need to be developed. Moreover, the exploitation and choice of many new materials with high redox potential and specific capacity is also an important direction. Currently, the dissolution or reaction of electrode materials is an urgent challenge that has a strong impact on cycle performance and coulombic efficiency. The main strategies are as follows: (1) adopting a super-concentrated electrolyte; (2) removing the dissolved O2 from the electrolyte; (3) building the surface coated layer of electrode materials to restrain the erosion from the electrolyte.
(III) The corrosion of the current collector.
The current collector, as a carrier for supporting the active material and collecting current, is an important part of rechargeable metal-ion batteries. Among them, metal meshes (such as stainless steel mesh and Ti mesh) are widely applied in RAIBs. However, the water electrolysis (hydrogen evolution or oxygen evolution) mainly occurs at the surface of the current collector during charge/discharge cycles, which severely affects the cycling stability of RAIBs. In addition, due to the corrosive nature of aqueous electrolytes, the current collector needs long-term stability during charging and discharging to achieve the long cycle life of aqueous ion batteries. Thus, for example, many aqueous electrolytes with sulfate salts were employed to replace chloride salt solutions that have high ionic conductivity, which is attributed to the higher corrosive of chloride salts towards stainless steel. However, the corrosion of the current collectors in aqueous electrolytes is inevitable, which causes the loss of active materials, resulting in capacity decay and cycle degradation. Nevertheless, many strategies that ease corrosion and side reactions can be adopted as follows: (1) exploring new-type antiseptic current collectors; (2) constructing a surface protecting layer. In order to better meet the life expectancy of large-scale energy storage, the long-term (at least 10 years) continuous slow corrosion of the current collector by the salt solution as a huge challenge needs further research.
1.3 Benefits of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries
Rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries (RAHBs) as the new members of the aqueous ion battery family have attracted great interest of researchers due to their low cost, high operating voltage, high power density and security.14,69 Although their mechanism with insertion/extraction (or deposition/dissolution) of metal ions is similar to that of aqueous single ion batteries, two electrodes (the cathode and anode) are only able to allow the individual diffusion of different metal ions from the surface to bulk and their electrolyte is composed of various electrochemically active ions. In 2012, Chen et al.70 reported on a new LiMn2O4/ZnCl2 + LiCl/Zn rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion battery which operates in a mildly acidic aqueous electrolyte and shows high coulombic efficiency as well as long cycle life. Liu et al. employed an innovative concept of aqueous hybrid ion batteries based on Li+/Na+ mixed-ion electrolytes, which also greatly broaden our horizons for battery research. As described above, rechargeable aqueous single ion batteries are limited by their low operating voltage and the choice of electrode materials which result in poor energy density and cycle performance.48,71–73 Nevertheless, rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries operating with two electrochemical processes based on the migration of one type of metal ion between the anode and cathode, respectively, have overcome this obstruction. Due to the simultaneous participation of dual ions, RAHBs comprise the separate advantage of single ions such as the excellent kinetics of monovalent ions and abundance of polyvalent metals.74 Besides, the synergistic electrochemical behaviors of dual ions may change the electrochemical behaviors of each single ion.75 In short, the following benefits could be reflected. (1) The aqueous electrolyte makes it difficult to construct high energy density batteries with a single ion electrolyte because of a narrow electrochemical window. However, this can be more easily realized by using a hybrid ion battery because the option for electrode materials is more extensive. For example, LiFePO4 becomes a cathode alternative for aqueous lithium-ion batteries (ALIBs) with the advantages of suitable voltage, high specific capacity and long cycle life.76,77 Differently, the maricite phase, NaFePO4, considered to be electrochemically inactive owing to (PO4)3− tetrahedra that totally surround Na+ and the absence of a free channel for Na+ diffusion resulting in low capacity, is not suitable as a cathode material for aqueous sodium ion batteries.78 Therefore, aqueous Li+/Na+ hybrid ion batteries with mixed-ion electrolytes can replace the aqueous sodium ion batteries by using LiFePO4 as the cathode material with an appropriate anode (such as NaTi2(PO4)3/C) to improve the energy density and cycle performance. (2) The gradually increasing cost of Li metal, resulting from the imbalance between the rapid augment of Li demand and the low abundance of Li resources in the earth crust, has hampered its long-term development in large-scale energy storage.79 The construction of a hybrid ion battery can partially or even totally replace lithium, which greatly reduces the cost and ensures the long-term storage of large-scale energy. (3) Due to the strong coulombic interaction between the polyvalent ion and cathode host, the shuttle of polyvalent ions always exhibits sluggish diffusion kinetics, which results in a low specific capacity and a poor rate performance for a variety of common cathode materials. The aqueous hybrid ion batteries can break this obstacle by introducing a monovalent ion insertion/extraction cathode material (such as LiMn2O4 and Prussian blue analogues) to match with a multivalent metal anode. This hybrid strategy is a good way to improve the rate performance and coulombic efficiency. For instance, Wang et al.80 found that the TiS2/Li+,Mg2+/Mg cell can deliver a large capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at C/3 rate relative to the TiS2/Mg2+/Mg cell without capacity fading, which verifies that hybrid batteries with a Mg2+/Li+ electrolyte combines the advantages of kinetically favourable Li+ diffusion with uniform and fast Mg plating/stripping.
2. The types of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries
Traditionally, the type of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion battery is usually defined by the composition of the electrolyte, such as Li–Na, Li–Zn and Mg–Zn. A typical schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 2. Hence, we summarized the research progress of several major types of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries (RAHBs). TFSI: bis-trifluoromethanesulfonimide. 
2.1 Aqueous hybrid monovalent/monovalent ion batteries
A monovalent ion is considered to be an ideal medium for electrochemical energy storage systems due to its high mobility, high reversibility, low polarization and small ionic radius. After decades of development, batteries based on lithium ion migration have matured and been successfully commercialized. Recently, sodium-ion and potassium-ion batteries have also attracted more and more attention due to higher earth abundance of Na and K, and are expected to replace lithium-ion batteries for electric vehicles and large-scale stationary energy storage systems (EES) in the future when lithium resources are depleted. In order to improve energy density and cycle stability, the development of electrode materials is an important part of research. For decades, researchers have explored a variety of electrode materials for Li-ion batteries (LIBs), Na-ion batteries (NIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIB) with organic electrolytes, and a database about the working potentials (vs. Li+/Li or Na+/Na or K+/K) of these materials is available. However, the narrow thermodynamic stability window of water hinders the application of most electrode materials because the working potential exceeds the H2 evolution potential and O2 evolution potential limit.81 The feasibility of the electrode materials for the aqueous system can be determined with the avoidance of electrolysis.82 At the same time, a variety of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion battery systems can be matched to achieve higher energy densities.83–85
In 2013, rechargeable aqueous Li+/Na+ hybrid ion batteries with mixed-ion electrolytes were proposed as a novel concept and an extension of the rechargeable aqueous ion battery family, which relies on two electrochemical processes to separate the Li+ insertion/extraction reaction and the other Na+ extraction/insertion reaction (Fig. 3).86 Based on this mechanism, a variety of cathode and anode materials with Li+ or Na+ insertion/extraction were matched and assembled into a variety of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries.83,87
 Fig. 3  Schematics of a Li+/Na+ mixed-ion battery. Lithium-intercalation compounds and sodium-intercalation compounds are used for the anode and cathode, respectively. During charging (or discharging), the storage (or release) of Li+ takes place at the anode, and the release (or storage) of Na+ occurs at the cathode. Ref. 86, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Liang Chen et al.,86 for the first time, reported aqueous Li+/Na+ hybrid ion batteries with a unique “mixed-ion electrolyte” (1 M Na2SO4 + 0.125 M Li2SO4) and cathode/anode systems such as LiMn2O4/Na0.22MnO2 and Na0.44MnO2/TiP2O7 (Fig. 4). Among them, the lithium manganese spinel (LiMn2O4), where smaller Li+ occupies preferentially tetrahedral sites and Mn3+/4+ ions are in octahedral positions, was regarded as the most representative case for selective Li+ intercalation. In addition, the sodium-based layered transition metal oxide NaxMO2 (M = Co, Mn, Fe, Cr, Ni) with various crystal morphology structures and physical properties as a sodium ion battery cathode material has been proven by researchers to have good electrochemical properties.46,88 Specifically, Na0.44MnO2 belongs to the space group Pbam with an orthorhombic structure. The manganese ions are located in two different environments: all Mn4+ ions and half of the Mn3+ ions are in octahedral sites, while the other Mn3+ gathers in a square-pyramidal environment.15,28 The latter forms edge-linked chains linked to two double and one triple octahedral chains by the vertices, leading to the formation of two types of tunnels (S-shaped tunnel and pentagon tunnel).
 Fig. 4  (a) A schematic of the LiMn2O4/Na0.22MnO2 mixed-ion battery. (b) A schematic of the Na0.44MnO2/TiP2O7 mixed-ion battery. Ref. 86, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Pyrophosphate TiP2O7 has a cubic 3 × 3 × 3 superstructure with the space group Pa3, which combines with PO4 tetrahedral and TiO6 octahedral sharing corners in a 3D network.43 Two batteries exhibit a specific energy of 17 W h kg−1 and 25 W h kg−1 based on the total weight of active electrode materials and the average working voltages of 0.6 V and 1.0 V, respectively. Subsequently, they employed indium hexacyanoferrates (InHCF) with a three-dimensional open structure as a cathode material, clarifying the mechanism of co-insertion of water with lithium ions (or sodium ions) into the host material, significantly increasing the insertion voltage and reducing the diffusion kinetics.89 The average working voltage (Eav) of the full cell (InHCF/Li+ + Na+/TiP2O7) is found to be 1.45 V, which is beyond the theoretical water electrolysis voltage of 1.23 V and the operating voltage of the full cell with single ion (Li+ or Na+) electrolytes. Yu et al.90 synthesized P2 type-Na2/3Ni1/4Mn3/4O2 by a solid phase method, and investigated the electrochemical performance of a Li+/Na+ hybrid aqueous solution electrolyte (1 M Na2SO4/Li2SO4) with NaTi2(PO4)3 as the negative electrode. When the battery voltage was 1.2 V and the power density is 16 W kg−1, the energy density is up to 36 W h kg−1 (based on the mass of the total active materials). Unfortunately, the cycle performance of the full battery is poor, and further optimization of the electrolyte and electrode materials is required.
Zhou et al.84 prepared NaTi2(PO4)3/C featuring a hierarchical structure, high specific surface area, and abundant mesopores through a simple and scalable co-precipitation post-annealing treatment method. The assembled NaTi2(PO4)3/C‖LiMn2O4 full cell with a 0.5 M Li2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte exhibits enhanced electrochemical performance, presenting an anode-dependent electrochemical behavior. At 1C, the full cell can deliver a discharge specific capacity (Cdis) of 104.6 mA h g−1 and a specific energy (Ecell) of 59.5 W h kg−1, and the Cdis and Ecell remain at 75.7 mA h g−1 and 43.0 W h kg−1 after 220 cycles, respectively. This full cell system exhibits good cycling stability and provides superior specific energy.
Due to the large radius of Na+ and K+, only a few reported materials could offer appropriate tunnels to transport Na+ or K+ in aqueous systems, such as Na2CoFe(CN)6,91 NaTi2(PO4)3,47,92 KCuFe(CN)6,93 and so forth. The Prussian blue analogue is a typical transition metal ferricyanide with a three-dimensional open structure, which facilitates the transport and storage of alkali metal ions without lattice distortion.94,95 Cui et al.85 synthesized K0.6Ni1.2Fe(CN)6·3.6H2O (NiHCF) nanoparticles and employed them as rechargeable aqueous sodium and potassium ion battery cathode materials with a redox potential of 0.59 V and 0.69 V (vs. SHE). NiHCF shows complete reversibility during electrochemical cycling with no capacity loss after 5000 cycles at 8.3C in 1 M NaNO3 solution. In addition, there is 93% capacity retention during electrochemical cycling in KNO3 solution after 5000 cycles at 8.3C. NaTi2(PO4)3, with a typical NASICON structure, allows sodium ions to migrate freely. The potential of the sodium ion insertion/extraction reaction is slightly higher than the potential of hydrogen evolution, which ensures that there is no electrolysis reaction of water during the normal sodium insertion/extraction reaction.96–98 However, the NaTi2(PO4)3/C anode possesses strict selectivity on Na+ because of optimal transmission channels. Recently, Liu et al.99 constructed a high-voltage K–Na hybrid aqueous battery based on a K2FeFe(CN)6 (K–FeHCF) cathode, carbon coated NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP/C) anode and 0.5 M K2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The reaction mechanism of K–FeHCF and NTP/C can be formulated as follows:K2FeII[FeII(CN)6]·2H2O ↔ K+ + KFeIII[FeII(CN)6]·2H2O + e− ↔ 2K+ + FeIII[FeIII(CN)6]·2H2O + 2e−NaTi2(PO4)3 + 2Na+ + 2e− ↔ Na3Ti2(PO4)3
In the mechanism two reversible redox chemistry types, K+ ion and Na+ ion deintercalation/intercalation into K–FeHCF and NTP/C, occur at voltages of about 0.9 V, 0.1 V and −0.85 V (Fig. 5a). The potentials of two discharging plateaus (at about 1.72 and 0.98 V, as shown in Fig. 5b) of the aqueous hybrid battery are higher than those of other known aqueous hybrid-ion batteries. The hybrid battery delivers a high capacity of 160 mA h g−1 at a 0.5C rate on account of the unique cation selectivity of both materials and ultrafast ion conduction of NTP/C and exhibits a good rate performance together with an excellent capacity recovery capability, found when the current rate returns to 0.5C rate with 96% retention of the initial capacity (Fig. 5c). A considerable capacity retention of 94.3% is obtained after 1000 cycles at even 60C rate (Fig. 5d). Meanwhile, a series of high-voltage RAHBs (B-I, CuHCF/Li+ + Na+/TiP2O7; B-II, CuHCF/Li+ + K+/TiP2O7; and B-III, CuHCF/Na+ + K+/NaTi2(PO4)3) based on open-framework copper hexacyanoferrates (CuHCFs) as cathode materials, and TiP2O7 & NaTi2(PO4)3 as anode materials were studied by the Zhaoping Liu group87 (Fig. 6). Their average voltages are up to 1.32 V (B-I), 1.39 V (B-II), and 1.53 V (B-III), respectively. Furthermore, a specific energy density of 47.3 W h kg−1 for B-I, 50.7 W h kg−1 for B-II and 56.1 W h kg−1 for B-III based on the total mass of the active electrode is obtained. In comparison with aqueous ion batteries that operate on single-ion electrolytes (B-IV, CuHCF/Li+/TiP2O7; B-II, CuHCF/Na+/NaTi2(PO4)3), the operating voltage of the aqueous hybrid ion batteries with mixed-ion electrolytes is significantly improved. Studies on the insertion mechanism of CuHCF show that CuHCF exhibits special ion selectivity: K+ > Na+ > Li+, which expounds the high voltage of RAHBs compared with aqueous ion batteries operating on single ion migration.
 Fig. 5  (a) Galvanostatic profiles of the HAB along with the voltage profiles of its individual anode and cathode electrodes versus SCE at 1C rate. (b) CV curves of the HAB at a scan rate of 1 mVs−1. (c) Rate performance of the HAB. (d) Long-term cycling stability of the HAB at 60C rate. Ref. 99, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 6  Aqueous mixed-ion batteries. (a–c) Galvanostatic profiles of CuHCF/Li+ + Na+/TiP2O7 (B-I), CuHCF/Li+ + K+/TiP2O7 (B-II) and CuHCF/Na+ + K+/NaTi2(PO4)3 (B-III) batteries along with the voltage profiles of their individual anode and cathode electrodes vs. the SHE at a rate of 1.5C. (d) Galvanostatic profiles of CuHCF/Li+/TiP2O7 (B-IV) and CuHCF/Na+/NaTi2(PO4)3 (B-V) at a 1.5C rate. 1C = 60 mA g−1. Ref. 87, Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2 Aqueous hybrid monovalent/multivalent ion batteries
In comparison with aqueous monovalent/monovalent hybrid ion batteries, aqueous monovalent/multivalent hybrid ion batteries generally show a higher energy density by introducing a relatively stable multivalent metal (such as Zn) with high theoretical specific capacity. Thus, aqueous monovalent/multivalent hybrid ion batteries, comprised of a cathode material based on monovalent ion insertion/extraction, an anode material together with multivalent ion plating/stripping and a mixed dual-ion electrolyte, have potential application prospects for large-scale energy storage.

2.2.1 Aqueous Li/Na/K–Zn metal anode batteries. 
A zinc anode with mild aqueous electrolytes is considered as one of the most promising candidates for emerging energy storage systems (ESSs) due to its innate ultra-high theoretical capacity of 820 mA h g−1 and a higher volumetric energy density (i.e., 5855 mA h cm−3 compared to 2061 mA h cm−3 for LIBs).66,100–103 Moreover, this is the key to its popularity in mild aqueous electrolytes because of the following attractive features.67 (1) In a mild aqueous electrolyte, the performances of zinc anode were weakened because of various by-products, resulting in poor cycle performance, and the growth of zinc dendrites in alkaline electrolytes (e.g., Zn + 4OH− ↔ Zn(OH)42− + 2e− ↔ ZnO + 2OH− + H2O +2e−); (2) the higher redox potential of zinc (−0.763 V vs. a standard hydrogen electrode [SHE]), an approximate ideal potential in comparison with the redox potential of other metals, allows the battery to normally operate in aqueous electrolytes; (3) the safety, stability and non-toxicity of Zn in aqueous electrolytes raise the possibility of their use in the actual application for large-scale energy storage. Therefore, the number of papers on aqueous zinc-ion batteries is growing, indicating that they have received widespread attention from researchers. Up to now, most of the previous studies focused on the cathode material of rechargeable aqueous zinc-ion batteries, such as manganese oxide,104 vanadium-based materials,105,106 Prussian blue analogues107 and polyanionic compounds.108–110 Among them, the loss of the manganese oxide active material due to the Jahn–Teller effect causes a rapid decay in capacity. For vanadium-based materials, the disadvantages of the large-scale use of vanadium, as vanadium is a “non-green” element (harmful to the human body and the environment), and its relatively high cost and low voltage should also be carefully considered in the future. Prussian blue analogues and polyanionic compounds are gradually abandoned due to low capacity. Based on this, the new hybrid battery system is considered a promising option because it overcomes the shortcomings of aqueous pure zinc ion batteries.
In 2012, Chen et al.70 proposed the first aqueous rechargeable hybrid battery (RAHBs) employing a LiMn2O4 cathode, metallic Zn anode and 3 M LiCl + 4 M ZnCl2 solution (pH = 4). The schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 7a. The electrochemical reaction of the LiMn2O4 cathode and Zn anode can be written as follows:LiMn2O4 ↔ Li1−xMn2O4 + xLi+ + xe−Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed mechanism for aqueous hybrid Li–Zn battery operation. (b) CV data of the Zn/LiMn2O4 system in an aqueous electrolyte at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 and electrochemical stability window of the electrolyte. (c) Charge–discharge profiles for different cycles of a cell operated at 4C rate (1.1 mA cm−2). (d) Cyclability and coulombic efficiency of undoped LiMn2O4. Ref. 70, Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
In the reaction two independent reversible redox chemistry types, Li+ ion insertion/extraction in spinal LiMn2O4 and deposition/dissolution of Zn, appear at 1.76–1.90 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn) and 0 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn), respectively (Fig. 7b). As shown in Fig. 7b, the two sharp current changes with significant irreversible processes, one cathodic at −0.5 V and another anodic at 2.2 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn), can be attributed to hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution resulting from decomposition of water in the aqueous electrolyte, respectively, indicating the limits of the electrochemical stability window. The typical galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of a Zn/LiMn2O4 cell are depicted in Fig. 7c, which shows that the hybrid battery provides a high average voltage of about 1.8 V and exhibits a slight increase in polarization after 1000 cycles. The hybrid full cell with an undoped LiMn2O4 cathode retains near 90% of the initial capacity at 4C after 1000 cycles, suggesting excellent cycling stability for practical application and few detrimental side reactions during the cyclic process (Fig. 7d). However, the electrochemical performance (such as the coulombic efficiency) needs to be further improved to achieve optimal performance. Up till now, the strategies are mainly as follows: (1) surface protection of the cathode material; (2) modification of the electrolyte; (3) treatment of the zinc anode.
Benefiting from its merits of environmental friendliness, low cost, abundance, and stability, LiMn2O4 has been considered one of the most promising cathode materials in aqueous hybrid ion batteries for large-scale energy storage. However, the low conductivity and structural degradation of LiMn2O4 lead to poor power capability and severe capacity fading of hybrid aqueous Zn/LiMn2O4 batteries.111–113 Typically, constructing composite materials by combining carbon materials is an effective pathway.114–116 Chen et al.117 employed an effective design strategy to realize the structural tuning of graphene based on an efficient chemical vapor deposition (CVD) template method, optimizing electrical and interfacial properties together with the electrode dynamics of LiMn2O4/graphene cathodes, which successfully accelerated significant improvements of electrical conductivity and structural stability. As illustrated in Fig. 8a, the mesoporous structure of graphene provides more conductive paths for Li+ ions and electrons by creating abundant defects, forming 3D conductive networks. Fig. 8b shows the CV curves of the LiMn2O4/porous graphene (LiMn2O4/PG) electrode in 2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 (pH = 4) solution, in which two pairs of distinct redox peaks at 1.85/1.76 and 1.98/1.90 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn) were observed, corresponding to the extraction/insertion processes of the LiMn2O4 materials. Moreover, the CV profiles of the prime three cycles show low polarization potentials, large integration areas and sharp peaks with high overlapping, which indicates high electrode kinetics and good electrochemical reversibility of the LiMn2O4/PG electrodes. The galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles also confirm the good electrochemical reversibility, and the LiMn2O4/PG electrode delivers a high initial discharge capacity of 102.6 mA h g−1, with a very high CE of 90.3% (Fig. 8c). In contrast to LiMn2O4/exfoliated graphene (LiMn2O4/EG) and LiMn2O4/reduced graphene oxide (LiMn2O4/RGO), the LiMn2O4/PG electrode delivers a higher capacity on cycling at each current rate and nearly recovers its initial capacity when the current rate returns to 4C. It is worth noting that the LiMn2O4/PG electrode still delivers an average capacity of 56.3 mA h g−1 at the highest current rate of 20C (Fig. 8d). As shown in Fig. 8e, the LiMn2O4/PG electrode exhibits high discharge capacity and a good retention of 74.2% after 300 cycles. In contrast, both the LiMn2O4/EG and LiMn2O4/RGO electrodes show fast capacity fading, with a very low retention of 14.6 and 20.5% after 300 cycles, respectively. Therefore, the structural tuning of graphene for the LiMn2O4 electrode is an effective strategy to improve the electrochemical performance of aqueous LiMn2O4–Zn hybrid ion batteries.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of microstructures and electronic transport of the LiMn2O4/graphene composites (LiMn2O4/EG, LiMn2O4/RGO and LiMn2O4/PG composites). (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the LiMn2O4/PG electrode for the first three cycles at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (c) Voltage profiles of LiMn2O4/PG at 4C. (d) Rate performance and (e) cycling performance of the LiMn2O4/EG, LiMn2O4/RGO and LiMn2O4/PG electrodes. Ref. 117, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the limitation of the electrochemical stability window, formation of Zn dendrites and corrosion of the metallic Zn anode,118–120 the modification of the electrolyte is also an efficient approach to improve the electrochemical performance of aqueous LiMn2O4–Zn hybrid ion batteries. The group of Pu Chen has made a lot of positive explorations in this regard.121–128 Initially, they introduced thiourea (TU) as an electrolyte additive for 2 M ZnSO4 + 1 M Li2SO4 electrolytes to measure the CV curves in a three-electrode Swagelok-type battery at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 (Fig. 9a).122 Obviously, there are no other new peaks with the evolution of oxygen/hydrogen and the redox of TU. As the same time, in contrast to the battery without TU, the left shift of the oxidation peak and a larger reduction peak area were observed, which indicates that the TU additive can reduce the voltage polarization and improve the charge–discharge efficiency. Subsequently, they employed hydrophilic silica nanoparticles as an additive to stabilize the chemical state of aqueous electrolytes, promoting the improvement of electrochemical properties in terms of capacity, rate capability and cycle life.123 As illustrated in Fig. 9b, the aqueous LiMn2O4–Zn hybrid ion battery with 5% SiO2 doped into the electrolyte shows a high specific capacity and superior rate capability, which suggests that the silica in electrolytes may accelerate the diffusion of reactive species between the cathode and anode, thereby enhancing the reversible specific capacity and excellent rate capability. Nevertheless, the short gelling time and the cost associated with the high silica loading are both the key obstacle for practical application. Chen and co-workers127 reported a new hybrid gelling system, a mixture of β-cyclodextrin (CD, a 7-membered sugar ring molecule) and fumed silica (FS), which possesses multiple hydroxyl groups on the surface, as shown in Fig. 9c. In addition, the aqueous LMO–Zn hybrid battery with a gel electrolyte (41, 4% FS + 1% CD) exhibits the best discharge capacity retention of 68% at 4C after 1000 cycles (Fig. 9d). This hybrid gel electrolyte is found to enhance the water retention capability and suppress the growing of Zn dendrites, causing the improvement of specific capacity, cycling stability and coulombic efficiency. Because dendrite formation and corrosion on the Zn electrode is a natural but complicated problem, they introduced fumed silica as the thixotropic gelling agent and pyrazole (P) as the corrosion inhibitor into the gel electrolyte to address these challenges.128Fig. 9e shows that corrosion on Zn upon contact with 5% FS + 0.2% P decreased by 23%, and the corrosion potential increased to approximately −1007 mV vs. SCE. As the same time, the aqueous LMO–Zn hybrid battery with the 5% FS + 0.2% P gel electrolyte achieves a higher capacity retention of 85.2% after 500 cycles (Fig. 9f). These results demonstrate that battery performance can be greatly improved through electrolyte formulation. Moreover, the pH value of the aqueous hybrid electrolyte seriously affects the electrochemical performance of the hybrid ion battery, which was discussed systematically by Chen et al.129 They employed dilute LiOH or H2SO4 to regulate the pH value of the electrolyte and examine the effect on the cycling stability. It is found that low pH of the electrolyte gives rise to continuous dissolution, resulting in a conspicuous capacity fading. And high pH makes the OH− concentration increase and Zn2+ precipitate, which causes the sluggish migration of Zn2+ and the decrease of the active material due to the formation of “dead zinc”. Therefore, the adjustment of the pH value in aqueous hybrid electrolytes has become an important part of improving the electrochemical performance of hybrid zinc battery systems. Recently, a new modified strategy of aqueous hybrid electrolytes, namely, using high solubility organic metal salts (such as LiTFSI) as solutes, was proposed by Wang and co-workers.130 They reported a highly concentrated aqueous electrolyte consisting of 1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI (HCZE), where the high population of anions forces them into the vicinity of Zn2+ to form close ion pairs (Zn–TFSI)+ which significantly suppresses the presence of (Zn-(H2O)6)2+. This design strategy is a very effective way to address irreversibility issues, as exemplified by its low coulombic efficiency (CE) and dendrite growth during plating/stripping, and sustained water consumption. As shown in Fig. 10a, the electrolyte pH values gradually increase with LiTFSI concentration, from pH = 3 at 1 m Zn(TFSI)2, in which the presence of (Zn-(H2O)6)2+ leads to strong hydrolysis, eventually to pH ≈ 7 at HCZE, where the formation of ion pairs (Zn–TFSI)+ effectively suppresses the hydrolysis of Zn2+. Fig. 10b and c exhibit the excellent electrochemical performance of the aqueous LiMn2O4–Zn hybrid ion battery with superconcentrated the 1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI (HCZE) electrolyte. Among them, the discharge capacity calculated based on the (cathode + anode) mass is 66 mA h g−1, corresponding to an energy density of 119 W h kg−1. When the Zn:LiMn2O4 mass ratio decreases to 0.25:1, a higher energy density of 180 W h kg−1 was achieved. In addition, the charge and discharge curves are highly coincident, indicating good reversibility (Fig. 10b). 85% of the initial capacity could still be retained after 4000 cycles at 4C, with a high CE of 99.9%, which is a new record for aqueous Li–Zn hybrid ion batteries (Fig. 10c). However, the use of a large amount of organic metal salts can cause environmental and cost concerns, which hinder the practical application for large-scale energy storage. Cui et al.120 reported a new “water-in-deep eutectic solvent (water-in-DES)” electrolyte (∼30 mol% H2O in a eutectic mixture of urea/LiTFSI/Zn(TFSI)2; TFSI, bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide), in which the water reactivity maintains a remarkably depressed level due to the formation of a well-defined eutectic network, leading to a suppressed reactivity with the Zn anode from both thermodynamic and electrochemical perspectives. As shown in Fig. 10d, the irreversible process, all the parasitic reactions of water (such as an inevitable H2 evolution reaction (HER) in the aqueous electrolyte), builds up internal pressure and induces Zn pulverization, eventually leading to cell failure even at trace amounts of H2. And the emphatic corrosion and passivation of the Zn anode facilitate electrolyte depletion, reduce the utilization of Zn, and thus lead to a short cycling life. The introduction of water-in-DES is an effective way to address these serious issues (Fig. 10d). Fig. 10e shows that these LZ-DESs are liquids at room temperature without any heat treatment and remain stable when components were mixed in an appropriate molar ratio range ((the Li/urea molar ratio between 1:3 and 1:3.8, and the Li/Zn molar ratio kept at 20). As illustrates in Fig. 10f, compared with the redox peaks in 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M Zn(TFSI)2, two cathodic peaks of LiMn2O4 exhibit a positive shift of ∼0.10 V in LZ-DES/2H2O. According to the Nernst equation and previous studies, highly concentrated electrolytes with low Li+ activity could make the redox process of faradaic Li+-insertion electrode materials modulate toward positive potentials. In addition, the hybrid battery supports the respective redox processes of the cathode and anode without interfering with each other, which leads to an obvious difference in the potential shift between the LiMn2O4 cathode and Zn anode, thereby increasing the operating voltage. This nonsynchronous modulation of the working voltage for the hybrid ion battery provides a promising strategy for developing high-voltage energy storage devices. Fig. 10g shows a comparison of the cycling performance of aqueous LiMn2O4–Zn hybrid cells with 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M Zn(TFSI)2 and LZ-DES/2H2O. For the LZ-DES/2H2O electrolyte, 90.8% (after 300 cycles), 82.7% (after 600 cycles) and 86.6% (after 600 cycles) of the discharge capacities have been retained at 0.1C, 0.5C and 2C, respectively, which exhibits an excellent cycle performance.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cyclic voltammetry of a LiMn2O4/Zn battery in the absence and presence of 0.14 wt% thiourea. Ref. 122, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Rate capability of hybrid batteries with 5% SiO2, 10% SiO2 doped and conventional electrolytes. Ref. 123, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Scheme of the structure of β-cyclodextrin and a typical surface of amorphous silica. (d) Constant current (CC)–constant voltage (CV) cycling of batteries at 4C up to 1000 cycles; the current cutoff in the CV period is set at 10% compared with the current in the CC period. Ref. 127, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) Linear polarization curves of Zn upon contact with different electrolytes. (f) Cyclability at 4C rate with constant-current/constant-voltage charging and constant-current discharging modes. Ref. 128, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 10  (a) The pH values of the electrolytes with varying LiTFSI concentrations. (b) A typical voltage profile of the Zn/LiMn2O4 full cell in HCZE (1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI) at a constant current (0.2C; areal capacity of LiMn2O4, 2.4 mA h cm−2). (c) The cycling stability and CE of the Zn/LiMn2O4 full cell in HCZE at 4C. Ref. 130, Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagrams of interfacial reactions (electrochemical H2 evolution, passivation and corrosion) on the Zn anode in the presence of traditional aqueous electrolytes and reversible Zn electrochemistry in the water-in-DES electrolyte. (e) Stoichiometric amounts of urea, LiTFSI and Zn(TFSI)2 used to prepare L-DES, LZ-DES and LZ-DES/2H2O. (f) CVs of LMO in different electrolytes. (g) Cycling performance of the Zn/LMO cell in LZ-DES/2H2O at various rates, in comparison with those in 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M Zn(TFSI)2. Ref. 120, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, the treatment of zinc anodes is also an effective strategy to suppress the side reactions consisting of dendrite formation, corrosion and passivation in metallic Zn anodes.131–136 At present, the treatment methods of zinc anodes are mainly as follows: (1) in situ preparation of zinc anodes; (2) ex situ surface treatment of zinc sheets. Chen et al.122 found that the capacity retention of polished Zn is much higher than that of unpolished Zn, which suggests that the surface state of metallic Zn anodes may affect the Zn deposition-dissolution efficiency and the overall coulombic efficiency. In comparison with planar Zn, porous Zn materials as an anode are more widely used for batteries because of their higher surface area and sufficient contact with the electrolyte. The higher surface area probably causes the passivation and corrosion of Zn, thereby degrading the electrochemical performance of hybrid batteries.137–139 Tao et al.140 demonstrated that the introduction of carbon additives into porous Zn anodes could improve the performance of rechargeable hybrid aqueous batteries (Zn//LiMn2O4).They utilized three different kinds of carbon additives, carbon nanotubes, active carbon and acetylene black (AC), to prepare porous Zn anode composites for aqueous LiMn2O4–Zn hybrid batteries with a 1 M ZnSO4 + 0.5 M Li2SO4 electrolyte. Fig. 11a shows that Zn anode composites with carbon additives can improve the discharge capacity relative to pure Zn anodes. Typically, the porous Zn/AC composite anode delivers an initial discharge specific capacity of 150 mA h g−1, which is higher than that of Zn composites and pure Zn anodes (114 mA h g−1). This is attributed to the carbon additives that prevent the immediate contact of the Zn anode with the electrolyte, and then impede the corrosion of the active Zn particles. Meanwhile, the activated carbon is beneficial to the deposition of Zn particles and the growth of Zn dendrites, inhibiting good cycling stability. Chen et al.125 exploited the use of electroplating to synthesize new zinc anodes by employing several inorganic additives and optimizing the plating conditions. They found that the modulation of the surface texture and the surface crystal structure contributed to the synthesized zinc anode which exhibit higher dendrite resistance and higher corrosion tolerance. Among these electroplated anodes, Zn–SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate, SDS) has been proven to be the most promising for aqueous hybrid battery systems owing to its low corrosion rate, low dendrite formation, low float current, and high capacity retention after 1000 cycles. Moreover, Xia et al.132 proposed the utilization of MOF ZIF-8 in situ annealed at an optimized temperature (500 °C) as a host material for highly stable and dendrite-free Zn metal anodes. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 11b, the Zn@ZIF-8-500 anode, in which a trace amount of Zn0 with a uniform distribution in the framework converted from the thermal reduction of the Zn2+ in the framework of ZIF-8, provides uniform nuclei for Zn plating and high over-potential for hydrogen evolution to reduce the undesired H2O decomposition. The initial Zn plating prefers to occur in and/or on ZIF-8-500 particles in the electrode because the trace amount of Zn0 in the framework of ZIF-8-500 provides nuclei for Zn plating. After the initial plating, the ZIF-8-500 particles filled with Zn can serve as the substrate with uniform Zn-nuclei for further Zn plating, leading to dendrite-free deposition. In contrast to aqueous zinc ion batteries, ex situ surface treatment of zinc sheets has not been carried out in aqueous hybrid ion batteries. It is obvious that the challenges of metallic Zn anodes are similar. Thus, the surface treatment approach for the zinc anode of aqueous zinc ion batteries can be extended to aqueous hybrid ion batteries. Kang et al.141 reported a porous nano-CaCO3 coating as a buffer layer, guiding uniform and position-selected Zn stripping/plating on the nanoCaCO3-layer/Zn foil interfaces, which shows at least four attractive merits: (1) green and environmentally friendly; (2) stable, abundant and inexpensive; (3) a low density (2.7 g cm−3) of CaCO3, benefiting the achievement of high energy density for full cells; (4) high compatibility with current battery-manufacture equipment and processes. The nano-CaCO3-coated Zn symmetric cell operated well within a test period of 836 h, with only a very gradual and small polarization increment from 80 to 105 mV, which suggests that the cycling life could be extended by the nano-CaCO3-coating treatment compared with pure Zn, confirming the benefits of the porous nano-CaCO3 coatings for Zn stripping/plating reactions (Fig. 11c). Analogously, Cui and co-workers129,131 introduced a “brightener-inspired” polyamide coating layer on a Zn anode to effectively regulate the aqueous Zn deposition behavior by elevating the nucleation barrier and restricting Zn2+ 2D diffusion. Compared to bare Zn, the coating layer increases the corrosion potential from −0.9738 V to −0.9627 V and reduces the corrosion current of 312.1 μA cm−2, exhibiting a less tendency of corrosion reactions and a lower corrosion rate (Fig. 11d). As seen in Fig. 11e, the symmetrical Zn cell with coated Zn shows a stable polarization voltage (∼0.1 V) and an ultra-long cycling life (over 8000 hours), endowing the Zn/Zn2+ cycling life with a 60-fold improvement and demonstrating the extremely reversible plating/stripping enabled by the PA layer.
 Fig. 11  (a) First discharge curves of the batteries with pure porous Zn, Zn/CNT, Zn/AC, and Zn/AB anodes, respectively, and current density is 240 mA g−1 based on the cathode between 0 and 2.0 V. Ref. 140, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the Zn plating on ZIF-8-500. Ref. 132, Copyright 2019, Cell Press. (c) Typical GCD profiles of Zn|ZnSO4 + MnSO4|Zn symmetric cells with bare (black) and nano-CaCO3-coated (red) Zn electrodes at a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2. Insets, the first (left inset) and the last (2001th, right inset) detailed voltage profiles of cells with bare (black) and nano-CaCO3-coated (red) Zn electrodes. Ref. 141, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Linear polarization curves showing the corrosion on bare Zn and coated Zn. (e) Long-term galvanostatic cycling of symmetrical Zn cells with coated Zn plates and bare Zn plates at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Ref. 131, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from LiMn2O4, other commercial cathode materials for lithium ion batteries, such as LiFePO4,142,143 LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2,144 Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP),129 and LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4 (ref. 145), are studied as probable cathode materials for aqueous rechargeable hybrid ion batteries (Li–Zn full cells). Zhang et al.146 disclosed a cooperative behavior of Zn2+ and Li+ to conduct charges in aqueous LiFePO4–Zn hybrid batteries with a CH3COOLi + Zn(CH3COO)2 electrolyte. The CV behaviors of the battery are shown in Fig. 12a, in which a distinct redox pair is located at 0.9/1.5 V in the potential range of 0.5–1.7 V. The electrochemical reaction can be described as follows:
 Fig. 12  (a) CV behavior at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 of the Zn–LiFePO4 hybrid system. (b) The charge–discharge curves and (c) the capacity and coulombic efficiency based on the mass of the LiFePO4 for Zn–LiFePO4 hybrid system. Ref. 146, Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a Zn/V2O5 aqueous hybrid-ion battery. (e) CV curves of Zn/V2O5 batteries at 0.1 mV s−1 in a Zn(CF3SO3)2-LiTFSI “water-in-salt” electrolyte and Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte. (f) Long-term cycling stability of V2O5 at 2000 mA g−1. Ref. 147, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Cathode:LiFePO4 ↔ Li+ + e− + FePO4
Anode:Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn
The overall reaction:  
During charging, LiFePO4 releases an electron to form the bulk matrix of FePO4 accompanied by the deintercalation of Li+ into the electrolyte and deposition of Zn2+ by accepting electrons to transform into metallic Zn on the surface of the anode. As pH is close to 7 for lithium acetate and zinc acetate in aqueous solution, it guarantees the normal operation of the LiFePO4 cathode and Zn anode. However, when the voltage range is widened, the undesired side reaction would be found. The charge–discharge curves at various current rates and the rate performance of the Zn|CH3COOLi + Zn(CH3COO)2|LiFePO4 hybrid battery are shown in Fig. 12b and c. The hybrid system delivers a discharge capacity of ∼155 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, exhibiting high specific capacity. The curves of rate performance present regularly graded changes and form a symmetric valley-shaped curve. In addition, the high efficiency and the perfect recovery of the capacity reveal a long cycle life and a good rate performance. The introduction of neutral to alkaline solutions rather than acidic aqueous Li2SO4 as the electrolyte is regarded as the main reason to effectively weaken the attack of water for improved performance. Bakenov et al.142 also constructed an aqueous LiFePO4–Zn hybrid ion battery to explore the electrochemical performance at different temperatures, thereby optimizing the combination and composition of the cathode, anode and electrolyte. Chen et al.143 employed graphene nanosheets to prepare a LiFePO4/graphene composite by a facile template-free hydrothermal approach as a cathode for aqueous LiFePO4–Zn hybrid ion batteries. LiFePO4/graphene shows much better rate capability and excellent cycle stability, which is attributed to the graphene nanosheets with a flexible electrically conductive matrix, ensuring a continuous electron pathway in the bulk electrode and retarding the volume change during lithium intercalation/de-intercalation of LiFePO4. Apart from the choice and optimization of the electrode, the aqueous electrolyte (such as “water-in-salt”) also attracts attention. Chen et al.145 assembled a Zn/LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4 aqueous hybrid-ion battery based on a “water-in-salt” electrolyte (21 m LiTFSI + 0.5 m ZnSO4 (pH = 4)), which obtains a high energy density of 183 W h kg−1 and a high operating voltage exceeding 1.8 V. Mai and co-workers147 applied a “water-in-salt” electrolyte (21 m LiTFSI and 1 m Zn(CF3SO3)2) to develop a novel rechargeable aqueous Zn/V2O5 hybrid-ion battery by using porous V2O5 as the cathode and zinc as the anode (Fig. 12d). As illustrated in Fig. 12e, the CV curves show three reduction peaks (0.52, 0.93, and 0.98 V) and four oxidation peaks (0.71, 0.95, 1.22, and 1.43 V) in Zn(CF3SO3)2, attributed to the intercalation/deintercalation of Zn2+ into porous V2O5 microplates during the discharge/charge processes. Differently, two pairs of redox peaks in Zn(CF3SO3)2–LiTFSI are observed at 0.90/1.08 V and 1.12/1.25 V, which suggests the participation of lithium ions in the electrochemical processes of the aqueous V2O5–Zn hybrid battery with the mixed Zn(CF3SO3)2–LiTFSI electrolyte. At a high current density of 2000 mA g−1, the hybrid battery system displays an initial discharge capacity of 137 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 80% after 2000 cycles (Fig. 12f). This result demonstrates the remarkable improvement of the cycling stability and energy density in the aqueous V2O5–Zn hybrid battery with the mixed Zn(CF3SO3)2–LiTFSI electrolyte, which indicates its great potential for large-scale energy storage applications.
Recently, aqueous Na–Zn hybrid ion batteries have become intrinsically attractive as promising sustainable energy-storage devices with the aim of substituting aqueous Li–Zn hybrid batteries because of the low cost and natural abundance of sodium resources, including the sodium salts for aqueous electrolytes and sodium raw materials for electrodes.148–150 Wu and co-workers151,152 proposed the first aqueous Na–Zn hybrid ion battery in 2013 employing a rod-like Na0.95MnO2 cathode synthesized by a hydrothermal reaction with a traditional solid–state reaction and metallic Zn anode. Fig. 13a and b show the schematic diagram of the aqueous Na–Zn hybrid ion battery and the SEM images of the prepared rod-like Na0.95MnO2, respectively. The CV curves of Zn and Na0.95MnO2 electrodes in 0.5 mol L−1 Zn(CH3COO)2 and 0.5 mol L−1 CH3COONa aqueous solution at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 are shown in Fig. 13c. In the case of rod-like Na0.95MnO2, a clear redox couple with anodic peaks at 1.7 V and cathodic peaks at 1.4 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn) is measured, accompanied by the extraction/insertion of Na+ ions in the aqueous electrolyte. For the metallic Zn anode, an obvious oxidization peak of 0.13 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn) represents the dissolution of Zn, and at the same time, the plating of Zn occurs continuously with the negative shift of the potential below 0 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn). The electrochemistry of the electrode and system can be described as follows:
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the redox reactions for the Zn//Na0.95MnO2 rechargeable aqueous Na–Zn battery during the charge and discharge process. (b) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the prepared rod-like Na0.95MnO2. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of Zn and Na0.95MnO2 in an aqueous solution of 0.5 mol L−1 Zn(CH3COO)2 and 0.5 mol L−1 CH3COONa at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. (d) Cycling performance of the Zn//Na0.95MnO2 ARSB at 4C rate with a fixed full charge capacity of 40 mA h g−1 based on Na0.95MnO2. Ref. 151, Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Negative electrode:Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn
Positive electrode:NaMn0.95O2 ↔ Na1−xMn0.95O2 + xNa+ + xe−
Total reaction:  
This Na0.95MnO2–Zn hybrid battery exhibits an average discharge voltage of 1.4 V and energy density of up to 78 W h kg−1 based on the two electrode materials. Fig. 13d shows a reversible capacity of 40 mA h g−1 based on Na0.95MnO2 and only 8% capacity loss after 1000 full cycles at 4C between 1 and 2 V. Although this battery expresses excellent cycling stability, rod-like Na0.95MnO2 still suffers from a low capacity of 40 mA h g−1 and low coulombic efficiency (∼90%) at 4C. Subsequently, Chen et al.152 investigated a Na0.44MnO2–Zn cell that delivers a very high initial discharge capacity of 186.2 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and discharge capacity of 113.3 mA h g−1 at 4C in the voltage range of 0.5–2.0 V, indicating an excellent rate capability.
Relative to tunnel-type NaxMnO2, Na+ ion superionic conductor (NASICON) structured Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) with a high theoretical capacity of 118 mA h g−1 becomes a new potential candidate as a cathode for aqueous Na–Zn hybrid batteries.108,129,150,153 Huang and coworker154 prepared NVP co-incorporated with carbon and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as a cathode to assemble a hybrid battery with Zn as the anode and CH3COONa/Zn(CH3COO)2 aqueous solution as the electrolyte. Fig. 14a shows a typical CV curve of the NVP–Zn hybrid cell, where a strong redox couple was tested at around 1.52 and 1.37 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn), corresponding to redox reactions of V3+/V4+ and Zn2+/Zn. The subsequent CV curves faultlessly coincide with those of the first cycle, further demonstrating high coulombic efficiency and excellent cycling reversibility. When the battery is charged and discharged at 0.5C, flat plateaus were observed at 1.42 and 1.47 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn). This stable operating voltage is higher than previous working voltage of aqueous single-ion batteries. The discharge capacities of the Na–Zn hybrid battery are 91, 86, 79, 73, 65, 61 and 54 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 15 and 20C, respectively, which demonstrates a good rate capability and high power density (Fig. 14b). The energy density of this battery is expected to be about 67 W h kg−1 based on the whole battery (considering that the active materials account for only 60 wt% in the whole practical battery). Subsequently, Kim et al.153 also reported carbon-wrapped sponge-like Na3V2(PO4)3 nanoparticles (NVP/C) synthesized by a simple pyro-synthesis to match with a metallic Zn anode in 1 M Zn(CH3COO)2 and 2 M CH3COONa hybrid solutions for RAHBs (as illustrated in Fig. 14c). Similarly, all CV curves show ideal profiles, indicating a constant electrochemical reaction and good reversibility (Fig. 14d). In addition, the electrode is able to deliver a discharge capacity of 66 mA h g−1 at a very high current rate of 32C, suggesting that the unique sponge-like morphology is beneficial to a good rate capability (Fig. 14e). The overall electrochemical reaction of the system can be expressed as follows:
 Fig. 14  (a) CV behaviors for the Zn//CH3COOLi + Zn(CH3COO)2//Na3V2(PO4)3 hybrid ion battery at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (b) The charge–discharge curves of the system at different C rates. Ref. 154, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Illustration of the working mechanism of the rechargeable aqueous Na3V2(PO4)3–Zn hybrid battery (ReHAB). (d) CV profiles of the NVP@C cathode at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 and (e) C-rate capability at different current rates from 0.8 to 32C in the ReHAB cell. (f) In situ synchrotron XRD pattern of NVP@C electrodes during electrochemical cycling in the ReHAB cell. Ref. 153, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Anode:Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn
Cathode:Na3V2(PO4)3 ↔ 2Na+ + 2e− + NaV2(PO4)3
Thus, in situ XRD analysis was conducted to examine the phase transformation of the NVP/C electrode in the hybrid battery during charge and discharge processes in Fig. 14f. All peaks can be indexed to the Na3V2(PO4)3 phase before charging. During continuous charging, several new peaks located at 14.7, 21.1, 24.5, 29.7, 32.9, and 37.1° emerge, along with the new phase of NaV2(PO4)3, which suggests that two Na ions were completely extracted from the Na3V2(PO4)3 host structure accompanied by the oxidation of V3+ to V4+. During the sequential discharging until the full discharge, the disappeared characteristic peak of Na3V2(PO4)3 gradually appears and the peak intensity gradually increases together with the weakening and disappearance of the characteristic peak of NaV2(PO4)3, which illustrates the structural stability and high reversibility of the NVP@C electrode in the RHAB system. However, the capacity of Na3V2(PO4)3-based Na–Zn hybrid aqueous rechargeable batteries remains a significant challenge. Cui et al.155 explored the mechanism of its capacity decay with a comprehensive analysis on its structure, morphology, and surface composition changes as well as the EIS results, which reveals that the capacity degradation and interfacial resistance augment of the Na3V2(PO4)3/C cathode in aqueous Na–Zn hybrid ion batteries are attributed to the mechanical and interfacial degradation of NVP/C with Na+ ion extraction and insertion. Apart from NVP/C cathode materials, other polyanion compounds150,156 (such as carbon-coated Na3V2(PO4)2F3) have been considered as cathodes to further improve the voltage of aqueous Na–Zn hybrid batteries. Kim et al.156 first reported the reversible electrochemical activity of the Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3−2x/MWCNT compound in an aqueous solution for the Na–Zn hybrid system. The Zn//Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3−2x/MWCNT full-cell delivers an initial capacity of 54 mA h g−1 and a discharge capacity of 46 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles with 85% retention in 10 M NaClO4 solution with 2 vol% of vinylene carbonate. The full-cell reveals a high voltage of 1.7 V and an energy density of 84 W h kg−1 based on both the cathode and anode, exceeding most of the aqueous ion batteries that have been reported.
Prussian blue and its analogies were attractive alternatives for aqueous hybrid batteries owing to their open framework structures with a large channel ensuring fast ion diffusion. In the cubic crystal of Prussian blue, the transition metal atom and six CN bonds are coordinated to form a three-dimensional tunnel structure with a large number of void sites, which can be rapidly exchanged with alkali metal ions in aqueous solution.157,158 Ma et al.149 summarized the electrochemical performance of nickel hexacyanoferrate (NiHCF) in various aqueous electrolytes together with different shuttle cations, and found that the incorporation of a Na+ containing electrolyte with a small amount of ZnSO4 contributes to improving the electrochemical activity, the kinetics of shuttle ions and the reversibility of electrodes, leading to a configuration of the aqueous ion battery with high specific capacity, high coulombic efficiency, and satisfactory cycling stability. Thus, they constructed an aqueous Na–Zn hybrid battery with NiHCF as the cathode in 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 50 mM ZnSO4 aqueous solution, as shown in Fig. 15a. The CV measurements showed distinct cathodic/anodic peaks at 0.32/0.47 V and −1.02/−1.13 V (vs. SCE, saturated calomel electrode), which were attributed to the insertion/extraction of Na+ in NiHCF and reversible dissolution/deposition of Zn, respectively (Fig. 15b). Analogously, Wang et al.148 employed Prussian blue nanocubes (NaFe–PB) as the cathode material, combined with a metallic Zn anode to form a full cell. Such an aqueous Na–Zn hybrid battery system provides an average potential of 1.1 V (as illustrate in Fig. 15c) and exhibits an impressive cycling stability with 80% capacity retention even after 1000 cycles at a current density of 300 mA g−1, which demonstrates that the specific benefit of the low crystal defect and reversible structure change of NaFe–PB. However, due to the high operating voltage of aqueous Na–Zn hybrid batteries, the side reaction of hydrogen evolution or oxygen evolution still has a strong impact on the cycle life. Hou et al.159 creatively introduced a surfactant into 1 M Na2SO4 and ZnSO4 hybrid electrolytes to construct an rechargeable aqueous hybrid battery using Na2MnFe(CN)6 nanocubes as the cathode and a zinc metal sheet as the anode. When the content of sodium lauryl sulfate (SDS) reaches the critical micelle concentration, the potential window was expanded from 1.8 to 2.55 V (Fig. 15d). Fig. 15e shows the typical galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the full cell between 1.0 V and 2.0 V at a current rate of 0.5C. Such a hybrid battery displays three discharge plateaus at 1.8 V, 1.65 V, and 1.4 V, delivering an initial discharge capacity of 140 mA h g−1. The discharge capacity of the full cell still reaches 100 mA h g−1 at a high rate of 30C, which exhibits its marvelous rate performance and high power density (Fig. 15f). Furthermore, the aqueous Na–Zn hybrid battery demonstrates long-term cycling stability with 75% capacity retention and a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% after 2000 cycles at a rate of 5C, as shown in Fig. 15g. To explain the role of the surfactant, a simulation based on density functional theory (DFT) was also adopted to calculate the binding energies (BE) of the SDS molecule with the Ti current collector to assess the level of adhesion (Fig. 15h). The result indicates that the energy barrier was about 1.306 eV when a water molecule passed through the SDS adsorption layer, which is higher than the energy barrier of 0.406 eV of sodium ions going through the SDS adsorption layer. It is suggested that sodium ions more easily pass through the hydrophobic layer than a water molecule, which causes the inhibition of water decomposition, thereby preventing the occurrence of hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution. Thus, the electrochemical stability window has been greatly expanded. This design strategy of the electrolyte by adding additives broadens the voltage window up to 2.55 V, reaching the same efficacy of “water-in-salt” electrolytes, and provides a low cost alternative to expensive “water-in-salt” electrolytes. As for aqueous K–Zn hybrid ion batteries, studies are rarely reported. Baioun and co-workers,160 for the first time, proposed this system by using Prussian yellow as the cathode material and metallic Zn as the anode, which not only broadens the horizon for aqueous monovalent/multivalent hybrid batteries, but also paves a new route to energy storage systems.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the redox process for the NiHCF//Zn battery during the charge–discharge processes. (b) CV curves of Zn and NiHCF in an aqueous solution of 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 50 mM ZnSO4. Ref. 149, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Galvanostatic discharge/charge voltage profiles of the aqueous hybrid Na–Zn cell at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Ref. 148, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Measurements of the electrochemical stability window of different electrolytes obtained by linear sweep voltammetry. (e) Charge/discharge profiles at a rate of 0.5C in the electrolyte with added SDS. (f) Rate capability of the battery. (g) Long cycle life tests at a rate of 5C. (h) Model of density functional theory calculations, showing a water molecule passing through the SDS adsorption interlayer at different positions and the tendency of the energy change at different positions. Ref. 159, Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.2 Aqueous Li/Na/K–other multivalent (Mg2+ and Al3+) ion batteries. 
Similar to zinc, other polyvalent metals also have advantages such as low cost and high abundance.161–163 In addition, the feature of no dendrites for metallic Mg as an anode is verified in rechargeable organic magnesium ion batteries, which is considered to have great potential applications for energy storage devices.164–166 However, relative to the insertion/extraction of monovalent ions in the positive electrode material, the diffusion kinetics of magnesium ions on the positive electrode material is very slow due to strong electrostatic interaction and large charge density.167–170 In aqueous electrolytes, although Mg metal cannot be used directly, it seems feasible to find a suitable cathode or anode host material as an alternative for aqueous magnesium ion batteries.171 Nonetheless, the choice of suitable anode materials with low cost and high capacity still hinders the development of aqueous magnesium ion batteries. Thus, an aqueous hybrid ion battery combined with the advantage of monovalent ion deintercalation/intercalation becomes a relatively ideal battery system. To the best of our knowledge, few cathode materials (such as MnO2 and Mn3O4) were employed to construct aqueous Na–Mg hybrid ion batteries with NaTi2(PO4)3 as the anode. Zheng et al.172 proposed a rechargeable aqueous Mg2+/Na+ hybrid battery system, in which spinel Mn3O4 is the cathode, NaTi2(PO4)3 is the anode and 2 M MgSO4 +1 M Na2SO4 solution is the electrolyte. The first charge/discharge curves of the full cell at a current density of 1C (1C = 100 mA g−1 in this work, based on the mass of the anode) within the cut-off voltage window of 0.4–1.85 V are shown in Fig. 16a. The hybrid battery displays an average discharge voltage of 1.2 V and an initial discharge capacity of 98 mA h g−1. When the current density changes from 1C to 50C, the discharge capacity of 98 mA h g−1 at 1C remains very stable and decreases gradually to 42 mA h g−1 at 50C, exhibiting a good rate capability (Fig. 16b). In addition, Fig. 16c shows that the hybrid battery delivers a discharge capacity of 65 mA h g−1 at 10C and a capacity retention of 94% after 6000 cycles, which reveals an excellent cycling stability. Taking into account the weight ratio of the Mn3O4 cathode and the sol–gel synthesized NaTi2(PO4)3–G–C anode in the full cell of ∼1.5:1, the specific energy of the cells is 47 W h kg−1 at a power density of 48 W kg−1 and 23.6 W h kg−1 at a high power of 400 W kg−1. Analogously, Zhang et al.173 also reported an aqueous rechargeable sodium-magnesium hybrid ion battery based on a NaTi2(PO4)3–MnO2 system, elucidating the reversibly intercalation/deintercalation of Na+ and Mg2+ from the MnO2 cathode material, while the intercalation/deintercalation of Na+ from NaTi2(PO4)3 anode material. As shown in Fig. 16d, the charge–discharge curves of the full cell were recorded at 1C current density in 2 M MgSO4 + 1 M Na2SO4 solution. There are two obvious plateaus at 0.8 V and 1.2 V during charging and discharging, respectively, with a capacity of 97 mA h g−1 (based on the mass of the cathode material). Furthermore, the charge–discharge profiles of the first five cycles have a high coincidence, which indicates the superior cycling reversibility of the full cell. Fig. 16e shows that the cycle life of the hybrid battery was measured at 4C current density. The first discharge capacity is 83 mA h g−1, and the discharge capacity remains at 72% of the initial capacity after 1000 cycles. The aqueous Na–Mg hybrid ion battery based on the NaTi2(PO4)3–MnO2 system delivers an energy density of 46.5 W h kg−1 at a power density of 96.1 W kg−1.
 Fig. 16  (a) Galvanostatic charge and discharge measurement of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell at 1C. (b) Rate performance and (c) cycling performance at a current density of 10C (1C = 100 mA g−1) of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell. Ref. 172, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Charge–discharge curves of the first five cycles of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell. (e) The cycling performance of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell (the capacity of the full cell is calculated based on the mass of the cathode material). Ref. 173, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
As far as we know, another aqueous Li/Na/K–Mg/Al hybrid ion battery has not been reported. In a word, although choosing an appropriate electrode material is a significant challenge, it is meaningful for the development of aqueous Li/Na/K–Mg/Al hybrid ion batteries because of the durable cycle stability verified from the Mn3O4–NaTi2(PO4)3 hybrid battery.

2.3 Aqueous hybrid multivalent/multivalent ion batteries
Di/tri-valent metal anodes (Zn, Al, etc.) in multivalent ion batteries due to their low cost, superior volumetric capacities and abundant resources attract more interest to explore optimized battery systems.174 Specifically, a metallic Mg anode with low cost and no dendrites was regarded as a promising candidate in non-aqueous Mg batteries for energy storage devices.175–177 However, compared with Zn anodes, Mg ion batteries limited by severe passivation and slow ion migration show a poor cycle life.57 In addition, the low reduction potential of Mg also limits the application of metallic Mg anodes in aqueous electrolytes. Fortunately, in aqueous electrolytes, studies had proved that water molecules can effectively shield the electrostatic interactions of multivalent ions and decrease the activation energy for charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface or ion migration from the surface to the bulk of the electrode compare to organic electrolytes.178 In 2018, Kim and co-workers179 constructed the first aqueous Mg–Zn hybrid ion battery, using high specific capacity MgMn2O4 as the cathode, a Zn sheet as the anode, and an aqueous electrolyte consisting of 1 mol L−1 “MgSO4 + ZnSO4” + 0.1 mol L−1 MnSO4 (MZM) (Fig. 17a). Fig. 17c shows the charge/discharge curve, in which the initial charge plateaus varies slightly from that in the succeeding cycles due to the periodic activation of the electrode material. The hybrid system delivers a specific charge capacity of 136 mA h g−1 and a sequential discharge capacity of 130 mA h g−1, and after the 5th cycle, the discharge capacity is up to 166 mA h g−1. To further explain the mechanism behind the phase and structural change during cycling in the cathode, in situ synchrotron XRD measurement (Fig. 17b) was carried out. This result shows that the reversible co-extraction/insertion of Mg2+ and Zn2+ and reversible behavior with formation/dissolution of Zn4(OH)6SO4·0.5H2O at discharge/charge end and, interestingly, formation/dissolution of (MgMn)9Zn4(OH)22(SO4)2·8H2O at charge/discharge ends, respectively. Fig. 17d exhibits the cycling life of the aqueous Mg–Zn hybrid ion battery that was measured at 500 mA g−1 after being fully activated, which displays an initial discharge capacity of 96 mA h g−1 and a high capacity retention of ∼80% after 500 cycles. This work has further promoted the choice of aqueous hybrid ion battery systems, exemplifying the feasibility of aqueous multivalent/multivalent hybrid ion batteries. Moreover, Wu et al.180 also proposed a new-type aqueous Al–Zn hybrid battery (Fig. 17e) with a Zn anode, expanded graphite nanosheets as the cathode and an aqueous electrolyte of Al2(SO4)3/Zn(CH3COO)2 solution (0.25/0.5 M), which achieved low cost and good cycle performance. The galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the hybrid battery at 0.1 A g−1 display an output voltage of above 1.0 V and a high capacity of ∼94 mA h g−1. When the current density increases to 2.0 A g−1, the hybrid system delivers a discharge capacity of 60 mA h g−1, demonstrating a good rate performance (Fig. 17f). As shown in Fig. 17g, the hybrid battery shows a high capacity retention of ∼94% after 200 cycles at 0.5 A g−1, which indicates a superior cycling reversibility and great preponderance for large-scale energy storage systems. This ultrathin graphite nanosheet with a larger specific surface area not only provides a larger space for Al ion intercalation into the outer graphene layers of graphite, but also facilitates rapid Al ion diffusion and fast reaction with graphite. However, before the practical application of this aqueous rechargeable Zn–Al ion battery, this system suffers from the erosion by the highly concentrated Al salt electrolyte due to high acidity resulting from the hydrolysis of Al ions, which limits its cycle life from meeting the requirements of large-scale energy storage. Currently, although the electrochemical performance of aqueous multivalent/multivalent hybrid ion batteries is not so desirable relative to other rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries, it is worth noting that the cost advantage still makes them competitive in the future energy storage field. Moreover, many battery systems of aqueous multivalent/multivalent hybrid ion batteries need to be developed by overcoming the hurdles to achieve superior electrochemical performance for low-cost and environmentally friendly energy storage devices.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration and redox reaction of the aqueous Mg–Zn hybrid battery. (b) Electrochemical charge/discharge profile of the assembled spectroelectrochemical cell cycled within 1.9–0.5 V at 100 mA g−1 and in situ XRD patterns within selected scanning angle (2θ) domains of 7–9, 15–22, and 28–45°. (c) Charge/discharge profiles for MgMn2O4 in a MZM electrolyte at a 100 mA g−1 rate. (d) Cyclability pattern (the initial five cycles were performed at 50 mA g−1 to achieve full electrode activation). Ref. 179, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic Illustration of the redox reactions for the Zn//graphite nanosheet aqueous rechargeable battery during the charge and discharge process. (f) Charge/discharge profiles and (g) cycling behavior of an aqueous rechargeable battery of Zn//graphite nanosheet. Ref. 180, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3. Conclusions & future prospects
Rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries as a new full-cell system due to high operating voltage, low cost, and high safety and flexibility have great potential for large-scale energy storage. The unique nature of water as solvent and special insertion/extraction of hybrid monovalent or multivalent ions provide high power density and high energy density, which is able to break the limitation that the system energy density of aqueous ion battery is not up to 70 W h kg−1. We have summarized the most recent progress and design strategies of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries. The summary of the electrochemical performances of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries is shown in Table 1. However, there are many scientific and technical challenges that retard their wide practical application in large-scale energy storage. Some prospects are presented as follows for future research.
Table 1 Summary of the electrochemical performances of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries




Types
Battery
Electrolyte
Average voltage (V)
Current density
Initial capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle (retention)
Ref.





a Capacities were calculated based on the weight of the anode materials or cathode materials, while the others were based on the total mass of the active electrode materials.





Li–Na
LiMn2O4‖Na0.22MnO2
1 M Na2SO4 + 0.125 M Li2SO4
0.6
0.25C
29
45 (83%)

86



Na0.44MnO2‖TiP2O7
1 M Na2SO4 + 0.125 M Li2SO4
1.0
0.4C
25
50 (62%)

86



InHCF‖TiP2O7
0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4
1.45
1.5C
52
—

89



CuHCF‖TiP2O7
0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4
1.32
1C
60
—

87



LiMn2O4‖NaTi2(PO4)3
0.5 M Li2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4
1.52
1C
104.6a
220 (72.3%)

84



Na2/3Ni1/4Mn3/4O2/NaTi2(PO4)3
1 M Na2SO4/Li2SO4
1.2
1C
∼45a
30 (∼78%)

90



Li–K
Ni1Zn1HCF‖TiP2O7
0.4 M K2SO4 + 0.1 M Li2SO4
1.25
1C
36.5
50 (63%)

83



InHCF‖TiP2O7
0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M K2SO4
1.4
1.5C
52
—

89



CuHCF‖TiP2O7
0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M K2SO4
1.39
1C
60
—

87



Na–K
Ni1Zn1HCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3
0.4 M K2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4
1.45
—
—
50 (49%)

83



InHCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3
0.25 M K2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4
1.6
1.5C
52
200 (90%)

89



CuHCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3
0.25 M K2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4
1.53
1C
60a
100 (92.7%)

87



K–FeHCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3/C
0.5 M K2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4
1.72/0.98
0.5C
60.8
1000 (94.3%)

99



Li–Zn
LiMn2O4‖Zn
3 M LiCl + 4 M ZnCl2 (pH = 4)
1.8
—
—
1000 (90%)

70



CNT/AB/LiMn2O4‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 (pH = 4)
1.8
4C
139a
300 (66%)

113



LiMn2O4/PG‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 (pH = 4)
1.8
4C
102.6a
300 (74.2%)

117



LiMn2O4‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 15 wt% fumed silica
1.8
4C
96a
800 (77.43%)

126



LiMn2O4‖Zn
1 M Li2SO4 + 2 M ZnSO4 with 0.14 wt% thiourea
1.8
—
—
300 (75%)

122



LiMn2O4‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 5 wt% SiO2
1.8
4C
122a
700 (68.2%)

123



LiMn2O4‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 4% fumed silica + 1% β-cyclodextrin
1.8
4C
126a
1000 (68%)

127



LiMn2O4‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 5% fumed silica + 0.2% pyrazole
1.8
4C
110a
500 (85.2%)

128



LiMn2O4‖Zn
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 5% fumed silica + PbSO4
1.8
1C
118a
300 (74.4%)

124



LiMn2O4‖Zn
1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI
1.8
4C
34
4000 (85%)

130



LiMn2O4‖Zn
“Water-in-deep eutectic solvent” electrolyte
1.92
0.1C
110a
300 (>90%)

120



LiMn2O4‖Zn/AC
0.5 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4
1.8
240 mA g−1
150a
210 (40%)

140



LiMn2O4‖Zn-TU
2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4
1.8
—
96a
1000 (80%)

125



LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2@graphene@MWCNTs‖Zn
0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.125 M Zn(CH3COO)2
1.65
0.5C
105a
50 (99%)

144



LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4‖Zn
21 m LiTFSI + 0.5 m ZnSO4 (pH = 4)
1.8/1.3
0.1C
137a
150 (∼100%)

145



V2O5‖Zn
1 m Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 21 m LITFSI
1.0
100 mA g−1
215a
160 (95%)

147



LiFePO4‖Zn
CH3COOLi + Zn(CH3COO)2
1.2
1C
114a
125 (>90%)

146



LiFePO4/graphene‖Zn
0.5 M LiCH3COO + 0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2
1.4
0.2C
145.8a
450 (∼78%)

143



Li3V2(PO4)3‖Zn
1 M Li2SO4 + 2 M ZnSO4
1.4
0.2C
128a
200 (85.4%)

129



Na3V2(PO4)3‖Zn
1 M Li2SO4 + 2 M ZnSO4
1.3
0.2C
96a
200 (84.1%)

129



Na–Zn
Na0.44MnO2‖Zn
0.5 M ZnSO4 + 1.0 M Na2SO4
1.08
4C
113.3a
100 (∼31%)

152



Na0.95MnO2‖Zn
0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2 + 0.5 M CH3COONa
1.4
4C
40a
1000 (92%)

151



Na3V2(PO4)3@C‖Zn
2 M NaCH3COO and 1 M Zn(CH3COO)2
1.45
1C
85a
1000 (72%)

153



Na3V2(PO4)3/C‖Zn
0.5 M CH3COONa/Zn(CH3COO)2
1.42
50 mA g−1
92a
200 (68%)

154



Na3V2(PO4)3/C‖Zn
0.5 M (CH3COO)2Zn + CH3COONa
1.4
50 mA g−1
87.1a
100 (75.6%)

155



Na3V2(PO4)2F3@C‖Zn@C
8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2
1.57
100 mA g−1
63.1a
1000 (∼100%)

150



Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3−2x/MWCNT‖Zn
10 M NaClO4 with 2 vol% of vinylene carbonate
1.65
1C
54a
400 (85%)

156



NiHCF‖Zn
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 50 mM ZnSO4
1,40
100 mA g−1
76.2a
1000 (81%)

149



NaFe–PB‖Zn
1 M Na2SO4
1.1
300 mA g−1
76a
1000 (80%)

148



Na2MnFe(CN)6‖Zn
1 M Na2SO4/ZnSO4 with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)
1.7
1C
137a
2000 (75%)

159



K–Zn
NiHCF‖Zn
0.5 M K2SO4 + 50 mM ZnSO4
1.4
100 mA g−1
70.2a
1000 (76%)

149



Prussian yellow (PY) film‖Zn
0.1 M KCl
1.1
3C
142a
500 (82%)

160



Na–Mg
Mn3O4‖NaTi2(PO4)3
2 M MgSO4 + 1 M Na2SO4
1.2
1C
98a
6000 (94%)

172



MnO2‖NaTi2(PO4)3
2 M MgSO4 + 1 M Na2SO4
1.4
1C
97a
1000 (72%)

173



Mg–Zn
MgMn2O4‖Zn
1 M MgSO4/ZnSO4 + 0.1 M MnSO4
1.3
500 mA g−1
109a
500 (80%)

179



Al–Zn
Graphite nanosheets‖Zn
0.25 M Al2(SO4)3 + 0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2
1.0
100 mA g−1
94a
200 (94%)

180





Cathode and anode materials: in general, there are fewer alternatives of electrode materials for aqueous hybrid ion batteries. Therefore, the development and exploration of new electrode materials is one of the important directions for the future research of aqueous hybrid ion battery systems. For cathode materials, the poor electrical conductivity and structural stability are the main reasons that lead to the capacity fading. The atom doping and surface coating, which have been reported in LIBs and SIBs, are regarded as effective strategies to improve the structural stability of cathode materials during the charge–discharge process, and can be extended to modify cathode materials for RAHBs. Except for the zinc negative electrode, most of the reported aqueous hybrid ion battery anode materials have a lower specific capacity. Thus, the metallic zinc anode has attracted great attention for RAHBs in recent years. Regretfully, the irreversibility of the Zn anode because of the Zn dendrite growth during plating/stripping and low coulombic efficiency hinders the pace of progress for high-performance RAHBs. Drawing on the experience of lithium metal research, the surface treatment of zinc anodes to isolate side reactions and induce uniform deposition should be an important part of future research on zinc anodes.
Electrochemical window and stability (aqueous electrolytes): the thermodynamically stable voltage window of water is relatively narrow (∼1.23 V), which hinders the development of aqueous ion batteries. Although kinetic limitations of the electrolysis of water may expand the voltage window to ∼1.8 V, serious side reactions may affect the long term cycling stability. Recently, “water-in-salt” electrolytes, hydrate-melt electrolytes and aqueous electrolytes with additives in aqueous lithium ion batteries can broaden the electrochemical window up to 3.0 V, which opens a new direction for the design of high energy density RAHBs based these superconcentrated electrolytes or aqueous electrolytes with additives. The widening of the voltage window is beneficial to the selection of high specific capacity electrode materials and the reduction of side reactions, thereby achieving stable operation of RAHBs. The design of aqueous hybrid electrolytes is an indispensable part of further research.
Current collector: the current collector as an inconspicuous but extremely important part determines the cycle life of aqueous hybrid ion batteries. A metal mesh (such as a stainless steel mesh and titanium mesh) is widely used in RAHBs due to its high conductivity, good ductility and strong adhesion. However, the long-term erosion due to aqueous solutions makes it difficult to meet the long life demand of large-scale energy storage. Hence, it is necessary to explore new-type antiseptic current collectors or employ a surface protected metal mesh.
Mechanism: as we all know, the electrochemical reactions in an aqueous electrolyte are much more complicated than those in an organic electrolyte. The presence of water molecules makes the electrochemical mechanism confusing in RAHBs. For example, Liu et al.89 proposed that the water molecules participate in Li+/Na+ insertion/extraction, improving the voltage and achieving fast kinetics. It is worth noting that this process does not exist in insertion/extraction of potassium ions. Solvent molecules (such as H2O) participate in ion-intercalation reactions, providing new insights into understanding ion-embedded compounds. The mechanism of stable operation of high-voltage RAHBs needs further research. In addition, the effect of electrolyte additives and high concentration electrolytes needs to be further confirmed by experimental data and theoretical calculations. The exploration of the mechanism, including interface transfer kinetics, uniformity of Zn dissolution/deposition and suppression of side reactions, is beneficial to comprehend and construct high performance aqueous hybrid battery systems.
Configuration: coordination and matching of the cathode, anode, electrolyte and current collector are one of the key factors to construct high energy density RAHBs. Especially, an optimized ratio of cathode and anode can maximize the energy density of RAHBs. In addition, the vast majority of the work on RAHBs is still conducted on coin cells or pouch cells. To meet the demand for large-scale energy storage systems, large-capacity cells should be constructed to verify the feasibility for practical application.
In a word, new-type aqueous hybrid ion batteries are regarded as a competitive candidate for large-scale energy storage. To date, in our opinion, compared to other aqueous hybrid ion battery systems, rechargeable aqueous hybrid Li+/Na+ ion batteries due to their low cost, high system energy density and good cycling stability are probably the most promising system for practical application in large-scale energy storage. The design of the electrolyte, structure optimization of the electrode material and optimized configuration of the full battery system are able to achieve the best performance of aqueous hybrid Li+/Na+ ion batteries. However, it is worth noting that a metallic zinc anode as a comparative ideal anode material is expected to play a key role in high performance aqueous hybrid ion batteries. Therefore, when the corrosion, passivation and dendrite growth of zinc anodes are suppressed in further studies, aqueous hybrid Li+/Zn2+ or Na+/Zn2+ ion batteries could be a very competitive alternative for energy storage systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFB0901503) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21875238 and 21521001).
Notes and references
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. Y. Shao, X. J. Zhang, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 581–597 CAS .
H. X. Yang and J. F. Qian, J. Inorg. Mater., 2013, 28, 1165–1171 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Kubota, M. Dahbi and S. Komaba, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11636–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Luo and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3877–3884 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Hong, K. Y. Park, H. Kim, S. W. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11788–11827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, X. H. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, M. S. Ding, M. Gobet, J. Vatamanu, X. Fan, T. Gao, N. Eidson, Y. Liang, W. Sun, S. Greenbaum, K. Xu and C. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 927–937 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. X. Lin, L. M. Suo, X. L. Fan, T. Gao, C. Y. Yang, F. D. Han, Y. Qi, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3666–3673 RSC .
J. Liu, C. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Ni and Z. X. Shen, Green Energy & Environment, 2018, 3, 20–41 Search PubMed .
J. F. Whitacre, T. Wiley, S. Shanbhag, Y. Wenzhuo, A. Mohamed, S. E. Chun, E. Weber, D. Blackwood, E. Lynch-Bell, J. Gulakowski, C. Smith and D. Humphreys, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. R. Dahn and D. S. Wainwright, Science, 1994, 264, 1115–1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, Z. Hu, W. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3891–3893,  10.1039/b806009f .
G. J. Wang, L. J. Fu, B. Wang, N. H. Zhao, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 579–581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kohler, H. Makihara, H. Uegaito, H. Inoue and M. Toki, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 46, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
W. Porcher, P. Moreau, B. Lestriez, S. Jouanneau and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A4 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Fu, N. Zhao, L. Yang, Y. Wu and H. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2007, 46, 295–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. T. Qu, L. J. Fu, X. Y. Zhan, D. Samuelis, J. Maier, L. Li, S. Tian, Z. H. Li and Y. P. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3985–3990 RSC .
V. G. Kumar, J. S. Gnanaraj, S. Ben-David, D. M. Pickup, E. R. H. Van-Eck, A. Gedanken and D. Aurbach, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4211–4216 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Wang, Q. T. Qu, B. Wang, Y. Shi, S. Tian, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1199–1203 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manickam, P. Singh, T. B. Issa, S. Thurgate and R. De Marco, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 254–259 CrossRef CAS .
H. Heli, H. Yadegari and A. Jabbari, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10889–10897 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Luo, W. J. Cui, P. He and Y. Y. Xia, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 760–765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Whitacre, A. Tevar and S. Sharma, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 463–466 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, S. Shabhag, J. Chang, A. Rutt and J. F. Whitacre, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A803–A808 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Peterson, J. Apt and J. F. Whitacre, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2385–2392 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Mohamed, N. J. Sansone, B. Kuei, N. R. Washburn and J. E. Whitacre, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2201–A2207 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Ciez and J. F. Whitacre, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 112, 435–444 CrossRef .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55, 7136–7141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Suo, F. D. Han, X. L. Fan, H. L. Liu, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6639–6644 RSC .
C. Yang, J. Chen, T. Qing, X. Fan, W. Sun, A. von Cresce, M. S. Ding, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, M. A. Schroeder, N. Eidson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2017, 1, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, L. M. Suo, Y. J. Liang, C. Y. Yang, F. D. Han, T. Gao, W. Sun and C. S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1600922 CrossRef .
C. Yang, X. Ji, X. Fan, T. Gao, L. Suo, F. Wang, W. Sun, J. Chen, L. Chen, F. Han, L. Miao, K. Xu, K. Gerasopoulos and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701972 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang, J. Chen, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, X. Lu, C. J. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu, T. Qing, Y. Wang, O. Borodin, Y. Ren, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nature, 2019, 569, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Placke and M. Winter, Joule, 2019, 3, 1184–1187 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, J. I. Feldblyum, D. G. Mackanic, F. Lissel, D. L. Michels, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2876–2883 RSC .
W. Sun, L. Suo, F. Wang, N. Eidson, C. Yang, F. Han, Z. Ma, T. Gao, M. Zhu and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 82, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, L. Chen, Y. Pang, Z. Guo, D. Bin, Y. G. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8075–8082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, J. Deng, F. Zhong, Y. Cao, X. Ai, J. Qian and H. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 92–99 CrossRef .
H. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Cheng, K. Feng, X. Li and H. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 278, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Zhang, Z. G. Hou, X. N. Li, J. W. Liang, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 856–860 RSC .
Z. G. Hou, X. N. Li, J. W. Liang, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1400–1404 RSC .
S. Liu, L. Wang, J. Liu, M. Zhou, Q. Nian, Y. Feng, Z. Tao and L. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 248–256 RSC .
K. Nakamoto, R. Sakamoto, Y. Sawada, M. Ito and S. Okada, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800220 CrossRef .
M. H. Lee, S. J. Kim, D. Chang, J. Kim, S. Moon, K. Oh, K.-Y. Park, W. M. Seong, H. Park, G. Kwon, B. Lee and K. Kang, Mater. Today, 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2019.02.004 .
Q. Zhang, C. Liao, T. Zhai and H. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 470–478 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12768–12772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, M. Sun, S. Guo, J. Qian, Y. Liu, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
X.-y. Wu, M.-y. Sun, Y.-f. Shen, J.-f. Qian, Y.-l. Cao, X.-p. Ai and H.-x. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 407–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, Y. Lu, C. Zhao, L. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Shen, J. Zhao, X. Yu, H. Li, X. Huang, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 495–503 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1900993,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201900993 .
L. Chen, J. L. Bao, X. Dong, D. G. Truhlar, Y. Wang, C. Wang and Y. Xia, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1115–1121 CrossRef .
F. Wang, X. Fan, T. Gao, W. Sun, Z. Ma, C. Yang, F. Han, K. Xu and C. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 1121–1128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gheytani, Y. Liang, F. Wu, Y. Jing, H. Dong, K. K. Rao, X. Chi, F. Fang and Y. Yao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700465 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801156 CrossRef .
D. Bin, Y. P. Wen, Y. G. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1521–1535 CrossRef .
N. Alias and A. A. Mohamad, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 237–251 CrossRef CAS .
Y. You, Z. S. Sang and J. P. Liu, Mater. Technol., 2016, 31, 501–509 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bin, F. Wang, A. G. Tamirat, L. M. Suo, Y. G. Wang, C. S. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703008 CrossRef .
S. Boyd and V. Augustyn, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 999–1015 RSC .
M. Song, H. Tan, D. L. Chao and H. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802564 CrossRef .
G. Z. Fang, J. Zhou, A. Q. Pan and S. Q. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2480–2501 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Chen, M. Y. Yan, Z. W. Mei and L. Q. Mai, J. Inorg. Mater., 2017, 32, 225–234 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, J. Hao, Z. Wang, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 410–437 CrossRef .
J. Yan, J. Wang, H. Liu, Z. Bakenov, D. Gosselink and P. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, C. H. Chiang, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, L. Chen, J. Liu, S. Haller, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501038 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Jing, S. Gheytani, K. Y. Lee, P. Liu, A. Facchetti and Y. Yao, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 841–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Stoyanova, V. Koleva and A. Stoyanova, Chem. Rec., 2019, 19, 474–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Yao, Y. You, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9326–9333 RSC .
A. Tron, Y. N. Jo, S. H. Oh, Y. D. Park and J. Mun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12391–12399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Hou, X. J. Wang, Y. S. Zhu, C. L. Hu, Z. Chang, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14713–14718 RSC .
P. P. Prosini, C. Cento, A. Masci and M. Carewska, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 263, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, F. D. Han, Y. J. Zhu, L. M. Suo, C. Luo, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401507 CrossRef .
W. Li, W. R. Mckinnon and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2310–2316 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ruffo, C. Wessells, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 247–249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2295–2302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Kong, J. X. Sun, L. G. Gai, X. J. Ma and J. H. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 220–229 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Wessells, S. V. Peddada, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5421–5425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Q. Gu, X. Zhou, S. Lee, Y. Xia and Z. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1946 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Jiang, H. Z. Shao, L. Chen, J. W. Feng and Z. P. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16740–16747 RSC .
S. Komaba, A. Ogata and T. Tsuchikawa, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1435–1437 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, H. Shao, X. Zhou, G. Liu, J. Jiang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11982 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yu, S. M. Zhang, C. Fang, Y. Liu, S. Y. He, J. Xia, J. H. Yang and N. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 9960–9967 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Shao, C. Li, C. Y. Liu, W. J. Deng, W. J. Wang, M. Q. Xue and R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1749–1755 RSC .
X. N. Li, X. B. Zhu, J. W. Liang, Z. G. Hou, Y. Wang, N. Lin, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1181–A1187 CrossRef CAS .
R. Trocoli, G. Kasiri and F. La Mantia, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paolella, C. Faure, V. Timoshevskii, S. Marras, G. Bertoni, A. Guerfi, A. Vijh, M. Armand and K. Zaghib, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18919–18932 RSC .
K. Itaya, I. Uchida and V. D. Neff, Acc. Chem. Res., 1986, 19, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. Young, K. Xiang, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 290–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Park, I. Gocheva, S. Okada and J.-i. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1067 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, A. Mohamed and J. F. Whitacre, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A497–A504 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. Wang, W. Deng, C. Li, J. Chen, M. Xue, R. Li and F. Pan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 7046–7050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ming, J. Guo, C. Xia, W. X. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 135, 58–84 CrossRef .
A. Konarov, N. Voronina, J. H. Jo, Z. Bakenov, Y. K. Sun and S. T. Myung, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2620–2640 CrossRef CAS .
P. Canepa, G. Sai Gautam, D. C. Hannah, R. Malik, M. Liu, K. G. Gallagher, K. A. Persson and G. Ceder, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 4287–4341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, S. H. Vajargah, L. W. Wan, B. Adams, D. Prendergast and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 881–892 RSC .
H. L. Pan, Y. Y. Shao, P. F. Yan, Y. W. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. M. Nie, C. M. Wang, J. H. Yang, X. L. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Yang, Y. Tang, G. Z. Fang, L. T. Shan, J. S. Guo, W. Y. Zhang, C. Wang, L. B. Wang, J. Zhou and S. Q. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3157–3162 RSC .
M. Yan, P. He, Y. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Wei, K. Zhao, X. Xu, Q. An, Y. Shuang, Y. Shao, K. T. Mueller, L. Mai, J. Liu and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703725 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Renman, D. O. Ojwang, M. Valvo, C. P. Gomez, T. Gustafsson and G. Svensson, J. Power Sources, 2017, 369, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hu, T. Zhu, X. P. Wang, X. F. Zhou, X. J. Wei, X. H. Yao, W. Luo, C. W. Shi, K. A. Owusu, L. Zhou and L. Q. Mai, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 492–498 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Jiang, C. H. Jin, W. Huang, X. L. Ding and Y. H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Park, H. Y. Asl, S. Therese and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7159–7167 RSC .
W. Tang, Y. Hou, F. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Wu and K. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2036–2040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. W. Wu, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Tian, H. B. Zhao and P. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 498–504 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Yu, Y. Tian, K. E. K. Sun, H. B. Zhao and P. Chen, Ionics, 2016, 22, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
K. Amine, J. Liu, S. Kang, I. Belharouak, Y. Hyung, D. Vissers and G. Henriksen, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, C. Yan, Z. Chen, R. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Guo, F. Wei and Y. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9669–9671 RSC .
K. S. Chen, R. Xu, N. S. Luu, E. B. Secor, K. Hamamoto, Q. Li, S. Kim, V. K. Sangwan, I. Balla, L. M. Guiney, J. T. Seo, X. Yu, W. Liu, J. Wu, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, S. A. Barnett, J. Lu, K. Amine and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2539–2546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, T. K. A. Hoang, G. Tan, X. Jia, R. Tao, F. Wu and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37110–37118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Huang, X. W. Chi, Q. Han, Y. Z. Liu, Y. X. Du, J. H. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A1211–A1216 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, K. E. K. Sun and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41677–41691 RSC .
J. W. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. H. Yang, B. B. Chen, Z. M. Zhao, H. Y. Qiu, S. M. Dong, X. H. Zhou, G. L. Cui and L. Q. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 625–634 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mitha, A. Z. Yazdi, M. Ahmed and P. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2409–2418 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Wu, Y. H. Li, C. C. Li, Z. X. He, Y. H. Xiang, L. Z. Xiong, D. Chen, Y. Yu, K. Sun, Z. Q. He and P. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 453–459 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lu, T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, H. B. Zhao, R. Pan, L. Yang, W. S. Guan and P. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2016, 170, 58–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rabe, D. Verdes, M. Rankl, G. R. Artus and S. Seeger, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 862–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Sun, T. K. Hoang, T. N. Doan, Y. Yu, X. Zhu, Y. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9681–9687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lu, T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, M. Acton, H. B. Zhao, W. S. Guan and P. Chen, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2016, 42, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, C. Lu, M. Ghaznavi, H. Zhao and P. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 5, 1804–1811 CrossRef .
T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, J. H. Cho, J. Y. J. Su, C. Lee, C. Lu and P. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2816–2822 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Zhao, C. J. Hu, H. W. Cheng, J. H. Fang, Y. P. Xie, W. Y. Fang, T. N. Doan, T. K. Hoang, J. Q. Xu and P. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2019, 3, 1289–1300 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Wu, Y. Zhang, Z. D. Althouse and N. Liu, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 6, 100032 CrossRef .
M. Ahmed, A. Z. Yazdi, S. B. Dayani, H. Jahed and P. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Zhao, C. X. Wang, Y. H. Yu, M. Y. Yan, Q. L. Wei, P. He, Y. F. Dong, Z. Y. Zhang, X. D. Wang and L. Q. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800848 CrossRef .
W. Dong, J.-L. Shi, T.-S. Wang, Y.-X. Yin, C.-R. Wang and Y.-G. Guo, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 19157–19163 RSC .
M. Minakshi, D. Appadoo and D. E. Martin, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A77–A80 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Li, C. J. Xu, C. P. Han, Y. Y. Chen, C. G. Wei, B. H. Li and F. Y. Kang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1439–A1444 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sharifi, M. Mojtahedi, M. Goodarzi and J. V. Khaki, Hydrometallurgy, 2009, 99, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Tao, X. Tong, L. Gan, S. Q. Zhang, X. M. Zhang and X. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Kang, M. W. Cui, F. Y. Jiang, Y. F. Gao, H. J. Luo, J. J. Liu, W. Liang and C. Y. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801090 CrossRef .
N. Yesibolati, N. Umirov, A. Koishybay, M. Omarova, I. Kurmanbayeva, Y. G. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Z. Bakenov, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 505–511 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yuan, J. T. Bai, T. N. L. Doan and P. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2015, 158, 248–251 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Wang, Y. Liu, X. W. Wang, Z. Chang, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Peng, S. Dong, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Wu, T. Yang, S. Liang and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9977–9979 RSC .
P. Hu, M. Yan, T. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Wei, J. Li, L. Zhou, Z. Li, L. Chen and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42717–42722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Wang, P. F. Wang, T. S. Wang, Y. X. Yin, Y. G. Guo and C. R. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 355, 18–22 CrossRef .
K. Lu, B. Song, J. T. Zhang and H. Y. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2016, 321, 257–263 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, M. Zhou, H. Zhan, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22059–22066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Wu, Y. Yang, Z. Chang, Z. Wen and Y. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1209–1211 RSC .
X. W. Wu, Y. H. Li, Y. H. Xiang, Z. X. Liu, Z. Q. He, X. M. Wu, Y. J. Li, L. Z. Xiong, C. C. Li and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 336, 35–39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Islam, M. H. Alfaruqi, D. Y. Putro, V. Mathew, S. Kim, J. Jo, S. Kim, Y. K. Sun, K. Kim and J. Kim, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2239–2247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Jiang, W. X. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 308, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Ma, P. Hu, B. Chen, C. Lu, X. Zhou, P. Han, L. Chen and G. Cui, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 32, 1–7 CrossRef .
P. R. Kumar, Y. H. Jung, C. H. Lim and D. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6271–6275 RSC .
J. Qian, C. Wu, Y. Cao, Z. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702619 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Mao, J. Yang and Y. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Hou, X. Q. Zhang, X. N. Li, Y. C. Zhu, J. W. Liang and Y. T. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 730–738 RSC .
A. Baioun, H. Kellawi and A. Falah, Curr. Nanosci., 2018, 14, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Xing, S. Wang, A. P. Yu and Z. W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 229–244 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qin, Z. P. Song, H. Zhan and Y. H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 367–372 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Guduru and J. C. Icaza, Nanomaterials, 2016, 6, 41 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Aurbach, Y. Gofer, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, O. Chusid, H. Gizbar, Y. Cohen, V. Ashkenazi, M. Moshkovich, R. Turgeman and E. Levi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Yoo, Y. Liang, Y. Li and Y. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. B. Liu, Y. Y. Shao, G. S. Li, M. Gu, J. Z. Hu, S. C. Xu, Z. M. Nie, X. L. Chen, C. M. Wang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3430–3438 RSC .
P. Saha, M. K. Datta, O. I. Velikokhatnyi, A. Manivannan, D. Alman and P. N. Kumta, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2014, 66, 1–86 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Nam, S. Kim, S. Lee, M. Salama, I. Shterenberg, Y. Gofer, J. S. Kim, E. Yang, C. S. Park, J. S. Kim, S. S. Lee, W. S. Chang, S. G. Doo, Y. N. Jo, Y. Jung, D. Aurbach and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4071–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Tutusaus, R. Mohtadi, T. S. Arthur, F. Mizuno, E. G. Nelson and Y. V. Sevryugina, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2015, 54, 7900–7904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Son, T. Gao, S. P. Harvey, K. X. Steirer, A. Stokes, A. Norman, C. Wang, A. Cresce, K. Xu and C. Ban, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 532–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, K. Asheim, P. E. Vullum, A. M. Svensson and F. Vullum-Bruer, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6459–6470 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, L. L. Wang, J. T. Chen and J. R. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15762–15770 RSC .
Z. Liu, G. Pang, S. Dong, Y. Zhang, C. Mi and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 311, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Chen, S. Shi, J. Li, F. Kang and D. Su, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Yoo, I. Shterenberg, Y. Gofer, G. Gershinsky, N. Pour and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2265–2279 RSC .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Orikasa, T. Masese, Y. Koyama, T. Mori, M. Hattori, K. Yamamoto, T. Okado, Z. D. Huang, T. Minato, C. Tassel, J. Kim, Y. Kobayashi, T. Abe, H. Kageyama and Y. Uchimoto, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Manalastas Jr, S. Kumar, V. Verma, L. Zhang, D. Yuan and M. Srinivasan, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 379–396 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Soundharrajan, B. Sambandam, S. Kim, V. Mathew, J. Jo, S. Kim, J. Lee, S. Islam, K. Kim, Y. K. Sun and J. Kim, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1998–2004 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, F. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Chang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Z. Wen, Y. Wu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9022–9029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Huaisheng Ao	Huaisheng Ao received his B.S. degree from the Beijing University of Chemical and Technology in 2016. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Professor Yitai Qian at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research focuses on rechargeable aqueous ion batteries for energy storage.
Yingyue Zhao	Yingyue Zhao received her B.S. degree from Shandong University in 2016 and M.S. degree from the University of Science and Technology of China in 2019 under the supervision of Professor Yitai Qian. Her research focuses on the design of cathode materials in aqueous and nonaqueous ion batteries for energy storage.
Yongchun Zhu	Yongchun Zhu is currently an Associate Professor working with Prof. Yitai Qian in the Department of Applied Chemistry and Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale at USTC. She received her PhD under the supervision of Prof. Yitai Qian at USTC in 2006. Her research interests mainly include the design of novel systems for green and high energy density batteries for energy storage, especially for rechargeable aqueous/nonaqueous metal-ion batteries and the fundamental mechanisms.
Yitai Qian	Yitai Qian received his B.S. in Chemistry from Shandong University in 1962. He was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1997. He presently is a full Professor at the University of Science and Technology of China. In 2008, he became a Fellow of the RSC. Professor Qian, as a corresponding author, has published more than 800 refereed journal publications including Science, J. Am. Chem. Soc., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., and Adv. Mater. with citations by important international journals exceeding 20000 times. He has active research programs in solid state chemistry and the synthesis of nanomaterials for energy storage.
LiMn2O4 ↔ Li1−xMn2O4 + xLi+ + xe−
VO2(B) + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixVO2(B)

 	Fig. 1  The electrochemical performance of current typical full-cell systems of rechargeable aqueous single-ion batteries (*: energy density of full cells was calculated based on the total mass of the active electrode materials, while the others were based on the weight of the anode materials or cathode materials). RALBs: rechargeable aqueous lithium ion batteries; RASBs: rechargeable aqueous sodium ion batteries; RAKBs: rechargeable aqueous potassium ion batteries; RAZBs: rechargeable aqueous zinc ion batteries; RAMBs: rechargeable aqueous magnesium ion batteries; RACBs: rechargeable aqueous calcium ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustrations of rechargeable aqueous hybrid ion batteries (RAHBs). TFSI: bis-trifluoromethanesulfonimide.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of a Li+/Na+ mixed-ion battery. Lithium-intercalation compounds and sodium-intercalation compounds are used for the anode and cathode, respectively. During charging (or discharging), the storage (or release) of Li+ takes place at the anode, and the release (or storage) of Na+ occurs at the cathode. Ref. 86, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A schematic of the LiMn2O4/Na0.22MnO2 mixed-ion battery. (b) A schematic of the Na0.44MnO2/TiP2O7 mixed-ion battery. Ref. 86, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 
K2FeII[FeII(CN)6]·2H2O ↔ K+ + KFeIII[FeII(CN)6]·2H2O + e− ↔ 2K+ + FeIII[FeIII(CN)6]·2H2O + 2e−
NaTi2(PO4)3 + 2Na+ + 2e− ↔ Na3Ti2(PO4)3

 	Fig. 5  (a) Galvanostatic profiles of the HAB along with the voltage profiles of its individual anode and cathode electrodes versus SCE at 1C rate. (b) CV curves of the HAB at a scan rate of 1 mVs−1. (c) Rate performance of the HAB. (d) Long-term cycling stability of the HAB at 60C rate. Ref. 99, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Aqueous mixed-ion batteries. (a–c) Galvanostatic profiles of CuHCF/Li+ + Na+/TiP2O7 (B-I), CuHCF/Li+ + K+/TiP2O7 (B-II) and CuHCF/Na+ + K+/NaTi2(PO4)3 (B-III) batteries along with the voltage profiles of their individual anode and cathode electrodes vs. the SHE at a rate of 1.5C. (d) Galvanostatic profiles of CuHCF/Li+/TiP2O7 (B-IV) and CuHCF/Na+/NaTi2(PO4)3 (B-V) at a 1.5C rate. 1C = 60 mA g−1. Ref. 87, Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
LiMn2O4 ↔ Li1−xMn2O4 + xLi+ + xe−
Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the proposed mechanism for aqueous hybrid Li–Zn battery operation. (b) CV data of the Zn/LiMn2O4 system in an aqueous electrolyte at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 and electrochemical stability window of the electrolyte. (c) Charge–discharge profiles for different cycles of a cell operated at 4C rate (1.1 mA cm−2). (d) Cyclability and coulombic efficiency of undoped LiMn2O4. Ref. 70, Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of microstructures and electronic transport of the LiMn2O4/graphene composites (LiMn2O4/EG, LiMn2O4/RGO and LiMn2O4/PG composites). (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the LiMn2O4/PG electrode for the first three cycles at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (c) Voltage profiles of LiMn2O4/PG at 4C. (d) Rate performance and (e) cycling performance of the LiMn2O4/EG, LiMn2O4/RGO and LiMn2O4/PG electrodes. Ref. 117, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cyclic voltammetry of a LiMn2O4/Zn battery in the absence and presence of 0.14 wt% thiourea. Ref. 122, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Rate capability of hybrid batteries with 5% SiO2, 10% SiO2 doped and conventional electrolytes. Ref. 123, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Scheme of the structure of β-cyclodextrin and a typical surface of amorphous silica. (d) Constant current (CC)–constant voltage (CV) cycling of batteries at 4C up to 1000 cycles; the current cutoff in the CV period is set at 10% compared with the current in the CC period. Ref. 127, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) Linear polarization curves of Zn upon contact with different electrolytes. (f) Cyclability at 4C rate with constant-current/constant-voltage charging and constant-current discharging modes. Ref. 128, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The pH values of the electrolytes with varying LiTFSI concentrations. (b) A typical voltage profile of the Zn/LiMn2O4 full cell in HCZE (1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI) at a constant current (0.2C; areal capacity of LiMn2O4, 2.4 mA h cm−2). (c) The cycling stability and CE of the Zn/LiMn2O4 full cell in HCZE at 4C. Ref. 130, Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagrams of interfacial reactions (electrochemical H2 evolution, passivation and corrosion) on the Zn anode in the presence of traditional aqueous electrolytes and reversible Zn electrochemistry in the water-in-DES electrolyte. (e) Stoichiometric amounts of urea, LiTFSI and Zn(TFSI)2 used to prepare L-DES, LZ-DES and LZ-DES/2H2O. (f) CVs of LMO in different electrolytes. (g) Cycling performance of the Zn/LMO cell in LZ-DES/2H2O at various rates, in comparison with those in 0.5 M LiTFSI + 0.5 M Zn(TFSI)2. Ref. 120, Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) First discharge curves of the batteries with pure porous Zn, Zn/CNT, Zn/AC, and Zn/AB anodes, respectively, and current density is 240 mA g−1 based on the cathode between 0 and 2.0 V. Ref. 140, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the Zn plating on ZIF-8-500. Ref. 132, Copyright 2019, Cell Press. (c) Typical GCD profiles of Zn|ZnSO4 + MnSO4|Zn symmetric cells with bare (black) and nano-CaCO3-coated (red) Zn electrodes at a current density of 0.25 mA cm−2. Insets, the first (left inset) and the last (2001th, right inset) detailed voltage profiles of cells with bare (black) and nano-CaCO3-coated (red) Zn electrodes. Ref. 141, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Linear polarization curves showing the corrosion on bare Zn and coated Zn. (e) Long-term galvanostatic cycling of symmetrical Zn cells with coated Zn plates and bare Zn plates at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2. Ref. 131, Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) CV behavior at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 of the Zn–LiFePO4 hybrid system. (b) The charge–discharge curves and (c) the capacity and coulombic efficiency based on the mass of the LiFePO4 for Zn–LiFePO4 hybrid system. Ref. 146, Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a Zn/V2O5 aqueous hybrid-ion battery. (e) CV curves of Zn/V2O5 batteries at 0.1 mV s−1 in a Zn(CF3SO3)2-LiTFSI “water-in-salt” electrolyte and Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte. (f) Long-term cycling stability of V2O5 at 2000 mA g−1. Ref. 147, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
LiFePO4 ↔ Li+ + e− + FePO4
Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn

 		 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the redox reactions for the Zn//Na0.95MnO2 rechargeable aqueous Na–Zn battery during the charge and discharge process. (b) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the prepared rod-like Na0.95MnO2. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of Zn and Na0.95MnO2 in an aqueous solution of 0.5 mol L−1 Zn(CH3COO)2 and 0.5 mol L−1 CH3COONa at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. (d) Cycling performance of the Zn//Na0.95MnO2 ARSB at 4C rate with a fixed full charge capacity of 40 mA h g−1 based on Na0.95MnO2. Ref. 151, Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn
NaMn0.95O2 ↔ Na1−xMn0.95O2 + xNa+ + xe−

 		 

 	Fig. 14  (a) CV behaviors for the Zn//CH3COOLi + Zn(CH3COO)2//Na3V2(PO4)3 hybrid ion battery at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (b) The charge–discharge curves of the system at different C rates. Ref. 154, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Illustration of the working mechanism of the rechargeable aqueous Na3V2(PO4)3–Zn hybrid battery (ReHAB). (d) CV profiles of the NVP@C cathode at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 and (e) C-rate capability at different current rates from 0.8 to 32C in the ReHAB cell. (f) In situ synchrotron XRD pattern of NVP@C electrodes during electrochemical cycling in the ReHAB cell. Ref. 153, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
Zn2+ + 2e− ↔ Zn
Na3V2(PO4)3 ↔ 2Na+ + 2e− + NaV2(PO4)3

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the redox process for the NiHCF//Zn battery during the charge–discharge processes. (b) CV curves of Zn and NiHCF in an aqueous solution of 0.5 M Na2SO4 and 50 mM ZnSO4. Ref. 149, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Galvanostatic discharge/charge voltage profiles of the aqueous hybrid Na–Zn cell at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Ref. 148, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Measurements of the electrochemical stability window of different electrolytes obtained by linear sweep voltammetry. (e) Charge/discharge profiles at a rate of 0.5C in the electrolyte with added SDS. (f) Rate capability of the battery. (g) Long cycle life tests at a rate of 5C. (h) Model of density functional theory calculations, showing a water molecule passing through the SDS adsorption interlayer at different positions and the tendency of the energy change at different positions. Ref. 159, Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Galvanostatic charge and discharge measurement of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell at 1C. (b) Rate performance and (c) cycling performance at a current density of 10C (1C = 100 mA g−1) of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell. Ref. 172, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Charge–discharge curves of the first five cycles of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell. (e) The cycling performance of the aqueous Na–Mg hybrid cell (the capacity of the full cell is calculated based on the mass of the cathode material). Ref. 173, Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration and redox reaction of the aqueous Mg–Zn hybrid battery. (b) Electrochemical charge/discharge profile of the assembled spectroelectrochemical cell cycled within 1.9–0.5 V at 100 mA g−1 and in situ XRD patterns within selected scanning angle (2θ) domains of 7–9, 15–22, and 28–45°. (c) Charge/discharge profiles for MgMn2O4 in a MZM electrolyte at a 100 mA g−1 rate. (d) Cyclability pattern (the initial five cycles were performed at 50 mA g−1 to achieve full electrode activation). Ref. 179, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic Illustration of the redox reactions for the Zn//graphite nanosheet aqueous rechargeable battery during the charge and discharge process. (f) Charge/discharge profiles and (g) cycling behavior of an aqueous rechargeable battery of Zn//graphite nanosheet. Ref. 180, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 


Li–Na	LiMn2O4‖Na0.22MnO2	1 M Na2SO4 + 0.125 M Li2SO4	0.6	0.25C	29	45 (83%)	
86

Na0.44MnO2‖TiP2O7	1 M Na2SO4 + 0.125 M Li2SO4	1.0	0.4C	25	50 (62%)	
86

InHCF‖TiP2O7	0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4	1.45	1.5C	52	—	
89

CuHCF‖TiP2O7	0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4	1.32	1C	60	—	
87

LiMn2O4‖NaTi2(PO4)3	0.5 M Li2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4	1.52	1C	104.6a	220 (72.3%)	
84

Na2/3Ni1/4Mn3/4O2/NaTi2(PO4)3	1 M Na2SO4/Li2SO4	1.2	1C	∼45a	30 (∼78%)	
90

Li–K	Ni1Zn1HCF‖TiP2O7	0.4 M K2SO4 + 0.1 M Li2SO4	1.25	1C	36.5	50 (63%)	
83

InHCF‖TiP2O7	0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M K2SO4	1.4	1.5C	52	—	
89

CuHCF‖TiP2O7	0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.25 M K2SO4	1.39	1C	60	—	
87

Na–K	Ni1Zn1HCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3	0.4 M K2SO4 + 0.1 M Na2SO4	1.45	—	—	50 (49%)	
83

InHCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3	0.25 M K2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4	1.6	1.5C	52	200 (90%)	
89

CuHCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3	0.25 M K2SO4 + 0.25 M Na2SO4	1.53	1C	60a	100 (92.7%)	
87

K–FeHCF‖NaTi2(PO4)3/C	0.5 M K2SO4 + 0.5 M Na2SO4	1.72/0.98	0.5C	60.8	1000 (94.3%)	
99

Li–Zn	LiMn2O4‖Zn	3 M LiCl + 4 M ZnCl2 (pH = 4)	1.8	—	—	1000 (90%)	
70

CNT/AB/LiMn2O4‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 (pH = 4)	1.8	4C	139a	300 (66%)	
113

LiMn2O4/PG‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 (pH = 4)	1.8	4C	102.6a	300 (74.2%)	
117

LiMn2O4‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 15 wt% fumed silica	1.8	4C	96a	800 (77.43%)	
126

LiMn2O4‖Zn	1 M Li2SO4 + 2 M ZnSO4 with 0.14 wt% thiourea	1.8	—	—	300 (75%)	
122

LiMn2O4‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 5 wt% SiO2	1.8	4C	122a	700 (68.2%)	
123

LiMn2O4‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 4% fumed silica + 1% β-cyclodextrin	1.8	4C	126a	1000 (68%)	
127

LiMn2O4‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 5% fumed silica + 0.2% pyrazole	1.8	4C	110a	500 (85.2%)	
128

LiMn2O4‖Zn	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4 with 5% fumed silica + PbSO4	1.8	1C	118a	300 (74.4%)	
124

LiMn2O4‖Zn	1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI	1.8	4C	34	4000 (85%)	
130

LiMn2O4‖Zn	“Water-in-deep eutectic solvent” electrolyte	1.92	0.1C	110a	300 (>90%)	
120

LiMn2O4‖Zn/AC	0.5 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4	1.8	240 mA g−1	150a	210 (40%)	
140

LiMn2O4‖Zn-TU	2 M Li2SO4 + 1 M ZnSO4	1.8	—	96a	1000 (80%)	
125

LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2@graphene@MWCNTs‖Zn	0.25 M Li2SO4 + 0.125 M Zn(CH3COO)2	1.65	0.5C	105a	50 (99%)	
144

LiMn0.8Fe0.2PO4‖Zn	21 m LiTFSI + 0.5 m ZnSO4 (pH = 4)	1.8/1.3	0.1C	137a	150 (∼100%)	
145

V2O5‖Zn	1 m Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 21 m LITFSI	1.0	100 mA g−1	215a	160 (95%)	
147

LiFePO4‖Zn	CH3COOLi + Zn(CH3COO)2	1.2	1C	114a	125 (>90%)	
146

LiFePO4/graphene‖Zn	0.5 M LiCH3COO + 0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2	1.4	0.2C	145.8a	450 (∼78%)	
143

Li3V2(PO4)3‖Zn	1 M Li2SO4 + 2 M ZnSO4	1.4	0.2C	128a	200 (85.4%)	
129

Na3V2(PO4)3‖Zn	1 M Li2SO4 + 2 M ZnSO4	1.3	0.2C	96a	200 (84.1%)	
129

Na–Zn	Na0.44MnO2‖Zn	0.5 M ZnSO4 + 1.0 M Na2SO4	1.08	4C	113.3a	100 (∼31%)	
152

Na0.95MnO2‖Zn	0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2 + 0.5 M CH3COONa	1.4	4C	40a	1000 (92%)	
151

Na3V2(PO4)3@C‖Zn	2 M NaCH3COO and 1 M Zn(CH3COO)2	1.45	1C	85a	1000 (72%)	
153

Na3V2(PO4)3/C‖Zn	0.5 M CH3COONa/Zn(CH3COO)2	1.42	50 mA g−1	92a	200 (68%)	
154

Na3V2(PO4)3/C‖Zn	0.5 M (CH3COO)2Zn + CH3COONa	1.4	50 mA g−1	87.1a	100 (75.6%)	
155

Na3V2(PO4)2F3@C‖Zn@C	8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2	1.57	100 mA g−1	63.1a	1000 (∼100%)	
150

Na3V2O2x(PO4)2F3−2x/MWCNT‖Zn	10 M NaClO4 with 2 vol% of vinylene carbonate	1.65	1C	54a	400 (85%)	
156

NiHCF‖Zn	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 50 mM ZnSO4	1,40	100 mA g−1	76.2a	1000 (81%)	
149

NaFe–PB‖Zn	1 M Na2SO4	1.1	300 mA g−1	76a	1000 (80%)	
148

Na2MnFe(CN)6‖Zn	1 M Na2SO4/ZnSO4 with sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)	1.7	1C	137a	2000 (75%)	
159

K–Zn	NiHCF‖Zn	0.5 M K2SO4 + 50 mM ZnSO4	1.4	100 mA g−1	70.2a	1000 (76%)	
149

Prussian yellow (PY) film‖Zn	0.1 M KCl	1.1	3C	142a	500 (82%)	
160

Na–Mg	Mn3O4‖NaTi2(PO4)3	2 M MgSO4 + 1 M Na2SO4	1.2	1C	98a	6000 (94%)	
172

MnO2‖NaTi2(PO4)3	2 M MgSO4 + 1 M Na2SO4	1.4	1C	97a	1000 (72%)	
173

Mg–Zn	MgMn2O4‖Zn	1 M MgSO4/ZnSO4 + 0.1 M MnSO4	1.3	500 mA g−1	109a	500 (80%)	
179

Al–Zn	Graphite nanosheets‖Zn	0.25 M Al2(SO4)3 + 0.5 M Zn(CH3COO)2	1.0	100 mA g−1	94a	200 (94%)	
180


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
