Progress in BiFeO 3 -based heterostructures: materials, properties and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR08800H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR08800H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 477-523Progress in BiFeO3-based heterostructures: materials, properties and applications

        
          
            Li 
            Yin
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wenbo 
            Mi
          
          
        
      *
      Tianjin Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Materials Physics and Preparation Technology, School of Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China. E-mail: miwenbo@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      14th October 2019
    , Accepted 11th December 2019First published on 11th December 2019AbstractBiFeO3-based heterostructures have attracted much attention for potential applications due to their room-temperature multiferroic properties, proper band gaps and ultrahigh ferroelectric polarization of BiFeO3, such as data storage, optical utilization in visible light regions and synapse-like function. Here, this work aims to offer a systematic review on the progress of BiFeO3-based heterostructures. In the first part, the optical, electric, magnetic, and valley properties and their interactions in BiFeO3-based heterostructures are briefly reviewed. In the second part, the morphologies of BiFeO3 and medium materials in the heterostructures are discussed. Particularly, in the third part, the physical properties and underlying mechanism in BiFeO3-based heterostructures are discussed thoroughly, such as the photovoltaic effect, electric field control of magnetism, resistance switching, and two-dimensional electron gas and valley characteristics. The fourth part illustrates the applications of BiFeO3-based heterostructures based on the materials and physical properties discussed in the second and third parts. This review also includes a future prospect, which can provide guidance for exploring novel physical properties and designing multifunctional devices.Li YinDr Li Yin received her B.S. degree from the School of Physics and Electronic Science at Shanxi Datong University, China, in 2014. She received her M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Applied Physics from Tianjin University in 2019, under the supervision of Prof. Wenbo Mi. Now she is working as a postdoctoral research associate in Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Her research interests focus on the multiferroic properties and electronic structures of oxide heterostructures.Wenbo MiProf. Wenbo Mi received his B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Physics from Tianjin University in 2001, 2004 and 2006, respectively. Then he became an assistant professor at the Department of Physics, Tianjin University and was promoted as a full professor in 2013. He was a visiting scholar in 2008 at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and then he became a Postdoc Fellow in the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in 2010. His research interests mainly focus on the theoretical design, fabrication and physical properties of low-dimensional spintronic and multiferroic materials.
I. Introduction
As a room-temperature single phase multiferroic material, BiFeO3 (BFO)1–4 has attracted much attention because of its high ferroelectric Curie temperature of 1103 K and antiferromagnetic Neel temperature of 643 K.5–7 The ferroelectric polarization in BFO is mainly induced by the ordered 6s2 lone pair electrons of Bi,8,9 and its antiferromagnetism comes from the 3d electrons of Fe. Based on X-ray and neutron diffraction analyses, the ferroelectric phase of BFO can be treated as a highly distorted perovskite with the rhombohedral symmetry and space group R3c,4,10,11 and shows [111]-oriented spontaneous polarization. The experimental ferroelectric polarization in BFO is different by an order of magnitude, which may be ascribed to the different switching pathways.1 BFO has a G-type antiferromagnetic order, which comes from the super-exchange interaction between the neighboring half–full d-shell of the Fe3+ cation and O2− anion.4 Moreover, based on the spin current model, the magnetic phase diagram as a function of the first- and second-nearest neighbor interactions has been predicted in bulk BFO.12
Early research studies on BFO focused on its magnetoelectric coupling in a bulk R3c perovskite structure13 with a cycloidal G-type antiferromagnetic order at a period of λ〈110〉 = 64 nm,12,14–16 where the spin orientation can be changed by the magnetic field.17–19 In 2003, Wang et al.10 fabricated BFO films, which expands the applications of BFO in heterostructures.20 The BFO film shows rhombohedral-like (R-), tetragonal-like (T-) and R–T mixed phases.11,21–24 R-BFO has a small monoclinic distortion in R3c and T-BFO has a cubic structure with a symmetry of P4mm.24 The ultrahigh spontaneous ferroelectric polarization is 90 μC cm−2 in R-BFO films25–27 and 150 μC cm−2 in T-BFO films.28,29 In particular, the BFO film shows a broken spin cycloid with a weak ferromagnetic moment30 and multidomain ferroelectric characteristics with different domain wall densities and flavors (i.e., 71°, 109°, and 180°), which is different from its bulk. The heterostructure is an effective way to utilize the ferroelectric polarization and multiferroic characteristics of BFO. The interplay among charge, spin, valley, lattice and orbital degrees of freedom (DOF)31,32 provides a fertile ground for discovering the emergent phenomena and physical properties in BFO-based heterostructures.
So far, many important characteristics (Fig. 1) have been found in BFO-based heterostructures including the optical, electrical, magnetic, and valley properties and the interactions among them. On the one hand, after the discovery of the photovoltaic effect in the BFO bulk,33,34 the photovoltaic BFO-based heterostructures have been studied extensively. BFO films with various morphologies have been fabricated to utilize the light energy. BFO nanoparticles were used to improve the photovoltaic properties of other semiconductors by forming heterostructures35 and heterojunctions.36 In ferroelectric tunnel junctions (FTJs) with a doped-BFO thin layer,37 the electroresistance can be tailored by light illumination due to the hysteretic photovoltaic effect. Polycrystalline BFO was utilized in photoelectrochemical water splitting by bringing it in contact with hydrophilic materials.38,39 On the other hand, the electric field control of magnetism in BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures4,40–42 has stimulated many novel properties43–47 by the magnetoelectric coupling.48 Both the magnetization reversal49 and magnetic anisotropy50,51 are tunable because of the ferroelectric/antiferromagnetic coupling in BFO and antiferromagnetic/ferromagnetic interfacial coupling.52 Meanwhile, the large resistance switching (RS)37,53,54 and memristive behavior55 also have been found in BFO-based FTJs owing to their strong ferroelectric polarization in BFO and conductive filaments.54,56 Four resistance states have been demonstrated in BFO-based multiferroic tunnel junctions (MFTJs),57 where the ferromagnetic electrodes are used in FTJs or the ferroelectric barriers are used in magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs). Emergent characteristics also have been observed in BFO-based heterostructures, such as the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in BFO/insulator heterointerfaces58,59 and the valley characteristics in the (111)-oriented R-BFO superlattices. In BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices,32 the ferroelectric polarization in the ultrathin BFO layer can tailor the valley height of BiIrO3, where the spin polarization in valley states can be affected by the spin orientation of BFO. In particular, the ferroelectric domain and phase transition in BFO provide a fertile ground for discovering the novel properties in heterostructures, such as the domain-dependent photovoltaic effect60 and phase-transition induced RS in junctions.61
 Fig. 1  The schematic diagram of interacting physical properties in the BFO-based heterostructures. 
Regarding applications, BFO-based heterostructures have been used in spintronic and energy-efficient devices, such as nonvolatile ferroelectric random access memory, spin valves and spin-transfer-torque magnetic random access memory. In these devices, BFO shows different formations including thin films, nanoparticles and doped systems. In particular, the interaction among the optical, ferroelectric and magnetic characteristics of BFO is very important for the functionality of the devices. Meanwhile, owing to the interaction of properties in BFO, the induced novel properties in BFO-based heterostructures are commonly tailored by electrical, magnetic and optical methods, which is beneficial for developing multifunctional and complementary devices. This article aims to offer a systematic review on the progress in BFO-based heterostructures. After the brief introduction in section I, the materials, properties and applications of BFO-based heterostructures are discussed in the next three sections, where the contributions of the domain and phase transition in BFO are analyzed. Finally, a prospect is also included in this review, which will provide guidance for exploring novel physical properties and designing multifunctional devices.
II. Materials in BiFeO3-based heterostructures
In order to clearly illustrate the materials of BFO-based heterostructures, the morphologies of BFO and materials in contact with BFO in heterostructures are discussed in subsections II.A and II.B, respectively. Here, in subsection II.A, the morphology of BFO is classified into the epitaxial film, polycrystalline film, nanostructures and doped systems, where the advantages and drawbacks among them are compared. In subsection II.B, the materials in contact with BFO in the heterostructures are divided into semiconductors, metals and insulators.
A. Morphology of BiFeO3 in heterostructures

1. Epitaxial film. 
In the heterostructures, the epitaxial BFO films have the R-, T- or R–T-mixed phases, which show different ferroelectric polarizations and related properties, such as the photovoltaic characteristics and electroresistance in FTJs. Fig. 2a shows the perovskite-type lattice structure of R-BFO, where the ferroelectric polarization shows 180°, 109° or 71° polarization switching by applying an electric field.62 The epitaxial R-BFO and T-BFO films are commonly fabricated on SrTiO3 and LaAlO3 substrates,10,63,64 which can be ascribed to the strain effect from the substrate due to the lattice mismatch. Particularly, the termination has a great influence on the electrical and magnetic properties of heterostructures.65,66 So far, since the fabrication technology has been greatly improved, the epitaxial BFO heterostructures with an atomic scale surface morphology have been fabricated, where the interfacial terminations of BFO and the adjacent material are controllable.67,68 For example, Yu et al. have fabricated La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO heterostructures with La0.7Sr0.3O–MnO2–BiO–FeO2 and MnO2–La0.7Sr0.3O–FeO2–BiO interfaces by pulsed laser deposition.67 In order to obtain an La0.7Sr0.3O-terminated La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 film, Yu et al.67 modified the SrTiO3 substrate from TiO2 to SrO termination, which can be realized by growing a very thin layer (2.5 unit cells) of SrRuO3 on SrTiO3 or monolayer SrO on the TiO2-terminated SrTiO3 substrate. Kim et al. also have fabricated the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO heterostructures with different terminations by a similar method.68 Besides, the (BFO)2/(SrTiO3)4 superlattices also have been prepared by pulsed laser deposition, where the thickness of BFO in heterostructures can be as small as two unit cells with ferroelectric domains.69 Moreover, except pulsed laser deposition, other experimental methods have also been used to fabricate the epitaxial BFO-based heterostructures. Using the van der Waals epitaxy method, Amrillah et al. have successfully grown BFO-based epitaxial heterostructures on a flexible muscovite substrate,70 which can avoid the substrate clamping effect to obtain a superior magnetoelectric coupling. Meanwhile, doped BFO superlattices also have been prepared by a chemical solution route.71 In addition, Akbashev et al. have successfully prepared a single-crystalline epitaxial BFO(001) film on an SrTiO3(001) substrate by an atomic layer deposition method,72 which is favored by a low-vacuum pressure process and subsequent annealing for a few minutes. It is worth noting that the BFO and other complex oxide films on perovskite substrates can be fabricated by the inexpensive and facile atomic layer deposition. These advanced fabrication methods provide the foundation for investigating the epitaxial BFO-based heterostructures with different interfaces, terminations, and thicknesses.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the lattice structure, ferroelectric polarization (bold arrows) and antiferromagnetic order (shaded planes) of the (001)-oriented BFO (a) before and (b) after electric poling. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. (c) The leakage current and (d) the ferroelectric hysteresis of 200 nm SmxBi1−xFeO3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2) films. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Photo-current density as a function of applied voltages in the Gd-doped BFO nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
The most typical feature of epitaxial BFO films is the ultrahigh spontaneous ferroelectric polarization, which can reach 90 μC cm−2 in R-BFO25–27 and a larger value of 150 μC cm−2 in T-BFO.28,29 However, it should be noted that the tunnel electroresistance (TER) in BFO-based FTJs is not only determined by the ferroelectric polarization, but also affected by the electrodes and interfaces. In the rhombohedral BFO-based FTJs with a semiconducting Nb-doped SrTiO3 electrode, Hu et al.37 observed a colossal TER of 105, which is 10 times larger than that in the T-BFO-based FTJs.55 Meanwhile, the writing current density in R-BFO-based FTJs [20] can be as small as 2 × 104 A cm−2, which is two to three orders smaller than that in the magnetic random access memories (MRAMs),73 spin–transfer–torque–MRAMs74 or spin–orbit–torque–MRAMs.75 Moreover, besides the ultrahigh ferroelectric polarization, the varied ferroelectric domain wall density and flavor can modulate the interfacial exchange couplings in the BFO-based heterostructures.4,76 In the tetragonal BFO-based FTJs,55 the multiple resistive states with memristive behaviors appear along with the engineered domain states. The ferroelectric domain size shows a square root dependence on the film thickness,76 which results in the nanoscale poly-domain states in the ultrathin ferroelectric films. More domain-related effects on the photovoltaic effects and RS in the BFO-based heterostructures will be discussed specifically in subsections III.A.1 and III.C.2, respectively.
The typical application of the epitaxial BFO-based heterostructures is FTJs, which can be further applied in integrated functionalities. On the one hand, the ferromagnetic electrodes with a high spin polarization are applied in BFO-based FTJs to form MFTJs with four resistance states.57 The reversible ferroelectric polarization in BFO and the tunable parallel–antiparallel magnetic configurations in two ferromagnetic electrodes result in four resistance states in the BFO-based MFTJs. On the other hand, owing to the photovoltaic effects in the BFO film, light illumination becomes a notably effective method to modulate the TER in epitaxial BFO-based FTJs,37 where the electric-field control of tunnel magnetoresistance (TMR) is also effective. Kim et al. have utilized epitaxial BFO films as a multiferroic nanocapacitor, which can induce a nonlinear electromechanical response.77 The electrical and optical modulations can provide a fertile ground for inducing multifunctional characteristics in BFO-based FTJs and MFTJs.
Notably, the charge screening at the heterointerfaces is always incomplete, which results in an extra depolarization field to reduce the polarization in ferroelectric materials.21,78–81 In order to improve the polarization at interfaces, Liu et al. have designed PbTiO3/BFO heterointerfaces with a discontinued chemical valence and ferroelectric polarization.82 A locally enhanced ferroelectric polarization occurs in the head-to-tail PbTiO3/BFO polarized interface region,82 which can be ascribed to the negative charge accumulation in BFO and the positively charged resultant oxygen vacancies in PbTiO3. Special hierarchical ferroelectric domains also have been found in (1 − x)BFO–xPbTiO3 ferroelectric solid solution.83 Obviously, since the ferroelectric polarization can modulate the interfacial coupling, the interfacial coupling can conversely affect the ferroelectric polarization, which should be intensively studied in the future. Besides, in the epitaxial BFO/LaFeO3 superlattices, the changed periodicity can modulate the interlayer strain, which will induce a phase transition in BFO.84 In lead-free BFO-based ceramics, the composition change can also induce the strain to trigger the phase transition in BFO.85 In the BFO-based heterostructures, the phase transition can affect the ferroelectric polarization and resistance,61 which will be discussed in subsection III.C.2.


2. Polycrystalline film. 
In the BFO-based heterostructures, the polycrystalline BFO films can come in contact with the other material without the limitation of a lattice match. Polycrystalline BFO films can be fabricated by various methods, such as radio-frequency sputtering,86 pulse laser deposition87 and the sol-gel method.39 In particular, two-dimensional graphene can serve as a transparent electrode in photovoltaic devices with polycrystalline BFO films, where the chemically treated graphene can enhance the photovoltaic effects in BFO.88 The switchable photovoltaic effect also occurs in the graphene/BFO heterostructures.87 Besides, the polycrystalline BFO films can come in contact with the hydrophilic RGO,39,89 where the improved photocurrent and photo-to-current efficiency can be used in photoelectrochemical water splitting. Different from the epitaxial BFO films, the polycrystalline BFO films can stimulate the novel electrical and optical properties by making contact with the two-dimensional or hydrophilic materials to form the heterostructures, which can expand the practical applications of BFO-based heterostructures.


3. Nanoscale particles and grains. 
Distinct from the epitaxial or polycrystalline films, the nanoscale BFO particles and grains have a special morphology and quantum size effects,90,91 which can induce the novel physical and chemical properties in BFO and its related heterostructures, such as the size-induced enhancement of antiferromagnetic transition temperature,92 a red-shift band gap of BFO93 and a size-dependent magnetic exchange bias.94 In particular, the BFO nanocomposites are used to enhance or improve the photovoltaic characteristics of other semiconductors by building the heterostructures.35 In the BFO/TiO2 nanotube arrays,35 the photoconversion efficiency of TiO2 nanotubes is largely improved by making contact with BFO nanoparticles which were deposited into TiO2 nanotubes by an ultrasonic-immersion method. Meanwhile, Sarkar et al. fabricated the multifunctional BFO/TiO2 nanoscale heterostructures by the wet chemical and electrochemical routes, showing the ferroelectric diode characteristic and photovoltaic effect.91 The nonvolatile ON–OFF electronic conductions can also be switched by the external bias in such BFO/TiO2 nanoheterostructures,91 which can be applied in logic circuits and nonvolatile resistance random access memory.
The BFO nanoparticles can also assemble together to form a thin film, which can interact with another film to build the heterostructures. Chatterjee et al. have fabricated p–i–n type BFO-based heterojunctions, where the insulating layer of BFO nanoparticles is sandwiched by the p-type NiO(MoO3) and n-type ZnO semiconducting layers.36 The photovoltaic properties of the p–i–n type BFO-based junctions are improved by comparing to the p–i or i–n structures because of the enlarged depletion regions.36
Notably, various self-assembled BFO-based nanocomposites have attracted more and more attention,95–102 where novel physical properties are observed. In Fig. 3, the CoFe2O4/BFO nanocomposites can be fabricated by coating, patterning, ion etching and epitaxial growth. Triblock terpolymers95 and nucleation induction103 have also been successfully utilized to fabricate self-assembled CoFe2O4/BFO nanocomposites. The CoFe2O4/BFO heterostructures can also be synthesized into well-ordered nanodots, where the piezoelectric response and ferromagnetic properties can lead to a large magnetoelectric effect.104 The magnetic properties of CoFe2O4/BFO nanocomposites can be tailored by the composition in the CoxNi1−xFe2O4/BFO (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) heterostructures.105 In particular, novel physical properties have been demonstrated in the nanoscale CoFe2O4/BFO systems. Budi et al. have reported an exchange bias in BFO:CoFe2O4 nanofibers.106 The local conduction appears at the BFO–CoFe2O4 tubular oxide interface.107 The epitaxial BFO–CoFe2O4 nanocomposites have also been successfully fabricated on Si substrates.108 These results provide opportunities for designing functional BFO-based nanoscale devices.
 Fig. 3  Fabrication process of CoFe2O4/BFO nanocomposites. (a) Depositing a CoFe2O4 film on an Nb-doped SrTiO3 substrate by pulsed electron deposition, and then (b) depositing an amorphous Si capping layer on a CoFe2O4 film by radio-frequency sputtering. (c) Performing spin coating on the fabricated sample with the hydrosilsesquioxane negative-tone e-beam resist, and then (d) patterning the coated structure into pillars by e-beam lithography. (e) Performing the reactive ion etching on an Si cap and subsequently Ar ion etching on the CoFe2O4 film. (g) Depositing a BFO film with a thickness of 1 nm, and then (h) preparing the CoFe2O4 and BFO films simultaneously by pulsed electron deposition. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the BFO nanoplates can be stacked upon monolayer graphene109 using the dry transfer method and a micromanipulator, which provides opportunities to compose BFO with the two-dimensional materials. BFO nanowires can form nanocomposites with RGO by the hydrothermal methods,110 and are a good electrode candidate in supercapacitors due to their superior capacitance, high charge density and high cycling stability. These unique properties of BFO nanocomposites fabricated by different preparation methods offer a fertile ground for stimulating novel properties and applications in multiferroic BFO-based heterostructures.


4. Doped variants of above forms. 
In FTJs with epitaxial BFO films, the leakage current suppresses the switching effect of the ferroelectric polarization and leads to a small TER, which is disadvantageous for the performances of devices. However, in oxide multiferroics, the doping cation is an effective tool to modulate the electrical properties.111 Abundant results indicate that the leakage current can effectively decrease by doping in BFO with A-site rare earth elements (such as La, Ce and Pr)112–114 and B-site transition metal elements (such as Ti, Ni and Mn).112,115,116 Hu et al. fabricated epitaxial Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 films by pulsed-laser deposition.37 As seen in Fig. 2c and d, the leakage current of the Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 (200 nm) film is more than 10 times smaller than that of pure BFO, where a large remnant polarization of ∼70 μC cm−2 is preserved by doping.37 Besides, the interface of BFO-based heterostructures is also an effective method to decrease the leakage current.117 The spatial distribution of the internal ferroelectric order in leaky BFO is vectorially coupled with light, where the generated spatially resolved photocurrent and photovoltage can be used to detect the leakage properties of BFO.118 Besides, based on the oxidation state and coordination number, the site of the dopant in BFO can be estimated from the tabulated ionic radii, which are predicted by the systematic first-principles calculations.119
In particular, in ferroelectric materials, the open-circuit voltage (VOC) depends on a large band gap, while the short-circuit photocurrent density (JSC) is related to a small band gap for effectively absorbing the solar energy.120–122 Considering that doping is an effective approach for tailoring the band gap,123 appropriate doping in BFO becomes an appropriate way to balance VOC and JSC.121 Gupta et al.112 have demonstrated that the intensity of laser light and the thickness of (Ce, Mn)-codoped BFO films can further increase the JSC to 0.245 mA cm−2. Polycrystalline BiFe0.95Si0.05O3 with a red shift of the band gap has been fabricated successfully, showing improved ferroelectric switching properties.122 Lotey et al. also observed a blue shift of the band gap in Gd-doped BFO nanoparticles.124 Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 2e, a higher JSC and resultant energy conversion efficiency have been achieved in the Gd-12%-doped case.124 So, doping in epitaxial films, polycrystalline films and nanoparticles of BFO is crucial for engineering the band gap, electrical properties and ferroelectric–photovoltaic characteristics, and provides a possible route to improve the performances in related ferroelectric and optical devices.
Besides, during the growth of BFO films, either the deposition parameters or targets can result in stoichiometry fluctuations and resultant defects in BFO.125,126 The impurity defects in BFO will pin the domain wall and hinder the back-witching of ferroelectric polarization,126 which will lead to the so-called retention failure in BFO-based ferroelectric storage systems. However, the storage-undesirable defects can modulate the polarization configurations and mixed-phase structures in BFO.126
Moreover, the molar ratio in BFO can be intentionally modulated using materials with similar lattice structures. By utilizing similar lattice structures of T-BFO and BiCoO3, Gao et al. have prepared BiFe0.5Co0.5O3 targets by a sol-gel method, which is further used to fabricate epitaxial BiFe0.5Co0.5O3 films on LaAlO3 substrates by pulsed laser deposition.127 Different from the antiferromagnetic properties of multiferroic BFO or BiCoO3, the BiFe0.5Co0.5O3 film shows a ferromagnetic characteristic because of the spin-state transition of Co3+ ions.127 Moreover, when a voltage is applied, the c axis of multiferroic BiFe0.5Co0.5O3 can be compressed by ∼20%,127 and such a large piezoelectric response is rare in multiferroics.

B. Medium in contact with BiFeO3 in heterostructures

1. Semiconductors. 
Semiconductors are commonly used as buffer layers to modulate the built-in electric field in the BFO/semiconductor interfaces, which can affect the separation of photo-generated carriers and the photovoltaic effect. n-Type ZnO,86 n-type TiO2,128 p-type NiO36 and p-type MoO3 semiconductors36 have been frequently used in photovoltaic BFO-based heterostructures. Besides, in order to improve the interactions between BFO and semiconductors, the mesoporous structure has been utilized in TiO2/BFO/NiO heterostructures.128 The morphology can evidently improve the photovoltaic characteristics in the TiO2/BFO/NiO heterostructures.128
Typically, in BFO-based FTJs, semiconductors37 can also serve as electrodes and light-absorbing layers. In Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs,37 the Nb:SrTiO3 electrode can induce two conduction modes of direct tunneling and Schottky thermionic emission, which is absent in BFO-FTJs with metal electrodes. Meanwhile, the semiconductors can generate abundant electron–hole pairs by light illumination, which can complement the inefficient generation of electron–hole pairs in ferroelectric materials.86


2. Nonmagnetic metals. 
In BFO-based heterostructures, nonmagnetic metals are commonly used as electrodes in photovoltaic devices and FTJs, such as Au and Pt.55,129,130 The metal electrodes in the BFO-based FTJs can be engineered with other metal atoms.131 You et al. have implanted Ti in a Pt bottom electrode in Au/BFO/Pt junctions. The implanted Ti atoms can diffuse into the BFO layer and modulate the interfacial oxide vacancies, which stabilize the RS in the Au/BFO/Ti junctions.131 Meanwhile, nonmagnetic metals with different work functions can also serve as a buffer layer to modulate the photovoltaic characteristics in BFO-based heterostructures. For example, in Au/Ti/T-BFO/La0.67Sr0.33MnO3(LSMO) and Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO,132 different relative barrier heights appear between the Ti/Cr buffer layer and LSMO electrode, which results in the different separation of the photo-generated carriers and photovoltaic characteristics. Moreover, nonmagnetic transparent electrodes have also been utilized to investigate the optical properties in BFO-based heterostructures, such as indium-tin-oxide (ITO) and two-dimensional graphene.122 Besides, an oxide metallic LaNiO3 with paramagnetic properties can also serve as an electrode, which has good conductivity and a perovskite structure.61,133 Hence, LaNiO3 is commonly used as an electrode or buffer layer in heterostructures with perovskite BFO.


3. Ferromagnetic metals. 
Ferromagnetic materials, such as Co0.9Fe0.1,49 Co,51,134 La1−xSrxMnO3,50,57,135–137 LaMn0.5Co0.5O3138 and Fe4N,45–47 are widely used for the electric field control of the magnetization reversal and magnetic anisotropy in BFO-based heterostructures. In BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, the mechanism of the electric-field control of magnetism can be ascribed to magnetoelectric coupling.43,44,139 The ferromagnetic layer can be pinned by antiferromagnetic BFO due to the interfacial exchange coupling.140–144 Highly spin-polarized LSMO136,137 and Fe4N145–147 are typical room-temperature ferromagnetic materials, which can be used to explore the spin-polarized transport properties in BFO-based MTJs and MFTJs. Moreover, hard magnetic CoFe2O4148–151 shows strain-sensitive magnetic anisotropy. In the BFO–CoFe2O4 composites, the electric-field modulated magnetic anisotropy can be controlled by magnetoelectric coupling150 and the strain in the piezoelectric substrate. The ferromagnetic shape memory alloy (FSMA) Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8152 has a controlled magnetoelectric effect owing to the martensitic transformation,153 which has also attracted much attention in electric-field controlled magnetism. Herewith, in BFO/ferromagnetic metal heterostructures, the ferroelectric polarization of BFO can modulate the interfacial oxygen vacancies,154,155 which can improve the thermal stability of the heterostructures. In BFO/CoFeB heterostructures, the polarization-modulated thermal stability can be improved by ∼100 °C,154 which can be used by other BFO/ferromagnetic metal heterostructures.


4. Nonmagnetic and antiferromagnetic insulators. 
In BFO-based heterostructures, nonmagnetic insulators are commonly used as substrates to grow epitaxial R-BFO and T-BFO films,10,64 such as perovskite-type SrTiO3, LaAlO3 and YAlO3.55 In particular, SrTiO358,156 and antiferromagnetic Mott insulator LaTiO359 can induce the 2DEG at the SrTiO3/BFO and LaTiO3/BFO interfaces due to the electronic confinement in the nanoscale dimensions.157 The appearance of the 2DEG in the BFO/insulator interfaces offers the opportunity of developing BFO-based nanoelectronic devices,158 such as high mobility field-effect transistors.
In particular, non-magnetic ferroelectric materials also can modulate the electrical and magnetic properties of the BFO layer in the heterostructures. BFO/BaTiO3 heterostructures show stronger ferroelectric properties than bare BFO.159,160 The BFO/BaTiO3 multilayers have shown a high energy storage efficiency of 82.3%161 and a large magnetoelectric coupling with a magnetoelectric coefficient of 60.2 V (cm Oe)−1.162 The magnetic characteristics of BFO can be tailored by the composition of BFO/ferroelectric solid solution nanostructures, such as BFOx–(BaTiO3)1−x nanocubes163 and BFO1−x–(PbTiO3)1−x ceramics.164,165

III. Properties and underlying mechanisms in BiFeO3-based heterostructures
BFO exhibits ferroelectric polarization, antiferromagnetic order and an R–T phase transition. The ferroelectric characteristics stimulate a photovoltaic effect in BFO-based heterostructures, which will be discussed in subsection III.A. In particular, the ferroelectric characteristics of BFO interact with the antiferromagnetic order, domain structure and lattice structure. These various orders and couplings in BFO provide abundant factors to achieve efficient electric-field control of the magnetism and RS in the BFO-based heterostructures, which are discussed in subsections III.B and III.C, respectively. Emergent characteristics in BFO-based heterostructures are discussed in subsection III.D, such as the 2DEG and valley characteristics. These novel physical characteristics provide the foundation for developing optical, spintronic and electronic integrated multifunctional BFO-based devices.
A. Photovoltaic effect
In past decades, the photovoltaic effect has been a promising method to utilize the abundant and renewable solar energy.166–170 Generally, the photovoltaic effect comes from the two basic processes of exciting the electron–hole (e–h) pairs and separating the e–h pairs.34,171 In 2009, Choi et al. demonstrated the diode and photovoltaic effects in single-ferroelectric-domain bulk BFO,34 where light-induced e–h pairs are separated by the depolarized field of ferroelectric BFO. Then, the diode forward direction in BFO can be reproducibly switched by the applied electric field due to the ferroelectric polarization of BFO.34 In particular, the small optical gap (2.2–2.8 eV) of BFO172,173 makes its photovoltaic effect lie in the visible light region,34,174,175 which is beneficial for the practical applications of photovoltaic devices. After discovering the visible-light photovoltaic effects and ferroelectric-switchable characteristics of BFO, the optical modulation of the magnetoelectric properties was investigated in BFO-based heterostructures and ferroelectric memories.37,176
In photovoltaic metal/BFO/metal structures, a large VOC is observed due to the depolarized field of BFO.177–179 However, the inefficient excitation of e–h pairs in ferroelectric materials with a large band gap can lead to a small JSC in the metal/BFO/metal structures.86,169,180 In order to generate more e–h pairs, semiconductors are introduced as a buffer layer,86 where the structure transforms into the metal/semiconductor/BFO/metal. Meanwhile, an extra built-in barrier is engineered by choosing the appropriate semiconductor86 and metal132 buffer layers to separate the e–h pairs. Both the barrier height and width can be tailored at the semiconductor/BFO interfaces,37 which lays the foundation for complimentary bias- and light-controlled electrical properties in BFO-based heterostructures. Special electrodes have been used to improve the JSC, VOC and energy-conversion efficiency in BFO-based heterostructures, such as semiconducting Nb:SrTiO3,37 transparent graphene,87,122 hydrophilic RGO39 and TiO2.35,91,128 Obviously, appropriate metal/BFO/metal structures are very crucial for improving the photovoltaic characteristics, and can be applied in nonvolatile ferroelectric memories, photocatalysis and photoelectrochemical water splitting in BFO-based materials. Next, the physical mechanisms of photovoltaic effects in modified metal/BFO/metal heterostructures will be discussed in detail, where the ferroelectric domain effects on the photovoltaic characteristics will also be reviewed.

1. Ferroelectric modulation in metal/BiFeO3/metal. 
The photovoltaic characteristics of the metal/BFO/metal structures are commonly studied, where the ferroelectric polarization direction of BFO layers can tailor the photovoltaic effects. Naturally, it is an approach to manipulate the photovoltaic effects by engineering the ferroelectric BFO layers. Sharma et al. have used a BFO/BaTiO3 multilayer as a ferroelectric layer to enhance the ferroelectric properties of the interlayer, as shown in Fig. 4a and b.159,160 Moreover, under the illumination of violet laser light (λ = 405 nm) with an intensity of 160 mW cm−2, the multilayered BFO/BaTiO3 structure shows a better photovoltaic response than a BFO single layer, which can enhance the VOC from 0.33 to 1.25 V, as shown in Fig. 4c. Since the band gap of BaTiO3 is 3.27 eV, the photovoltaic effect in BFO/BaTiO3 based structures at a wavelength of 405 nm is not contributed by BaTiO3. In the metal/ferroelectric/metal structures, the net built-in electric field can be defined as181,182 (1)where Ein is the internal electric field in the ferroelectric/metal interface, Edp is the depolarization field of the ferroelectric layer, εF is the relative dielectric constant of the ferroelectric layer, εe is the relative dielectric constant of the electrode layer, λ is the screening length, P is the polarization and d is the thickness of the ferroelectric layer.181,182 In eqn (1), the enhanced ferroelectric polarization of the BFO/BaTiO3 multilayers can enhance the net built-in field, which accelerates the separation of light-induced charge carriers and the resultant larger VOC, than that of the BFO single layer. These results demonstrate that it is a practicable way to modulate the photovoltaic effects in the metal/BFO/metal structures by engineering the ferroelectric BFO layer.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the metal/ferroelectric/metal capacitor configuration with a BFO/BaTiO3 multilayer. (b) Room-temperature ferroelectric hysteresis curves of bare BFO, bare BaTiO3 and multilayered BFO/BaTiO3. (c) J–V curves of the multilayered BFO/BaTiO3 (in the upper panel) and BFO single layer (in the lower panel) under both dark conditions and illumination of violet laser light (λ = 405 nm) with an intensity of 160 mW cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing. 
Moreover, the photocurrent density can be increased and the energy conversion efficiency along with a broader applicable solar spectrum is improved by reducing the band gap in ferroelectric materials with the remaining ferroelectric polarization.169,180,183 So, several heterostructures or superlattices will be illustrated to reduce the band gap of BFO. By fabricating an alloyed BiCrO3/BFO film, Qiao et al. realized a band gap reduction of nearly 0.8 eV.184 Nie et al. have fabricated a BiCrO3/BFO bilayer by the sol-gel method185 and epitaxial BiCrO3/BFO heterostructures by pulse laser deposition, where the photocurrent density can reach ∼0.013 mA cm−2.180 Significantly, Nechache et al. have grown the double perovskite Bi2CrFeO3 and successfully tailored the band gap, which realizes a considerably large energy conversion efficiency of 8.1%.123 Zhang et al. also predicted a remarkable reduction of the band gap in the BiCrO3/BFO superlattices by first-principles calculations.183
The physical characteristics of the metal/BFO/metal structures can also be modified by selecting the electrode materials. Transparent graphene87,122 and hydrophilic RGO39 show a high carrier mobility, electric conductivity and transparency in the visible light spectral region. Gupta et al. have grown graphene/BiFe0.95Si0.05O3(BFSiO)/ITO/glass and reverse glass/ITO/BFSiO/graphene configurations by the bottom-up spin coating technique (Fig. 5a and b),122 where switchable photovoltaic effects with repeatable and stable instantaneous responses appear in both the configurations (Fig. 5c–e). The bilayered-graphene/BFO heterostructures87 with a switchable photovoltaic effect were also fabricated by pulsed laser deposition. Meanwhile, the JSC and VOC responses in either the graphene/BFSiO/ITO122 or graphene/BFO/Pt87 structure are less than 100 ms. The photovoltaic effects in the graphene/BFO-based heterostructures pave the way for exploring the optical modulation of two-dimensional materials and BFO, which offers opportunities to develop multifunctional devices.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the (a) graphene/BFSiO/ITO/glass and (b) glass/ITO/BFSiO/graphene configurations. (c) I–V characteristics of the graphene/BFSiO/ITO structure under dark conditions and illumination with standard AM 1.5 with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 in a Keithley model 2401 electrometer. (d) Transient open-circuit voltage and (e) short-circuit current response for consecutive light ON and OFF cycles of ∼10 s. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing. 
BFO with photovoltaic effects can also serve as a photoelectrode in photoelectrochemical water splitting. However, the recombination of photo-generated e–h pairs in a pure BFO photoelectrode is rapid, which results in a low photoelectrochemical performance. In order to improve the photoelectrochemical performance, BFO-based composite photoelectrodes are considered. RGO has a better hydrophilic character than graphene and a higher conductivity than the normal graphene oxide, which is a suitable candidate to improve the photoelectrochemical performance of the BFO photoelectrode. Ren et al. fabricated RGO/BFO composite photoelectrodes with switchable photovoltaic effects, where polycrystalline BFO films were prepared by the sol-gel method and RGO nanosheets were decorated on BFO films by the dip-coating method.39 In particular, the photoelectrochemical performances are evidently enhanced in the optimized RGO3/BFO sample (Fig. 6),39 where JSC has a 600% improvement and the incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) shows a threefold enhancement. In Fig. 6d, IPCE in the range of 400–550 nm can be ascribed to the optical absorption of BFO (Fig. 6c), where the IPCE response at 400 nm increases from 0.15% in pure BFO to 0.43% in RGO3/BFO films.39 The generated photocurrent at 520 nm is consistent with the band gap of BFO (Fig. 6d), which excludes the possibility of a photocurrent induced in RGO. The improved photoelectrochemical performances in the optimized RGO3/BFO sample provide the foundation for developing efficient and multifunctional BFO-based ferroelectric photoelectrodes, while the switchable photovoltaic effect is absent in the conventional semiconducting photoelectrodes. Meanwhile, the feasible and low-cost fabrication methods of RGO3/BFO composite electrodes are beneficial for extending the multifunctional ferroelectric photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 6  (a) X-ray diffraction patterns of the pristine BFO and RGO3/BFO films. (b) Raman scattering spectra of the RGO3/BFO films (measured spectra: open circles and fitted spectra: thick solid lines) and the decomposed active modes (thin solid lines and arrows). The inset shows the Raman scattering spectra of RGO3/BFO films. (c) UV-vis absorption of pristine BFO and RGO3/BFO films. The inset shows the schematic energy band alignment of BFO. EO, EF, EV, and EC represent the vacuum level, Fermi level, valence band and conduction band of BFO, respectively. (d) IPCE as a function of the wavelength for pristine BFO and RGO3/BFO films at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl. Adapted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
The light-induced VOC in ferroelectric or ferroelastic materials can exceed its band gap.60,179,186 In 2010, Yang et al. demonstrated the electrostatic potentials of a ferroelectric domain wall in BFO films,187 which can separate the photo-generated charge carriers and result in an above-bandgap voltage.60 Lee et al. also demonstrated domain-dependent photovoltaic effects in Pt/BFO/SrRuO3 heterostructures.188 As shown in Fig. 7, the diode polarity and light-induced JSC and VOC in pure polarization-up or polarization-down domains disappear in polarization-mixed domains.188 Moreover, the disappeared photovoltaic effects in the mixed domains indicate the third state, rather than the customer polarization-up and polarization-down states, as shown in Fig. 7g. Such three-state photovoltaic characteristics also show no signs of fatigue (Fig. 7g).
 Fig. 7  (a–f) J–V curves of dark (open squares) and illuminated (closed squares) Pt/BFO/SrRuO3 thin film capacitors. The insets show the (a and b) upward, (c and d) downward and (e and f) upward/downward mixed-polarization domains, respectively. (g) Cycling test for the nonvolatile photovoltaic effects in the Pt/BFO/SrRuO3 capacitors with three states. Adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2011, American Physical Society. 
The domain wall dependent photovoltaic effects have been proved in many subsequent results of BFO films, which are mainly connected with 71° and 109° domains.189–191 Owing to the controllable ferroelectric polarization, the domain-dependent above-band-gap photovoltaic responses in BFO are tunable by an electric field. The previously reported VOC reached 50 V by tuning the conductivity of domain walls.191 It is obvious that the variable ferroelectric domains offer a new way to modulate the photovoltaic effects in pristine BFO films. Such domain effects on the photovoltaic characteristics will be taken seriously in doped BFO and other ferroelectric materials with multidomain structures.
Additionally, Maksymovych et al. reported that the ferroelectric domain walls in BFO exhibit inherently dynamic conductivity,192 mimicking the memristive behavior. By applying an electric field, the domain walls in BFO show a transition from localized insulation to conductance by an order of magnitude because of the metastable conductance states.192 Bhatnagar et al. demonstrated that the above-band-gap light can induce an evident change of conductivity in strained BFO films, which can be ascribed to the trapping characters of the sub-band levels.193,194 However, by considering the domain-dependent above-band-gap photovoltaic characteristics in BFO,121,187 the special conductivity in BFO under above-band-gap light should be related to the domain structures and its dynamic conductivity, which should be taken into account in the future.
Moreover, since the anisotropic domain walls in REMnO3 (RE = Sc, Y, Ho, etc.) crystals are discovered,195,196 Jin et al. studied the conductivity of head-to-head, tail-to-tail and head-to-tail domain walls in BFO films,197 where the tail-to-tail domain walls are more conductive than the other two domain walls. These results demonstrate the anisotropic ferroelectric domain walls in BFO. However, the electron transport in the domain walls of BFO can be tailored with an external magnetic field, such as the anisotropic magnetoresistance,198 which indicates the possible magnetic characteristics of domain walls. In the BFO films and heterostructures, the anisotropic conductivity and magnetoresistance in the ferroelectric domain walls of BFO show the possible magnetoelectric coupling in domain scales. It can be noted that the domain walls can be another degree of freedom to induce and stimulate the electrical, magnetic and optical properties in BFO-related heterostructures.
On the basis of the photovoltaic effects, Yang et al. have successfully observed the fully optical control of the ferroelectric polarization in (001)pc-BFO/(110)-TbScO3 heterostructures,199 which gives new insight into the interacted light and ferroic orders in the BFO-based heterostructures. The photovoltaic effects in the BFO-based heterostructures are attributed to the photo-generated e–h pairs separated by the ferroelectric polarization, interfacial barriers or domain wall induced electrostatic potentials.37,187 However, Li et al. have studied the electrode-free photovoltaic effects in phase-pure BFO films,200 where the diffusion of charge-neutral excitons in BFO and their subsequent separation at interfaces result in photovoltaic effects. The new results are in contrast to the conventional separation of photo-generated e–h pairs in BFO; so more efforts should be made to study the charge dynamics of photovoltaic effects in BFO-based heterostructures.


2. Barrier modulation in metal/metal-buffer-layer/BiFeO3/metal. 
As discussed in subsection III.A.1, the photovoltaic effects in the metal/BFO/metal structures can be modulated by engineering the ferroelectric layers and choosing special electrodes. In this section, a metal buffer layer is introduced in the basic metal/BFO/metal structures to tailor the photovoltaic characteristics. Lu et al. have prepared Au/Ti(Cr)/T-BFO/LSMO structures by pulsed laser deposition (Fig. 8a and b), where the ferroelectric polarization in the epitaxial T-BFO is switched, as shown in Fig. 8c and e.132 The work function of Ti and Cr metals is close to that of BFO, which has a small barrier height at the Ti(Cr)/BFO interfaces, which can benefit the separation of photo-induced e–h pairs. In particular, in Fig. 8d and f, the photovoltaic response is different in the Ti- and Cr-buffered systems. In the Au/Ti/T-BFO/LSMO structure (Fig. 8d), the negative VOC and positive JSC appear in either polarized-up or polarized-down states. However, in the Cr-buffered case (Fig. 8f), the cell with a polarized-up state shows a negative VOC and a positive JSC. However, the cell with a polarized-down state shows a positive VOC and a negative JSC. These different photovoltaic responses in the Ti- and Cr-buffered systems can be attributed to the different net built-in electric fields Ebi132 (2)where the work function of Ti, Cr and LSMO is WTi = 4.33 eV, WCr = 4.50 eV and WLSMO = 4.96 eV, respectively.
 Fig. 8  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of the T-BFO/LSMO sample on a (001)-LaAlO3 single crystal wafer. (b) Setup for the measurement of the local photovoltaic effects. Local ferroelectric switching and the J–V curves of the (c and d) Au/Ti/T-BFO/LSMO and (e and f) Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO heterostructures. Circle-fork A(A′) represents the polarized-down state, and circle-dot B(B′) represents the polarized-up state. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In both the Ti- and Cr-buffered systems with a polarized-up state (Fig. 9a and c), both the Ein and Edp point towards the LSMO, which obeys the formula Ebi = Ein + Edp. Hence, the built-in electric field in two systems produces a positive JSC. Secondly, in the polarized-down state (Fig. 9b and d), Edp is antiparallel to Ein, which obeys the formula Ebi = Ein − Edp. So, if |Ein| > |Edp|, the net Ebi has the same direction as Ein (i.e., pointing towards LSMO), which can induce a positive JSC. Such a case is consistent with the Ti-buffered system. Meanwhile, if |Ein| < |Edp|, the net Ebi is opposite to Ein (i.e., pointing towards the metal buffer layers), which can produce a negative JSC. This formula can exactly describe the Cr-buffered system. These results demonstrate that the photovoltaic characteristics in the metal/BFO/metal structures can be manipulated by selecting a suitable metal buffer layer and switching the ferroelectric polarization in T-BFO layers.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the energy levels and photo-generated carrier transfer process of the Au/Ti(Cr)/T-BFO/LSMO structures with the (a and c) polarized-up and (b and d) polarized-down states. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3. Barrier modulation in metal/semiconductor–buffer–layer/BFO/metal. 
In order to improve the photovoltaic responses in the metal/BFO/metal structures, a semiconductor buffer layer is introduced,86 which can generate many more e–h pairs by light illumination and form a barrier at the semiconductor/BFO interfaces, which can enhance the separation of the photo-generated e–h pairs. In Fig. 10a, the ITO/BFO/Pt structure86 shows a large VOC and a small JSC, while the ITO/ZnO/Pt structure has a large JSC and a small VOC of nearly 0 eV. However, the ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt structure86 shows an evidently enhanced JSC on comparing with the ITO/BFO/Pt system (Fig. 10a), which can be attributed to the abundant e–h pairs induced in the semiconducting ZnO. In particular, the band alignments in the ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt structure86 result in the Schottky barrier and n+–n junction at the BFO/Pt and ZnO/BFO interfaces (Fig. 10b), where two built-in fields accelerate the separation and transport of the photo-generated e–h pairs. Meanwhile, as seen in Fig. 10c, the energy conversion efficiency η of the ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt structure is also significantly improved by introducing the semiconducting ZnO buffer layer, where the largest η is ∼0.33%. These results demonstrate that the barriers at the semiconductor–buffer–layer/BFO interfaces have a prominent modulation of the photovoltaic effects in the BFO-based heterostructures. Similar barrier modulation of the photovoltaic characteristics also appears in the p–i–n type NiO/BFO/ZnO and MoO3/BFO/ZnO heterojunctions,36 where the type-II band alignment at the NiO/BFO(p–i) and BFO/ZnO(i–n) interfaces favors the separation of carriers.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photovoltaic J–V characteristics and (b) energy band diagrams of the ITO/BFO/Pt, ITO/ZnO/Pt and ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt heterostructures. (c) Energy conversion efficiency η as a function of the BFO layer thickness in the ITO/BFO/Pt and ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt heterostructures. A xenon light source (Hamamatsu LC8 with L8253 super-quiet xenon lamp) giving 22.3 mW cm−2 blue monochromatic light was used for the photovoltaic measurements. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. 
Notably, the ferroelectric BFO with the visible-light-responsive photovoltaic effects is one of the third-generation photocatalysts due to its narrow band gap.201 Stable, nontoxic and low-cost TiO2 is the most studied material for solar-energy utilization, which can be further modified by ferroelectric BFO.35 Zhu et al. deposited BFO nanoparticles on TiO2 nanotube arrays by an ultrasonic-immersion strategy, where the BFO/TiO2 composites on Ti sheets are used as a composite electrode.35 In Fig. 11a, the photoconversion efficiency in the BFO/TiO2/Ti composite electrode is much higher than that of the TiO2/Ti electrode because of the enhanced visible-light utilization in BFO and the barrier formed between BFO and TiO2.35 Here, the photoconversion efficiency η from light energy to chemical energy under a bias potential can be described as (3)where Poutput is the total power output, Pelectrical-input is the electrical power input, Poptical-input is the optical power input, jp is the photocurrent density, E0rev is the standard reversible potential, Eapp is the applied bias and I0 is the power density of the incident light.35 The BFO/TiO2/Ti composite electrode also shows a high efficiency in the photoelectrocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B under visible light. Besides, Wang et al. demonstrated that the morphology of BFO in heterostructures can greatly affect the photovoltaic characteristics,128 especially the mesoporous structures. In Fig. 11c, the band alignment of the TiO2/BFO/NiO structure makes the electrons move toward TiO2 and the holes toward NiO, which benefits the separation of e–h pairs generated in BFO. However, as seen in Fig. 11b and c, the mesoporous m-TiO2/BFO/NiO heterojunctions have much more m-TiO2/BFO and BFO/NiO interfaces than the planar p-TiO2/BFO/NiO structure, resulting in a more efficient separation of e–h pairs generated in BFO grains and a larger VOC(JSC). These photovoltaic effects in the BFO/TiO2-related systems provide the foundation for developing the BFO-related photoelectrocatalysts and solar cells.
 Fig. 11  (a) Diagram of the photo-induced electron generation, separation and transfer pathway in the BFO/TiO2-nanotube arrays by visible-light excitation. The photoconversion efficiency as a function of the applied potential in the BFO/TiO2-nanotube arrays and bare TiO2-nanotube arrays at a visible-light irradiation of 140 mW cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of device architectures and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images of planar and mesostructured heterojunctions, respectively. (c) Energy levels of the TiO2/BFO/NiO heterojunctions and J–V curves of planar and mesostructured TiO2/BFO/NiO heterojunctions. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2017, Wiley. 
Additionally, visible-light absorbing ferroelectric semiconductors have been discovered,202 such as the Sn chalcogenide ferroelectrics Sn2P2S6 and Sn2P2Se6 with indirect band gaps of 2.20 eV and 1.55 eV. However, the photovoltaic performances in these ferroelectric semiconductors are inferior to those of the oxides. It should be noted that BFO can be used to modulate the photovoltaic effect in the ferroelectric semiconductor materials. Dong et al. incorporated an ultrathin BFO layer into the semiconducting BiVO4,203 which can increase the JSC by 2 fold to 0.14 mA cm−2 and increase the VOC by 5 fold to 1 V compared to pristine BiVO4. Since BFO can influence the asymmetric BiVO4, the photovoltaic effect in the asymmetric chalcogenide ferroelectrics might be tunable with BFO.


4. Switchable conduction modes in semiconductor-electrode/BiFeO3/metal. 
As discussed in subsection III.A.3, the semiconductors can serve as a buffer layer to modulate the photovoltaic effects in BFO-based heterostructures. However, the semiconductors can also be used as electrodes to engineer the photovoltaic responses. Hu et al. have used the semiconducting Nb-doped SrTiO3 as the bottom electrode to explore the optically controlled electroresistance in BFO-based FTJs (Fig. 12a), where Sm-doped BFO can decrease the leakage current.37 In the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs,37 the photovoltaic effects (Fig. 12b) can be increased by ultraviolet light (max-303, 250–385 nm), but not visible light (max-302, 385–740 nm). Here, the band gap of 2.7 eV (460 nm) in Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 lies in the visible light range, while the band gap of 3.2 eV (388 nm) in Nb:SrTiO3 is on the edge of the ultraviolet light. So, the light adsorption in the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs can be mainly ascribed to semiconducting Nb:SrTiO3, instead of Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic structure of the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs. (b) I–V curves of the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3(3 nm)/Pt FTJs under visible light illumination (max-302, 385–740 nm, maximum intensity of 1.5 W cm−2) and ultraviolet light illumination (max-303, 250–385 nm, maximum intensity of 60 mW cm−2). (c and d) The band alignments of the FTJs at different polarization directions (yellow arrow) under darkness and light illumination, respectively. The black filled and empty circles in (c and d) represent the photon-excited electrons and holes, respectively. (e) Typical I–V data of the LRS and HRS in the low bias region after writing with voltages of +3 and −16 V, both in the dark and under ultraviolet light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Particularly, the photovoltaic responses in the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs are highly dependent on the electroresistance states (Fig. 12e), where ultraviolet illumination has almost no effect on the low resistance state (LRS) but an evident influence on the high resistance state (HRS). Such a phenomenon can be attributed to the different band-bending-induced conduction modes in the LRS and HRS. As the polarization in Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 points towards the bottom Nb:SrTiO3 electrode (Fig. 12c), the carrier accumulates at the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 interface, which results in a direct tunneling and the corresponding LRS with a parabolic I–V curve in FTJs.37 The direct tunneling in LRS is well explained by the WKB approximation204 (4) (5)where φ1,2 is the tunneling barrier height at two interfaces and m* is the effective mass of electrons in the Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 tunnel barrier.204 By using the ϕ1,2 = 0.48(0.47) eV parameters at the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 (Pt/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3) interface and m* = 0.69m0, Hu et al. achieved a good fitting between the theoretical and experimental I–V curves.37 However, at the opposite polarization (Fig. 12d), the carrier at the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3 interface is depleted due to the charge screening effect, which leads to the depletion layer and the resultant HRS.37 The direct tunneling mechanism cannot satisfy the experimental I–V curve in the HRS, which is described by the Schottky thermionic emission37 (6)
In eqn (6), A is the junction area, A* is the standard Richardson constant, ϕs is the Schottky barrier height, ϕT is the average tunneling barrier height, T is the temperature and n is the ideality factor.37 The different conduction modes in the LRS and HRS lead to a colossal TER of 105 in the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs.
The HRS and LRS in the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs show the different conduction modes and photovoltaic responses, which offers a new optical route to the memory state of FTJ-based devices. Besides, the Nb doping content in SrTiO3 will affect the semiconducting characteristics of Nb:SrTiO3 and the interfacial depletion region, which can modulate the HRS and related photovoltaic responses. These results indicate the various control approaches on the photovoltaic effects in the BFO-based heterostructures with a semiconductor electrode.
Besides, except for the photovoltaic effects, other optoelectronic phenomena have also been explored in the BFO-based heterostructures. In the current-perpendicular-to-plane Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt junctions,205 a colossal X-ray-induced persistent photoconductivity is achieved by enhancing six orders of magnitude, which can be attributed to the X-ray-modulated formation and ionization of oxygen vacancies and the reduced interfacial Schottky barriers. The photostriction phenomenon has been demonstrated in BFO crystals, where the size of BFO can be tailored by light illumination.120,206 Particularly, the optical control of the ferroelectric polarization switching has been demonstrated in BaTiO3/MoS2 heterostructures, and is attributed to the redistributed photo-generated carriers and charge screening at the BaTiO3/MoS2 interface.207 Such a photo-controlled polarization reversal will be addressed in other ferroelectric/semiconducting heterostructures.

B. Electric field control of magnetism
In the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures,43,44 the electric-field control of magnetism is based on two types of coupling: (i) the internal magnetoelectric coupling in antiferromagnetic and ferroelectric BFO; and (ii) the magnetic coupling between antiferromagnetic BFO and other ferromagnetic materials. The first coupling enables the electric field control of the antiferromagnetic order in BFO, and the controlled antiferromagnetic order of BFO can modulate the ferromagnetism by the second coupling. In the multiferroic BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, such an indirect magnetoelectric coupling enables the effective electric-field control of magnetization, which will be discussed with the aspects of magnetization reversal and magnetic anisotropy in following subsections III.B.1 and III.B.2. Piezoelectric materials have also been utilized to tailor the magnetic anisotropy in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, which is based on the electric-field-induced strain (see subsection III.B.3). In particular, the ferroelectric domain and antiferromagnetic domain in multiferroic BFO highly interact with the ferromagnetic domains in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, which are theoretically and experimentally analyzed in the whole III.B part.

1. Electric field control of magnetization reversal by magnetoelectric coupling. 
Magnetoelectric coupling includes two types:208 one is the direct magnetoelectric effect that describes the coupling between polarization and the magnetic field ΔP = αHΔH.(7)
The other is the converse magnetoelectric effect that illustrates the coupling between magnetization and the electric field μ0ΔM = αEΔE.(8)
In this section, the converse magnetoelectric effect will be focused on to explore the electric-field control of magnetization. In the BFO/ferromagnet multiferroic heterostructures, the electric-field control of magnetism can be ascribed to the ferroelectric and antiferromagnetic coupling in multiferroic BFO,62,209 as shown in Fig. 13. In BFO films, the antiferromagnetic vector and ferroelectric polarization before and after electric poling can be reflected by the photoemission electron microscopy and in-plane piezoelectric force microscopy images, respectively. In Fig. 13c and d, the ferroelectric polarization in regions 1 and 2 are reversed by the electric poling. In particular, the antiferromagnetic vectors in regions 1 and 2 can also be inversed by the electric poling (Fig. 13a and b). Hence, the antiferromagnetic domain switching is induced by switching the ferroelectric polarization, indicating the magnetoelectric coupling in the BFO film.
 Fig. 13  (a and b) Photoemission electron microscopy and (c and d) in-plane piezoelectric force microscopy images of the same area of the BFO film (a and c) before and (b and d) after electric poling. Arrows in (a and b) indicate the X-ray polarization direction during the measurements. Arrows in (c and d) show the direction of the in-plane component of ferroelectric polarization. Regions 1 and 2 (marked with green and red circles, respectively) refer to 109° ferroelectric domain switching, whereas Regions 3 (black and yellow circles) and 4 (white circles) correspond to 71° and 180° domain switching, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. 
Furthermore, by considering the magnetic coupling between the antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic properties, the electric-field modulated ferroelectric properties can tailor the ferromagnetic characteristics, as illustrated in Fig. 14a and e. In the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO/SrRuO3/SrTiO3 structure,43 Chu et al. observed the electric-field controlled magnetization of the Co0.9Fe0.1 layer, where the ferroelectric and ferromagnetic domains are evidently matched after either the first upward electric poling or the second downward poling (Fig. 14b and c). Such a phenomenon can be attributed to the collinear coupling between the direction of magnetization in Co0.9Fe0.1 and the projection of the ferroelectric-tunable antiferromagnetic plane in BFO, as illustrated in Fig. 14d. Finally, in Fig. 15a–c, the average magnetization direction of Co0.9Fe0.1 is reversibly rotated by 90° in an electric field. Heron et al. realized a magnetization reversal of 180° in Co0.9Fe0.1 in the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO/DyScO3 heterostructures (Fig. 15d and e).49 This advantage can provide opportunities to write the magnetic state in data storage and spin valves. Besides, the reversible electric-field control of the exchange bias has also been experimentally observed in BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructures,210 which is attributed to the magnetic coupling between BFO and La0.7Sr0.3MnO3, as shown in Fig. 14a. The electric-field control of the exchange bias is also tunable by the relative proportion of 109° domain walls in the BFO-based heterostructures.211,212 The exchange bias in the BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructures appears above the critical BFO layer thickness of 2 nm,213 which indicates the film thickness effects on the exchange bias in other BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the electrical control of magnetism. (b) In-plane piezoelectric force microscopy image of the BFO film with large (10 μm, red square) and small (5 μm, green square) electrically switched regions in the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO heterostructures. (c) X-ray magnetic circular dichroism–photoemission electron microscopy image taken at the Co L-edge of the CoFe film grown on the written pattern of Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO heterostructures. (d) Coupling mechanism among ferroelectricity, antiferromagnetism and ferromagnetism of the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO heterostructures. (e) Schematic diagram of the coplanar epitaxial electrode device. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 15  X-ray magnetic circular dichroism–photoemission electron microscopy image taken at the Co L-edge of (a) the as-grown Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO/SrRuO3/SrTiO3 heterostructure, (b) after the first electrical switching and (c) after the second electrical switching. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. Schematic diagram of the electric field induced magnetization reversal of (d) the as-grown state Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO/DyScO3 heterostructures and (e) after the first electric pulse. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2011, American Physical Society. 
The indirect coupling among the ferroelectricity, antiferromagnetism and ferromagnetism is practicable for the electric-field control of magnetism in the BFO-based heterostructures because of the interacting ferroelectric, antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic domains. Besides, De Luca et al. observed the evolution of the voltage-tailored domain-pattern transfer across the BFO/Co0.9Fe0.1 interfaces by combining the optical second-harmonic generation and magnetic force microscopy,214 where the varied orientation of the magnetic domains in the ferromagnetic Co0.9Fe0.1 layer is highly consistent with the in-plane direction of ferroelectric domains in BFO. These results directly present the domain-related magnetoelectric coupling in the BFO/ferromagnetic heterostructures. Additionally, the exchange bias occurs in not only the antiferromagnetic/ferromagnetic heterostructures but also the single-phase multiferroic materials, such as the long-period Aurivillius oxides.215 However, on the basis of exchange bias, the further electric-field control of the exchange bias is the key part in the BFO/ferromagnet systems, which enables the exchange bias in heterostructures to be applied in data storage or sensors.
Particularly, BFO can also modulate the magnetization of shaped nanodots. Yao et al. fabricated special Co/BFO/(La,Sr)MnO3/SrTiO3 multiferroic heterostructures by pulsed laser deposition and nanosphere lithography techniques,216 where (La,Sr)MnO3 bottom electrodes were predeposited on SrTiO3 substrates, then T-BFO films were sequentially deposited, and finally Co nanodot arrays were fabricated on the T-BFO films using a packed nanosphere template. In the Co/BFO/(La,Sr)MnO3/SrTiO3 heterostructures, the reversible and robust magnetic domain rotation of 180° appears in Co nanodots by applying an electric field at room temperature (see Fig. 16), which is consistent with the results of the micromagnetic simulations based on the Landau–Lifshitz–Gilbert ordinary differential equation and Green function method.216,217 Moreover, in Fig. 17a and b, the magnetic order in Co nanodots can be rotated in a short time of ∼10 ns by a small electric field within 10 V, where the magnetic rotation also shows a superior retention of nine months (Fig. 17b). Notably, besides the interfacial exchange coupling in the Co/BFO heterostructures, both the electric-field-induced piezostrain of BFO and the shape anisotropy of Co nanodots favor the electric-field driven magnetic rotation. The fast electric-field driven magnetic rotation in the shaped nanodots/BFO paves a new way to explore energy-consumption memories.
 Fig. 16  (A) Atomic force microscopy topology of six Co nanodots on the epitaxial BFO film. (B–D) Magnetic force microscopy images of the six Co nanodots in the initial magnetic state without pretreatment, then upon an electric pulse of +8 V, and then upon a −8 V pulse, respectively. The top rows in (E) and (F) indicate the enlarged magnetic force microscopy images of the blue-marked I and II nanodots, respectively. The red dashed arrows show the average magnetization vectors of the three triangle wings in magnetic force microscopy images. Corresponding to the top row in (E) and (F), the simulated magnetic force microscopy contours and magnetic moment configurations are displayed in the middle and bottom rows, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 17  (A) Wave distribution at the ultrashort electric pulses of 10 ns at ±10 V, which is applied on one chosen Co nanodot on the epitaxial BFO film. (B) Magnetic force microscopy images of the Co nanodot in the initial magnetic state without pretreatment, then upon an electric pulse of +10 V, and then upon a −10 V pulse, respectively. The top row in (B) indicates the simulated magnetic force microscopy images of the blue-marked I and II nanodots, respectively. The dashed red arrows show the average magnetization vectors of the three triangle wings. (C) Serious reads of “written” Co nanodots marked by dashed red cycles: the initial state, switched state after an electric pulse of 8 V at 1.0 ms, switched state after heating at 100 °C in 1 h, and then the switched state after the retention of nine months. Adapted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In particular, the phase-field theory provides a way to simulate the phase transition and domain structures in a ferroelectric film.218 In homogeneous crystals, the thermodynamic potentials can be described by the specific mechanical boundary conditions. However, the ferroelectric film is an inhomogeneous system with a polarization-distinguished domain structure. During the ferroelectric polarization switching in BFO films, the temporal evolution of the polarization vector field can be simulated by the phase-field theory based on the time-dependent Ginzburg–Landau equation219,220 (9)where Pi(r,t) is the polarization, L is a kinetic coefficient associated with the domain wall mobility. F is the total free energy including Landau energy, elastic energy, electrical energy and gradient energy,218,221 which can be defined as (10)
The time-dependent Ginzburg–Landau equation is solved by a semi-implicit Fourier spectral method at a discreet grid, where the periodic boundary conditions are considered in the film plane. Assuming that the bottom of the BFO film comes in contact with the conductive substrate or buffer layer, the electric potential at the bottom of the BFO film is assumed to be zero, and the electric potential at the top of the BFO film is assumed to be continuous,222,223 which can be written as Φ|z=0 = 0, Φ|z=h−0 − Φ|z=h+0 = 0,(11) (12)σsurface indicates the surface charge density at the top of the BFO film, which can be used to describe the electrostatic potential ϕ(r) (13)where ε0 and εr are the permittivity of vacuum and the BFO film, respectively. The boundary conditions used in the phase-field theory can be gained from the measured thermodynamic parameters in the bulk crystal. By using the determined boundary conditions, the time-dependent ferroelectric polarization in the BFO film at the given strain and temperature will be predicted by the phase-field theory, which can be used to determine the phase transition temperature and domain structure in the BFO film. Moreover, the magnetic free energy of the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures is composed of several energy contributions,208 which can be defined as (14)where A is the exchange stiffness constant, m is the normalized magnetization vector, fani(m) is the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy density, ε is the total strain that represents the distortion in a ferromagnetic material, c is the elastic stiffness tensor, and HE is the exchange anisotropy field induced by the ferromagnetic/antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic/ferroelectric exchange couplings. In eqn (14), the surface/interfacial anisotropy energy density  is inversely proportional to the film thickness of the ferromagnet. Hence, the surface/interfacial anisotropy will play a key role in a relatively thin film. In order to clarify the changing mechanism of magnetization in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostrucutres, the finite-element multiphysics model, phase-field theory within the microelasticity theory and micromagnetic simulations have been used. The motion of local magnetization M(r) is calculated using the Landau–Lifshitz–Gilbert equation (15)where the effective magnetic field Heff is related to the total magnetic free energy in eqn (14). In eqn (9) and (15), the changing processes of ferroelectric polarization and magnetization in the BFO/ferromagnetic heterostructures can be described theoretically, which has been confirmed by the experimental results. The cooperation between the theoretical simulations and experimental results plays a key role in studying the electrical and magnetic properties of multiferroic heterostructures, which can be reflected by the abovementioned magnetic moment configuration in the Co/BFO/(La,Sr)MnO3/SrTiO3 heterostructures (Fig. 16).216 The developed phase-field theory can also be used to investigate the ferroelectric domain structure,224 charged domain walls225 and flexoelectric field distribution226 in BFO film, which are discussed in subsections III.D.1, III.C.2 and III.B.3, respectively.
The antiferromagnetic structure of BFO is canted by the antisymmetric Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interactions (−D·M1 × M2) between the nearest magnetic moments M1 and M2, where D is the symmetry-constrained Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya vector.52 However, antiferromagnetic BFO shows a ferromagnetic characteristic in the heterointerfaces.30,227 In the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO heterostructures, the interfacial ferromagnetic states with a moment of 0.6μB/Fe appear in BFO, which is attributed to the interfacial orbital reconstruction.30 Guo et al. also observed a large net moment of ∼2.8μB/Fe in the (100)-BFO/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 superlattices.228 However, no net moment is induced in the (111)-BFO/La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 superlattices.228 So, the spin canting triggered by the interfacial exchange coupling results in a large net moment in the (100)-oriented case.228 Moreover, Yin et al. demonstrated two interfacial couplings for achieving the net Fe moment at the BFO/LSMO interfaces, where the direct Fe−–Mn (indirect Fe+–OB–MnO) exchange coupling induces a net Fe moment of 0.55μB (−1.07μB) in the MnO2/Fe–O2 (MnO2/O2–Fe) model.227 The interfacial net Fe moment in the MnO2/Fe–O2 model with a spin polarization of 100% can also be reversed by applying an electric field, which provides the foundation for developing the BFO/LSMO-based spintronic devices.
The interfacial magnetoelectric coupling (IMEC) is demonstrated in the BFO/LSMO heterostructures by first-principles calculations, where the ferroelectric polarization reversal of BFO can increase or decrease the magnetic moments of LSMO.136,137 Here, IMEC is proposed in the ferromagnetic/ferroelectric heterostructures,208,229 where the ferroelectric polarization directions are opposite at two interfaces. The IMEC coefficient is defined as α ≈ μ0ΔM/Ec,229 where Ec is the coercive fields of ferroelectric materials, μ0 is the permeability under vacuum and ΔM is the difference of the magnetic moments at two interfaces. Yin et al. found that the tetragonal BFO/LSMO heterostructures show an IMEC of α ≈ 0.221 G cm kV−1 in the xy-plane lattice constants ranging from 3.62 to 3.92 Å,137 which is larger than α ≈ 0.174 G cm kV−1 of the BFO/LSMO superlattices.136 A stronger IMEC in the BFO/LSMO heterostructures than in its superlattices can be ascribed to the different interfacial Fe–OLSMO covalent and OBFO–La electrovalent bonds in two LaO-type BFO/LSMO heterostructures.


2. Electric field control of magnetic anisotropy by magnetoelectric coupling. 
Since the electric field can tailor the magnetization reversal in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, the magnetic anisotropy of ferromagnetic materials should be controlled by antiferromagnetic BFO and an electric field.230,231 You et al. demonstrated the [100] easy axis of the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 layer in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO bilayers (Fig. 18a), which is different from the [010] easy axis in a pure La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 layer.50 Here, HC, MR and MS are the coercive field, remnant magnetization and saturation magnetization, respectively. You et al. further studied the in-plane angle dependent HC and MR/MS of the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO heterostructures.50 The uniaxial magnetic anisotropy is observed in the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 layer, which is related to the striped ferroelectric domains in BFO (Fig. 18b).50 The anisotropic striped ferroelectric domains in BFO couple to their antiferromagnetic domains; so they can couple to the subsequent ferromagnetic domains in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3. Consequently, the uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 is tunable by multiferroic BFO with the striped ferroelectric domains.50
 Fig. 18  (a) In-plane M–H curves along the [100] and [010] directions of the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 single layer and La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO bilayers. (b) Scheme of the ferroelectric polarization induced uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO bilayers. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, Wiley. (c) Angle-dependent magnetic coercivity HC and MR/MS of the Co layer in the as-grown Co/BFO heterostructures, after the first +400 kV cm−1 poling, after the subsequent −400 kV cm−1 poling, and after the second +400 kV cm−1 poling. 0° and 90° indicate the (100) and (010) directions of the SrTiO3 substrate (long blue and black arrows), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Since the magnetic anisotropy of BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures can be modulated by the ferroelectric property of BFO, the electric field should modulate the magnetic anisotropy through the electric-field controlled ferroelectric property.16 In the Co/BFO heterostructures (Fig. 18c), the magnetic easy axis of the Co layer switches from 0° to 45° after +400 kV cm−1 poling, which transforms from 45° back to 0° after the −400 kV cm−1 poling.51 Moreover, the magnetic easy axis in the Co layer switches again from 0° to 45° after further +400 kV cm−1 poling. Hence, in the Co/BFO heterostructures, the electric field can reversibly switch the magnetic easy axis by 45°.51
The tetragonal distortion is demonstrated to induce a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) in a cubic ferromagnet.232,233 Yin et al. found that the PMA appears in the entire Fe4N layer of the tetragonal Fe4N/BFO heterostructures (Fig. 19a), and is attributed to the interfacial hybridization and tetragonal distortion with different terminations, interfacial atomic positions and ferroelectric polarizations.45 The influence of ferroelectric polarization on the PMA of Fe4N mainly lies in the first interfacial atomic layer (Fig. 19b), where PMA turns into the in-plane magnetic anisotropy. The modulation of ferroelectric polarizations on PMA has also been experimentally realized in the BFO/Al2O3/Pt/Co/Pt heterostructures.234 By considering the spin–orbit coupling (SOC),45,235–237 the total magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) in the multiferroic heterostructures is defined over different orbital λ values of atom i with the so-called canonical formulation235,236 (16)where noutiλ(E) and niniλ(E) are the density of states on orbital λ of atom i in the out-of-plane and in-plane magnetization orientations, and a is the in-plane lattice constant. The MAE of atom i can be calculated with λ for each of the orbitals45,236 (17)and then the sum of MAEi over all the atoms produces the total MAE.236 Based on the atomic layer- and orbital-distinguished MAE results, Yin et al. found that the PMA of Fe4N is preserved by d1 = dxy + dx2−y2 and d2 = dxz + dyz + dz2 orbital oscillations in the unstrained and strained Fe4N/BFO heterostructures.46 Moreover, in the tetragonal Fe4N/BFO heterostructures, the PMA in each Fe4N atomic layer can be modulated by an electric field, not only the interfacial layers.47 Such an effective electric-field control of PMA can be attributed to the broken spin screening of the electric field47,238 in highly spin-polarized Fe4N.47,145,239 These results reveal that T-BFO films can be used to stimulate the PMA in ferromagnets. Additionally, another important theory is necessary to calculate the MAE. Based on the second-order perturbation theory, the MAE also can be described by the occupied and unoccupied states, which can be defined as240,241 (18)where ξ is the SOC constant, and Eo(Eu) and ψo(ψu) are the eigenstates and eigenvalues of the occupied (unoccupied) states. In the Fe1−xCox/MgO structures,242 the second-order perturbation theory qualitatively demonstrates that the MAE of Fe1−xCox is highly dependent on the d orbital occupation. The second-order perturbation theory can be used to calculate the MAE of the BFO-based multiferroic heterostructures with the localized d orbitals.
 Fig. 19  (a) Structures of the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures, bulk Fe4N and BFO. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (b) Magnetic order of the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures with the opposite polarization directions of ferroelectric BFO. M+(M−) indicates the magnetic moment with a positive (negative) value. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, American Physical Society. (c) Layer-resolved magnetic anisotropy energy of the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures at different electric fields by GGA+U+SOC calculations. The FN label indicates Fe4N. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (d) Orbital-resolved magnetic anisotropy energy oscillation of the Fe4N layer in the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the ferroelectric and antiferromagnetic domains of BFO have aroused plenty of fascinating phenomena, such as the domain-dependent photovoltaic effects188 and domain-interacted electric-field control of magnetism.216 So, the domain-based research studies should be paid much attention by precisely engineering the domain structures in BFO. Winkler et al. clarified that the misfit dislocations at the BFO/substrate interfaces can serve as nucleation sites, which can slow down the domain motion.243 In 2011, Nelson et al. observed the special vortex domain arrays at BFO/TbScO3 interfaces.244 These phenomena reveal the interfacial effects on the domain structures in the BFO-based heterostructures. Particularly, Chen et al. have successfully engineered the domain structure of BFO via introducing a dielectric layer to form new interfaces by pulsed laser deposition.245Fig. 20 shows the pure 71° domains of BFO transferred into the mixed 71° and 109° ones by inserting a La0.25Bi0.75FeO3 layer.245 Moreover, the proportion of 109° domains in the BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/SrRuO3/DyScO3 heterostructures increases with the increase in the La0.25Bi0.75FeO3 layer thickness, which finally turns into pure 109° domains at a thickness of 10 nm. The precise control of 71° and 109° domains also unambiguously confirms that the exchange bias in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures comes from 109° domains, but not 71° domains, as shown in Fig. 21.245 The 180° domains of BFO also favor the exchange bias in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, which has been observed in the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO structures.246 The realized interfacial modulation of the domain structures of BFO provides a good platform for developing novel domain-based optical, electrical and spintronic devices. Besides, the domain structure of BFO can also be controlled by changing the growth pressure during pulsed laser deposition, where the high background pressure can produce a z-directional film and long range ordering of 71° domains.247 The ferroelectric domains of BFO can also be oriented by temperature in the optical second harmonic generation technique.248
 Fig. 20  In-plane and out-of-plane (insets in the top right corner) piezoresponse force microscopy images of (a) BFO/SrRuO3/DyScO3 with pure 71° domains, (b–d) thickness-varied BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/SrRuO3/DyScO3 heterostructures with mixed 71° and 109° domains, and (e) BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/SrRuO3/DyScO3 heterostructures with 10 nm thick La0.25Bi0.75FeO3 and pure 109° domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 21  Diagrams of the applied magnetic field orientation and the used magnetic field in superconducting quantum interference device measurements for (a) Pt/CoFe/DyScO3 and (b) Pt/CoFe/BFO/DyScO3 and Pt/CoFe/BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/DyScO3. Magnetic properties of (c) Pt/CoFe heterostructures (black loop), CoFe/BFO heterostructures (red and blue loops) with pure 71° domains and (d) CoFe/BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3 with pure 109° domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Here, we underline a special BFO/electrode interface. Zou et al. demonstrated that the charged domain walls by electrical cycling will not lead to polarization fatigue.249 However, after prolonged cycling, the injected charges move into the BFO/electrode interface, which can pin the domains and cause polarization fatigue.249 Such a domain-pinned BFO/electrode interface should be avoided in the future. Besides, Chu et al. have successfully obtained 1D periodically ferroelectric domain structures in BFO films,250 which can be ascribed to the in-plane lattice constants of SrRuO3 films constricted by DyScO3 substrates. Jang et al. have successfully selected the 109° and 71° ferroelectric domains in BFO by miscutting cubic SrTiO3 substrates, which stimulates the step-flow growth of BFO films with two-variant stripe domains.251 It can be noted that, except the interfacial effects, strain is another effective tool to control the domain structure in BFO.


3. Electric field control of magnetic anisotropy by induced strain. 
Epitaxial BFO films have the ferroelastic property252 and strain-tunable domain structures,253 which will contribute to the strain modulation on the electric-field controlled magnetic anisotropy. Here, hard magnetic CoFe2O4 is taken as an example because of its strain-sensitive magnetic anisotropy. More importantly, CoFe2O4 can epitaxially grow on perovskite BFO, where CoFe2O4 nanopillars are embedded in the BFO matrix (i.e., the BFO–CoFe2O4 nanocomposites). The self-assembled nanostructures can provide a larger interfacial area between CoFe2O4 and BFO, which is beneficial for the interfacial magnetoelectric coupling. Zavaliche et al. observed two electric-switchable perpendicular magnetic states in the BFO–CoFe2O4 composites on SrTiO3 substrates due to the magnetoelectric coupling.150
In particular, the strain effect on the magnetic anisotropy in the BFO–CoFe2O4 composites was investigated by depositing the composite films on piezoelectric Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)0.7Ti0.3O3 (PMN-PT) substrates. Wang et al. have fabricated 65BFO-35CoFe2O4/PMN-PT heterostructures (Fig. 22a and b) by pulsed laser deposition, where the magnetic anisotropy of CoFe2O4 can be tailored by the electric-field induced strain.151 As seen in Fig. 22c, the MR and HC of CoFe2O4 decrease (increase) in the out-of-plane (in-plane) direction after electric poling, where the magnetic easy axis turns from the out-of-plane to in-plane directions on applying an electric field.151 In Fig. 22c, the modulated magnetic anisotropy can be attributed to the electric-field-induced strain in the PMN-PT substrate, where the strain can transfer into the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4 layer. Therefore, the electric-field induced strain provides a new tool to tailor the magnetic anisotropy of ferromagnets, which can be integrated with the magnetoelectric-coupling-tunable magnetic anisotropy in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures. The two kinds of electric-field control of magnetic anisotropy provide a fertile ground for developing BFO-based data storage and multifunctional devices.
 Fig. 22  (a) X-ray diffraction line scan of 65BFO-35CoFe2O4 on PMN-PT before and after poling. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4 layer and the scheme of the strain conditions during the poling process in the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4/PMN-PT structure. (c) Magnetic hysteresis loops of the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4/PMN-PT structure before and after electric poling in the out-of-plane and in-plane directions, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing. 
The antiferromagnetic vector of BFO epitaxial films is not always perpendicular to its ferroelectric polarizations, which can also be tailored by the substrate strain. Although the epitaxial strain has no obvious impact on the ferroelectric polarization direction of the BFO(110)/GdScO3(010)O heterostructures, the antiferromagnetic spin axis of BFO is continuously reoriented from the in-plane direction to the out-of-plane direction by a large epitaxial strain,254 which is different from the previously reported perpendicular relationship between the polarization direction and antiferromagnetic axis of BFO. The special strain effect on the ferroelectricity and antiferromagnetism of BFO is theoretically clarified by considering the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction and single-ion anisotropy. The Hamiltonian can be written as (19)where Si is the ith spin vector, Jij is the exchange parameter, Dij is the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction vector, K is the single-ion anisotropy constant and H0 represents all other interactions. Chen et al. performed the density functional theory calculations on BFO cubic perovskite units with three axes of [110], [001] and [10] by revising the Hamiltonian.254 It is found that the antiferromagnetic spin axis in BFO is dominated by the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction at small strains, which agrees well with the previously reported perpendicular relationship between the polarization direction and antiferromagnetic vector in BFO. However, at a large strain, the single-ion anisotropy of BFO increases dramatically until it is comparable to the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction, which results in the antiferromagnetic vector reorientation in BFO without changing the ferroelectric polarization. Moreover, the strain-induced antiferromagnetic vector reorientation of BFO can further tailor the magnetic anisotropy of the ferromagnetic Co0.9Fe0.1 layer.254
Moreover, Bordacs et al. observed that the cycloidal spin structure of a bulk BFO crystal with a ferroelectric monodomain can be rearranged under a magnetic field by small-angle neutron scattering.255 The cycloid propagation vectors are rotatable when the applied magnetic field with a pinning threshold value above 5 T is perpendicular to the rhombohedral polar axis, which reveals a new coupling between the magnetic anisotropy and ferroelectric polarization of BFO.255 Fishman used the so-called “canonical” model to explain the magnetic field induced rearrangement of cycloidal domains in BFO, where the Hamiltonian is written as (20)where the first Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction D1 indicates the cycloidal wavelength and the second Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction D2 generates a small tilt of the spins out of the x′–z′ plane.256 The “canonical” model was further augmented by the threefold anisotropy and magnetoelastic energy, which successfully deduced the critical magnetic field to rotate the cycloidal domains of BFO.256
The piezoelectric materials with transformable electrical and mechanical energy are essential for the strain tunable magnetic anisotropy in BFO-based heterostructures. Meanwhile, the BFO-based composites can also efficiently switch the ferroelectric and ferroelastic domains by an electric field. Narayan et al. found a large electric field induced strain of 1.3% in BFO–PbTiO3–LaFeO3 ferroelectric composites, which is larger than that in polycrystalline piezoelectric ceramics.257 Moreover, Narayan et al. have also revealed that the electric field induced strain can be affected by four factors, including a large spontaneous lattice strain in the piezoelectric phase, a domain miniaturization, a low-symmetric ferroelectric phase and a high reverse switching of non-180° domains.257 The design strategy can be utilized in future ferroelectric piezoelectrics for obtaining a large electric field induced strain.
Additionally, BFO can tailor not only the magnetic anisotropy, but also the electronic anisotropy of the ferromagnets in the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures. In the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO heterostructures,258 a transition from a metal to an insulator appears in [001]o oriented LSMO at 301.3 K. However, the [1−10]o directional transport shows an insulator-like characteristic at low temperatures. So, the in-plane anisotropic resistance appears in LSMO, which can reach 800% at low temperatures. In the BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures, the large anisotropic resistivity can be ascribed to the different strains in LSMO at different lattice orientations, which is tunable by the ferroelastic domain walls of BFO. Based on the ferroelectric, antiferromagnetic and ferroelastic characteristics of BFO, both the magnetic and electronic anisotropy of the ferromagnets can be tailored in the BFO-based heterostructures, which provides a platform for designing multifunctional devices.
However, the electromechanical coupling between the electric polarization and strain gradient in the BFO-based heterostructures is limited to utilizing not only the electric field induced strain due to the piezoelectric effects, but also the flexoelectricity,259,260 which enables the mechanical control of ferroelectric polarization without an electric bias. In particular, Park et al. have successfully induced a flexoelectric field by moving a scanning probe microscope tip, which can selectively switch the polarization of multidomain structures of BFO, as shown in Fig. 23.226 Moreover, based on the induced flexoelectric field, the motion of the scanning probe microscope tip can not only stimulate the 180° ferroelectric domain switching (Fig. 23) but also the 71° ferroelastic domain switching, where the ferroelectric or ferroelastic switching is dependent on the tip scanning direction. The novel flexoelectricity effects of multidomain BFO provides new insight for developing electromechanical devices. Besides, the disclinations of BFO can be used to generate a strain gradient. Tang et al. have stimulated the inhomogeneous strain with a linear gradient of 106 per meter in LaAlO3/BFO/LaAlO3 nanostructures,261 which resulted in a large built-in electric field and improved solar absorption. Such strain engineering in the BFO-based heterostructures can be utilized to design photoelectric devices.
 Fig. 23  Schematics of the flexoelectric field and related polarization switching in the BFO film under the scanning probe (a) in static contact, and (b and c) tracing the moved tip in [0] and [110] directions, respectively. Phase-field simulations of the in-plane flexoelectric field distribution of the BFO film under the scanning probe (d) in static contact, and (e and f) tracing the moved tip in [0] and [110] directions. Adapted with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 

C. Resistance switching
The RS characteristics in BFO-based heterostructures have been widely investigated due to their potential applications in data storage and memory. In BFO-based FTJs, the RS properties can be generated by conductive filaments, which will be discussed in subsection III.C.1 including the contribution of oxygen vacancies and memristive switching. In subsection III.C.2, the RS triggered by the ferroelectric polarization reversal and charged domain walls is reviewed, such as the memristive behavior and phase transition in the BFO-based FTJs. Moreover, the four resistance states and photoresponse in BFO-based MFTJs are theoretically262 and experimentally57,152 illustrated in subsection III.C.3. Besides, the resistance switching in the semiconductor/BFO/metal junctions has been illustrated in subsection III.A.4, along with different photovoltaic responses and conduction modes in the junctions at low and high resistance states.

1. Conductive filament-related resistance switching in metal/BiFeO3/metal sandwiches. 
In the metal/BFO/metal sandwich structures, RS can be modulated by the conductive filaments, which are commonly associated with the oxygen vacancies in the insulating BFO region.54,129 In Ag/Bi0.95La0.05FeO3/Pt sandwich structures,129 the temperature-dependent resistances show a metallic (semiconducting) characteristic in the LRS (HRS). Moreover, the LRS is weakly dependent on the device area, which reveals the conductive filament dominated RS in the Ag/Bi0.95La0.05FeO3/Pt structures. In particular, the nonpolar RS in the Pt/BiFe1−xMnxO3/Pt structures54 was ascribed to the oxygen vacancy induced conductive filaments, followed by the changed valence states of Fe cations. In Fig. 24a, the ionized oxygen vacancies move towards the cathode and capture the injected electrons in the cathode. Then, the conducting state of the cathode extends to the anode (Fig. 24b), where the conductive path forms.54 In particular, in Fig. 24c, a negative voltage benefits the release of the electrons from the neutral oxygen vacancies with the changed valence states of Fe ions, which can damage the conductive filaments and result in the bipolar RS.54 The unipolar RS is attributed to the thermally assisted ionization of oxygen vacancies (Fig. 24d), which randomly appears in the BiFe1−xMn films.54 Overall, the conductive filaments in the insulating BFO region can switch the structure of the LRS, while the conductive filaments damaged by the reversal voltages make the structure return to the HRS. The conductive filaments will remarkably decrease the effective areas in the top and bottom electrodes, which can damage the ferroelectric hysteresis loops. Meanwhile, the conductive filament related RS in the BFO-based heterostrutures can be ascribed to the local redox reaction and valence changes of cations, and much attention should be paid to the reliability of such a device, including the retention and endurance.
 Fig. 24  Diagram of the nonpolar RS mechanism of the Pt/BiFe1−xMnxO3/Pt devices at the (a and b) forming process, (c) bipolar RS and (d) unique RS. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2012, AIP Publishing. 
The conductive filaments formed by the oxygen vacancies can also be related to the grain boundaries in undoped polycrystalline BFO. Based on the density functional theory and Monte Carlo simulations, the uniformly distributed oxygen vacancies in polycrystalline BFO can be pushed into the grain boundaries by the voltage.263 The hopping conduction barriers formed by the oxygen vacancies at the grain boundaries can be eliminated by a critical SET voltage. Moreover, in the reversal part of the cycle, the grain boundaries also have nonzero conductivity because of the RESET voltage induced oxygen vacancy redistribution.263 So, the grain boundaries can serve as 2D nanovaristors in polycrystalline BFO under an electric field, which has been confirmed by experimental results.263 The nanovaristor induced by grain boundaries opens a new way to investigate the memristive switching of the polycrystalline oxide materials. Based on the Miller–Abrahams theory, the rate ν of carrier hopping from one localized oxygen vacancy A to another localized oxygen vacancy B can be written as263 (21)where ν0 is the attempt hopping frequency, r is the distance between the vacancies, r0 is the spatial extent of the localized oxygen vacancies, and EA (EB) is the energy level at the localized oxygen vacancies. It is found that the hopping conduction is modulated by the oxygen vacancy position and its energy level. Besides, Du et al. have observed that the electric field can drive the hopping transport of charged oxygen vacancies in BFO, which results in the RS.264
Here, three typical conduction mechanisms are considered in the BFO film.188 The first one is the interfacial Schottky emission, where the current density J can be written as (22)where q, K, T and E are the charge of carriers, dielectric constant, temperature and external electric field, respectively. So, the Schottky emission can be determined from a linear relationship between ln(J) and E0.5. The second mechanism is the space-charge-limited conduction of bulk BFO, which can be divided into three cases by the relationship between the current density J and voltage V,188 including (1) the partially filled shallow traps with a linear Ohmic behavior J ∝ V, (2) the completely filled shallow traps but partially filled deep traps with J ∝ Vn, n > 2, and (3) the nearly filled deep traps with J ∝ V2. The third mechanism is the bulk-limited Poole–Frenkel emission, which can be examined using the linear relationship between ln(J/E) and E0.5 as (23)
The three conduction mechanisms can be used in the conduction analyses of the BFO-based heterostructures.


2. Polarization-modulated RS and memristive behavior in BiFeO3-based ferroelectric tunnel junctions. 
Compared with the conductive filament related RS with chemical alternation, the reversal of ferroelectric polarization is much stable, which can effectively tailor the RS in the BFO-based FTJs. In Fig. 25b, the bipolar RS appears in both downward and upward polarization states of the Au/BFO/SrRuO3 FTJs, where the voltage sign for the HRS (LRS) in the downward polarization state is opposite to that in the upward polarization state.130 Such a polarization regulated RS can be attributed to the polarization induced barrier change by the interfacial band bending. In Fig. 25a, the depolarization field towards SrRuO3 accumulates the electrons at the BFO/SrRuO3 interface, which can reduce the depletion width and barrier height. Meanwhile, the negative polarization field widens the depletion region and enlarges the barrier height/width at the Au/BFO interface. In the Au/BFO/SrRuO3 junctions, the asymmetric barrier height/width can result in a positive diode performance, showing a positive-bias-read LRS (Fig. 25b). Similarly, as the depolarization field points towards the Au layer, a reversed diode behavior appears, showing a negative-bias-read LRS (Fig. 25b). Moreover, since the oxygen vacancies exist, the BFO film is always treated as an n-type semiconductor. In the metal/n-type semiconductor/metal junctions, the net built-in potential ϕ′bi is defined as (24)where ϕbi is the built-in potential without the polarization charges, ΔϕPbi is the polarization induced change of the built-in potential, P is the ferroelectric polarization, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, εs is the low-frequency dielectric constant, and δ is the width between the polarization surface charge and physical interface with electrodes.130 It is obvious that the built-in potential can be increased or decreased by switching the ferroelectric polarization, which stimulates the distinct LRS and HRS of the junctions. Meanwhile, the magnitude of ferroelectric polarization can also affect the built-in potential and resistances of the junctions. Therefore, it is an effective tool to tailor the RS by tailoring the ferroelectric polarization in the junctions. Besides, the RS of the multidomain BFO-based heterostructures can be modulated by not only the ferroelectric polarization inside the domains, but also the accumulated oxygen vacancies at the domain walls.265 The oxygen vacancy effects on the RS of the BFO-based heterostructures should be seriously investigated in the future.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic energy band structure and (b) rectifying I–V curves of the Au/BFO/SrRuO3 FTJs in the downward and upward polarization states, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (c) Phase image of square domains and (d) local I–V curves with the downward (purple in (c) and blue in (d)) and upward (yellow in (c) and red in (d)) polarization states of Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs, which correspond to the structure in Fig. 12(a). Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
In particular, the semiconductors can also be used to modulate the barrier and RS characteristics of FTJs. In Fig. 25c and d, the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs show the HRS and LRS at the downward and upward polarization states, respectively.37 In the inset of Fig. 25d, the I–V curve in the LRS shows a parabolic shape, which is in good agreement with the direct tunneling theory by the WKB approximation in eqn (4).204 However, the I–V curve in the HRS can be described by Schottky thermionic emission, as illustrated by eqn (6). Therefore, the RS in the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs can be attributed to different conduction modes at the opposite ferroelectric polarizations.37 Besides, the polarization-induced RS can be further tuned by the illumination owing to the photovoltaic effect of BFO (Fig. 12e),37,266,267 which can produce multiple resistance states.268 Meanwhile, the photovoltaic effect can also be improved by RS effects in the BFO-based heterostructures.269 Additionally, Rana et al. have found that the ferroelectric polarization tunable RS is dependent on the thickness and lateral length in the BFO/La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 heterostructures.270 Besides, Cao et al. have utilized a radially symmetric electric field to modulate the resistive switching in the BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructures, where the polarization reorientation along the radially symmetric electric field results in the polar discontinuity and resultant RS.271
Moreover, RS can be induced by not only reversing the ferroelectric polarization in the BFO-based heterostructures, but also the charged ferroelectric domain wall. Generally, the domain walls are always charge-neutral to minimize the electrostatic energy, where a small variation of conductivity can also be induced by the trapped electrons in domain walls272 and thermal activation,192,273–276 while, the strongly charged domain walls can be electrically stimulated by gathering the free charges, which provides a new way to induce the large conductance277 and RS.225 In the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 heterostructures, the applied voltage can write and erase the strongly charged 71° domain walls (Fig. 26), which is identified by the experimental measurements and theoretical calculations. Moreover, the bias-tunable charged domain walls in the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 heterostructures can induce the “on” and “off” conductivity states (Fig. 27), which is different from the bias-induced polarization reversal.225 Besides, in topologically confined BFO nanoislands, the conductivity of charged domain walls in BFO is changed by three orders of magnitude by switching the ferroelectric polarization, as observed by Ma et al.277
 Fig. 26  (a) Experimental setup diagrams for writing and erasing the strongly charged domain walls of the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/TbScO3 structures. (b and c) Cross-sectional dark-field transmission electron microscopy image of the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/TbScO3 structures with and without 71° strongly charged domain walls, respectively. (d–g) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy images of the four rectangle-marked regions in (b). The yellow arrows represent the ferroelectric polarization direction. (h) Models of the R-phase domains and the strongly charged T-phase domain walls. The green arrows indicate the ferroelectric polarization direction. (i and j) Phase-field simulation of the polarization distribution in the BFO film with and without the strongly charged domain walls. The BFO layer thickness is 20 nm in (b) and (c), and then the thickness of simulated BFO in (i) and (j) is 19 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
 Fig. 27  
I–V curves of the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/TbScO3 structures by considering the “on” state with the strongly charged domain walls and the “off” state without the strongly charged domain walls. During the measurements, there is no sign of domain wall motion. Adapted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2016, Wiley. 
Particularly, the initial R-phase BFO in the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 heterostructures can turn into the T phase (Fig. 26h) at the locally charged domain wall boundaries,225 which provides the possible phase transition effects on the RS of the BFO-based heterostructures.225,278 Afterwards, the relationship between the phase transition and RS is clearly demonstrated in the Pt/BFO/LaNiO3/LaAlO3 heterostructures.61 In Fig. 28a and b, the saturation ferroelectric polarization of the epitaxial BFO films is accompanied by the transition from the R–T mixed phase to pure T-phase. In particular, an intermediate resistance state at a voltage of 4.5 V appears during the phase transition (Fig. 28c), where the polarized R–T-mixed phase of BFO at 4.5 V (Fig. 28d) is different from the original R–T-mixed phase (i.e., 0 V) and the polarized pure T-phase (i.e., 5 V).61 Consequently, multiple resistance states are observed in the Pt/BFO/LaNiO3 FTJs because of the phase transition,61 which suggests the possibility of phase transition induced RS in other BFO-based FTJs.
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic hysteresis loop and (b) phase transition between R-BFO and mixed phases with possible multiple states. (c) Current and resistive switching and (d) selected area electron diffraction patterns of the mixed BFO phases under different voltage pulses. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
This indicates that both ferroelectric polarization and phase transition are crucial for RS in the BFO-based heterostructures; so it is necessary to modulate these two aspects in experiments. Chen et al. proposed a systematic method to engineer the ferroelectric ordered T–R phase boundaries in BFO by writing the trajectories of a biased atomic force microscope tip.279 The fast-scanning axis causes the polarization change of the mixed-phase stripes, and the slow-scanning axis modulates the ordered domains of T-phase BFO.279 Moreover, the morphotropic phase boundary has been detected in BiMnO3–BFO–PbTiO3 composites, where the ferromagnetic and ferroelectric orders can be tailored by the polymorphs.280 These results suggest that the phase boundary has an obvious influence on the magnetic and electrical properties of the BFO-based heterostructures, which may be emphasized in the future.
Particularly, BFO shows the ultrafast polarization dynamics.281 The ferroelectric polarization tunable RS of the BFO-based heterojunctions can be implanted into the interfacial barrier, which provides the opportunity for continuously tunable RS behaviors, i.e., memristive behaviors.282 In the Pt/Co/BFO/Ca0.96Ce0.04MnO3 FTJs, the typical resistance hysteresis as a function of writing voltage pulses is shown in Fig. 29a, where the RS OFF/ON ratio reaches 10000.55 In particular, in Fig. 29a, the multiple hysteresis loops show an evident dependence on the maximum writing voltage pulse, where different intermediate states can be stabilized in cycles 2–5. Meanwhile, the Pt/Co/BFO/Ca0.96Ce0.04MnO3 FTJs show a good retention property between the ON, OFF and intermediate resistance states (Fig. 29c) and anti-fatigue characteristics (Fig. 29d).55 The memristive behavior, excellent retention and anti-fatigue properties of the BFO-based FTJs can be used in nonvolatile ferroelectric memristors,282 compact sequential logics283 and synapse-like networks,284 laying a fertile ground for designing multifunctional devices (please see section IV).
 Fig. 29  (a) Resistances as a function of write voltage pulses and (b) the measurement setup of the Pt/Co/BFO/Ca0.96Ce0.04MnO3 FTJs. Cycles 1 and 2(3) correspond to ON and OFF states, respectively. Cycles 4 and 5 indicate minor loops with the intermediate resistance states. (c and d) The retention and fatigue tests of the Pt/Co/BFO/Ca0.96Ce0.04MnO3 FTJs. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


3. Four resistance states in BiFeO3-based multiferroic tunnel junctions. 
MFTJs (i.e., FTJs with two ferromagnetic electrodes) have been widely investigated theoretically262,285 and experimentally57,152,286,287 due to their four resistance states, which can be attributed to the reversal of ferroelectric polarization of the ferroelectric interlayer and the relatively (anti)parallel magnetization configurations of two ferromagnetic electrodes. Ju et al. theoretically investigated the TMR and TER of the BFO-based junctions,262 which stimulates the following experiments. By using the transfer matrix method, Ju et al. obtained the parallel conductance G(0) and antiparallel conductance G(0) as (25) (26)
Based on eqn (25) and (26), TMR can be written as (27)where PL and PR are the effective spin polarization of the left and right ferromagnetic electrodes, respectively.262,288 Moreover, Velev et al. theoretically predicted the four distinct resistance states in the SrRuO3/BaTiO3/SrRuO3 MFTJs,285 where the spin-polarized conductance Gσ is calculated using the Landauer–Büttiker formula (28)
In eqn (28), Tσ(k∥, EF) is the transmission coefficient with spin σ (σ = ↑, ↓), the transverse Bloch wave vector k∥ = (kx, ky), EF is the Fermi level, e is the electron charge, and h is Planck's constant. TMR and TER ratios are defined as (29)where G↑↑ and G↑↓ are the total conductance of the PC and APC magnetic configurations, respectively. G→ and G← are the total conductance at the right and left polarization directions of ferroelectric BFO, respectively.285
In Fig. 30a, the epitaxial La0.6Sr0.4MnO3/BFO/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3 MFTJs fabricated by magnetron sputtering show strong ferroelectric characteristics and exchange bias.57 More importantly, in Fig. 30b, the entire R–H curve shifts by reversing the ferroelectric polarization, resulting in two (anti)parallel states and four resistance states. Particularly, in FSMA, the magnetic field can induce the martensitic transition, which can generate a large magnetoelectric effect in the FSMA/piezoelectric composites.153 By considering the controllable magnetoelectric couplings in FSMA, Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8 serves as the electrode in the BFO-based MFTJs (Fig. 30c),152 where the magnetic field induced strain of Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8 can be transferred into ferroelectric BFO. Consequently, the ferroelectric polarization of BFO in the Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8/BFO/Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8 MFTJs is engineered by the transferred strains (Fig. 30c), which can further affect the TER.152 It is noteworthy that the BFO-based MFTJs integrate the MTJs and FTJs, which provides new insight for developing BFO-based multifunctional spintronic devices. Unfortunately, the achieved TMR and TER of the BFO-based MFTJs are smaller than 20%,57,152 which needs to be enhanced. Besides, Yin et al. demonstrated that an inverse TMR appears in the Fe4N/T-BFO/Fe4N MFTJs,147 which does not obey the Julliere's formula of TMR = 2P1P2/(1 + P1P2).288 The inverse TMR of the Fe4N/T-BFO/Fe4N MFTJs can switch into a positive TMR by an applied bias, which can be ascribed to the spin-polarized transport in MFTJs. Obviously, the spin-polarized ferromagnetic electrodes provide an opportunity for enhancing the novel electronic properties of the BFO-based heterostructures.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic diagram of measurements and (b) R–H curves at the positive (negative) ferroelectric polarization of La0.6Sr0.4MnO3/BFO/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3 MFTJs. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (c) Room-temperature ferroelectric hysteresis loop with and without a magnetic field and a schematic diagram of Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8/BFO/Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8 MFTJs. Adapted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2016, AIP Publishing. 
Moreover, the TER in the junctions is demonstrated to be associated with the barrier layer thickness and electrode screening length in theory56,204 and experiments.289,290 Based on the Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin model, TER is defined as56 (30)where m is the electron effective mass, d is the ferroelectric layer thickness, ϕ is the average potential height, δϕ is the change of the potential induced by the ferroelectric polarization reversal, P is the ferroelectric polarization, ε is the dielectric permittivity and δ1,2 is the screening length of two electrodes in FTJs. Assuming that the magnitude of ferroelectric polarization is uniform in the ferroelectric layer and does not change with the polarization reversal, TER in formula (30) can be deduced as290 (31)
In eqn (31), TER exponentially depends on the ferroelectric polarization, where a large TER in the junctions can be achieved by enlarging the ferroelectric polarization. Therefore, BFO with an ultrahigh ferroelectric polarization attracts much attention to increase TER. In particular, based on the ferroelectric photovoltaic effect in the BFO-based FTJs,55 Yin et al. have predicted a multiferroic photovoltaic effect in the LSMO/BFO/Fe4N MFTJs irradiated with linearly or left-hand (right-hand) polarized light,291 where the magnitude of the induced photocurrent can be tailored by both the ferroelectric polarization of the BFO barrier and magnetization configurations of two ferromagnetic electrodes. The direction of the induced photocurrent is only dependent on the polarization direction of ferroelectric BFO in the LSMO/BFO/Fe4N MFTJs. The multiferroic photovoltaic effects should exist in general MFTJs considering the intrinsic ferroelectric and ferromagnetic characteristics of MFTJs.

D. Emergent characteristics

1. Two-dimensional electron gas. 
The 2DEG is known as a promising property within nanoscale electronic confinement157,292,293 for developing advanced nanoelectronic devices,158,294,295 such as high mobility field-effect transistors. The polar/nonpolar LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface is a typical example for inducing the 2DEG, where the polar discontinuity rebuilds the electrostatic potential at the interface.296 In particular, the ferroelectric/insulator interface can also induce the polar discontinuity, where the reversible ferroelectric polarization can transfer the electrons or holes into the interface to form the 2DEG or two-dimensional hole gas.293,297,298 It is noteworthy that the 2DEG has been demonstrated in BFO-based heterostructures. In 2011, Zhang et al. predicted that the 2DEG appears at the SrTiO3/BFO interface by first-principles calculations.58 In the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices with two n-type (BiO)+/(TiO2)0 interfaces,58 the region of the 2DEG is symmetric at two interfaces with paraelectric BFO (see the red curve in Fig. 31a). However, when the ferroelectric polarization of BFO points towards the specific interface, the 2DEG only occurs at one interface of the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices with ferroelectric BFO, and the induced 2DEG at the SrTiO3/BFO interface originates from the electronic reconstruction to avoid the polarization catastrophe.58 Meanwhile, the polarization screen effect results in the ferroelectric polarization tailored 2DEG in the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices.58
 Fig. 31  (a) Calculated distribution of the free charges and screening charges on Fe and Ti atoms per formula across the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices in the paraelectric and ferroelectric states of BFO. The screening charge is the difference of the free charges in the paraelectric and ferroelectric superlattices. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing. (b) Band structure of LaTiO3/BFO superlattices with specific LaO–BiO and TiO2–BiO structures. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Nanoscale current mapping of the cross-sectional (100) SrTiO3/BFO interface. (d) Atom-resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy mapping. The interface is indicated by a dashed line. (e) Electron energy loss spectra with Ti–L2,3 and Fe–L2,3 edges. The red spectrum is recorded from the interfacial Fe site (site A in (c)) and the blue one from the interfacial Ti site (site B in (c)). Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing. 
The 2DEG has already been observed experimentally in the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices.156 In Fig. 31c, the 2DEG is observed at the SrTiO3/BFO interface by cross-sectional current mapping.156 Ti cations of SrTiO3 diffuse into Fe sites of BFO, but Fe cations do not diffuse into the SrTiO3 substrate, which has been observed by atom-resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy (Fig. 31d).156 Meanwhile, diffused Ti exists in a mixed valence state of +3/+4, which is different from the valence state of +4 in Ti cations of SrTiO3, as shown in Fig. 31e.156 The above results indicate that the electronic reconstruction due to polarization discontinuity and the changed valence state of diffused Ti are crucial to form the 2DEG in the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices. Besides, the 2DEG was also predicted at the interfaces between multiferroic BFO and antiferromagnetic Mott insulator LaTiO3,59,299,300 where the kz-independent discrete energy levels (Fig. 31b) confine the electrons at the interfaces to form 2DEG.59,301
Particularly, Zhang et al. demonstrated the anisotropic polarization-induced conductivity in the BFO/TbScO3 heterostructures with 109° stripe domain walls.224 At the BFO/TbScO3 interface (Fig. 32), it is conducting along the striped domain, but insulating in the direction perpendicular to the striped domain. Moreover, at the cross-sectional BFO/TbScO3 interface along the striped domain (Fig. 33), the conductivity changes by switching the ferroelectric polarization in domain stripes of BFO, including the doped electrons or holes at the interfaces. In particular, the conducting channel width in BFO is dominated by the screening length δ of the polarization charge,224 which can be described using Thomas–Fermi approximation as302 (32)
 Fig. 32  (a and d) Piezoresponse force microscopy and (b and e) conductive atomic force microscopy images of the cross-sectional BFO film in the BFO/TbScO3 heterostructures with 109° domain arrays. The cross-sectional BFO films in (a and b) and (d and e) are perpendicular and parallel to the 109° stripe domain, respectively. (c) Average current profile of the BFO/TbScO3 interface, corresponding to the dashed-line-marked region in (b). The white arrows in (a) and (d) indicate the three-dimensional polarization vectors of BFO. (f) I–V curves at the BFO/TbScO3 interface with upward and downward polarizations. The ‘Pup’ symbol indicates the polarization pointing towards the BFO/TbScO3 interface, and the ‘Pdown’ symbol shows the polarization pointing away from the interface. (g) Histogram of the current in upward-polarized and downward-polarized BFO shown in (b). (h) I–V curves of the BFO/TbScO3 interface with the directions perpendicular and parallel to the 109° stripe domain. The inset of (h) shows the current profile of the BFO/TbScO3 interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 33  (a) Layer-resolved density of states in the BFO/TbScO3 superlattices by first-principles calculations. (b) Domain structure of BFO with 109° domain arrays simulated with the phase-field theory. (c) Bound charge distribution of the BFO/TbScO3 interface along the domain stripe. (d) Potential distribution of the BFO/TbScO3 interface perpendicular to the domain stripe. The green arrows in (a) and white arrows in (b) indicate the ferroelectric polarization direction of BFO. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
In eqn (32), ε is the dielectric permittivity of BFO, e is the elementary charge and ρF is the density of states at the Fermi level.224 Zhang et al. obtained a theoretical value of δ ∼ 1 nm by considering a dielectric permittivity of ∼100ε0 in BFO and a ρF of ∼1 eV per u.c., which is in good agreement with the experimental value of 1.5 nm.224 Overall, these results of the 2DEG in the BFO-based heterostructures offer a platform for developing the novel BFO-based electronic devices.


2. Valley features: generation and modulation. 
The valley DOF has been intensively investigated in two-dimensional materials, such as graphene303 and MoS2304–307 with a honeycomb lattice structure (Fig. 34a). Based on the broken inversion symmetry, the valley-dependent optoelectronics308,309 and spin–valley coupled physics305,310 have been paid much attention, such as the valley-selective circular dichroism311 and dichroic spin–valley photocurrent.312 Novel valley-based phenomena and devices have also been proposed, such as the valley Hall effect,305,306 valley-polarized quantum anomalous Hall effect,313 valley diodes314 and valley valves.315 Valleytronics will integrate with spintronic307,316 and optoelectronic devices,309,311,312 which is beneficial for designing multifunctional electronic devices. In particular, the graphene-like hexagonal lattice structure also exists in (111)-oriented perovskite ABO3/AB′O3 oxide heterostructures, but its topological317–322 and valley phenomena are different from two-dimensional materials.303,307 The ferroelectric Rashba semiconductor323 and a new ferrovalley material324,325 with a spontaneous valley polarization have been demonstrated due to the broken inversion symmetry by ferroelectric polarization.
 Fig. 34  (a) Top view of graphene, monolayer MoS2 and bilayered BFO. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Band structure of the BiAlO3/BiIrO3 superlattices, where the sz polarization is highlighted in blue (up) and red (down) colors. Adapted with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2015, American Physical Society. (c) Band structure of the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices with BFO/OIB termination, where the solid and dashed black lines represent the spin-up (spin-down) band without SOC. For the case with SOC in (c), the circle represents BiIrO3, and the spin projection is depicted by the color scale. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Since BFO has the ferroelectric characteristic and photovoltaic effect, it might exhibit a novel performance in the valley index. Meanwhile, (111)-oriented R-BFO with two atomic layers has a special honeycomb structure with both Fe and surrounding O atoms (Fig. 34a),2,326,327 where the valley characteristic will be different from those of two-dimensional graphene or transition metal dichalcogenides. Yamauchi et al. proposed the valley characteristic in rhombohedral BiIrO3 with a strong SOC due to the heavy metal Ir atom.328 Moreover, the two-atomic-layer thick BiIrO3 shows strong spin–valley coupling in the BiAlO3/BiIrO3 ferroelectric heterostructures.328 However, in Fig. 34b, the dispersion of the valence band maximum (VBM) in BiIrO3 is nearly flat in the BiAlO3/BiIrO3 heterostructures, which is disadvantageous to the valleytronic and spintronic devices.328 In Fig. 34c, the flat dispersion of the VBM in BiIrO3 can be effectively lifted by the proximity effect of antiferromagnetic BFO,32 where a high spin polarization appears in the lifted valley at high symmetric points of K and K′. Particularly, the valley polarization occurs in the BiIrO3/BFO superlattices. In Fig. 34c, the conduction band minimum of BiIrO3 forms a quasi-direct band gap at the K′ point and an indirect band gap at the K point, respectively, which makes the electrons at the K′ point easier to emit than that those at the K point due to the extra momentum transformation.329 Meanwhile, in Fig. 34c, the electrons at the K′ point would be stimulated from the spin-up to spin-up polarized channels, while electrons at the K point shall be transformed from spin-down to spin-up polarized channels with extra energy consumption.32 So, the different momentum and spin characteristics at K′ and K points can distinguish the valley at K and K′ points, which generates a valley polarization in BiIrO3 of the BFO/OIB model.32
Moreover, BiIrO3 shows a flat dispersion at the valence band maximum in the BFO/BIO model.32 Hence, the relatively parallel and antiparallel directions of ferroelectric polarization in BFO and BiIrO3 can switch the valley states of the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices,32 where the parallel and antiparallel ferroelectric polarizations can induce the flat valley and polarized valley, respectively. Owing to the different coercive fields of BFO and BiIrO3, the ferroelectric states in the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices can be tailored by an electric field,61,330,331 which can switch the valley states of the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices. Besides, the valley states can be modulated in transition-metal dichalcogenide monolayers by the magnetic proximity effect.332 In the BiIrO3/BFO superlattices (Fig. 35a),32 the spin polarization in the valley of BiIrO3 is highly dependent on the [100]- and [001]-oriented magnetization of Fe in BFO. Such a phenomenon suggests that the magnetic fields parallel (Min-plane) and perpendicular (Mout-of-plane) to the honeycomb plane might produce different spin polarizations in the valley of the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices. Yin et al. proposed a BFO/BiIrO3-based prototype device with multiple resistance states by considering the electric field switched valley polarization and magnetic field tuned spin polarization in the lifted valley (Fig. 35b),32 which can be used as nonvolatile ferroelectric random access memories61 and valley filters.333 The large ferroelectric polarization and high Curie temperature of BFO also favor the nonvolatile ferroelectric modulation in the valley index, which may promote the next-generation valleytronic and ferroelectric devices.
 Fig. 35  (a) Band structure of the BFO/OIB model with the [100]- and [001]-oriented Fe spins, respectively. The circle represents BiIrO3, and the spin projection is depicted by the color scale. (b) Diagram of the valley-spin component for the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The ultrathin T-BFO films with a thickness of one-unit-cell still show the ferroelectric order,334 which was directly observed by aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy. The ferroelectric order of T-BFO under the two-dimensional limit makes BFO promising in novel high-density nonvolatile storage and memories.

IV. Applications
Based on the ferroelectric polarization tailored photovoltaic effect and magnetoelectric coupling of BFO, the BFO-based heterostructures can be used in two aspects: (i) nonvolatile data storage and logic switching with a BFO ferroelectric barrier, and (ii) photoelectrochemical water splitting and photocatalysis with a BFO photoelectrode. The two kinds of applications are discussed respectively in the following subsections.
A. Nonvolatile data storage and logic switching
The BFO/ferromagnet heterostructures show novel electrical and magnetic properties, including the photovoltaic effect, RS and electric field control of magnetism, which have been discussed in section III. These characteristics offer opportunities for writing the magnetic state in BFO-based junctions,57 spin valves49,51 and photodetectors.335 BFO-based nonvolatile ferroelectric random access memories, memristors55 and synapse-like networks284 also have been proposed. In particular, Guo et al. demonstrated a cross-bar prototype memory with the photovoltaic effect (Fig. 36), where each cell can display the VOC and JSC. The cross-bar structure can read data by itself, which saves the driving force compared to other memory structures.336 Such a microarray structure is convenient to design data storage. Here, the Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO structure is taken as an example to illustrate the mechanism of nonvolatile BFO-based data storage and logic switching.
 Fig. 36  (a) Topology of the prototype 16-cell Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 memory with a cross-bar architecture. The polarization in each cell is presented, where the blue (red) colour indicates upward (downward) polarization. (b) The induced VOC in each cell under the light of 20 mW cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
In Fig. 8f and 37a, the Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO microarray in the upward and downward ferroelectric polarizations show distinct JSC and VOC, which can represent the “0” and “1” states, respectively.132 The writing of “0” and “1” states can be realized by changing the ferroelectric polarized direction of T-BFO, and the reading of “0” and “1” states is accessible by light irradiation. The data storage with electric writing and optical reading modes consumes less energy than the conventional ones. Meanwhile, in Fig. 8f and 37b, the Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO microarray132 shows the distinct states with and without light illumination, which can serve as the reversible light-switching “ON” and “OFF” logic states. Besides, for the non-volatile memory, the long data retention and excellent anti-fatigue are two essential factors, which have been examined in the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructures.336 As seen in Fig. 38, the VOC and JSC in the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 cells did not deteriorate for four months. Then, the cells after bipolar switching of 108 cycles did not show fatigue, which overstepped the rewriting cycle of ∼105 in the flash memory. The long data retention and excellent anti-fatigue of the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 junctions are beneficial for developing non-volatile memory.336
 Fig. 37  Designations of (a) data storage and (b) the logic switching microdevice prototype based on the Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO microarray. The red and blue colors in (a) and (b) represent the downward and upward ferroelectric polarizations, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Sketch of pre- and post-neurons connected by a synapse. (d) Sketch of the Pt/Co/BiFeO3/(Ca,Ce)MnO3 ferroelectric memristors. Adapted with permission from ref. 284. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Schematic pathways of photoelectrochemical degradation of rhodamine B by the BFO/TiO2 composite electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 38  Retention test of (a) VOC and (b) JSC in the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructures under a halogen lamp of 20 mW cm−2. (c) P–E and (d) I–V curves of the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructure after repetitive polarization switching by a pulse of ±3 V with 1 ms. The blue and red colors refer to the upward and downward polarizations, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
The memristive behavior of the BFO-based FTJs can be utilized as an electronic synapse due to the sensitive voltage tunable conductance (Fig. 29a).284 In the Pt/Co/BFO/(Ca,Ce)MnO3 ferroelectric memristor (Fig. 37d), the applied voltage pulse can engineer the domain population, which further results in resistance changes. In such a memristor, the resistance is dependent on the history of the applied voltage, which emulates the synaptic function with the plasticity (Fig. 37c).
BFO can also be utilized in capacitors,337 especially the so-called ferroelectric capacitive memory.338,339 In the BFO/Si3N4/p-Si heterostructures, the polarized charge of ferroelectric BFO can stabilize the positive charges of Si3N4, which can generate the memcapacitive effect,339 which is advantageous for the capacitive switching in a pure Si3N4/p-Si structure without coated BFO. Meanwhile, the capacitive switching of the BFO/Si3N4/p-Si heterostructures can be modulated by the intensity and wavelength of light due to the ferroelectric photovoltaic effect of BFO, which can serve as a photodetector.339 Besides, except the nonvolatile data storage and synapse-like devices, the BFO-based heterostructures also can be utilized in the ferroelectric-modulated superconducting critical temperature and strong ferroelectric field effect in YBa2Cu3O7−δ/BFO heterostructures,340 and magnetic field modulated surface acoustic wave excitation on BFO.341 These phenomena make the BFO-based heterostructures attractive for developing multifunctional electronic devices.
B. Photoelectrochemical water splitting and photoelectrocatalysis
BFO with the ferroelectric-modulated photovoltaic effect can serve as the photoelectrode under visible-light illumination. In particular, ferroelectric BFO films can form high-frequency in-plane and out-of-plane electromechanical images under the liquid conditions,342,343 which expands the applications of ferroelectricity in BFO. Ren et al. indicated that the photocurrent and photo-to-current efficiency of BFO can be improved by bringing it in contact with hydrophilic materials, such as RGO (Fig. 6d).39 Such an RGO/BFO composite electrode can be utilized in photoelectrochemical water splitting, where the light energy can be efficiently converted into chemical and electrical energies.
Particularly, the BFO-based heterostructures can also be used in the photocatalytic process, where BFO is commonly utilized in the form of nanoparticles owing to its high surface area.344 Generally, visible light sensitive BFO is always interacted with typical semiconductor-based photocatalysts to improve the photocatalytic efficiency under visible light, such as TiO2 with a band gap of 3.0 eV or 3.2 eV,345,346 metal-free graphitic C3N4 with a band gap of 2.7 eV347 and magnetic spinel ZnFe2O4 with a band gap of 1.92 eV.348 In the C3N4/xBFO heterostructures, the photocatalytic efficiency is 1.4 times higher than that of pure C3N4 by optimizing the composition of BFO at x = 10 wt%, where x indicates the weight ratio of BFO to C3N4 and the photocatalytic efficiency is evaluated by degrading rhodamine B in an aqueous solution under visible light irradiation.347 Moreover, owing to the aligned ferroelectric polarization, the photocatalytic activities of C3N4/xBFO heterostructures can further increase by 1.3 times via mechanical pressing and by 1.8 times via electrical poling.347
In the TiO2/BFO heterostructures illuminated with visible light in an energy interval from 2.53 to 2.70 eV, the pattern of reduced silver cations at the TiO2 surface simulates the domain structure of BFO.345 However, the silver reduction is insignificant in pure TiO2. So, the photo-generated electrons are modulated by the dipolar field in ferroelectric domains, which finally pass through TiO2 and reduce the silver cations at the surface.345 Moreover, as seen in Fig. 37e, the BFO/TiO2 composite electrode is utilized to degrade rhodamine B, which can be divided into two pathways.35 On the one hand, the photo-generated electrons react with chemisorbed O2, which combines with H+ in the solution and subsequently forms H2O2. The formed H2O2 further reacts with the electrons in the counter electrode, which will modulate the degradation and mineralization of the adsorbed molecules near rhodamine B (Fig. 37e). On the other hand, the visible-light irradiation can directly excite the rhodamine B molecules. The photo-excited electrons and holes in rhodamine B interact with the BFO/TiO2 composite electrodes, as shown in Fig. 37e,35 which can further modulate the photoelectrocatalytic degradation towards rhodamine B under visible light with improved photoconversion efficiency (Fig. 11a).
Additionally, BFO itself can serve as the main photocatalyst, and its photocatalystic efficiency can be improved by combining with other materials, such as graphene.349 Li et al. synthesized graphene–BFO nanocomposites by a one-pot hydrothermal method, where the band gap of the nanocomposites can be easily modulated into 1.78–2.24 eV by controlling the concentrated OH group.349 Overall, the photovoltaic characteristics in the BFO-based composite photoelectrode under visible-light irradiation provide a promising tool to improve the photoelectrochemical water splitting and photoelectrocatalysis.
However, the interaction between BFO and degraded organics is not only revealed by the photovoltaic effect of BFO on organics, but also reflected by the aqueous solution modulation on the ferroelectric polarization of BFO. In the BFO/(La,Sr)MnO3/SrTiO3 structures, the internal ferroelectric polarization of the BFO layer can be switched using Milli-Q water (PH = 7) and acidic solution (PH = 3), which is in contact with the surface of BFO, as shown in Fig. 39.350 Moreover, the ferroelectric polarization of BFO can be cyclically switched upward and downward by the aqueous solution at different PH values (Fig. 40d), which enables an erasable type-printing polarization of BFO. As seen in Fig. 40e, the initially upward polarization of BFO turns into downward polarization by the acidic solution. Then, a pattern is coated on the surface of BFO by photoengraving, where the polarization of the patterned BFO region is reversed upward by exposed to Milli-Q water. After removing the photoresist, Chinese characteristic water is successfully printed by the tunable ferroelectric polarization of BFO. Moreover, owing to the reversible PH-tailored polarization switching of BFO, the printed character becomes erasable. The water-modulated ferroelectric polarization of BFO offers opportunities to develop multifunctional catalysis, which also paves a new way to utilize green energy.
 Fig. 39  (a and c) Diagram of modulated ferroelectric polarization switching of BFO on the SrTiO3 substrate with a (La,Sr)MnO3 buffer layer, where the polarization switches from downward (upward) to upward (downward) when BFO is exposed to Milli-Q water (acidic solution). The arrow indicates the out-of-plane component of ferroelectric polarization. (b and d) Piezoresponse force microscopy images of BFO before and after exposure to the aqueous solution, corresponding to (a) and (c), respectively. The scale bar in (b) and (d) is 2 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 350. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 40  Piezoresponse force microscopy images of (a) initially upward-polarized BFO, (b) downward-polarized BFO after being exposed to acidic solution and (c) cyclically switchable polarization of BFO after being exposed to Milli-Q water and acidic solution. The scale bar in (a–c) is 2 μm. (d) Out-of-plane component of polarization in initially upward-polarized BFO in aqueous solution with different PH values. (e) Schematics of printing and erasing the ferroelectric polarization of BFO by controlling the PH value of the aqueous solution in contact with the surface of BFO. (f) Piezoresponse force microscopy images of Chinese characteristic water from a calligraphy artwork. The scale bar in (f) is 10 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 350. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
V. Conclusion and outlook
This review offers a comprehensive review of BFO-based heterostructures, where the materials, properties and applications are reviewed, respectively. The morphologies of BFO and medium materials in the heterostructures stimulate novel optical, electrical, magnetic and valley characteristics. In particular, these properties are connected with each other, which clarifies the mechanism behind the photovoltaic effect, electric field control of magnetism, RS and valley characteristics, as shown in Fig. 1. Moreover, the novel physical properties of the BFO-based heterostructures enable two main kinds of applications: one is the nonvolatile data storage and logic switching with a BFO ferroelectric barrier and the other is the photoelectrochemical water splitting and photocatalysis with the BFO photoelectrodes. These glorious properties and applications in BFO-based heterostructures provide a way for developing efficient data storage and integrated multifunctional devices in the future. Nevertheless, the physical properties of the BFO-based heterostructures have not been explored sufficiently, which mainly focus on the domain-, phase transition- and valley-related properties:
(i) The ferroelectric polarization and domain structure of BFO are crucial for the photovoltaic effect and resistance states in related heterostructures and junctions. Different from the ferroelectric polarization induced depolarization field, the ferroelectric domain walls of BFO films have an extra electrostatic potential to separate the photo-generated charge carrier,187 which can result in an above-bandgap voltage.60 Moreover, the domain-dependent above-band-gap photovoltaic response of BFO is tunable by an electric field.191 It is noted that the domain walls become a new index to modulate the photovoltaic effects. However, many special characteristics have been induced in the domain walls of BFO. The charged domain walls have been stimulated by gathering the free charges, which can produce a large conductance277 and RS.225 The anisotropic ferroelectric domain walls have been observed in BFO films,197 where the tail-to-tail domain walls are more conductive than the head-to-head or head-to-tail domain walls. So, we suppose that the engineered charged domain walls and anisotropic domain structure can be used to induce novel photovoltaic effects in the BFO-based heterostructures.
Besides, the ferroelectric topological textures have been demonstrated in epitaxial BFO square nanoplates at a large strain gradient of 105 m−1, along with the vortices and antivortices.351 The net number of vortices in the BFO nanoplates is tunable by selective domain switching.351 Moreover, the topologically confined ferroelectric domain walls have been demonstrated in self-assembled BFO nanoislands.277 So, the ferroelectric topological textures and mechanism should be addressed in the self-assembled BFO-based nanostructures. Owing to the advanced fabrication methods, tunable BFO self-assembled nanostructures have been fabricated successfully.96,101,103
(ii) The phase transition of BFO is able to affect the ferroelectric polarization and RS of the heterostructures.61 However, in the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 heterostructures,225 initial R-phase BFO can transform into the T phase (Fig. 26h) at the locally charged domain wall boundaries. So, the phase transition of BFO should be tailored by engineering the charged domain walls, which can affect the RS in the heterostructures.
(iii) Valley-related photovoltaic characteristics of the (111)-oriented bilayered R-BFO-based heterostructures have been investigated by theoretical and experimental means. The fabrication of the (111)-oriented perovskite oxide superlattices has reached the atomic level.352 The (111)-oriented Ca0.5Sr0.5IrO3/SrTiO3 superlattices have been grown by pulsed laser deposition,353 and (111)-oriented (LaNiO3)n/(LaMnO3)m superlattices were fabricated by off-axis radiofrequency magnetron sputtering.354 The (BFO)2/(SrTiO3)4 superlattices also were successfully fabricated by pulsed laser deposition.69 These advanced fabrication methods offer opportunities for future experimental work on BFO-based superlattices with novel valley–spin characteristics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51871161, 51671142, and U1632152), and the Key Project of the Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (16JCZDJC37300).
References
J. Neaton, C. Ederer, U. Waghmare, N. Spaldin and K. Rabe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 014113 CrossRef .
G. Catalan and J. F. Scott, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2463–2485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Hsieh, F. Xue, T. Yang, H. J. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. C. Chen, Q. Zhan, C. G. Duan, L. Q. Chen, Q. He and Y. H. Chu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heron, D. Schlom and R. Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1, 021303 Search PubMed .
D. Mazumdar, V. Shelke, M. Iliev, S. Jesse, A. Kumar, S. V. Kalinin, A. P. Baddorf and A. Gupta, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2555–2561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Han and H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 6852–6857 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Scott and J. Gardner, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 553–562 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Khomskii, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2006, 306, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
R. Seshadri and N. A. Hill, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2892–2899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. B. Neaton, H. Zheng, V. Nagarajan, S. B. Ogale, B. Liu, D. Viehland, V. Vaithyanathan, D. G. Schlom, U. V. Waghmare, N. A. Spaldin, K. M. Rabe, M. Wuttig and R. Ramesh, Science, 2003, 299, 1719–1722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ratcliff, D. Kan, W. Chen, S. Watson, S. Chi, R. Erwin, G. J. McIntyre, S. C. Capelli and I. Takeuchi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1567–1574 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, B. Dupé, C. Xu, H. Xiang and L. Bellaiche, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 184420 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sosnowska, T. Peterlin-Neumaier and E. Steichele, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 4835–4846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agbelele, D. Sando, C. Toulouse, C. Paillard, R. D. Johnson, R. Ruffer, A. F. Popkov, C. Carretero, P. Rovillain, J. M. Le Breton, B. Dkhil, M. Cazayous, Y. Gallais, M. A. Measson, A. Sacuto, P. Manuel, A. K. Zvezdin, A. Barthelemy, J. Juraszek and M. Bibes, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602327 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Herrero-Albillos, G. Catalan, J. A. Rodriguez-Velamazan, M. Viret, D. Colson and J. F. Scott, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 256001 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lebeugle, A. Mougin, M. Viret, D. Colson and L. Ranno, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 257601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Singh, R. S. Katiyar and J. F. Scott, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 252203 CrossRef .
B. Ruette, S. Zvyagin, A. P. Pyatakov, A. Bush, J. F. Li, V. I. Belotelov, A. K. Zvezdin and D. Viehland, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 064114 CrossRef .
H. M. Jang, H. Han and J. H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 405 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lu, W. Hu, Y. Tian and T. Wu, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 2, 021304 Search PubMed .
R. Huang, H.-C. Ding, W.-I. Liang, Y.-C. Gao, X.-D. Tang, Q. He, C.-G. Duan, Z. Zhu, J. Chu, C. A. J. Fisher, T. Hirayama, Y. Ikuhara and Y.-H. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 793–799 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Z. Luo, C. Huang, Y. Qi, P. Yang, L. You, C. Hu, T. Wu, J. Wang, C. Gao, T. Sritharan and L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng and X. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 172406 CrossRef .
P. Chen, N. Podraza, X. Xu, A. Melville, E. Vlahos, V. Gopalan, R. Ramesh, D. G. Schlom and J. Musfeldt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 131907 CrossRef .
R. J. Zeches, M. D. Rossell, J. X. Zhang, A. J. Hatt, Q. He, C. H. Yang, A. Kumar, C. H. Wang, A. Melville, C. Adamo, G. Sheng, Y. H. Chu, J. F. Ihlefeld, R. Erni, C. Ederer, V. Gopalan, L. Q. Chen, D. G. Schlom, N. A. Spaldin, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Science, 2009, 326, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hatt and N. Spaldin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 054109 CrossRef .
L. Martin, S. Crane, Y. Chu, M. Holcomb, M. Gajek, M. Huijben, C. Yang, N. Balke and R. Ramesh, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 434220 CrossRef .
D. Ricinschi, K. Y. Yun and M. Okuyama, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, L97–L105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Damodaran, C. W. Liang, Q. He, C. Y. Peng, L. Chang, Y. H. Chu and L. W. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3170–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, J. S. Lee, S. Okamoto, M. D. Rossell, M. Huijben, C. H. Yang, Q. He, J. X. Zhang, S. Y. Yang, M. J. Lee, Q. M. Ramasse, R. Erni, Y. H. Chu, D. A. Arena, C. C. Kao, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 027201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Hwang, Y. Iwasa, M. Kawasaki, B. Keimer, N. Nagaosa and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 103–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, X. Wang and W. Mi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3822–3829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Young, F. Zheng and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 236601 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhu, Q. Zhao, X. Li and Y. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 671–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chatterjee, A. Bera and A. J. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20479–20486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Hu, Z. Wang, W. Yu and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mukherjee, S. Chakrabarty, N. Kumari, W. N. Su and S. Basu, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 5946–5957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, F. Nan, L. You, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Su, M. Shen and L. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1603457 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Xu, D. Wang, H. J. Zhao, J. Íñiguez, X. M. Chen and L. Bellaiche, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3626–3633 CrossRef CAS .
C. Daumont, J. Wolfman, C. Autret-Lambert, P. Andreazza and B. Negulescu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 112401 CrossRef .
C. Song, B. Cui, F. Li, X. Zhou and F. Pan, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 87, 33–82 CrossRef .
Y. H. Chu, L. W. Martin, M. B. Holcomb, M. Gajek, S. J. Han, Q. He, N. Balke, C. H. Yang, D. Lee, W. Hu, Q. Zhan, P. L. Yang, A. Fraile-Rodriguez, A. Scholl, S. X. Wang and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 478–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chu, L. Martin, M. Holcomb and R. Ramesh, Mater. Today, 2017, 10, 16–23 CrossRef .
L. Yin, W. Mi and X. Wang, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 6, 064022 CrossRef .
L. Yin, X. Wang and W. Mi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15887–15892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, W. Mi and X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 032404 CrossRef .
J.-M. Hu, C.-G. Duan, C.-W. Nan and L.-Q. Chen, npj Comput. Mater., 2017, 3, 18 CrossRef .
J. T. Heron, M. Trassin, K. Ashraf, M. Gajek, Q. He, S. Y. Yang, D. E. Nikonov, Y. H. Chu, S. Salahuddin and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 217202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. You, C. Lu, P. Yang, G. Han, T. Wu, U. Luders, W. Prellier, K. Yao, L. Chen and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4964–4968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, X. Zhang, W. Ratcliff, S. Maruyama, M. Murakami, A. Varatharajan, Z. Yamani, P. Chen, K. Wang, H. Zhang, R. Shull, L. A. Bendersky, J. Unguris, R. Ramesh and I. Takeuchi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2825–2832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Meisenheimer, S. Novakov, N. M. Vu and J. T. Heron, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 240901 CrossRef .
B. Sun, Y. Liu, W. Zhao and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 13513–13518 RSC .
J. Luo, S. Lin, Y. Zheng and B. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 062902 CrossRef .
H. Yamada, V. Garcia, S. Fusil, S. Boyn, M. Marinova, A. Gloter, S. Xavier, J. Grollier, E. Jacquet, C. Carretero, C. Deranlot, M. Bibes and A. Barthelemy, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5385–5390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Velev, J. D. Burton, M. Y. Zhuravlev and E. Y. Tsymbal, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 16009 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Yin, S. Dong, S. Yang, T. Jiang and X. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 043507 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, P. Wu, L. Chen and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 062902 CrossRef .
L. Yin, W. Mi and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 11066–11075 RSC .
H. Mai, T. Lu, Q. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Li, F. Kremer, L. Li, R. L. Withers, H. Wen and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12781–12789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chiu, C. Huang, Y. Hsieh, J. Chen, C. Chang, Y. Chu and W. Wu, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, A. Scholl, F. Zavaliche, K. Lee, M. Barry, A. Doran, M. P. Cruz, Y. H. Chu, C. Ederer, N. A. Spaldin, R. R. Das, D. M. Kim, S. H. Baek, C. B. Eom and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 823–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, A. Scholl, H. Zheng, S. B. Ogale, D. Viehland, D. G. Schlom, N. A. Spaldin, K. M. Rabe, M. Wuttig, L. Mohaddes, J. B. Neaton, U. Waghmare, T. Zhao and R. Ramesh, Science, 2005, 307, 1203b CrossRef .
J. X. Zhang, Q. He, M. Trassin, W. Luo, D. Yi, M. D. Rossell, P. Yu, L. You, C. H. Wang, C. Y. Kuo, J. T. Heron, Z. Hu, R. J. Zeches, H. J. Lin, A. Tanaka, C. T. Chen, L. H. Tjeng, Y. H. Chu and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 147602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Q. Dai, T.-F. Cao and X.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17250–17260 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Huang, P. Yu, Y. H. Chu, C. S. Chang, R. Ramesh, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, P. Ebert and Y. P. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1089–1095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, W. Luo, D. Yi, J. Zhang, M. Rossell, C. Yang, L. You, G. Singh-Bhalla, S. Yang, Q. He, Q. Ramassed, R. Erni, L. Martin, Y. Chu, S. Pantelides, S. Pennycook and R. Ramesh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9710–9715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Kim, A. Kumar, A. Hatt, A. N. Morozovska, A. Tselev, M. D. Biegalski, I. Ivanov, E. A. Eliseev, S. J. Pennycook, J. M. Rondinelli, S. V. Kalinin and A. Y. Borisevich, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2497–2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bruyer, A. Sayede, A. Ferri, R. Desfeux, R. Mangalam, R. Ranjith and W. Prellier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 042904 CrossRef .
T. Amrillah, Y. Bitla, K. Shin, T. Yang, Y. H. Hsieh, Y. Y. Chiou, H. J. Liu, T. H. Do, D. Su, Y. C. Chen, S. U. Jen, L. Q. Chen, K. H. Kim, J. Y. Juang and Y. H. Chu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6122–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, G. Tan, W. Yang, L. Lv, M. Xue, Y. Liu, H. Ren and A. Xia, Mater. Lett., 2018, 228, 13–16 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Akbashev, G. Chen and J. E. Spanier, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 44–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ikeda, J. Hayakawa, Y. Lee, F. Matsukura, Y. Ohno and T. Hanyu, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2007, 54, 991–1002 CAS .
W. G. Wang, M. Li, S. Hageman and C. L. Chien, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 64–68 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yu, P. Upadhyaya, Y. Fan, J. G. Alzate, W. Jiang, K. L. Wong, S. Takei, S. A. Bender, L. T. Chang, Y. Jiang, M. Lang, J. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Tserkovnyak, P. K. Amiri and K. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 548–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Catalan, J. Seidel, R. Ramesh and J. Scott, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2012, 84, 119–156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, A. Kumar, A. Tselev, I. I. Kravchenko, H. Han, I. Vrejoiu, W. Lee, D. Hesse, M. Alexe, S. V. Kalinin and S. Jesse, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9104–9112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Chisholm, W. Luo, M. P. Oxley, S. T. Pantelides and H. N. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 197602 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lichtensteiger, J. M. Triscone, J. Junquera and P. Ghosez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 047603 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Trieloff, E. K. Jessberger, I. Herrwerth, J. Hopp, C. Fieni, M. Ghelis, M. Bourot-Denise and P. Pellas, Nature, 2003, 422, 502–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Marinova, J. E. Rault, A. Gloter, S. Nemsak, G. K. Palsson, J. P. Rueff, C. S. Fadley, C. Carretero, H. Yamada, K. March, V. Garcia, S. Fusil, A. Barthelemy, O. Stephan, C. Colliex and M. Bibes, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2533–2541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. L. Zhu, Y. L. Tang, Y. J. Wang, Y. X. Jiang, Y. B. Xu, B. Zhang and X. L. Ma, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3619–3628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhuang, A. A. Bokov, N. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Yang, W. Ren and Z.-G. Ye, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 4503–4510 CrossRef CAS .
B. Carcan, H. Bouyanfif, M. El Marssi, F. Le Marrec, L. Dupont, C. Davoisne, J. Wolfman and D. C. Arnold, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 044105 CrossRef .
D. Duraisamy and G. N. Venkatesan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 052903 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, K. Yao and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 162903 CrossRef .
R. Katiyar, P. Misra, F. Mendoza, G. Morell and R. Katiyar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 142902 CrossRef .
Y. Zang, D. Xie, X. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, M. Li, H. Tian, X. Li, Z. Li, H. Zhu, T. Ren and D. Plant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 132904 CrossRef .
M. Bagherzadeh and R. Kaveh, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 359, 11–22 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goswami, D. Bhattacharya, C. K. Ghosh, B. Ghosh, S. D. Kaushik, V. Siruguri and P. S. R. Krishna, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3728 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Sarkar, G. Khan, A. Chaudhuri, A. Das and K. Mandal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 033112 CrossRef .
A. N. Morozovska, E. A. Eliseev, M. D. Glinchuk, O. M. Fesenko, V. V. Shvartsman, V. Gopalan, M. V. Silibin and D. V. Karpinsky, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 134115 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Xu, C. Koenigsmann, A. C. Santulli, S. S. Wong and J. L. Musfeldt, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4526–4532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huang, X. Xu, X. Lu, M. Zhou, H. Sang and J. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2311 CrossRef PubMed .
H. K. Choi, N. M. Aimon, D. H. Kim, X. Y. Sun, J. Gwyther, I. Manners and C. A. Ross, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9248–9254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Comes, H. Liu, M. Khokhlov, R. Kasica, J. Lu and S. A. Wolf, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2367–2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Imai, X. Cheng, H. L. Xin, E. A. Eliseev, A. N. Morozovska, S. V. Kalinin, R. Takahashi, M. Lippmaa, Y. Matsumoto and V. Nagarajan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11079–11086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Hsieh, E. Strelcov, J.-M. Liou, C.-Y. Shen, Y.-C. Chen, S. V. Kalinin and Y.-H. Chu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8627–8633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Strelcov, A. Belianinov, Y.-H. Hsieh, S. Jesse, A. P. Baddorf, Y.-H. Chu and S. V. Kalinin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6449–6457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zavaliche, H. Zheng, L. Mohaddes-Ardabili, S. Y. Yang, Q. Zhan, P. Shafer, E. Reilly, R. Chopdekar, Y. Jia, P. Wright, D. G. Schlom, Y. Suzuki and R. Ramesh, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1793–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, F. Straub, Q. Zhan, P. L. Yang, W. K. Hsieh, F. Zavaliche, Y. H. Chu, U. Dahmen and R. Ramesh, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2747–2752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, T. Choi, J. H. Jeon, Y. Kim, H. Lee, H. Y. Joo, I. Hwang, J. S. Kim, S. O. Kang, S. V. Kalinin and B. H. Park, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2339–2343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Stratulat, X. Lu, A. Morelli, D. Hesse, W. Erfurth and M. Alexe, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3884–3889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, F. Zhang, J. Yao, H. Fan, P. Li, Z. Li, X. Song, X. Zhang, M. Qin, M. Zeng, Z. Zhang, J. Yao, X. Gao and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1025–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ojha, W. C. Nunes, N. M. Aimon and C. A. Ross, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7657–7664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. K. Budi, E. B. Glass, N. G. Rudawski and J. S. Andrew, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8586–8592 RSC .
Y. H. Hsieh, J. M. Liou, B. C. Huang, C. W. Liang, Q. He, Q. Zhan, Y. P. Chiu, Y. C. Chen and Y. H. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4564–4568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, N. M. Aimon, X. Y. Sun, L. Kornblum, F. J. Walker, C. H. Ahn and C. A. Ross, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5889–5896 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Song, Y. F. Wu, X. Yang, Z. Ren, X. Ke, M. Kurttepeli, G. V. Tendeloo, D. Liu, H. C. Wu, B. Yan, X. Wu, C. G. Duan, G. Han, Z. M. Liao and D. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2435–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Moitra, C. Anand, B. K. Ghosh, M. Chandel and N. N. Ghosh, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 464–474 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campanini, R. Erni, C. H. Yang, R. Ramesh and M. D. Rossell, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 717–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, M. Tomar and V. Gupta, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 014102 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lee, J.-M. Wu and C.-H. Lai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 042903 CrossRef .
B. Yu, M. Li, Z. Hu, L. Pei, D. Guo, X. Zhao and S. Dong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 182909 CrossRef .
P. Kharel, S. Talebi, B. Ramachandran, A. Dixit, V. M. Naik, M. B. Sahana, C. Sudakar, R. Naik, M. S. Rao and G. Lawes, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 21, 036001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and C.-W. Nan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 052903 CrossRef .
M. Guo, G. Tan, Y. Zheng, W. Liu, H. Ren and A. Xia, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 175303 CrossRef .
W. M. Lee, J. H. Sung, K. Chu, X. Moya, D. Lee, C. J. Kim, N. D. Mathur, S. W. Cheong, C. H. Yang and M. H. Jo, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, OP49–OP53 CAS .
J. Gebhardt and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 125202 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kundys, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2015, 2, 011301 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Cao, D. Hea and X. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4706–4712 RSC .
S. Gupta, R. Medwal, T. Limbu, R. Katiyar, S. Pavunny, M. Tomar, G. Morell, V. Gupta and R. Katiyar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 062902 CrossRef .
R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Li, L. Cardenas, W. Huang, J. Chakrabartty and F. Rosei, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 9, 61–67 CrossRef .
G. Lotey and N. Verma, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 574, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tsurumaki, H. Yamada and A. Sawa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1040–1047 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Xie, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Beekman, J. C. Yang, Y. H. Chu, H. M. Christen and X. Pan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3556–3562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, L. Lin, C. Chen, L. Wei, J. Wang, B. Xu, C. Li, J. Bian, S. Dong, J. Du and Q. Xu, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 084401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Ma, L. Chang, C. Ma, G. Yuan, J. Wang and T. Wu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602355 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, F. Zhuge, X. Zhu, K. Yin, J. Wang, Y. Liu, C. He, B. Chen and R. W. Li, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 425202 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Z. Yan, X. Lu, Z. Lu, M. Zeng, Y. Chen, X. Gao, J. Wan, J. Dai and J. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 143503 CrossRef .
T. You, X. Ou, G. Niu, F. Barwolf, G. Li, N. Du, D. Burger, I. Skorupa, Q. Jia, W. Yu, X. Wang, O. G. Schmidt and H. Schmidt, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, P. Li, J. G. Wan, Z. Huang, G. Tian, D. Pan, Z. Fan, X. Gao and J. M. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27284–27289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fan, M. Duan, B. Luo and C. Chen, Chin. J. Phys., 2018, 56, 1903–1908 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Cheng, B. Li, X. Cheng and Q. Cheng, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 202, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Zhou and C. Chen, Physica B, 2017, 521, 376–380 CrossRef CAS .
N. Feng, W. Mi, X. Wang, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlogl, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10612–10616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, Q. Zhang, W. Mi and X. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 165303 CrossRef .
A. Lahmar, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2017, 439, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Vaz, J. Hoffman, C. H. Ahn and R. Ramesh, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2900–2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Zhou, Q. Fu, Y. Tian, S. Wang, H. Gou, J. Ai, L. Zhang and F. Xue, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 449, 372–377 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, L. Guo, C. Li, B. Gao, R. Zheng, J. Wang, Q. Li, J. Du and Q. Xu, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 464, 156–160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bea, M. Bibes, F. Ott, B. Dupe, X. H. Zhu, S. Petit, S. Fusil, C. Deranlot, K. Bouzehouane and A. Barthelemy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 017204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Shen, W. B. Yang, A. Kumar, H. H. Zhao, Y. J. Lai, L. S. Feng, Q. Y. Xu, Y. Q. Zhang, J. Du and Q. Li, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 451, 734–736 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aftabi and M. M. Tehranchi, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 766, 1054–1060 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kokado, N. Fujima, K. Harigaya, H. Shimizu and A. Sakuma, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 172410 CrossRef .
K. Sunaga, M. Tsunoda, K. Komagaki, Y. Uehara and M. Takahashi, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 013917 CrossRef .
L. Yin, X. Wang and W. Mi, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 033905 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, S. Li, Z. Tian, W. Liang, J. Wang, X. Li, X. Cheng, J. He and J. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 762, 438–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuila, S. Tiwary, M. R. Sahoo, A. Barik and P. N. Vishwakarma, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 154104 CrossRef .
F. Zavaliche, T. Zhao, H. Zheng, F. Straub, M. Cruz, P. Yang, D. Hao and R. Ramesh, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1586–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Yang, R. Viswan, J. Li and D. Viehland, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 043110 CrossRef .
R. Barman and D. Kaur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 092404 CrossRef .
S. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Han, C. Zhang, Y. Du and Z. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 022501 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, L. You, X. Shen, C. Wan, Z. Yuan, X. Zhang, L. Huang, W. Kong, H. Wu, R. Yu, J. Wang and X. Han, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6934–6938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Biswas, C. Thirmal, S. Pal and P. Murugavel, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 024101 CrossRef .
C. Chen, S. Lv, J. Li, Z. Wang, X. Liang, Y. Li, D. Viehland, K. Nakajima and Y. Ikuhara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 031601 CrossRef .
C. Cen, S. Thiel, J. Mannhart and J. Levy, Science, 2009, 323, 1026–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Chen, F. Trier, T. Wijnands, R. J. Green, N. Gauquelin, R. Egoavil, D. V. Christensen, G. Koster, M. Huijben, N. Bovet, S. Macke, F. He, R. Sutarto, N. H. Andersen, J. A. Sulpizio, M. Honig, G. E. Prawiroatmodjo, T. S. Jespersen, S. Linderoth, S. Ilani, J. Verbeeck, G. Van Tendeloo, G. Rijnders, G. A. Sawatzky and N. Pryds, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 801–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, M. Tomar, A. Kumar, N. K. Puri and V. Gupta, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59150–59154 RSC .
S. Sharma, M. Tomar, A. Kumar, N. Puri and V. Gupta, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 074103 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, R. Han, W. Li, L. Luo and W. Fei, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 21917–21924 RSC .
J. K. Jochum, M. Lorenz, H. P. Gunnlaugsson, C. Patzig, T. Hoche, M. Grundmann, A. Vantomme, K. Temst, M. J. Van Bael and V. Lazenka, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5574–5580 RSC .
T.-J. Park, G. C. Papaefthymiou, A. J. Viescas, Y. Lee, H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 024431 CrossRef .
W. M. Zhu, H. Y. Guo and Z. G. Ye, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 014401 CrossRef .
N. Wang, J. Cheng, A. Pyatakov, A. K. Zvezdin, J. F. Li, L. E. Cross and D. Viehland, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 104434 CrossRef .
B. Chen, J. Shi, X. Zheng, Y. Zhou, K. Zhu and S. Priya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7699–7705 RSC .
Y. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 851–866 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lopez-Varo, L. Bertoluzzi, J. Bisquert, M. Alexe, M. Coll, J. Huang, J. A. Jimenez-Tejada, T. Kirchartz, R. Nechache, F. Rosei and Y. Yuan, Phys. Rep., 2016, 653, 1–40 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang, L. W. Martin, S. J. Byrnes, T. E. Conry, S. R. Basu, D. Paran, L. Reichertz, J. Ihlefeld, C. Adamo, A. Melville, Y. H. Chu, C. H. Yang, J. L. Musfeldt, D. G. Schlom, J. W. Ager and R. Ramesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 062909 CrossRef .
C. Paillard, X. Bai, I. C. Infante, M. Guennou, G. Geneste, M. Alexe, J. Kreisel and B. Dkhil, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5153–5168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yan, G. Chen, L. Lu and J. E. Spanier, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2353–2360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, Y. Yuan, K. Wang, X. Chen, F. Chen, J. Liu and F. Ren, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 102506 CrossRef .
C. Himcinschi, A. Bhatnagar, A. Talkenberger, M. Barchuk, D. R. T. Zahn, D. Rafaja, J. Kortus and M. Alexe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 012908 CrossRef .
W. Ji, K. Yao and Y. C. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1763–1766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Yi, T. Choi, S. G. Choi, Y. S. Oh and S. W. Cheong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3403–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, D. Zheng, C. Jin, W. Zheng and H. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19836–19843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Fridkin, Crystallogr. Rep., 2001, 46, 654–658 CrossRef .
L. Pintilie, I. Vrejoiu, G. Le Rhun and M. Alexe, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 064109 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao, B. Yang and J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6027–6041 RSC .
J. Chakrabartty, R. Nechache, S. Li, M. Nicklaus, A. Ruediger, F. Rosei and D. D. Viehland, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 1837–1840 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, M. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Zuo, F. Zhuge, Q. F. Zhan and R. W. Li, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 195201 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Kim, J. Y. Jo, Y. S. Kim, Y. J. Chang, J. S. Lee, J. G. Yoon, T. K. Song and T. W. Noh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 237602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Y. Xiao, S. M. Peng, G. X. Yang, Z. J. Liu, X. T. Zu, S. Li, D. J. Singh, L. W. Martin and L. Qiao, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 044004 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiao, S. Zhang, H. Y. Xiao, D. J. Singh, K. H. L. Zhang, Z. J. Liu, X. T. Zu and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1239–1247 RSC .
C. Nie, S. Zhao, Y. Bai and Q. Lu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 14036–14040 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, F. Zhang, P. Long, T. Lu, H. Zeng, Y. Liu, R. L. Withers, Y. Li and Z. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801619 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, J. Seidel, S. J. Byrnes, P. Shafer, C. H. Yang, M. D. Rossell, P. Yu, Y. H. Chu, J. F. Scott, J. W. Ager 3rd, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, S. H. Baek, T. H. Kim, J. G. Yoon, C. M. Folkman, C. B. Eom and T. W. Noh, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 125305 CrossRef .
R. Guo, L. You, L. Chen, D. Wu and J. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 122902 CrossRef .
J. Seidel, D. Fu, S. Y. Yang, E. Alarcon-Llado, J. Wu, R. Ramesh and J. W. Ager, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 126805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bhatnagar, A. R. Chaudhuri, Y. H. Kim, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 3835 Search PubMed .
P. Maksymovych, J. Seidel, Y. H. Chu, P. Wu, A. P. Baddorf, L. Q. Chen, S. V. Kalinin and R. Ramesh, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1906–1912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhatnagar, Y. H. Kim, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5224–5228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Yang, X. Meng, A. Jiang, Z. Bai, X. Zheng, L. Jin, C. Wang and S. Feng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 182904 CrossRef .
D. Meier, J. Seidel, A. Cano, K. Delaney, Y. Kumagai, M. Mostovoy, N. A. Spaldin, R. Ramesh and M. Fiebig, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 284–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Y. Horibe, N. Lee, S. W. Cheong and J. R. Guest, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 077203 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jin, S. Xiao, J.-C. Yang, J. Zhang, X. Lu, Y.-H. Chu, S. W. Cheong, J. Li, Y. Kan, C. Yue, Y. Li, C. Ju, F. Huang and J. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 082904 CrossRef .
J. H. Lee, I. Fina, X. Marti, Y. H. Kim, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7078–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Yang and M. Alexe, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1704908 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Adamo, C. E. Rowland, R. D. Schaller, D. G. Schlom and D. A. Walko, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 084905 CrossRef .
S. Li, Y. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Wang and C. Nan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2903–2908 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and D. J. Singh, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1, 075402 CrossRef .
W. Dong, Y. Guo, B. Guo, H. Li, H. Liu and T. W. Joel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6925–6929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gruverman, D. Wu, H. Lu, Y. Wang, H. W. Jang, C. M. Folkman, M. Y. Zhuravlev, D. Felker, M. Rzchowski, C. Eom and E. Y. Tsymbal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3539–3543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Hu, T. R. Paudel, S. Lopatin, Z. Wang, H. Ma, K. Wu, A. Bera, G. Yuan, A. Gruverman, E. Y. Tsymbal and T. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704337 CrossRef .
B. Kundys, M. Viret, D. Colson and D. O. Kundys, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, A. Lipatov, H. Lu, H. Lee, J. W. Lee, E. Torun, L. Wirtz, C. B. Eom, J. Iniguez, A. Sinitskii and A. Gruverman, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3344 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Hu, L. Q. Chen and C. W. Nan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 15–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Rao, J. T. Prater, F. Wu, C. T. Shelton, J. P. Maria and J. Narayan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5814–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Wu, S. A. Cybart, P. Yu, M. D. Rossell, J. X. Zhang, R. Ramesh and R. C. Dynes, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 756–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Allibe, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane, C. Daumont, D. Sando, E. Jacquet, C. Deranlot, M. Bibes and A. Barthelemy, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1141–1145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. W. Martin, Y.-H. Chu, M. B. Holcomb, M. Huijben, P. Yu, S.-J. Han, D. Lee, S. X. Wang and R. Ramesh, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2050–2055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huijben, P. Yu, L. W. Martin, H. J. Molegraaf, Y. H. Chu, M. B. Holcomb, N. Balke, G. Rijnders and R. Ramesh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4739–4745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. De Luca, P. Schoenherr, J. Mendil, D. Meier, M. Fiebig and M. Trassin, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 054030 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Z. Chen, H. He, D. Meng, H. Yang, X. Mao, Q. Pan, B. Chu, M. Zuo, Z. Sun, R. Peng, Z. Fu, X. Zhai and Y. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6156–6163 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, X. Song, X. Gao, G. Tian, P. Li, H. Fan, Z. Huang, W. Yang, D. Chen, Z. Fan, M. Zeng and J. M. Liu, ACS
Nano, 2018, 12, 6767–6776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Saito, J. Chen and S. Ishio, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1999, 191, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Q. Chen, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 1835–1844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, M. Li, A. N. Morozovska, Y. Wang, E. A. Eliseev, V. Gopalan and L.-Q. Chen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 174111 CrossRef .
J.-J. Wang, Y. Wang, J. F. Ihlefeld, P. E. Hopkins and L.-Q. Chen, Acta Mater., 2016, 111, 220–231 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Zhang, D. G. Schlom, L. Q. Chen and C. B. Eom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 122904 CrossRef .
M. J. Highland, T. T. Fister, D. D. Fong, P. H. Fuoss, C. Thompson, J. A. Eastman, S. K. Streiffer and G. B. Stephenson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 187602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Vorotiahin, E. A. Eliseev, Q. Li, S. V. Kalinin, Y. A. Genenko and A. N. Morozovska, Acta Mater., 2017, 137, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Lu, L. Xie, X. Yan, T. R. Paudel, J. Kim, X. Cheng, H. Wang, C. Heikes, L. Li, M. Xu, D. G. Schlom, L. Q. Chen, R. Wu, E. Y. Tsymbal, A. Gruverman and X. Pan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 1132–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Britson, J. R. Jokisaari, Y. Zhang, C. Adamo, A. Melville, D. G. Schlom, L. Q. Chen and X. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6574–6580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Park, B. Wang, S. Das, S. C. Chae, J. S. Chung, J. G. Yoon, L. Q. Chen, S. M. Yang and T. W. Noh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 366–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, Q. Zhang, D. Li, W. Mi and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15342–15348 CrossRef CAS .
E.-J. Guo, M. A. Roldan, X. Sang, S. Okamoto, T. Charlton, H. Ambaye, H. N. Lee and M. R. Fitzsimmons, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 114404 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Duan, S. S. Jaswal and E. Y. Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 047201 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Pan, Q. Yuan, Z. Liao, L. Qin, J. Bi, D. Gao, J. Wu, H. Wu and Z.-G. Ye, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 762, 184–189 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Harumoto, J. Wang, E. Suzuki, K. Nakada, Y. Nakamura, S. Nakagawa and J. Shi, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 453, 206–210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, R. Viswan, X. Tang, C. M. Leung, J. Li and D. Viehland, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 323 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jeong, Y. Ferrante, S. V. Faleev, M. G. Samant, C. Felser and S. S. Parkin, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Liu, J. Miao, Z. D. Xu, G. Jakob, Q. Liu, Z. Y. Ren, K. K. Meng, Y. Wu, J. K. Chen, X. G. Xu and Y. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 062401 CrossRef .
A. Hallal, H. X. Yang, B. Dieny and M. Chshiev, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 184423 CrossRef .
D. Li, C. Barreteau, M. R. Castell, F. Silly and A. Smogunov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 205409 CrossRef .
H. X. Yang, M. Chshiev, B. Dieny, J. H. Lee, A. Manchon and K. H. Shin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 054401 CrossRef .
C. G. Duan, J. P. Velev, R. F. Sabirianov, Z. Zhu, J. Chu, S. S. Jaswal and E. Y. Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 137201 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Mi, Z. Guo, X. Feng and H. Bai, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 6387–6395 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Ong, N. Kioussis, P. K. Amiri, J. G. Alzate, K. L. Wang, G. P. Carman, J. Hu and R. Wu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 094422 CrossRef .
D.-S. Wang, R. Wu and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 14932–14947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, P. V. Lukashev, S. S. Jaswal and E. Y. Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 014435 CrossRef .
C. R. Winkler, M. L. Jablonski, K. Ashraf, A. R. Damodaran, K. Jambunathan, J. L. Hart, J. G. Wen, D. J. Miller, L. W. Martin, S. Salahuddin and M. L. Taheri, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3617–3622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Nelson, B. Winchester, Y. Zhang, S. J. Kim, A. Melville, C. Adamo, C. M. Folkman, S. H. Baek, C. B. Eom, D. G. Schlom, L. Q. Chen and X. Pan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 828–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, Z. Chen, Q. He, J. D. Clarkson, C. R. Serrao, A. K. Yadav, M. E. Nowakowski, Z. Fan, L. You, X. Gao, D. Zeng, L. Chen, A. Y. Borisevich, S. Salahuddin, J. M. Liu and J. Bokor, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 486–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Qi, D. Chen, S. L. Hsu, A. R. Damodaran, X. He, A. T. N'Diaye, A. Rockett and L. W. Martin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6506–6513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yun, N. Ramakrishnegowda, D.-S. Park and A. Bhatnagar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 042901 CrossRef .
C. J. Roh, J. H. Lee, K.-E. Kim, C.-H. Yang and J. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 052904 CrossRef .
X. Zou, L. You, W. Chen, H. Ding, D. Wu, T. Wu, L. Chen and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8997–9004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chu, Q. Zhan, L. W. Martin, M. P. Cruz, P. L. Yang, G. W. Pabst, F. Zavaliche, S. Y. Yang, J. X. Zhang, L. Q. Chen, D. G. Schlom, I. N. Lin, T. B. Wu and R. Ramesh, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2307–2311 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Jang, D. Ortiz, S.-H. Baek, C. M. Folkman, R. R. Das, P. Shafer, Y. Chen, C. T. Nelson, X. Pan, R. Ramesh and C.-B. Eom, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 817–823 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alsubaie, P. Sharma, J. H. Lee, J. Y. Kim, C. H. Yang and J. Seidel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11768–11775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. You, Z. Chen, X. Zou, H. Ding, W. Chen, L. Chen, G. Yuan and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5388–5394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Y. Kuo, Y. Tang, L. R. Dedon, Q. Li, L. Zhang, C. Klewe, Y. L. Huang, B. Prasad, A. Farhan, M. Yang, J. D. Clarkson, S. Das, S. Manipatruni, A. Tanaka, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, A. Scholl, Y. H. Chu, Z. Q. Qiu, Z. Hu, L. H. Tjeng, R. Ramesh, L. W. Wang and L. W. Martin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3764 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bordacs, D. G. Farkas, J. S. White, R. Cubitt, L. DeBeer-Schmitt, T. Ito and I. Kezsmarki, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 147203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Fishman, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 014405 CrossRef CAS .
B. Narayan, J. S. Malhotra, R. Pandey, K. Yaddanapudi, P. Nukala, B. Dkhil, A. Senyshyn and R. Ranjan, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 427–431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ju, J. C. Yang, C. Luo, P. Shafer, H. J. Liu, Y. L. Huang, H. H. Kuo, F. Xue, C. W. Luo, Q. He, P. Yu, E. Arenholz, L. Q. Chen, J. Zhu, X. Lu and Y. H. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 876–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Catalan, A. Lubk, A. H. Vlooswijk, E. Snoeck, C. Magen, A. Janssens, G. Rispens, G. Rijnders, D. H. Blank and B. Noheda, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 963–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, C.-W. Bark, D. Esque de los Ojos, J. Alcala, C. B. Eom, G. Catalan and A. Gruverman, Science, 2012, 336, 59–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Tang, Y. L. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. J. Wang and X. L. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ju, T. Cai, G. Guo and Z. Li, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 053904 CrossRef .
X. Shen, K. Yin, Y. S. Puzyrev, Y. Liu, L. Sun, R.-W. Li and S. T. Pantelides, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1500019 CrossRef .
N. Du, N. Manjunath, Y. Li, S. Menzel, E. Linn, R. Waser, T. You, D. Bürger, I. Skorupa, D. Walczyk, C. Walczyk, O. G. Schmidt and H. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 054025 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ho Sung, W.-M. Lee, J. Hong Lee, K. Chu, D. Lee, X. Moya, N. D. Mathur, C.-H. Yang, J.-H. Park and M.-H. Jo, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e38 CrossRef .
D. Liang, X. Li, J. Wang, L. Wu and P. Chen, Solid-State Electron., 2018, 145, 46–48 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, B. Sun, W. Zhao, H. Li and P. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 393, 325–329 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, D. Zheng, C. Jin, P. Li, X. Liu, W. Zheng and H. Bai, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800171 CrossRef .
B. Xu, G. Wang, Y. Zhou, Q. Li and Q. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 133901 CrossRef .
A. Rana, H. Lu, K. Bogle, Q. Zhang, R. Vasudevan, V. Thakare, A. Gruverman, S. Ogale and N. Valanoor, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3962–3969 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, Q. Li, M. Huijben, R. K. Vasudevan, S. V. Kalinin and P. Maksymovych, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 094401 CrossRef CAS .
S. Körbel, J. Hlinka and S. Sanvito, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 100104(R) CrossRef .
J. Guyonnet, I. Gaponenko, S. Gariglio and P. Paruch, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5377–5382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seidel, L. W. Martin, Q. He, Q. Zhan, Y. H. Chu, A. Rother, M. E. Hawkridge, P. Maksymovych, P. Yu, M. Gajek, N. Balke, S. V. Kalinin, S. Gemming, F. Wang, G. Catalan, J. F. Scott, N. A. Spaldin, J. Orenstein and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 229–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Farokhipoor and B. Noheda, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 127601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seidel, P. Maksymovych, Y. Batra, A. Katan, S. Y. Yang, Q. He, A. P. Baddorf, S. V. Kalinin, C. H. Yang, J. C. Yang, Y. H. Chu, E. K. Salje, H. Wormeester, M. Salmeron and R. Ramesh, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 197603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, J. Ma, Q. Zhang, R. Peng, J. Wang, C. Liu, M. Wang, N. Li, M. Chen, X. Cheng, P. Gao, L. Gu, L. Q. Chen, P. Yu, J. Zhang and C. W. Nan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 947–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Beekman, W. Siemons, T. Z. Ward, M. Chi, J. Howe, M. D. Biegalski, N. Balke, P. Maksymovych, A. K. Farrar, J. B. Romero, P. Gao, X. Q. Pan, D. A. Tenne and H. M. Christen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5561–5567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, Q. He, F. N. Chu, Y. C. Huang, J. W. Chen, W. I. Liang, R. K. Vasudevan, V. Nagarajan, E. Arenholz, S. V. Kalinin and Y. H. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3070–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Fernández-Posada, A. Castro, J.-M. Kiat, F. Porcher, O. Peña, R. Jiménez, M. Algueró and H. Amorín, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802338 CrossRef .
D. S. Rana, I. Kawayama, K. Mavani, K. Takahashi, H. Murakami and M. Tonouchi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2881–2885 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, Q. Li, M. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. Liu and S. Dong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 102901 CrossRef .
T. You, Y. Shuai, W. Luo, N. Du, D. Bürger, I. Skorupa, R. Hübner, S. Henker, C. Mayr, R. Schüffny, T. Mikolajick, O. G. Schmidt and H. Schmidt, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3357–3365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Boyn, J. Grollier, G. Lecerf, B. Xu, N. Locatelli, S. Fusil, S. Girod, C. Carretero, K. Garcia, S. Xavier, J. Tomas, L. Bellaiche, M. Bibes, A. Barthelemy, S. Saighi and V. Garcia, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Velev, C. Duan, J. Burton, A. Smogunov, M. Niranjan, E. Tosatti, S. S. Jaswal and E. Y. Tsymbal, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 427–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Garcia, M. Bibes, L. Bocher, S. Valencia, F. Kronast, A. Crassous, X. Moya, S. Enouz-Vedrenne, A. Gloter, D. Imhoff, C. Deranlot, N. D. Mathur, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane and A. Barthelemy, Science, 2010, 327, 1106–1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pantel, S. Goetze, D. Hesse and M. Alexe, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 289–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Julliere, Phys. Lett., 1975, 54, 225–226 CrossRef .
V. Garcia, S. Fusil, K. Bouzehouane, S. Enouz-Vedrenne, N. D. Mathur, A. Barthelemy and M. Bibes, Nature, 2009, 460, 81–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sokolov, O. Bak, H. Lu, S. Li, E. Y. Tsymbal and A. Gruverman, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 305202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, X. Wang and W. Mi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 1057–1064 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sołtys, M. Ptasinska, J. Piechota and S. Krukowski, J. Cryst. Growth, 2014, 401, 30–32 CrossRef .
P. Aguado-Puente, N. C. Bristowe, B. Yin, R. Shirasawa, P. Ghosez, P. B. Littlewood and E. Artacho, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 035438 CrossRef .
F. Cossu, J. Jilili and U. Schwingenschlögl, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400057 CrossRef .
X. Xiang, L. Qiao, H. Y. Xiao, F. Gao, X. T. Zu, S. Li and W. L. Zhou, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, Nature, 2004, 427, 423–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. J. Marshall, A. Malashevich, A. S. Disa, M.-G. Han, H. Chen, Y. Zhu, S. Ismail-Beigi, F. J. Walker and C. H. Ahn, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 051001 CrossRef .
K. D. Fredrickson and A. A. Demkov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 115126 CrossRef .
J. E. Kleibeuker, Z. Zhong, H. Nishikawa, J. Gabel, A. Muller, F. Pfaff, M. Sing, K. Held, R. Claessen, G. Koster and G. Rijnders, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 237402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Disa, D. P. Kumah, A. Malashevich, H. Chen, D. A. Arena, E. D. Specht, S. Ismail-Beigi, F. J. Walker and C. H. Ahn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 026801 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. You and J. H. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 155111 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, J. D. Burton, S. S. Jaswal and E. Y. Tsymbal, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 247601 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xiao, W. Yao and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 236809 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hao, J. F. Specht, P. Nagler, L. Xu, K. Tran, A. Singh, C. K. Dass, C. Schuller, T. Korn, M. Richter, A. Knorr, X. Li and G. Moody, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, G. B. Liu, W. Feng, X. Xu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 196802 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. L. McGill, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2014, 344, 1489–1492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, Y. Yao, W. Zhu, J. Zhou, W. Yao and D. Xiao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165108 CrossRef .
W. T. Hsu, Y. L. Chen, C. H. Chen, P. S. Liu, T. H. Hou, L. J. Li and W. H. Chang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yao, D. Xiao and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 235406 CrossRef .
Z. Gong, G. B. Liu, H. Yu, D. Xiao, X. Cui, X. Xu and W. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2053 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang, B. Liu and J. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Eginligil, B. Cao, Z. Wang, X. Shen, C. Cong, J. Shang, C. Soci and T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7636 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Q. Sun and P. Jena, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 046403 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Chen, S. T. Lo, S. C. Ho, S. S. Wong, T. H. Vu, X. Q. Zhang, Y. D. Liu, Y. Y. Chiou, Y. X. Chen, J. C. Yang, Y. C. Chen, Y. H. Chu, Y. H. Lee, C. J. Chung, T. M. Chen, C. H. Chen and C. L. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3143 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rycerz, J. Tworzydlo and C. Beenakker, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 172–175 Search PubMed .
H. Lu, W. Shan, W. Yao, Q. Niu and S. Shen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 115407 CrossRef .
D. Doennig, W. E. Pickett and R. Pentcheva, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 121110(R) CrossRef .
S. Okamoto, W. Zhu, Y. Nomura, R. Arita, D. Xiao and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 195121 CrossRef .
D. Doennig, S. Baidya, W. E. Pickett and R. Pentcheva, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 165145 CrossRef .
D. Doennig, W. E. Pickett and R. Pentcheva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 126804 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Weng, X. Huang, Y. Yao and S. Dong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 195114 CrossRef .
H. Tahini, F. Cossu, N. Singh, S. Smith and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 035117 CrossRef .
S. Picozzi, Front. Phys., 2014, 2, 10 Search PubMed .
K. Yamauchi, P. Barone and S. Picozzi, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 035146 CrossRef .
W. Y. Tong, S. J. Gong, X. Wan and C. G. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Weng, L. Lin, E. Dagotto and S. Dong, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 037601 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Choi, H. T. Yi, S. W. Cheong, J. N. Hilfiker, R. France and A. G. Norman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 100101(R) CrossRef .
K. Yamauchi, P. Barone, T. Shishidou, T. Oguchi and S. Picozzi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 037602 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Weber and M. Alonso, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 5683–5693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fabiano, X. Crispin and M. Berggren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 438–442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, D. Wang, Z. Chen, W. Liu, S. Lim and S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26301–26306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, X. Li, Q. Niu and J. Feng, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 121403(R) CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, S. A. Yang, W. Mi, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlogl, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 959–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. R. Liu, H. Y. Yoong, T. R. Paudel, J. X. Xiao, R. Guo, W. N. Lin, P. Yang, J. Wang, G. M. Chow, T. Venkatesan, E. Y. Tsymbal, H. Tian and J. S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qi, N. Ma, X. Ma, R. Adelung and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13712–13719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Guo, L. You, Y. Zhou, Z. S. Lim, X. Zou, L. Chen, R. Ramesh and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1990 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Liang, J. M. Song, X. H. Dai, Y. S. Zhang, X. F. Liu, X. B. Li, J. Zhang, X. D. Meng, L. Zhao and B. T. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 229, 312–315 CrossRef CAS .
A. Q. Jiang, C. Wang, K. J. Jin, X. B. Liu, J. F. Scott, C. S. Hwang, T. A. Tang, H. B. Lu and G. Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1277–1281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. You, L. P. Selvaraj, H. Zeng, W. Luo, N. Du, D. Bürger, I. Skorupa, S. Prucnal, A. Lawerenz, T. Mikolajick, O. G. Schmidt and H. Schmidt, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500352 CrossRef .
L. Bégon-Lours, V. Rouco, Q. Qiao, A. Sander, M. A. Roldán, R. Bernard, J. Trastoy, A. Crassous, E. Jacquet, K. Bouzehouane, M. Bibes, J. Santamaría, A. Barthélémy, M. Varela and J. E. Villegas, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 084405 CrossRef .
Y. Ishii, R. Sasaki, Y. Nii, T. Ito and Y. Onose, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 9, 034034 CrossRef CAS .
N. Balke, S. Jesse, Y.-H. Chu and S. V. Kalinin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5559–5565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Balke, A. Tselev, T. M. Arruda, S. Jesse, Y.-H. Chu and S. V. Kalinin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10139–10146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, X. Y. Chen, K. B. Yin, S. Dong, Z. F. Ren, F. Yuan, T. Yu, Z. G. Zou and J. M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2889–2892 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. M. Schultz, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4168–4174 RSC .
Y. C. Yang, Y. Liu, J. H. Wei, C. X. Pan, R. Xiong and J. Shi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 31941–31947 RSC .
X. Z. Deng, C. Song, Y. L. Tong, G. Yuan, F. Gao, D. Q. Liu and S. T. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 3648–3657 RSC .
B. Safizade, S. M. Masoudpanah, M. Hasheminiasari and A. Ghasemi, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 6988–6995 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Shen, Y. Guan, Y. Hu, Y. Lin and C.-W. Nan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1967–1973 RSC .
Y. Tian, L. Wei, Q. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhou, F. Ma, L. Gu, S. Meng, L. Q. Chen, C. W. Nan and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3809 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-E. Kim, S. Jeong, K. Chu, J. H. Lee, G.-Y. Kim, F. Xue, T. Y. Koo, L.-Q. Chen, S.-Y. Choi, R. Ramesh and C.-H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 403 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Belhadi, S. Yousfi, H. Bouyanfif and M. El Marssi, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 154103 CrossRef .
D. Hirai, J. Matsuno and H. Takagi, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 041508 CrossRef .
M. Gibert, P. Zubko, R. Scherwitzl, J. Iniguez and J. M. Triscone, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Li Yin	Dr Li Yin received her B.S. degree from the School of Physics and Electronic Science at Shanxi Datong University, China, in 2014. She received her M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Applied Physics from Tianjin University in 2019, under the supervision of Prof. Wenbo Mi. Now she is working as a postdoctoral research associate in Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Her research interests focus on the multiferroic properties and electronic structures of oxide heterostructures.
Wenbo Mi	Prof. Wenbo Mi received his B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Physics from Tianjin University in 2001, 2004 and 2006, respectively. Then he became an assistant professor at the Department of Physics, Tianjin University and was promoted as a full professor in 2013. He was a visiting scholar in 2008 at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and then he became a Postdoc Fellow in the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in 2010. His research interests mainly focus on the theoretical design, fabrication and physical properties of low-dimensional spintronic and multiferroic materials.

 	Fig. 1  The schematic diagram of interacting physical properties in the BFO-based heterostructures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the lattice structure, ferroelectric polarization (bold arrows) and antiferromagnetic order (shaded planes) of the (001)-oriented BFO (a) before and (b) after electric poling. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. (c) The leakage current and (d) the ferroelectric hysteresis of 200 nm SmxBi1−xFeO3 (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2) films. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Photo-current density as a function of applied voltages in the Gd-doped BFO nanoparticles. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Fabrication process of CoFe2O4/BFO nanocomposites. (a) Depositing a CoFe2O4 film on an Nb-doped SrTiO3 substrate by pulsed electron deposition, and then (b) depositing an amorphous Si capping layer on a CoFe2O4 film by radio-frequency sputtering. (c) Performing spin coating on the fabricated sample with the hydrosilsesquioxane negative-tone e-beam resist, and then (d) patterning the coated structure into pillars by e-beam lithography. (e) Performing the reactive ion etching on an Si cap and subsequently Ar ion etching on the CoFe2O4 film. (g) Depositing a BFO film with a thickness of 1 nm, and then (h) preparing the CoFe2O4 and BFO films simultaneously by pulsed electron deposition. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the metal/ferroelectric/metal capacitor configuration with a BFO/BaTiO3 multilayer. (b) Room-temperature ferroelectric hysteresis curves of bare BFO, bare BaTiO3 and multilayered BFO/BaTiO3. (c) J–V curves of the multilayered BFO/BaTiO3 (in the upper panel) and BFO single layer (in the lower panel) under both dark conditions and illumination of violet laser light (λ = 405 nm) with an intensity of 160 mW cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the (a) graphene/BFSiO/ITO/glass and (b) glass/ITO/BFSiO/graphene configurations. (c) I–V characteristics of the graphene/BFSiO/ITO structure under dark conditions and illumination with standard AM 1.5 with a power density of 100 mW cm−2 in a Keithley model 2401 electrometer. (d) Transient open-circuit voltage and (e) short-circuit current response for consecutive light ON and OFF cycles of ∼10 s. Adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) X-ray diffraction patterns of the pristine BFO and RGO3/BFO films. (b) Raman scattering spectra of the RGO3/BFO films (measured spectra: open circles and fitted spectra: thick solid lines) and the decomposed active modes (thin solid lines and arrows). The inset shows the Raman scattering spectra of RGO3/BFO films. (c) UV-vis absorption of pristine BFO and RGO3/BFO films. The inset shows the schematic energy band alignment of BFO. EO, EF, EV, and EC represent the vacuum level, Fermi level, valence band and conduction band of BFO, respectively. (d) IPCE as a function of the wavelength for pristine BFO and RGO3/BFO films at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl. Adapted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–f) J–V curves of dark (open squares) and illuminated (closed squares) Pt/BFO/SrRuO3 thin film capacitors. The insets show the (a and b) upward, (c and d) downward and (e and f) upward/downward mixed-polarization domains, respectively. (g) Cycling test for the nonvolatile photovoltaic effects in the Pt/BFO/SrRuO3 capacitors with three states. Adapted with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2011, American Physical Society.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  (a) X-ray diffraction pattern of the T-BFO/LSMO sample on a (001)-LaAlO3 single crystal wafer. (b) Setup for the measurement of the local photovoltaic effects. Local ferroelectric switching and the J–V curves of the (c and d) Au/Ti/T-BFO/LSMO and (e and f) Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO heterostructures. Circle-fork A(A′) represents the polarized-down state, and circle-dot B(B′) represents the polarized-up state. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the energy levels and photo-generated carrier transfer process of the Au/Ti(Cr)/T-BFO/LSMO structures with the (a and c) polarized-up and (b and d) polarized-down states. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photovoltaic J–V characteristics and (b) energy band diagrams of the ITO/BFO/Pt, ITO/ZnO/Pt and ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt heterostructures. (c) Energy conversion efficiency η as a function of the BFO layer thickness in the ITO/BFO/Pt and ITO/ZnO/BFO/Pt heterostructures. A xenon light source (Hamamatsu LC8 with L8253 super-quiet xenon lamp) giving 22.3 mW cm−2 blue monochromatic light was used for the photovoltaic measurements. Adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Diagram of the photo-induced electron generation, separation and transfer pathway in the BFO/TiO2-nanotube arrays by visible-light excitation. The photoconversion efficiency as a function of the applied potential in the BFO/TiO2-nanotube arrays and bare TiO2-nanotube arrays at a visible-light irradiation of 140 mW cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of device architectures and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy images of planar and mesostructured heterojunctions, respectively. (c) Energy levels of the TiO2/BFO/NiO heterojunctions and J–V curves of planar and mesostructured TiO2/BFO/NiO heterojunctions. Adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2017, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic structure of the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs. (b) I–V curves of the Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3(3 nm)/Pt FTJs under visible light illumination (max-302, 385–740 nm, maximum intensity of 1.5 W cm−2) and ultraviolet light illumination (max-303, 250–385 nm, maximum intensity of 60 mW cm−2). (c and d) The band alignments of the FTJs at different polarization directions (yellow arrow) under darkness and light illumination, respectively. The black filled and empty circles in (c and d) represent the photon-excited electrons and holes, respectively. (e) Typical I–V data of the LRS and HRS in the low bias region after writing with voltages of +3 and −16 V, both in the dark and under ultraviolet light illumination. Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
ΔP = αHΔH.	(7)
μ0ΔM = αEΔE.	(8)

 	Fig. 13  (a and b) Photoemission electron microscopy and (c and d) in-plane piezoelectric force microscopy images of the same area of the BFO film (a and c) before and (b and d) after electric poling. Arrows in (a and b) indicate the X-ray polarization direction during the measurements. Arrows in (c and d) show the direction of the in-plane component of ferroelectric polarization. Regions 1 and 2 (marked with green and red circles, respectively) refer to 109° ferroelectric domain switching, whereas Regions 3 (black and yellow circles) and 4 (white circles) correspond to 71° and 180° domain switching, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the electrical control of magnetism. (b) In-plane piezoelectric force microscopy image of the BFO film with large (10 μm, red square) and small (5 μm, green square) electrically switched regions in the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO heterostructures. (c) X-ray magnetic circular dichroism–photoemission electron microscopy image taken at the Co L-edge of the CoFe film grown on the written pattern of Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO heterostructures. (d) Coupling mechanism among ferroelectricity, antiferromagnetism and ferromagnetism of the Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO heterostructures. (e) Schematic diagram of the coplanar epitaxial electrode device. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  X-ray magnetic circular dichroism–photoemission electron microscopy image taken at the Co L-edge of (a) the as-grown Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO/SrRuO3/SrTiO3 heterostructure, (b) after the first electrical switching and (c) after the second electrical switching. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. Schematic diagram of the electric field induced magnetization reversal of (d) the as-grown state Co0.9Fe0.1/BFO/DyScO3 heterostructures and (e) after the first electric pulse. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2011, American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Atomic force microscopy topology of six Co nanodots on the epitaxial BFO film. (B–D) Magnetic force microscopy images of the six Co nanodots in the initial magnetic state without pretreatment, then upon an electric pulse of +8 V, and then upon a −8 V pulse, respectively. The top rows in (E) and (F) indicate the enlarged magnetic force microscopy images of the blue-marked I and II nanodots, respectively. The red dashed arrows show the average magnetization vectors of the three triangle wings in magnetic force microscopy images. Corresponding to the top row in (E) and (F), the simulated magnetic force microscopy contours and magnetic moment configurations are displayed in the middle and bottom rows, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Wave distribution at the ultrashort electric pulses of 10 ns at ±10 V, which is applied on one chosen Co nanodot on the epitaxial BFO film. (B) Magnetic force microscopy images of the Co nanodot in the initial magnetic state without pretreatment, then upon an electric pulse of +10 V, and then upon a −10 V pulse, respectively. The top row in (B) indicates the simulated magnetic force microscopy images of the blue-marked I and II nanodots, respectively. The dashed red arrows show the average magnetization vectors of the three triangle wings. (C) Serious reads of “written” Co nanodots marked by dashed red cycles: the initial state, switched state after an electric pulse of 8 V at 1.0 ms, switched state after heating at 100 °C in 1 h, and then the switched state after the retention of nine months. Adapted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
	(9)
	(10)
Φ|z=0 = 0, Φ|z=h−0 − Φ|z=h+0 = 0,	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)

 	Fig. 18  (a) In-plane M–H curves along the [100] and [010] directions of the La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 single layer and La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO bilayers. (b) Scheme of the ferroelectric polarization induced uniaxial magnetic anisotropy of La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/BFO bilayers. Adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2010, Wiley. (c) Angle-dependent magnetic coercivity HC and MR/MS of the Co layer in the as-grown Co/BFO heterostructures, after the first +400 kV cm−1 poling, after the subsequent −400 kV cm−1 poling, and after the second +400 kV cm−1 poling. 0° and 90° indicate the (100) and (010) directions of the SrTiO3 substrate (long blue and black arrows), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 19  (a) Structures of the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures, bulk Fe4N and BFO. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (b) Magnetic order of the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures with the opposite polarization directions of ferroelectric BFO. M+(M−) indicates the magnetic moment with a positive (negative) value. Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, American Physical Society. (c) Layer-resolved magnetic anisotropy energy of the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures at different electric fields by GGA+U+SOC calculations. The FN label indicates Fe4N. Adapted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (d) Orbital-resolved magnetic anisotropy energy oscillation of the Fe4N layer in the Fe4N/BFO heterostructures. Adapted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  In-plane and out-of-plane (insets in the top right corner) piezoresponse force microscopy images of (a) BFO/SrRuO3/DyScO3 with pure 71° domains, (b–d) thickness-varied BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/SrRuO3/DyScO3 heterostructures with mixed 71° and 109° domains, and (e) BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/SrRuO3/DyScO3 heterostructures with 10 nm thick La0.25Bi0.75FeO3 and pure 109° domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Diagrams of the applied magnetic field orientation and the used magnetic field in superconducting quantum interference device measurements for (a) Pt/CoFe/DyScO3 and (b) Pt/CoFe/BFO/DyScO3 and Pt/CoFe/BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3/DyScO3. Magnetic properties of (c) Pt/CoFe heterostructures (black loop), CoFe/BFO heterostructures (red and blue loops) with pure 71° domains and (d) CoFe/BFO/La0.25Bi0.75FeO3 with pure 109° domains. Adapted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) X-ray diffraction line scan of 65BFO-35CoFe2O4 on PMN-PT before and after poling. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4 layer and the scheme of the strain conditions during the poling process in the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4/PMN-PT structure. (c) Magnetic hysteresis loops of the 65BFO-35CoFe2O4/PMN-PT structure before and after electric poling in the out-of-plane and in-plane directions, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing.	 
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 23  Schematics of the flexoelectric field and related polarization switching in the BFO film under the scanning probe (a) in static contact, and (b and c) tracing the moved tip in [0] and [110] directions, respectively. Phase-field simulations of the in-plane flexoelectric field distribution of the BFO film under the scanning probe (d) in static contact, and (e and f) tracing the moved tip in [0] and [110] directions. Adapted with permission from ref. 226. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  Diagram of the nonpolar RS mechanism of the Pt/BiFe1−xMnxO3/Pt devices at the (a and b) forming process, (c) bipolar RS and (d) unique RS. Adapted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2012, AIP Publishing.	 
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic energy band structure and (b) rectifying I–V curves of the Au/BFO/SrRuO3 FTJs in the downward and upward polarization states, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (c) Phase image of square domains and (d) local I–V curves with the downward (purple in (c) and blue in (d)) and upward (yellow in (c) and red in (d)) polarization states of Nb:SrTiO3/Sm0.1Bi0.9FeO3/Pt FTJs, which correspond to the structure in Fig. 12(a). Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Experimental setup diagrams for writing and erasing the strongly charged domain walls of the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/TbScO3 structures. (b and c) Cross-sectional dark-field transmission electron microscopy image of the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/TbScO3 structures with and without 71° strongly charged domain walls, respectively. (d–g) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy images of the four rectangle-marked regions in (b). The yellow arrows represent the ferroelectric polarization direction. (h) Models of the R-phase domains and the strongly charged T-phase domain walls. The green arrows indicate the ferroelectric polarization direction. (i and j) Phase-field simulation of the polarization distribution in the BFO film with and without the strongly charged domain walls. The BFO layer thickness is 20 nm in (b) and (c), and then the thickness of simulated BFO in (i) and (j) is 19 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 27  
I–V curves of the BFO/La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/TbScO3 structures by considering the “on” state with the strongly charged domain walls and the “off” state without the strongly charged domain walls. During the measurements, there is no sign of domain wall motion. Adapted with permission from ref. 225. Copyright 2016, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic hysteresis loop and (b) phase transition between R-BFO and mixed phases with possible multiple states. (c) Current and resistive switching and (d) selected area electron diffraction patterns of the mixed BFO phases under different voltage pulses. Adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Resistances as a function of write voltage pulses and (b) the measurement setup of the Pt/Co/BFO/Ca0.96Ce0.04MnO3 FTJs. Cycles 1 and 2(3) correspond to ON and OFF states, respectively. Cycles 4 and 5 indicate minor loops with the intermediate resistance states. (c and d) The retention and fatigue tests of the Pt/Co/BFO/Ca0.96Ce0.04MnO3 FTJs. Adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
	(29)

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic diagram of measurements and (b) R–H curves at the positive (negative) ferroelectric polarization of La0.6Sr0.4MnO3/BFO/La0.6Sr0.4MnO3 MFTJs. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing. (c) Room-temperature ferroelectric hysteresis loop with and without a magnetic field and a schematic diagram of Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8/BFO/Ni50.3Mn36.9Sb12.8 MFTJs. Adapted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2016, AIP Publishing.	 
	(30)
	(31)

 	Fig. 31  (a) Calculated distribution of the free charges and screening charges on Fe and Ti atoms per formula across the SrTiO3/BFO superlattices in the paraelectric and ferroelectric states of BFO. The screening charge is the difference of the free charges in the paraelectric and ferroelectric superlattices. Adapted with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2011, AIP Publishing. (b) Band structure of LaTiO3/BFO superlattices with specific LaO–BiO and TiO2–BiO structures. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Nanoscale current mapping of the cross-sectional (100) SrTiO3/BFO interface. (d) Atom-resolved electron energy loss spectroscopy mapping. The interface is indicated by a dashed line. (e) Electron energy loss spectra with Ti–L2,3 and Fe–L2,3 edges. The red spectrum is recorded from the interfacial Fe site (site A in (c)) and the blue one from the interfacial Ti site (site B in (c)). Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing.	 
	(32)

 	Fig. 32  (a and d) Piezoresponse force microscopy and (b and e) conductive atomic force microscopy images of the cross-sectional BFO film in the BFO/TbScO3 heterostructures with 109° domain arrays. The cross-sectional BFO films in (a and b) and (d and e) are perpendicular and parallel to the 109° stripe domain, respectively. (c) Average current profile of the BFO/TbScO3 interface, corresponding to the dashed-line-marked region in (b). The white arrows in (a) and (d) indicate the three-dimensional polarization vectors of BFO. (f) I–V curves at the BFO/TbScO3 interface with upward and downward polarizations. The ‘Pup’ symbol indicates the polarization pointing towards the BFO/TbScO3 interface, and the ‘Pdown’ symbol shows the polarization pointing away from the interface. (g) Histogram of the current in upward-polarized and downward-polarized BFO shown in (b). (h) I–V curves of the BFO/TbScO3 interface with the directions perpendicular and parallel to the 109° stripe domain. The inset of (h) shows the current profile of the BFO/TbScO3 interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Layer-resolved density of states in the BFO/TbScO3 superlattices by first-principles calculations. (b) Domain structure of BFO with 109° domain arrays simulated with the phase-field theory. (c) Bound charge distribution of the BFO/TbScO3 interface along the domain stripe. (d) Potential distribution of the BFO/TbScO3 interface perpendicular to the domain stripe. The green arrows in (a) and white arrows in (b) indicate the ferroelectric polarization direction of BFO. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Top view of graphene, monolayer MoS2 and bilayered BFO. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Band structure of the BiAlO3/BiIrO3 superlattices, where the sz polarization is highlighted in blue (up) and red (down) colors. Adapted with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2015, American Physical Society. (c) Band structure of the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices with BFO/OIB termination, where the solid and dashed black lines represent the spin-up (spin-down) band without SOC. For the case with SOC in (c), the circle represents BiIrO3, and the spin projection is depicted by the color scale. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Band structure of the BFO/OIB model with the [100]- and [001]-oriented Fe spins, respectively. The circle represents BiIrO3, and the spin projection is depicted by the color scale. (b) Diagram of the valley-spin component for the BFO/BiIrO3 superlattices. Adapted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Topology of the prototype 16-cell Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 memory with a cross-bar architecture. The polarization in each cell is presented, where the blue (red) colour indicates upward (downward) polarization. (b) The induced VOC in each cell under the light of 20 mW cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 37  Designations of (a) data storage and (b) the logic switching microdevice prototype based on the Au/Cr/T-BFO/LSMO microarray. The red and blue colors in (a) and (b) represent the downward and upward ferroelectric polarizations, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Sketch of pre- and post-neurons connected by a synapse. (d) Sketch of the Pt/Co/BiFeO3/(Ca,Ce)MnO3 ferroelectric memristors. Adapted with permission from ref. 284. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Schematic pathways of photoelectrochemical degradation of rhodamine B by the BFO/TiO2 composite electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Retention test of (a) VOC and (b) JSC in the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructures under a halogen lamp of 20 mW cm−2. (c) P–E and (d) I–V curves of the Fe/BFO/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 heterostructure after repetitive polarization switching by a pulse of ±3 V with 1 ms. The blue and red colors refer to the upward and downward polarizations, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a and c) Diagram of modulated ferroelectric polarization switching of BFO on the SrTiO3 substrate with a (La,Sr)MnO3 buffer layer, where the polarization switches from downward (upward) to upward (downward) when BFO is exposed to Milli-Q water (acidic solution). The arrow indicates the out-of-plane component of ferroelectric polarization. (b and d) Piezoresponse force microscopy images of BFO before and after exposure to the aqueous solution, corresponding to (a) and (c), respectively. The scale bar in (b) and (d) is 2 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 350. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 40  Piezoresponse force microscopy images of (a) initially upward-polarized BFO, (b) downward-polarized BFO after being exposed to acidic solution and (c) cyclically switchable polarization of BFO after being exposed to Milli-Q water and acidic solution. The scale bar in (a–c) is 2 μm. (d) Out-of-plane component of polarization in initially upward-polarized BFO in aqueous solution with different PH values. (e) Schematics of printing and erasing the ferroelectric polarization of BFO by controlling the PH value of the aqueous solution in contact with the surface of BFO. (f) Piezoresponse force microscopy images of Chinese characteristic water from a calligraphy artwork. The scale bar in (f) is 10 μm. Adapted with permission from ref. 350. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
