Emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in lithium-ion batteries  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC05084A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC05084A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14570-14584Emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Yu-Xing 
            Yao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chong 
            Yan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Qiang 
            Zhang
          
        
      *
      Beijing Key Laboratory of Green Chemical Reaction Engineering and Technology, Department of Chemical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. E-mail: zhang-qiang@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      26th July 2020
    , Accepted 7th October 2020First published on 7th October 2020AbstractUnderstanding the electrode/electrolyte interfacial chemistry is the cornerstone of designing lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) with superior performance. Graphite has been exclusively utilized as the anode material in state-of-the-art LIBs, whose interfacial chemistry has a profound impact on battery life and power delivery. However, current understanding of the graphite/electrolyte interface is still incomplete because of its intricate nature, which has driven unremitting explorations and breakthroughs in the past few decades. On the one hand, the applications of emerging experimental and computational tools have led researchers to re-examine several decades-old problems, such as the underlying mechanism of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formation and the co-intercalation mystery. On the other hand, from anion-derived interfacial chemistry to artificial interphases, novel interfacial chemistry for graphite is being proposed to replace the traditional ethylene carbonate-derived SEI for better performances. By summarizing the latest advances in the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in LIBs, this review affords a fresh perspective on interface science and engineering towards next-generation energy storage devices.
1. Background
The Nobel prize in chemistry 2019 was rewarded to three distinguished electrochemists for their contribution to the invention of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), as this lightweight and rechargeable power source has energized the digital era since 1991.1,2 LIBs have been one of the major driving forces pushing the life of mankind and evolution of technology forward.3 They are now the dominant power supply in 3C portable devices and electric vehicle markets.4–6 As a trend for green development, stationary applications such as emergency power supplies and large-scale energy storage devices are starting to use LIBs for tuning the wind/solar power grid.7,8 Such broad applications inevitably raise high standards for LIBs, including long shelf and cycle life, increased safety and high power density.9–11
It is generally acknowledged that the above-mentioned performance metrics are largely determined by the graphite/electrolyte interfacial chemistry.12,13 Unlike the various alternatives of cathode materials for vast applications, the anode material has exclusively been graphite owing to its low operating potential (0.1 V vs. Li/Li+), high specific capacity (372 mA h g−1), low cost and environmental friendliness.14,15 Graphite will still be the main anode of choice until next-generation anode materials (such as silicon and Li metal) are ready towards practical applications. To ensure reversible lithiation/delithiation of graphite at the extreme potential where no electrolyte is thermodynamically stable, a Li+-conducting, electron-insulating, chemically and mechanically stable surface passivation film is a prerequisite.16,17 Moreover, such a film must protect graphite from being exfoliated by the co-intercalation of Li+–solvent complexes and maintain its structural integrity upon cycling. This indispensable surface film acts like a thin layer of electrolyte, which accounts for the nomenclature of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI).16 In commercial LIBs, ethylene carbonate (EC) is mainly responsible for the formation of a desirable SEI that guarantees stable cycling of graphite anodes.18–20 The understanding of the exclusive EC-derived interfacial chemistry in the academic and industrial community constitutes the foundation of the success of LIBs.
Although the graphite/electrolyte interface carries great weight in determining the life and performance of LIBs, it is poorly understood due to its ad hoc chemistry and lack of in situ characterization techniques.21 The mechanistic understanding of the graphite/electrolyte interfacial chemistry mainly focuses on two long-standing mysteries. The first mystery is the formation, chemical nature, structure, and evolution of SEI. Although the concept of SEI was first proposed in 1979, it remains today, according to Winter, the most important yet least understood component in rechargeable Li batteries.22 Fresh knowledge about SEI is constantly being updated especially in recent years, driven by the development of advanced characterization tools. The second mystery is to understand why and how certain electrolyte components form stable interphases (e.g., EC) while others cause co-intercalation (e.g., propylene carbonate, PC), with the most famous example being the “EC–PC disparity”.23,24 The answers to these two fundamental questions can potentially inspire new strategies to tailor favourable interphases in LIBs, which will lead to improved devices.
Actually, several promising interfacial chemistries are currently under active investigations to provide alternatives to traditional EC-derived interfacial chemistry. Even though EC-derived interfacial chemistry enables the operation of almost all commercial LIBs, it is unable to satisfy the increasing technological demands. For instance, the high melting point and high viscosity of EC makes it unsuitable for low temperature applications.18 Moreover, EC-based electrolytes are struggling to meet the standards of high-voltage and fast-charging batteries.14,25–27 Driven by such gap, researchers started to develop novel interfacial chemistry that could meet these demanding requirements in the past decade. Showing bright prospects are the anion-derived interfacial chemistry achieved by superconcentrated/weakly solvating electrolytes,28,29 and artificial interphases that decouple interfacial chemistry from the bulk electrolyte.30,31 These novel concepts of electrode/electrolyte interfaces have enabled many unique properties at the device level, such as long cycle life, fast-charging, and extension of the electrolyte stability window.
The aim of this review is to provide a fresh perspective on the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in current LIBs (Fig. 1). In Section 2, we introduce some major breakthroughs in the interfacial processes between the graphite electrode and the electrolyte, which are categorized into two parts. The first part includes several important contributions that provided new understanding on the formation, chemical nature, structure, and evolution of SEI by employing cutting-edge characterization techniques. The second part involves efforts trying to unravel the co-intercalation mystery. In Section 3, we focus on superconcentrated electrolytes (SCEs) and diluted superconcentrated electrolytes (DSCEs) that brings the idea of anion-derived interfacial chemistry, which has been an overwhelming research area in the past decade. Weakly solvating electrolytes (WSEs), which emerged recently as a new class of electrolytes that enable anion-derived interfacial chemistry, are also introduced. Section 4 presents the recent progress in artificial interphases, which serves as a promising way to prevent co-intercalation, enable fast-charging and widen the voltage windows of electrolytes through ex situ interphase manipulation. Current limitations and future perspectives are also included.
 Fig. 1  Recent advances in the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in lithium-ion batteries, which can be divided into two parts. The first part is the new fundamental insights into the interfacial processes of graphite anodes, including SEI formation and solvent co-intercalation. The second part is the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes that represents new concepts, including anion-derived interfacial chemistry and artificial interphases. 
2. Revisiting the intriguing graphite/electrolyte interfaces
The graphite/electrolyte interface is undoubtedly the most intriguing and most challenging territory of the science in LIBs.32 The complexity of graphite/electrolyte interfaces lies in two major aspects: the elusive manner of SEI formation, and the unpredictable reaction pathways between graphite and solvated Li+. The SEI arises from the decomposition of electrolyte components, but over the years various SEI components and divergent formation mechanisms are reported.33,34 The dynamic evolution of SEI is also insufficiently understood.35 The graphite intercalation compound can be either binary or ternary depending on whether Li+ intercalation or solvent co-intercalation occurs, which existing models can neither fully explain nor predict.36 Revisiting these intriguing problems requires emerging experimental and computational tools which can uncover insights at an unprecedented level.
New understanding of SEI
The concept of SEI was first proposed in 1979 by Peled.37 The SEI is the key factor that determines the life and safety of LIBs.38 However, precise information on the formation, chemical nature, structure, and evolution of SEI is incomplete, mainly due to the following reasons: (1) the chemical sensitivity of SEI towards air, moisture, and high-energy photon or electron beams used during characterization. These external interferences can inadvertently create artefacts that conceal important chemical information. (2) The lack of efficient characterization tools. Various spectroscopic analyses provide critical chemical information but fail to represent microstructures. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) or transmission electron microscopy (TEM) affords high spatial resolution, but reveals only limited molecular information.39 Nevertheless, ground-breaking understanding of SEI is obtained with the burgeoning applications of advanced characterization techniques in recent years.
Through combined in situ atomic force microscopy (AFM) and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM), Liu et al. recently characterized the initial formation process of SEI on the graphite electrode in a commercial EC-based electrolyte (Fig. 2a).21 Five distinct processes are confirmed: (1) LiF formation at 1.5 V; (2) co-intercalation of solvated Li+ at 0.88 V; (3) preliminary EC decomposition at 0.74 V to produce lithium alkylcarbonates; (4) further EC decomposition from 0.74 V down to 0 V; (5) the partial re-oxidation of lithium alkylcarbonates during reverse scan above 0.3 V. Such an unprecedented level of detail provides fresh insight into the formation of SEI. However, due to the accuracy limit of EQCM, the exact species of lithium alkylcarbonates cannot be determined. The primary product of EC decomposition is commonly believed to be lithium ethylene di-carbonate (LEDC), which is established by a body of literature.22,35,40–42 Therefore, both LEDC and LiF are labelled as the main SEI components, being consistent with previous reports. Interestingly, only one year later, this decade-old misconception was overthrown. Wang et al. successfully demonstrated that lithium ethylene mono-carbonate (LEMC) prevails as the dominant SEI ingredient (Fig. 2b).33 Their conclusion is based on two important findings. First, earlier efforts to synthetize the standard LEDC compound mistakenly produced LEMC due to the faulty synthetic route. Second, LEMC appears to be a good ionic conductor, while LEDC is almost an ionic insulator. They also suggested a complex interconversion and equilibria between multiple SEI components, which further confirms the sophisticated chemical nature of SEI.43
 Fig. 2  Advanced characterization methods afford fresh insights into the formation, chemical nature, structure and evolution of SEI. (a) Schematic illustration of SEI formation on graphite during the first lithiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2019 Nature. (b) Interconversion equilibria of different SEI components and the inferred authentic SEI structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2019 Nature. (c) An SEI structural model based on real-time mass spectrometric characterization. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2020 Nature. (d) Two different scenarios of SEI evolution, including a passivating, compact SEI imbedded with inorganic components and an extended SEI spanning hundreds of nanometers. Adapted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Very recently, Zhou et al. investigated the formation mechanism of SEI by applying liquid secondary ion mass spectrometry (liquid-SIMS) under operando conditions.44 They discovered that an electrical double layer forms prior to SEI and directs the structure of SEI. When the anode surface is negatively charged, anions are expelled from the inner layer, resulting in a thin and dense inner SEI mainly composed of Li2O. The inner SEI is responsible for the main functions of SEI, which is to conduct Li+ and eradicate electron tunnelling. The outer layer of SEI consists of loose organic oligomers permeable to electrolytes (Fig. 2c). Importantly, their findings reveal how fluorine can be introduced to the inner SEI. By introducing fluorine in solvent molecules or using superconcentrated electrolytes, fluorine-containing species can appear in the inner electric double layer and undergo subsequent decomposition.
Cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cyro-TEM) has achieved great success in characterizing sensitive battery materials during recent years.45–47 Huang et al. applied cyro-TEM to observe the SEI on carbon electrodes and investigated its evolution during repeated cycling.48 They identified two representative scenarios that lead to completely different electrochemical performances: a compact SEI embedded with various inorganic components, and an extended organic-rich SEI spanning hundreds of nanometers. The former leads to a well-passivated surface that guarantees stable cycling, and the latter causes increasing internal resistance that may be the main culprit of cell failure. The branching of these totally different SEI evolution patterns highlights the importance of constructing a chemically/mechanically stable SEI on graphite electrodes for long-life LIBs.
The co-intercalation mystery
A long-standing mystery in the history of LIBs is the famous “EC–PC disparity”. It has long been confounding that EC forms a stable SEI on graphite electrodes, while its close structural cousin, PC, induces severe co-intercalation that inhibits reversible Li+ intercalation. More broadly, why do a merely few solvents are able to generate a stable SEI while the majority of others fail to protect the graphite anode effectively? Combining density functional theory (DFT) calculation with electrochemical and spectral experiments, Xing et al. successfully explained the origin of “EC–PC disparity” by examining the molecular-scale interactions between the Li+ solvation sheath and graphite.36 It is revealed that the competitive solvation of solvent against fluorine-containing anions dictates the initial surface products (Fig. 3a). EC exhibits smaller solvation energy compared with PF6−, and therefore it is more likely to be stripped during the partial desolvation process. The remaining PF6− in the primary solvation sheath subsequently decomposes and creates abundant LiF that effectively passivates the graphite anode. In contrast, PC exhibits a stronger tendency to stay in the primary solvation sheath than PF6− Consequently, the co-intercalation of Li+–(PC)x is more likely to occur. Furthermore, Xing et al. pointed out that the decomposition products of EC and PC, namely LEDC and lithium propylene di-carbonate (LEPC), are also accountable for the distinct difference in interfacial behaviours. LEDC has a sufficiently flat configuration that enables a compact protective layer, while LEPC fails to pack densely and adhere to graphite due to its bent structure. This work affords a complete interfacial model to settle the controversial “EC–PC disparity”, in which the methodology can be transplanted to many other battery systems that contain intercalation-type anodes.
 Fig. 3  Interfacial models to explain the co-intercalation mystery. (a) Solvation energy of solvent and PF6− with Li+ in EC and PC electrolytes. Adapted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the desolvation process at the interface between electrode and electrolyte. (c) A molecular-scale model of the Li+ solvation structure with two key parameters: binding energy (L) and the effective volume/shape of solvent molecules evaluated using the Sterimol parameter (B). The values of these two parameters are calculated for different solvents as depicted in the diagram. (b) and (c) are adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Undoubtedly, the SEI plays an important role in determining the interfacial stability of graphite. However, because a transient co-intercalation process always precedes SEI formation, the role of the Li+ solvation structure cannot be overlooked. In their recent publications, Ming et al. suggested that researchers may have overstated the importance of SEI and underestimated the effect of the Li+ solvation structure on the interfacial behaviour of electrodes.49–51 They firstly proved that the SEI on graphite is not implantable.49 In other words, a SEI-protected graphite electrode cannot operate in electrolytes that are intrinsically unstable against graphite. Hence the Li+ solvation structure seems to prevail over SEI. Further, they proposed a molecular-scale interfacial model for predicting the interfacial stability of electrodes (Fig. 3b).50 According to their model, two key factors that characterize the strength and conformation of the Li+ solvation sheath determine the interfacial behaviour: the Li+–solvent binding energy (L) and the half distance between adjacent solvent molecules (B) (Fig. 3c). A large L indicates an energy-consuming desolvation process, while a larger B corresponds to looser stacking of solvents in the solvation sheath and a higher probability of co-intercalation. A design principle is put forward to regulate the compatibility of electrolytes with graphite anodes in LIBs. Additionally, the same group also found that additives can also enable reversible (de)lithiation of graphite in PC-based electrolytes by modifying the Li+ solvation structure.51 These new findings raise awareness about the importance of the Li+ solvation structure in dictating the interfacial reactions of graphite anodes, which serves as the key to solving the co-intercalation puzzle.
3. Anion-derived interfacial chemistry
Theoretically, the interfacial chemistry of graphite in EC-based electrolytes can be classified as solvent-derived because the formation of SEI is mainly due to the preferential reduction of EC.52 Since the 1990s, the skeleton formulation of electrolytes in all commercial LIBs has been 1.0 M LiPF6 in a solvent mixture of EC and linear carbonates, with minor variations among different manufacturers.18 The salt concentration is fixed at around 1.0 M for maximum ionic conductivity, and the application of EC guarantees stable cycling of graphite anodes. However, such an invariable electrolyte formula cannot catch up with the fast-changing battery chemistry and increasingly demanding operation conditions. Firstly, the high melting point (36.4 °C) and high viscosity (1.9 at 40 °C) of EC strongly limit the battery performance at low temperatures.18 Secondly, the high desolvation energy barrier of Li+–(EC)x complexes is widely believed to impede fast-charging.53,54 Thirdly, EC-based electrolytes are not compatible with high-voltage cathodes operating above 4.3 V because of the low anodic stability of EC relative to other electrolyte components (LiPF6 and linear carbonates).25,26 The flammability of carbonate-based electrolytes also raises serious safety concerns. However, if new solvents are introduced to tackle these problems, the stability of the anode is usually compromised because the reversible lithiation of graphite is highly sensitive to the change of electrolyte components. At this point, researchers started to realize that new interfacial chemistry, apart from the traditional EC-based one, is urgently needed to upgrade the performance of LIBs. From 2010 onwards, an emerging family of electrolytes has attracted tremendous attention in the field, which is superconcentrated electrolytes.28,55 Diluted superconcentrated electrolytes were then put forward as an improved version of superconcentrated electrolytes.56 Very recently, the concept of weakly solvating electrolytes adds a rising star into this family of electrolytes. SCEs, DSCEs and WSEs all lead to the formation of anion-derived interfacial chemistry that exhibits remarkable properties such as fast-charging, long-term cycling and inhibited parasitic reactions.28 This section presents recent advances in anion-derived interfacial chemistry that presents the most promising alternative to break the dependence of modern LIBs on EC.
Superconcentrated electrolytes
The definition of SCEs is ambiguous by nature, but typically refers to formulating electrolytes with salt concentration > 3.0 M. The earliest efforts to explore SCEs in LIBs aimed at circumventing the undesirable co-intercalation of PC-based electrolytes. For example, in 2003, Jeong et al. found that an electrolyte consisting of 2.72 M lithium bis(perfluoroethylsulfonyl)imide in PC enables reversible lithiation of graphite.57 However, the underlying mechanism was not clear at the time. During 2003–2010, researchers established the correlation between the Li+ solvation sheath and the reactions at the graphite/electrolyte interface.52,58–62 An important piece of knowledge is that the dominant species in the primary Li+ solvation sheath constitutes the precursor of SEI and undergoes preferential decomposition. The graphite/electrolyte interfacial chemistry is therefore linked to the bulk solution structure. This understanding served as an important foundation for further exploration of SCEs. From 2010 onwards, significant breakthroughs started to emerge.
In 2013, Lucht and co-workers investigated how increasing concentrations of LiPF6/PC electrolytes gradually enable reversible lithiation/delithiation of graphite (Fig. 4a).63 By combining spectroscopic analysis on the solvation structures, they inferred that the formation of Li+–PF6− ion pairs in SCEs produces LiF instead of LEPC as the main SEI component to stabilize the graphite electrode. Yamada and co-workers also discovered a similar phenomenon in the lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)amide/1,2-dimethoxyethane (LiFSI/DME) electrolyte, showing that elevated concentration can circumvent co-intercalation (Fig. 4b).64 The same group further confirmed that this pattern is universal for various solvents that are intrinsically unstable against graphite (e.g., tetrahydrofuran, sulfoxides and dimethyl sulfoxide).65 Therefore, they conducted a systematic investigation on the underlying mechanism.66 In conventional dilute electrolytes, Li+ is solvated by polar solvents and anions are excluded from the primary solvation sheath (Fig. 4c).67 However, anions inevitably appear in the primary solvation sheath in SCEs due to the abundance of anions and the scarcity of solvents. Contact ion pairs (CIPs) and aggregates (AGGs) prevail in SCEs as free solvents and free anions disappear. Such unique solution structure leads to modification of the frontier orbital levels, which alters the reductive decomposition behaviour. Fig. 4d presents the projected density of states (PDOS) obtained with density functional theory-based molecular dynamics (DFT-MD) for the superconcentrated lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide/acetonitrile (LiTFSI/AN) electrolyte.67 The lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) is located at AN in the dilute solution, suggesting that AN is prone to reduction at the surface of graphite. In the superconcentrated solution, new LUMOs appear and are located at TFSI−, suggesting that TFSI− should preferentially receive electrons in a reductive atmosphere. Consequently, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) detects abundant inorganic species including LiF, LixSOy, and Li sulfides, all derived from the anion decomposition. The picture of anion-derived interfacial chemistry is therefore completed.
 Fig. 4  Superconcentrated electrolyte creates new interfacial chemistry in LIBs. (a) Charge and discharge curves at different concentrations of LiPF6/PC electrolytes. Adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of natural graphite electrodes in 1.0 and 3.6 M LiFSI–DME electrolytes. Adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the solution structure in dilute and superconcentrated electrolytes. (d) PDOS profile of a concentrated 4.2 M LiTFSI/AN electrolyte obtained with first-principles DFT-MD simulations. The inset shows a magnified figure of the lowest energy-level edge of the conduction band. (e) F 1s and S 2p spectra of XPS revealing the surface composition of the graphite electrode cycled in a superconcentrated 4.2 M LiTFSI/AN electrolyte. (f) Fast-charging character of graphite electrodes in a commercial 1.0 M LiPF6/EC:DMC electrolyte and a superconcentrated 4.5 M LiFSI/AN electrolyte. (c), (d), (e) and (f) are adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
It is interesting to note that SCEs can enable fast-charging of graphite electrodes. Yamada and co-workers discovered that both LiFSI/DME and LiFSI/AN SCEs can sustain high-rate charging up to 5C, delivering capacities far exceeding that of the commercial EC counterpart (Fig. 4f).64,67 However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. The charging process can be divided into 4 distinct steps: (1) Li+ diffusion in electrolytes, (2) Li+ desolvation, (3) Li+ migration through the SEI, and (4) Li+ diffusion in graphite. Apparently, steps 1 and 4 cannot account for the fast-charging performance. This is because the Li+ diffusion coefficient in SCEs is lower than that in EC-based electrolytes, and Li+ diffusion in graphite is identical in both cases. Consequently, the fast-charging character of SCEs may be attributed to the fast desolvation process and the highly conductive SEI. The detailed mechanism is yet to be probed.
SCEs almost decouple the interfacial chemistry of graphite from the solvents used in the electrolyte. Since the concentrated anion always guarantees the stable operation of graphite, researchers can now choose freely from a wide spectrum of solvents to formulate functional electrolytes without worrying about their stability against graphite.68–71 Undoubtedly, this endows electrolyte engineering with much more possibility and flexibility. As a result, SCEs were deployed in full LIBs to showcase unique properties such as high-voltage operation and enhanced safety.
Developing high-voltage cathodes is the key to raise the energy density of LIBs. However, conventional EC-based electrolytes cannot work well with 5 V class cathodes. In light of this, Wang et al. reported a superconcentrated 1:1.1 LiFSI/DMC electrolyte to realize a high-voltage LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4/graphite battery with excellent cycling stability (Fig. 5a).72 The 1:1.1 LiFSI/DMC electrolyte inhibits the dissolution of both aluminium and transition metals due to its unique solution structure. It is worth noting that the 1:1.1 LiFSI/DMC electrolyte presents a comparable rate performance to the routine EC/DMC electrolyte even with substantially lower ionic conductivity, indicating a fast charge transport across interfaces (Fig. 5b). Alvarado et al. also reported an EC-free, sulfone-based SCE for high-voltage Li-ion batteries.73 For more examples on this topic, the readers can refer to a review specifically focusing on EC-free, high voltage electrolytes for graphite-based LIBs.25
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical and safety performance of SCEs in full batteries. (a) Cycling performance at 0.2C and (b) rate performance of a high-voltage LiNi05Mn1.5O4|natural graphite battery containing commercial and 1:1.1 LiFSI/DMC electrolytes. (a) and (b) are adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 Nature. (c) Cycling performance of the 1:2 LiFSI–TEP electrolyte with FEC–LiBOB additives in a commercial 18650 cell with graphite anode and LiCoO2 cathode. The rate is set at 0.05C. (d) Nail penetration test of 18650 cells containing a commercial carbonate electrolyte and the 1:2 LiFSI–TEP + FEC–LiBOB electrolyte. (c) and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018 Nature. 
Securing high safety in LIBs is crucial for applications ranging from mobile devices to electric cars. However, non-flammable solvents usually cause instability issues with the graphite anode. Wang et al. developed a SCE with non-flammable trimethyl phosphate as the solvent.74 The electrolyte is fire extinguishing, while at the same time it induces an anion-derived SEI that enables a graphite | Li cell to cycle 1000 times with negligible capacity decay. Similarly, Zeng et al. reported an electrolyte consisting of 1:2 LiFSI–triethyl phosphate (TEP) and fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC)–lithium bis(oxalate)borate (LiBOB) binary additives.75 The 1:2 LiFSI–TEP + FEC–LiBOB electrolyte enables commercial 18650 cells to maintain 90% capacity after 50 cycles (Fig. 5c) and pass the violent nail penetration test (Fig. 5d). These remarkable performances are not possible without the concept of superconcentration and the underlying anion-derived interfacial chemistry.
Diluted superconcentrated electrolytes
Although SCEs possess many advantages and are a key enabler of next-generation LIBs, two key issues impede their practical applications: high cost and high viscosity. In commercial LIBs, electrolytes are only second to cathode materials in terms of cost, and lithium salt is the most expensive component in electrolytes. Needless to say, the cost of SCEs is unacceptable for mass production. The viscosity of SCEs is often two magnitudes higher than that of commercial dilute electrolytes, which will considerably extend battery formation time to obtain sufficient wetting of separators and electrodes.28 A rather ingenious approach to tackle these two problems is the use of diluted superconcentrated electrolytes. The essence of this approach is to dilute SCEs with a non-polar co-solvent, which is miscible with SCEs but barely participates in the Li+ solvation sheath.76 In doing so, the overall Li salt concentration and viscosity are significantly reduced, but the local Li+ solvation structure is unchanged and so does the anion-derived interfacial chemistry. Therefore, DSCEs are also termed localized superconcentrated electrolytes, which is a vivid description of the underlying methodology.56
In recent years, DSCEs have been widely studied, but mostly the focus is on developing Li metal anodes.77,78 In 2018 Zhang and co-workers first proposed the concept of localized high-concentration electrolytes and applied the concept to high-voltage Li metal batteries.56 This study was immediately followed by many research studies across the field and the concept quickly became one of the most promising electrolyte design strategies to enable the application of metal anodes.77–80 However, the first report on the same concept dates back to 2013, when Dokko et al. used 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl-2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether (HFE or TTE) to dilute an LiTFSI/glyme (G4) equimolar mixture.81 Such a solvated ionic liquid electrolyte suppresses the dissolution of polysulfides, and results in high coulombic efficiency (CE) and stable cycling in Li–S batteries. At the time, a suitable nomenclature was not proposed for this ingenious idea.
The first report of DSCEs in LIBs emerged in 2015.82 Using the same HFE-diluted LiTFSI/G4 electrolyte, Moon et al. demonstrated the different electrochemical behaviour of graphite in 1.0 M LiTFSI–xG3–yHFE electrolytes by varying x and y (Fig. 6a). As the content of HFE increases, the reversibility of graphite lithiation/delithiation increases. The 1.0 M LiTFSI–1G3–4.46HFE electrolyte exhibits the highest reversibility comparable to a commercial EC-based electrolyte, and enables successful operation of a graphite|LiCoO2 battery (Fig. 6b). Although unmentioned, one can reasonably infer that the compatibility of this glyme-based electrolyte with graphite originates from the anion-derived interfacial chemistry. Despite the great potential of DSCEs, they have received much less attention in graphite-based LIBs compared with the extensive research with respect to Li metal batteries, possibly due to the more urgent need for advanced electrolytes to deal with the challenges in metal anodes.
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical performance and the graphite–electrolyte interface of DSCEs. (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of graphite electrodes in 1 M LiTFSI–xG3–yHFE electrolytes. (b) Cycling performance of a graphite|LiCoO2 battery containing the 1 M LiTFSI–1G3–4.46HFE electrolyte. (a) and (b) are adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Long term cycling of graphite|NMC811 cells within 2.7–4.4 V using a commercial EC-based electrolyte and three DSCEs. The three DSCEs all contain the same skeleton formula (1.4 M LiFSI in DMC/TTE, AE001), with VC (AE002) and EC (AE003) additives. (d) HRTEM image of the SEI on graphite after 100 cycles at 60 °C in graphite|NMC811 cells with the AE003 electrolyte. (c) and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. 
The first comprehensive report of DSCEs as advanced electrolytes in LIBs came late in 2020.83 Zhang et al. showcased that DSCEs can enable fast-charging, high-voltage (LiNixMnyCo1−x−yO2, NMC) LIBs in a wide temperature range. Three electrolytes containing the same skeleton formula (1.4 M LiFSI in DMC/TTE (AE001), with vinylene carbonate (VC) (AE002) and EC (AE003) as additives) are applied in graphite|NMC811 batteries. In particular, the AE003 electrolyte exhibits exceptional performance at ambient (25 °C), elevated (60 °C) and low (down to −40 °C) temperatures (Fig. 6c). The AE003 electrolyte also affords high-rate charging/discharging. A closer examination of the graphite anode reveals that DSCEs contribute to a thin, compact, and inorganic-rich SEI derived from anion decomposition (Fig. 6d). This work further implies that electrode–electrolyte interfaces, rather than conductivity or viscosity of the electrolyte, govern the performance of LIBs. Compared with EC-derived interfacial chemistry, anion-derived interfacial chemistry certainly opens a new way towards state-of-the-art LIBs containing graphite electrodes with remarkable performances. For a more comprehensive picture on SCEs and DSCEs, the readers can refer to other excellent reviews written by several prestigious experts in this field.28,84–87
Weakly solvating electrolytes
The mechanisms underpinning the anion-derived interfacial chemistry in SCEs and DSCEs are essentially the same: They both increase the anion/solvent ratio in electrolytes to force more anions into the inner solvation sheath of Li+. From another angle, since anions and solvents are competing to enter the Li+ solvation sheath, reducing the solvating ability of solvents can theoretically allow more anions to coordinate with Li+.88,89 Taking this idea to the extreme, Yao et al. successfully prepared a weakly solvating electrolyte consisting of a pure non-polar solvent and Li salt.29 It is demonstrated that this WSE has a peculiar solvation structure, where ion pairs and aggregates prevail under a normal salt concentration of 1.0 M. This unique solvation structure, resembling that of the SCEs, results in an anion-derived interphase on graphite with fast charge-transfer kinetics. Combined with density functional theory calculations, they unveiled a fundamental principle that the competitive coordination between solvents and anions is the origin of different interfacial chemistries. The concept of WSEs inaugurates a new research field for precise interface engineering in energy storage devices using rationally designed electrolytes. It is expected that more WSEs are going to be reported in the near future for a variety of battery chemistries with better device performance.
4. Artificial interphases
Electrolyte engineering is regarded as the most convenient way to manipulate interfaces in batteries. However, the structure–property relationship between electrolytes and their resultant interphases is not well understood. Consequently, electrolyte engineering cannot always guarantee interphases with desired properties, with try-and-error being inevitable. Artificial interphases emerged in recent years as a promising method to customize different interphases for realizing various functions. Artificial interphases have been a research hotspot in the field of alkali and alkaline-earth metal anodes in the past decade, because conventional liquid electrolytes are usually unable to form stable, ion-conducting interphases on these reactive metals.12,90–93 For graphite anodes in LIBs, artificial interphases can also realize a wide range of functions, such as preventing co-intercalation, enabling fast-charging and widening the voltage windows of electrolytes.
Preventing co-intercalation
Co-intercalation is typically deemed as an unwanted side reaction in graphite-based LIBs because it usually undermines the structure of graphite and leads to capacity fade, with PC being the most typical example. Although recent findings suggested that ether co-intercalation in graphite can achieve high reversibility, the limited theoretical capacity and high equilibrium potential significantly lower the overall energy density.94 Engineering artificial interphases is an effective way to inhibit solvent co-intercalation, which is typically achieved by ex situ chemical or physical pre-treatment of graphite. In most cases, neat PC-based electrolytes are employed to showcase the efficacy of artificial interphases. Another reason for choosing PC is that PC-based electrolytes render better low-temperature performance compared with EC-based electrolytes.
Metallic interphases were firstly exploited to inhibit solvent co-intercalation. Wu et al. found that the addition of Ag ions in PC-based electrolytes can generate a porous Ag film on mesocarbon microbeads (MCMB), which restrains the co-intercalation of PC.95 Gao et al. discovered that both Cu- and Ag-coated graphite can inhibit PC co-intercalation.96,97 However, the durability of metallic interphases may be unsatisfactory because the coated graphite electrodes can only sustain no more than 20 charge/discharge cycles. Polymer coatings were then found to be more effective than metal coatings, which serve not only as artificial interphases but also as the binder of electrodes. Three different oxygen-containing polymers, poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), poly(methacrylic acid) (PMA), and poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), were utilized as binders for graphite electrodes to replace poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF).98–100 It was demonstrated that PAA, PMA, and PVA can all suppress the co-intercalation of graphite in neat PC-based electrolytes, while PVDF cannot (Fig. 7a and b). It was inferred that the interaction between Li+ and the electron-donating oxygen atoms in the polymers facilitates the dissociation of Li+–(PC)x complexes, which helps to prevent co-intercalation. More importantly, introducing functional polymer binders to protect graphite electrodes is highly compatible with the existing manufacturing processes, and therefore it bears huge potential for industrialization.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of graphite protected by (a) PVDF- and (b) PAA-artificial interphases to inhibit PC co-intercalation. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
Enabling fast-charging
Fast-charging is a prerequisite for the mass adoption of electric vehicles.14 The bottleneck of fast-charging in commercial LIBs lies in graphite anodes because their operating potential (0.1 V vs. Li/Li+) is very close to Li plating. To avoid Li plating, Li+ intercalation at the graphite–electrolyte interface should be accelerated to reduce anode polarization during fast-charging. Engineering artificial interphases with high ion-transport capability is a promising way towards fast-charging LIBs.
Great efforts have been devoted to artificial metallic interphases and their effects on interfacial charge transport. For instance, Marassi and co-workers systematically studied the effect of a wide class of metal coatings, including Cu, Sn, Pb, Ni, Al, Pb, In, and Au, on the electrochemical behaviour of graphite anodes.101–106 Their main conclusions can be generalized as follows: (1) metal coatings significantly increase the Li+ intercalation rate especially at low temperatures. (2) The fast electrode reaction rate can be attributed to the catalytic effect of metals on the desolvation process, an increased electrode bulk conductivity and an accelerated Li+ transport through metal layers. (3) There is an optimum thickness of metal coating. Thin metal layers do not show an obvious effect, while above certain thickness the charge transfer resistance increases. In 2019, Tallman et al. demonstrated that artificial metallic interphases can significantly reduce anode polarization and inhibit Li plating in actual LIBs, which confirms the feasibility of this approach.107
Apart from metal coatings, various inorganic and polymer interphases have been extensively studied. For instance, Kim et al. fabricated edge-site-activated graphite with an amorphous silicon nanolayer interphase.108 This hybrid anode enables fast Li+ transport at the interface and inhibits Li plating even under harsh charging conditions. Analogously, an amorphous Al2O3 layer was implanted on the surface of graphite to improve the wettability of electrolytes.109 The surface-engineered graphite anode achieved a capacity retention of 97.2% even at a high rate of 4000 mA g-1 (Fig. 8a), exhibiting great potential for future high-power LIBs. As previously mentioned, polymer coatings can facilitate the desolvation process by altering the Li+ solvation structure. Wu and co-workers constructed an artificial interphase using polyethylene glycol tert-octylphenyl ether (PEGPE; C14H22O(C2H4O)n, n = 9–10) on the surface of graphite (Fig. 8b).110 The lone-pair electrons of oxygen atoms in ether groups can coordinate with Li+ to form a “dry coordinated” state, providing more Li+ transport pathways across the interface. As a result, coated graphite electrodes exhibited a capacity of 336 mA h g−1 even at 10C rate.
 Fig. 8  Improving the fast-charging capability of graphite anodes via artificial interphases. (a) Al2O3-coated graphite to increase the electrolyte wettability. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) Self-assembly of a polymer-based artificial interphase to accelerate Li+ transport across the graphite/electrolyte interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (c) A proof-of-concept graphite electrode with a Li dendrite suppression layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Li dendrite formation is the main culprit in fast-charging because it causes not only performance degradation but also severe safety concerns. Under harsh lithiation conditions where unwanted Li plating is inevitable, suppressing Li dendrite formation is crucial for minimizing the detrimental effect. Wu and co-workers demonstrated a proof-of-concept graphite electrode with a dendrite-suppressing layer composed of β-phase PVDF (Fig. 8c).111 The PVDF-coated graphite anode renders dendrite-free Li deposition either under deliberate over-lithiation (10% to 50%) or fast-charging up to 10C, with coulombic efficiency/capacity retention close to that of graphite anodes under normal lithiation conditions. This strategy (i.e., constructing artificial interphases on graphite to suppress Li dendrites) presents a promising way to improve battery stability and safety during fast-charging, and can be easily commercialized because the coating procedure is compatible with the current state-of-the-art electrode manufacturing process.
Widening voltage windows
The graphite anode operates at a potential (0.1 V vs. Li/Li+) close to that of Li metal (−3.04 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode). Its lithiated form, LiC6, is among the strongest reducing agents. Therefore, most aprotic organic solvents for LIBs rely on the formation of a solid electrolyte layer to kinetically stabilize the graphite–electrolyte interface. In recent years, the quest for intrinsically safe batteries has motivated the research of aqueous LIBs. Nevertheless, water provides a narrow electrochemical window of 1.23 V and is unable to form effective solid-state passivation layers, which strongly limits the overall energy density.112 At pH = 7.0, the cathodic limit of water is located at 2.62 V versus Li/Li+, which is far from the equilibrium potential of lithiated graphite.113 Furthermore, efforts to enhance the reductive stability of water are hindered by the formidable “cathodic challenge”. As the electrode potential is driven downwards, anions are expelled from the electrode surface as a large number of water molecules are absorbed with hydrogen directed towards the electrode, making hydrogen evolution reaction strongly favourable.113 Even in the most extreme cases of superconcentrated aqueous electrolytes, the cathodic limit of water can only be extended to 1.7–1.9 V, automatically ruling out all the high-energy anode materials (e.g., Li metal, 0 V; graphite, 0.1 V; silicon, 0.3 V).114–117 In these cases, even the anion-derived passivation is unable to stabilize the graphite/electrolyte interface. Enabling the operation of graphite anodes in aqueous electrolytes appears to be the ultimate challenge towards intrinsically safe and high-energy LIBs.
The only solution to this dilemma lies in artificial interphases. Yang et al. successfully protected the graphite electrode in a previously reported water-in-bisalt (WiBS) electrolyte, by using an “inhomogeneous additive” approach (Fig. 9a).113 By coating graphite with a hydrophobic gel consisting of LiTFSI, HFE, and polyethylene oxide, reversible lithiation/delithiation can proceed without the decomposition of water. Coupling the protected graphite anode with the LiVPO4F cathode, a 4.0 V aqueous LIB is demonstrated. Furthermore, they built a high-voltage aqueous LIB with an unprecedented energy density of 304 W h kg−1 (total mass of the electrode and electrolyte, Fig. 9b) by combining a novel halogen conversion–intercalation chemistry in graphite.118 By widening the voltage windows of aqueous electrolytes, artificial interphases serve as the cornerstone for achieving high-voltage aqueous LIBs beyond the capability of even the most state-of-the-art electrolytes.
 Fig. 9  An artificial interphase that enables graphite anodes to operate in aqueous electrolytes. (a) Surface coating of graphite and Li metal by adopting an “inhomogeneous additive” approach. The cyclic voltammograms are conducted in gel-WiBS with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (b) A high energy LIB consisting of a passivated graphite anode and a composite cathode based on halogen conversion–intercalation chemistry in graphite. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019 Nature. 
5. Summary and outlook
Graphite will continue to be the most ideal anode material in modern LIBs for many years to come. The intriguing chemistry between graphite and liquid electrolytes dictates the overall performance of LIBs, whose underlying mechanism may also provide design principles for other promising anode candidates (such as Li metal and silicon) and even other battery chemistries where interface and interphase are present. This review summarizes the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in LIBs, by presenting the latest advances in (1) the unsolved mysteries at the graphite/electrolyte interface, (2) the novel anion-derived interfacial chemistry achieved by superconcentrated electrolytes, and (3) artificial interphases that enable varied functions. These ground-breaking discoveries and concepts can be the key enabler of next-generation energy storage devices with remarkable performances.
A timeline showcasing the long journey of exploration of the interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes is presented in Fig. 10. The first-ever documented PC co-intercalation in graphite appeared in 1967 when researchers were attempting to deposit Li+ in different substrates. Unaware of interphase knowledge and the magical role of EC, they brushed past the most exciting energy storage technology in human history. Since the commercialization of LIBs in 1991, tremendous efforts have been devoted to exploring the interfacial chemistry in LIBs. The energy density of a LIB, with the first-generation prototype being 80 W h kg−1, is now approaching 300 W h kg−1. Looking back, one can confirm that significant progress has indeed been achieved, especially during the last 3 years due to the burgeoning of nanotechnology, characterization and computation. The subject of interface science in LIBs is certainly not reinventing known knowledge, as it has helped to create better devices in the last 30 years and will provide endless possibilities for the future.
 Fig. 10  A timeline showcasing the important discoveries in the interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes. It is the compelling history of lithium-ion batteries in miniature. The red texts describe ground-breaking mechanism advances and the green texts represent crucial engineering achievements. 
Future strategic directions of both mechanistic understanding and practical applications are presented below.
(1) Understanding interfaces. To further explore the rationale behind SEI formation and solvent co-intercalation, new characterization tools and computational tools are strongly requested. The uncharted structure–property relationship at the graphite/electrolyte interfaces can only be unveiled by methods that afford new insights at the microscopic level. Cyro-TEM, neutron diffraction, synchrotron X-ray analytical tools, in situ NMR/SIMS/Raman spectroscopy/XPS/AFM, and mixed Monte Carlo/molecular dynamics method are all promising techniques for future study on the interfacial chemistry of graphite. In particular, the application of these high-end research techniques should focus on the following issues: (a) the precise formation mechanism of SEI. Due to the ad hoc chemistry of SEI in different electrolyte/electrode systems, there is no general model to describe the formation process of SEI. The chemical sources of various SEI components are unclear, as some SEI components are suggested to exhibit complicated interconversion equilibria during evolution. (b) The underlying rationale of unwanted solvent co-intercalation. A direct link between solvent properties and interfacial reaction pathways is lacking. Understanding why and why not solvents co-intercalate into graphite is crucial for future electrolyte design. (c) The kinetics of interfacial reactions. It is widely believed that the desolvation process has the highest activation energy, but the kinetics of Li+ transport through the SEI has received much less attention. Moreover, quantifying the kinetics of SEI formation and growth has been an important but underexplored research theme. The kinetics of interfacial reactions in LIBs is closely related to rate performance, cell aging, and low-temperature performance.
(2) The Helmholtz layer. Although the correlation between solvation structure and interfacial processes is extensively studied, little attention is paid to the Helmholtz layer, which is a nanometer-thin space layer between the electrode surface and the bulk electrolyte phase. The Helmholtz layer cannot accommodate solvated ions, and is mainly composed of specifically adsorbed species. As discussed previously, the Helmholtz layer has a profound impact on the interfacial reactions and the formation of SEI. It bridges the gap between electrolyte structure and surface chemistry of electrodes.44,113,119 However, a universal model for describing the microstructure of the Helmholtz layer, as well as suitable characterization tools, is lacking. As preliminary findings have already identified its importance, future studies on the Helmholtz layer may reshape our understanding of the interfaces in batteries.
(3) Unwanted Li plating. Apart from Li+ intercalation and solvent co-intercalation, there is a third reaction pathway for the reduction of Li+ at the graphite/electrolyte interface: Li plating. Li plating is usually found when cells are subjected to fast-charging, low-temperature operation or unbalanced anode/cathode capacity ratio. Upon cycling, the plated Li metal gives rise to Li dendrites, electrolyte consumption and low coulombic efficiency. Li plating is the main culprit of safety hazards and capacity fade in commercial LIBs. Therefore, advanced interphase design for graphite-based LIBs should focus on eliminating Li plating. This can be achieved by employing anion-derived SEIs or artificial interphases with superior Li+ transport kinetics. Additionally, advanced electrolytes with high ionic conductivity, low desolvation energy barrier, low viscosity and wide temperature range are also effective.
(4) Superconcentrated electrolytes. SCEs and DSCEs are long-awaited technologies that represent the most promising advanced electrolyte systems in the next decade. Their unique solvation structures equip LIBs with a wide voltage range, a fast-charging ability, high safety, long-term stability and inhibited corrosion of current collectors. Current understanding of the anion-derived interfacial chemistry and other unique properties of SCEs and DSCEs appears to be satisfactory, if not complete. Future studies on SCEs and DSCEs should focus on two major aspects. Firstly, the cost of these electrolytes is very high. Most SCEs require high concentrations of LiFSI/LiTFSI, which are much more expensive than commercial LiPF6. Although DSCEs partially tackle this issue, the diluent used in DCSEs, usually a fluorinated ether, is also pricy. Therefore, future efforts should focus on inexpensive salts and diluents if the batteries are for civil use. Secondly, life-cycle assessment of the stability of SCEs and DSCEs in batteries should be conducted.
(5) Artificial interphases. An ideal artificial interphase for graphite in LIBs needs to satisfy a list of properties, including high ionic conductivity, sufficient electron insulation, excellent mechanical properties, high chemical/electrochemical stability, and good adhesion on the electrode surface. Building such an interphase requires ingenious chemical design and advanced coating techniques. In addition, constructing artificial interphases alters the manufacturing process of existing electrode materials. Therefore, the feasibility of the large-scale manufacture of coated electrode materials, as well as compatibility with the current production line, should be evaluated. Moreover, the compatibility of artificial interphases with other interphase enablers in commercial electrolytes (e.g., additives and co-solvents) must be considered, especially during long-term cycling.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21825501, 21805161, and U1801257), the National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFA0202500), and the Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program.
Notes and references
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1569 RSC .
J. Deng, C. Bae, A. Denlinger and T. Miller, Joule, 2020, 4, 511 CrossRef .
J. E. Knoop and S. Ahn, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 47, 86 CrossRef .
R. Wang, W. Cui, F. Chu and F. Wu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 145 CrossRef .
J. B. Hou, M. Yang, D. Y. Wang and J. L. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904152 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thresher, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 453 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, M. Li, J. Lu, J. Liu and K. Amine, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 200 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Deng and G. Chen, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 154 CrossRef .
M. Yuan and K. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 43, 58 CrossRef .
C. Yan, R. Xu, Y. Xiao, J. F. Ding, L. Xu, B. Q. Li and J. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909887 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and A. Manthiram, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 527 RSC .
W. Cai, Y. X. Yao, G. L. Zhu, C. Yan, L. L. Jiang, C. He, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3806 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Lu, P. Adelhelm, M. M. Titirici and Y. S. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4655 RSC .
E. Peled and S. Menkin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1703 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, Y.-X. Yao, W.-L. Cai, L. Xu, S. Kaskel, H. S. Park and J.-Q. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 49, 335 CrossRef .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fong, U. Vonsacken and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2009 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Lin, X. Bi, L. Tian, K. Yang, J. Liu, M. Li, Z. Chen, J. Lu, K. Amine, K. Xu and F. Pan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, Z. Phys. Chem., 2009, 223, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A751 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wagner, J. H. Albering, K. C. Moeller, J. O. Besenhard and M. Winter, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 947 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and E. Paillard, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2018, 12, 577 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, A. Dolocan, J. Li, Q. Xie and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901152 CrossRef .
G. L. Zhu, C. Z. Zhao, J. Q. Huang, C. He, J. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Xu, H. Yuan and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1805389 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, J. H. Wang, S. Ko, E. Watanabe and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Yao, X. Chen, C. Yan, X. Q. Zhang, W. L. Cai, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202011482 .
Z. Zhu and X. Chen, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4115 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and Y. Tang, Chem. Res. Chinese. Univ., 2020, 36, 402 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu and A. von Cresce, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9849 RSC .
L. Wang, A. Menakath, F. Han, Y. Wang, P. Y. Zavalij, K. J. Gaskell, O. Borodin, D. Iuga, S. P. Brown, C. Wang, K. Xu and B. W. Eichhorn, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 789 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, P. Maire and P. Novák, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6332 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Heiskanen, J. Kim and B. L. Lucht, Joule, 2019, 3, 2322 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xing, X. Zheng, M. Schroeder, J. Alvarado, A. von Wald Cresce, K. Xu, Q. Li and W. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 282 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Eineli, O. Chusid, Y. Carmeli, M. Babai and H. Yamin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 603 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nie, D. Chalasani, D. P. Abraham, Y. Chen, A. Bose and B. L. Lucht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1257 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Zhuang, K. Xu, H. Yang, T. R. Jow and P. N. Ross, Jr., J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17567 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, G. V. Zhuang, J. L. Allen, U. Lee, S. S. Zhang, P. N. Ross, Jr. and T. R. Jow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7708 CrossRef CAS .
O. Chusid, Y. E. Ely, D. Aurbach, M. Babai and Y. Carmeli, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 47 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, M. Su, X. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. G. Wang, X. Ren, R. Cao, W. Xu, D. R. Baer, Y. Du, O. Borodin, Y. Wang, X. L. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Xu, C. Wang and Z. Zhu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 224 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Zachman, Z. Tu, S. Choudhury, L. A. Archer and L. F. Kourkoutis, Nature, 2018, 560, 345 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Li, A. Pei, K. Yan, Y. Sun, C. L. Wu, L. M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Science, 2017, 358, 506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Huang, Y. Li, A. Pei, D. T. Boyle and Y. Cui, Joule, 2018, 2, 2167 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, P. M. Attia, H. Wang, S. E. Renfrew, N. Jin, S. Das, Z. Zhang, D. T. Boyle, Y. Li, M. Z. Bazant, B. D. McCloskey, W. C. Chueh and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5140 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, Z. Cao, W. Wahyudi, M. Li, P. Kumar, Y. Wu, J.-Y. Hwang, M. N. Hedhili, L. Cavallo, Y.-K. Sun and L.-J. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 335 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, Z. Cao, Q. Li, W. Wahyudi, W. Wang, L. Cavallo, K.-J. Park, Y.-K. Sun and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1584 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, Z. Cao, Y. Wu, W. Wahyudi, W. Wang, X. Guo, L. Cavallo, J.-Y. Hwang, A. Shamim, L.-J. Li, Y.-K. Sun and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2613 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Y. F. Lam, S. S. Zhang, T. R. Jow and T. B. Curtis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, A. von Cresce and U. Lee, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11538 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A162 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, J. A. Lochala, A. Kwok, Z. D. Deng and J. Xiao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700032 CrossRef .
S. Chen, J. Zheng, D. Mei, K. S. Han, M. H. Engelhard, W. Zhao, W. Xu, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706102 CrossRef .
S.-K. Jeong, M. Inaba, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A13 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abe, F. Sagane, M. Ohtsuka, Y. Iriyama and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A2151 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, Y. Koyama, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8948 CrossRef CAS .
A. von Wald Cresce, O. Borodin and K. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26111 CrossRef CAS .
A. von Cresce and K. Xu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A154 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nie, D. P. Abraham, D. M. Seo, Y. Chen, A. Bose and B. L. Lucht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, M. Yaegashi, T. Abe and A. Yamada, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11194 RSC .
Y. Yamada, K. Usui, C. H. Chiang, K. Kikuchi, K. Furukawa and A. Yamada, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10892 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sodeyama, Y. Yamada, K. Aikawa, A. Yamada and Y. Tateyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14091 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, K. Furukawa, K. Sodeyama, K. Kikuchi, M. Yaegashi, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5039 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lv, P. Yan, Y. Shao, Q. Li, S. Ferrara, H. Pan, G. L. Graff, B. Polzin, C. Wang, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13454 RSC .
X. R. Liu, L. Wang, L. J. Wan and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9573 CrossRef CAS .
R. Petibon, C. P. Aiken, L. Ma, D. Xiong and J. R. Dahn, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 287 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, J. Tao, P. Yan, W. A. Henderson, Q. Li, Y. Shao, M. L. Helm, O. Borodin, G. L. Graff, B. Polzin, C. M. Wang, M. Engelhard, J. G. Zhang, J. J. De Yoreo, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1602 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, C. H. Chiang, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12032 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alvarado, M. A. Schroeder, M. Zhang, O. Borodin, E. Gobrogge, M. Olguin, M. S. Ding, M. Gobet, S. Greenbaum, Y. S. Meng and K. Xu, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, E. Watanabe, K. Takada, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2017, 3, 22 CrossRef .
Z. Q. Zeng, V. Murugesan, K. S. Han, X. Y. Jiang, Y. L. Cao, L. F. Xiao, X. P. Ai, H. X. Yang, J. G. Zhang, M. L. Sushko and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 674 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, C. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xu and J. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6783 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Ren, S. R. Chen, H. Lee, D. H. Mei, M. H. Engelhard, S. D. Burton, W. G. Zhao, J. M. Zheng, Q. Y. Li, M. S. Ding, M. Schroeder, J. Alvarado, K. Xu, Y. S. Meng, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Chem, 2018, 4, 1877 CAS .
L. Yu, S. Chen, H. Lee, L. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, Q. Li, S. Jiao, J. Liu, W. Xu and J.-G. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2059 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Chen, J. M. Zheng, L. Yu, X. D. Ren, M. H. Engelhard, C. J. Niu, H. Lee, W. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1548 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Ren, L. F. Zou, X. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, W. Liu, S. D. Burton, H. Lee, C. J. Niu, B. E. Matthews, Z. H. Zhu, C. M. Wang, B. W. Arey, J. Xiao, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1662 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dokko, N. Tachikawa, K. Yamauchi, M. Tsuchiya, A. Yamazaki, E. Takashima, J.-W. Park, K. Ueno, S. Seki, N. Serizawa and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A1304 CrossRef CAS .
H. Moon, T. Mandai, R. Tatara, K. Ueno, A. Yamazaki, K. Yoshida, S. Seki, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3957 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhang, L. F. Zou, Y. B. Xu, X. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, B. E. Matthews, L. R. Zhong, H. P. Wu, H. Jia, X. D. Ren, P. Y. Gao, Z. H. Chen, Y. Qin, C. Kompella, B. W. Arey, J. Li, D. Y. Wang, C. M. Wang, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2406 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, Electrochemistry, 2017, 85, 559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 1056 CrossRef .
Y. Yamada, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 109 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Fan, X. Ji, L. Chen, J. Chen, T. Deng, F. D. Han, J. Yue, N. Piao, R. X. Wang, X. Q. Zhou, X. Z. Xiao, L. X. Chen and C. S. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 882 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, H. Wang, X. Kong, W. Huang, Y. Tsao, D. G. Mackanic, K. Wang, X. Wang, W. Huang, S. Choudhury, Y. Zheng, C. V. Amanchukwu, S. T. Hung, Y. Ma, E. G. Lomeli, J. Qin, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 526 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Lin, P. Y. Yuen, K. Liu, J. Xie, R. H. Dauskardt and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605531 CrossRef .
R. Xu, Y. Xiao, R. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, C. Z. Zhao, X. Q. Zhang, C. Yan, Q. Zhang and J. Q. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808392 CrossRef .
C. Yan, X. B. Cheng, Y. Tian, X. Chen, X. Q. Zhang, W. J. Li, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707629 CrossRef .
C. Yan, X. B. Cheng, Y. X. Yao, X. Shen, B. Q. Li, W. J. Li, R. Zhang, J. Q. Huang, H. Li and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804461 CrossRef .
H. Kim, K. Lim, G. Yoon, J.-H. Park, K. Ku, H.-D. Lim, Y.-E. Sung and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700418 CrossRef .
M.-S. Wu, J.-C. Lin and P.-C. J. Chiang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wu and R. Holze, Solid State Ionics, 2007, 178, 1225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, H. P. Zhang, L. J. Fu, T. Zhang, Y. P. Wu, T. Takamura, H. Q. Wu and R. Holze, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, T. Ozeki and K. Okushi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 197 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki, K. Okushi, H. Yui, K. Konno, Y. Katayama and T. Miura, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6069 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ui, S. Kikuchi, F. Mikami, Y. Kadoma and N. Kumagai, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 518 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, S. Dsoke, T. Mecozzi and R. Marassi, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 536 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, S. Dsoke, M. Mancini, R. Tossici and R. Marassi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 845 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mancini, F. Nobili, S. Dsoke, F. D’Amico, R. Tossici, F. Croce and R. Marassi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 141 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, S. Dsoke, M. Mancini and R. Marassi, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 264 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, M. Mancini, P. E. Stallworth, F. Croce, S. G. Greenbaum and R. Marassi, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marinaro, M. Mancini, F. Nobili, R. Tossici, L. Damen and R. Marassi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 66 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Tallman, B. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Yan, K. Thompson, X. Tong, J. Thieme, A. Kiss, A. C. Marschilok, K. J. Takeuchi, D. C. Bock and E. S. Takeuchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46864 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim, S. Chae, J. Ma, M. Ko and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 812 CrossRef .
D. S. Kim, Y. E. Kim and H. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 422, 18 CrossRef CAS .
F.-S. Li, Y.-S. Wu, J. Chou, M. Winter and N.-L. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, C.-E. Wu, L.-Y. Su, S.-S. Huang, C.-C. Fang, Y.-S. Wu, J. Chou and N.-L. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 406, 63 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, D. Oh, Y. Lin, Z. Zhuo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, F. Wang, A. Kushima, Z. Wang, H. C. Kim, Y. Qi, W. Yang, F. Pan, J. Li, K. Xu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18670 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. Chen, T. Qing, X. Fan, W. Sun, A. von Cresce, M. S. Ding, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, M. A. Schroeder, N. Eidson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2017, 1, 122 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Zhang, Q. Li, J. Vatamanu, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, C. Cui, S. Hou, J. Chen, C. Yang, L. Ma, M. S. Ding, M. Garaga, S. Greenbaum, H.-S. Lee, O. Borodin, K. Xu and C. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 968 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, K. Usui, K. Sodeyama, S. Ko, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16129 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, J. Chen, X. Ji, T. P. Pollard, X. Lü, C.-J. Sun, S. Hou, Q. Liu, C. Liu, T. Qing, Y. Wang, O. Borodin, Y. Ren, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nature, 2019, 569, 245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, H. R. Li, X. Chen, X. Q. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, R. Xu, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9422 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Recent advances in the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes in lithium-ion batteries, which can be divided into two parts. The first part is the new fundamental insights into the interfacial processes of graphite anodes, including SEI formation and solvent co-intercalation. The second part is the emerging interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes that represents new concepts, including anion-derived interfacial chemistry and artificial interphases.	 

 	Fig. 2  Advanced characterization methods afford fresh insights into the formation, chemical nature, structure and evolution of SEI. (a) Schematic illustration of SEI formation on graphite during the first lithiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2019 Nature. (b) Interconversion equilibria of different SEI components and the inferred authentic SEI structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2019 Nature. (c) An SEI structural model based on real-time mass spectrometric characterization. Adapted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2020 Nature. (d) Two different scenarios of SEI evolution, including a passivating, compact SEI imbedded with inorganic components and an extended SEI spanning hundreds of nanometers. Adapted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Interfacial models to explain the co-intercalation mystery. (a) Solvation energy of solvent and PF6− with Li+ in EC and PC electrolytes. Adapted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of the desolvation process at the interface between electrode and electrolyte. (c) A molecular-scale model of the Li+ solvation structure with two key parameters: binding energy (L) and the effective volume/shape of solvent molecules evaluated using the Sterimol parameter (B). The values of these two parameters are calculated for different solvents as depicted in the diagram. (b) and (c) are adapted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Superconcentrated electrolyte creates new interfacial chemistry in LIBs. (a) Charge and discharge curves at different concentrations of LiPF6/PC electrolytes. Adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of natural graphite electrodes in 1.0 and 3.6 M LiFSI–DME electrolytes. Adapted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the solution structure in dilute and superconcentrated electrolytes. (d) PDOS profile of a concentrated 4.2 M LiTFSI/AN electrolyte obtained with first-principles DFT-MD simulations. The inset shows a magnified figure of the lowest energy-level edge of the conduction band. (e) F 1s and S 2p spectra of XPS revealing the surface composition of the graphite electrode cycled in a superconcentrated 4.2 M LiTFSI/AN electrolyte. (f) Fast-charging character of graphite electrodes in a commercial 1.0 M LiPF6/EC:DMC electrolyte and a superconcentrated 4.5 M LiFSI/AN electrolyte. (c), (d), (e) and (f) are adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical and safety performance of SCEs in full batteries. (a) Cycling performance at 0.2C and (b) rate performance of a high-voltage LiNi05Mn1.5O4|natural graphite battery containing commercial and 1:1.1 LiFSI/DMC electrolytes. (a) and (b) are adapted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 Nature. (c) Cycling performance of the 1:2 LiFSI–TEP electrolyte with FEC–LiBOB additives in a commercial 18650 cell with graphite anode and LiCoO2 cathode. The rate is set at 0.05C. (d) Nail penetration test of 18650 cells containing a commercial carbonate electrolyte and the 1:2 LiFSI–TEP + FEC–LiBOB electrolyte. (c) and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical performance and the graphite–electrolyte interface of DSCEs. (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of graphite electrodes in 1 M LiTFSI–xG3–yHFE electrolytes. (b) Cycling performance of a graphite|LiCoO2 battery containing the 1 M LiTFSI–1G3–4.46HFE electrolyte. (a) and (b) are adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) Long term cycling of graphite|NMC811 cells within 2.7–4.4 V using a commercial EC-based electrolyte and three DSCEs. The three DSCEs all contain the same skeleton formula (1.4 M LiFSI in DMC/TTE, AE001), with VC (AE002) and EC (AE003) additives. (d) HRTEM image of the SEI on graphite after 100 cycles at 60 °C in graphite|NMC811 cells with the AE003 electrolyte. (c) and (d) are adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustrations of graphite protected by (a) PVDF- and (b) PAA-artificial interphases to inhibit PC co-intercalation. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Improving the fast-charging capability of graphite anodes via artificial interphases. (a) Al2O3-coated graphite to increase the electrolyte wettability. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) Self-assembly of a polymer-based artificial interphase to accelerate Li+ transport across the graphite/electrolyte interface. Adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (c) A proof-of-concept graphite electrode with a Li dendrite suppression layer. Adapted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  An artificial interphase that enables graphite anodes to operate in aqueous electrolytes. (a) Surface coating of graphite and Li metal by adopting an “inhomogeneous additive” approach. The cyclic voltammograms are conducted in gel-WiBS with an Ag/AgCl reference electrode and active carbon counter electrode. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (b) A high energy LIB consisting of a passivated graphite anode and a composite cathode based on halogen conversion–intercalation chemistry in graphite. Adapted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2019 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  A timeline showcasing the important discoveries in the interfacial chemistry of graphite anodes. It is the compelling history of lithium-ion batteries in miniature. The red texts describe ground-breaking mechanism advances and the green texts represent crucial engineering achievements.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
