Applications and trends in electrochemiluminescence  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B923679C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B923679C
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3275-3304Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsApplications and trends in electrochemiluminescence

        
          
            Lianzhe 
            Hu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Guobao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, People’s Republic of China. E-mail: guobaoxu@ciac.jl.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85262747;   Tel: +86-431-85262747
bGraduate University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100864, People’s Republic of China
Received 
      28th January 2010
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      1st July 2010
    AbstractElectrochemiluminescence (ECL) is chemiluminescence triggered by electrochemical techniques. More than 150 ECL assays with remarkably high sensitivity and extremely wide dynamic range are currently available, and accounts for hundreds of millions of dollars in sales per year. The recent development of ECL is particularly rapid. After a brief introduction to ECL, this critical review presents the active and/or emerging areas of ECL research as well as new applications and phenomena of ECL, such as light-emitting electrochemical cell, wireless electrochemical microarray using ECL as photonic reporter, high throughput analysis, aptasensors, immunoassays and DNA analysis, ECL of nanoclusters and carbon nanomaterials, ECL imaging techniques, scanning ECL microscopy, colorimetric ECL sensor, surface plasmon-coupled ECL, electrostatic chemiluminescence, soliton-like ECL waves, ECL investigation of molecular interaction, and single molecule detection. Finally, some perspectives on this rapidly developing field are discussed (322 references).
Lianzhe Hu
Lianzhe Hu obtained his Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry from Jilin University. He is presently studying for a PhD under the guidance of Professor Guobao Xu at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include electrochemiluminescence and aptasensors.
Guobao Xu
Guobao Xu received his BSc in chemistry from Jilin University, his MSc from Xiamen University, and his PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. After postdoctoral research at the University of Hong Kong, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and NTT Microsystem Integration Laboratories, he joined Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry as a Professor. His research interests include electrochemiluminescence, single-walled carbon nanohorns, biosensors, synthesis and applications of nanomaterials, and electrochemistry. He won Young Scholar Award of the Chinese Chemical society in 2005, and Excellent Youth Award of the Chinese Society of Electrochemistry and the Second Class Award of National Natural Science of China in 2009.
1. Introduction
Electrochemiluminescence (ECL), also referred to as electrogenerated chemiluminescence, is chemiluminescence triggered by electrochemical methods.1–15 Analogous to chemiluminescence, ECL does not require the use of external light sources. The smart combination of chemiluminescence and electrochemistry brings ECL many potential advantages.1–15 First, some reactants can be electrochemically regenerated at the electrode. The regeneration of these reactants allows them to take part in ECL reactions again in an excess of coreactants that can react with ECL luminophores to produce light. As a result, many photons are produced per measurement cycle. This greatly enhances the sensitivity of the technique. For example, Ru(bpy)32+ can be highly sensitively detected at subpicomolar concentrations with an extremely wide dynamic range of greater than six orders of magnitude. The regeneration of reactants also enables the development of light-emitting devices (LEDs), simplifies the instrument, and saves reactants. Second, extremely unstable chemiluminescence reagents and intermediates can be electrogenerated in situ, and chemiluminescence analysis that needs extremely unstable reagent can be easily carried out by ECL analysis. Consequently, ECL can also avoid the problem of instable reagents in some chemiluminescence systems, including some important systems such as Ru(bpy)32+ ECL and luminol ECL. Third, it is possible to electrochemically transform some compounds to species that can take part in a chemiluminescence reaction that would otherwise be inactive, and hence extends the range of analytes detectable with a particular chemiluminescence reaction. Fourth, it allows greater control over the position of emission since the ECL emission is close to the electrode surface. The better control over the emission position is beneficial for sensitivity, selectivity, multi-analytes detection, and imaging analysis. For example, nonseparation assays can be performed by the combination of ECL with magnetic bead technology because of dramatic difference in the ECL signal of bound and unbound fractions. The control over position also enables the determination of multi-analytes in the same sample by using multi-electrodes and the development of ECL microscopy including scanning ECL microscopy. Fifth, it allows greater control over the time of ECL reactions, and thus improves reproducibility and simplifies operation. Sixth, the current signal and light signal are obtained simultaneously, facilitating the investigation of light emission mechanism by electrochemical methods, the investigation of electrochemical reactions by ECL, as well as simultaneous ECL and electrochemical detection. Finally, ECL is relatively benign and user-friendly in some cases, since it eliminates the use of toxic and/or corrosive reagents required in some chemiluminescent systems, including the popular Ru(bpy)32+ system. On the other hand, the requirement for electrochemical techniques in ECL results in some limitations for analytical applications. For example, ECL requires an electrochemical setup and the frequent renewal of electrode surfaces to ensure good reproducibility. Generally, ECL occurs in the vicinity of electrode surface. Thus it is much weaker than chemiluminescence, and has higher demand on the sensitivity of light detectors. It is more difficult to couple ECL with capillary electrophoresis than chemiluminescence since ECL needs suitable setup to avoid the effect of high voltage of capillary electrophoresis.
The first detailed investigations of ECL emission were reported in the mid-1960s involving organic compounds,16–18 although reports concerning light emission during electrolysis date back to the 1920s.19,20 The ECL studies of Ru(bpy)32+ and its analogs began in the 1970s.21,22 However, analytical applications of ECL appeared in the literature sporadically throughout the 1970s and only really took hold in the 1980s. Over the next two decades, ECL developed rapidly and has emerged as a very powerful technique. Commercial ECL immunoassays and DNA probe assays have been widely used in the areas of clinical diagnostics, food and water testing, environmental monitoring, biowarfare agent detection, and scientific research. ECL has also been exploited for the determination of numerous analytes, particularly amine-containing analytes, by combining with high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), flow injection analysis (FIA), capillary electrophoresis (CE), and micro total analysis systems (μTAS). A comprehensive ECL monograph was published in 2004,1 and several excellent reviews on ECL have appeared.1–15 Most reviews focus on analytical applications of ECL. New ECL systems, applications, and phenomena teem. Therefore, in this critical review, we will concentrate our attention on new developments and the demonstration of various intriguing applications of ECL.
2. Fundamentals of ECL
There are two dominant pathways through which ECL can be produced, namely the annihilation and coreactant pathways.1 In addition, ECL can be also achieved by hot electron-induced pathway and electrostatic chemiluminescence.
2.1 Annihilation pathway
In the annihilation pathway, both oxidized and reduced species are produced on the electrode surface by a potential step or sweep. These species then interact to produce a ground state and an electronically excited state which then relaxes by emission. The annihilation ECL is generally produced as follows (eqn (1)–(6)), where 1A* and 3A* represent singlet state species and triplet state species, respectively. A → A˙+ + e−(1) A → A˙− − e−(2) A˙+ + A˙− → A + 1A*(3)or A˙+ + A˙− → A + 3A*(4) 3A* + 3A* → A + 1A*(5) A* → A + hv(6) In systems with sufficient energy, the light emission process is defined as to follow the singlet route “S-route” (eqn (1)–(3)), because 1A* will be directly generated. Most ECL systems based on aromatic compounds are in accordance with this kind of mechanism.23,24 In contrast, in systems with insufficient energy, the triple state energy 3A* will first be produced, then 1A* will be generated by subsequent annihilation of 3A* (triplet–triplet annihilation), and this reaction is said to follow the “T-route” (eqn (4)–(6)). A typical example of triplet–triplet annihilation is the ECL of DPA/TMPD (DPA = 9,10-diphenylanthracene and TMPD = N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine) system,25 and many ECL reactions with different precursors follow this route.8 ECL based on annihilation pathway is frequently used in light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs),1 and LECs will be described in section 6.1.
2.2 Coreactant pathway
In the coreactant pathway, ECL is usually generated by one directional potential scanning on the electrode in the presence of both the luminophore and corectant. For example, oxalate ion (C2O42−) is the first coreactant discovered.21 ECL of Ru(bpy)32+/oxalate system is produced as follows (eqn (7)–(13)).21,26 A very interesting phenomenon in this system is that the oxidation of oxalate leads to the generation of a strong reductant CO2˙−, instead of an oxidant. And ECL systems involving the generation of reductants by electrochemical oxidation are referred to as “oxidative-reductive” ECL systems. Ru(bpy)32+ − e− → Ru(bpy)33+(7) Ru(bpy)33+ + C2O42− → Ru(bpy)32+ + C2O4˙−(8) C2O4˙− → CO2˙− + CO2(9) Ru(bpy)33+ + CO2˙− → Ru(bpy)32+* + CO2(10) Ru(bpy)32+ + CO2˙− → Ru(bpy)3+ + CO2(11) Ru(bpy)33+ + Ru(bpy)3+ → Ru(bpy)32+ + Ru(bpy)32+*(12) Ru(bpy)32+* → Ru(bpy)32+ + hv(13)Another example of the “oxidative-reductive” system is the popular Ru(bpy)32+/tripropylamine (TPrA) system,27–30 which is currently the basis of the commercial ECL immunoassays and DNA analyses. The mechanism for this system has been elucidated in detail in recent years.30 As shown in Fig. 1, there are four possible reaction routes of this system. In Scheme 1, Fig. 1, the ECL reactions occur as follows (eqn (14)–(18)). Both Ru(bpy)32+ and TPrA are oxidized at the electrode surface, and Ru(bpy)33+ is reduced by TPrA˙ to produce the excited state. Ru(bpy)32+ − e− → Ru(bpy)33+(14) TPrA − e− → TPrA˙+(15) TPrA˙+ → TPrA˙ + H+(16) Ru(bpy)33+ + TPrA˙ → Ru(bpy)32+* + products(17) Ru(bpy)32+* → Ru(bpy)32+ + hv(18)In Scheme 2, Fig. 1, Ru(bpy)32+ is reduced by TPrA˙, and Ru(bpy)3+ reacts directly with Ru(bpy)33+ to form the excited state and then emit light. In Scheme 3, only Ru(bpy)33+ is generated at the electrode surface, TPrA is oxidized by the generated Ru(bpy)33+. The contribution of this process to the overall ECL intensity depends upon the Ru(bpy)32+ concentration and is not favoured when Ru(bpy)32+ concentrations are low. The process of Scheme 4, Fig. 1, occurs with the direct oxidation of TPrA at the electrode to generate TPrA˙+ and TPrA˙. The subsequent reaction between TPrA˙ and Ru(bpy)32+ generates Ru(bpy)3+, and then Ru(bpy)3+ reacts with TPrA˙+ to form the excited state Ru(bpy)32+*. The ECL route in Scheme 4, Fig. 1, can occur at a low oxidation potential (LOP) that is just positive enough to oxidize TPrA, but not enough to oxidize Ru(bpy)32+, and is designated as LOP ECL.
 Fig. 1  Schemes for the reaction mechanisms of the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. 
The ECL intensity of the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system strongly depends on the solution pH. The maximum value of the ECL intensity occurs at around pH 7.5, which is very suitable for applications in biological systems. The addition of surfactants can dramatically increase the sensitivity of this system.31–35 For example, up to 8-fold increase in ECL efficiency were observed in nonioinic surfactant media.31 The mechanism of the surfactant effect appears to involve the adsorption of surfactant on the electrode surface, which can make the electrode surface more hydrophobic and thus facilitates the direct oxidation of TPrA. A study of the effects of nonionic chain length on Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA ECL32 and the dependence of the surfactant effect on the electrode materials33 confirm these results. Nonionic fluorosurfactants34 and ionic surfactants35 can also enhance ECL intensity. The addition of fluorosurfactant Zonyl FSN and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide increases ECL intensity up to about 50-fold and 30-fold, respectively.34,35
Besides the surfactant effects, the effects of a series of hydroxylic solvents, including fluorinated alcohols, on the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA ECL have been reported for the first time.36 Hydrogen bonding and dipole forces dramatically change the ground- and excited-state properties in Ru(bpy)32+, including a larger difference between the first electrochemical reduction and oxidation (ΔE1/2) and shifts in UV-vis absorption, photoluminescence, and ECL bands. The ΔE1/2 and the energy of maximum photoluminescence and ECL emission increase as the polarity of the solvents increases. Moreover, remarkable increases in ECL efficiencies ranging from 6- to 270-fold were observed in mixed alcohol/water solutions compared to that in water. It is the most effective method to enhance Ru(bpy)32+ ECL.
Despite its exclusive popularity, TPrA has several disadvantages such as it is toxic, volatile, and needs to be used in high concentrations (usually up to 100 mM) to obtain good sensitivity. A more environmentally-friendly coreactant 2-(dibutylamino)ethanol (DBAE) was recently introduced for Ru(bpy)32+ ECL assay.37 The ECL intensities of the Ru(bpy)32+/DBAE system at Au and Pt electrodes were approximately 10 and 100 times greater than that of the commonly used Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system, respectively, when 25 mM of each coreactant was used (Fig. 2). The sensitivity of the Ru(bpy)32+/DBAE system is about an order of magnitude better than that of the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system. DBAE is much less toxic and less volatile than TPrA, and 20 mM DBAE is more effective than 100 mM TPrA. It is also easy to prepare DBAE solutions because DBAE has better solubility in aqueous solutions. As a result, DBAE is a very promising coreactant for Ru(bpy)32+ ECL immunoassay and DNA probe assays. The great ECL enhancement of DBAE was attributed to the catalytic effect of hydroxyl group toward the direct oxidation of DBAE at the electrode, which shows that electron-withdrawing substitutents can also enhance ECL efficiencies in some cases. ECL of several monoamines and diamines that contain different numbers of hydroxyl groups were investigated further.38 It was found that N-butyldiethanolamine containing two hydroxyl groups was even more effective than DBAE containing one hydroxyl at Au and Pt electrodes, and is the most effective coreactant reported so far. Surprisingly, diamines exhibited much weaker ECL than the monoamines, which may result from more significant side reactions of diamines. These results may be helpful in search of new highly efficient coreactants.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of the ECL curves of 25 mM DBAE and TPrA at Au and Pt electrodes in 0.1 M pH 7.5 phosphate buffer solution containing 1 μM Ru(bpy)32+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. 
“Reductive-oxidative” coreactants are also used to generate ECL. A typical example of this ECL reaction model is the Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− system,39,40 and the light emission processes are as follows (eqn (19)–(24)). S2O82− + e− → SO4˙− + SO42−(19) Ru(bpy)32+ + e− → Ru(bpy)3+(20) Ru(bpy)3+ + SO4˙− → Ru(bpy)32+* + SO42−(21) Ru(bpy)32+ + SO4˙− → Ru(bpy)33+ + SO42−(22) Ru(bpy)33+ + Ru(bpy)3+ → Ru(bpy)32+ + Ru(bpy)32+*(23) Ru(bpy)32+* → Ru(bpy)32+ + hv(24)ECL in the “reductive-oxidative” systems is usually produced by applying a very negative potential. As a result, it is quite difficult to observe stable ECL in these systems in aqueous solutions because of serious hydrogen evolution upon applying very negative potentials. Thus ECL of the Ru(bpy)32+/S2O82− system was achieved in acetonitrile–H2O mixed solutions in early studies. To overcome the problem of serious hydrogen evolution upon applying very negative potentials, carbon paste electrodes were used to perform cathodic ECL in aqueous solutions.40 Recently, ECL emission in aqueous solution was realized by using bismuth electrode that has high hydrogen evolution potential.41 Owing to their high hydrogen overpotential, bismuth electrodes are expected to be powerful electrodes for cathodic ECL studies in aqueous solutions. The reader is referred to some excellent reviews for more detailed information about coreactants.1–15
2.3 Hot Electron-induced ECL
There is a special light emission pathway in ECL that is known as hot electron-induced ECL.42–44 Hot electrons are defined as electrons with thermal energies greater than the thermal energy of a phase or as electrons at an energy far above the Fermi energy of a phase.45–47 ECL can be generated via hot electrons emitted into electrolyte solution from an oxide-covered electrode surface, sometimes called a conductor/insulator/electrolyte surface.10 The insulating layer of metal oxide prevents electron transfer from the metal to a solution species until a large electric field exists across the oxide and the Fermi level in the metal is above that of the conduction band of the metal oxide. Current flow across the oxide film can then produce a hot solution-phase electron.44 Due to the strong reductive ability of the hot electrons, the components in solution could be reduced and generate strong reductants. These reducing intermediates then react with the luminophor to generate an excited state and then emit light. For example, both Ru(bpy)32+ and luminol exhibit strong hot-electron induced ECL on an oxide-covered aluminium electrode based on a tunnel emission of hot electrons into an aqueous solution.48,49 The method allows the detection of Ru(bpy)32+ and luminol labels below nanomolar concentration levels and with a dynamic range of several orders of magnitude.
2.4 Electrostatic chemiluminescence
Very recently, a unique ECL, namely electrostatic chemiluminescence, has been reported.50 In this study, electrostatic charges on insulated Teflon were produced by rubbing with Lucite (poly(methyl methacrylate), PMMA). Following rubbing, PMMA became positively charged and Teflon became negatively charged. When the charged Teflon rod was immersed in a mixture solution containing Ru(bpy)32+ and S2O82−, strong electrostatic chemiluminescence was observed. Similar results had been obtained when Mg powder was introduced into the Ru(bpy)32+ and S2O82− solution. The identical effect generated from both charged Teflon and a strong reductant Mg powder, together with the fact that both Ru(bpy)32+ and S2O82− must coexist in the MeCN–H2O mixture to produce strong luminescence, demonstrates that the luminescence observed indeed results from an electron transfer reaction, rather than a spark from an electrostatic discharge. In other words, electrostatic charges on Teflon produced by rubbing with PMMA are electrons rather than ions. It throws light on the long-standing debate on the identity of charges generated by contact electrification on dielectrics. The electrostatic chemiluminescence may also find applications to single-electrode electrochemistry without a counter electrode and power supply.
However, it is still unclear whether the electrons transferred initially resided on PMMA and were then transferred to Teflon during rubbing as suggested by the electron transfer model or whether they were liberated in the rubbing process, e.g., by bond cleavage. The subsequent study found that the addition of PMMA powder to a solution containing Ru(bpy)32+ and S2O82− also produced light.51 When the solution contained only S2O82− or Ru(bpy)32+, the emission was negligible. Moreover, PMMA powder can reduce metal ions including Ag+, Cu2+, and Pd2+, and cannot reduce Cu2+ after rubbing with Teflon. These results show that pristine PMMA can spontaneously transfer electrons to species in a liquid and can transfer electron to Teflon by rubbing. Since the charge could not come from the HOMO molecular levels of the PMMA chains, the electrons were identified as cryptoelectrons which exist in a material with energies significantly different from those expected from molecular states (or bands) in the material.
3. Instrumentation
Although certain types of ECL instruments are now commercially available, most of the ECL studies reported in the literature were carried out with home-made instruments. The basic experimental instrumentations of ECL study generally include two parts, the electrochemical device and the optical device. Light detection can be made by a photomultiplier tube (PMT) biased at a high voltage with a high-voltage power supply, a charged coupled device (CCD) camera, or a photodiode. CCD camera offers the advantages of instant image manipulation, high spatial resolution, and multi-channel detection ability. It has received increasing attention in ECL imaging and high throughput analysis.
The first commercial ECL instrument was produced by Igen International, Inc. (technology later acquired by Roche Diagnostics Corp.52) in 1994.53 This system uses magnetic microbeads modified with probe molecules, such as antibodies or nucleic acids, to capture analyte molecules in a sample and Ru(bpy)32+ labels. The unbound Ru(bpy)32+ labels are flushed from the cell before the ECL measurements were made. The bound Ru(bpy)32+ labels are measured in a TPrA solution. Some new generation ECL instrumentation with over 150 assays are now available from Roche Diagnostics Corp., including Roche ELECSYS 2010, MODULAR ANALYTICS E-170 systems, cobas 6000 analyzer series and the cobas e 411 analyzer.
The ECL instruments developed by Mesoscale Discovery (MSD) corporation use proprietary multi-array and multi-spot multiwell plates with carbon electrodes integrated into the bottom of the multiwell plates.54 Biological reagents can be attached to the carbon simply by passive adsorption and retain a high level of biological activity. The ECL generated when electrochemically stimulated using Ru(bpy)32+ labels and TPrA as a coreactant. Only labels near the electrode are excited and detected, enabling non-washed assays. Four models of instruments are currently available from MSD corporation: SECTOR Imager 6000, SECTOR Imager 2400, SECTOR PR 400 and SECTOR PR 100. The light is collected with an ultralow-noise CCD camera for SECTOR Imager and a photodiode array for Sector PR Reader. A total of more than 150 immunoassays are currently available from MSD, including phosphoprotein and intracellular markers, cardiac markers, vascular markers and growth factors, fertility markers, hypoxia markers, metabolic markers, and so on.
Recently, a commercial CE-ECL system using PMT to detect light has been developed by the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and manufactured by Xi'an Remax Electronic Co. LtD., (Xi'an, China).15 The system integrates CE separation together with simultaneous electrochemical and ECL detection, including computer-controllable data acquisition and data treatment. This CE-ECL instrumentation has now been used by many universities and institutes in China.
4. ECL luminophores
4.1 Inorganic systems
Among many organic and inorganic ECL systems, ECL based on Ru(bpy)32+ and its derivatives has been most studied due to their good stability and ECL efficiency in aqueous media, favorable electrochemical properties, and compatibility with a wide range of analytes. Ru(bpy)32+ ECL has been widely used for the determination of numerous coreactants such as oxalate,21 alkylamines,55,56 amino acids,57 ascorbic acid,58 and many pharmaceutical compounds.59,60 More importantly, the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA ECL system could provide extremely sensitive label detection at subpicomolar concentration as well as an extremely wide dynamic range of greater than six orders of magnitude. Therefore, Ru(bpy)32+ labels coupled with TPrA as a coreactant has found broad applications in commercial ECL immunoassays and DNA analyses.
Many attempts have been made in designing or modifying the ligands of ruthenium complexes to improve molecular recognition ability. For example, ruthenium complexes containing crown ether moieties covalently bonded to bipyridyl or phenanthroline ligands have been used for metal-cation sensing.1,61–65 The effects of cation binding on the ECL of these ruthenium(II) complexes were studied via either the annihilation route or the coreactant schemes. In some cases, the ECL intensity can be dramatically enhanced up to 20-fold.62 Recently, ECL detection of anions with a modified ruthenium bipyridyl complex has also been reported.66 With TPrA as a coreactant, ECL emission of the guanidinium 3,3′-functionalized bipyridylruthenium complex increased only in the presence of dihydrogenphosphate. Acetate, iodide, and chloride anions did not modify the ECL signals.
[Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ (dppz = dipyrido[3,2-a:2′,3′-c]phenazine) has been found to intercalate into DNA with high affinity (Ka: ∼106 M−1) due to its extended aromatic structure.67 It is a popular “light switch” molecule because it shows no photoluminescence in aqueous solutions, but displays intense photoluminescence in the presence of DNA. Its ECL property has recently been investigated as well.68 [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ shows negligible ECL in the oxalate solution, and its ECL increases about 1000 times when it intercalates to the nucleic acid structure (Fig. 3). The ECL molecular switch behavior of [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ was ascribed to the intercalation that shielded the phenazine nitrogens from the solvent and resulted in a luminescent excited state, which is similar to the reason of its photoluminescence properties. The dramatic increase in ECL intensity upon intercalation makes [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ a promising ECL probe for DNA interaction study and DNA-related biosensors.
 Fig. 3  (A) Scheme of ECL switch based on [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ and DNA. (B) ECL intensities in 5 mM pH 5.5 oxalate solution containing 0.1 mM [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ (curve a) and 0.1 mM [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ + 0.16 mM DNA (curve b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Ru(bpy)32+-containing supramolecular microstructure was synthesized via a solution-based self-assembly strategy by directly mixing H2PtCl6 and Ru(bpy)3Cl2 aqueous solutions.69Fig. 4 shows typical SEM and TEM images of the supramolecular microstructure. It consists of a large quantity of star-shaped microstructures with six branches. It is believed that electrostatic attractions between the positively charged Ru(bpy)32+ and the negatively charged PtCl62− drive the formation of micrometre-scale supramolecular microstructures. More importantly, such microstructures exhibit excellent ECL behaviors and therefore hold great promise as new luminescent materials.
 Fig. 4  (a) Low-magnification SEM, (b) high-magnification SEM, and (c) TEM image of the Ru(bpy)32+-containing luminescent supramolecular microstructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
It is interesting to observe ECL from nanoscale ruthenium complexes because the distinctive properties of nanostructured materials. Single crystalline nanobelts were obtained from a water-insoluble Ru(bpy)32+ derivative,70 [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-(CH3(CH2)14COO)2-bpy)](ClO4)2 (Fig. 5). ECL from the prepared nanobelts dispersed in water could be easily observed using TPrA as a coreactant. Moreover, ECL of a single nanobelt deposited on an ultramicroelectrode was observed. This work could be useful in the study of the electrochemistry of nanoparticles (NPs) and for highly sensitive ECL detection.
 Fig. 5  (A) Structure of [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-(CH3(CH2)14COO)2bpy)]2+ (B) SEM (a) and TEM (b) images of the product. Insets in panels a and b show side-face SEM image and SAED pattern of single nanobelt, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
To increase sensitivity, multimetallic ruthenium complexes have been studied.71–75 The first multimetallic ruthenium complex studied in ECL is the bimetallic ruthenium complex [(bpy)2Ru]2(bphb)4+ (bphb = 1, 4-bis(4′-methyl-2,2′-bipyridin-4-yl)benzene).71 It produced 2–3 folds more intense emission than Ru(bpy)32+ in aqueous and nonaqueous solution via annihilation and with TPrA. Dendritic Ru(bpy)32+ labels have also been reported to multilabel biomolecules at a single site to enhance ECL intensity with minimum impact on bioreactivity.72,73 Besides, a trinuclear, mixed-metal supramolecular complex, [((phen)2-Ru(dpp))2RhCl2]5+ (phen = 1,10-phenanthroline, dpp = 2,3-bis(2-pyridyl)pyrazine) has been studied.74 Interestingly, its ECL spectrum demonstrates a ∼55 nm blue shift compared to its fluorescence in acetonitrile with DBAE as a coreactant, indicating that the ECL emissive state is rather different from the photoluminescent state. Its interaction with calf thymus DNA has also been first investigated using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). To study the effect of the length of carbon chain linkage, three new bimetallic ruthenium complexes [(bpy)2Ru(bpy)(CH2)n(bpy)Ru(bpy)2]4+ (n = 3,5,8) have been synthesized and studied by using TPrA and DBAE as coreactants.75 The ECL intensities increase with increasing the length of carbon chain linkage. The ECL intensities of 1 μM [(bpy)2Ru(bpy)(CH2)8(bpy)Ru(bpy)2]4+ at Pt electrodes are about 25 and 29 times that of Ru(bpy)32+ in the presence of 5 mM TPrA and DBAE, respectively. With 20 mM DBAE, the linear range for this bimetallic ruthenium complex was 1.0 × 10−15 to 1.0 × 10−8 M at Au electrode, and the detection limit can be lowered to 1 fM. These studies demonstrate a feasible method to further improve and tune ECL efficiency by using multimetallic ruthenium complexes.
In a number of metal polypyridine ECL systems other than ruthenium(II) complex systems, the oxidation is irreversible, while the reduction is usually reversible. In such cases, the commonly adopted ECL processes would destroy these molecules by electro-oxidation.76 As described in section 2.2, a LOP ECL route was proposed for the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system. The emission can be generated at potentials that is just positive enough to oxidize TPrA and is not enough to oxidize Ru(bpy)32+.30 The LOP ECL provides a promising route for the generation of ECL of irreversible oxidation metal complexes. ECL of a bis-cyclometalated alkynylgold(III) with irreversible oxidation but reversible reduction has recently been investigated via the LOP ECL route.77 The lower potentials required in the LOP ECL may also be advantageous in DNA diagnostic applications because oligonucleotide sequences would be irreversibly damaged at potentials above +1.0 V vs. SCE.
Although many Ir(III) neutral complexes are known to be ECL active in a nonaqueous environment, often with a degree of efficiency much higher than Ru(bpy)32+, their use has been restricted by their very low solubility in aqueous solutions and sensitivity to oxygen quenching.1,78–82 Stable ECL of a completely insoluble neutral Ir(III) complex Ir(pq)2acac in aqueous media have recently been observed by encapsulating it into silica-PEG NPs.83 This nanoassembly makes the ECL detection feasible under typical bioassay conditions by limiting water and oxygen quenching and allowing solubilization. Considering the flexibility of the silica-PEG NP architecture, it provides a promising way to obtain a great number of water soluble ECL materials. Recently, chemiluminescence of three ionic iridium complexes has been studied for the first time, including [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]Cl2 (ppy = 2-phenylpyridine), [Ir(ppy)2(phen)]Cl2, and [Ir(ppy)2(BPS)]Na (BPS = 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthrolinedisulfonate).84 These ionic iridium complexes have favorable solubility in aqueous solutions, and show comparable chemiluminescent intensity to that of Ru(bpy)32+. This result shows that ionic iridium complexes hold great promise for ECL and chemiluminescent detection in aqueous solutions. The reader is referred to the excellent ECL monograph1 and reviews8,10,11 for more detailed information about inorganic systems.
4.2 Organic systems
The earliest subjects of ECL studies involved polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The PAHs rubrene and DPA have been studied in detail because of their high fluorescence quantum yields and stable radical cations and anions in aprotic media. Many studies on PAHs followed, and other organic systems including luminol,85 acridinium esters,86 polymers,87–89 and siloles90 have also been extensively investigated. The reader is referred to the excellent ECL monograph1 and reviews8,10,11 for more detailed information about early study on organic systems.
Recently, fluorene-substituted PAHs with enhanced ECL efficiency and stability have been reported.91 Fluorene was used as a capping agent to produce the derivatives of DPA, pyrene, and anthracene as new compounds (Fig. 6). The introduction of fluorene groups imparts steric hindrance that prevents interchromophore interactions and blocks the active position of PAH cores subject to electrochemical decomposition. Therefore, these molecules have high photoluminescence quantum yields and can generate stable radical ions. Moreover, the C2 and C6 substitutions on the DPA core provide extra stabilization for the highly charged species (dication and dianion), allowing the fluorene-substituted DPA to have highly efficient (Φ = 0.90, Φ is the relative ECL quantum yields compared to DPA) and stable blue ECL for up to 20000 pulses. In another approach, the enhancement of ECL and radical stability by peripheral multidonors on pyrene derivatives has been demonstrated.92 Although the pyrene molecule shows poor ECL properties because of the electrochemical instability of its cationic radical, the ECL efficiencies of pyrene derivatives increase in proportion to the number of peripheral N,N-dimethyl aniline donors, which suggests that this approach has some promise for the development of highly efficient ECL materials.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structures of new ECL active aromatic compounds and model compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. 
The ECL of 2,2′-bis(10-phenylanthracen-9-yl)-9,9′-spirobifluorene that is a dichromophoric molecule composed of two phenylanthracenes linked by a spirobifluorene moiety was studied.93 Because there are two redox centers, di-ions are created during each potential pulse of an ECL experiment. Since annihilation occurs between di-ions, a single electron transfer to form an excimer should be quenched by intramolecular transfer of the other electron prior to emission. Therefore, the ECL of 2,2′-bis(10-phenylanthracen-9-yl)-9,9′-spirobifluorene is reasonably explained by a simultaneous two-electron transfer. ECL of 3,6-dispirobifluorene-N-phenylcarbazole which contains two spirobifluorene groups covalently attached to a N-phenylcarbazole core has also been reported.94 Semiempirical MNDO (modified neglect of differential overlap) calculations of this compound demonstrate that the spirobifluorene is twisted relative to N-phenylcarbazole and shows a weak orbital overlap between these two groups. This molecular geometry favors the localization of negative charges on the individual spirobifluorene groups and of the positive charge of radical cation onto N-phenylcarbazole. Donor–acceptor architectures such as this may provide a general approach to design new materials exhibiting efficient ECL.
A group of highly fluorescent 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole derivatives, including two fluorene derivatives, were synthesized. These compounds show strong and stable green ECL emission.95 Generally, the fluorene derivatives emit blue light due to their large energy gap. By introducing a unit with a narrower energy gap, the electron-deficient 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole group, into the fluorene backbone, the emission color can be tuned to green region. The ability to tune the luminescence of these systems makes them of interest to achieve multiple wavelength ECL labels.
Electrochemistry, spectroscopy, and ECL of a series of extended silole-based chromophores were studied to understand the effect of structure on behavior.90 By changing substituents attached to the chromophore, large variations in quantum efficiency, λmax for absorbance and photoluminescence, and radical ion stability were observed. The differences are related to the motion in the 2,5-substituents and the steric protection of both the chromophore and the reactive parts of the substituents. Very recently, efficient and stable ECL was obtained by tuning the electrochemical potentials of silole–thiophene hybrid chromophores.96 Stable radical cations favorable for ECL emission were generated by extending silole Π conjugation with thiophene units and by constraining the applied potential range. This provides a new approach for acquiring efficient ECL materials.
Organic polymers have also attracted attention. A recent example involved excimer emission from two linear, stereoregular, and structurally defined polyphenylene vinylene (PPV) derivatives, poly[distyrylbenzene-b-(ethylene oxide)]s, with 12 and 16 of ethylene oxide repeating units in the backbone, respectively.97 A one-electron transfer, reversible oxidation at ∼0.75 V vs. Ag/Ag+ was observed for both polymers in CH2Cl2 solution. ECL responses with a maximum emission at ∼1.10 V vs. Ag/Ag+ were obtained with the polymer cast film in MeCN in the presence of TPrA. The proposed mechanism for ECL involved the oxidized polymer species and the strongly reducing TPrA free radical (TPrA˙). In another paper, strong blue photoluminescence and ECL from (NH4)2S2O8-treated OH-terminated polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers were reported.98 A considerable enhancement of the ECL signal was observed when 10 mM sodium oxalate was added as a coreactant. This kind of blue-luminescent chemical species may have potential applications as a new fluorophore or in aqueous ECL.
The soliton-like ECL waves in the electrochemical oxidation of thin films of the semiconducting conjugated polymer poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) have been observed recently.99 The waves were triggered by AuNPs embedded in the film (Fig. 7). The ECL “wave fronts” were visualized and imaged in space and time by optical emission microscopy and observed to freely propagate parallel to the plane of an electrode. ECL free waves were also launched by a square-shaped scratch instead of an embedded NP. For a film with a shallow scratch, irregular patterns of ECL rather than a free wave were observed. Similarly, a dense array of triggering leaks for ultrathin films generates dendritic ECL filaments throughout the film as a result of drying cracks. The proposed soliton ECL wave mechanism, which is based on lateral wave propagation, anion-gated electrochemistry, and critical polymer swelling transitions, has important implications for the design and operation of electrochemical light-emitting diodes, chemically sensitive field-effect transistors, electrochromic window coatings, and certain types of solar cells.
 Fig. 7  (a) The electrochemical cell includes a silver-wire quasi-reference electrode, an Au planar counter electrode, and a 50 nm conjugated polymer-coated indium tin oxide (ITO) working electrode. (b) Images of free and pinned ECL waves triggered by 250 nm AuNPs with potential steps of 1.5 and 1.8 V, respectively. (c) Radius vs. time for (b). (d) ECL images at (left) 0.3 and (right) 0.6 s after the potential step of 1.6 V. The integration time was 100 ms (free) and 12 ms (pinned) in (b) and 100 ms in (d). Scale bars are 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Luminol is a classical organic species that continues to generate interest. ECL of luminol is often produced in alkaline solution in the presence of hydrogen peroxide upon electrochemical oxidation. Many biological active substances can transform or metabolize into hydrogen peroxide, which can be sensitively detected by luminol ECL. As a result, luminol-based ECL is considered for applications in various biosensors. ECL behaviors of luminol on various NP modified electrodes were studied.100,101 It has been demonstrated that the AuNP modified electrodes could generate strong luminol ECL in neutral pH conditions.102 The catalytic performance of AuNP modified electrodes depended both on the size of AuNPs and the electrode substrate. This allows the development of sensitive ECL enzyme biosensors in physiological pH because of the excellent biocompatible property of AuNPs.
4.3 Nanoparticle systems
The ECL study of NPs was first reported in 2002 using semiconductor Si NPs,103 where ECL was generated from both annihilation and coreactant systems in MeCN solutions. A series of semiconductor nanocrystals (also known as quantum dots and abbreviated QDs), such as CdSe,104 CdS,105 CdTe106, and ZnS107 NPs, show ECL emission properties. The semiconductor NP ECL systems pre-2007 have been reviewed.11,108 Recently, ECL from PbS and ZnSe QDs was also observed.109,110 And the ECL of semiconductor NP systems has found applications in the field of biosensors.111–113 Generally, semiconductor NP ECL systems use either hydrogen peroxide or peroxydisulfate as coreactants and high potentials. Noteworthily, it has reported recently that semiconductor NPs can react with amines such as DBAE at low potential to generate strong ECL.114 And tertiary amines are more effective than secondary and primary amines, and DBAE is the most effective.
Besides semiconductor NPs, many other NPs can also produce ECL. For example, ECL emission from both a prepared suspension of graphene oxide NPs and an electrochemically oxidized graphite layer on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite has been observed.115 The nature of emitting centers is under investigation, and a possible explanation of the broad emission is the existence of smaller aromatic hydrocarbon-like domains formed on the graphitic layers by the interruption of the conjugation by oxidized centers. ECL of individual graphene oxide NPs was detected by using a coreactant at relatively high concentrations. With appropriate surface derivatization and functionalization on graphene or graphene oxide to enhance ECL efficiency and the accessibility to substrate, highly sensitive analytical applications may emerge.
Recently, carbon NPs with ECL activity have been prepared by an electrochemical method.116 The carbon NPs were probably obtained by electrochemical release of carbon NPs initially immobilized in a graphite rod into supporting electrolyte. Carbon NPs with ECL properties can also be prepared through a facile and economical microwave pyrolysis approach.117 After the saccharide and surfactant PEG-200 mixture solution was heated in a 500 W microwave oven for 2–10 min, the colorless solution changed to yellow and finally to dark brown, which implies the formation of carbon NPs (Fig. 8). This clean, cheap, and convenient route shortens the reaction time and represents a potential advancement to large-scale industrialization.
 Fig. 8  Microwave pyrolysis approach to carbon NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Silver nanoclusters that exhibit cathodic hot electron-induced ECL have also been reported,118 which suggests the considerable potential of using nanoclusters as probes in applications such as molecular sensing. ECL has been extensively studied for organic molecules, but few studies have been done on organic NP ECL.119 ECL emission from rubrene and DPA NPs was observed upon electrochemical oxidation in aqueous solutions containing different coreactants, such as TPrA for rubrene and an oxalate ion for DPA NPs. And the ECL intensity from the rubrene NPs was sufficient to suggest their use as labels for ECL analytical methods.
Recently, luminol-reduced AuNPs have been synthesized by the direct reaction between HAuCl4 and luminol in aqueous solutions,120,121 and the diameter of the NPs increases with decreasing amounts of reductant luminol. The ECL of luminol-capped AuNPs could be enhanced 20-fold in the presence of cysteine. The biocompatibility of Au cores and the relative strong ECL intensity make the luminol-capped AuNPs potential ECL biomarkers for their applications in biosensors.
5. Analytical applications and strategies
5.1 ECL Immunoassays
One of the most important applications of ECL is its use in commercial diagnostic assays based on the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system, in which Ru(bpy)32+ derivatives are used as ECL labels and TPrA is used as a coreactant. This ECL technology has many distinct advantages over other detection systems. First, ECL provides for extremely sensitive label detection at subpicomolar concentrations, and an extremely wide dynamic range of greater than six orders of magnitude. Second, multiple labels can be coupled to proteins or oligonucleotides without affecting immunoreactivity, solubility, or ability to hybridize, because the label has low molecular mass and favorable solubility in aqueous solutions. Third, both separation and nonseparation assays can be performed because the selectivity of bound and unbound fractions can be achieved based on the different ability of labelled species to access electrode surfaces. Fourth, the technique is readily adaptable to the detection of both large and small analytes with easy disposal. Fifth, the measurement is rapid. Sixth, the labels are extremely stable compared with those of most other chemiluminescent systems, having shelf lives of longer than one year at room temperature. Labelled proteins are similarly stable if stored at 2–5 °C. Finally, the technique uses simple instrumentation, and allows high-throughput analysis. The advantages above have made the ECL technology very popular. Hundreds of millions of dollars in sales per year are achieved, and more than 150 ECL immunoassays are currently commercial available.
Many efforts have been taken to improve sensitivity and extend applications of ECL immunoassays. An ultrasensitive sandwich-type human C-reactive protein (CPR) immunoassay was demonstrated by adding multiple Ru(bpy)32+ to a single antibody by encapsulating a hydrophobic Ru(bpy)32+ compound in polystyrene microspheres/beads.122 The loading capacity of the ECL labels per polystyrene bead can be as high as ∼109 molecules, thus it is a very large amplification factor of Ru(bpy)32+ label molecules for each antibody. With this technique, the CPR detection limit is as low as 0.01 μg mL−1, which is lower than those obtained from most of the presently available automated high-sensitivity CPR assay systems. Based on a similar idea of holding multiple labels in a larger container, submicrometer-sized liposome containing Ru(bpy)32+ was prepared as ECL labels for the CPR immunoassay.123 The release of the ECL label from liposome can be realized by the addition of 0.1 M TPrA and 0.1 M phosphate buffer containing 0.1 M NaCl and 1% Triton X-100. The described approach allows the assay to be carried out in aqueous solutions, and this is compatible with current commercial ECL instrumentation. This work has been extended to the determination of hemagglutinin which plays an important role in influenza virus infection.124 In this approach, hemagglutinin was first immobilized on an Au electrode, an immunoliposome encapsulating a Ru complex was prepared to bind with hemagglutinin through competitive antigen–antibody reaction. After the immunoreaction, the immunoliposome was destroyed by the addition of ethanol, and the ECL was measured from the Ru complex adsorbed onto Au electrode surfaces (Fig. 9). Hemagglutinin of influenza virus were determined in a concentration range from 3 × 10−13 to 4 × 10−11 g mL−1. The ECL method with high sensitivity at the attomole level would be applicable for detecting trace amounts of various proteins containing the influenza virus.
 Fig. 9  Detection procedure: (1) immobilization of hemagglutinin (or antigen peptide) on an Au electrode; (2) binding of immunoliposome with hemagglutinin onto the Au electrode through competitive antigen–antibody reaction; (3) destruction of immunoliposome by addition of ethanol; (4) adsorption of Ru(II) complex by heating at 60 °C for 10 min; (5) ECL measurement on application of potential. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Ru(bpy)32+ ECL has been applied to detect surface proteins on live cells.125 The method uses carbon surface electrodes built into the bottom of microwell plates to achieve ECL assay. The carbon surface plates bind suspension cells tightly enough to allow plates to be washed, thus the centrifugation steps typically used for washing suspension cells could be eliminated. The ECL strategy has some advantages compared with the common used flow cytometry and cell-based enzyme-liked immunosorbent assays, such as it is easier to perform and has a better signal to noise ratio.
Recently, an ECL immunosensor for the detection of protein cancer biomarkers using carbon nanotube (CNT) forests and Ru(bpy)32+-doped silica NPs has been reported.126 The sandwich format was designed by first chemically attaching capture antibodies Ab1 on CNT forests on pyrolytic graphite disks, and then incubating the prostated specific antigen (PSA). After washing with non-specific binding blockers, the RuBPY-silica-Ab2 NP bioconjugate was added (Fig. 10). This ECL sensor presents a clinically viable concentration range. A detection limit of 40 pg mL−1 is obtained, which is well below the normal serum levels of PSA.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of ECL-based single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) immunosensors after addition of PSA and the RuBPY-silica-Ab2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides Ru(bpy)32+, acetylcholinesterase has recently been used as an alternative label in ECL immunoassays.127 Acetylcholinesterase was used to convert acetylthiocholine to thiocholine. The generated thiocholine was collected on a gold electrode surface by gold-thiol binding. The ECL detection was performed using thiocholine collected on the gold electrode as a coreactant in the presence of Ru(bpy)32+. This method can greatly enhance the sensitivity since a large number of coreactant molecules can be generated by the enzymatic reaction.
CdSe QD-based ECL immunosensors have also been developed. In these immunosensors, CdSe NP films are initially immobilized onto the electrode surfaces, and thus label-free detection is realized. For example, a label-free ECL immunosensor for the sensitive detection of human IgG was fabricated using CdSe NP/CNT-CHIT/APS film modified electrode.128 The antibody of human IgG was bound to the functionalized film via glutaric dialdehyde, and the specific immunoreaction between human IgG and antibody resulted in the decrease in ECL intensity, which could be attributed to the protein layer blocking the electron exchange in ECL reaction. The detection limit of human IgG was 1 pg mL−1 using this method.
Luminol based ECL systems have long been used for applications in the field of immunoassays.129,130 The sensitivity of these immunosensors could be improved when the ECL was generated on a NP modified electrode. A sandwich-type immunosensor for human IgG was developed on an AuNP modified electrode using N-(aminobutyl)-N-ethylisoluminol labeling.129 The sensitivity of this AuNP amplification immunosensor has three orders of magnitude improvement over other sandwich-type methods using the modified electrode as the immobilized support. Homogeneous ECL immunoassay for human IgG has also been developed using N-(aminobutyl)-N-ethylisoluminol as labels at AuNP modified paraffin-impregnated graphite electrode.130 ECL emission was generated from the N-(aminobutyl)-N-ethylisoluminol labelled human IgG antibody and markedly increased in the presence of human IgG antigen because of the formation of a more rigid structure of the N-(aminobutyl)-N-ethylisoluminol moiety. The detection limit for human IgG was 10 pg mL−1. It is higher than the results obtained by other methods, which is probably attributed to low label ratio of N-(aminobutyl)-N-ethylisoluminol per human IgG antibody in this work.
5.2 ECL DNA probe assays
DNA probe assays have a wide range of applications in areas of clinical diagnostics, forensic chemistry, environmental investigations, pharmaceutical studies, and biological warfare agent detections. ECL has been used as a powerful tool for DNA probe assays. Similar to ECL immunoassays, ECL DNA probe assays employ Ru(bpy)32+ as an ECL label and TPrA as a coreactant. Currently, much work has been done to improve the ECL sensitivity including the employment of high quantum efficiency ECL labels and the use of multilabelling approaches. For example, an ultrasensitive ECL method for the detection of DNA hybridization utilizing polystyrene microspheres/beads as the carriers of a large number of hydrophobic ECL labels of Ru(bpy)3[B(C6F5)4] has been developed (Fig. 11).131 A highly selective ECL biosensor for the detection of target ssDNA was developed using hairpin DNA as the recognition element and ruthenium complex as the signal producing compound.132 In the absence of target ssDNA, the hairpin DNA probe was in the folded configuration in which its termini were held in close proximity to the electrode, and thus a strong ECL signal could be generated. In the presence of target ssDNA, a stem-loop of the ECL probe on the electrode was converted into a linear double-helix configuration due to the hybridization, resulting in the tag moving away from the electrode surface, which in turn decreased the ECL signal (Fig. 12). The ECL intensity of the DNA biosensor decreased with an increase in the concentration of target DNA, and a detection limit of 90 pM was achieved. It was found that changes in the length of the probe loop present a promising alternative for improvement of the sensitivity and selectivity of DNA hybridization assays. This hairpin ECL biosensor presents good selectivity and single-base mismatch of ssDNA can be discriminated.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of DNA hybridization on a polystyrene bead as the ECL label carrier and a magnetic bead for the separation of analyte- contained ECL label/polystyrene beads. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the hairpin–DNA probe detection for DNA hybridization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
ECL combines mutant allele specific amplification (MASA) for the detection of point mutation in clinical samples has been demonstrated.133 It can detect K-ras mutant in a 5000-fold excess of wild-type allele. Different kinds of mutations can be clearly discriminated. The MASA-ECL method is faster and simpler than the ECL-PCR (polymerase chain reaction) approach by avoiding the digestion of PCR product with restriction enzyme, and thus it is a promising method for point mutation detection.
Some ECL-inducible DNA intercalators were recently used as coreactants for ECL DNA hybridization assays.134 The dsDNA intercalated by doxorubicin, daunorubicin, or 2-phenylindole shows favorable ECL with Ru(bpy)32+, while the non-intercalated ssDNA does not. Several pathogens were detected using this ECL approach, and a good specificity of single point mutations for hepatitis disease was obtained by the 2-phenylindole-intercalated Ru(bpy)32+ ECL. The efficient quenching of Ru(bpy)32+ ECL by oxidizing ferrocene at an electrode has been utilized for quantitative and sequence-specific DNA detection.135 In this method, ferrocene was labelled on a complementary DNA sequence, and could quench ECL upon hybridization. The quenching method was extended to a controllable solid-state ECL film based on the conformation change of ferrocene-labelled DNA molecular beacon (MB).136 The Ru(bpy)32+–AuNP composite was first immobilized on a cysteamine-derivatized Au electrode, then the ferrocene-labelled DNA MB self-assembled on the resultant electrode via Au–S interaction. The ECL intensity of the film can be controlled by the conformation change of the stem-loop structure of the ferrocene-MB. The ferrocene can be apart away from the Ru(bpy)32+ when the ferrocene-MB is hybridized with the complementary DNA, or when the conformation of the ferrocene-MB are altered by temperature change. Therefore, this solid-state Ru(bpy)32+–ECL film has the potential to be applied to reagentless DNA biosensors as well as to calculate thermodynamic parameters of equilibrium constants of MB binding and the stem-loop formation.
Direct ECL detection of DNA in poly(vinylpyridine) (PVP) ultra-thin film using cationic polymer [Ru(bpy)2(PVP)10]2+ or [Os(bpy)2(PVP)10]2+ has been demonstrated.137–139 That is, DNA itself can act as the sacrificial reductant. Significant ECL generation occurred only when guanine bases were present in the oligonucleotide films. The mechanism for light emission involves the interaction of guanine radicals with Ru3+ metal centre to generate the Ru2+* excited state or the reduction of Ru2+ to Ru+ by the guanine radicals, followed by annihilation of Ru3+ and Ru+. It has been successfully extended for the study of DNA damage and genotoxicity screening, although this approach is not sequence specific for DNA detection.140 A label-free ECL DNA detection approach based on catalytic guanine and adenine base oxidation using a CNT/Nafion/Ru(bpy)32+ modified glassy carbon (GC) electrode has been recently presented (Fig. 13).141 ECL signals of dsDNA and their thermally denatured counterparts could be distinctly discriminated at a low concentration of 30.4 nM, and single-base mismatch detection of p53 gene sequence segment was realized with 0.4 nM.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the procedure employed for the modification of the GC electrode and ECL detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2007 Elsevier. 
Other methods of DNA hybridization detection include luminol–H2O2-based and QD-based ECL. A highly sensitive ECL DNA biosensor was designed using glucose oxidase-based biocatalyzed ECL and non-fouling surfaces.142 The sequence-specific DNA sensing was accomplished by ECL of luminol with in situ generated H2O2, as low as 1 pM of target DNA could be detected because the non-fouling surfaces significantly suppressed the adsorption of enzyme label on the electrode and reduced the background noise of this sensor. In the latter case, a simple ECL sensing platform for target DNA detection was proposed using CdS:Mn NPs as the ECL luminophores and AuNPs as both ECL quencher and enhancer.143 The quenching of ECL from the CdS:Mn NP film by proximal AuNPs occurs as a result of Förster energy transfer, while an enhancement of ECL takes place after hybridization with target DNA due to the energy transfer of ECL excited surface plasmon resonances in AuNPs to the CdS:Mn NPs at large separation. This combination of quenching with enhancement of ECL from the CdS:Mn NP film by AuNPs together in one assay provides great sensitivity for the DNA detection. A remarkably low detection limit of 50 aM target DNA was obtained, and as little as 2.9 fM one-base mismatch was realized using this ECL method.
5.3 Aptamer and DNAzyme ECL biosensors
A large number of functional oligonucleotides such as aptamers and DNAzymes have been selected in vitro recently.144–147 Aptamers are functional DNA or RNA structures that possess high recognition ability to specific molecular targets ranging from small molecules or proteins to even a cell. Compared to traditional molecular recognition system such as antibody–antigen interaction, aptamers exhibit many advantages in terms of simplicity of synthesis, ease of labelling, and excellent stability. Due to their unique properties, aptamers have been widely employed as recognition elements in chromatography, CE, mass spectrometry, and biosensors, such as fluorescent, colorimetric, electrochemical, acoustic, and cantilever-based biosensors. The combination of highly sensitive ECL technique with highly selective aptamers is attractive for biorelated applications, and this area is still in early stage of development.
The first ECL studies using aptamer was reported for the detection of anthrax spores, cholera toxin, and staphylococcal enterotoxin B in 1999.148,149 Currently, various aptamer-based ECL biosensing formats for the determination of proteins and small molecules have been developed (Table 1). In most ECL aptasensors, Ru(bpy)32+ or its derivatives and TPrA have been employed as ECL labels and as a coreactant, respectively. For example, an ECL aptasensor for the detection of thrombin by using a sandwich format and AuNP amplification was reported.150 To detect thrombin, AuNP labeled capture aptamers were first immobilized onto a thio-silanized ITO electrode surface through strong Au–S bonds. After catching the target thrombin, signal aptamers tagged with Ru(bpy)32+ labels were attached to the assembled electrode surface. ECL detection was then performed in TPrA solutions. The detection limit was estimated to be 10 nM. The compatibility of ITO with microfabrication and miniaturization makes the method promising in microarray analysis. Another sensitive thrombin aptasensor was based on the target protein-induced displacement of the Ru(bpy)32+-doped silica NP labelled cDNA.151 The aptamer was assembled on the Au electrode surface through Au–S binding, and hybridized with the Ru(bpy)32+-doped silica NP labelled cDNA. Then, the cDNA was displaced by thrombin and caused a decrease in ECL intensity. Other proteins have an almost negligible effect on ECL intensity and the aptasensor displays high specificity and sensitivity with a detection limit as low as 1.0 fM. Besides Ru(bpy)32+ species, QDs were also used as light emitters for the construction of ECL aptasensors.152,153
Table 1 ECL Sensors Based on Aptamers and DNAzymes




Analytes
Detection methods
Detection limit
Ref




Thrombin and lysozyme
Ru(phen)32+ as intercalator into dsDNA
0.05 pM for thrombin

160



Thrombin
Sandwich type with Ru(bpy)32+ as labels
10 nM

150



Thrombin
ECL quenching with ferrocene as a quencher
60 pM

156



Thrombin
Target protein-induced strand displacement, Ru(bpy)32+ doped silica NPs as labels
1 fM

151



Thrombin
ECL quenching with ferrocene-labeled molecular beacon
50 fM

157



Thrombin
Sandwich type with QDs as ECL labels
2.72 nM

153



Lysozyme
DMAET-capped CdTe NPs as labels, in the presence Ru(bpy)32+
0.5 nM

155



Lysozyme
QDs as ECL labels



152



Lysozyme
[Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)NHS] label with AuNPs amplification
0.1 pM

154



ATP
cDNA of aptamers labelled with Ru(bpy)32+ as probes
0.02 nM

159



ATP
[Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ molecular switch as a intercalator, label-free
100 nM

68



Cocaine
Signal-on detection with Ru(bpy)32+ as labels
1 nM

158



Pb2+
Pb2+-specific DNAzyme with Ru(bpy)32+ as labels
11 pM

163



Anthrax spores
Magnetic bead-ECL sandwich assay



148



Cholera toxin
Magnetic bead-ECL assay
40 ng

149



Staphylococcal enterotoxin B
Magnetic bead-ECL assay
10 pg

149





The labeled protein often has a lower affinity to the aptamer compared with the unmodified one. Based on which, a lysozyme aptasensor was developed through the displacement of [Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)NHS]-labeled lysozyme bound to the aptamer in different concentrations of lysozyme solutions (Fig. 14).154 This biosensor was applied successfully to determine the content of lysozyme in eggs. In another study, a tertiary amine derivative capped CdTe NPs were used as lysozyme labels.155 They can be displaced by lysozyme in the solution and then transferred into a detection cell to generate an ECL signal with Ru(bpy)32+ at a certain potential. The use of CdTe NPs enriched ECL co-reactants by multilabelling at a single-site, thus satisfactory sensitivity was obtained.
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of aptamer-based displacement assay and ECL detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH. 
Quenching ECL of Ru(bpy)32+ by ferrocene has also been used to develop ECL aptasensors for the determination of proteins.156,157 A recent study placed a ferrocene-labelled aptamer in a duplex structure with a cDNA sequence labelled with the Ru species, and the presence of targets forced the departure of the aptamer from the cDNA immobilized at electrode surfaces, accompanied by an increase in ECL.156 Using this method a detection limit of 60 pM for thrombin was obtained. Another study first modified the complex of AuNPs and Ru(bpy)32+ onto the Au electrode surface, and then immobilized the ferrocene labelled MB aptamer.157 In the presence of thrombin, the MB aptamer opened its stem-loop, and the labelled ferrocene was consequently kept away from the ECL substrate. Such structural change resulted in an obvious increase in ECL intensity due to the decreased quenching effect of ferrocene to the ECL substrate. The detection limit was 50 fM for thrombin.
ECL aptasensors for the determination of small molecules such as cocaine and ATP have also been reported.158,159 For example, an aptasensor for ATP detection has been designed employing ATP binding aptamer as molecular recognition element and its cDNA labeling a Ru complex as the probe for ECL sensing.159 This ECL biosensor was fabricated by assembling cDNA onto the Au electrode surface through the 5′-HS on the cDNA, after cDNA hybridized with the ATP bonding aptamer (Fig. 15). When the sensing interface was immersed into ATP solution, the ATP molecules dissociated the aptamers from the electrode surface due to the specific ATP–aptamer interaction. After the biosensor was incubated in a high ionic strength solution to form the stem-loop structure, the ECL intensity greatly increased, and as low as 0.02 nM ATP could be detected using this method.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the ECL aptasensor for ATP detection and its regeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
A label-free ECL aptasensor based on a Ru(phen)32+-dsDNA composite film electrode has been reported.160 As shown in Fig. 16, after the anti thrombin thiolated aptamer was attached to an Au electrode, dsDNA structure was formed with its cDNA. Instead of the chemical modification of the aptamer or target with the probe molecule, Ru(phen)32+ was intercalated into the dsDNA structure as the probe. After thrombin bonded with its aptamer, the dsDNA dissociated and the intercalated Ru(phen)32+ was released because of the higher stability of the aptamer–thrombin complex. The decrease in ECL intensity after the binding of thrombin and its aptamer was used to quantify thrombin. This ECL-based protocol has some advantages such as label-free and low detection limits (0.05 pM thrombin). Another label-free method has recently been developed by using an ECL molecular switch [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ to detect ATP.68 The method takes advantage of the sensitive ECL intensity change when ATP binds to the folded aptamer where [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ intercalates. The detection limit for ATP is 100 nM with a linear range up to 1 μM. This solution-based ECL detection method is simple, and needs neither the labeling of aptamers and capture probes nor the immobilization of them on electrode surfaces.
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram for the principle of the developed ECL aptasensor for detecting thrombin. (A) The adsorption of thiolated antithrombin aptamer on and the 2-mercaptoethanol block to the electrode. (B) The formation of the dsDNA between aptamer and its complementary ssDNA. (C) The intercalation of Ru(phen)32+ into the dsDNA sequence. (D) Dissociation of dsDNA and release of Ru(phen)32+ due to the interaction between thrombin and its aptamer, resulting in the decreased ECL emission, which was used to quantify thrombin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Besides for the detection of proteins and small molecules, the combination of ECL and aptamers has also been used for a high-throughput assay of an RNA editing reaction.161 RNA editing describes those molecular processes in which the information content in an RNA molecule is altered through a chemical change in the base make-up.162 The ECL assay is performed within streptavidin-coated microtiter plates that have carbon electrodes running through the bottom of the plates. The reporter RNA for the editing reaction is labelled with a Ru complex that can generate ECL only when held in proximity to these electrodes. Editing causes a conformational change in the reporter that activates a streptavidin-binding aptamer. This results in the immobilization of the RNA at the bottom of the microtiter plates and the generation of ECL. The assay is sensitive to low femtomole quantities of edited products and suited for high-throughput drug screening.
DNAzymes are catalytic nucleic acids capable of catalyzing a broad range of reactions including cleaving nucleic acid substrates, ligation, and porphyrin metallation. Recently, a specific ECL sensor for Pb2+ based on DNAzyme as a recognition element using Ru(bpy)32+ for ECL signal readout has been designed.163 Thiol modified DNAzymes are immobilized onto the surface of a Au electrode, and then hybridized with the Ru(bpy)32+ labelled DNA substrate to make a dsDNA. When the modified electrode is immersed into a solution containing Pb2+, the DNAzyme catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage of the dsDNA into two pieces (Fig. 17). The Ru(bpy)32+ labelled DNA substrate is removed, which results in the reduction of ECL intensity. The ECL intensity decreases with increasing Pb2+ concentrations in the range of 2.5 × 10−10 to 1.0 × 10−9 M. The detection limit for Pb2+ is 11 pM, which is much lower than those of fluorescent, colorimetric, or electrical biosensors. Because DNAzymes specific for Cu2+, Zn2+, Co2+, and Hg2+ have also been obtained, it is convenient to design ECL sensors to determine these metal ions.
 Fig. 17  Principle of the ECL Pb2+ sensor based on DNAzyme. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.4 Determination of coreactants
ECL has been used for the determination of a wide range of chemical and biochemical analytes including those important for clinical diagnostics, food and water safety, environmental monitoring, and pharmaceutical study. To achieve selective detection, ECL has been frequently coupled with separation techniques such as HPLC and CE. Due to its high separation efficiency, rapid separations, low sample volume requirements, minimal solvent consumption, and easy miniaturization, CE is currently the predominant separation technique for ECL detection.164,165 The research of CE-ECL is mainly focused on the following: (1) improving the separation efficiency,166 such as by using capillary electrochromatography to detect neutral coreactants; (2) enhancing the detection sensitivity,167–169 such as by using a pH junction and field amplification; (3) developing new analysis methods,170–172 such as analysis by ECL and other methods simultaneously; (4) expanding the application area,173–175 such as studying the interactions of small molecules with proteins or aptamers; (5) simplifying the experimental devices,176,177 such as by using porous etched joints and poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) detection cells for CE-ECL analysis. The PDMS-based detection cell is attractive because it is easy to operate and allows batch production with good reproducibility (Fig. 18).176
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the PDMS cell. (a) Working electrode in pipette tip, (b) capillary column, (c) electrochemical cell, (d) PDMS block, (e) glass slide. Modified with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
The microfluidic chip is in a boom period at present. ECL detection platforms should play an important role in this area because they not only rival the sensitivity of more expensive laser-induced fluorescence and mass spectroscopy detection systems, but have the size advantages of electrochemical systems. The first ECL capillary microchip was reported in 2001.178 In this microchip, a microfabricated U-shaped floating Pt electrodes was placed across the separation channel, ECL reactions occurred by the electrical field available in the separation channel during electrophoretic separation. Later, one-, two-, and three-channel microfluidic sensors that could detect anodic or cathodic redox reactions indirectly using anodic ECL as a photonic reporter were demonstrated.179–181 These methods all rely on charge balance between anode and cathode. The current at the cathode must equal the current at the anode, and there is a correspondence between the number of electrons consumed at the cathode and the ECL photo flux at the anode. The transparency of ITO electrodes is beneficial for ECL detection, and thus an integrated ITO electrode-based Ru(bpy)32+ ECL detector was constructed for a microchip CE.182 The microchip consists of a PDMS layer containing separation and injection channels and an electrode plate with an ITO electrode fabricated by a photolithographic method. The high separation electric field had no significant influence on the ECL detector, and decouplers for isolating the separation electric field were not needed in the microchip system. In 2005, a microchip CE with solid-state ECL detector was first reported. The solid-state ECL detector was fabricated by immobilizing Ru(bpy)32+ into an Eastman AQ55D-silica-CNT composite film on the ITO electrode.183 The whole system was built by reversibly sealing the Ru(bpy)32+-modified ITO electrode plate with a PDMS layer containing electrophoresis microchannels. The microchip has been employed to detect proline with low detection limit and good reproducibility. To achieve large-scale production, an instrumental approach was introduced that integrated ECL analysis in microfluidic systems based on the printed circuit board technology. The printed circuit board electrodes used can be fabricated inexpensively in large-scale production. The proposed microfluidic devices have been tested by detecting hydrogen peroxide with luminol ECL.184
Because of the good electrochemical stability and reversibility, Ru(bpy)32+ can be regenerated by immobilizing onto an electrode surface. The immobilization of Ru(bpy)32+ on the electrode surface shows several advantages compared with the solution-phase Ru(bpy)32+ ECL system, such as simplifying the experiment design and facilitating miniaturization. Therefore, the solid state ECL of Ru(bpy)32+ was actively studying. To construct a good solid state ECL sensor, the following factors must be taken into consideration. First, adequate Ru(bpy)32+ should be attached to electrode surfaces to ensure good sensitivity. Second, the composite films should allow electron transfers between the electrode and Ru(bpy)32+ over a long time to ensure the long-term stability of sensors. Third, the interaction of Ru(bpy)32+ and composite films must be strong enough to avoid Ru(bpy)32+ leaching from the film and promise good stability and reproducibility of sensors. A variety of approaches have been employed to immobilize ruthenium complexes to electrode surfaces, and the area of solid-state ECL has recently been reviewed.185 Generally the immobilized forms include the incorporation of Ru complexes to ion exchange polymer composite films,186–189 sol–gel composite film,190,191 NP composite films192,193 and others.194
The cation-exchange polymer Nafion is very popular for immobilizing Ru complexes because of its high ion-exchange selectivity coefficients for Ru(bpy)32+ and its electrochemical stability. However, the migration of the Ru(bpy)32+ into the electrochemically inactive hydrophobic region of Nafion results in the poor long-term stability of ECL sensor. Several materials have been introduced to Ru(bpy)32+-Nafion film to improve performance, such as CNTs, silica, titania, and zirconia. Very recently, Ru(bpy)32+ has been immobilized into a Nafion–graphene composite film electrode.195 The introduction of conductive graphene into Nafion not only greatly facilitates the electron transfer of Ru(bpy)32+, but also dramatically improves the long-term stability of the sensor by inhibiting the migration of Ru(bpy)32+ into the electrochemically inactive hydrophobic region of Nafion. The ECL sensor is sensitive and as low as 50 nM TPrA has been detected. Furthermore, the ECL sensor was successfully applied to the selective and sensitive determination of oxalate in urine samples.
Covalent binding of ruthenium complex luminophores onto an electrode surface or in silica NPs could solve the leakage of the luminophores.196–199 Consequently, Ru(bpy)32+ was covalently doped in silica NPs and used as multicenter tunable structures for ECL amplification.200 The ruthenium complex covalently linked CNTs hybrid was also synthesized and used for constructing high performance solid state ECL sensors.201 The Ru(bpy)32+–CNT hybrid possesses high ECL efficiency which is ca. 17 times larger than that of the physically adsorbed Ru(bpy)32+ in the CNT matrix, which is possibly due to efficient electron transfer between Ru(bpy)32+ and the CNTs in the covalently conjugated system. The Ru(bpy)32+–CNT based ECL sensor exhibits high stability toward the determination of TPrA with a detection limit of 8.75 pM.
ECL are widely used in the field of enzyme biosensors.12 Enzyme biosensors based on luminol ECL generally involve specific enzymatic reactions between substrate and enzyme and subsequent ECL reactions between luminol and enzymatically produced hydrogen peroxide.202,203 In a recent example, an ECL glucose biosensor was proposed by encapsulating glucose oxidase into a AuNPs/sol–gel composite film.202 Hydrogen peroxide, the product of the redox enzymatic reaction, could be detected by luminol ECL. Therefore, the substrate glucose could be detected indirectly through the determination of hydrogen peroxide in the luminol ECL system. A disposable ECL biosensor for lactate determination has also been reported.204 The lactate recognition system is based on lactate oxidase and the transduction system consists of luminol. All the required reagents have been immobilized by a membrane placed on the working electrode of the screen-printed electrochemical cell. This ECL enzyme biosensor was used to monitor lactate in human saliva as an alternative procedure for obtaining the lactate level in a non-invasive way.
Most Ru(bpy)32+ ECL applications in enzyme-based biosensors involve dehydrogenase-type enzymes.205,206 The analyte was oxidized by the corresponding dehydrogenase with concomitant conversion of NAD+ to NADH followed by ECL detection of NADH. In view of the compatibilities of sol–gel materials, various sol–gel hybrid films have been adopted to immobilize alcohol dehydrogenase for the ECL determination of ethanol, including Ru(bpy)32+/Nafion/sol–gel/grafting copolymer of poly(vinyl alcohol) with 4-vinylpyridine film,207 Ru(bpy)32+/poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate)/sol–gel/chitosan film,208 Ru(bpy)32+/Nafion/CNT/titania film,209 Ru(bpy)32+/AuNP film,210 Ru(bpy)32+/partial sulfonated (3-mercaptopropyl)-trimethoxysilane sol–gel/AuNP film,211 and Ru(bpy)32+-doped silica/chitosan film.212
QDs have also found applications in ECL enzyme-based biosensors. For example, a glucose biosensor was constructed based on the quenching of ECL of CdSe NPs with O2 that was consumed in the enzymatic reaction.213 This sensor shows a sensitive ECL response to glucose in a wide linear range. In another study, a signal-on ECL enzyme biosensor based on CdS NPs formed in situ on the surface of CNTs was demonstrated.214 The CNT–CdS complex can react with hydrogen peroxide to generate strong and stable ECL emission in neutral solution. Based on which, the biosensor was fabricated by cross-linking choline oxidase or acetylcholine esterase with glutaraldehyde on CNT–CdS modified electrode for the detection of choline and acetylcholine. The ECL biosensor showed wide linear ranges with lower detection limit of 0.8 and 1.7 μM for choline and acetylcholine, respectively.
An interesting colorimetric ECL sensor was fabricated based on dual-color system including a strong red Ru(bpy)32+ ECL and a green reference light from a light emitting diode (Fig. 19).215 This sensor can transform the traditional ECL intensity information into a color variation. Under different applied potentials or concentrations of coreactants, the sensor displayed distinguishable color changes. The color variation can be directly monitored using naked eyes or a CCD camera, which greatly simplifies experimental setups. TPrA, proline, and dopamine have been successfully determined using this sensor (Fig. 20). It could be potentially applied in multianalyte analysis and point-of-care testing.
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the colorimetric ECL sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 20  Color variation under different concentrations of (a) TPrA, (b) proline, and (c) dopamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
ECL has been investigated at electrically heating electrodes because the temperature of the electrodes may affect the diffusion and convection of luminescent compounds near the electrode surfaces.216–218 The enzyme's activity is highly dependent on temperatures. Therefore, an ECL enzyme biosensor for hypoxanthine has been developed by using a xanthine oxidase modified electrically heated carbon paste electrode,217 the temperature of the electrode is controllable so that the most suitable temperature for the enzyme reaction can be obtained. The detection limit for hypoxanthine at 35 °C is found to be 30 folds lower than that at 25 °C. The proposed electrically heated electrode holds great potential for use in the ECL enzyme-based biosensors.
The effect of ultrasonic irradiation on the ECL of Ru(bpy)32+ was investigated, enhanced ECL and improved reproducibility were achieved under the ultrasonic conditions.219 The reason appears to be the ultrasonic agitation of the system resulting in greater mass transport across the electrode double layer and less dependence on the diffusion of reactants. A microscale ECL cell was recently fabricated with an ultrasonic vibration electrode.220 The lower mass transport in the microscale ECL cell was solved by ultrasonically vibrating the electrode probe, and thus the ECL sensitivity was significantly improved.
Ionic liquids (ILs) are new materials with potential use in various fields due to their special chemical and physical properties.221–223 ECL of Ru(bpy)32+ was observed in both methyl tributylammonium imide (M3BNIm) and 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIPF6) ILs.224 Coreactant ECL in BMIPF6 was also investigated using the Ru(bpy)32+/triethylamine system as a model.225 The high viscosity of IL caused a small diffusion controlled oxidation current of Ru(bpy)32+, while the high ionic strength led to a low electrocatalytic efficiency of the Ru(bpy)32+/triethylamine system, and thus much lower ECL intensity in IL than that in the neutral aqueous solution was observed. Recently, enhanced ECL efficiency is obtained by adding 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMImBF4) to aqueous solutions.226 Upon the addition of BMImBF4 to 0.1 mM Ru(bpy)32+ solution, weak binding occurred between Ru(bpy)32+ and BMImBF4, resulting in increases in the Ru(bpy)32+ redox current and ECL efficiency. A decrease in ECL intensity occurred for BMImBF4 > 1% (v/v), and the best compromise between high ionic conductivity and viscosity was reached at ca. 1% (v/v). Upon the addition of BMImBF4 to the Ru(bpy)32+/coreactant system at a GC electrode, the adsorption of IL occurred and resulted in a change of the polarity of the electrode surface, and sensitive and selective concentration enrichment of the coreactants was demonstrated. IL has also been used as additives for the CE-ECL analysis.227,228 By the use of 3% BMImBF4 additive, the detection sensitivity of avidin was improved by over one order of magnitude. Moreover, the interference for protein adsorption was almost avoided.
Hexamethylene triperoxide diamine (HMTD), which is an explosive commonly used by terrorists, has recently been sensitively detected using ECL technology coupled with silver nitrate enhancement.229 This approach is based on the fact that HMTD contains tertiary amine moieties, which can act as an ECL coreactant. The addition of small amounts of silver nitrate into the HMTD/Ru(bpy)32+ system resulted in a significant enhancement in ECL intensity and improved the sensitivity. A detection limit of 50 μM of HMTD was achieved, which was 10 times more sensitive than that based on HPLC/FT-IR detection method.
Many compounds have been found to be able to quench, inhibit, or enhance the ECL of popular coreactant ECL systems such as Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA, Ru(bpy)32+/C2O42−, and Ru(bpy)32+/DBAE systems. For example, phenol, substituted phenols, hydroquinones, catechols, and benzoquinones inhibited ECL of the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system.230,231 It is believed that the electrogeneration of benzoquinone derivatives at electrode surfaces quenches ECL via energy transfer. Inhibited Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA ECL by adrenaline, gallic acid, and anilines has also been observed.232–234 Recently, Ru(bpy)32+/TEA ECL has been found to be strongly inhibited by many compounds with electrochemical oxidation activities, covering inorganic compounds such as NO2−, NO, [Fe(CN)6]4−, and I−, and organic compounds such as phenol-containing compounds, indoles, aniline, imidazoles, purines, and pyrimidines.235 It was proposed that the lower oxidation potentials of inhibitors than that of Ru(bpy)32+ resulted in an increase in IR drop, which decreased the effective potential of working electrode and ultimately inhibited ECL intensity. Dopamine was found to be able to inhibit the ECL of the Ru(bpy)32+/DBAE system.236 The quenched ECL intensity was proportional to the concentration of dopamine in the range of 5×10−10 ∼ 7 × 10−7 M. The consumption of DBAE radical by the oxidation products of dopamine probably accounts for the ECL inhibition. In contrast, many compounds can enhance the ECL and chemiluminescence of Ru(bpy)32+ system.15,237,238 Noteworthily, silver ion can remarkable increase Ru(bpy)32+ chemiluminescence with many compounds, such as citric acid, glycine, proline, and tartaric acid, which probably results from the formation of silver complexes and NPs.238
5.5 ECL high throughput analysis and their applications
High-throughput and miniaturized biosensors based on ECL technology have attracted the interest of the research community. ECL arrays for high-throughput in vitro genetoxicity screening have been developed utilizing multiple layer-by-layer “spots” of DNA, enzyme, and metallopolymer [Ru(bpy)2PVP10]2+ (RuPVP).239–244 In a typical device, a pattern of small spots was created on a 2.5-cm2 pyrolytic graphite electrode block, each containing DNA, a cyt P450 enzyme, and RuPVP. RuPVP generates ECL by reacting with guanines and provides larger signals from damaged DNA.240 ECL from all spots was visualized simultaneously using a CCD camera. Rates of DNA damage from reactive metabolites produced by individual cyt P450 enzymes can be estimated simultaneously from the dependence of ECL intensity on enzyme reaction time. Genetoxicity of N-nitroso compounds bioactivated by human cytochrome P450 enzyme has been demonstrated using this ECL arrays.241 The ECL arrays were also employed to elucidate cytochrome P450 dependent metabolism of the tobacco specific carcinogen, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone.242 A significant time- and cost-related bottleneck in these ECL arrays is the generation and purification of enzymes. Therefore, rat liver microsomes and bicistronic human cyt P450 2E1 membrane films were used as enzyme sources in ECL arrays for toxicity screening (Fig. 21).243 Recently, a new method to screen reactive metabolites produced in multi-enzyme metabolic processes by the combination of human liver cytosol and microsomal enzyme sources into an ECL array has also been demonstrated.244
 Fig. 21  Microsome/DNA films and reactions on nanoreactors (left) or array chip (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Another approach to achieve high throughput analysis is based on wireless microarrays using bipolar electrodes.245 In this approach, ECL at the anode end of bipolar electrodes was activated upon electrocatalytic reduction of O2 at the cathode end of the electrode. The oxygen reduction reaction is catalyzed by hybridization of target DNA labelled with PtNPs to previously immobilized capture DNA. In the presence of DNA hybridization at the cathode, ECL was produced from the anode. Therefore, this approach can be used to sense hybridization of DNA oligonucleotides. The work has extended to a large-scale microarray composed of 1000 individual bipolar electrodes that were controlled with just two driving electrodes and a simple power supply.246 The system is configured so that faradaic processes occurring at the cathode end of each electrode are correlated to light emission via ECL at the anode end (Fig. 22). As a result, the state of each electrode can be monitored simultaneously using ECL as a photonic reporter. Besides bipolar electrodes, a microelectrode array for ECL detection and quantitative analysis of DNA has been demonstrated with a lower detection limit of 1 nM and a sample volume as low as 1 μL.247 The microelectrode array system can be integrated with a bipolar semiconductor photodiode array chip to fabricate a highly compact embodiment for on-chip handling of solutions and ECL detection.
 Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of the wireless electrochemical bipolar electrode microarray. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Optical fibre bundles have been productively used to fabricate arrays of transparent nanoelectrodes with ECL imaging properties.248–251 Spatially resolved ECL has been reported on an array of electrode tips which were fabricated by coating etched optical fiber bundle with gold.248 The ECL images obtained from the partially insulated array showed that the equivalent radius of the electrochemically active tips was ∼0.5–1.5 μm. Diffusional decoupling between individual electrodes in an array could be achieved without the need to insulate the array, and an electrochemical array based on metallized nanotips can be used to obtain spatially resolved information at the tip level as long as diffusional decoupling between the electrochemical processes induced around each tip are achieved. An array of 6000 optoelectrochemical submicrometer-sized sensors has also been reported for remote ECL imaging.249,250 This array was fabricated by chemical etching of a coherent optical fiber bundle to produce a nanotip array. The surface of the etched bundle was sputter-coated with a thin layer of indium tin oxide in order to create a transparent and electrically conductive surface that is insulated eventually by a new electrophoretic paint. Curing the fibers at 180 °C for 1 h induces the shrinking of the deposited film. The whole surface of the sensor array is then insulated except the tip apex, and the tip apex is used as the working electrode for ECL experiments. Very recently, a multiplexed ECL platform was described which consisted of encoded beads deposited by solvent evaporation in the wells of an etched and gold-coated optical fibre bundle comprising 50000 optical cores.251 The approach involves attaching specific antibodies to microbeads and leads to the localization of ECL labels on microbeads where the analyte has bound (Fig. 23). ECL is collected through a microscope and finally imaged with a CCD camera. This approach enables multiplexed assays because all of the individual sensing beads in the array are imaged simultaneously. Duplex and triplex assay results were demonstrated as well as a cross reactivity study.
 Fig. 23  (Top) A sandwich immunoassay is performed by exposing antibody-functionalized microbeads to three solutions: (1) an antigen containing sample, (2) biotinylated detection antibodies, and (3) streptavidin modified with a Ru(bpy)32+ complex (SA-Ru). The beads are housed in microwells created from an etched gold-coated fiber-optic bundle. The gold coated fiber bundle acts as the working electrode for ECL. CE and RE refer to counter electrode and reference electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
5.6 Surface plasmon-coupled ECL
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) is an example of light-metal thin film interactions.252–254 In SPR, the change in the angle of reflected light from metal thin film provides quantitative information on specific biological recognition events occurring in close proximity to the metal surface. Recently, a new approach to collect ECL signal was reported by coupling of the excited state of Ru(bpy)32+ with surface plasmons in a thin gold film.255,256 The energy radiates into the substrate at a defined angle. The ECL can be efficiently collected and directed towards a detector. There are several properties of surface plasmon-coupled ECL which make this phenomenon useful for chemical and biological assay. The signal is generated near a gold film which serves as both the source of energy and the optical element for collecting the emission. This means that only ECL generated near the gold film will be observed, which could reduce background. Moreover, the possibility of using gold as the metal film is advantageous because the surface chemistry of gold has been extensively characterized.
5.7 Single molecule detection
In the analytical field, the improvement of sensitivity is always of interest, especially in the detection of biological species. The ultimate goal in such studies is the ECL detection of single molecule. By using an ultramicroelectrode and observing events with high temporal resolution, discrete chemical reaction event occurring in solution was observed by single-photon detection of the product of an ECL reaction.257 The reactants were generated from DPA in acetonitrile with potential pulses applied to the ultramicroelectrode to produce DPA˙− and DPA˙+. When events during a single cathodic pulse following an anodic pulse were viewed with high temporal resolution, ECL emission from individual electron-transfer reaction events was resolved. Single reaction event of reactant generated at electrodes was also observed by using ECL as scanning electrochemical microscope (SECM) probes.258 With higher temporal resolution, the histogram of ECL intensity for a tip far from a surface shows clearly the discrete nature of photon emission, thus the individual ECL reaction event of the Ru(bpy)32+ and TPrA could be detected. Recently, ECL from a single conjugated polymer NPs (r = 25 nm) through the use of a single-molecule spectroelectrochemistry technique was demonstrated (Fig. 24).259 It will facilitate investigations about the effects of particle heterogeneity on ECL response.
 Fig. 24  (a) F8BT chemical structure. (b) schematic diagram of single-molecule spectroelectrochemistry cell. (c) wide-field ECL image. (d) wide-field photoluminescence image (same area as c) with the laser beam focused on the central area of the image (inset: expanded region showing ECL from four particles). The intensity scale (0–200 counts) and integration time (0.5 s) of images c and d are the same. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
6. Miscellaneous topics
6.1 Light-emitting device
From the earliest days of ECL there was interest in using this phenomenon for developing LEDs. After the mechanism of annihilation-type ECL was proposed, several attempts were made to develop solution LECs.260 These early works did not lead to commercial devices, perhaps because the operating life was not adequate and also it was difficult at the time to encapsulate liquids. The first solid state LECs using electroactive polymers was reported in 1995.261 Since then, increasing attentions have been paid to the investigation of solid state LECs, because they are more appealing as practical devices and promising alternatives for organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The major difference between LECs and OLEDs is that the operational mechanism of LECs is dominated by the presence of mobile ions, while that of OLEDs depends on the migration of excitons. LECs offer several advantages over OLEDs. Typical OLEDs require a multilayered structure for charge injection, transport, and light emission. LECs require only a single active layer that can be processed directly from solution. Furthermore, charge injection in LECs is insensitive to the work function of electrodes, thus permitting the use of air-stable metals (Au, Ag, or Al) as cathode materials. Finally, LECs generally give low turn-on voltages, and are insensitive to the thickness of active layers. Therefore, LECs will be likely more cost effective than OLEDs. Generally, LECs can be divided into two categories, including polymer-based LECs and ionic transition metal complex (iTMC)-based LECs.

6.1.1 Polymer-based LECs. 
Polymer-based LECs offer an attractive opportunity for low-cost production of functional devices in flexible and large-area configurations. Extensive efforts have been made to improve the lifetimes, transient response, and efficiencies of polymer LECs. Some excellent reviews about this area have been published.262,263 Therefore, we will focus our attention on some of the most recent developments of polymer-based LECs.
It has been reported that the limited operational lifetime of LECs stemed from photoinduced chemical reactions involving the conjugated polymer in the light-emitting p–n junction region, and that the extent of these side reactions was much more severe at elevated temperatures.264 Several approaches have been developed to improve the lifetime of polymer LECs, such as by adding a low concentration of ions into a light-emitting polymer active layer to form a single-phase system,265 by using some crosslinkable hole transport materials,266 and by selecting the composition of the active material and the protocol of operation.267 Notably, the composition of active material and the operational protocol can have a profound influence on the device performance of LECs. By optimizing the composition of active material and by employing an appropriate operational protocol, an orange–red emitting LEC, comprising an active material mixture of {MEH-PPV:PEO:KCF3SO3} sandwiched between stable ITO and Al electrodes, can attain a respectable operational lifetime of ∼1000 h at a significant brightness of >100 cd m−2 and a high power conversion efficiency of 2 lm/W.267
Planar LECs with extremely large interelectrode gaps of 1 mm have been characterized by analyzing doping concentrations, emission-zone position, and turn-on time.268 The position of the p–n junction in such LECs with Au electrodes contacting an active material mixture of MEH-PPV, poly(ethylene oxide), and a XCF3SO3 salt (X = Li, K, Rb), depends on the salt selection. The p-n junction is positioned very close to the negative electrode using LiCF3SO3, and is significantly more centered in the interelectrode gap using KCF3SO3 or RbCF3SO3. The devices using KCF3SO3 or RbCF3SO3 exhibit significantly faster turn-on times than the devices using LiCF3SO3, which is a consequence of a higher ionic conductivity in the former devices.
Electrochemical side-reactions involving the electrolyte can be a significant and undesired feature in LECs. Recent study demonstrates that an electrochemical side-reaction at the cathodic interface can be the dominant process during the initial operation of common LECs, as directly evidenced by the formation a degradation layer at the cathodic interface and by a delay in the onset of n-type doping.269 And it is possible to alleviate the extent of this undesired side-reaction and attain a relatively centered p–n junction by operating LECs at a high initial applied voltage and under conditions at which the LECs active material exhibits high ionic conductivity.


6.1.2 iTMC-based LECs. 
iTMC-based LECs have received increasing attention because of their several advantages over conventional polymer-based LECs.270–273 iTMC-based LECs do not require the presence of an added electrolyte or an ion-conducting polymer, making the device architecture simpler than that of polymer-based LECs and free from phase separation problems. Moreover, iTMCs can be synthesized and purified with relative ease, and show excellent electrochemical, photochemical, and thermal stability, good charge-transport properties, and long-lived excited states. Finally, higher efficiency is expected for iTMC-based LECs because of efficient phosphorescence of iTMCs at room temperature. The first iTMC-based LEC device, based on an ionic ruthenium complex, was reported in 1996.274 Since then, many efforts have been made on iTMC-based LECs. These studies lead to the development of lots of valuable strategies to improve the stability, turn-on time, and efficiency of iTMC-based LECs.275,276 Because most research on ionic ruthenium complex-based LECs were carried out before 2007, and there are several excellent review articles published earlier on iTMC-based LECs,270,271 this review will focus on ionic iridium(III)-based LECs.
Due to the limited ligand-field spitting energies of central metal ions of ionic ruthenium complexes, the majority of electroluminescent devices based on ionic ruthenium complexes reported thus far exhibit orange-red emission, with emission spectra having a maximum wavelength between 600 and 650 nm. Iridium complexes have turned out to be highly promising candidates with high quantum efficiencies for color tuning over ruthenium complexes due to higher ligand-field splitting energies of the trivalent iridium ion. In 2004, LECs based on ionic iridium complexes was first demonstrated.277 The device fabricated from [Ir(ppy)2(dtb-bpy)]PF6 (dtb-bpy = 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-dipyridyl) emits yellow light with a brightness that exceeds 300 cd m−2 and a luminous power efficiency that exceeds 10 lm/W at just 3 V. Subsequently, several effective methods have been developed to tune the light emission wavelength of cationic iridium complexes and corresponding LECs. For example, the color tuning can be achieved by using diimine ancillary ligands involving electron-donating nitrogen atoms, since the color-tuning towards blue is difficult for cationic iridium complexes containing bpy-type ancillary ligands. Based on which, LECs based on [Ir(dFppy)2(pzpy)]PF6 (dFppy = 2-(2,4-difluorophenyl) pyridine, pzpy = 2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl) pyridine) have been developed, and show the bluest light emission (460 nm) for iTMC-based LECs reported so far.278 Recently, the first white iTMC-based LEC has been prepared by combining the blue-green-emitting complexes and red-emitting complexes in the host–guest systems.279 Highly efficient blue-green to red emitting cationic iridium complexes have also been obtained by tuning the conjugation length of imidazole-type ancillary ligands.280
Besides color tuning, much research has been devoted to increase efficiencies. For example, highly efficient LECs consisting of green-emitting [Ir(dFppy)2sb]PF6 (sb = 4,5-diaza-9,9′-spirobifluorene) as the host and orange-emitting [Ir(ppy)2sb]PF6 as the guest was fabricated.281 The LECs based on such host–guest cationic complex systems show substantially enhanced quantum efficiencies of up to 10.4% (36.8 lm/W), representing a 1.5 times enhancement compared to those of pure host and guest devices due to suppressed intermolecular interactions. Another highly efficient LECs was obtained by reducing the self-quenching effect based on enhanced steric hindrance.282 The devices that use single-layered neat film of [Ir(ppy)2sb]PF6 and [Ir(dFppy)2sb]PF6 achieve high peak external quantum efficiencies and power efficiencies of 7.1% and 22.6 lm/W at 2.5 V, and 7.1% and 26.2 lm/W at 2.8 V, respectively. Also, a very efficient green light-emitting complex, [Ir(dFppy)2(dtb-bpy)]PF6, with a photoluminescence quantum yield in a solid film close to unity has been synthesized. The LEC based on this complex has an high external quantum efficiency of 15% and a power efficiency of 38 Lm/W, respectively.283 Noteworthily, the peak external quantum efficiency, current efficiency, and power efficiency of a new white LEC reach up to 5.2%, 11.2 cd A−1, and 10 lm/W, respectively. These are the highest for white LECs reported so far, indicating the great potential of the use of cationic iridium complexes in white LECs.280
Currently, the low stability has seriously retarded the practical application of LECs. Extensive research has been carried out to improve the lifetime of iridium complexes-based LECs. The lifetime has been significantly improved through increasing the hydrophobicity of complex by introducing bulky aromatic groups on the periphery of the complex,284 and by the use of Ir-iTMC that forms a supramolecular cage via an intramolecular π–π stacking.285 The lifetime of a simple employing air-stable electrodes and using the supramolecularly-caged complex [Ir(ppy)2(Hpbpy)]PF6 (Hpbpy = 6-phenyl-2,2′-bipyridine) as the only active component is more than 3000 h at an average luminance of 200 cd m−2 while operating at a driving voltage of 3 volts, which is much better than the record lifetime reported for an iridium based LEC (60 h) and reaches the stability required for practical applications. This remarkable increase in lifetime was obtained without sacrificing the device turn-on time of a few seconds. The total photon flux emitted by the device is 73 J, which is two orders of magnitude larger that the best value reported before. Highly stable LEC based on another supramolecularly-caged ionic Iridium(III) complex [Ir(ppy)2(ptbpy)]PF6 (ptbpy = 6-phenyl-4-(2-thienyl)-2,2′-bipyridine) exhibits a maximum luminance value of 2700 cd m−2 which is by far the highest value reported for an iTMC device.286 Density functional theory (DFT) calculations show that this stacking is maintained in the excited-state thus protecting the complex against ligand-exchange reactions. These characteristics make them suitable for practical lighting and signing applications. Later, LEC was fabricated using a new cationic iridium(III) complex [Ir(ppy)2(dpbpy)]PF6 (dpbpy = 6,6′-diphenyl-2,2′-bipyridine) that exhibited a double intramolecular π-stacking between the two phenyl groups of the dpbpy ligand and different cyclometallated ppy ligands.287 Surprisingly, its lifetime is shorter with respect to previous device using a similar complex that can only form one phenyl-ppy intramolecular π-stack. The shorter lifetime is attributed to the distortion of the planarity of bpy ligand domain when the two attached phenyl groups π-stack with the phenyl groups of the ppy ligands, which renders the complex more susceptible to emission losses and degradation reactions.
Another limitation for the practical applications of iTMC-based LECs is their slow turn-on times. Different strategies have been developed to improve turn-on time. One strategy is to fabricate LECs using ruthenium and iridium complexes with pendant triethylammonium groups bonded to the ligands with methylene units of various lengths.288 The presence of ionic moieties dramatically shortens the turn-on times of the devices. These materials led to devices with turn-on times as short as 2.5 min at 3 V for the iridium complexes and as low as 5 s for the ruthenium complexes. These are the fastest turn-on times for pristine heteroleptic iridium complexes. Another strategy to decrease the turn-on time is by tethering an ionic Ir complex with imidazolium groups that increases the net charge per complex and the ionic conductivity of LECs.289 Since turn-on time is dependent on the mobility of counterions, it usually ranges from a few seconds to several hours. To overcome the slow turn-on times associated with iTMC-based LECs, a neutral iridium complex containing a pendant sodium ion instead of the classic iTMC with counter anion was designed.290 A dramatic decrease in turn-on time is realized since sodium ion has a faster mobility in solid film than bulky anions. In another study, ILs has also been used for decreasing the turn-on time of iTMC-based LECs.291
The mechanism of operation of LECs has been controversial, as there is no consensus regarding the distribution of electric field in these devices. A recent study has developed a method to probe the operation of LECs using electric force microscopy on planar devices.292 This study shows that obtaining the appropriate boundary conditions is essential for capturing the underlying device physics. This finding leads to the design of a new patterning scheme. The new patterning scheme can avoid overlap between the mixed-conductor layer and the metal electrodes, enabling the accurate in situ measurement of electric-field distribution. Based on new pattern scheme, the study shows that the accumulation and depletion of mobile ions near electrodes created high interfacial electric fields that enhanced the injection of electronic carriers. Another study was carried out to reveal the excimer nature of the electroluminescence emission by performing a correlated photoluminescence and electroluminescence investigation of LECs based on [Ir(4,5-diphenyl-2-methylthiazolo)2(5-methyl-1,10-phenanthroline)]-PF6.293 This study shows that the molecular rearrangement into aggregates favours the formation of excimer states, which are irreversibly formed once the device is biased and are the preferential emitting states even in devices left unbiased for a long period of time. The photoluminescence lifetime measurements in working devices provide unambiguous evidence of the excimer character of electroluminescence. These results show that excimers play a role in the mechanism of operation and performance degradation of iTMC-based LECs.

6.2 ECL imaging and scanning ECL microscopy
Because light-emitting species is formed close to an electrode, and ECL intensities depend on the microenvironment in the close vicinity of electrode surface, the monitoring of ECL signals provides a unique way to study the microenvironment in the close vicinity of electrode surface. By using ECL imaging technique, the time-dependent evolution of uniform flux at a disk microelectrode at short times and the edge-dominated flux at long times were observed.294 ECL imaging techniques has also been used for obtaining an image of surface electrochemical activity distribution with the location, size, and geometry of individual active regions clearly visible.295 The spatial resolution of this technique is quite high since it is determined by the distance the excited species diffuses before releasing a photon, and a relatively large fraction of the electrode or the entire electrode can be readily observed in a single experiment.
Recently, a device using fluorine-doped tin oxide working electrode for ultrasensitive ECL microscopy imaging was designed (Fig. 25).296 Polystyrene microbeads with a diameter of 8 μm were used to simulate randomly distributed biological cells on the microscope field of view. The Ru(bpy)32+ immobilized on the microbeads can be imaged at a concentration as low as 1 × 10−19 mol μm−2 and accurately localized with a spatial resolution of 0.4 μm. This system has the potential for ultrasensitive multiplex imaging on cells and tissues.
 Fig. 25  Schematic diagram of the ECL optical imaging cell (75 × 25 × 1 mm) and microscope imaging 20 × objective/30 ms. (A) Transmitted light image and (B) ECL image of Ru(bpy)32+-conjugated polystyrene microbeads using the biotin–streptavidin interaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
In a flow system, the diffusion of ECL reactants can be accelerated greatly. If the ECL reaction is slow, ECL emission will happen away from an electrode surface, resulting in the generation of ECL tail. Consequently, a simple method to roughly estimate reaction kinetics was developed by monitoring ECL patterns in a FIA system and to optimize condition for FIA.297 The study shows that linear velocity must be optimized relative to reaction time course to obtain the greatest ECL intensity. In general, the maximum ECL emission is obtained at low linear velocities for slow reactions, at intermediate linear velocities for reactions with intermediate kinetics, and at high linear velocities for fast reactions.
In contrast to fast diffusion in flow systems, the diffusion in static thin-layer electrochemical cell is much slower, enabling the observation of electrohydrodynamic convection patterns by ECL techniques.298,299 With the modern tools of image recording and processing, the electrolysis of rubrene in a thin-layer electrochemical cell was studied.300 The ECL patterns under stable convection conditions are typically in the form of quasi-hexagonal cells or elongated curvilinear shape. Cellular patterns predominate at higher voltages, and their diameters are close to the doubled interelectrode distance. Since only the very small uncompensated space charge leads to a driving force for electrohydrodynamic convection in the electric field, a bipolar model, instead of unipolar model, was proposed to explain the formation of ECL patterns.
High-frequency ECL has been exploited to study microelectrodes.301 The electrode potential was a high-frequency square wave so that the diffusion layer and its associated light-producing reaction layer were kept in close proximity to the electrode, yielding high resolution ECL images. The ECL image study reveals that the electrodes constructed using simple techniques have quite bizarre shapes and certainly cannot be considered disks, which is quite different from that inferred from steady-state cyclic voltammograms. The results show that the responses of such electrodes would be difficult to fit to theoretical predictions for the flux and thus would be unsuitable for kinetic measurements. High-frequency ECL technique has also been used to image current density at microelectrodes.302 Nonuniform current present at microelectrodes during high frequency potential steps has been reflected by nonuniform ECL across the electrode surface. Unusually large current densities force currents to flow from regions of greatest curvature. At high DPA concentrations, the generation of ECL only occurs at regions of high curvature such as the circumference of a disk-shaped microelectrode, at the ends of a band, or at the tip of a cone. This enables the creation of a submicrometer ECL light source even though the uninsulated area of an electrode is much larger.
In 2006, a confocal microspectrometer was used to collect spatially resolved ECL pattern.303 The use of a confocal microspectrometer allows in situ ECL detection with micrometric spatial resolution and observes the concentration distribution of light-emitting molecules in the vicinity of an interelectrode gap. These results pave the way for addressing problems concerning LECs, such as the role of ionic transport conditions on the resulting light distribution (e.g. the shift of the emission maximum towards the cathode/or anode according to the resulting migration effects which affects dissymmetrically the transport).
Imaging of samples can also be obtained by monitoring ECL generated at a SECM tip that is scanned over a sample surface. Such imaging strategy was first demonstrated in 1998.304 A Pt microdisk electrode with a radius of 12.5 μm was used as the tip. A decrease of ECL signal intensity with a decrease in tip-substrate distance was observed due to the blocking of the reactants' access to the microdisk electrode by the substrate, and the resolution is in the micrometre range, which was limited by the tip size and tip-substrate spacing. To overcome the problem, an etched conical-shaped Pt nanoelectrode coated with electrophoretic paint with effective diameters of 60–100 nm was adopted as the tip, and the scan was carried out in a near-field regime.305 A resolution of the order of 200 nm, close to one-third of the wavelength of the Ru(bpy)32+ ECL emission, was achieved for ECL near-field image (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  ECL near-field image of a test sample containing submicrometer holes. Tip size, 172-nm diameter (effective). Data acquisition time, ∼8 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. 
Taking advantage of the phenomenon that ECL at microelectrodes can occur only at the apex of a conducting surface by using high-frequency potential pulses and high concentrations of ECL reagents in a solution, a flame-etched cone-shaped carbon fiber electrode that have no insulating coating was adopted as the tip.306 A resolution of about 600 nm was reported even though a feedback loop was not employed to control the tip distance from the sample. The scanning ECL microscopy is thus a promising near-field scanning optical microscope, especially for optical imaging of samples immersed in solution.1
With growing interest in organic LEDs, tuning-fork-based scanning probe microscopy in combination with ECL and other electrochemical techniques were utilized to characterize a [Ru(bpy)3(ClO4)2]-thin-film-based organic LED to obtain a better understanding of the mechanism involved in the charge carrier injection and transport processes.307 The study shows that both single and double charge carrier injection can takes place under suitable conditions, and the spin-cast [Ru(bpy)3(ClO4)2] thin films contain uniformly distributed nanostructures. These nanostructures produce heterogeneity in the current and luminescence responses.
The scanning ECL microscopy has also been used for visualizing the localized enzymatic activity (Fig. 27).308 By using the phase-sensitive lock-in amplifier, the potential applied to the SECM tip was sinusoidally swept to invoke an associated oscillation of ECL. The lock-in amplifier can recover signals by selective amplification at the modulation frequency even in presence of a big background noise, leading to improved sensitivity and high signal-to-noise ratio.
 Fig. 27  (A) Generator/collector-SECM image of glucose oxidase-polymer spots in 100 mM glucose and 0.20 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8); (B) SECL image of the same spots as SECM in 100 mM glucose, 1 mM luminol, and 0.20 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) using a 250 μm Pt disk as tip electrode (RG 2.2). Amplifier parameters: OSC frequency, 3 Hz; amplitude, 0.3 VPP; sensitivity, 5 mV; ac gain, 10 dB; (C) x-line scans through the spot centers from the SECM and SECL images in panels A and B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
6.3 Thermodynamic and mechanistic study
Extensive studies have shows that ECL is a very powerful tool for thermodynamic and mechanistic study. Since ECL generally involve energetic electron transfer reaction, it is particularly useful for investigating electron transfer, electron generation, as well as the existence and energetics of very unstable intermediates, and thus helps elucidate complex mechanisms. A good example is the investigation of reaction mechanism of the famous Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA ECL system. It has been proposed that the ECL mechanism of this system follows the mechanism described by Schemes 1–3 in Fig. 1. In the commercial Origen analyzer, the Ru(bpy)32+-tagged species are immobilized on 2.8 μm diameter magnetic beads. Direct oxidation of Ru(bpy)32+ on the beads would only occur for those within electron tunneling distance from the electrode, ∼1 to 2 nm, so most of the labels on the bead would not contribute to the ECL response according to the mechanism. However, the high sensitivity of the technique indicates that most of the labels on the beads participate in the reaction. To explain this phenomenon, scanning ECL microscopy experiment has been carried out to investigate ECL mechanism.30 In this experiment, Ru(bpy)2[bpy(COOH)2]2+ was covalently immobilized on an ITO electrode, this modified ITO electrode was at an open circuit potential during the course of the scanning ECL microscope experiment. Upon the oxidation of TPrA at 0.80 V vs. Ag/AgCl, an ECL signal appeared. The ECL signal could be detected only within a distance of less than ∼5–6 μm. This experiment clearly demonstrates that the oxidation of TPrA can cause the excitation of Ru(bpy)32+ at all positions of a 2.8 μm bead on an electrode surface. Assuming the maximum distance at which ECL is observed represents the distance that TPrA˙+ can diffuse before deprotonation, the half-life of TPrA˙+ was estimated as 0.2 ms. Since the potential for oxidation of TPrA˙, the standard potential for oxidation of TPrA to TPrA˙+, the standard potential for oxidation of Ru(bpy)32+ to Ru(bpy)33+, the standard potential for reduction of Ru(bpy)32+ to Ru(bpy)3+ are about −1.7, 0.9, 1.06, and −1.48 V vs. SCE, respectively, a new route described by Scheme 4 in Fig. 1 is proposed based on the energetic requirements for the observation of ECL. ECL has also been used to estimate the free energies of TPrA˙, because the energy of the electron transfer reaction that produces ECL must be larger than the energy of the excited state.309 Since ECL was observed in the rubrene-TPrA system and was not observed in the naphthol[2,3-a]pyrene-TPrA system, the potential for oxidation of TPrA˙ was estimated to be about −1.7 V vs. SCE based on energetic requirements.309
Another application of ECL is to provide experimental evidence for Marcus electron transfer theory.310,311 Marcus electron transfer theory predicts the existence of an inverted region where the electron transfer rate decreases with increasing free energy under conditions that the free energy of a very exothermic reaction is greater than the reorganization energy. According to this theory, the intersection of the potential energy surface of reactants with that of the electronic ground-state products produces a large energetic barrier compared to the intersection with respect to one producing an excited state in the highly exoergic electron transfer reaction, so that the rate of the formation of the ground-state products then becomes slow relative to the formation of the excited states. ECL provides the earliest experimental evidences of the existence of an inverted region.310 Later, the existence of the inverted region is confirmed by spectrophotometrically measuring the rates vs. exothermicity of electron-transfer reactions in a rigid glass.312,313 A recent ECL study at the liquid/liquid interface also supports the existence of the inverted region.311
ECL is also used to provide experimental evidence for the production of hot electrons.314 Hot electrons have been studied in metals, semiconductors, and liquids. In a semiconductor, hot electrons are those with energies appreciably higher than the conduction band edge. The measurement of the injection of hot electrons from the semiconductor into solution is experimentally challenging. Ta2O5 is a large band-gap material that is chemically and electrochemically stable and its film formation has been widely studied. The generation of ECL by the reduction of the oxidized forms of thianthrene and a heptamethine cyanine dye at an oxide-covered tantalum electrode confirmed the occurrence of the hot electron injection.314
6.4 Laser action driven by ECL
Dye lasers are vastly used in areas such as spectroscopy and light scattering. The active media in dye lasers is fluorescent dyes. Every electronic energy level of a dye consists of a stack of vibrational levels that are closely spaced and almost form a continuum of states. Thus one can obtain a laser emission at any wavelength within the fluorescence spectrum. However, the use of other lasers as pumping source to build a continuous wave dye laser makes dye lasers unreasonable pricewise. To overcome this problem, it has been suggested that energy obtained by the process of ECL can be used as an alternative pump for dye lasers in 1974.315 In 1998, a flow cell was successfully designed to enhance ECL efficiency, and laser action was observed in such a flow cell.316 The cell consists of a pair of platinum-film electrodes on quartz substrates and a 4-μm-thick polypropylene spacer. The thickness of platinum film is such that one platinum-film electrode is totally reflecting, and the other has 99.2% reflectance. The very small distance between two electrodes allows the generation of ECL without using supporting electrolyte. The absence of supporting electrolyte and the flow of solution can diminish quenching. Furthermore, the cell has a Fabry–Pérot resonance structure which can increase the stimulated emission rate by the effective use of the absorption/reemission effect of photons from the short-wavelength region, and thus the ECL spectrum is strongly modulated by Fabry–Pérot resonance. The ECL intensity increases nonlinearly with increasing faradaic current through the cell, and a clear threshold is observed at 0.45 mA. The peak heights of the ECL spectrum above threshold is much greater than those below threshold, and the envelops of the spectrum above threshold narrow. The narrowing phenomenon confirms that the emission is indeed a laser driven by the electrochemical reaction. This study demonstrates that ECL is an attractive alternative to pump continuous wave dye lasers in terms of power, tunability, and range of available wavelengths.
6.5 Single particle collision
NPs have a wide range of applications. The research of NP at the single particle level is important for understanding the properties of NPs and designing new materials. However the electrochemical study of single NP is obsessed by experimental difficulties, such as problems in generating, locating, and characterizing a single NP and in measuring the very small currents or charges associated with these electrode reactions. Most electrochemical methods for the investigation of single NP involve ultramicroelectrodes. Recently, an interesting ECL method for observing single particle collision events without the need of ultramicroelectrodes has been demonstrated (Fig. 28).317 Taking advantage of the catalytic ECL amplification of the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system by Pt NP on an ITO electrode and the fast temporal response of ECL, the single Pt NP collision event with ECL was observed. Every collision produces a unique photon spike whose amplitude and frequency can be correlated with the size and concentration of the Pt NPs. In comparison to other methods, the catalytic ECL amplification method should allow a study of the dynamics and the heterogeneous electron transfer kinetics at the single particle level. Moreover, it may be useful as a very sensitive analytical method, even down to the single molecule level.
 Fig. 28  Schematic diagram of a single Pt NP collision event. Reprinted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
6.6 Molecular interaction
ECL has been demonstrated as a useful technique for the investigation of molecular interaction. The ECL method for studying the DNA interaction with metal complexes including Ru(phen)32+ and Os(bpy)32+ was first demonstrated in 1990.318,319 Both Ru(phen)32+ and Os(bpy)32+ generated ECL in the absence of DNA, and the addition of DNA caused a decrease in the ECL intensity. A study of the decrease in ECL intensity, as a function of relative DNA concentration, allowed the estimation of the binding constant and binding site.318,319 DNA-binding mode of antitumor and antiviral agents could also be evaluated by utilizing the DNA-binding and the ECL generating abilities of Ru(phen)32+.320 The ECL intensity of Ru(phen)32+/DNA complex increased with the drug concentration was observed for cisplatin, daunomycin, and DC92-B. This suggests that these drugs bind to DNA with a major groove site, where Ru(phen)32+ should bind. The addition of drugs, such as mitomycin C and duocarmycin SA, did not cause a change in the ECL intensity of Ru(phen)32+/DNA complex, indicating that these drugs bind to DNA with minor groove binding. Recently, the interaction of [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ with DNA was investigated using ECL technology.68 The remarkable increase (∼1000 times) in [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ ECL in the presence of DNA makes the study of DNA interaction more sensitive and allows the use of much lower DNA concentrations.
ECL has also been coupled with CE to investigate drug–protein binding after equilibrium dialysis.173 Three antiparkinsonian basic drugs, pridinol, procyclidine, and its analogue trihexyphenidyl, were successfully separated by capillary zone electrophoresis with end-column Ru(bpy)32+ ECL detection. The relative drug binding to human serum albumin for each single drug and for the mixture of three drugs was studied. The results show that these drugs compete for the same binding site on human serum albumin. CE-ECL was further applied to the label-free investigation of the adaptive recognition of small molecules by nucleic acid aptamers using IL as a selector (Fig. 29).174 Cocaine was chosen as a model molecule. It contains a tertiary amino group and can generate strong ECL emission in the presence of Ru(bpy)32+. When cocaine is bound by its aptamer, it was excluded from the capillary by the IL selector because the cocaine–aptamer complex is negatively charged, resulting in the decrease in ECL intensity. The change of ECL intensity upon the formation of complex allows the investigation of molecule–aptamer interactions without requirement for the labelling and/or modification of aptamers.
 Fig. 29  Label-free method for aptamer-based recognition of cocaine from its hydrolysate (ecgonine) using CE-ECL analysis assisted with ionic liquid selector. Ionic liquid was used as the selector for the sample injection in the CE process, enriching cocaine and excluding the cocaine–aptamer complex and ecgonine from the capillary. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. 
6.7 Charge transport through DNA
The charge transport (electrons and holes) through DNA has been the subject of numerous recent studies, since understanding charge transport through DNA is essential to characterize and control important life processes, such as aging and radiation damage and repair.321 Very recently, the electron transfer behaviour of DNA was studied with ECL technology,322 in which an Au electrode is attached with DNA sequences tagged with Ru(bpy)32+-type labels and the ECL responses are recorded upon anodic potential scanning using TPrA as a coreactant. Both 15-mer and 20-mer dsDNA displays two ECL waves with the same ECL peak potentials, implying that complementary dsDNA helical structures can transfer electrons at a very fast rate constant. In contrast, 15-mer ssDNA does not show the second ECL wave. The absence of the second ECL wave shows that the direct oxidation of Ru(bpy)32+ at the electrode is inhibited by 15-mer ssDNA, suggesting that ssDNA is not electronically conductive.
7. Conclusions and perspectives
ECL is not only a commercially successful analytical technique and but also a versatile tool for understanding fundamental questions in chemistry, biology, and physics. It has many advantages for the detection of a wide range of analytes, such as biomarkers, toxins, and bacteria. The distinguished feature of ECL technique, the popularization of the commercial ECL instrumentation, and the demand in various fields will lead to a large increase in the development of new assays and the applications of ECL assays in clinical diagnostics, biodefense, drug screening, food and water safety, environmental detections, and so on. The demands will drive the active study in high-throughput analysis, aptasensors, development of new coreactants and ECL light-emitting molecules, miniaturization of instruments, ECL microchips, ECL imaging techniques, LEDs, single molecule detection, ECL mechanism, investigation of molecular interaction, ECL screening techniques, new analytical strategies, and new applications of ECL. For example, highly sensitive CCD camera-based ECL instruments will be rapidly developed to meet the need of high-throughput analysis and ECL imaging techniques. The miniaturization of instruments will lead to the development of portable devices such as biomedical point-of-care devices and field instruments for use in environmental research. The development of new ECL light-emitting molecules with different properties and high efficiencies can enable multi-parameter assays, single molecular detection, and the development of highly efficient LECs. The rapid progress in aptamers shall promote the development of ECL aptasensors. The remarkable feature of ECL technique shows that ECL will continue actively used for practical applications and scientific research. The broad applications of ECL and the progress of related areas render ECL a dynamic area of research.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20505016 and 20875086), the Ministry of Science and technology of the People's Republic of China (No. 2006BAE03B08), the Department of Sciences & Technology of Jilin Province (20070108 and 20082104), and Hundred Talents Programme of Chinese Academy of Sciences for financial support.
References

Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence, ed. A. J. Bard, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
A. W. Knight and G. M. Greenway, Analyst, 1996, 121, 101R–106R RSC .
W. Y. Lee, Mikrochim. Acta, 1997, 127, 19–39 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Gerardi, N. W. Barnett and S. W. Lewis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 378, 1–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Knight, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 1999, 18, 47–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Fähnrich, M. Pravda and G. G. Guilbault, Talanta, 2001, 54, 531–559 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kulmala and J. Suomi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 500, 21–69 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Richter, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3003–3036 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gorman, P. S. Francis and N. W. Barnett, Analyst, 2006, 131, 616–639 RSC .
R. Pyati and M. M. Richter, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 2007, 103, 12–78 RSC .
W. J. Miao, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2506–2553 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Marquette and L. J. Blum, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 390, 155–168 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bertoncello and R. J. Forster, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3191–3200 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Forster, P. Bertoncello and T. E. Keyes, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2009, 2, 359–385 Search PubMed .
H. J. Li, S. Han, L. Z. Hu and G. B. Xu, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2009, 37, 1557–1565 CAS .
D. M. Hercules, Science, 1964, 145, 808–809 CAS .
K. S. V. Santhanam and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1965, 87, 139–140 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Visco and E. A. Chandross, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1964, 86, 5350–5351 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Dufford, D. Nightingale and L. W. Gaddum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1927, 49, 1858–1864 CrossRef CAS .
N. Harvey, J. Phys. Chem., 1929, 33, 1456–1459 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Chang, T. Saji and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5399–5403 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Tokel and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 2862–2863 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Beideman and D. M. Hercules, J. Phys. Chem., 1979, 83, 2203–2209 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Faulkner, H. Tachikawa and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 691–699 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Ritchie, P. Pastore and R. M. Wightman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 11920–11925 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rubinstein and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 512–516 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Deaver, Nature, 1995, 377, 758–760 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Leland and M. J. Powell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 3127–3131 CAS .
J. B. Noffsinger and N. D. Danielson, Anal. Chem., 1987, 59, 865–868 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Miao, J. P. Choi and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14478–14485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Workman and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 5556–5561 CrossRef CAS .
B. Factor, B. Muegge, S. Workman, E. Bolton, J. Bos and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 4621–4624 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zu and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 3960–3964 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li and Y. B. Zu, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1768–1772 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Xu, H. L. Peng, B. Xu, S. J. Dong and K. Y. Wong, Analyst, 2005, 130, 541–544 RSC .
D. J. Vinyard and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 6404–6409 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Liu, L. H. Shi, W. X. Niu, H. J. Li and G. B. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 421–424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, W. X. Niu, H. J. Li, L. Z. Hu, Y. L. Yuan and G. B. Xu, Talanta, 2010, 81, 44–47 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. White and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 6891–6985 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Xu and S. J. Dong, Electroanalysis, 2000, 12, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Hu, H. J. Li, S. Y. Zhu, L. S. Fan, L. H. Shi, X. Q. Liu and G. B. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4146–4148 RSC .
J. Kankare, K. Falden, S. Kulmala and K. Haapakka, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1992, 256, 17–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kankare, K. Haapakka, S. Kulmala, V. Nanto, J. Eskola and H. Takalo, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1992, 266, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gaillard, Y. E. Sung and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 193–231 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. R. Verlet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 505–517 RSC .

Electrochemistry at Semiconductor and Oxidized Metal Electrodes, ed. S. R. Morrison, Plenum Press, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
T. Ala-Kleme, S. Kulmala, L. Väre, P. Juhala and M. Helin, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 5538–5543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kulmala, T. Ala-Kleme, A. Kulmala, D. Papkovsky and K. Loikas, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 1112–1118 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Liu and A. J. Bard, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 505–509 CrossRef .
C. Y. Liu and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6397–6401 CrossRef CAS .
Roche Diagnostics Corp, http://www.roche.com.
H. Yang, J. K. Leland, Y. D. and R. J. Massey, Bio/Technology, 1994, 12, 193–194 CrossRef CAS .
Mesoscale Discovery, http://www.mesoscale.com.
R. M. Wightman, S. P. Forry, R. Maus, D. Badocco and P. Pastore, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19119–19125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zu and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 3223–3232 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Skotty, W. Y. Lee and T. A. Nieman, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 1530–1535 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zorzi, P. Pastore and F. Magno, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 4934–4939 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Shi, X. Q. Liu, H. J. Li and G. B. Xu, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 7330–7334 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Xu and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 5308–5312 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Lai, M. Chiba, N. Kitamura and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 551–553 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Muegge and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 547–550 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bruce and M. M. Richter, Analyst, 2002, 127, 1492–1494 RSC .
M. J. Li, Z. F. Chen, N. Y. Zhu, V. W. W. Yam and Y. B. Zu, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1218–1223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schmittel and H. W. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 893–896 CrossRef CAS .
E. Berni, I. Gosse, D. Badocco, P. Pastore, N. Sojic and S. Pinet, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 5145–5152 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Friedman, J. C. Chambron, J. P. Sauvage, N. J. Turro and J. K. Barton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 4960–4962 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Hu, B. Zheng, H. J. Li, S. Han, Y. L. Yuan, L. X. Gao and G. B. Xu, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 9807–9811 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Sun, Y. Du, L. X. Zhang, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 2588–2592 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, F. R. F. Fan, S. L. Pan, V. M. Lynch, K. M. Omer and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7196–7197 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Richter, A. J. Bard, W. Kim and R. S. Schmehl, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 310–318 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou and J. Roovers, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 244–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. Roovers, G. P. Robertson and C. P. Grover, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 6708–6717 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Wang, J. Milam, A. C. Ohlin, V. H. Rambaran, E. Clark, W. Ward, L. Seymour, W. H. Casey, A. A. Holder and W. J. Miao, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 4068–4075 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Sun, Y. Yang, F. Y. Li, Y. Pang, J. L. Fan, L. C. Sun and X. J. Peng, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 10227–10231 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. W. Lo, C. K. Chung, T. K. M. Lee, L. H. Lui, K. H. K. Tsang and N. Zhu, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 6886–6897 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Chen, K. M. C. Wong, V. K. M. Au, Y. B. Zu and V. W. W. Yam, Chem. Commun., 2009, 791–793 RSC .
D. Bruce and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 1340–1342 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cole, B. D. Muegge and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 601–604 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Muegge and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Kim, I. S. Shin, H. Kim and J. K. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1614–1615 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Shin, J. I. Kim, T. H. Kwon, J. I. Hong, J. K. Lee and H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2280–2286 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zanarini, E. Rampazzo, S. Bonacchi, R. Juris, M. Marcaccio, M. Montalti, F. Paolucci and L. Prodi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14208–14209 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Kiran, E. M. Zammit, C. F. Hogan, B. D. James, N. W. Barnett and P. S. Francis, Analyst, 2009, 134, 1297–1298 RSC .
B. Leca and L. J. Blum, Analyst, 2000, 125, 789–791 RSC .
J. S. Littig and T. A. Nieman, Anal. Chem., 1992, 64, 1140–1144 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan, A. Mau and A. J. Bard, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 116, 400–404 CrossRef CAS .
I. Prieto, J. Teetsov, M. A. Fox, D. A. V. Bout and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 520–523 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Richter, F. R. F. Fan, F. Klavetter, A. J. Heeger and A. J. Bard, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 226, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sartin, A. J. Boydston, B. L. Pagenkopf and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10163–10170 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Omer, S.-Y. Ku, K. T. Wong and A. J. Bard, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9300–9303 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Oh, Y. O. Lee, T. H. Kim, K. C. Ko, J. Y. Lee, H. Kim and J. S. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2522–2524 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sartin, C. F. Shu and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5354–5360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rashidnadimi, T. H. Hung, K. T. Wong and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 634–639 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Omer, S. Y. Ku, K. T. Wong and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10733–10741 CrossRef CAS .
C. Booker, X. Wang, S. Haroun, J. G. Zhou, M. Jennings, B. L. Pagenkopf and Z. F. Ding, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7731–7735 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Rosado, W. M. Jr, Q. Sun and Y. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15719–15723 CrossRef .
W. I. Lee, Y. Bae and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8358–8359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Chang, R. E. Palacios, J. T. Chen, K. J. Stevenson, S. Guo, W. M. Lackowski and P. F. Barbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14166–14167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, Y. Xu and Z. F. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 4002–4010 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Dong, H. Cui and C. M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18408–18414 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Dong, H. Cui and Y. Xu, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 523–529 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ding, B. M. Quinn, S. K. Haram, L. E. Pell, B. A. Korgel and A. J. Bard, Science, 2002, 296, 1293–1297 CrossRef CAS .
N. Myung, Z. Ding and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1315–1319 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Haram, B. M. Quinn and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bae, N. Myung and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1153–1161 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, X. Cui, H. Qi and C. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8172–8175 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, Z. Ding and N. Myung, Struct. Bonding, 2005, 118, 1–57 CAS .
X. F. Hu, H. Y. Han, L. J. Hua and Z. H. Sheng, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1843–1846 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Sun, L. Bao, B. R. Hyun, A. C. Bartnik, Y. W. Zhong, J. C. Reed, D. W. Pang, H. D. Abruña, G. G. Malliaras and F. W. Wise, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 789–793 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Jie, B. Liu, H. C. Pan, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 5574–5581 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Jiang, J. P. Lei and H. X. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 8055–8060 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Lu, L. H. Tang, H. X. Chang and J. H. Li, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 9710–9715 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, X. Q. Zou, E. B. Ying and S. J. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4451–4454 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan, S. Park, Y. W. Zhu, R. S. Ruoff and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 937–939 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zheng, Y. W. Chi, Y. Q. Dong, J. P. Lin and B. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4564–4565 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, X. L. Wang, Y. L. Li, Z. J. Wang, F. Yang and X. R. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5118–5120 RSC .
I. Díez, M. Pusa, S. Kulmala, H. Jiang, A. Walther, A. S. Goldmann, A. H. E. Müller, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1–5 CrossRef .
K. M. Omer and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11575–11578 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, W. W., C. F. Duan, Y. P. Dong and J. Z. Guo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6975–6984 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, T. Xiong and H. Cui, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2826–2833 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Miao and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 7109–7113 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhan and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 459–463 CrossRef CAS .
N. Egashira, S. Morita, E. Hifumi, Y. Mitoma and T. Uda, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 4020–4025 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lu, J. Young and Y. G. Meng, Curr. Opin. Pharmacol., 2007, 7, 505–506 CrossRef .
N. Sardesai, S. Pan and J. Rusling, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4968–4970 RSC .
R. Kurita, K. Arai, K. Nakamoto, D. Kato and O. Niwa, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 1692–1697 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Jie, J. J. Zhang, D. C. Wang, C. Cheng, H. Y. Chen and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 4033–4039 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Tian, C. F. Duan, W. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang, H. Cui and Y. Y. Lu, Talanta, 2009, 78, 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Qi, Y. Zhang, Y. G. Peng and C. X. Zhang, Talanta, 2008, 75, 684–690 CAS .
W. J. Miao and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 5379–5386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. L. Qi, Y. Li, J. Yang, Q. Gao and C. X. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 2888–2894 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Zhu, D. Xing, Y. B. Tang and L. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3306–3310 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Lee, K. Yun, G. S. Lim, S. E. Lee, S. Kim and J. K. Park, Bioelectrochemistry, 2007, 70, 228–234 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Cao, J. P. Ferrance, J. Demas and J. P. Landers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7572–7578 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, W. Yun, P. Dong, J. M. Zhou, P. G. He and Y. Z. Fang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2200–2205 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dennany, R. J. Forster and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5213–5218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dennany, R. J. Forster, B. White, M. Smyth and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8835–8841 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dennany, C. F. Hogan, T. E. Keyes and R. J. Forster, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 1412–1417 CrossRef CAS .
M. So, E. G. Hvastkovs, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 23, 492–498 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Y. Du, J. Z. Kang and E. K. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1474–1479 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhang, D. Li, W. L. Meng, Q. Huang, Y. Su, L. H. Wang, S. P. Song and C. H. Fan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 368–372 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shan, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2009, 905–907 RSC .
A. D. Ellington and J. W. Szostak, Nature, 1990, 346, 818–822 CrossRef CAS .
M. Famulok, J. S. Hartig and G. Mayer, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3715–3743 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Liu, Z. H. Cao and Y. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1948–1998 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tuerk and L. Gold, Science, 1990, 249, 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Bruno and J. L. Kiel, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1999, 14, 457–464 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Bruno and J. L. Kiel, BioTechniques, 2002, 32, 178–183 CAS .
L. Y. Fang, Z. Z. Lv, W. H. and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 628, 80–86 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, J. M. Zhou, W. Yun, S. S. Xiao, Z. Chang, P. G. He and Y. Z. Fang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 598, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Huang, G. F. Jie, R. J. Cui and J. J. Zhu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 816–818 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Huang and J. J. Zhu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 927–930 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Bai, H. Wei, B. L. Li, L. H. Song, L. Y. Fang, Z. Z. Lv, W. H. Zhou and E. K. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 1935–1941 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Guo, J. P. Yuan, B. L. Li, Y. Du, E. B. Ying and E. K. Wang, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1209–1213 RSC .
Y. Li, H. L. Qi, Y. G. Peng, Q. Gao and C. X. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1322–1325 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, P. Dong, W. Yun, Y. Xu, P. G. He and Y. Z. Fang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3288–3292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. L. Qi, Y. G. Peng, J. Yang and C. X. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2571–2575 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yao, L. Wang, H. Y. Wang, X. L. Zhang and L. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 3269–3274 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yin, Y. Y. Xin and Y. Zhao, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 9299–9305 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang and G. J. Connell, RNA, 2009, 15, 1929–1938 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Gott and R. B. Emeson, Annu. Rev. Genet., 2000, 34, 499–U34 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Z. Y. Lin, L. F. Chen, B. Qiu and G. N. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6050–6052 RSC .
Y. Du and E. K. Wang, J. Sep. Sci., 2007, 30, 875–890 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yin and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 533, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, X. Q. Liu, W. X. Niu, S. Y. Zhu, L. S. Fan, L. H. Shi and G. B. Xu, Electrophoresis, 2008, 29, 4475–4481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xu, Y. Gao, H. Wei and E. K. Wang, J. Chromatogr., A, 2006, 1115, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, L. H. Shi, X. Q. Liu, W. X. Niu and G. B. Xu, Electrophoresis, 2009, 30, 3926–3931 CrossRef .
M. Sreedhar, Y. W. Lin, W. L. Tseng and H. T. Chang, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26, 2984–2990 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Qiu, X. B. Yin, J. L. Yan, X. C. Zhao, X. R. Yang and E. K. Wang, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26, 687–693 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Chang, K. H. Lee, C. C. Hu and H. T. Chang, Electrophoresis, 2007, 28, 1092–1099 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Yuan, J. S. Huang, J. Y. Sun and T. Y. You, Electrophoresis, 2009, 30, 479–486 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Zhao, T. Y. You, J. F. Liu, X. H. Sun, J. L. Yan, X. R. Yang and E. K. Wang, Electrophoresis, 2004, 25, 3422–3426 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, B. L. Li and S. J. Dong, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6718–6723 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Guo, H. H. Yang, B. Q., X. Y. Xiao, L. L. Xue, D. Kim and G. N. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 9578–9584 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Yan, X. R. Yang and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 5385–5388 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Yin, H. B. Qiu, X. H. Sun, J. L. Yan, J. F. Liu and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 3846–3850 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arora, J. C. T. Eijkel, W. E. Morf and A. Manz, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 3282–3288 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhan, J. Alvarez and R. M. Crooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13265–13270 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhan, J. Alvarez and R. M. Crooks, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 313–318 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhan, J. Alvarez, L. Sun and R. M. Crooks, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 1233–1238 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Qiu, J. L. Yan, X. H. Sun, J. F. Liu, W. D. Cao, X. R. Yang and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 5435–5440 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, H. Wei, J. Z. Kang, J. L. Yan, X. B. Yin, X. R. Yang and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 7993–7997 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pittet, G. N. Lu, J. M. Galvan, R. Ferrigno, L. J. Blum and B. Leca-Bouvier, Analyst, 2007, 132, 409–411 RSC .
H. Wei and E. K. Wang, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2008, 27, 447–459 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kim, Y. K. Lyu, H. N. Choi, I. H. Min and W. Y. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2966–2968 RSC .
Z. H. Guo and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 2683–2688 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. H. Xu, H. Wei, T. Huo and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 5439–5443 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xing and X. B. Yin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2939–2942 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Collinson, B. Novak, S. A. Martin and J. S. Taussig, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 2914–2918 CrossRef CAS .
L. Armelao, R. Bertoncello, S. Gross, D. Badocco and P. Pastore, Electroanalysis, 2003, 15, 803–811 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Sun, Y. Du, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 8166–8169 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Guo and E. K. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Guo, Y. Shen, M. K. Wang, F. Zhao and S. J. Dong, Anal.
Chem., 2004, 76, 184–191 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, J. A. Chen, S. Han, W. X. Niu, X. Q. Liu and G. B. Xu, Talanta, 2009, 79, 165–170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, J. Y. Yin and E. K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5635–5639 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Li, Z. F. Chen, V. W. W. Yam and Y. B. Zu, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 905–912 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, B. F. Liu and S. J. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 10448–10452 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 5199–5123 .
S. Zanarini, E. Rampazzo, L. D. Ciana, M. Marcaccio, E. Marzocchi, M. Montalti, F. Paolucci and L. Prodi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2260–2267 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. R. Gao, W. Gao, X. H. Xia and L. M. Zheng, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7545–7547 RSC .
X. Q. Liu, W. X. Niu, H. J. Li, S. Han, L. Z. Hu and G. B. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1250–1253 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, X. P. Wu, H. F. Xu, M. D. Wei, Y. M. Wang and G. N. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1599–1602 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Claver, M. C. Valencia Mirón and L. F. Capitán-Vallvey, Analyst, 2009, 134, 1423–1432 RSC .
A. F. Martin and T. A. Nieman, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1993, 281, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jameison, R. I. Sanchez, L. Dong, J. K. Leland, D. Yost and M. T. Mirtin, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 1298–1302 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Xu, Z. H. Guo and S. J. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2005, 21, 455–461 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, Z. A. Xu and S. J. Dong, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 575, 52–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Choi, S. H. Yoon, Y. K. Lyu and W. Y. Lee, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 459–465 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Zhang, Z. A. Xu, X. P. Sun and S. J. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 1097–1100 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, L. H. Zhang, L. Shang, S. J. Guo, D. Wen, F. Wang and S. J. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2273–2276 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Jia, Z. M. Cai, X. M. Chen, Z. J. Lin, X. L. Huang, X. Chen and G. N. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 263–267 CrossRef .
H. Jiang and H. X. Ju, Chem. Commun., 2007, 404–406 RSC .
X. F. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1444–1450 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Lin, X. M. Chen, T. T. Jia, X. D. Wang, Z. X. Xie, M. Oyama and X. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 830–833 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Sun, J. Chen. L. Guo and G. Chen, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2006, 564, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Lin, J. J. Sun, J. H. Chen, L. Guo, Y. T. Chen and G. N. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 2826–2831 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Chen, Y. W. Chi, X. X. Zheng, Y. J. Zhang and G. N. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 2394–2398 CrossRef CAS .
F. Takahashi and J. Y. Jin, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1581–1586 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hiroi, A. Inui, J. Y. Jin and T. Takeuchi, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 154, 269–274 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, Y. M. Liang and W. M. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2590–2599 RSC .
T. L. Greaves and C. J. Drummond, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1709–1726 RSC .
A. A.-M. Santafe, B. Doumeche, L. J. Blum, A. P. Girard-Egrot and C. A. Marquette, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 2401–2404 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Quinn, Z. F. Ding, R. Moulton and A. J. Bard, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1734–1742 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zheng, Y. W. Chi, Y. Q. Dong, L. Zhang and G. N. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15570–15575 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xu, Y. Gao, T. Li, Y. Du, J. Li and E. K. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xu, L. Y. Fang and E. K. Wang, Electrophoresis, 2009, 30, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, B. L. Li, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8516–8521 CrossRef CAS .
S. Parajuli and W. J. Miao, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5267–5272 CrossRef CAS .
J. McCall, C. Alexander and M. M. Richter, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 2523–2527 CrossRef CAS .
J. McCall and M. M. Richter, Analyst, 2000, 125, 545–548 RSC .
H. Z. Zheng and Y. B. Zu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Lin, F. Li, Y. Q. Pang and H. Cui, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 378, 2028–2033 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cui, F. Li, M. J. Shi, Y. Q. Pang and X. Q. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2005, 17, 589–598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chi, Y. Q. Dong and G. N. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 4521–4528 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Xue, L. H. Guo, B. Qiu, Z. Y. Lin and G. N. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1579–1582 CrossRef CAS .
A. Waseem, M. Yaqoob, A. Nabi and G. M. Greenway, Anal. Lett., 2007, 40, 1071–1083 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gorman, P. S. Francis, D. E. Dunstan and N. W. Barnett, Chem. Commun., 2007, 395–397 RSC .
J. F. Rusling, E. G. Hvastkovs, D. O. Hull and J. B. Schenkman, Chem. Commun., 2008, 141–154 RSC .
E. G. Hvastkovs, M. So, S. Krishnan, B. Bajrami, M. Tarun, I. Jansson, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 1897–1906 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krishnan, E. G. Hvastkovs, B. Bajrami, I. Jansson, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1713–1715 RSC .
S. Krishnan, E. G. Hvastkovs, B. Bajrami, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Mol. BioSyst., 2009, 5, 163–169 RSC .
S. Krishnan, E. G. Hvastkovs, B. Bajrami, D. Choudhary, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5279–5285 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhao, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5279–5285 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Chow, F. Mavré and R. M. Crooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7544–7545 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Chow, F. Mavré, J. A. Crooks, B. Y. Chang and R. M. Crooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8364–8365 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pal. M. J. Kim, M. J. Kim and J. M. Song, Biochip. Journal, 2008, 2, 66–72 Search PubMed .
S. Szunerits, J. M. Tam, L. Thouin, C. Amatore and D. R. Walt, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75, 4382–4388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chovin, P. Garrigue, P. Vinatier and N. Sojic, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chovin, P. Garrigue and N. Sojic, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3751–3757 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deiss, C. N. LaFratta, M. Symer, T. M. Blicharz, N. Sojic and D. R. Walt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6088–6089 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, J. Y. Chen, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. D. Li, M. Marquez and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209–217 RSC .
J. Homola, S. S. Yee and G. Gauglitz, Sens. Actuators, B, 1999, 54, 3–15 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, Z. Gryczynski and J. R. Lakowicz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 483–487 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aslan and C. D. Geddes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2556–2564 RSC .
M. M. Collinson and R. M. Wightman, Science, 1995, 268, 1883–1885 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard and F. R. F. Fan, Acc. Chem. Res., 1996, 29, 572–578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Chang, R. E. Palacios, F. R. F. Fan, A. J. Bard and P. F. Barbara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8906–8907 CrossRef CAS .
D. Laser and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 122, 632–640 CAS .
Q. Pei, G. Yu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 269, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Sun, Y. F. Li and Q. B. Pei, J. Disp. Technol., 2007, 3, 211–224 Search PubMed .
D. Dini, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1933–1945 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wågberg, P. R. Hania, N. D. Robinson, J. H. Shin, P. Matyba and L. Edman, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1744–1749 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 365–370 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, X. Gong, A. J. Heeger, M. Liu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1972–1975 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Fang, P. Matyba and L. Edman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2671–2676 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shin, N. D. Robinson, S. Xiao and L. Edman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1807–1813 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Fang, P. Matyba, N. D. Robinson and L. Edman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4562–4568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Slinker, D. Bernards, P. L. Houston, H. D. Abruña, S. Bernhard and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2392–2399 RSC .
J. D. Slinker, J. Rivnay, J. S. Moskowitz, J. B. Parker, S. Bernhard, H. D. Abruña and G. G. Malliaras, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2976–2988 RSC .
E. Holder, B. M. W. Langeveld and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1109–1121 CrossRef CAS .
V. Marin, E. Holder, R. Hoogenboom and U. S. Schubert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 618–635 RSC .
J. K. Lee, D. S. Yoo, E. S. Handy and M. F. Rubner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 1686–1688 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buda, G. Kalyuzhny and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6090–6098 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kalyuzhny, M. Buda, J. McNeill, P. Barbara and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6272–6283 CrossRef .
J. D. Slinker, A. A. Gorodetsky, M. S. Lowry, J. Wang, S. Parker, R. Rohl, S. Bernhard and G. G. Malliaras, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2763–2767 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, L. Duan, J. Qiao, R. J. Wang, P. Wei, L. D. Wang and Y. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2123–2131 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Su, H. F. Chen, F. C. Fang, C. C. Liu, C. C. Wu, K. T. Wong, Y. H. Liu and S. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3413–3419 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, J. Qiao, L. Duan, G. F. Dong, D. Q. Zhang, L. D. Wang and Y. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2950–2960 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Su, C. C. Wu, F. C. Fang and K. T. Wong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 261118-1–261118-3 .
H. C. Su, F. C. Fang, T. Y. Hwu, H. H. Hsieh, H. F. Chen, G. H. Lee, S. M. Peng, K. T. Wong and C. C. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1019–1027 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Bolink, E. Coronado, R. D. Costa, N. Lardiés and E. Ortí, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 9149–9151 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Bolink, L. Cappelli, E. Coronado, M. Graetzel, E. Ortí, R. D. Costa, M. Viruela and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14786–14787 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Bolink, E. Coronado, R. D. Costa, E. Ortí, M. Sessolo, S. Graber, K. Doyle, M. Neuburger, C. E. Housecroft and E. C. Constable, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3910–3913 CrossRef CAS .
S. Graber, K. Doyle, M. Neuburger, C. E. Housecroft, E. C. Constable, R. D. Costa, E. Ortí, D. Repetto and H. J. Bolink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14944–14945 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Costa, E. Ortí, H. J. Bolink, S. Graber, C. E. Housecroft, M. Neuburger, S. Schaffnerb and E. C. Constable, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2029–2031 RSC .
E. Zysman-Colman, J. D. Slinker, J. B. Parker, G. G. Malliaras and S. Bernhard, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 388–396 CrossRef .
H. C. Su, H. F. Chen, C. C. Wu and K. T. Wong, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 1922–1928 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Kwon, Y. H. Oh, I. S. Shin and J. I. Hong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 711–717 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Costa, E. Ortí, H. J. Bolink, S. Graber, S. Schaffner, M. Neuburger, C. E. Housecroft and E. C. Constable, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3456–3463 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Slinker, J. A. DeFranco, M. J. Jaquith, W. R. Silveira, Y. W. Zhong, J. M. Moran-mirabal, H. G. Craighead, H. D. Abruna, J. A. Marohn and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
E. Margapoti, V. Shukla, A. Valore, A. Sharma, C. Dragonetti, C. C. Kitts, D. Roberto, M. Murgia, R. Ugo and M. Muccini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12517–12522 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Pharr, R. C. Engstrom, R. A. Tople, T. K. Bee and P. L. Unzelman, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 278, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Engstrom, K. W. Johnson and S. DesJarlais, Anal. Chem., 1987, 59, 670–673 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Dolci, S. Zanarini, L. D. Ciana, F. Paolucci and A. Roda, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 6234–6241 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Shultz, J. S. Stoyanoff and T. A. Nieman, Anal. Chem., 1996, 68, 349–354 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods; Wiley, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
A. J. Kapturkiewicz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 372, 101–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Orlik, J. Rosenmund, K. Doblhofer and G. Ertl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1397–1403 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Wightman, C. L. Curtis, P. A. Flowers, R. G. Maus and E. M. McDonald, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9991–9996 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Maus, E. M. McDonald and R. M. Wightman, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 4944–4950 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore, C. Pebay, L. Servant, N. Sojic, S. Szunerits and L. Thouin, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1322–1327 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan, D. Cliffel and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 1998, 70, 2941–2948 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zu, Z. F. Ding, J. F. Zhou, Y. M. Lee and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 2153–2156 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Maus and R. M. Wightman, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 3993–3998 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1781–1787 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lei, L. Stratmann, D. Schäfer, T. Erichsen, S. Neugebauer, N. Li and W. Schuhmann, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5070–5074 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Lai and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 3335–3340 CAS .
W. L. Wallace and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1979, 83, 1350–1357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zu, F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6272–6276 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller, J. V. Beitz and R. K. Huddkston, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 5057–5068 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Closs and J. R. Miller, Science, 1988, 240, 440–447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. E. Sung, F. Gaillard and A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9797–9805 CrossRef .
R. M. Measures, Appl. Opt., 1974, 13, 1289–1294 CrossRef .
T. Horiuchi, O. Niwa and N. Hatakenaka, Nature, 1998, 394, 659–661 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1746–1749 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Carter and A. J. Bard, Bioconjugate Chem., 1990, 1, 257–263 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rodriguez and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 1990, 62, 2658–2662 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuwabara, T. Noda, H. Ohtake, T. Ohtake, S. Toyama and Y. Ikariyama, Anal. Biochem., 2003, 314, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boussicault and M. Robert, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2622–2645 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Pittman and W. J. Miao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16999–17004 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Lianzhe Hu
	Lianzhe Hu obtained his Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry from Jilin University. He is presently studying for a PhD under the guidance of Professor Guobao Xu at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry in the Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research interests include electrochemiluminescence and aptasensors.

Guobao Xu
	Guobao Xu received his BSc in chemistry from Jilin University, his MSc from Xiamen University, and his PhD from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry. After postdoctoral research at the University of Hong Kong, the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, and NTT Microsystem Integration Laboratories, he joined Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry as a Professor. His research interests include electrochemiluminescence, single-walled carbon nanohorns, biosensors, synthesis and applications of nanomaterials, and electrochemistry. He won Young Scholar Award of the Chinese Chemical society in 2005, and Excellent Youth Award of the Chinese Society of Electrochemistry and the Second Class Award of National Natural Science of China in 2009.
A → A˙+ + e−	(1)
A → A˙− − e−	(2)
A˙+ + A˙− → A + 1A*	(3)
A˙+ + A˙− → A + 3A*	(4)
3A* + 3A* → A + 1A*	(5)
A* → A + hv	(6)
Ru(bpy)32+ − e− → Ru(bpy)33+	(7)
Ru(bpy)33+ + C2O42− → Ru(bpy)32+ + C2O4˙−	(8)
C2O4˙− → CO2˙− + CO2	(9)
Ru(bpy)33+ + CO2˙− → Ru(bpy)32+* + CO2	(10)
Ru(bpy)32+ + CO2˙− → Ru(bpy)3+ + CO2	(11)
Ru(bpy)33+ + Ru(bpy)3+ → Ru(bpy)32+ + Ru(bpy)32+*	(12)
Ru(bpy)32+* → Ru(bpy)32+ + hv	(13)
Ru(bpy)32+ − e− → Ru(bpy)33+	(14)
TPrA − e− → TPrA˙+	(15)
TPrA˙+ → TPrA˙ + H+	(16)
Ru(bpy)33+ + TPrA˙ → Ru(bpy)32+* + products	(17)
Ru(bpy)32+* → Ru(bpy)32+ + hv	(18)

 	Fig. 1  Schemes for the reaction mechanisms of the Ru(bpy)32+/TPrA system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of the ECL curves of 25 mM DBAE and TPrA at Au and Pt electrodes in 0.1 M pH 7.5 phosphate buffer solution containing 1 μM Ru(bpy)32+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH.	 
S2O82− + e− → SO4˙− + SO42−	(19)
Ru(bpy)32+ + e− → Ru(bpy)3+	(20)
Ru(bpy)3+ + SO4˙− → Ru(bpy)32+* + SO42−	(21)
Ru(bpy)32+ + SO4˙− → Ru(bpy)33+ + SO42−	(22)
Ru(bpy)33+ + Ru(bpy)3+ → Ru(bpy)32+ + Ru(bpy)32+*	(23)
Ru(bpy)32+* → Ru(bpy)32+ + hv	(24)

 	Fig. 3  (A) Scheme of ECL switch based on [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ and DNA. (B) ECL intensities in 5 mM pH 5.5 oxalate solution containing 0.1 mM [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ (curve a) and 0.1 mM [Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ + 0.16 mM DNA (curve b). Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Low-magnification SEM, (b) high-magnification SEM, and (c) TEM image of the Ru(bpy)32+-containing luminescent supramolecular microstructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Structure of [Ru(bpy)2(4,4′-(CH3(CH2)14COO)2bpy)]2+ (B) SEM (a) and TEM (b) images of the product. Insets in panels a and b show side-face SEM image and SAED pattern of single nanobelt, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structures of new ECL active aromatic compounds and model compounds. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The electrochemical cell includes a silver-wire quasi-reference electrode, an Au planar counter electrode, and a 50 nm conjugated polymer-coated indium tin oxide (ITO) working electrode. (b) Images of free and pinned ECL waves triggered by 250 nm AuNPs with potential steps of 1.5 and 1.8 V, respectively. (c) Radius vs. time for (b). (d) ECL images at (left) 0.3 and (right) 0.6 s after the potential step of 1.6 V. The integration time was 100 ms (free) and 12 ms (pinned) in (b) and 100 ms in (d). Scale bars are 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Microwave pyrolysis approach to carbon NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Detection procedure: (1) immobilization of hemagglutinin (or antigen peptide) on an Au electrode; (2) binding of immunoliposome with hemagglutinin onto the Au electrode through competitive antigen–antibody reaction; (3) destruction of immunoliposome by addition of ethanol; (4) adsorption of Ru(II) complex by heating at 60 °C for 10 min; (5) ECL measurement on application of potential. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of ECL-based single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) immunosensors after addition of PSA and the RuBPY-silica-Ab2 NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of DNA hybridization on a polystyrene bead as the ECL label carrier and a magnetic bead for the separation of analyte- contained ECL label/polystyrene beads. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of the hairpin–DNA probe detection for DNA hybridization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the procedure employed for the modification of the GC electrode and ECL detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2007 Elsevier.	 

Thrombin and lysozyme	Ru(phen)32+ as intercalator into dsDNA	0.05 pM for thrombin	
160

Thrombin	Sandwich type with Ru(bpy)32+ as labels	10 nM	
150

Thrombin	ECL quenching with ferrocene as a quencher	60 pM	
156

Thrombin	Target protein-induced strand displacement, Ru(bpy)32+ doped silica NPs as labels	1 fM	
151

Thrombin	ECL quenching with ferrocene-labeled molecular beacon	50 fM	
157

Thrombin	Sandwich type with QDs as ECL labels	2.72 nM	
153

Lysozyme	DMAET-capped CdTe NPs as labels, in the presence Ru(bpy)32+	0.5 nM	
155

Lysozyme	QDs as ECL labels	
	
152

Lysozyme	[Ru(bpy)2(dcbpy)NHS] label with AuNPs amplification	0.1 pM	
154

ATP	cDNA of aptamers labelled with Ru(bpy)32+ as probes	0.02 nM	
159

ATP	[Ru(bpy)2dppz]2+ molecular switch as a intercalator, label-free	100 nM	
68

Cocaine	Signal-on detection with Ru(bpy)32+ as labels	1 nM	
158

Pb2+	Pb2+-specific DNAzyme with Ru(bpy)32+ as labels	11 pM	
163

Anthrax spores	Magnetic bead-ECL sandwich assay	
	
148

Cholera toxin	Magnetic bead-ECL assay	40 ng	
149

Staphylococcal enterotoxin B	Magnetic bead-ECL assay	10 pg	
149


 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of aptamer-based displacement assay and ECL detection. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustration of the ECL aptasensor for ATP detection and its regeneration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram for the principle of the developed ECL aptasensor for detecting thrombin. (A) The adsorption of thiolated antithrombin aptamer on and the 2-mercaptoethanol block to the electrode. (B) The formation of the dsDNA between aptamer and its complementary ssDNA. (C) The intercalation of Ru(phen)32+ into the dsDNA sequence. (D) Dissociation of dsDNA and release of Ru(phen)32+ due to the interaction between thrombin and its aptamer, resulting in the decreased ECL emission, which was used to quantify thrombin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Principle of the ECL Pb2+ sensor based on DNAzyme. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the PDMS cell. (a) Working electrode in pipette tip, (b) capillary column, (c) electrochemical cell, (d) PDMS block, (e) glass slide. Modified with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the colorimetric ECL sensor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Color variation under different concentrations of (a) TPrA, (b) proline, and (c) dopamine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Microsome/DNA films and reactions on nanoreactors (left) or array chip (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic diagram of the wireless electrochemical bipolar electrode microarray. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (Top) A sandwich immunoassay is performed by exposing antibody-functionalized microbeads to three solutions: (1) an antigen containing sample, (2) biotinylated detection antibodies, and (3) streptavidin modified with a Ru(bpy)32+ complex (SA-Ru). The beads are housed in microwells created from an etched gold-coated fiber-optic bundle. The gold coated fiber bundle acts as the working electrode for ECL. CE and RE refer to counter electrode and reference electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) F8BT chemical structure. (b) schematic diagram of single-molecule spectroelectrochemistry cell. (c) wide-field ECL image. (d) wide-field photoluminescence image (same area as c) with the laser beam focused on the central area of the image (inset: expanded region showing ECL from four particles). The intensity scale (0–200 counts) and integration time (0.5 s) of images c and d are the same. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic diagram of the ECL optical imaging cell (75 × 25 × 1 mm) and microscope imaging 20 × objective/30 ms. (A) Transmitted light image and (B) ECL image of Ru(bpy)32+-conjugated polystyrene microbeads using the biotin–streptavidin interaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  ECL near-field image of a test sample containing submicrometer holes. Tip size, 172-nm diameter (effective). Data acquisition time, ∼8 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) Generator/collector-SECM image of glucose oxidase-polymer spots in 100 mM glucose and 0.20 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.8); (B) SECL image of the same spots as SECM in 100 mM glucose, 1 mM luminol, and 0.20 M Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.5) using a 250 μm Pt disk as tip electrode (RG 2.2). Amplifier parameters: OSC frequency, 3 Hz; amplitude, 0.3 VPP; sensitivity, 5 mV; ac gain, 10 dB; (C) x-line scans through the spot centers from the SECM and SECL images in panels A and B. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic diagram of a single Pt NP collision event. Reprinted with permission from ref. 317. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Label-free method for aptamer-based recognition of cocaine from its hydrolysate (ecgonine) using CE-ECL analysis assisted with ionic liquid selector. Ionic liquid was used as the selector for the sample injection in the CE process, enriching cocaine and excluding the cocaine–aptamer complex and ecgonine from the capillary. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
