Enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00392E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00392E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 13449-13466Enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems†

        
          
            Shaohua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      bf, 
      
        
          
            Shusong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiying 
            Sun
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shihao 
            Li
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiafu 
            Shi
          
          
        
      *ade and 

        
          
            Zhongyi 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *bcd
aSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: shijiafu@tju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: zhyjiang@tju.edu.cn
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China
dJoint School of National University of Singapore and Tianjin University, International Campus of Tianjin University, Binhai New City, Fuzhou, 350207, China
eState Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 10090, China
fInstitute for Molecules and Materials, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Received 
      30th June 2021
    First published on 4th November 2021AbstractEfficient chemical transformation in a green, low-carbon way is crucial for the sustainable development of modern society. Enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems (EPCS) that integrate the exceptional selectivity of enzyme catalysis and the unique reactivity of photocatalysis hold great promise in solar-driven ‘molecular editing’. However, the involvement of multiple components and catalytic processes challenged the design of efficient and stable EPCS. To show a clear picture of the complex catalytic system, in this review, we analyze EPCS from the perspective of system engineering. First, we disintegrate the complex system into four elementary components, and reorganize these components into biocatalytic and photocatalytic ensembles (BE and PE). By resolving current accessible systems, we identify that connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE are two crucial factors that govern the performance of EPCS. Then, we discuss the origin of undesirable connectivity and low compatibility, and deduce the possible solutions. Based on these understandings, we propose the designing principles of EPCS. Lastly, we provide a future perspective of EPCS.
Shaohua Zhang
Shaohua Zhang received his PhD in Chemical Technology from Tianjin University in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. Zhongyi Jiang, where he worked on the design and construction of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems for solar chemical production. Then, he joined the group of Prof. Daniela A. Wilson at Radboud University in the Netherlands as a postdoctoral researcher and now he has started working on artificial photosynthetic nanomotors in the same group as a Marie Curie fellow. His research interests include photobiocatalysis and supramolecular nanomotors.
Shusong Liu
Shusong Liu received his Master's degree in Environmental Science and Engineering from Tianjin University of Technology in 2020. He is now pursuing a PhD under the tutelage of Associate Professor Jiafu Shi at the School of Environment Science and Engineering of Tianjin University. His research interests include artificial photosynthesis and biocatalysis.
Yiying Sun
Yiying Sun received her Bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Tianjin University in 2017. She is now pursuing a PhD under the tutelage of Prof. Zhongyi Jiang at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. Her research interests include photobiocatalysis and nanobiotechnology.
Shihao Li
Shihao Li received his Bachelor degree in Bioengineering from Hebei University of Technology in 2016. He is now pursuing a PhD under the tutelage of Professor Zhongyi Jiang and Professor Hong Wu at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. His research interests include artificial photosynthesis and enzyme catalysis.
Jiafu Shi
Jiafu Shi is an associate professor at the School of Environmental Science and Engineering of Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Technology from Tianjin University in 2013 under the tutelage of Prof. Zhongyi Jiang. After graduation, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University, and started working at the School of Environmental Science and Engineering. He was a visiting scholar of University of California at Berkeley with Professor Phillip B. Messersmith from 2016 to 2017. He is the winner of National Science Fund for Outstanding Young Scholars in China. His research interest encompasses enzyme-photo-coupled catalysis, biocatalysis, and bioinspired functional materials for energy and environmental applications. He has co-authored over 100 peer-reviewed papers including in Chemical Society Reviews, ACS Catalysis, Advanced Functional Materials, Chem, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, Joule, etc. The total number of citations is over 3300, and his h-index is 32.
Zhongyi Jiang
Zhongyi Jiang is a Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. He obtained a PhD degree from Tianjin University in 1994. He was a visiting scholar of University of Minnesota with Prof. Edward Cussler in 1997 and California Institute of Technology with Prof. David Tirrell in 2009. He is the winner of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China, Cheung Kong Chair Professor, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interest includes biomimetic and bioinspired membranes and membrane processes, biocatalysis, photocatalysis. To date, he has co-authored over 600 peer-reviewed papers, including in Nature Communications, Chemical Society Reviews, Progress in Polymer Science, Journal of the American Chemical Society, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, Advanced Materials, ACS Catalysis, Advanced Functional Materials, etc. The total number of citations is over 23000 and his h-index is 86.

Key learning points
(1) Concept, general framework, and reaction routes of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems.
(2) Connectivity and compatibility between biocatalytic and photocatalytic ensembles.
(3) Bioinspired coordination of biocatalytic and photocatalytic ensembles for solar-driven chemical transformation.
(4) Designing principles of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems.

1. Introduction
Reducing carbon emission and remitting the dependence on non-renewable energy are highly desirable for chemical manufacturing. Solar-driven chemical transformation pioneers an indispensable low-carbon manufacturing system. This system utilizes the abundant solar energy to power the rearrangement of chemical bonds under ambient temperature and pressure. Currently, photo-chemo, photo-microbial, and photo-enzymatic catalytic systems have been developed for solar-driven chemical transformation. The photo-chemo catalytic system, coupling light-harvesting materials and chemocatalysts, is the most widely studied system, which has successfully enabled photocatalytic O–H activation, C–C formation, C–H activation, etc. Despite the great progress, the photo-chemo catalytic system is still severely restricted in driving the synthesis of complex organic molecules. Compared with chemocatalysts, enzymes have distinct advantages in catalyzing the synthesis of complex organic molecules, especially value-added chiral chemicals.1 Advanced protein engineering can further expand the substrate spectrum of enzymes.2 These ensure photo-microbial and photo-enzymatic catalytic systems to well complement photo-chemo catalytic systems for solar-driven chemical transformation.3,4
Photo-enzymatic catalytic systems or enzyme-photo coupled catalytic systems (EPCS) integrate the selectivity of enzyme catalysis and the unique reactivity of photocatalysis for solar-driven chemical transformation. EPCS are much simpler than photo-microbial catalytic systems, and afford an excellent model system to elucidate the reaction and mass transport mechanisms as well as to explore the potential of coupled biocatalysis and photocatalysis. The first EPCS can be dated back to the early 1960s, where partly purified hydrogenase worked together with spinach chloroplasts for solar-driven H2 evolution.5 The integration of enzyme catalysis and natural photosynthesis represented the first wave of EPCS. With the development of semiconductor photocatalysis, hydrogenase was coupled with semiconductors in the 1980s, representing the second wave of EPCS.6 Compared with chloroplasts, the semiconductor can more efficiently harvest solar energy, assuring EPCS for efficient solar-driven chemical transformation. However, due to insufficient understanding of enzyme structure, EPCS were often constructed through the random coupling of a semiconductor and enzyme, and the core catalytic mechanism of EPCS remained unclear. The third wave of EPCS started in the early 2010s, which was facilitated by the discovery of more enzymes, and a much deeper understanding of enzyme structure.7 This allowed the rational design of EPCS for solar-driven H2 evolution and CO2 reduction.8 In the past five years, non-natural enzymatic reactions, novel photocatalytic reactions, and photoelectrochemical cells were integrated into EPCS. This rapidly expanded the available reactions by EPCS to oxyfunctionalization, asymmetric reduction of alkenes, and enantioselective radical dehalogenation, etc., promising the synthesis of complex organic molecules.9–11 Despite the grand achievements in coupled biocatalysis and photocatalysis, the complicated interactions between different catalysts and catalytic processes brought about a number of new challenges for the development of EPCS. It is thus urgent and important to identify the key limiting factors of EPCS and establish basic designing principles for EPCS.
In this review, to show a clear picture of EPCS, we analyze this complex catalytic system from the perspective of system engineering (Fig. 1). First, we disintegrate the complex system into four elementary components, and reorganize these components into two catalytic ensembles, BE and PE (Section 2). We identify that connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE are two crucial factors that govern the performance of EPCS (Section 3). Then, we discuss the origin of the undesirable connectivity and low compatibility, and deduce the possible solutions (Section 4). Given these understandings, we propose the designing principles of EPCS, and finally, we provide a future perspective of EPCS for solar-driven chemical transformation.
 Fig. 1  The general framework of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems (EPCS). Four elementary components (tree level), including enzyme, substrate, photocatalyst, and solar energy, are combined to form EPCS (forest level). Based on the involved catalytic processes, EPCS are divided into the biocatalytic ensemble (BE) and photocatalytic ensemble (PE). Diverse reactions have been enabled by coupling BE and PE in different manners, which include sequential-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions, parallel-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions, photo-induced natural enzymatic reactions (or photoenzyme catalyzed reactions), and photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions. For efficient and stable EPCS, two crucial factors, i.e. connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE, need to be considered. 
2. System engineering analysis of EPCS
For complex catalytic systems, it is challenging to identify the key limiting factors when bearing the whole system in mind. Disintegration and reorganization are the first steps in understanding the complex systems and the prerequisite for establishing the designing principles. After carefully resolving currently accessible EPCS, we disintegrate the complex catalytic systems into four elementary components: enzyme, substrate, photocatalyst, and solar energy (Fig. 1). Here, we use “tree and forest” to reflect the relationship between the elementary components and the whole system. Complicated substance conversion and energy transformation among these components present grand challenges for the development of efficient and stable EPCS. To show a clear picture of EPCS, we reorganize the elementary components into two catalytic ensembles according to the catalytic processes they participate in, i.e. biocatalytic and photocatalytic reactions. For instance, enzyme and substrate are organized into the biocatalytic ensemble (BE) for biocatalytic reactions; photocatalyst, solar energy, and substrate are organized into the photocatalytic ensemble (PE) for photocatalytic reactions. Finally, BE and PE are coupled into EPCS to enable diverse reactions. Through system engineering analysis, we divide the construction of EPCS into two stages: (1) the construction of catalytic ensembles and (2) the coupling of catalytic ensembles for EPCS. The construction strategies of BE and PE have been well established by scientists from biocatalysis and photocatalysis, respectively. Thus, the coupling of BE and PE becomes the core task in constructing EPCS.
When coupling, two crucial factors, i.e. connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE, need to be considered (Fig. 1). For current accessible EPCS, BE and PE are either connected by electron transfer or molecule diffusion. Thus, the efficiency of electron transfer or molecule diffusion dominates the activity of EPCS. Moreover, BE comprising the ‘fragile’ enzymes can be easily deactivated by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and charge carriers (electrons and holes) generated by PE. The compatibility between BE and PE determines the stability of EPCS. Considering the above two factors, we need to (1) design BE and PE at the system level, i.e. considering connectivity and compatibility when designing catalytic ensembles, and (2) develop coupling methods to coordinate BE and PE. This can help the full potential of biocatalysis and photocatalysis for solar-driven chemical transformation to be exploited.
3. Coupling of catalytic ensembles for solar-driven chemical transformation
Currently, diverse reactions have been enabled by coupling BE and PE (Fig. 1). We categorized these reactions into (1) photobiocatalytic reactions and (2) photo-induced enzymatic reactions (Table S1, ESI†). Photobiocatalytic reactions integrated enzymatic reactions by BE and photocatalytic reactions by PE for chemical transformations. By combining BE and PE in solution, sequential-cascade and parallel-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions have already been established. Photo-induced enzymatic reactions referred to the natural or non-natural enzymatic reactions driven by light. BE and PE were organized by protein scaffold to enable the natural reactivity of the photoenzyme or induce the non-natural reactivity of the enzyme.
3.1 Photobiocatalytic reactions

3.1.1 Sequential-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions. 
Coupling BE and PE in a sequential-cascade has generated different types of photobiocatalytic reactions, including asymmetric reduction of alkenes and synthesis of chiral secondary fatty alcohols (Table S1, ESI†).10,12–14 For sequential-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions, the substrate was first converted into an intermediate by PE (or BE), and then converted into the product by BE (or PE) (Fig. 1). BE and PE were connected via the diffusion of the intermediate. The advantage of coupling BE and PE in the sequential-cascade was highlighted by photobiocatalytic asymmetric reduction of alkenes (Fig. 2).10 In this system, BE used ene-reductase and glucose dehydrogenase as enzymes, and NADP+ and glucose as substrates to reduce alkenes. PE used Ir-16 or flavin mononucleotide (FMN) as the photocatalyst and blue light (450–470 nm) as solar energy to isomerize the alkenes. Unreactive stereoisomers of alkenes for BE were first isomerized to reactive stereoisomers by PE, which were then reduced by BE to enantioenriched products. After 15 h illumination with a blue LED lamp (465 nm), (R)-dimethyl 2-phenylsuccinate was obtained in 87% yield and >99% ee by EPCS, while negligible product was obtained by only BE. This demonstrated that the coupling of BE and PE in sequential-cascade successfully expanded the substrate spectrum of BE and enabled the efficient and enantioselective production of chiral chemicals in a one-pot manner. Moreover, the integration of the stereoselectivity of enzyme catalysis and the reactivity of photocatalysis can also simplify the synthetic routes and increase the yield for enantioenriched chemicals (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 2  The coupling of BE and PE in sequential-cascade for photobiocatalytic asymmetric reduction of alkenes. BE reduced alkenes with ene-reductase and glucose dehydrogenase as enzymes, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) and glucose as substrates. PE isomerized alkenes with an iridium complex (Ir-16) or FMN as the photocatalyst, and blue light (450–470 nm) as the solar energy. BE and PE were connected through the diffusion of the intermediate. 


3.1.2 Parallel-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions. 
Oxidoreductases can catalyze multi-electron redox reactions in high selectivity and yield by consuming expensive biological redox mediators, such as NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H and ferredoxin. These redox mediators can be regenerated by metabolic reactions under in vivo conditions. To engineer oxidoreductases for in vitro application, efficient and cost-effective regeneration systems need to be developed and integrated with oxidoreductases for sustainable enzymatic transformation. Photocatalysts have been employed to regenerate biological redox mediators with abundant solar energy under mild conditions.8 Hence, PE that regenerated a redox mediator was coupled with BE for photobiocatalytic reactions (Table S1, ESI†). Differing from sequential-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions, BE and PE were operated in a parallel manner, where the redox mediator generated by PE was transferred to BE for enzymatic transformation. Currently, redox mediators of NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H, FMN/FMNH− and H2O2/H2O, or an electron itself, have been used to connect BE and PE (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  The coupling of BE and PE in parallel-cascade for photobiocatalytic reactions. (a) Connecting BE and PE by electron transfer for photobiocatalytic reduction of N2. (b) Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of NAD+/NADH for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction. FDH, formate dehydrogenase. FaldDH, formaldehyde dehydrogenase. ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase. Rh complex, [Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine. (c) Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of H2O2/H2O for photobiocatalytic oxyfunctionalization. 
For enzymes bound with electron-transfer cofactors (cofactors that bind to proteins and act as conduits for electrons), electrons could be directly transferred between BE and PE through these cofactors. Fig. 3a presents a typical EPCS using electrons to connect BE and PE.15 In this system, BE used nitrogenase MoFe protein as the enzyme to convert N2 to NH3. PE used CdS nanorods as the photocatalyst, HEPES as the electron donor, and blue light (405 nm) as the solar energy to generate electrons. Electrons on PE were transferred to the active site of nitrogenase of BE through the P cluster to trigger the reduction of N2. The coupling of BE and PE got rid of the dependence of nitrogenase on ATP, while using solar energy to drive N2 reduction. Besides nitrogenase, BE comprised [FeFe] hydrogenase, [NiFe]-hydrogenase, CO dehydrogenase I, or W-dependent formate dehydrogenase was also connected to PE by electron transfer for photobiocatalytic H2 evolution and CO2 reduction (Table S1, ESI†). For these enzymes, the active sites were generally buried by an insulating protein scaffold, which can only be reached by electrons on the photocatalyst through electron-transfer cofactors. Thus, the interface between photocatalyst and enzyme needs to be carefully designed to improve the electron transfer efficiency.
For enzymes without electron-transfer cofactors, redox mediators were necessary to connect BE and PE. Since ∼80% of oxidoreductases are NAD(P)-dependent enzymes, NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H has been recognized as one of the most important redox mediators in EPCS.16Fig. 3b presents a typical EPCS using NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H to connect BE and PE.17 BE used FDH, FaldDH and ADH as enzymes to convert CO2 to CH3OH. PE used a α-Fe2O3, BiFeO3, and Rh complex as the photocatalyst, H2O as the electron donor, and visible light (>420 nm) as the solar energy to regenerate NADH. The regenerated NADH was transferred from PE to BE to trigger CO2 reduction. Methanol was produced at a rate of 220 μM h−1 by consuming H2O and solar energy. Besides PE, an enzymatic NADH regeneration ensemble was also coupled with BE for CO2 reduction. Although consuming L-glutamate (not water), methanol can only be produced at a rate of 8 μM h−1 (Table S1, ESI†). The much higher reaction rate highlighted the advantages of EPCS for CO2 reduction: (1) H2O as the electron donor, and (2) high CO2 reduction rate. Recently, engineered photoautotrophic microorganisms, like cyanobacteria, were demonstrated as another promising system for solar chemical production with CO2 and H2O (Table S2, ESI†). The thylakoid of cyanobacteria can regenerate NADPH and ATP by oxidizing H2O to O2. The engineered metabolic pathways convert CO2 into valuable products by consuming NADPH and ATP. 1-Butanol was produced at a rate of 170 μM h−1 by the engineered cyanobacteria.18 Although the reaction rate is lower than EPCS, engineered cyanobacteria can produce more complex organic molecules. The lower rate should be caused by the low efficient Calvin cycle and the competitive endogenous metabolic pathways of cyanobacteria. When ene-reductase was expressed in cyanobacteria, 2-methylmaleimide can be reduced to 2-methylsuccinimide at a rate of 18300 μM h−1 by consuming the regenerated NADPH.19 This suggests that the CO2 reduction performance of engineered cyanobacteria was restricted by the CO2 metabolic pathway. The above analysis of EPCS and engineered photoautotrophic microorganisms demonstrated the vital role of NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H in connecting photocatalysis and biocatalysis. As compared with engineered photoautotrophic microorganisms, EPCS is a superb model system to elucidate the reaction and mass transport mechanisms.
Besides NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H, FMN/FMNH− and H2O2/H2O were also used as redox mediators for the reduction of CC and the oxyfunctionalization of C–H, respectively.9,20Fig. 3c presents a typical EPCS using H2O2/H2O to connect BE and PE. BE used peroxygenase as the enzyme to convert hydrocarbons to chiral alcohols. PE used Au–TiO2 as the photocatalyst, H2O as the electron donor, and visible light (>400 nm) as the solar energy to generate H2O2. The generated H2O2 was transferred from PE to BE to trigger the oxyfunctionalization of hydrocarbons. The coupling of BE and PE in a parallel-cascade enabled the production of (R)-1-phenylethanol at 30 μM h−1. When the enzymatic H2O2 generation ensemble was coupled with BE, (R)-1-phenylethanol was produced at 2900 μM h−1 by consuming methanol (Table S1, ESI†). The lower volumetric productivity of EPCS should be attributed to the low H2O2 production rate of PE with H2O as the electron donor. By optimizing the activity of PE, the volumetric productivity of EPCS has been elevated to 890 μM h−1. Although still lower than the pure enzymatic system, EPCS did not consume methanol, while using O2, H2O, and solar energy for oxyfunctionalization, which is preferable for a sustainable future. Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of redox mediators alleviated the requirements of electron-transfer cofactors in enzymes, promising the activation of different types of oxidoreductases. However, the dilution of the redox mediator by bulk solution and degradation of the redox mediator by a photocatalyst still restricted the connecting efficiency using redox mediators.

3.2 Photo-induced enzymatic reactions

3.2.1 Photoenzyme catalyzed reactions. 
Besides photobiocatalytic reactions, nature evolved photoenzymes for solar-driven chemical transformation. Currently, four photoenzymes have already been identified, including photosystems, DNA photolyase, light-dependent protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase, and fatty acid photodecarboxylase (FAP). The potential of photoenzymes for solar-driven chemical transformation is highlighted by photoenzymatic decarboxylation of fatty acids (Fig. 4a).21 In this system, BE comprised photodecarboxylase and enzyme-bound fatty acid, and PE comprised enzyme-bound flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and blue light (Fig. 4b). FAD harvested the blue light and then induced the forward electron transfer from enzyme-bound fatty acid to FAD. The as-formed fatty acid radical went through decarboxylation, yielding the alkyl radical and CO2. Back electron transfer from the reduced FAD to the alkyl radical and sequential proton transfer generated a hydrocarbon. Forward and back electron transfer between BE and PE contributed to the natural reactivity of fatty acid photodecarboxylase. System engineering analysis can help to understand the catalytic mechanism of photoenzymes, which might inspire the design of novel EPCS. FAP can efficiently convert fatty acids to hydrocarbons and CO2, holding great promise for solar-driven biofuel production.22 However, wild-type FAP prefers long-chain fatty acids. Through protein engineering or the addition of a decoy molecule, the substrate spectrum of FAP has already been expanded to medium- and short-chain carboxylic acids (Table S1, ESI†).23–25 These pioneering results demonstrated the potential of natural photoenzymes for solar-driven chemical transformation.
 Fig. 4  System engineering analysis of EPCS for photoenzyme catalyzed reactions. (a) Photoenzyme catalyzed decarboxylation of fatty acids. (b) BE comprised fatty acid photodecarboxylase and enzyme-bound substrate. PE comprised enzyme-bound FAD and blue light (450 nm). Forward and back electron transfer between PE and BE contributed to the natural activity of photodecarboxylase. R stands for the alkyl group. 


3.2.2 Photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions. 
Instead of enabling the natural reactivity of photoenzymes, light can also induce the non-natural reactivities of enzymes, which are known for their reactivity under dark conditions.11,26–29 This can readily expand the substrate spectrum of enzymes and open up a new direction for EPCS. As shown in Fig. 5a, ketoreductases were successfully transformed from a carbonyl reductase into a radical initiator for enantioselective radical dehalogenation by visible light irradiation.11 In this system, BE comprised ketoreductases and enzyme-bound substrate, and PE comprised enzyme-bound NAD(P)H and blue light (460 nm) (Fig. 5b). NAD(P)H and substrate formed the electron donor–acceptor complex in the active site of ketoreductases, which harvested the incident photons and induced electron transfer from NAD(P)H to the substrate. Subsequent dehalogenation of the substrate and hydrogen atom transfer from NAD(P)H to the substrate completed the enantioselective dehalogenation reaction. The protein scaffold of ketoreductases guaranteed the enantioselectivity by arranging the NAD(P)H and substrate in the appropriate conformation in the active site. Connecting BE and PE by sequential electron and enantioselective hydrogen atom transfer contributed to the non-natural reactivities of ketoreductases. System engineering analysis helped us to easily understand the origin of the non-natural reactivity of enzymes and distinguished this system from other EPCS. By substituting the core components in the system, diverse photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions have been enabled (Table S1, ESI†). For instance, an electron donor–acceptor complex was formed between the enzyme-bound substrate and flavin cofactor of flavin-dependent ene-reductases.26,27 Light irradiation-induced sequential electron and enantioselective hydrogen atom transfer between flavin and substrates enables asymmetric radical cyclization and enantioselective intermolecular radical hydroalkylation. For current photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions, the enzyme acts as the scaffold to confine the substrate and cofactor. Light irradiation revised the one-step hydride transfer between the cofactor and substrate to a two-step electron/hydrogen atom transfer, inducing the non-natural reactivities of enzymes.
 Fig. 5  System engineering analysis of EPCS for photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions. (a) Photo-induced enantioselective dehalogenation of lactones by ketoreductases. (b) BE comprised ketoreductases and enzyme-bound substrate. PE comprised enzyme-bound NAD(P)H and blue light (460 nm). Sequential electron and hydrogen atom transfer from PE to BE contributed to the non-natural reactivities of ketoreductases. In this system, NAD(P)H in charge of harvesting photons was consumed during the reaction, which should not be taken as a photocatalyst. Ph stands for phenyl group. 

4. Coordination of catalytic ensembles in EPCS
The coupling of BE and PE has enabled diverse challenging reactions, promising EPCS to complement photo-chemo catalytic systems for solar-driven chemical transformation. However, the performance of EPCS is restricted by the undesirable connectivity and low compatibility between BE and PE (Fig. 1). For instance, the connecting efficiency between BE and PE is limited by the insulating protein scaffold when connected by electron transfer, and limited by dilution and degradation of redox mediators when connected by the diffusion of molecules. The ROS and charge carriers generated by PE can easily deactivate the enzymes of BE. The undesirable connectivity and low compatibility between catalytic ensembles require us to (1) design BE and PE at the system level, i.e. considering connectivity and compatibility when designing catalytic ensembles, and (2) develop novel coupling methods to coordinate BE and PE. Coordination of BE and PE demonstrated that favorable connectivity and compatibility between catalytic ensembles are enabled simultaneously.
Natural photosynthesis presents an elegant model in coordinating thylakoid (PE) and the Calvin cycle (BE) by a chloroplast (Fig. 6).30 For PE, photosystem I (PS I) and photosystem II (PS II) are embedded in thylakoid membrane for solar-driven NADPH and ATP regeneration, and O2 evolution. For BE, enzymes in the Calvin cycle are confined in chloroplast stroma for CO2 reduction. ATP and NADPH regenerated by PE are confined in chloroplast stroma, which efficiently connects BE and PE. Thylakoid membrane and enzymatic ROS elimination protect enzymes of BE from deactivation by holes and ROS of PE. Chloroplasts set an exceptional example to coordinate BE and PE, where each catalytic ensemble is designed at the system level to ensure favorable connectivity and compatibility.
 Fig. 6  Coordination of thylakoid (PE) and the Calvin cycle (BE) by a chloroplast for natural photosynthesis. Connectivity (Section 4.1) and compatibility (Section 4.2) between BE and PE. Coordination of BE and PE by a chloroplast (Section 4.3). 
Inspired by the chloroplast, we discuss the coordination of BE and PE in Section 4. Specifically, in Section 4.1, we analyze the origin of undesirable connectivity between BE and PE, and highlight the design of catalytic ensembles to improve connectivity. In Section 4.2, we analyze the origin of low compatibility between BE and PE, and highlight the design of catalytic ensembles to improve compatibility. In Section 4.3, we summarize and analyze the coordination strategies of BE and PE. In Section 4.4, we propose the designing principles of EPCS.
4.1 Connectivity between BE and PE

4.1.1 Electron transfer between BE and PE. 
In EPCS, the photocatalyst of PE can harvest solar energy and generate electrons/holes. For enzymes bound with electron-transfer cofactors, electrons could be directly transferred between BE and PE via these cofactors for chemical transformation (Fig. 7a). Herein, the photocatalyst of PE can be considered as an electron donor (or acceptor), and enzyme-bound cofactor as an electron acceptor (or donor). The semiclassical theory of electron transfer (eqn (1)) could offer some basic understanding of the electron transfer rate (kET) between the donor and acceptor.30 (1)
 Fig. 7  Electron transfer between BE and PE. (a) Connecting BE and PE by electron transfer through electron-transfer cofactors of enzymes. (b) Light-induced electron transfer in Ru complex-azurins (Ru complex: RuIII(tpy)(bpy)(His83), bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, tpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine, His83 = 83 histidine of azurins). (c) Surface engineering and (d) pore structure engineering of photocatalysts to intensify electron transfer from BE and PE for photobiocatalytic H2 evolution. (e) Representative oxidoreductases bound with electron-transfer cofactors for EPCS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. 
The electron transfer rate mainly depends on three parameters: (1) the standard state free-energy change (ΔG°, driving force of electron transfer), (2) the reorganization energy (λ), and (3) the electronic coupling between donor and acceptor at the transition state (|HAB|). For a fixed pair of photocatalyst and enzyme, |HAB| was the only parameter that can be optimized. The electron transfer between the photocatalyst and protein-bound cofactor was systematically studied by Prof. Gray and co-workers (Fig. 7b).31,32 A Ru complex was attached to different proteins, including azurin, cytochrome c, and myoglobin, etc. The electron transfer kinetics validated the dependence of |HAB| on the distance and intervening medium between the photocatalyst and protein-bound cofactors. When the photocatalyst and enzyme were homogeneously dispersed in solution, their distance was dominated by the concentration of two catalysts, and the intervening medium was water. We hypothesized that shortening the distance between the photocatalyst and enzyme, and removing water molecules from the photocatalyst/enzyme interface could elevate the electron transfer rate.
Here, [NiFeSe] hydrogenase was chosen as a representative enzyme to highlight the effective strategies in improving the electron transfer efficiency between BE and PE. Hydrogenase was the most efficient noble-metal free H2 evolution catalyst, whose turnover frequency could exceed 1000 s−1 at room temperature.33 Meanwhile, the features of O2 tolerance and marginal H2 inhibition ensured [NiFeSe] hydrogenase was a superior candidate for photobiocatalytic H2 production. As shown in Fig. 7c, [NiFeSe] hydrogenase contains three [4Fe–4S] clusters as electron-transfer cofactors, and an [NiFeSe] cluster as the active site. Since the active site is embedded in an insulating protein scaffold, electrons can only be transferred to the active site by sequentially passing through distal [4Fe–4S] and other cofactors. According to the semiclassical theory of electron transfer, we envisioned that intimate contact between the photocatalyst and distal [4Fe–4S] cluster of [NiFeSe] hydrogenase could improve the electron transfer efficiency between BE and PE.
So far, surface and pore structure engineering of the photocatalyst have been used to build intimate contact with the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster of [NiFeSe] hydrogenase (Fig. 7c and d). Surface engineering of the photocatalyst was to orient the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster of [NiFeSe] hydrogenase to the surface of the photocatalyst. This required the specific interaction between photocatalyst and the protein domain around the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster. An excellent example of surface engineering is the coupling of carbon dots and [NiFeSe] hydrogenase. For [NiFeSe] hydrogenase, the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster of [NiFeSe] hydrogenase was surrounded by negatively charged glutamate and aspartate residues.34 When positively charged ammonium-terminated carbon dots were combined with [NiFeSe] hydrogenase, H2 was produced at an ultrahigh turnover frequency (TOF) of 3.9 × 103 h−1. For negatively charged carboxylate-terminated carbon dots, negligible H2 was produced. This should arise from the electrostatic interaction between positively charged carbon dots and negatively charged functional groups around distal [4Fe–4S], which oriented distal [4Fe–4S] to the surface of the carbon dots and enabled efficient electron transfer. Pore structure engineering of the photocatalyst was to create multiple contacting points between the enzyme and photocatalyst. As shown in Fig. 7d, [NiFeSe] hydrogenase was confined in the pores of In2S3, where multiple contact points were created.35 The photogenerated electrons on In2S3 could be transferred to [NiFeSe] hydrogenase through the contact points that were physically close to the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster. In this case, the stringent requirements on the orientation of hydrogenase could be eliminated. Besides In2S3, TiO2 was also engineered into the hierarchical porous structure for hydrogenase immobilization.36
The above strategies can be applied to a broad range of enzymes bound with electron-transfer cofactors, including [FeFe] hydrogenase, CO dehydrogenase I, Mo-dependent FDH, etc. (Fig. 7e). The surface functional groups and bulk materials of the photocatalyst should be rationally manipulated according to the surface properties near the electron-transfer cofactors.


4.1.2 Molecule diffusion between BE and PE. 
Besides electron transfer, PE can be connected to BE through the diffusion of redox mediators (Fig. 8a). Typical redox mediators are summarized in Fig. 8b. Given over ∼80% oxidoreductases are NAD(P)-dependent enzymes, NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H has been recognized as one of the most important redox mediators in EPCS.16 Here, we discuss the challenge of using NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H as a redox mediator and summarize the strategies in improving the connectivity between BE and PE.
 Fig. 8  Molecule diffusion between BE and PE. (a) Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of the redox mediator. (b) Typical redox mediators for connection. (c) The concentration of free-diffusing redox mediators as a function of radial distance (r) from a single photocatalytic active site. Gradients were shown for ratios of turnover frequency (k) to diffusion coefficient (D). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) NADH oxidation by photogenerated holes. (e) Attachment of NADH on hollow nanofibers for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction. (f) Confinement of NADPH in mesoporous ITO for bioelectrocatalysis. FNR, ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase. 
Based on our work and other relevant work, we identified two crucial points that need to be carefully solved when connecting BE and PE with NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H: (1) the dilution of regenerated redox mediators by bulk solution, and (2) the back reaction between regenerated redox mediators and photocatalyst. To illustrate the dilution of redox mediators, we calculate the concentration of regenerated redox mediator (c) as a function of radial distance (r) from a single photocatalytic active site by eqn (2).37 (2)

Eqn (2) represents the Brownian motion of a chemical species, where t is the time, D is the diffusion coefficient, and τ is the time between reaction events (τ = 1/k, k is the turnover frequency). The concentration profile based on k/D is shown in Fig. 8c. For photocatalytic NADH regeneration, k was generally less than 2 h−1, where the diffusion constant of NADH was 3.24 × 10−6 cm2 s−1.38 Thus, k/D for a photocatalytic NADH regeneration reaction was 1.7 × 10−6 μm−2. According to Fig. 8c, the concentration of regenerated NADH was spatially uniform, suggesting that regenerated NADH was rapidly diluted by bulk solution. The diffusion of NADH into bulk solution restricted the connecting efficiency between BE and PE. Another point is the back reaction between NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H and charge carriers on the photocatalyst. For instance, NADH was degraded to ADP-ribose by photogenerated holes under light irradiation, which could not be used by BE anymore (Fig. 8d).39 This also restricted the connecting efficiency between BE and PE.
Currently, two strategies based on the attachment and the nano-confinement of NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H were explored to improve the connecting efficiency between BE and PE. Prof. Zhang and coworkers attached NAD+/NADH to the inner surface of poly(allylamine hydrochloride)-doped polyurethane hollow nanofibers through electrostatic interaction (Fig. 8e).40 The attachment of NAD+/NADH avoided its dilution by bulk solution and inhibited its oxidation by photogenerated holes left on the photosensitizer. This efficiently connected PE on the external surface of the nanofiber and BE in the internal compartment of the nanofiber. Inspired by NADPH confinement by a chloroplast, compartments enabled by nanoporous indium tin oxide (ITO) were applied to confine the NAD(P)H and enzyme (Fig. 8f).41 The nano-compartments relieved the dilution of NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H by bulk solution, thereby elevating the connecting efficiency between the enzyme and FNR. The nano-confinement strategy pointed out a new direction in connecting BE and PE with redox mediators.

4.2 Compatibility between BE and PE
Enzymes contribute to the high activity and selectivity of BE, while also lead to the low stability of BE. This raises concerns over the compatibility between BE and PE. Enzymes are formed through the folding of polypeptide chains by multiple non-covalent interactions among peptide groups of main chains and amino acid residues of side chains. Multiple weak interactions contribute to a flexible conformation of the enzyme. This not only allows the efficient binding of substrate to enzyme for chemical transformation but also leads to the reversible folding and unfolding of the enzyme. As indicated by the Lumry–Eyring model, an unfolded enzyme could be irreversibly deactivated by non-covalent and covalent modification (Fig. 9a).42 Temperature, pH, and ionic strength, etc. were well recognized to irreversibly deactivate enzymes in the biocatalysis field. For EPCS, besides these items, irradiation, holes, ROS, and an organometallic complex of PE could also deactivate enzymes by interacting with native and unfolded enzymes. This complicated the protection of BE from PE in EPCS.
 Fig. 9  Compatibility between BE and PE. (a) Irreversible enzyme deactivation pathway by the Lumry–Eyring model. The red font demonstrates the deactivation items of EPCS. (b) Protecting BE from the photogenerated holes by compartmentalizing FDH from CdS quantum dots with protamine/titania microcapsules. (c) Protecting BE from ROS by compartmentalizing peroxygenase from graphitic carbon nitride (GCN) with a dialysis bag. (d) Light-induced aggregation of ADH and Rh complex. (e) Protecting BE from the organometallic complex by compartmentalizing ADH from the Rh complex with titania coating. 
Holes generated on the photocatalyst of PE can deactivate BE by breaking the hierarchical structure of the enzyme. A representative example is the deactivation of formate dehydrogenase from Candida boidinii (CbFDH) by PE.43 Structural analysis revealed that photogenerated holes on the photocatalyst damaged the α-helix of CbFDH and then induced the dissociation between the NADH binding region and catalytic region of CbFDH. Inspired by thylakoid, a compartmental strategy was developed to protect CbFDH from holes on the photocatalyst (Fig. 6).43 As shown in Fig. 9b, holes on CdS quantum dots were compartmentalized with CbFDH by a protamine/titania capsule wall. The mesoporous capsule wall prohibited the penetration of CbFDH, avoiding its deactivation by holes. Electrons could be transferred through the capsule wall to CbFDH for CO2 reduction. This compartmental strategy successfully elevated the compatibility between the photocatalyst and CbFDH, where ∼100% of the initial activity of CbFDH was retained.
ROS of PE can degrade the active site and redox-sensitive amino acids of the enzyme. A representative example was the deactivation of peroxygenase by the ROS of PE.9 HO˙ generated on the surface of the photocatalyst was demonstrated to degrade the heme of peroxygenase.44 Given the short lifetime of HO˙, spatial separation of BE and PE was applied to protect peroxygenase.9 As shown in Fig. 9c, BE comprised peroxygenase was added into the dialysis bag, which was compartmentalized with PE in the reaction solution. The majority of the HO˙ species generated by PE should go through annihilation before approaching peroxygenase. This successfully protects BE from PE, enabling a turnover number of 60000 for peroxygenase.45
Besides holes and ROS, the organometallic complex of PE can also deactivate enzymes of BE. Recently, we revealed that the Rh complex, a typical chemocatalyst for NADH regeneration, could induce the aggregation of ADH under illumination.46 ADH was completely deactivated by the Rh complex under illumination. In-depth analysis indicated that light irradiation shifted the electron density of Rh and promoted the detachment of the aqua ligand. This created an opening site on Rh, promoting its binding with cysteine, histidine, and tryptophan residues of ADH (Fig. 9d). To protect BE from deactivation, the Rh complex was embedded into a size-sieving titania coating (Fig. 9e). The dense coating prohibited the penetration of ADH and avoided the interaction between ADH and the Rh complex. ADH of BE retained ∼76% of its original activity.
Given the above considerations, there exist multiple deactivation pathways in EPCS. Unravelling the deactivation mechanisms and exploring the effective protection strategies should be an important research direction, which is vital for the industrial application of EPCS. For industrial applications, a higher concentration of substrate will be used, which would require a longer reaction and illumination time. This challenges the protection of BE from PE, especially when hydroxyl radicals or other ROS are produced by PE. The above strategies demonstrate the protection of BE by compartmentalizing holes, ROS, and organometallic complexes from enzymes with porous materials, a dialysis bag, and functional coatings. Inspired by these strategies, a photocatalyst and organometallic complex can be cast into a membrane and coated on the inner surface of a transparent reactor, which can protect BE from PE, and allow PE to efficiently harvest photons. Alternatively, the semipermeable membrane can be integrated into the reactor to protect BE and PE. Besides these strategies, the following methods might increase the stability of EPCS for industrial application: (1) enzyme immobilization; (2) addition of radical scavengers or superoxide dismutase; (3) intermittent irradiation. (1) The enzyme can be immobilized in a porous bead, which can easily compartmentalize BE and PE. ROS should mainly go through annihilation before approaching the enzyme. Moreover, enzyme immobilization would allow recycling of expensive enzymes. (2) Radical scavengers or superoxide dismutase can be added into the reactor to scavenge ROS. However, the addition of scavengers and enzymes should not influence the performance or separation efficiency of the product. (3) Last but not least, intermittent irradiation can be used to replace continuous irradiation. This can provide additional time for ROS annihilation.
4.3 Bioinspired coordination of BE and PE
To maximize the full potential of each catalytic ensemble, we need to coordinate BE and PE, i.e. building favorable connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE simultaneously. Inspired by the structure and function of a chloroplast, the coordination of BE and PE by artificial scaffold was demonstrated in this section. Two kinds of the artificial scaffold, microdroplet and photoelectrochemical cell (PEC), for coordination, were discussed, respectively.

4.3.1 Coordination of BE and PE by microdroplets. 
Coordination of BE and PE is the most important step in realizing the full potential of EPCS. However, coordination is difficult to achieve by randomly dispersing BE and PE in solution. Inspired by chloroplasts, microcompartments were explored to coordinate BE and PE.47 Specifically, PE (thylakoid, NADP+/NADPH, ADP/ATP) and BE (crotonyl-coenzyme A (CoA)/ethylmalonyl-CoA/hydroxybutyryl-CoA cycle (CETCH), CO2) were encapsulated in a water-in-oil microdroplet for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 10a). Similar to the chloroplast membrane, the surfactant layer confined the regenerated NADPH and ATP in the microdroplet, allowing them to be efficiently consumed by CETCH. Microdroplets exhibited a higher CO2 reduction activity than the homogenous mixture of BE and PE in solution, confirming the efficient connection between BE and PE (Fig. 10b). Thylakoid membrane compartmentalized BE from holes and ROS generated by PE, protects BE from deactivation. The compatibility between BE and PE was further optimized by shielding the hydrase activity of the thylakoid. The encapsulation of BE and PE in microdroplets presented a feasible way to coordinate BE and PE. Moreover, this work directly harnessed the high activity and compatibility of natural thylakoid, which saved the efforts of constructing an artificial photocatalyst. However, thylakoid shared the limited stability of biocomponents especially in catalytic medium and conditions, and narrow and discrete light absorption by chlorophyll, which could only harness <50% of the solar spectrum. Constructing artificial thylakoid or integrating synthetic materials with thylakoid could further improve the performance of EPCS.
 Fig. 10  Bioinspired coordination of BE and PE by an artificial scaffold. (a and b) Coordination of BE and PE by water-in-oil microdroplets for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, Science Publishing Group. (c) Coordination of BE and PE by a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) for photobiocatalytic overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 


4.3.2 Coordination of BE and PE by PEC. 
PEC with two compartments, physically separated by a semipermeable membrane and connected by a conductive wire, provides another artificial scaffold to coordinate BE and PE. As compared with microdroplets, PEC is more stable and controllable. Fig. 10c demonstrates the coordination of BE and PE with PEC for photobiocatalytic overall water splitting.48 PE was prepared by sequentially depositing PS II, a redox polymer, and diketopyrrolopyrrole on a macro–mesoporous TiO2 anode for photocatalytic O2 evolution. BE was prepared by depositing [NiFeSe] hydrogenase on a macro–mesoporous ITO cathode for enzymatic H2 evolution. PEC connected BE and PE by electron transfer through an external conductive wire. PEC compartmentalized BE and PE with a semipermeable membrane, avoiding the deactivation of BE by O2 and ROS from PE. Currently, BE that use hydrogenase, formate dehydrogenase, or peroxygenase/ene-reductase as enzymes have been successfully coupled with different PE (Table S1, ESI†).48,49 These examples validated the versatility of PEC in coordinating BE and PE. Although exhibiting an unparalleled coordination capability, PEC also had obvious drawbacks. For instance, the semipermeable membrane to separate the two compartments would lead to voltage drops, decreasing the solar energy conversion efficiency. The proton gradient generated by redox reactions in two compartments was to be more appropriately manipulated.

4.4 Designing principles of EPCS
For an ideal EPCS, BE should be efficiently connected to PE, while protected from deactivation by PE. Traditional photocatalysts and biocatalysts could not satisfy these requirements. We need to establish new designing principles for BE and PE, and develop novel coupling strategies to coordinate BE and PE for EPCS. By analyzing the origin of undesirable connectivity and low compatibility, we proposed the designing principles of PE, BE, and EPCS (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Designing principles of EPCS. (a and b) Designing principles of BE and PE, respectively. (c) Designing principles of EPCS. 
Designing principles of PE:
(i) Use visible light, not UV light that can deactivate enzymes. This requires the use of a photocatalyst with a narrow bandgap. A photocatalyst with a large bandgap, like TiO2, should be avoided.
(ii) Use a biocompatible photocatalyst. To protect the enzyme from deactivation, biocompatible photocatalysts, like carbon dots, and graphic carbon nitride, etc. should be used. CdS and CdSe that can potentially release poisonous Cd2+ should be avoided.
(iii) Achieve spatial charge separation. Spatial charge separation can suppress the recombination of charge carriers, inhibit the degradation of the redox mediator, and elevate the quantum efficiency of PE.
Designing principles of BE:
(i) Use a robust enzyme. An enzyme with marginal product inhibition and high tolerance to O2, acid or base conditions, and high temperature, etc. should be used.
(ii) Use a stable substrate. The substrate and product should not be degraded by PE.
(iii) Channel intermediates between enzymes. When multiple enzymes are used in BE, the intermediate should be channeled between these enzymes. This can promote the performance of BE.
Designing principles of EPCS:
(i) Shuttle the electron or molecule between BE and PE. To efficiently connect BE and PE, the electron or molecule should be shuttled between BE and PE. This can inhibit the dilution and degradation of connecting molecules, and increase connecting efficiency.
(ii) Confine holes, ROS, etc. To protect BE from deactivation, holes, ROS, etc. should be confined and compartmentalized from PE.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
The past five years have witnessed the rapid development of EPCS. The coupling of biocatalysis and photocatalysis has enabled diverse challenging reactions and promised the one-pot enantioselective production of complex organic molecules. However, the involvement of multiple components and catalytic processes perplexed the design of efficient and stable EPCS. Based on system engineering philosophy, we disintegrated the complex system into four elementary components, and reorganized these components into two catalytic ensembles, BE and PE. Furthermore, we identified that connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE were two crucial factors that governed the performance of EPCS. By analyzing the origin of the undesirable connectivity and low compatibility, we demonstrated the coordination strategies of BE and PE, and proposed the designing principles of EPCS. In this review, we demonstrated the unique superiority of system engineering analysis in understanding complex catalytic systems. Although we proposed preliminary designing principles, many other key issues still need to be solved in future work to complement and improve these principles.
5.1 Degradation of the redox mediator
NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ has been recognized as one of the most important redox mediators in EPCS. However, multiple side-reactions during NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ regeneration would decrease the amount of NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ and deactivate the whole system. For instance, ATP-ribose was detected during photocatalytic NAD(P)H oxidation. Furthermore, NAD(P) dimer, 1,2-NAD(P)H and 1,6-NAD(P)H were detected during electrochemical NADP+ reduction. This raised the concern for selective regeneration of NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+. Moreover, photogenerated electrons/holes would simultaneously diffuse to the surface of the particulate photocatalyst. This would induce the back reaction between regenerated NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ and photogenerated electrons/holes. Ensuring the selective regeneration of cofactors and inhibiting the back reaction could efficiently coordinate BE and PE. An artificial nicotinamide cofactor, like robust carba-NADP+, may provide a stable alternative to NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H for EPCS.50 However, solid experimental data is still required to validate its feasibility.
5.2 Enzyme deactivation by PE
So far, the deactivation mechanisms of the enzyme by photogenerated holes, ROS, and an organometallic complex of PE have been preliminarily built up, and several protection strategies were demonstrated. However, the enzyme would still rapidly lose its activity, hindering its practical application. The deactivation mechanisms of enzymes need to be further unraveled to acquire more effective protection strategies. Inspired by the structure and function of enzymes, the design of efficient and robust chemocatalysts may be one important direction.
5.3 Bioinspired nano/micro-compartments to coordinate BE and PE
Currently, PEC is the most popular artificial scaffold to coordinate BE and PE. However, the semi-permeable membrane to separate the two compartments would lead to voltage drops, and the proton gradient between the two compartments is still not well manipulated. For natural photosynthesis, the proton gradient caused by electron transfer was used to drive ATP regeneration by ATP synthase. How to delicately utilize the concentration gradient is one grand challenge in EPCS, which could potentially elevate the solar energy conversion efficiency. Inspired by thylakoid, nano/micro-compartments by self-assemblies of surfactant and block copolymer may afford an alternative to coordinate BE and PE.
5.4 Extended reactions and products by EPCS design
The past five years have witnessed the rapid expansion of reactions by EPCS. Currently, the majority of the reactions have relied on the coupling of PE and BE comprising a single enzyme. Coupling PE and BE comprising multiple enzymes could potentially unlock numerous important reactions. This could revolutionize chemical manufacturing by producing value-added chemicals from cheap, sustainable, or even currently useless/waste feedstocks.
5.5 Scaleup of EPCS by mesoscience and relevant technologies
Currently, EPCS is used for chemical transformation often at the lab scale. Establishing quantitative correlation among the catalysts, system, and reactor from the viewpoint of mesoscience would benefit the processing scaleup of EPCS. On this occasion, scientists in the research field of simulation calculation could be joined, who could potentially help to promote the application of EPCS for large-scale chemical transformation.
Finally, EPCS involves the interplay between catalysts and supports, mass transport and reactions, and mass and energy. This requires the joint efforts of scientists from chemistry, bioscience, materials science, and chemical engineering fields for the development of EPCS.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the collection and discussion of the content. S. Z. wrote the first draft. All authors helped to revise the manuscript before submission.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2020YFA0907902), the National Natural Science Funds of China (21776213 and 21621004), the Natural Science Fund of Tianjin (19JCYBJC19700), the Open Funding Project of the State Key Laboratory of Biochemical Engineering (2020KF-06) and the Tianjin Synthetic Biotechnology Innovation Capacity Improvement Project (TSBICIP-KJGG-003) for financial support.
Notes and references
R. A. Sheldon and J. M. Woodley, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 801–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen and F. H. Arnold, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Tan and J. Nielsen, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 274–288 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang and E. Reisner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Arnon, A. Mitsui and A. Paneque, Science, 1961, 134, 1425–1437 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Nikandrov, M. A. Shlyk, N. A. Zorin, I. N. Gogotov and A. A. Krasnovsky, FEBS Lett., 1988, 234, 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, D. S. Choi, S. K. Kuk and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7958–7985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, E. Fernández-Fueyo, Y. Ni, M. van Schie, J. Gacs, R. Renirie, R. Wever, F. G. Mutti, D. Rother, M. Alcalde and F. Hollmann, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 55–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Litman, Y. Wang, H. Zhao and J. F. Hartwig, Nature, 2018, 560, 355–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Emmanuel, N. R. Greenberg, D. G. Oblinsky and T. K. Hyster, Nature, 2016, 540, 414–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lauder, A. Toscani, Y. Qi, J. Lim, S. J. Charnock, K. Korah and D. Castagnolo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5803–5807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Betori, C. M. May and K. A. Scheidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 16642–16646 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, J. H. Lee, S. H. H. Younes, F. Tonin, P. L. Hagedoorn, H. Pichler, Y. Baeg, J. B. Park, R. Kourist and F. Hollmann, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, T. Saba, H. H. P. Yiu, R. F. Howe, J. A. Anderson and J. Shi, Chem, 2017, 2, 621–654 CAS .
S. K. Kuk, R. K. Singh, D. H. Nam, R. Singh, J. K. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3827–3832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, R. Miao, P. Lindberg and P. Lindblad, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2765–2777 RSC .
L. Assil-Companioni, H. C. Büchsenschütz, D. Solymosi, N. G. Dyczmons-Nowaczyk, K. K. F. Bauer, S. Wallner, P. Macheroux, Y. Allahverdiyeva, M. M. Nowaczyk and R. Kourist, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11864–11877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Son, S. H. Lee, S. K. Kuk, M. Pesic, D. S. Choi, J. W. Ko, K. Kim, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705232 CrossRef .
D. Sorigué, K. Hadjidemetriou, S. Blangy, G. Gotthard, A. Bonvalet, N. Coquelle, P. Samire, A. Aleksandrov, L. Antonucci, A. Benachir, S. Boutet, M. Byrdin, M. Cammarata, S. Carbajo, S. Cuiné, R. B. Doak, L. Foucar, A. Gorel, M. Grünbein, E. Hartmann, R. Hienerwadel, M. Hilpert, M. Kloos, T. J. Lane, B. Légeret, P. Legrand, Y. Li-Beisson, S. L. Y. Moulin, D. Nurizzo, G. Peltier, G. Schirò, R. L. Shoeman, M. Sliwa, X. Solinas, B. Zhuang, T. R. M. Barends, J.-P. Colletier, M. Joffre, A. Royant, C. Berthomieu, M. Weik, T. Domratcheva, K. Brettel, M. H. Vos, I. Schlichting, P. Arnoux, P. Müller and F. Beisson, Science, 2021, 372, eabd5687 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. E. Huijbers, W. Zhang, F. Tonin and F. Hollmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13648–13651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. Fan, Y. Lou, W. Xu, Z. Wang, D. Li, H. Zhou, X. Lin and Q. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Ma, M. M. E. Huijbers, G. A. Filonenko, E. A. Pidko, M. van Schie, S. de Boer, B. O. Burek, J. Z. Bloh, W. J. H. van Berkel, W. A. Smith and F. Hollmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3116–3120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amer, E. Z. Wojcik, C. Sun, R. Hoeven, J. M. X. Hughes, M. Faulkner, I. S. Yunus, S. Tait, L. O. Johannissen, S. J. O. Hardman, D. J. Heyes, G. Q. Chen, M. H. Smith, P. R. Jones, H. S. Toogood and N. S. Scrutton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1818–1831 RSC .
K. F. Biegasiewicz, S. J. Cooper, X. Gao, D. G. Oblinsky, J. H. Kim, S. E. Garfinkle, L. A. Joyce, B. A. Sandoval, G. D. Scholes and T. K. Hyster, Science, 2019, 364, 1166–1169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, B. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, J. Feng and H. Zhao, Nature, 2020, 584, 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Biegasiewicz, S. J. Cooper, M. A. Emmanuel, D. C. Miller and T. K. Hyster, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 770–775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Black, K. F. Biegasiewicz, A. J. Meichan, D. G. Oblinsky, B. Kudisch, G. D. Scholes and T. K. Hyster, Nat. Chem., 2019, 12, 71–75 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular mechanisms of photosynthesis, John Wiley & Sons,  2014 Search PubMed .
B. R. Crane, A. J. Di Bilio, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11623–11631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2930–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Armstrong, R. M. Evans, S. V. Hexter, B. J. Murphy, M. M. Roessler and P. Wulff, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 884–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. Reuillard, B. C. M. Martindale, C. A. Caputo, C. W. J. Lockwood, J. N. Butt and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16722–16730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tapia, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira, J. C. Conesa, M. Pita and A. L. De Lacey, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5691–5698 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, V. Andrei, N. Kornienko, N. Heidary, A. Wagner, K. Nakanishi, K. P. Sokol, B. Slater, I. Zebger, S. Hofmann, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, C. B. Park and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10595–10599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Wheeldon, S. D. Minteer, S. Banta, S. C. Barton, P. Atanassov and M. Sigman, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 299–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zare and S. Golabi, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2000, 4, 87–94 CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Chen, Q. Huo, W. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Wang and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4967–4972 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, Z. Su, P. Wang, G. Ma and S. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 4753–4762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Megarity, B. Siritanaratkul, R. S. Heath, L. Wan, G. Morello, S. R. FitzPatrick, R. L. Booth, A. J. Sills, A. W. Robertson, J. H. Warner, N. J. Turner and F. A. Armstrong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4948–4952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Sanchez-Ruiz, Biophys. J., 1992, 61, 921–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Shi, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Z. Cai, Y. Chen, C. You, P. Han and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3913–3925 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Burek, S. R. de Boer, F. Tieves, W. Zhang, M. van Schie, S. Bormann, M. Alcalde, D. Holtmann, F. Hollmann, D. W. Bahnemann and J. Z. Bloh, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 3093–3100 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. C. H. van Schie, W. Zhang, F. Tieves, D. S. Choi, C. B. Park, B. O. Burek, J. Z. Bloh, I. W. C. E. Arends, C. E. Paul, M. Alcalde and F. Hollmann, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7409–7417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. Yang, S. Li, Y. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Cheng, J. Shi and Z. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2020, 11, 476–483 CrossRef .
T. E. Miller, T. Beneyton, T. Schwander, C. Diehl, M. Girault, R. McLean, T. Chotel, P. Claus, N. S. Cortina, J. C. Baret and T. J. Erb, Science, 2020, 368, 649–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, J. Warnan, N. Kornienko, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 944–951 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Choi, J. Kim, F. Hollmann and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15886–15890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Zachos, M. Döring, G. Tafertshofer, R. C. Simon and V. Sieber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14701–14706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00392eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shaohua Zhang
	Shaohua Zhang received his PhD in Chemical Technology from Tianjin University in 2019 under the supervision of Prof. Zhongyi Jiang, where he worked on the design and construction of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems for solar chemical production. Then, he joined the group of Prof. Daniela A. Wilson at Radboud University in the Netherlands as a postdoctoral researcher and now he has started working on artificial photosynthetic nanomotors in the same group as a Marie Curie fellow. His research interests include photobiocatalysis and supramolecular nanomotors.

Shusong Liu
	Shusong Liu received his Master's degree in Environmental Science and Engineering from Tianjin University of Technology in 2020. He is now pursuing a PhD under the tutelage of Associate Professor Jiafu Shi at the School of Environment Science and Engineering of Tianjin University. His research interests include artificial photosynthesis and biocatalysis.

Yiying Sun
	Yiying Sun received her Bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Tianjin University in 2017. She is now pursuing a PhD under the tutelage of Prof. Zhongyi Jiang at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. Her research interests include photobiocatalysis and nanobiotechnology.

Shihao Li
	Shihao Li received his Bachelor degree in Bioengineering from Hebei University of Technology in 2016. He is now pursuing a PhD under the tutelage of Professor Zhongyi Jiang and Professor Hong Wu at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. His research interests include artificial photosynthesis and enzyme catalysis.

Jiafu Shi
	Jiafu Shi is an associate professor at the School of Environmental Science and Engineering of Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Technology from Tianjin University in 2013 under the tutelage of Prof. Zhongyi Jiang. After graduation, he joined the faculty of Tianjin University, and started working at the School of Environmental Science and Engineering. He was a visiting scholar of University of California at Berkeley with Professor Phillip B. Messersmith from 2016 to 2017. He is the winner of National Science Fund for Outstanding Young Scholars in China. His research interest encompasses enzyme-photo-coupled catalysis, biocatalysis, and bioinspired functional materials for energy and environmental applications. He has co-authored over 100 peer-reviewed papers including in Chemical Society Reviews, ACS Catalysis, Advanced Functional Materials, Chem, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, Joule, etc. The total number of citations is over 3300, and his h-index is 32.

Zhongyi Jiang
	Zhongyi Jiang is a Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology of Tianjin University. He obtained a PhD degree from Tianjin University in 1994. He was a visiting scholar of University of Minnesota with Prof. Edward Cussler in 1997 and California Institute of Technology with Prof. David Tirrell in 2009. He is the winner of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China, Cheung Kong Chair Professor, Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. His research interest includes biomimetic and bioinspired membranes and membrane processes, biocatalysis, photocatalysis. To date, he has co-authored over 600 peer-reviewed papers, including in Nature Communications, Chemical Society Reviews, Progress in Polymer Science, Journal of the American Chemical Society, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, Advanced Materials, ACS Catalysis, Advanced Functional Materials, etc. The total number of citations is over 23000 and his h-index is 86.

Key learning points
(1) Concept, general framework, and reaction routes of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems.
(2) Connectivity and compatibility between biocatalytic and photocatalytic ensembles.
(3) Bioinspired coordination of biocatalytic and photocatalytic ensembles for solar-driven chemical transformation.
(4) Designing principles of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems.


 	Fig. 1  The general framework of enzyme-photo-coupled catalytic systems (EPCS). Four elementary components (tree level), including enzyme, substrate, photocatalyst, and solar energy, are combined to form EPCS (forest level). Based on the involved catalytic processes, EPCS are divided into the biocatalytic ensemble (BE) and photocatalytic ensemble (PE). Diverse reactions have been enabled by coupling BE and PE in different manners, which include sequential-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions, parallel-cascade photobiocatalytic reactions, photo-induced natural enzymatic reactions (or photoenzyme catalyzed reactions), and photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions. For efficient and stable EPCS, two crucial factors, i.e. connectivity and compatibility between BE and PE, need to be considered.	 

 	Fig. 2  The coupling of BE and PE in sequential-cascade for photobiocatalytic asymmetric reduction of alkenes. BE reduced alkenes with ene-reductase and glucose dehydrogenase as enzymes, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) and glucose as substrates. PE isomerized alkenes with an iridium complex (Ir-16) or FMN as the photocatalyst, and blue light (450–470 nm) as the solar energy. BE and PE were connected through the diffusion of the intermediate.	 

 	Fig. 3  The coupling of BE and PE in parallel-cascade for photobiocatalytic reactions. (a) Connecting BE and PE by electron transfer for photobiocatalytic reduction of N2. (b) Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of NAD+/NADH for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction. FDH, formate dehydrogenase. FaldDH, formaldehyde dehydrogenase. ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase. Rh complex, [Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine. (c) Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of H2O2/H2O for photobiocatalytic oxyfunctionalization.	 

 	Fig. 4  System engineering analysis of EPCS for photoenzyme catalyzed reactions. (a) Photoenzyme catalyzed decarboxylation of fatty acids. (b) BE comprised fatty acid photodecarboxylase and enzyme-bound substrate. PE comprised enzyme-bound FAD and blue light (450 nm). Forward and back electron transfer between PE and BE contributed to the natural activity of photodecarboxylase. R stands for the alkyl group.	 

 	Fig. 5  System engineering analysis of EPCS for photo-induced non-natural enzymatic reactions. (a) Photo-induced enantioselective dehalogenation of lactones by ketoreductases. (b) BE comprised ketoreductases and enzyme-bound substrate. PE comprised enzyme-bound NAD(P)H and blue light (460 nm). Sequential electron and hydrogen atom transfer from PE to BE contributed to the non-natural reactivities of ketoreductases. In this system, NAD(P)H in charge of harvesting photons was consumed during the reaction, which should not be taken as a photocatalyst. Ph stands for phenyl group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Coordination of thylakoid (PE) and the Calvin cycle (BE) by a chloroplast for natural photosynthesis. Connectivity (Section 4.1) and compatibility (Section 4.2) between BE and PE. Coordination of BE and PE by a chloroplast (Section 4.3).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Electron transfer between BE and PE. (a) Connecting BE and PE by electron transfer through electron-transfer cofactors of enzymes. (b) Light-induced electron transfer in Ru complex-azurins (Ru complex: RuIII(tpy)(bpy)(His83), bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, tpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine, His83 = 83 histidine of azurins). (c) Surface engineering and (d) pore structure engineering of photocatalysts to intensify electron transfer from BE and PE for photobiocatalytic H2 evolution. (e) Representative oxidoreductases bound with electron-transfer cofactors for EPCS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecule diffusion between BE and PE. (a) Connecting BE and PE through the diffusion of the redox mediator. (b) Typical redox mediators for connection. (c) The concentration of free-diffusing redox mediators as a function of radial distance (r) from a single photocatalytic active site. Gradients were shown for ratios of turnover frequency (k) to diffusion coefficient (D). Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) NADH oxidation by photogenerated holes. (e) Attachment of NADH on hollow nanofibers for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction. (f) Confinement of NADPH in mesoporous ITO for bioelectrocatalysis. FNR, ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Compatibility between BE and PE. (a) Irreversible enzyme deactivation pathway by the Lumry–Eyring model. The red font demonstrates the deactivation items of EPCS. (b) Protecting BE from the photogenerated holes by compartmentalizing FDH from CdS quantum dots with protamine/titania microcapsules. (c) Protecting BE from ROS by compartmentalizing peroxygenase from graphitic carbon nitride (GCN) with a dialysis bag. (d) Light-induced aggregation of ADH and Rh complex. (e) Protecting BE from the organometallic complex by compartmentalizing ADH from the Rh complex with titania coating.	 

 	Fig. 10  Bioinspired coordination of BE and PE by an artificial scaffold. (a and b) Coordination of BE and PE by water-in-oil microdroplets for photobiocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2020, Science Publishing Group. (c) Coordination of BE and PE by a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) for photobiocatalytic overall water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Designing principles of EPCS. (a and b) Designing principles of BE and PE, respectively. (c) Designing principles of EPCS.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cs00392e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
