The role of structural fluctuations and environmental noise in the electron/hole separation kinetics at organic polymer bulk-heterojunction interfaces ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP05037E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP05037E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 28853-28859The role of structural fluctuations and environmental noise in the electron/hole separation kinetics at organic polymer bulk-heterojunction interfaces

        
          
            Eric R. 
            Bittner
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Allen 
            Kelley
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry and Centre for Quantum Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA. E-mail: bittner@uh.edu;  Fax: +1-713-743-2709;   Tel: +1-832-842-8849
Received 
      24th August 2015
    , Accepted 22nd September 2015First published on 22nd September 2015AbstractWe investigate the electronic dynamics of a model organic photovoltaic (OPV) system consisting of polyphenylene vinylene (PPV) oligomers and a [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methylester (PCBM) blend using a mixed molecular mechanics/quantum mechanics (MM/QM) approach. Using a heuristic model that connects energy gap fluctuations to the average electronic couplings and decoherence times, we provide an estimate of the state-to-state internal conversion rates within the manifold of the lowest few electronic excitations. We find that the lowest few excited states of a model interface are rapidly mixed by CC bond fluctuations such that the system can sample both intermolecular charge-transfer and charge-separated electronic configurations on a time scale of 20 fs. Our simulations support an emerging picture of carrier generation in OPV systems in which interfacial electronic states can rapidly decay into charge-separated and current producing states via coupling to vibronic degrees of freedom.
1 Introduction
The power conversion efficiencies of highly optimized organic polymer-based photovoltaic (OPV) cells exceed 10% under standard solar illumination1 with reports of efficiencies as high as 12% in multi-junction OPVs. This boost in efficiency indicates that mobile charge carriers can be generated efficiently in well-optimized organic heterostructures; however, the underlying mechanism for converting highly bound Frenkel excitons into mobile and asymptotically free photocarriers remains elusive in spite of vigorous, multidisciplinary research activity.2–18 Much of the difficulty in developing a comprehensive picture stems from our lack of detailed understanding of the electronic energy states at the interface between donor and acceptor materials and how these states are influenced by small-but significant-fluctuations in the molecular structure.
The generic photophysical pathways that underlie the generation of mobile charge carriers in an OPV solar cell are sketched in Fig. 1. The absorption of a photon by the material produces a π−π* excitation (exciton) within the bulk (a) that can migrate and diffuse via Förster energy transfer processes. Once in close proximity to a bulk-heterojunction interface, energetic off-sets between the respective HOMO and LUMO levels of adjacent donor and acceptor molecules provide the necessary driving force to separate an exciton into a localized charge transfer (CT) state (b) which typically lies in the range of 0.25 to 0.4 eV lower in energy. Alternatively, an exciton may dissociate directly via tunneling into charge-separated (CS) or polaron states (c) which may subsequently evolve to contribute to the photocurrent or undergo geminate or non-geminate recombination to form CT states (d). We distinguish CT states from CS states by whether or not the donor and acceptor species are in direct contact (CT) or separated by one or more intermediate molecules (CS).
 Fig. 1  Jablonski diagram showing relative energetic positions of excited states in a bulk-heterojunction system. The discrete states on the left are assumed to be localised excitons or charge-transfer states while the polaron states are assumed to be a quasi-continuum of mobile charge-separated states within the bulk. The latter of these are presumed to be responsible for producing photocurrent from a given device. 
Ultrafast spectroscopic measurements on OPV systems have reported that charged photoexcitations are generated on ≤100 fs timescales;2,12,15,19–22 however, full charge separation to produce free photocarriers is expected to be energetically expensive given the strong Coulombic attraction between electrons and holes due to the low dielectric constant in molecular semiconductors. Nonetheless, experiments by Gélinas et al., in which Stark-effect signatures in transient absorption spectra were analysed to probe the local electric field as charge separation proceeds, indicate that electrons and holes separate by as much as 40 Å over the first 100 fs and evolve further on picosecond timescales to produce unbound and hence freely mobile charge pairs.4 Concurrently, transient resonance-Raman measurements by Provencher et al. demonstrate clear polaronic vibrational signatures on sub-100 fs on the polymer backbone, with very limited molecular reorganization or vibrational relaxation following the ultrafast step.8 Such rapid through-space charge transfer between excitons on the polymer backbone and acceptors across the heterojunction would be difficult to rationalize within Marcus theory using a localised basis without invoking the unphysical distance dependence of tunnelling rate constants23 and appear to be a common feature of organic polymer bulk heterojunction systems.
Polymer microstructural probes have revealed general relationships between disorder, aggregation and electronic properties of polymeric semiconductors.24 Moreover, aggregation (ordering) can be perturbed by varying the blend-ratio and the composition of donor and acceptor polymers.18 On one hand, energetic disorder at the interface would provide a free-energy gradient for localised charge-transfer states to escape to the asymptotic regions. In essence, the localised polarons in the interfacial region could escape into bands of highly mobile polarons away from the heterojunction region.25 On the other hand, energetic disorder in the regions away from the interface would provide an entropic driving force by increasing the density of localised polaron states away from the interfacial region, allowing the polarons to hop or diffuse away from the interface before recombination could take place.26 It has also been suggested that in polymer/fullerene blends, interfacial exciton fission is facilitated by charge-delocalisation along the interface which provides a lower barrier for fission with the excess energy provided by thermally hot vibronic dynamics.17 Finally, a report by Bakulin et al. indicates that when relaxed charge-transfer-excitons are pushed with an infrared pulse, they increase photocurrent via delocalised states rather than by energy gradient-driven hopping.27
Recent MD simulations by Fu et al. of a model Squarene/Fullerene OPV cell indicate that the degree of disorder at the interface directly affects couplings and hence golden-rule transition rates between the ground and excited states. The disorder in the system is at least partly introduced by thermal annealing and the interactions between the Squaraine and Fullerene layers. Their simulations indicate that even at 300 K, the thermal motions of the molecules at the interface can be quite profound and the degree of disorder inherent around the interface can greatly affect the formation of electron/hole pairs.28
Finally, we recently presented a fully quantum dynamical model of photo-induced charge-fission at a polymeric type-II heterojunction interface.29 Our model supposes that the energy level fluctuations due to bulk atomic motions create resonant conditions for coherent separation of electrons and holes via long-range tunnelling. Simulations based upon lattice models reveal that such fluctuations lead to strong quantum mechanical coupling between excitonic states produced near the interface and unbound electron/hole scattering states resulting in a strong enhancement of the decay rate of photoexcitations into unbound polaronic states.
In this work, we employ our model in conjunction with an atomistic quantum/molecular dynamics study of a model donor–acceptor blend to provide an estimate of the interstate transition rates with the excited-state manifold. Our simulations combine a molecular dynamics description of the atomic motions coupled to an on the fly description of the excited state π-electronic structure. By analysing the energy gap fluctuations between excited states, we provide a robust estimate of both the interstate electronic couplings, decoherence times, and transition rates. We begin with a brief overview of our model and then describe our results.
1.1 Heuristic model
A simple model for considering the role of the environment can be developed as follows.29,30 Consider a two-state quantum system with coupling λ in which the energy gap Δ(t) fluctuates in time about its average Δo and 〈Δ(t)Δ(0)〉 = σΔ2. In a two-state basis of {|0〉,|1〉} the Hamiltonian for this can be written as (1)where k are Pauli matrices. Note that eqn (1) can be transformed such that fluctuations are in the off-diagonal coupling (2)where Δo =  + λ and . The fluctuations in the electronic energy levels are attributed to thermal and bond-vibrational motions of polymer chains and can be related to the spectral density, S(ω) via (3) Averaging over the environmental noise, we can write the average energy gap as  with eigenstates |ψ+〉 = cosθ|0〉 + sinθ|1〉(4) |ψ−〉 = −sinθ|0〉 + cosθ|1〉(5)where tan2θ = ||/Δo defines the mixing angle between original kets. Consequently, by analysing energy gap fluctuations, we can obtain an estimate of both the coupling between states as well as transition rates.
1.2 Noise-averaged kinetics
To estimate the average transition rate between states, we first write the equations of motion for the reduced density matrix for a two level system coupled to a dissipative environment, (6)where we have introduced τ1 and τ2 as the natural lifetimes of each state and Td as the decoherence time for the quantum superposition, which in turn, can be related to the spectral density via Td−1 = /h. Taking Td to be short compared to the lifetimes of each state, we can write the population of the initial state as (7)where k is the average state-to-state transition rate. Integrating this over time, we obtain an equation of the form (8)suggesting a form for the exact solution of eqn (6). Taking the Laplace transform of eqn (6) and assuming that our initial population is in state 1 (ρ11(0) = 1), eqn (6) becomes a series of algebraic equations  (9)which after a bit of algebra gives a rate constant of the form (10) The average rate vanishes in the limit of rapid decoherence (Td → 0). This is the quantum Zeno effect whereby rapid quantum measurements on the system by the environment at a rate given by Td−1 collapses the quantum superposition formed due to the interactions and thereby suppresses transitions between states. On the other hand, transient coherences can facilitate quantum transitions between otherwise weakly coupled states.
For the sake of connecting this to the photophysical dynamics of an OPV heterojunction, let us assume that one state corresponds to a CT state and the other corresponds to a CS state. When the fluctuations are weak,  ≪ Δo, the original kets |CT〉 and |CS〉 provide a good zeroth description of actual eigenstates of the system and the coupling can be treated as a weak perturbation. However, when the off-diagonal couplings are comparable to the average gap, even low-lying CT states may be brought into strong coupling with the CS states.
The implication of this heuristic model is that one can obtain the input to the rate equation (eqn (10)) from mixed quantum classical simulations that take into account the excited state populations. Here we report on such simulations of a model OPV system consisting of a blend of fullerene and polyphenylene vinylene oligomers as depicted in Fig. 2. Our simulation method employs an atomistic description of the nuclear dynamics described by a force-field that responds to changes in the local π electronic structure of a sub-set of molecules within the simulation cell. We restrict the excited state population to the lowest π–π* excitation as to simulate the long-time fate of a singlet CT state prepared via either photoexcitation or charge recombination. By analysing the energy gaps between electronic adjacent states and the character of the excited states in terms of electron–hole configuations we can deduce how small vibronic motions of the polymer chains modulate the electronic coupling and induce charge-separation.
 Fig. 2  Snapshot of the MD simulation cell containing 50 PCMB molecules and 25 PPV oligomers following equilibration at 100 K and 1 bar of pressure. The red and blue highlighted molecules denote the π-active units in our system. 
2 Methods
Our simulations employ a modified version of the TINKER molecular dynamics (MD) package31 in which the MM332 intramolecular bonding parameters were allowed to vary with the local π-electronic density as described by a Parisier–Parr–Pople (PPP) semi-empirical Hamiltonian.33,34 Specifically, we assume that the internal bond force constants, bond-lengths, bond angles, bending potentials, and bond torsion parameters are linear functions of the local bond-order. We specifically chose 1 PCBM and 3 nearby PPV oligomers to represent a model bulk-heterojunction in order to study the penetration of extended intramolecular electronic states into the bulk region. The remaining molecules in the simulation were treated using a purely classical force-field. At each step of the simulation, we compute the Hartree–Fock (HF) ground-state for the π system and use configuration interaction (singles) (SCI) to describe the lowest few π → π* excitations. Intermolecular interactions within the active space were introduced via non-bonding Coulombic coupling terms and static dispersion interactions contained within the MM3 forcefield.

Fig. 2 shows a snapshot of the periodic simulation cell containing 50 PCMB molecules and 25 PPV oligomers following equilibration at 100 K and 1 bar of pressure using classical molecular dynamics (MD) within the NPT ensemble.† The molecules surrounding the 4 π-active molecules serve as a thermal bath and electronic excitations are confined to the π-active orbitals. In total, our π-active space included a total of 172 carbon 2pz orbitals and we used a total of 10 occupied and 10 unoccupied orbitals to construct electron/hole configurations for the CI calculations. During the equilibration steps, we assume the system to be in its electronic ground state, after which we excite the system to the first SCI excited state and allow the system to respond to the change in the electronic density within the adiabatic/Born–Oppenheimer approximation. It is important to note that the excited state we prepare is not the state which carries the most oscillator strength to the ground nor do we account for non-adiabatic surface hopping-type transitions in our approach.35–37 Our dynamics and simulations reflect the longer-time fate of the lowest-lying excited state populations as depicted in step (d) in Fig. 1. The combination of a classical MD forcefield with a semi-empirical description of a selected few molecules within the system seems to be a suitable compromise between a fully ab initio approach which would be limited to only a few molecules and short simulation times and a fully classical MD description which would neglect any transient changes in the local electronic density.21 In spite of the relative simplicity of our model, the simulations remain quite formidable.
3 Results
Over the course of a 50 ps simulation, the lowest lying SCI excitation samples a variety of electronic configurations ranging from localised PCBM excitons to charge-separated and charge-transfer states with varying degrees of charge separation. In Fig. 3a, we show the lowest few SCI excitation energies following excitation at t = 0 fs to the lowest SCI state for one representative simulation. The labels refer to snap-shots taken at 50 fs intervals to visualize the various electronic configurations sampled by our approach in Fig. 4. First, we note that following promotion to the lowest lying SCI at t = 0 there is very little energetic reorganization or relaxation compared to the overall thermal fluctuations that modulate the SCI eigenvalues. This can be rationalized since the excitation to the π* orbitals at any given time is largely delocalised over one or more molecular units and hence the average electron–phonon coupling per CC bond is quite small. The number of avoided crossings that occur between the lowest lying states is highly striking, signalling that the internal molecular dynamics even at 100 K is sufficient to bring these states into regions of strong electronic coupling.
 Fig. 3  (a) Single CI (SCI) energies for the first 50 fs following excitation to the lowest SCI state. (b) Histogram distribution of the 5 lowest excitation energy levels over a 50 ps simulation. Throughout the simulation, the lowest lying state (in blue) remained populated and varied in character from excitonic to charge-separated. Labels A–E refer to the configurations shown in Fig. 5. The color of each component corresponds to the specific SCI eigenvalue depicted in (a). (c) Histogram of energy gaps between the first excited and higher-lying excited states. Gold: 1 → 2, blue: 1 → 3, green: 1 → 4, and red: 1 → 5. 
 Fig. 4  Sequence of states following initial excitation. In this particular simulation, the initial excited state population was localised on PCBM. This population rapidly dissociates into charge-transfer and then charge-separated configurations within 100–150 fs. This scenario appears to be a ubiquitous feature of our simulations indicating that fluctuations alone can carry the system from a localized CT state to charge-separated states, eventually current-producing polaron states. 
In Fig. 3b we show a histogram of the energies of the lowest 5 SCI energies accumulated over 50 ps of simulation time following promotion to the lowest SCI state. Focusing upon the lowest lying state (in blue), fluctuations due to molecular dynamics can account for nearly 0.25 eV of inhomogeneous broadening of this state bringing it (and similar to the other states) into regions of strong electronic coupling with nearby states which dramatically changes the overall electronic character of the state from purely charge-transfer to purely excitonic on a rapid time-scale.
We next consider the origins of the energy fluctuations evidenced in Fig. 3a. While we only show a 200 fs segment of a much longer 50 ps simulation, over this period one can see that the CI energies are modulated with a time-period of about 20 fs. Indeed, the Fourier transform of the average CI excitation energy reveals a series of peaks between 1400–1700 cm−1 which correspond to the CC stretching modes present in the polymer chains and fullerene molecules. We conclude that small-scale vibronic fluctuations in the molecular structures and orientations produce a significant energetic overlap between different electronic configurations in organic polymer-fullerene heterojunction systems and speculate that this may be the origin of efficient charge separation in such systems.
A variety of states are produced by our model and we categorize them as excitonic (electron/hole on the same molecular unit) occupying ≈ 50% of the states, charge-transfer (electron on PCMB/hole on PPV#1 (nearest to PCBM)) occupying ≈ 15% of the states, or charge separation (electron on PCBM/hole on PPV #2 or #3) occupying ≈ 25% of the states. These are shown in Fig. 5 where we indicate the local charge-density of each C2pz orbital by a blue (positive) or red (negative) sphere scaled in proportion to the local charge on each site.
 Fig. 5  A 6 fs time history from 51 to 56 fs of the first excited CI state is shown in Fig. 3. This series resides around an avoided crossing between the first and second excited state, showing how a CT state at the interface can evolve into exciton states farther into the bulk around one avoided crossing point. After the excited states diverge, the exciton in the bulk collapses back into an exciton localised on PCBM. 
In Fig. 4 we show a sequence of snapshots taken every 50 fs following the initial excitation. These figures reveal the highly dynamic nature of the lowest lying excitation in which the system samples excitonic configurations (a), charge-transfer configurations (b and c), charge-separated states in which the electron and the hole are separated by at least one polymer chain (d and e), and highly mixed charge-tranfer/excitonic states as in (e) and (f). The scenario depicted here is not an exceptional case within our simulation. Here, the initial excited state is clearly localized on the PCBM unit with a high degree of excitonic character. There is clearly some charge separation within the PCBM; however, both the electron and the hole clearly reside on the PCBM. After 50 fs (cf.Fig. 4b), structural fluctuations in part induced by changes in electronic density and in part by the thermal fluctuations of the surrounding medium bring this state nearly into resonance with the second SCI state inducing charge separation between the PCBM and a nearby PPV oligomer. Further fluctuations bring this state into resonance with other charge separated states as shown in Fig. 4c, d and f. Because our quantum subspace is restricted to the molecules shown in Fig. 4, charge separation to more distant regions cannot occur.

Fig. 3c shows a histogram of the energy gaps between the first and higher-lying excited states of our system. According to our heuristic model, the mean (μ) and the variance (σ2) of the gap distributions can be used as inputs to estimate the state-to-state rate for this system under the mapping that μ = Δo and  as per eqn (3). Furthermore, we take Td−1 ≈ /ℏ as an estimate of the decoherence time. The results are shown in Table 1. The estimated transition rates are consistent with the observation that the system rapidly samples a wide number of possible configurations over the course of the molecular dynamics simulation. On average, the state-to-state coupling of 70 meV is comparable to the average energy gaps between the lowest states. This brings the system into the regime of strong electronic coupling. However, larger couplings also imply shorter electronic decoherence times-which dramatically limit the ability of charges to separate by tunnelling. In this case, any superposition CI states resulting from the quantum mechanical time-evolution of the system would collapse to a single eigenstate on a sub-10 fs time-scale due to the interaction with the vibronic degrees of freedom. Based upon our model and simulations, we estimate that within 20 fs, the population in any low-lying electronic state is effectively mixed with nearby states simply due to the underlying vibrations of the lattice.
Table 1 Estimated interstate transition rates from eqn (10) and vibronic couplings




Transition

Δ
o (eV)

 (eV)

T
d (fs)


−1 (fs)




1 → 2
0.11
0.06
71.7
21.8


1 → 3
0.18
0.08
54.4
16.6


1 → 4
0.26
0.08
54.7
16.7





Fig. 5 illustrates how the electronic nature of the lowest lying excitation changes over a short time period. Shown here are the excess charge-densities at each atomic site taken at 1 fs intervals. At each 1 fs time-step, the electronic character changes wildly due to strong coupling between the electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom.
4 Conclusions
We present here the results of hybrid quantum/classical simulations of the excited states of a model polymer/fullerene heterojunction interface. Our results indicate that dynamical fluctuations due to both the response of the system to the initial excitation and to thermal noise can rapidly change the character of the lowest lying excited states from purely excitonic to purely charge separated over a time scale on the order of 100 fs. In many cases, an exciton localised on the fullerene will dissociate into a charge-transfer state with the hole (or electron) delocalised over multiple polymer units before localizing to form a charge-separated state. While the finite size of our system prevents further dissociation of the charges, the results are clearly suggestive that such interstate crossing events driven by bond-fluctuations can efficiently separate charges to a distance where their Coulombic attraction is comparable to the thermal energy.
The nuclear motions most strongly coupled to the electronic degrees of freedom correspond to CC bond stretching modes implying that small changes in the local lengths play a dramatic role in modulating the electronic couplings between excited states. Since kT ≪ ℏω for these modes, they should be treated as quantum mechanically rather than as classical motions. Generally speaking, including quantum zero-point effects into the calculation of Fermi golden-rule rates leads to slower transition rates than those computed using classical correlation functions which implies that the values estimated here are the upper bounds for the actual transition rates. The results presented here corroborate the recent ultrafast experimental evidence suggesting that free polarons can form on ultrafast timescales (sub 100 fs) and underscore the dynamical nature of the bulk-heterojunction interface.4,7,8,17,22,24,29,38,39
Acknowledgements
The work at the University of Houston was funded in part by the National Science Foundation (CHE-1362006) and the Robert A. Welch Foundation (E-1337). The authors declare no competing interests. We also wish to acknowledge many discussions with Prof. Carlos Silva over the course of this work.
References
Z. He, C. Zhong, S. Su, M. Xu, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 591–595 Search PubMed .
M. Tong, N. Coates, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger, S. Beaupré and M. Leclerc, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125210 CrossRef .
L. G. Kaake, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2264–2268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512–516 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Collini and G. D. Scholes, Science, 2009, 323, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukamel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10563–10564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Monahan, K. W. Williams, B. Kumar, C. Nuckolls and X.-Y. Zhu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 247003 CrossRef .
F. Provencher, N. Bérubé, A. W. Parker, G. M. Greetham, M. Towrie, C. Hellmann, M. Côté, N. Stingelin, C. Silva and S. C. Hayes, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4288 CAS .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T.-K. Ahn, T. Mancal, Y.-C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Beljonne, E. Hennebicq, C. Daniel, L. M. Herz, C. Silva, G. D. Scholes, F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, A. P. H. J. Schenning, S. C. J. Meskers, R. T. Phillips, R. H. Friend and E. W. Meijer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10594–10604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tamura, E. R. Bittner and I. Burghardt, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 021103 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Grancini, M. Maiuri, D. Fazzi, A. Petrozza, H.-J. Egelhaaf, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 29–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Troisi, Faraday Discuss., 2013, 163, 377–392 RSC .
H. Tamura, J. G. S. Ramon, E. R. Bittner and I. Burghardt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 107402 CrossRef .
C.-X. Sheng, T. Basel, B. Pandit and Z. V. Vardeny, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1031–1037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, T. E. Dykstra and G. D. Scholes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 045203 CrossRef .
H. Tamura and I. Burghardt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16364–16367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, T. P. Martin, E. T. Niles, A. J. Wise, A. K. Thomas and J. K. Grey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15121–15128 CAS .
N. Sariciftci and A. Heeger, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 1994, 8, 237–274 CrossRef CAS .
N. Banerji, S. Cowan, M. Leclerc, E. Vauthey and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17459–17470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Jailaubekov, A. P. Willard, J. R. Tritsch, W.-L. Chan, N. Sai, R. Gearba, L. G. Kaake, K. J. Williams, K. Leung, P. J. Rossky and X.-Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 66–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Banerji, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3052 RSC .
P. Barbara, T. Meyer and M. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13148–13168 CrossRef CAS .
R. Noriega, J. Rivnay, K. Vandewal, F. P. V. Koch, N. Stingelin, P. Smith, M. F. Toney and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1038–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Zimmerman, X. Xiao, C. K. Renshaw, S. Wang, V. V. Diev, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4366–4371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Pensack, C. Guo, K. Vakhshouri, E. D. Gomez and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4824–4831 CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Fu, D. da Silva Filho, G. Sini, A. Asiri, S. Aziz, C. Risko and J.-L. Bredas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3790–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Bittner and C. Silva, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3119 Search PubMed .
H. Haken and G. Strobl, Z. Phys., 1973, 262, 135–148 CrossRef CAS .

          J. W. Ponder, TINKER: Software Tools for Molecular Design, 4.2 ed,  2004 Search PubMed .
N. L. Allinger, F. Li, L. Yan and J. C. Tai, J. Comput. Chem., 1990, 11, 868–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pariser and R. G. Parr, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Pople, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1953, 49, 1375–1385 RSC .
J. C. Tully, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 93, 1061–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Tully and R. K. Preston, J. Chem. Phys., 1971, 55, 562–572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Granucci and M. Persico, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 134114 CrossRef PubMed .
A. W. Chin, J. Prior, R. Rosenbach, F. Caycedo-Soler, S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Andrea Rozzi, S. Maria Falke, N. Spallanzani, A. Rubio, E. Molinari, D. Brida, M. Maiuri, G. Cerullo, H. Schramm, J. Christoffers and C. Lienau, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1602 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† PCBM: phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester and PPV: polyphenylene vinylene.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Jablonski diagram showing relative energetic positions of excited states in a bulk-heterojunction system. The discrete states on the left are assumed to be localised excitons or charge-transfer states while the polaron states are assumed to be a quasi-continuum of mobile charge-separated states within the bulk. The latter of these are presumed to be responsible for producing photocurrent from a given device.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
|ψ+〉 = cosθ|0〉 + sinθ|1〉	(4)
|ψ−〉 = −sinθ|0〉 + cosθ|1〉	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 2  Snapshot of the MD simulation cell containing 50 PCMB molecules and 25 PPV oligomers following equilibration at 100 K and 1 bar of pressure. The red and blue highlighted molecules denote the π-active units in our system.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Single CI (SCI) energies for the first 50 fs following excitation to the lowest SCI state. (b) Histogram distribution of the 5 lowest excitation energy levels over a 50 ps simulation. Throughout the simulation, the lowest lying state (in blue) remained populated and varied in character from excitonic to charge-separated. Labels A–E refer to the configurations shown in Fig. 5. The color of each component corresponds to the specific SCI eigenvalue depicted in (a). (c) Histogram of energy gaps between the first excited and higher-lying excited states. Gold: 1 → 2, blue: 1 → 3, green: 1 → 4, and red: 1 → 5.	 

 	Fig. 4  Sequence of states following initial excitation. In this particular simulation, the initial excited state population was localised on PCBM. This population rapidly dissociates into charge-transfer and then charge-separated configurations within 100–150 fs. This scenario appears to be a ubiquitous feature of our simulations indicating that fluctuations alone can carry the system from a localized CT state to charge-separated states, eventually current-producing polaron states.	 

 	Fig. 5  A 6 fs time history from 51 to 56 fs of the first excited CI state is shown in Fig. 3. This series resides around an avoided crossing between the first and second excited state, showing how a CT state at the interface can evolve into exciton states farther into the bulk around one avoided crossing point. After the excited states diverge, the exciton in the bulk collapses back into an exciton localised on PCBM.	 

1 → 2	0.11	0.06	71.7	21.8
1 → 3	0.18	0.08	54.4	16.6
1 → 4	0.26	0.08	54.7	16.7
Footnote
† PCBM: phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester and PPV: polyphenylene vinylene.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
