Photoinduced switchable underwater superoleophobicity–superoleophilicity on laser modified titanium surfaces   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA01782C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA01782C
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10703-10709Photoinduced switchable underwater superoleophobicity–superoleophilicity on laser modified titanium surfaces†

        
          
            Jiale 
            Yong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Chen
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Yang
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Umar 
            Farooq
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xun 
            Hou
          
        
      
Key Laboratory of Photonics Technology for Information of Shaanxi Province & State Key Laboratory for Manufacturing System Engineering, School of Electronics & Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: chenfeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; yangqing@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      10th March 2015
    , Accepted 21st April 2015First published on 21st April 2015AbstractSwitchable underwater superoleophobicity–superoleophilicity on femtosecond laser-induced rough TiO2 surfaces by alternate UV irradiation and dark storage is achieved for the first time. Femtosecond laser ablation not only forms a micro/nanoscale hierarchical rough structure but also oxidizes the Ti materials, resulting in a rough TiO2 layer covering on the surface. The reversible switching of underwater oil wettability is caused by photoinduced switching between superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic states in air. These rough TiO2 surfaces can even respond to visible light. We believe this subtle switching method will be potentially applied in the biological and medical fields.
1. Introduction
Underwater oil wettability has recently emerged as a new research focus due to its importance in various phenomena and applications.1 Two extreme states, underwater superoleophobicity and superhydrophilicity, are particularly fascinating.2 In nature, the combination of the hydrophilic chemical composition and the rough microstructure of fish scales,3 clam shells,4 and the lower side of lotus leaves5 results in underwater superoleophobicity with an oil contact angle (OCA) larger than 150°. This allows these biological surfaces to have remarkable oil-repellent abilities in water environments. Underwater superoleophobic surfaces inspired by nature have been fabricated through various methods to operate under a three phase (oil/water/solid) system.1,2,6 These surfaces play a significant role in the fields of self-cleaning,7 submerged anti-fouling,8 water/oil separation,9 oil droplet manipulation,10 anti-bioadhesion,11 and microfluidics.7 Additionally underwater superoleophilic surfaces (OCA smaller than 10°) are of interest because of their excellent oil-adsorption properties, which are usually applied to oil collection and cleaning of waste oil.12 Recently, smart interfaces with tunable wettability have attracted considerable research interest and have been developed by forming rough surface microstructures on stimuli-responsive materials or modifying rough solid surfaces with stimuli-responsive molecular layers.13 However, current strategies mainly target water wetting and water adhesion in air.14 Finding a simple route to smart surfaces with switchable underwater superoleophobicity and superoleophilicity has remained challenging.
Here, we present a one-step strategy for constructing a micro/nanoscale hierarchical rough titanium dioxide (TiO2) layer by femtosecond laser ablation of a titanium (Ti) sheet. The femtosecond laser-induced TiO2 surface shows not only a hierarchical microstructure but also a high oxygen content. The oil wettability of the as-prepared surfaces in water can be reversibly switched between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity through UV irradiation and dark storage. This smart property is caused by photoinduced switching between superhydrophobic and superhydrophilic states in air. Oil can refer to lipid based materials such as cells, proteins, biological tissues, etc., which are often in aqueous media. Therefore, this switchable underwater oil wettability should have significant biomedical applications.
2. Experimental section
The Ti sheets (1 × 1 × 0.1 cm3) were ablated by a femtosecond laser using the typical line-by-line and serial scanning process. The laser beam (pulse duration: 50 fs; center wavelength: 800 nm; repetition: 1 kHz) coming from a regenerative amplified Ti: sapphire laser system (CoHerent, Libra-usp-1K-he-200) was focused on the sample using a microscope lens with an NA of 0.45 (Nikon, Japan). The laser power was held constant at 15 mW. The scanning speed and the shift of adjacent laser scanning lines were set at 2 mm s−1 and 2 μm, respectively.
The microstructure was probed using a Quantan 250 FEG scanning electron microscope (FEI, America). The static and dynamic wettability were investigated using a JC2000D4 contact-angle system (Powereach, China). A droplet of 1,2-dichloroethane (8 μL) was mainly used as the test oil. UV light irradiation was carried out with a UV lamp with a wavelength of 370 nm and power of 36 W. The distance between the light source and the samples was approximately 7 cm. For dark storage, the samples were placed in an opaque black box, and stored at a temperature of 150 °C to accelerate the recovery process. The reversible switching of underwater oil wettability was also verified by He–Ne laser excitation at a wavelength of 633 nm and an output power of 0.96 mW. The as-prepared samples were irradiated by the He–Ne laser for one day in an otherwise totally dark room. The spectral absorbance of the femtosecond laser-induced TiO2 surface was examined using a V-570 spectrophotometer (JASCO, Japan).
3. Results and discussion
Ti and TiO2 are widely used materials in industry, energy and environmental applications, agriculture, medicine, sports and other fields.15 Besides its well-known photocatalytic properties, TiO2 is capable of switching its wettability between hydrophilic and hydrophobic states by alternative UV irradiation and dark storage.16 Combined with wettability amplification effects of rough surface microstructures, even the conversion from superhydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity can be realized. According to theoretical calculations, hydrophobic (hydrophilic) materials in air become oleophilic (oleophobic) once the sample is immersed in water.17 This suggests that the photoinduced water wettability transition of a rough TiO2 surface offers the opportunity to control the underwater oil wettability.

Fig. 1a–d show typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of femtosecond laser ablated Ti surfaces. There exist uniformly distributed rough micro-mountain arrays on the surfaces. The size of the features is several microns. The surface of each micro-mountain is covered by irregular protrusions ranging in size from tens to hundreds of nanometers (Fig. 1d). The micro/nanoscale hierarchical rough structures result from laser ablation followed by the re-solidification of ejected particles.18Fig. 1e and f and S1† show energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDXS) results for the Ti surface before and after femtosecond laser irradiation. It can be seen that the original material is primarily composed of Ti. Upon laser ablation, the atomic proportion of Ti decreases from 100% to 51.81% while the atomic proportion of oxygen increases to 48.19%. These results indicate that the laser ablated Ti surface is oxidized during the formation of the rough microstructures, resulting in a rough TiO2 layer on the surface. The EDXS results agree well with the fact that the color of the Ti sheet changed from yellowish to black upon femtosecond laser ablation (inset of Fig. 1a). It has been recently demonstrated that black TiO2 contains a high oxygen content which results in improved photocatalytic activity.19
 Fig. 1  (a–d) SEM images of a femtosecond laser-ablated Ti surface. The sample in (c) is tilted 45°. The inset is a photograph of the laser-induced Ti sheet. EDXS results of the Ti surface before (e) and after (f) femtosecond laser ablation. 
Contact angle measurements were used to study the water wettability in air and oil wettability in water of the ablated Ti surfaces. Water droplets on the laser-induced surface showed superhydrophobicity with a water contact angle (WCA) of 154.5° ± 2.5° without any chemical modification (Fig. 2a). When the sample was immersed in water, the laser-ablated region showed silver mirror-like reflectance (Fig. S2, ESI†). This mirror-like interface is due to a trapped air layer between water and the as-prepared surface suggesting that the laser-ablated Ti is a Cassie–Baxter surface.20 After being irradiated by UV light for 40 min, the WCA was found to be only 2.5° (Fig. 2b and Movie S1 in the ESI†); that is, the as-prepared surface switched from being superhydrophobic to superhydrophilic in air. Additionally the silver mirror did not appear while submerging the UV-exposed sample in water (Fig. S2, ESI†). Interestingly, the sample could recover its superhydrophobicity after keeping it in the dark for 2 days.
 Fig. 2  Reversible switching between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity by alternate UV irradiation and dark storage. (a and b) Images of a water droplet on the femtosecond laser-ablated Ti surface after dark storage (a) and UV irradiation (b) in air. (c and d) Images of an oil droplet on the femtosecond laser-ablated Ti surface after dark storage (c) and UV irradiation (d) in water. (e) Reversibility of the oil wettability being switched between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity. 
The switching trend of underwater oil wettability is opposite to that of water wettability in air. As demonstrated by the underwater oil repellency of fish scales, superhydrophilic solid surfaces become superoleophobic in water.3 When an oil droplet approaches the submerged laser induced TiO2 surface, the droplet spreads out quickly once it contacts the substrate, resulting in a very small OCA near 4°, as shown in Fig. 2c and Movie S2 in the ESI.† Therefore, the as-prepared surface shows underwater superoleophilicity.21 However, after being irradiated by UV light, the underwater oil wettability switches from superoleophilicity to superoleophobicity with OCA values reaching up to 160.5 ± 2°. Fig. 2d shows the approximately spherical shape of an underwater oil droplet on the as-prepared surface. Additionally, the oil droplet can easily roll off the laser-ablated surface once it is tilted at an angle of 1°, indicating ultra-low oil-adhesion in water medium (Fig. S3 and Movie S3, ESI†). After dark storage for 2 days, the as-prepared sample can recover its underwater superoleophilicity (Fig. 2c and d). Furthermore, this reversibility between underwater superoleophilicity and superoleophobicity can be repeated several times, demonstrating excellent reproducibility and stability (Fig. 2e).

Fig. 3a and b show the evolution of the underwater OCA with time under UV irradiation and dark storage, respectively. While the UV irradiation time increases to 40 min, the OCA gradually increases from 4° to 160.5°, indicating that the wettability changes from underwater superoleophilic to underwater superoleophobic states. Upon dark storage, the OCA sharply decreases to 20° over the first day, and then slowly recovers to its initial value of about 4° over the second day regaining underwater superoleophilicity. Interestingly, the femtosecond laser-induced TiO2 surface is responsive not only to UV light but also to visible light. Fig. S4a–d (ESI†) show the reversible switching between underwater superoleophilic and underwater superoleophobic states after He–Ne laser (wavelength = 633 nm) irradiation and dark storage. The high absorption of visible light is further supported by UV-vis spectroscopy measurements (Fig. S4e, ESI†). Taking advantage of a broad absorption band, the as-prepared TiO2 surfaces have the potential for sunlight induced switchability. Furthermore, the as-prepared surface also exhibits switchable underwater oil wettability toward a wide range of oil liquids including petroleum ether, hexadecane, diesel, paraffin liquid, crude oil, and chloroform, as shown in Fig. 3c.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Time dependent evolution of the underwater oil wettability on the femtosecond laser ablated Ti surface under UV irradiation and dark storage, respectively. (c) Switching between underwater superoleophobicity and underwater superoleophilicity for various oils. 
Traditional smart surfaces often lose their wettable switchability after being oil fouled. However, TiO2 materials are capable of photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds which can endow them with excellent antifouling performance.22 To verify this property, oleic acid, which has a low volatility, was chosen to pollute the as-prepared sample. As shown in Fig. S5 of the ESI,† the WCA of the original UV-irradiated surface increases from 2.5° to 74°, and the underwater OCA decreases from 160.5° to 14° after being adhered by oleic acid. When this contaminated sample is irradiated by UV light for 5 h, the surface recovers its superhydrophilicity in air and superoleophobicity in water. This antifouling performance of femtosecond laser induced TiO2 surfaces is important for repeated and long-term use.
The underlying mechanism of switching between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity is depicted in Fig. 4. As shown in Fig. 4a, femtosecond laser ablation not only forms a micro/nanoscale hierarchical surface structure but also oxidizes the Ti material, resulting in a rough TiO2 layer covering on the Ti surface. After ablation, the surface exhibits superhydrophobicity and ultra-low water adhesion. Following the Cassie–Baxter model, the water droplet sits on the peaks of the microstructure leaving air trapped in the pores (Fig. 4c).23 If a large amount of water is poured on the as-prepared surface as opposed to a droplet or if the surface is completely submerged, the air cushion still exists. When an underwater oil droplet contacts the rough surface, the oil spreads along the gap between the water and microstructure surface under pressure and through capillary action with the oil displacing the trapped air and filling the space between the rough surface and the water. This process can be observed directly, as shown in Fig. S6 and Movie S2 in the ESI.† When an oil droplet contacts the as-prepared sample in water, air bubbles appear on the oil surface while the oil droplet spreads out. These air bubbles are believed to come mainly from the air cushion trapped between the water and the TiO2 surface, which is pushed out when the oil droplet occupies that space. This mechanism is characteristic of the surface exhibiting underwater superoleophilicity (Fig. 4e).
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the switching between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity. 
TiO2 is a well-known photo-responsive semiconducting oxide material.16 After the structured surface is irradiated by UV light, photogenerated holes interact with lattice oxygen forming highly unstable oxygen vacancies on the TiO2 surface.16 These oxygen vacancies possess a strong propensity for dissociative adsorption of atmospheric water resulting in two adjacent Ti–OH groups per vacancy (Fig. 4b). The hydroxyl groups have a high surface energy and endow the as-prepared surface with superhydrophilicity (Fig. 4d). When such a sample is immersed in water, the rough surface is completely wetted, resulting in water occupying the interspace between the microstructures. When contacted by an oil droplet, a water cushion is formed between the oil droplet and the surface making the oil droplet sit on the peaks of the microstructure (Fig. 4f). This oil wetting state follows the underwater version of the Cassie–Baxter model, which is commonly used to describe the oil/water/solid three-phase system.3 The water trapped in the hierarchical rough structure is a repulsive liquid phase to oil, giving rise to underwater superoleophobicity.24 Interestingly, the underwater oil wettability returns to its initial superoleophilic state after 2 days of dark storage. During dark storage, ambient oxygen replaces the newly implanted hydroxyl moieties because oxygen adsorption is more stable thermodynamically.16 As the hydrophobicity of the laser-induced surface increases, the surface recovers to its original superhydrophobic state as well as underwater superoleophilic state (Fig. 4c and e). The reversible switching between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity is ascribed to a combination of the controllable chemical composition and the hierarchical rough microstructure of femtosecond laser ablated Ti surfaces. The former switches the TiO2 layer between hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity in air or oleophilicity and oleophobicity in water, and the latter strongly amplifies these wettability properties.
It is worth noting that the time of finishing a wetting switching cycle of the femtosecond laser-induced rough TiO2 surface is shorter than that of most TiO2 materials developed by other methods, which usually take several weeks.25 This relatively fast switchability is a result of the laser ablated sample having a high level of oxygen content. This causes the oxygen vacancies and the implanted hydroxyl groups to form more easily during UV irradiation as well as to be removed by ambient oxygen under dark conditions. Additionally, our as-prepared surface exhibits a micro/nanoscale hierarchical structure. The surface area of a multiscale structure is much larger than that of a single-scale structure, which allows the TiO2 surface to absorb more photons during the UV irradiation process and contact more oxygen molecules during the dark storage process. The above-mentioned advantages endow the femtosecond laser-induced rough TiO2 surface with faster response speed than traditionally developed TiO2 materials. Since TiO2 materials are widely applied in solar cells, photocatalytic decomposition of water into hydrogen, and photodegradation of organic pollutants, highly oxygenated and multiscale microstructures may be a way to improve the efficiency of their applications.26
In recent years, femtosecond laser microfabrication has proven to be a powerful and efficient way to control the wettability of a solid surface because it can not only form micro/nanoscale hierarchical structures via a one-step process, but it can also be applied to various materials.27 Moreover, the processing position can be precisely controlled by a computer; thereby, complex structures can be designed without using expensive masks and clean rooms. Fig. 5 shows some examples of different patterns which can be realized by femtosecond laser microfabrication. Those heterogeneous structures may exhibit surprising wetting properties in combination with the photoinduced switchable wettability of TiO2 materials.
 Fig. 5  Various patterns prepared through femtosecond laser microfabrication. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, a simple and effective way to achieve reversible switching between underwater superoleophobicity and underwater superoleophilicity of a femtosecond laser ablated Ti material has been demonstrated for the first time. Femtosecond laser ablation not only forms a micro/nanoscale hierarchical rough structure but also oxidizes the Ti materials, resulting in a rough TiO2 layer on the surface. The as-prepared surface is superhydrophobic in air as well as superoleophilic in water. However, after UV irradiation for 40 min, the surface becomes superoleophobic in water with the initial underwater superoleophilic state being recovered after 2 days of dark storage. Because of the hierarchical microstructure and high oxygen content, the femtosecond laser-induced TiO2 surface performs a single cycle in a shorter switching time than traditionally developed TiO2 materials. Furthermore, the TiO2 surface is responsive not only to UV light but also to visible light. This subtle reversible switching of underwater oil wettability provides new insight into smart surfaces, and we believe that the femtosecond laser ablated Ti surface will be potentially applied in the biological and medical fields.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation of China under the Grant nos 51335008, 61275008, and 61176113, the special-funded programme on national key scientific instruments and equipment development of China under the Grant no. 2012YQ12004706, the Collaborative Innovation Center of high-end Manufacturing equipment. The SEM work was done at International Center for Dielectric Research (ICDR), Xi'an Jiaotong University; the authors also thank Juan Feng for her help in using SEM.
References

  (a) Z. Xue, M. Liu and L. Jiang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 1209 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Xue, Y. Cao, N. Liu, L. Feng and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2445 RSC .

  (a) L. Lin, M. Liu, L. Chen, P. Chen, J. Ma, D. Han and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4826 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Liu, J. Gao, Z. Xue, L. Chen, L. Lin, L. Jiang and S. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5614 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Zhang, Z. Zhang and P. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e8 CrossRef ; 
  (d) L. Xu, N. Liu, Y. Cao, F. Lu, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Feng and Y. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13324 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) B. Cortese, D. Caschera, F. Federici, G. M. Ingo and G. Gigli, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6781 RSC .
M. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Wei, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Xue, J. Gao, J. Meng, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, M. Li, Y. Zheng, B. Su, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5948 RSC .

  (a) Y. Huang, M. Liu, J. Wang, J. Zhou, L. Wang, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4436 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. P. Xu, J. Zhao, B. Su, X. Liu, J. Peng, Y. Liu, H. Liu, G. Yang, L. Jiang, Y. Wen, X. Zhang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 26, 606 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) W. Ma, H. Xu and A. Takahara, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300092 Search PubMed .
D. Wu, S. Z. Wu, Q. D. Chen, S. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Jiao, J. A. Piersol, J. N. Wang, H. B. Sun and L. Jiang, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3873 RSC .
J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, D. Zhang, U. Farooq, G. Du and X. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8790 CAS .

  (a) F. Zhang, W. B. Zhang, Z. Shi, D. Wang, J. Jin and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4192 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Gao, L. P. Xu, Z. Xue, L. Feng, J. Peng, Y. Wen, S. Wang and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1771 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. A. Gondal, M. S. Sadullah, M. A. Dastageer, G. H. McKinley, D. Panchanathan and K. K. Varanasi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13400 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) J. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, H. Bian, G. Du, U. Farooq and X. Hou, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400388 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, U. Farooq, H. Bian, G. Du and X. Hou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 071608 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, G. Du, C. Shan, U. Farooq, J. Wang and X. Hou, RSC Adv., 2015 10.1039/c5ra04671h .
T. Sun, G. Qing, B. Su and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2909 RSC .

  (a) M. Cheng, G. Ju, C. Jiang, Y. Zhang and F. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13411 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, J. Ma, T. Wu, X. Wang, G. Huang, Y. Liu, H. Qiu, Y. Li, W. Wang and J. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. Xia and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Sun and G. Qing, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, H57–H77 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Sun, G. Wang, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 357 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Z. Hu, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, K. Huo, P. K. Chu, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Li, R. Guo, X. Jiang, S. Hu, L. Li, X. Cao, H. Yang, Y. Song, Y. Ma and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4254 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Wu, S. Z. Wu, Q. D. Chen, Y. L. Zhang, J. Yao, X. Yao, L. G. Niu, J. N. Wang, L. Jiang and H. B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 545 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Hong, X. Gao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) F. Xia, L. Feng, S. Wang, T. Sun, W. Song, W. Jiang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dahl, Y. Liu and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. Liu, M. Cao, A. Fujishima and L. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1044 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura, M. Shimohigoshi and T. Watanabe, Nature, 1997, 388, 431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jin, S. Li, J. Wang, Z. Xue, M. Liao and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11745 RSC .

  (a) F. Chem, D. Zhang, Q. Yang, X. Wang, B. Dai, X. Li, X. Hao, Y. Ding, J. Si and X. Hou, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 359 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, D. Zhang, H. Bian, Y. Ou, J. Si, G. Du and X. Hou, Appl. Phys. A, 2013, 111, 243 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Larmour, S. E. J. Bell and G. C. Saunders, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 1740 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura, M. Shimohigoshi and T. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sawai, S. Nishimato, Y. Kameshima, E. Fujii and M. Miyake, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 6784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Q. Wen, J. Di, L. Jiang, J. Yu and R. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 591 RSC ; 
  (b) J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, G. Du, C. Shan, H. Bian, U. Farooq and X. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9379 RSC .

  (a) X. Liu, Y. Liang, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 2070 RSC ; 
  (b) D. Wang, X. Wang, X. Liu and F. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9938 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and A. Selloni, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. Zhang, F. Chen, Q. Yang, J. Yong, H. Bian, Y. Ou, J. Si, X. Meng and X. Hou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4905 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, D. Zhang, G. Du, J. Si, F. Yun and X. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24907 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta01782cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a–d) SEM images of a femtosecond laser-ablated Ti surface. The sample in (c) is tilted 45°. The inset is a photograph of the laser-induced Ti sheet. EDXS results of the Ti surface before (e) and after (f) femtosecond laser ablation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Reversible switching between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity by alternate UV irradiation and dark storage. (a and b) Images of a water droplet on the femtosecond laser-ablated Ti surface after dark storage (a) and UV irradiation (b) in air. (c and d) Images of an oil droplet on the femtosecond laser-ablated Ti surface after dark storage (c) and UV irradiation (d) in water. (e) Reversibility of the oil wettability being switched between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Time dependent evolution of the underwater oil wettability on the femtosecond laser ablated Ti surface under UV irradiation and dark storage, respectively. (c) Switching between underwater superoleophobicity and underwater superoleophilicity for various oils.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the switching between underwater superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity.	 

 	Fig. 5  Various patterns prepared through femtosecond laser microfabrication.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta01782c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
