Research progress on photocatalytic reduction of CO 2 based on LDH materials  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR08235C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR08235C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 3367-3386Research progress on photocatalytic reduction of CO2 based on LDH materials

        
          
            Zhe-xu 
            Bi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rui-tang 
            Guo
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xing 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wei-guo 
            Pan
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Energy and Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai, China. E-mail: grta@zju.edu.cn; pweiguo@163.com
bShanghai Engineering Research Center of Power Generation Environment Protection, Shanghai, China
Received 
      15th December 2021
    , Accepted 29th January 2022First published on 31st January 2022AbstractConverting CO2 to renewable fuels or valuable carbon compounds is an effective way to solve the global warming and energy crisis. Compared with other CO2 conversion methods, photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is more energy-saving, environmentally friendly, and has a broader application prospect. Layered double hydroxide (LDH) has attracted widespread attention as a two-dimensional material, composed of metal hydroxide layers, interlayer anions and water molecules. This review briefly introduces the basic theory of photocatalysis and the mechanism of CO2 reduction. The composition and properties of LDH are introduced. The research progress on LDH in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is elaborated from six aspects: directly as a catalyst, as a precursor for a catalyst, and by modification, intercalation, supporting with other materials and construction of a heterojunction. Finally, the development prospects of LDH are put forward. This review could provide an effective reference for the development of more efficient and reasonable photocatalysts based on LDH.
1. Introduction
Since the Industrial Revolution, the demand for fossil fuels has been increasing. The huge consumption of fossil fuels has not only brought about a serious energy crisis, but also emits abundant greenhouse gases, mainly carbon dioxide (CO2). The accumulation of CO2 in the atmosphere has a lot of effects on the global climate, such as the increase of hurricane intensity, the El Niño phenomenon, the decrease of marine plankton calcification, and so on.1 Therefore, it is necessary to explore an efficient and low-cost method for CO2 reduction. Many methods have been developed for the reduction of CO2, including thermochemical, electrochemical, bioelectrochemical, and photocatalytic methods.2 Thermochemical reduction requires a higher temperature, which increases the energy consumption. Electrochemical reduction of CO2 requires external electricity input, which increases the cost. Meanwhile, the electrochemical reaction is often accompanied by H2 generated by water splitting, which will affect the purity of the product. Bioelectrochemistry uses microorganisms as a catalyst to reduce CO2; however, microorganisms have strict requirements for living conditions, which can only be carried out in the laboratory.3 Compared with the above methods, photocatalytic reduction of CO2, which can store renewable solar energy in fuel, is more energy-efficient and environmentally friendly, and is a very promising method.4,5
Taking into account the higher stability and chemical inertness of the CO2 molecule,6 it is difficult to reduce CO2. Using various methods to reduce the activation energy required for the reaction, stimulate more photogenerated electrons, and decrease the recombination of electrons and holes can effectively improve the efficiency of the reaction. In the past four decades, researchers have made significant developments by exploiting a large number of materials, but the achievements are still limited.7,8 Conventional metal oxide-based or metal sulfide-based semiconducting photocatalysts are not so widely used in practice, marred by their low solar energy conversion efficiency.9,10 TiO2 is one of the most studied metal oxide semiconductors, and is used in photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants,11 hydrogen production from water splitting,12 dye-sensitized solar cells13 and other fields. However, because of a lower quantum efficiency caused by the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, and the wide band gap (3.2 eV for anatase and 3.0 eV for rutile), TiO2 can only absorb ultraviolet (UV) light to stimulate photogenerated electrons, which severely limits its practical application.14–16 Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is also a traditional photocatalyst with convenient preparation, good stability and environmental friendliness. However, the drawback of its fast carrier recombination rate limits its photocatalytic activity to a certain extent.17–22 It is a great challenge to develop efficient photocatalysts to solve the above problems.
Layered double hydroxide (LDH) is a type of two-dimensional metal compound with a unique structure, which is composed of positively charged host layers containing M(OH)6 octahedron, interlayer anions and water molecules.23 LDH has been widely used in the field of heterogeneous catalysis because of its excellent physical and chemical properties (compositional flexibility, adjustable acidity and basicity, memory effect, and good thermal stability). Some LDHs exhibit photocatalytic activity, which can degrade organic matter,24 split water,25 and reduce CO2 in the presence of water or hydrogen gas.26 LDH shows basicity as a whole, and the combination of the hydroxyl groups on the surface with CO2 molecules facilitates the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Meanwhile, the synthesis method of LDH material is relatively simple. Various methods and strategies can be used to synthesize LDH catalysts with different morphologies, and their composition, particle size, surface defects and electronic properties can be adjusted to enhance their catalytic effects. The methods of synthesizing LDH include co-precipitation,27,28 ion exchange,7 hydrothermal,29 mechanochemical,30 sol–gel,31 template synthesis32,33 and so on. LDH can be used as a catalyst, catalyst precursor and catalyst carrier in a catalytic reaction owing to its excellent properties.
Although a large number of reviews have been published on the application of LDH in the fields of supercapacitors,34,35 electrocatalysis,36 biomedicine,37,38 photocatalytic degradation of pollutants9 and splitting water,39,40 there are few systematic reviews in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2. In this review, the photocatalytic theory and the mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 over LDH and LDH-based materials are briefly introduced. This paper mainly introduces the composition and properties of LDH. In addition, the research progress on LDH in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 is reviewed in detail. At the end of this review, the potential of LDH in this field is discussed. We firmly believe that this work can provide an effective reference for the design and research of photocatalytic systems based on LDH in the future, and encourage more researchers to explore the application of LDH in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2.
2. Theory of photocatalytic reduction of CO2
2.1. Theory of photocatalysis
The photocatalytic process generally refers to a photocatalyst that accelerates a specific redox reaction with the assistance of light energy.41 In 1972, Fujishima and Honda, Japanese scholars, discovered that TiO2 had the function of decomposing water into hydrogen and oxygen under ultraviolet light, and published this achievement in Nature.42 This research achievement has attracted much attention from the scientific community, and researchers began to study photocatalysis. Carey et al. completed the experiment of photocatalytic dechlorination of polychlorinated biphenyls with TiO2, which expanded photocatalytic technology to the field of pollutant treatment in 1976.43 In 1979, Inoue et al. conducted a semiconductor photocatalytic reduction of CO2 experiment, using light to irradiate TiO2, ZnO, CdS, GaP and SiC suspension to reduce CO2 to produce formic acid, formaldehyde, methanol and methane.44 This experiment opened up a new way for semiconductor photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to produce valuable fuel.
Based on the solid energy band theory, the semiconductor photocatalytic process can be divided into the following four steps. First, the reactant molecules are adsorbed by the catalyst.45 In the second step, under the irradiation of light, the catalyst is activated, and when the energy absorbed by the electrons in the valence band (VB) is enough to cross the band gap, the electrons will transfer to the conduction band (CB) and leave corresponding holes in the VB, forming electron–hole pairs.3 Then the electron–hole pairs separate and transport to the surface of the catalyst to interact with the reaction sites of the material. Finally, redox reaction occurs on the surface of the catalyst.
In the process of photocatalysis, the energy required for the electron to step from the VB to the CB is determined by the value of the band gap. The band gaps of conductors, semiconductors, and insulators are shown in Fig. 1. In an insulator, the band gap between the VB and the CB is very large, and electrons generally do not undergo transition. In the conductor, the VB overlaps with the CB, and the valence electrons can move freely from the VB to the CB.41 In semiconductors, light can excite electrons on the VB, causing them to transition to the CB. Semiconductors as photocatalysts not only need to have high catalytic activity, but also need to have high chemical stability. For example, NiV-LDH exhibits high photocatalytic activity to reduce CO2 to CO. However, due to leaching into the reaction solution, its stability is poor,46 so it is not suitable as photocatalyst.
 Fig. 1  The band gap structure of conductors, semiconductors and insulators. 
2.2. Mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2
The CO2 molecule is very stable, showing a linear structure of O=C=O, with the characteristics of σ- and π-bonds.47 The band energy of C=O is 805 kJ mol−1, while the main bond energies of various reduction products are C–C (336 kJ mol−1), C–O (327 kJ mol−1) and C–H (411 kJ mol−1), respectively.48 Therefore, it takes a lot of energy to reduce CO2 to hydrocarbons. Photocatalytic reduction of CO2 uses the energy of light to convert CO2 into carbon monoxide, methane, methanol, ethanol and other renewable fuels or valuable products.49,50 The reaction process is similar to the photosynthesis of plants. The selectivity of reduction products depends on the reaction conditions and process. Eqn (1)–(12) are the thermodynamic potentials of different CO2 reduction products and water-splitting reactions versus the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE), when the pH of the aqueous solution is 7, the temperature is 25 °C, and the pressure is 1 atm.51,52 Among them, eqn (1) is a single-electron reaction. After obtaining one electron, the linear CO2 molecule will be transformed to a ˙CO2− anion with curvilinear geometry, which requires large energy,53 and the redox potential is high, reaching −1.90 V. Such a high reduction potential makes the reaction difficult in thermodynamics. Meanwhile, other reaction steps are considered to be initiated by this reaction. Therefore, the speed of the single-electron reaction determines the speed of the entire CO2 reduction. CO2 molecules can be adsorbed on the oxygen vacancies in the material. The d orbital of the unsaturated metal atom can provide more electrons to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the CO2 molecule, thus promoting the bending of the CO2 molecule and the dissociation of chemical bond, which is beneficial for the CO2 molecule to obtain an electron from the oxygen vacancy and be activated as ˙CO2− radical ion,54,55 which can overcome its high reduction potential (−1.90 V) and promote the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Moreover, if multiple proton-coupled electron transfer is involved in the reduction reaction, the adverse reaction of CO2 to ˙CO2− will be alleviated.56 CO2 + e− → ˙CO2− −1.90 V(1) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O −0.53 V(2) CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH −0.61 V(3) CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCOH + H2O −0.48 V(4) CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O −0.38 V(5) CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O −0.24 V(6) 2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O −0.35 V(7) 2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O −0.33 V(8) 2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O −0.27 V(9) 3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH + 5H2O −0.31 V(10) 2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+ +0.81 V(11) 2H+ + 2e− → H2 −0.42 V(12)
Under purely thermodynamic control, the sequence of products produced is: methane, ethane, propanol, ethanol, acetylene, methanol, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide and formic acid. However, from the analysis of chemical reaction kinetics, only two electrons and protons are required to generate CO, whereas eight electrons and protons are required for the generation of CH4, and more electrons and CO2 are required as ingredients for the generation of C2+ product. Especially, CO is the most easily generated product. In general, the whole reduction process is carried out in the gas phase, and the reduction products are mainly CO and CH4, while the main products are CH3OH, CH3COOH and HCOOH in the liquid phase.3 The C2+ product is typically generated in a much lower proportion than the C1 product, which generally accounts for about 5% due to the multi-electron coupled proton transfer (MECPT) reaction and the C–C coupling step. The selectivity of CO2 reduction products can be tuned by adjusting the band structure, charges separation efficiency, adsorption/activation of reactants, reaction/active sites on the catalyst surface, and so on.57
When semiconductors are used as photocatalysts for the reduction of CO2, the photogenerated electrons on the CB generated by the material under photoexcitation should have a higher (more negative) reduction potential than that of the product/CO2, and the VB should be at a more positive potential than the oxidation potential. That is to say, the band gap of the photocatalyst should straddle the redox potential of each product generated by the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Therefore, semiconductors with broad band gap are ideal materials for photocatalyst CO2 reduction.58 However, the band gap of the catalyst shouldn't be too wide, otherwise the energy required to generate electron–hole pairs by light excitation is too large, and the wavelength range of available light will be reduced. For example, due to the wide band gap of TiO2 (∼3.2 eV for anatase), it can only absorb a small part of the UV portion of the entire solar spectrum, which limits its wide application.47 Visible light and infrared light account for 46% and about 50% of the solar spectrum reaching the Earth's surface, respectively. Therefore, semiconductor materials with high catalytic activity that can utilize visible light and infrared light have broad application prospects. The introduction of metal ions or metal compounds into the LDH layer can have the effect of modulating the band structure.
As the reduction process of CO2 involves the transfer of multiple electrons, the electron concentration on the surface of the photocatalyst can affect the reaction rate as well as the product selectivity. Under photoexcitation, the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs in the catalyst, in turn, directly affects the electron concentration on its surface. Therefore, controlling the separation efficiency of carriers is also an effective means of altering the product selectivity of CO2 photocatalytic reduction. The current common method is to construct heterojunctions to realize the efficient separation of electrons and holes in space by the built-in electric field. Moreover, loading nanoparticles on the LDH surface as electron traps can facilitate carriers’ separation and provide active sites for CO2 reduction.59
The adsorption of the reactants is the most elementary step in the entire CO2 photocatalytic reaction process. LDH itself appears basic, thus favoring the adsorption of CO2 molecules. CO2 molecules can be adsorbed on the surface or inside of LDH, which is mainly composed of four forms: (1) residual CO32− acts as charge compensating anion in the interlayer of LDH, (2) CO2 was captured by LDH interlayer to form CO32−, (3) dissolved CO2 in water, and (4) the linear/non-linear CO2 molecules adsorbed on the surface.27,60 Increasing the specific surface area, enhancing the basicity and enlarging the interlayer distance are all beneficial for the adsorption of CO2 molecules.26,61 Studies have shown that interlayer CO32− is more efficiently reduced to CH4 than surrounding free CO2 or CO32−.45 Simultaneously, the interlayer space in LDH can be increased so that more CO2 molecules diffuse into the reaction space and combine with the hydroxyl groups on the surface of the layer, which also facilitates the adsorption of CO2 molecules. Besides, formatting a large number of vacancies on the surface of LDH by methods such as changing its morphology is also a way to improve CO2 adsorption. The product selectivity can be adjusted through selective adsorption and activation of CO2 and H2O on certain elements or functional groups on the catalyst. Owing to the presence of highly dispersed two or three transition metal elements in LDH as well as the flexible tunability in the composition of metal elements, the selectivity of CO2 reduction products can be tuned by adjusting the species and proportion of metal cations in the LDH layer. Comprehensive previous studies have shown that Ni, Zn, and Mg in LDH can effectively promote the conversion from CO2 to CO, and Cu has a facilitating effect on the generation of CH3OH, while the presence of In is beneficial for H2 production.
It is worth noting that while the electrons are consumed in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, an equal number of photogenerated holes should also be utilized. Otherwise, with the decrease of the electrons in the electron–hole pairs generated by photoexcitation, the remaining holes will accumulate, which increases the probability of charge recombination. This is not conducive to the reduction reaction.51 The electron donor can be used to react with the hole, thereby reducing the possibility of charge recombination and prolonging the life of photogenerated electrons.62 G. R. Dey et al. found that the presence of 2-propanol as a hole scavenger greatly increased the rate of CO2 methanation catalyzed by TiO2.63 The ideal electron donor is recyclable and does not consume precious hydrocarbons with high energy.
3. Structures and properties of LDH photocatalysts
3.1. Compositional structures
LDH is a typical two-dimensional layered anionic clay, whose structure is similar to that of brucite (Mg(OH)2). The main layer is composed of metal hydroxide octahedron with common edges,64,65 and the interlayer is composed of anions and water molecules, as shown in Fig. 2.66 In general, its chemical formula is [M2+1−xM3+x(OH)2]x+(An−x/n)·mH2O, where M2+ and M3+ represent divalent and trivalent metal cations, respectively, and x is the molar ratio of M3+/(M2+ + M3+), which is generally regarded as 0.2 ≤ x ≤ 0.33.67,68 An− represents the interlayer anion, neutralizing the positive charge of the layer and preserving the overall charge neutrality. In addition, m corresponds to the water molecules amount through the natural electrostatic stacking between layer structure with positive charge and negative charge anion interlayers.69
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the LDH structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2017) MDPI. 
The metal cations that make up the layers of LDH are mainly the elements of the third and fourth periods in the periodic table.70 Among them, the common divalent and trivalent cations are Mg2+, Cd2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+, Cu2+ and Al3+, Mo3+, Fe3+, Co3+, Cr3+, Ga3+, respectively. But not any combination of divalent and trivalent metal elements can produce LDH layers. For example, Iglesias et al. found that Cu2+ ion (d9 configuration) could cause severe distortion of metal octahedrons due to the strong Jahn–Teller effect, and couldn't form Cu–Fe double hydroxide, while the existence of Co2+ was conducive to the formation of an LDH structure containing Cu2+ and Fe3+.71 Furthermore, some monovalent and tetravalent metal cations can also be introduced into LDH layers, but they are limited to Li+, Ti4+, Zr4+, Sn4+.72
Any kind of anion can be inserted into the interlayer of LDH, as long as it does not damage the metal cations on the layer and has enough negative charge to neutralize the positive charge of the layer.64 The interior of the LDH layer is connected by a strong covalent bond. Each hydroxyl group in the layer is oriented to the interlayer region and is connected with anions and water molecules through hydrogen bonds.73 The adjacent layers are connected by hydrogen bonds which are provided by water molecules surrounding the anions.74 The strength of hydrogen bond energy is related to the molecular types. Therefore, the interaction of adjacent layers in LDH can be weakened by changing the interlayer anion and water molecules, and then the monolayer LDH can be peeled off.9
3.2. Properties of LDH photocatalyst

3.2.1. Adjustability of the composition. 
Previous studies have shown that photocatalysts with band gaps from 2.0 to 3.4 eV could be synthesized by incorporating specific metal cations into LDH,67 which could significantly improve the absorption efficiency of visible light. Simultaneously, the product selectivity of the LDH-catalyzed reaction can also be changed by incorporating different metal cations. Xiong and his colleagues found that different CO2 reduction products could be obtained by changing different metal cations M in ZnM-LDH.28 Among them, the reduction product of ZnTi-LDH was mainly CH4, ZnGa-LDH and ZnAl-LDH reduced CO2 to CO, while ZnFe-LDH and ZnCo-LDH mainly generated H2. Exploring the reason for the selectivity of the products, these authors came to a very novel conclusion: the adsorption intensity of CO2 was controlled by the position of the d-band (εd) of trivalent or tetravalent metal cations in LDH, and further controlled the selectivity of reduction products. The metal cations (Fe3+ and Co3+) whose d-band center was relatively far away from the Fermi level had poor ability to adsorb CO2, and only could split water to produce H2 in the reaction. On the contrary, the metal cations (Ti4+, Ga3+ and Al3+) with d-band center close to the Fermi level had strong CO2 adsorption capacity, and the adsorbed CO2 molecules were more easily injected with electrons from the surface, then CO2 was reduced to CH4 or CO.
The proportion of metal cations in LDH layers can be changed by adjusting the proportion of metal compounds in the preparation process. Generally, for the given metal cations and interlayer anions, the LDH crystal phase is the best when the ratio of M2+ to M3+ is 3:1.75 The interlayer spacing of LDH increases at first and then decreases with the increase of the ratio of M2+ to M3+. If the ratio of M2+ to M3+ is too high, the number of basic sites with adsorption activity will decrease,76 which will reduce the adsorption of CO2. When the molar ratio of M2+/M3+ is between 2 and 3, the adsorption effect of LDH on CO2 is the best.45
In LDH, not only can the cations in the layers be adjusted, but the anions in the interlayer can also be changed. The interlayer distance of LDH can be changed by changing the interlayer anions, and the variation is related to the chemical properties, volume, charge of the anions, and the intensity of interaction between anions and hydroxyl groups on the layer. Meanwhile, the type of anion will also affect the stability of LDH. Studies have shown that ZnAl-LDH had better crystallinity and stability when using CO32− intercalation than NO3− intercalation.77 The anions are exchangeable, the intercalation capacity usually being: CO32− > HPO42− > HAsO42− > CrO42− > SO42− > OH− > F− > Cl− > Br− > NO3−.70 When the nitrate was used as Mg2+ precursor for the preparation of MgAl-LDH, Flores-Flores et al. used carbonate, fluoride or chloride to absorb and remove the residual NO3− between the LDH layers, because these NO3− occupied the active sites of CO2 adsorption, which limited the photocatalytic activity of the materials.78


3.2.2. Adjustable acidity and basicity. 
The acidity and basicity of LDH are mainly related to the chemical compositions (the species of cations and anions, the ratio of M2+ to M3+) and activation conditions.79,80 Generally, the acidity of LDH is mainly determined by the interlayer anions. When heteropoly acid anions exist in the interlayer, the acidity of LDH is stronger, while the acidity of LDH intercalated by some simple anions (such as CO32−, NO3−) is weaker.70 The species and proportion of metal cations in the layers usually affect the basicity of LDH. Hong et al. studied the CO2 methanation performance of several LDH and C3N4 composite materials.81 Among them, the assembled MgAl-LDH/C3N4 had the best catalytic activity, thanks to the fact that the large amount of CO2 was adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst by MgAl-LDH, and its adsorption capacity was much higher than that of other LDH (Fig. 3). The strong CO2 adsorption capacity of MgAl-LDH was attributed to the fact that Mg2+ cations could produce stronger basicity than Zn2+, Cr3+, Al3+, and Ni2+. Tan et al. found that when the ratio of Ni2+ to Al3+ in monolayer NiAl-LDH was 2:1 and 3:1, the surface basicity was strong, which was beneficial for the adsorption of CO2 molecules.82 And the selectivity of the reduction products (CH4 and CO) reached 85%, while this value was 70% when the ratio of Ni2+ to Al3+ was 4:1 (Fig. 4). Among the Ru/LDH catalysts, the CO2 adsorption capacity near the Ru catalytic center could be adjusted by varying the ratio of Mg2+ to Al3+ in LDH.83 When Mg2+/Al3+ = 5, the adsorption capacity reached the maximum, which was related to the basicity of the LDH matrix.
 Fig. 3  CO2 adsorption isotherms of (a) MgAl-LDH, (b) C3N4, (c) NiAl-LDH, (d) ZnAl-LDH, and (e) ZnCr-LDH at room temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2014) Wiley. 
 Fig. 4  Selectivity of CH4, CO and H2 in CO2PR on NiAl-LDH under irradiation above 400 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2019) Wiley. 
Usually, the metal oxides formed by calcination of LDH can exhibit larger specific surface area and stronger basicity. LDH is generally weakly basic, which creates favorable conditions for the adsorption of CO2 and promotes the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.


3.2.3. Memory effect. 
LDH material has excellent memory effect. Mixed metal oxide (MMO) with good dispersibility and high surface area can be obtained by calcining LDH at high temperature (450–600 °C). In addition, by changing the conditions of the synthesis and/or the calcination step of LDH precursor, the precise modulation of the exposure of crystal facets and defect structure (such as oxygen vacancy) of MMO can be realized.73 Under the condition of CO2 isolation, the pristine LDH can be reconstructed by dispersing MMO in aqueous solution, and the rate of rehydration depends on the calcination temperature and the rehydration temperature. In this way, some larger anions can be introduced into LDH to modify it. However, if the calcination temperature is higher than 600 °C, the formed product will not return to the layered structure of the pristine LDH.64


3.2.4. Thermal stability. 
LDH has good thermal stability and can only be decomposed at high temperature. Generally, CO32− in the interlayer will be decomposed into CO2 at about 250 °C, NOX will be released at 400–500 °C due to the decomposition of NO3− in the interlayer, and SO42− is decomposed into SO2 at 850–900 °C.70 The decomposition temperature of organic acid and heteropoly acid is higher. In general, the decomposition of LDH cannot be completed in one step. Through thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Yang et al. found that when the pristine CoZnAl-LDH was heated to below 250 °C, surface-adsorbed and interlayer water molecules were desorbed, but the structure of the layer was not affected.84 At 250–350 °C, the weight loss could be assigned to the decomposition of interlayer carbonate ions. Finally, when the material was heated to above 350 °C, the weight loss could be attributed to the dehydroxylation reaction of the layers accompanied by the collapse of the layer structure.

4. LDH and LDH-based photocatalysts for CO2 reduction
Compared with the soluble basic catalyst which may cause corrosion to the equipment during the catalytic process and environmental pollution after the experiment, the solid basic catalyst has the advantages of environmental friendliness and facile manipulation.23,85,86 In recent years, LDH has attracted extensive interest of researchers as solid basic catalysts to accelerate the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to renewable fuels, and a variety of LDH-based photocatalysts have been developed. The number of defects, vacancies and active sites can be increased by controlling the morphology of pristine LDH. It can also be used as a precursor for calcination or reduction to form an LDH-derived catalyst, or the composition of LDH can be changed to change its catalytic performance. Also, other materials can be loaded on LDH to improve the catalytic activity of LDH by using the synergistic effect between them and LDH.87,88 In this section, the photocatalytic activities of various LDH and LDH-based catalysts for CO2 reduction are summarized and discussed. The performances of various LDH and LDH-based catalysts for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of LDH photocatalysts and other LDH-based photocatalysts for photocatalytic reduction of CO2




Photocatalyst
Synthesized method
Morphology
Light source
Type of reactor
Reaction condition
Primary products (μmol g−1 h−1)
Selectivity
Ref.




CoZnAl-LDH/RGO/g-C3N4 (0.1 g)
Hydrothermal, in situ loading
Urchin-like
300 W Xe
4.2 cm2 glass reactor
Deionized water
CO: 10.11
96%

84



HC-NiCo-LDH
Template method
Hollow nanocage
300 W Xe
40 mL closed stainless reactor
Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O
CH4: 560
62.66%

89



400 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm
CH3CN:TEOA:H2O = 6: 1: 3 (v/v/v)


NiAl-LDH
Hydrothermal
Xerogels
400 W Hg
Quartz glass reactor
H2O (vapor)
CO: 50 μmol h−1
80%

90



10 wt% ZnCr-LDH/BiOCl
Electrostatic interaction
—
300 W Xe
4.0 cm2 quartz reaction cell
Ultrapure water
CH4: 0.86
100%

91



4% (w) FeNi-LDH/g-C3N4
Hydrothermal
—
300 W Xe
200 mL double-neck Pyrex reactor
H2O
CH3OH: 1.64
—

92



CoAl-LDH
Titration
Ultrathin
300 W Xe
50 mL sealed reactor
TEOA:H2O:CH3CN = 1:1:3 by volume
CO: 2.52 × 103
60.93%

93



400 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm
Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O


20 wt% P25@CoAl-LDH
Hydrothermal
—
300 W Xe
Sealed 320 ml stainless steel photoreactor
H2O
CO: 2.21
94%

94



UV-vis


NiAl-275
Calcination
—
300 W Xe
50 mL closed stainless reactor
TEOA:H2O:CH3CN = 1:1:3 by volume
CH4: 95
22.8%

95



400 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm
Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O


g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH
self-sacrificing template
Urchin-like
300 W Xe
—
Deionized water
CO: 27.02
—

96



30% In2S3/NiAl-LDH
Hydrothermal
Ball-flower
300 W Xe
—
Deionized water
CH4: 36.1
90%

97



10 wt% Fe3O4/MgAl- LDH
Coprecipitation
(2D) ultrathin
Ultraviolet light
300 mL custom-made quartz reactor
NaOH
CO: 442.2
—

98



254 nm
C2H3N
CH4: 223.9


HT150MgAlTi-LDH
Coprecipitation hydrothermal
—
400 W UV
Quartz tube reactor
H2O (vapor)
CO: 10
—

99



200–1000 nm


Mg6Al1.85Ce0.15-LDH
Hydrothermal
—
300 W Xe
50 mL closed stainless reactor
TEOA:H2O:CH3CN = 1:1:3 by volume
CO: 85
42.1%

100



Visible light
Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O


B-ZnO@LDH
Coprecipitation
Belt
450 W Xe
Quartz glass reactor
H2O
CH4: 68.88
—

101



R-ZnO@LDH
Rod

λ = 320–780 nm
CH4: 73.92
—




CoCo-LDH/Ti3C2Tx-15 mg

In situ MOF-derived strategy
—
5 W LED
gas-closed quartz reactor
[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2·6H2O
CO: 1.25 × 104
63.9%

102



MeCN/H2O/TEOA (3 mL/2 mL/1 mL)


ZnTi-LDH
Coprecipitation
Ultrathin
300 W Xe
Teflon-lined stainless reactor
H2O (vapor)
CH4: 1.2
CH4: 68%

28



200–800 nm
H2: 0.7
H2: 31%


ZnAl-LDH
CO: 1.3
90%


ZnGa-LDH
CO: 1.6
78%


g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH 10 wt%

In situ hydrothermal
—
300 W Xe
250 mL stainless steel photoreactor
H2O (vapor)
CO: 8.2
—

103




λ ≥ 420 nm


0.1Cu2O@Zn1.8Cr LDH

In situ reduction
—
200 W Hg—Xe
290 mL glass reactor
H2O
CO: 1.31
62.3%

59




F(7.5) NiAl-LDH
Coprecipitation
—
400 W high-pressure Hg
Quartz inner-irradiation type reaction vessel
NaCl solution
CO: 9.33
80%

60





4.1. LDH as a catalyst in its own right
LDH can be directly used as a catalyst in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. There are abundant basic sites on the surface of LDH, and two or more metal cations are uniformly distributed in the layer without a segregation of “lakes” of separate cations.73 One of these metal ions is a transition metal with catalytic activity, which can lead to high catalytic activity and product selectivity of LDH.9 For instance, Ni species in NiAl LDH leads to its selectivity for CO, and Cu sites in Cu-based LDH catalyst improve the selectivity for CH3OH.
The photocatalytic activity of bulk LDH is limited by its relatively small specific surface area, poor light absorption capacity, inefficient gas adsorption–separation and slow transferability of photogenerated electrons. The catalytic activity of LDH can be improved by adjusting the morphology of the pristine bulk LDH, changing its electronic structure and active sites. Ultrathin or monolayer nanosheets can be made from bulk LDH by bottom-up or top-down methods.23,104 In the process of stripping ultrathin or monolayer LDH nanosheets from the bulk LDH, the surface atoms are easily removed or lost, resulting in the distortion of the structure and the existence of vacancies.67 Engineering of vacancies provides the possibility for adjusting the electronic structure and the transportation and separation of hot carriers,9 which will significantly affect the photocatalytic performance of LDH.
Compared with the bulk LDH catalyst, the ultrathin LDH has larger specific surface area and better electronic structure, which are conducive to the adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules. Zhang et al. compared the CO2 adsorption capacity of bulk ZnAl-LDH and monolayer ZnAl-LDH. The monolayer LDH exhibited excellent adsorption properties because of its large specific surface area (455 m2 g−1) and lower d-band center value (−5.58 eV) (Fig. 5).105 The d-band center of the monolayer LDH was closer to the Fermi level, where more electrons exist, so the electron activity was better. The adsorption of CO2 molecules on the monolayer LDH was physical adsorption, which required a smaller adsorption energy (−0.22 eV), especially at low temperature. However, there was a strong electron transfer between bulk LDH and CO2. CO2 molecules were adsorbed on the surface of bulk LDH in the form of chemical adsorption, and the adsorption energy was larger (−1.01 eV), and it was relatively stable at high temperature.
 Fig. 5  Fractional densities of states for bulk-LDH (A) and monolayer-LDH (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society. 
The ultrathin layered material shortens the distance of photogenerated charge carriers’ transfer from the interior to the reaction site or interface, and reduces the loss of photogenerated charge carriers. Furthermore, it is easier for charge carriers to move along the surface in the same layer, which can ensure a higher charge mobility along the surface.106 Zhao et al. reported the excellent activity of ultrathin ZnAl-LDH nanosheets in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.107 Ultrathin ZnAl-LDH nanosheets (ZnAl-1,2) and bulk ZnAl-LDH samples (ZnAl-3) were prepared by an inverse microemulsion method, controlled hydrolysis method and urea co-precipitation method, respectively. In the presence of water vapor under UV-vis light, nanoscale ZnAl-n (n = 1, 2) showed more excellent activity than equivalent bulk ZnAl-LDH for the reduction of CO2 into CO. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) showed that the thickness of ultrathin ZnAl-n (n = 1, 2) nanosheets was only 2.70 nm and 4.08 nm, which was much thinner than that of ZnAl-3 (210 nm). According to the FT of the Zn EXAFS, compared with ZnAl-3, ZnAl-1 had a shorter Zn–O distance (2.06 Å) and a lower coordination number (5.9). And the atomic distance of Zn–Zn increased, and the coordination number decreased from 4.0 of ZnAl-3 to 3.6, which showed that oxygen vacancies and metal vacancies were successfully introduced into the material. Meanwhile, the results of XAFS and positron annihilation spectroscopy also proved that, owing to the thickness of the nanoscale, a high proportion of coordinatively unsaturated Zn defects were produced. After light irradiation, Zn+-VO could effectively adsorb CO2 and H2O molecules as a capture site, promoted the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes, and the 4s electron of the complex was easily excited to active CO2 and H2O molecules, which significantly improved the efficiency of CO2 reduction. Bai et al. also reached a similar conclusion through experiments.93 In ultrathin CoAl-LDH, abundant oxygen vacancies and metal vacancies further enhanced the adsorption of H2O and CO2 molecules, improved the efficiency of charge transfer, and at the same time its narrower band gap and d–d transition allowed for good visible light utilization and high rates carrier generation rate.
The monolayer LDH nanowires with atomic thickness (i.e. ≈1 nm) can produce better carrier separation efficiency than ultrathin nanosheets owing to the further reduction of its thickness. Tan et al. found that the content of coordinatively unsaturated metals and hydroxyl defects in NiAl-LDH would increase with the decrease of thickness, as confirmed by XAFS, XAS, and PAS (Fig. 6).82 The synergistic existence of these defects decreased the Gibbs free energy barrier of CO2 reduction to CH4 and improved the CO2PR performance of monolayer NiAl-LDH. Meanwhile, compared with bulk NiAl-LDH (2.10 eV) and ultrathin NiAl-LDH (1.92 eV), the band gap of monolayer NiAl-LDH reduced to 1.78 eV. From the PL spectrum (Fig. 6(G)), it could be seen that the photoluminescence intensity of [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2·6H2O on monolayer NiAl-LDH was weaker than that on bulk NiAl-LDH and ultrathin NiAl-LDH, indicating that photogenerated electrons and holes could be separated more effectively. These were all related to the large number of defects on its surface.
 Fig. 6  (A) Ni K-edge XANES spectra, (B) Ni L3-edge soft XAS, (C) magnitude of weighted FT of Ni K-edge EXAFS, (D) XRD patterns, and (E) PAS spectra of b-NiAl-LDH, f-NiAl-LDH, m-NiAl-LDH, respectively; (F) schematic illustration of VM and VOH on m-NiAl-LDH. (G) PL spectra of the above catalysts in solution containing 14.7 × 10−6 M [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2·6H2O. Adapted from ref. 82. Copyright (2019) Wiley. 
Ultrathin LDH nanosheets and LDH particles usually cause serious aggregation, forming non-porous “stone like” particles with the size ranging from tens to several hundreds of microns,108 which can lead to the deactivation of catalytic sites. Through meticulous design and preparation of catalysts with excellent structure, photogenerated electron–hole pairs can be easily separated, which is conducive to the production of excellent catalytic performance,109,110 such as urchin-like,84,96,111,112 flower-like,113 nanocage-like32,33,114 and so on. Using ZIF-67, An and colleagues synthesized NiCo-LDH with a unique hollow nanocage structure through a novel template method, named HC-NiCo-LDH.89 The morphologies of bulk NiCo-LDH and HC-NiCo-LDH are shown in Fig. 7. The results of BET, ESR, and XAFS showed that a large number of ultrathin LDH nanosheets were formed and deposited on the surface of HC-NiCo-LDH, which increased its specific surface area by 30 times compared with flower-like bulk NiCo-LDH. Abundant oxygen vacancies and metal vacancies were successfully introduced on the surface and edge of the photocatalyst. The bond energy of these defect sites was relatively weak, which reduced the splitting between the bond and the anti-bond orbit, thus producing electronic states in the band gap and forming a new defect level, which reduced the band gap from 1.516 eV of the bulk NiCo-LDH to 1.427 eV of HC-NiCo-LDH. The narrowing of the band gap allowed more electrons to be transferred to CO2 molecules, thereby improving the performance of CO2PR. HC-NiCo-LDH has high catalytic activity owing to its unique morphology, which provides a new idea for the application of LDH in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.
 Fig. 7  SEM images (A) and TEM images (B) of bulk-NiCo-LDH; SEM images (C and D) and TEM images (E) of HC-NiCo-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2021) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2. LDH as precursor of catalyst
According to previous studies, metal oxides can be widely used in heterogeneous catalytic reactions. The section and surface defect structure of the crystal affect its catalytic performance. In this aspect, MMO has great advantages, and was prepared through the topological transformation of LDH. A series of previous studies has shown that defects (such as oxygen vacancies) and the exposure of the crystal plate of MMO could be accurately controlled by changing the synthesis conditions of LDH precursors and the topological transition parameters such as heating rate, temperature and atmosphere during calcination.73,115 Generally, the calcination temperature should be controlled between 400 and 500 °C; too high a temperature easily causes irreversible damage to the structure, and the calcination time should be less than 8 hours.116 After calcination at high temperature, the interlayer anions and water molecules in LDH precursors are decomposed and removed, and the obtained metal oxides have a highly porous structure, with a specific surface area of 70–160 m2 g−1,117 while that of conventional LDH is 40–120 m2 g−1.118 In the work of Wang et al., NiAl-LDH was synthesized by co-precipitation method and calcined at 200, 250, 275, 300, 400, 500, 600, and 800 °C respectively, to form mixed metal oxides composed of NiO and amorphous Al2O3.95 With the increase of calcination temperature, the MMO changed from black to green, and the light absorption intensity decreased gradually. When the calcination temperature was 275 °C, NiAl-275 had the highest catalytic activity of all samples, which was attributed to the existence of a large number of Ni and O defects; the Gibbs free energy barrier of CO2 conversion to CH4 decreased from 0.628 eV to 0.448 eV. Under light irradiation of λ > 600 nm, the driving force of photogenerated electrons was enough to overcome this barrier and make the reaction take place.
If the composition of LDH precursor is changed, the structure and properties of MMO can be adjusted, which enables the preparation of many new materials.31,119 For example, Gao et al. prepared Cu/Zn/Al/X (X = Mn, La, Ce, Zr and Y) catalysts by introducing various elements into Cu/Zn/Al-LDH and calcining them in air at 500 °C for 4 hours.120 Among all the samples, Cu/Zn/Al/Y had the largest specific surface area, exposed Cu surface area and Cu dispersion, showing the highest CO2 conversion rate. When Zr element was introduced, the catalyst exhibited the highest density and proportion of basic sites, resulting in the highest methanol selectivity. The performance of the modified catalysts was significantly better than that of the pristine Cu/Zn/Al catalyst.
In addition, we can use the unique “memory effect” of LDH to rehydrate MMO to generate LDH, which is usually called “activated LDH”. Zhao et al. redispersed the calcined MgAl-LDH containing Ti in water for reconstruction.99 The morphology of the pristine and reconstructed MgAlTi-LDH is shown in Fig. 8; it can be seen that the morphology of the reconstructed MgAlTi-LDH had no significant change, and the flake size was obviously unchanged with the increase of calcination temperature. Among the reconstructed samples, the sample calcined at 400 °C had the best catalytic activity, which was better than the pristine LDH. Anatase TiO2 was obtained when the precursor was calcined at 600 °C (R600), but R600 had poor catalytic activity due to its larger anatase crystal size and low surface area. In addition, through this method, some large anions can be introduced into the interlayer of LDH.70
 Fig. 8  SEM images of MgAlTi-LDH (CP) and calcination + reconstruction treatment (R400, R500, and R600). Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
In addition to calcining LDH to produce MMO, LDH precursor can also be reduced at high temperature to prepare supported metal catalysts. LDH has unique advantages as a precursor of supported metal catalyst because the metal cations in LDH are uniformly dispersed and the composition is easily controlled. Li and colleagues reduced MgFeAl ternary LDH nanosheets in a H2/Ar (10/90 v/v) flow at temperatures between 300 and 700 °C to prepare novel Fe-based catalysts, which had high CO2 conversion and significant selectivity to C2+ hydrocarbon.29 The detailed morphology characterization showed that when the heating temperature was 500 °C, the prepared catalyst comprised Fe/FeOX supported on MgO–Al2O3. The excellent catalytic performance of the material benefited as follows: (1) Fe species were the active site for CO2 hydrogenation, the FeOX phase was the active component that promoted the hydrogenation reaction; (2) MgO was beneficial for the adsorption of CO2 molecules; (3) Al2O3 had good mechanical properties, excellent resistance, mild metal–support interaction,121–123 high specific surface area and excellent physical strength.73 Chen et al. prepared Cu-based catalysts by reducing XCuMgAl-LDH (X = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7) precursors with different Cu2+/Mg2+ ratios (0/2/1, 0.3/1.7/1, 0.5/1.5/1, 0.7/1.3/1) in 10% H2 atmosphere at 400 °C.124 The catalytic activity values of LDH with different ratios of Cu2+/Mg2+ are shown in Table 2. Compared with other precursors, when the molar ratio of Cu2+ to Mg2+ was 0.3/1.7, the conversion of CO2 was the highest, reaching 33.5%. The high catalytic activity was attributed to the higher dispersion of Cu on the support and more basic sites on the catalyst surface. All these benefited from LDH as catalyst precursor and a better ratio of divalent metal ions. To sum up, using LDH as precursor to prepare supported metal catalysts has three advantages: first, owing to the uniform distribution of divalent and trivalent metal cations in the LDH layers, metal nanoparticles can be highly dispersed after the reduction process. Second, with the calcination process, there would be a strong interaction between the metal NPs and metal oxides, which could prevent the sintering and aggregation of the metal NPs. Third, the morphology and particle size of metal NPs can be controlled in situ by the topological properties of the conversion of LDH to MMO and/or the interlayer confinement in the LDH precursor.73,115,125,126
Table 2 Catalytic activity of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 over the LDH with different ratios of Cu2+/Mg2+. Adapted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2021) Wiley




Sample
CO2 Conv. (%)
CO Sel. (%)
CH4 Sel. (%)




0.3CuMgAl-LDH-400
33.50
>99.8
<0.2


0.5CuMgAl-LDH-400
30.43
>99.8
<0.2


0.7CuMgAl-LDH-400
27.03
>99.8
<0.2


0.9CuMgAl-LDH-400
25.20
>99.8
<0.2




In addition, placing the LDH with a special morphology in a reducing atmosphere can generate an LDH-derived catalyst with the original morphology. Lee et al. reduced the prepared NiAl-LDH@Al with core–shell structure in H2 atmosphere, and the prepared Ni/Al2O3@Al catalyst maintained the original core–shell structure, as shown in Fig. 9.127 During the reduction process, Ni NPs were precipitated from NiAl-LDH and dispersed uniformly on the Al2O3 shell. Ni/Al2O3@Al showed excellent CO2 methanation performance, and its turnover frequency (TOF) (the moles of produced product per mole of catalytic sites per hour) was three times than that of Ni/Al2O3 prepared by the traditional impregnation method. The preparation method of this material can be extended to other Al-based LDH core–shell materials to form high-efficiency supported core–shell metal catalysts.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of Ni/Al2O3@Al with core–shell microstructure. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
In conclusion, because of its excellent properties, LDH has great advantages in preparing new catalysts with good catalytic activity as a catalyst precursor. The LDH-derived catalyst has the same excellent CO2 adsorption capacity as LDH at medium temperature. Meanwhile, its specific surface area is larger, the element dispersion is more uniform, and the active sites are easier to control. Therefore, the LDH-derived catalyst has good catalytic performance.128
4.3. Modified LDH
As mentioned above, metal ions are highly ordered dispersed in LDH layers and have high flexibility. Therefore, some active components can be introduced into LDH layers to improve its catalytic activity. LDH modification is an effective method to improve its photoresponsiveness or the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs by introducing metal ions or metal compounds into the LDH layers.129
Doping appropriate metal ions can adjust the electronic structure of the pristine binary LDH, resulting in lattice defects, thereby improving the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs. In addition, the newly doped metal ions will have a synergistic effect with the host metals in the layers, and the resulting ternary LDH has higher catalytic activity.130,131 Ning and his colleagues reported a ternary LDH catalyst.132 Co was introduced into MgAl-LDH nanosheets by a simple one-step co-precipitation method to prepare CoMgAl-LDH nanosheets. Under irradiation at λ > 400 nm, these showed good catalytic activity, with the TOF of 11.57 h−1, which was three times that of CoAl-LDH. When the irradiation wavelength was up to 650 nm, they still showed high catalytic activity, with a CO production rate of 0.35 μmol h−1. The results showed that Co atoms were the main active centers of CO2 photoreduction. Doping with an appropriate amount of Co could make it disperse properly on the surface of CoMgAl-LDH and realize the efficient use of Co atoms. After Co doping, hydroxyl vacancies (VOH) were formed in the layers, as shown in Fig. 10, which further improved the efficiency of electron transfer. However, in CoAl-LDH, due to the high content of Co, the structure was relatively complete/perfect, and no unsaturated sites were exposed. In addition, the appropriate introduction of Co promoted the hydrogenation of CO2 molecules adsorbed on the catalyst surface through active H*, while inhibiting the production of H2. Khan et al. replaced Al3+ in Co2Al1-LDH with La3+, and carried out experiments of photocatalytic reduction of CO2.133 When 5% La was used to replace Al, the good hexagonal structure of Co2Al1-LDH was not destroyed. However, with the increase of La content, the crystallinity decreased, forming a corrugated circular nanosheet structure instead of the hexagonal structure, as shown in Fig. 11. The photocatalytic activity test results showed that Co2Al0.95La0.05-LDH had the highest selectivity for CH4, and the yields of CH4 and CO were also higher, which was owing to the higher basicity and a large number of oxygen vacancies produced by doping. In addition, thanks to its complete hexagonal nanostructure, it could still maintain good stability in multiple cycles. Hao et al. introduced Ni2+ ions into CoFe-LDH, and under light irradiation at λ > 500 nm the selectivity of CH4 was increased from 0% to 78.9%, and H2 generation was effectively inhibited.134 This was attributed to the introduction of Ni species, which acted as an active site for CO2 methanation, and generated oxygen vacancies and metal vacancies. In summary, the introduction of an appropriate amount of active elements can not only obtain highly dispersed active sites, but also lead to the introduction of unsaturated defect sites, and further improve the catalytic performance.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of CoMgAl-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2021) Elsevier. 
 Fig. 11  With the increase of La content, the effect on the structure of the synthesized LDH and the composition of subsequent extra-LDH compounds. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2021) American Chemical Society. 
In addition, different performances will be produced by doping different elements in the same LDH. Lv et al. doped Ni, Zn and Mg elements into CuAl-LDH to synthesize three ternary LDH catalysts.135 Among the prepared ternary LDH catalysts, CuNiAl-LDH had the narrowest band gap, the largest specific surface area, the highest catalytic activity and the worst stability. The different structural properties and chemical stability of these ternary LDH catalysts were attributed to the electronic structure, bond length, cell angle and the Mulliken population of the cluster of different divalent metal cations.
Doping other elements in the LDH precursor can control the composition, structure and defects of the LDH-derived catalyst. Zang et al. partially replaced the In element in NiIn-LDH with Al, and constructed 2D NiInAlC intermetallic compounds (IMCs) by calcination, reduction and in situ C doping.136 Owing to the addition of Al, the metal support interaction was stronger, the pore structure was richer and the concentration of oxygen vacancies was higher. Compared with undoped Ni3InCX catalyst, Ni3In0.7Al0.3CX had higher CO2 conversion, but the selectivity of CO decreased, mainly due to the formation of Ni metal supported on Al2O3, which led to the deep hydrogenation of CO2 to CH4.
In addition to preparing such ternary LDH catalysts or precursors by introducing appropriate metal ions, some metal compounds can also be introduced into the LDH layers. For example, in the work of Iguchi et al., NiAl-LDH photocatalyst doped with AlF63− was prepared by a typical co-precipitation method, which changed the chemical and/or physical properties of the original LDH.60 The doped fluorine substituted the hydroxyl groups on the original layer, which had a great influence on the basicity of the LDH due to its high electronegativity. The calculated value of d(003), the specific surface area (SBET) and the result of the photocatalytic activity test for F(x) NiAl-LDH (x value represents the ratio of Na3AlF6/(AlCl3 + Na3AlF6) = 0, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 20 during preparation) are listed in Table 3. As the content of AlF63− increased, the amount of CO produced increased first and then decreased. F(7.5) NiAl-LDH had the largest amount of CO produced and had high selectivity. In addition, compared with the preparation of F(7.5) imp-NiAl-LDH via an impregnation method, the introduction of AlF63− significantly improved the efficiency of the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO. In this study, the researchers considered that the fluorination of LDH was not “doping” but a “solid solution”, because fluorine atoms existed as a component of the AlF63− in the brucite layers, as shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of fluorinated NiAl-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
Table 3 The calculated value of d(003), the SBET, and the result of the photocatalytic activity test for F(x) NiAl-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Elsevier





x


d
(003)/Å

S
BET/m2 g−1
Amounts of products/μmol
Selectivity (%)


CO
H2




0
7.76
75.1
18.8
20.6
47


2.5
7.75
83.4
30.0
8.0
79


5.0
7.75
113
36.8
7.0
84


7.5
7.74
113
47.3
12.0
80


10
7.73
120
31.7
14.1
69


20
7.70
86.3
18.5
12.6
59




4.4. Intercalated LDH
In addition to adjusting the composition of metal cations in LDH layers, changing the type of intercalation anions is also an effective way to improve its catalytic activity. Due to the unique anion exchange ability of LDH, many functional anions (such as simple inorganic anions, complex anions and biomacromolecules) can be inserted into the interlayer of LDH, resulting in materials with good catalytic performance.
At present, the required anions can be introduced into the interlayer of LDH by co-precipitation, ion exchange and calcination–reconstruction methods. The co-precipitation method is also the most commonly used method for synthesizing LDH. Two or more metal compounds are dissolved into one solution, and the anions which need to be inserted form another solution with alkali (usually NaOH), and then the two solutions are mixed, aged and dried to obtain the product. For example, NaOH was added dropwise to the aqueous solution containing Co(NO3)2·6H2O and Al(NO3)3·9H2O with a molar ratio of 2:1, and the pH maintained at about 10. After stirring, centrifuging, and washing, CoAl-LDH could be obtained finally.137 The ion exchange method has a certain directionality, that is, anions with strong intercalation ability can easily replace anions with weak intercalation ability. For example, Wang et al. dissolved Co(NO3)2·6H2O and Al(NO3)3·9H2O in deionized water to form solution A, and NaOH and anhydrous Na2CO3 were also dissolved in deionized water to form solution B.27 Solution A was added dropwise to solution B and then the mixed solution was heated in an autoclave. Finally, the obtained precipitate was washed and dried, and CO32− was successfully introduced into the interlayer of CoAl-LDH instead of NO3−. Abdolmohammad-Zadeh et al. added MgAl-Cl-LDH prepared by co-precipitation to an aqueous solution of salicylic acid (SA) and stirred vigorously in N2 atmosphere to prepare MgAl-LDH-SA nanomaterials.138 The calcination–reconstruction method makes use of the unique “memory effect” of LDH, that is, the MMO formed after calcining is put into a solution containing different anions, and then it can be inserted into LDH. This method is suitable for introducing those anions which are difficult to insert into the interlayer of LDH. For example, Huang et al. added the calcined MgAl-LDH powder into the Fe(III) complex solution and successfully prepared Fe(III) intercalated MgAl–FeOx (R) and MgAl–FeCit (R), respectively.139 Using this method, polysaccharide anions can also be introduced into the interlayer of LDH.140
The chemical properties, volume, valence state and the strength of hydrogen bond within the layer of the anion will affect the interlayer spacing, electron density and energy band structure of LDH, which in turn affects the performance of the LDH photocatalyst. For example, the introduction of carbanion can make LDH have higher catalytic activity, which benefits from the synergistic effect of carbanion, slowing down the recombination rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.141,142 The experimental results showed that Ni2Al–NO3−-LDH exhibited better CO2 reduction activity than Ni2Al–CO32−-LDH under visible light.7 This was due to the fact that the insertion of NO3− produced a higher degree of structural distortion, thus resulting in a larger number of oxygen vacancies and metal vacancies, exposing more coordinated unsaturated sites, which were conducive to the separation of electron–hole pairs. Meanwhile, Ni2Al–NO3−-LDH exhibited a stronger visible light absorption capacity and a lower charge transfer resistance, so it was easy to generate and transfer photogenerated electrons. Li et al. intercalated negatively charged 4,4′-diaminostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid (DAS) and 4,4′-dinitrostilbene-2,2′-disulfonic acid salt (DNS) into the positively charged Ni2Mn-LDH layers (Fig. 13(A)).143 Owing to the staggered energy-level structure of DAS-DNS, a new type of organic electron donor–acceptor system was constituted. The two anions were closely aligned into the interlayer of LDH, forming the π–π interaction. And this interaction promoted the migration of electrons produced by DAS and DNS to LDH, and provided additional electrons to participate in the reduction of CO2. Meanwhile, this intercalation structure enhanced the light absorption capacity of the catalyst (Fig. 13(B)). This experiment provides a new idea for the insertion of organic semiconductors into LDH.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of possible structure of Ni2Mn-DAS, DNS-n; (B) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy of pristine Ni2Mn-LDH, NDS, DAS and Ni2Mn-DAS, DNS. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2021) Wiley. 
Note that among the methods of changing the composition of LDH, modification and intercalation are two different methods. The former is to introduce metal atoms or metal compounds into the layers, while the latter is to insert anions into the interlayer of LDH.144
4.5. Supporting LDH
Supporting LDH photocatalyst, as one of the most studied LDH-based catalysts, refers to the dispersion of metal, metal compound, and non-metallic material domains on the layered structure of LDH, and uses the synergistic effect between the two constituents to promote the occurrence of the photocatalytic reaction. LDH can be used as both carrier and co-catalyst.145 Compared with the common catalysts with good catalytic activity, LDH can adjust the band gap by changing its composition. In addition, some single metal elements, alloy materials and metal oxides have high electron storage capacity and electron transfer efficiency, such as Cu, Ag, Ni, Co–Pd, Pd–Ga, TiO2, Cu2O, MXene, etc. Combining these photocatalytic materials possessing different characteristics with LDH can significantly broaden their light response range and improve the transmission efficiency of photogenerated carriers.146,147
Due to its large specific surface area, flexible composition, confinement effect and strong anchoring effect of the support, LDH nanosheets can support some noble metal particles (such as Ru, Pd, Pt, Au and Ag, etc.) to form structurally stable catalysts.148,149 The particle size, morphology and electronic structure of metal NPs are affected by the surface hydroxyl groups and defect structures on the brucite-like matrix layer, which in turn affect the catalytic activity. Ren et al. loaded Ru nanoparticles onto ultrathin MgAl-LDH nanosheets by the impregnation method, and obtained CH4 with a yield of 277 mmol h−1 g−1.150 The excellent catalytic activity was owing to the fact that LDH was conducive to the adsorption and activation of CO2 molecules, and the Ru Nps could significantly increase the local temperature to activate H2 and then to induce the hydrogenation of CO2 or CO32−. In the work of Wang and colleagues, in conjunction with Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O as photosensitizer, the molar ratio of CO/H2 in CO2 reduction products could be adjusted by changing the amount of Pd NPs loaded on CoAl-LDH (as shown in Fig. 14).137 EIS, photocurrent response and steady-state PL spectroscopy all showed that Pd NPs loaded on LDH played a major role in the reaction and promoted charge transfer and separation. The existence of Pd NPs was also conducive to the adsorption of H2O and the evolution of H2. This study provides an effective strategy for adjusting the ratio of CO/H2 in the syngas produced by photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Zhang et al. prepared Ag@U-LDH catalysts with high efficiency for CO2 reduction by self-redox strategy.151 The Ag–O–Co interface bonding between Ag and ultrathin CoAl-LDH activated the interface structure as the active sites of CO2 reduction, which could effectively reduce the formation energy of *COOH intermediate and promote the reaction.
 Fig. 14  The rate (A), selectivity (B) and ratio (C) of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO and H2 on CoAl-LDH, Pd/CoAl-0.55, Pd/CoAl-2.46 and Pd/CoAl-7.57. Adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
Loading different metal nanoparticles on the same LDH can also adjust the catalytic activity of the material and the selectivity of the product. Au and Ag NPs were loaded on [Zn3Ga(OH)8]2CO3·mH2O layered double hydroxide (Zn3Ga|CO3 LDH), and the catalytic activity of the prepared catalysts surpassed that of the original ZnGa-LDH.152 When loaded with Au and Ag, the conversion rates of CO2 were 1.78 and 1.69 times higher than that of the original LDH, respectively. Ag/ZnGa-LDH increased the methanol selectivity from 39 mol% to 54 mol%, while Au/ZnGa-LDH reduced it to 13 mol%. The reason for this difference was that the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of Ag NPs promoted the reduction of CO2 by H2 under visible light. However, under visible light irradiation, the assembly of Au NPs with LDH was inert, and the electrons produced by SPR of Au couldn't reduce CO2.
Since LDH belongs to the amphoteric hydroxides, it is unstable in strong acid and basic environments when loading precious metal catalysts. By hybridizing LDH with metal oxides, the lifetime of electrons and holes can be increased, which is expected to improve the photocatalytic activity of LDH. For example, the 0.1Cu2O@Zn1.8Cr-LDH prepared by Jiang et al. showed better catalytic activity than Cu–Zn–Cr ternary LDH and pristine Zn2Cr-LDH.59 In the whole catalytic reaction, Cu2O, as a co-catalyst, might play the role of electron trap and promote charge separation, and because it was quite sensitive to CO2, could function as the active site for the reduction reaction, while LDH was only used as a light-harvesting material. However, the existence of excessive Cu2O would reduce the catalytic activity, which was due to the poor dispersion of large Cu2O particles, and would mask the LDH surface, reduce the number of photoexcited electrons and inhibit the catalytic reaction. Gao et al. loaded Fe3O4 on two-dimensional ultrathin MgAl-LDH by the co-precipitation method to prepare Fe3O4/MgAl-LDH photocatalyst.98 Its catalytic performance was significantly better than the bare MgAl-LDH, and the yields of CO and CH4 were increased by 1.8 and 1.7 times, respectively. The advantages of Fe3O4, such as narrow band gap and high conductivity, improved the transfer ability of photogenerated electrons. Ultrathin MgAl-LDH could reduce the transmission resistance of photogenerated carriers and generate a large number of surface active sites. Under light excitation, electrons entered the CB of MgAl-LDH and quickly transferred to Fe3O4. Because Fe3O4 could be used as electron trapping sites, the lifetime of photogenerated electrons is prolonged, and the multi-electron reaction of CO2 to CH4 promoted (as shown in Fig. 15). In addition, owing to the high magnetism of Fe3O4, the material had good recyclability and could be recycled from the mixture by an external magnet and reused.
 Fig. 15  Electron transfer process in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by Fe3O4/MgAl-LDH Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
If the composite material is modified by metal particles, its catalytic activity is expected to be further improved. Iguchi et al. used Ag-modified MgAl-LDH/Ga2O3 photocatalyst for CO2 reduction under UV light.153 The 95MgAl-LDH/Ga2O3 loaded with 0.25 wt% Ag showed a higher CO generation rate. The loading of MgAl-LDH increased the specific surface area of bare Ga2O3, which could act as an adsorbent for CO2 to enrich it near the Ag co-catalyst and improve the conversion rate. Photogenerated electrons would transfer from Ga2O3 to Ag without MgAl-LDH, which was beneficial for the reduction of H+ to H2. For Ag/95-MgAl/Ga2O3, the electrons generated by Ga2O3 were transferred to Ag particles via MgAl-LDH, so that CO2 could be selectively reduced to CO. Fang et al. prepared photocatalysts with MgAl-LDH as Cu-ZnO-ZrO2 (CZZ) carrier by co-precipitation method.154 Owing to the high adsorption capacity of CO2 on MgAl-LDH derivatives, the concentration of CO2 near the active site of Cu was increased, and the actual partial pressure of CO2 was higher than that in the system, which was beneficial for promoting the production of methanol.
In recent years, some researchers have compounded LDH with MXene. Using the good conductivity of MXene, electrons could be transmitted quickly and efficiently through the hybrid interface. For example, Chen et al. took advantage of an in situ MOF derivation strategy to strongly couple the stripped Ti3C2TX nanosheets and ultrathin CoCo-LDH nanosheets to prepare a three-dimensional hierarchical CoCo-LDH/TNS nanoarray, as shown in Fig. 16(A).102 Ti3C2TX has the advantages of large specific surface area, high conductivity, and good chemical stability, which can accelerate the transfer of electrons, so that more CO2 adsorbed at the Co active sites could be reduced. With the increase of TNS in the hybrid, the catalytic activity increased at first and then decreased, because too much TNS hinders the active sites of Co, resulting in the decrease of catalytic activity. In addition, the vertical sheets-on-sheets nanoarray structure could expose more catalytically active sites and accelerate the transfer of electrons to active sites, and could exhibit excellent performance in photocatalytic reactions, which provided a very novel method for future research. Shi et al. reached a similar conclusion.155 Three-dimensional hierarchical NiAl-LDH/Ti3C2 nanocomposites were prepared by the hydrothermal synthesis of flower-like NiAl-LDH and the in situ loading of Ti3C2 nanosheets (Fig. 16(B)). Compared with bare NiAl-LDH, the fluorescence lifetime of NiAl-LDH/Ti3C2 decreased significantly from 1.23 ns to 0.95 ns, indicating that the load of Ti3C2 was beneficial for electron transfer. Meanwhile, the intimate contact between Ti3C2 and NiAl-LDH resulted in a good 2D/2D heterogeneous interface, which decreased the transmission distance of charge carriers and facilitated interfacial electrons’ migration. As reported in the previous experiment, excessive Ti3C2 would cause agglomeration, which was disadvantageous to the separation and migration of charge, resulting in the decrease of catalytic activity.
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of CoCo-LDH/TNS nanosheets. Adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the 3D hierarchical NiAl-LDH/Ti3C2 hybrid. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright (2021) Elsevier. 
4.6. Formation of heterojunction with semiconductor material
Another effective way to improve the activity of LDH-based photocatalyst to reduce CO2 is by using LDH and other semiconductors to construct heterojunctions. So far, the heterostructures based on LDH-based materials are mainly type-II and Z-scheme heterostructures. Type-II and Z-scheme heterojunctions are very similar in band structure, but the way of electron migration is different. A type-II heterojunction is shown in Fig. 17(A); the bands of two semiconductors are presented in staggered arrangement. After the migration of electrons and holes, the electrons gather on the CB of semiconductor II, and the holes are accumulated on the VB of semiconductor I, achieving the effective separation of electrons and holes in space and exhibiting better catalytic activity than a single semiconductor. The beta-In2S3/NiAl-LDH previously prepared by our research group belongs to this type.97 Compared with unadulterated LDH and pure In2S3, the CH4 yield over the 30% In2S3/NiAl-LDH was greatly improved by 2.5 times and 3.5 times, respectively. The PL spectrum showed that the peak intensities of the prepared composite were much weaker than that of bare LDH, indicating the successful separation of electron–hole pairs. In addition, the specific surface area of the composite was increased by loading In2S3. Jo et al. successfully prepared N-doped C dot/CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4 catalyst via a facile hydrothermal method.156 This catalyst was also a type-II heterojunction, as shown in Fig. 17(B). Under simulated-solar-light illumination, the appropriate ratio of NCDs to LDH showed that the selectivity of CH4 was close to 100%, and the yield was 25.69 μmol g−1 h−1. The excellent catalytic performance benefited from the admirable upconverted PL properties, electron storage capacity and CO adsorption capacity of NCDs. First, NCDs were able to absorb visible light with longer wavelength and then emitted visible light with shorter wavelength. This conversion ability could excite LDH and CN to generate more electrons and holes. Second, NCDs could capture the electrons accumulated on the CB of LDH, and CO2 added an electron to form ˙CO2−, speeding up the rate-limiting step of the reaction. Finally, the strong chemical interaction between NCDs and CO prevented the desorption of CO, allowing it to accept more electrons and eventually generate CH4. Besides, NiFe-LDH/g-C3N4,157 P25@CoAl-LDH,94 urchin-like hierarchical g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH,96 2D/2D g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH103 and CoAl-LDH@TiO2158 are also staggered heterojunctions (type-II).
 Fig. 17  (A) Schematic illustration of a type-II heterojunction. (B) Schematic illustration of the electron transfer process for photocatalytic reduction reaction of CO2 in the N-doped C dot/CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4. Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
In the type-II heterojunction, electrons and holes transfer and accumulate on the CB and VB with lower energy levels, respectively. Although this process inhibits the recombination of electrons and holes, it weakens the redox ability of the photocatalyst. In contrast, the Z-scheme heterojunction has the advantage of strong redox ability, which is attributed to the accumulation of electrons at higher (more negative) energy levels and of holes at more positive energy level.159–162 As shown in Fig. 18(A) and (B), this is the energy band arrangement and electron migration mechanism of the Z-scheme heterojunction. The holes on the VB of S-I recombine with the electrons on the CB of S-II and annihilate, and the remaining electrons and holes exist on the CB of S-I and the VB of S-II, respectively, thus realizing the effective separation of electron–hole pairs.163 The Z-scheme heterojunction has certain requirements for composite catalysts, that is, the CB potential of S-II is lower than the VB potential of S-I.164 According to the above conclusions, the Z-scheme heterojunction can effectively separate electrons and holes without reducing the redox capacity of the catalyst. Wu et al. discussed whether the prepared NiFe-LDH/Cu2O photocatalyst followed the type-II or Z-scheme mechanism.113 As shown in Fig. 18(C) and (D), if the type-II mechanism was followed, the potential of CB of NiFe-LDH was more positive than the potential (−0.24 V) required for the conversion of CO2 to CH4, so the reduction reaction couldn't occur. Actually, the electrons on the CB of NiFe-LDH recombined with the holes on the VB of Cu2O, and the CB potential of NiFe-LDH was higher than the potential required for the reaction, suggesting that the composite followed the Z-scheme mechanism.
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of (A) and (B) the separation and transfer of electron–hole pairs in a Z-scheme heterojunction, (C) type-II and (D) Z-scheme mechanism during the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by NiFe-LDH/Cu2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. 
In the construction of a Z-scheme heterojunction, in addition to coupling two semiconductors directly, conductors or semiconductors with good conductivity can be added between the two materials. Yang et al. synthesized CoZnAl-LDH by a hydrothermal method and in situ loading of RGO and g-C3N4, and finally prepared a LDH/RGO/CN catalyst with a unique urchin-like structure.84 Under visible light irradiation, CoZnAl-LDH and g-C3N4 both produced photogenerated electrons and holes. The electrons on the CB of CoZnAl-LDH recombined with the holes on the VB of g-C3N4 through the conduction of the RGO. The remaining electrons and holes accumulated on the CB of g-C3N4 and the VB of CoZnAl-LDH, respectively, as shown in Fig. 19(A), which conformed to a Z-scheme heterojunction. The high conductivity of RGO promoted the transformation of electrons. The transient photocurrent (Fig. 19(B)) responses showed that the photocurrent of LDH/RGO/CN composites increased significantly, indicating that the light-harvesting capacity and the separation efficiency of electron–hole pairs had been significantly improved.
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of a Z-scheme heterojunction for LDH/RGO/CN; (B) transient photocurrent responses for all the samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
The photocatalytic performance of materials can be greatly improved by constructing heterojunctions with special morphology. An LDH-based heterojunction with a core–shell structure is adjustable in size, shape and composition, resulting in a flexible and stable structure.165–167 In addition, it exhibits a larger interfacial contact area, which provides a broader platform for effective transfer of electrons.168,169 Wang et al. fabricated Cu2O@ZnCr-LDH photocatalysts with core–shell structure by an in situ crystallization-selective etching method (Fig. 20(A)).170 The interlayer S2O32− of ZnCr-LDH interacted with positively charged LDH layers and cooperated with Cu2O to form a complete Z-scheme heterojunction structure (Fig. 20(B)). Jo et al. designed a core–shell photocatalyst with TiO2 hollow spheres as the core and NiAl-LDH nanosheets as the shell.171SBET, average pore size and total pore volume of core–shell TiO2/LDH and several other reference materials are summarized in Table 4. TiO2/LDH with a core–shell structure exhibited the largest specific surface area. Compared with the original TiO2 hollow spheres, the average pore size and total pore volume of the core–shell structure were improved, which might be attributed to the introduction of LDH. The high specific surface area and porous characteristics of the core–shell structure facilitated the exposure of activation sites and ion transport channels, thus improving the photocatalytic performance. Guo et al. used the surface deposition–precipitation method to synthesize ZnO enwrapped by hierarchical CuZnAl-LDH and obtained similar conclusions.101
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of (A) the preparation of Cu2O@ZnCr-LDH photocatalysts with core–shell structure and (B) the separation and transfer of electron–hole pairs in the Cu2O@ZnCr-LDH system. Adapted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright (2017) Elsevier. 
Table 4 
S
BET, mean pore diameter, and total pore volume for TiO2 hollow spheres, TiO2/LDH with core–shell structure, bare NiAl-LDH, and TiO2 NPs. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright (2020) Royal Society of Chemistry




photocatalyst

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Mean pore diameter (nm)
Total pore volume (cm3 g−1)




TiO2 hollow spheres
108.5
6.5
0.278


TiO2/LDH core–shell
115.2
10.8
0.312


NiAl-LDH
35.9
48.7
0.396


TiO2 NPs
47.3
38.4
0.354




In summary, each type of heterojunction has its own shortcomings. The redox ability of the type-II heterojunction is decreased. The separation of electrons and holes of the Z-scheme heterojunction is achieved based on the recombination of electrons and holes, which consumes part of the photogenerated electrons, resulting in the decrease of carrier concentration on the surface of the catalyst and the catalytic activity. Therefore, looking for new materials and methods to construct heterojunctions is still an important research direction.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
LDH and LDH-based photocatalysts have attracted more and more attention owing to their excellent physical and chemical properties and good catalytic performance. At present, in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2, researchers have explored 6 application forms of LDH: as catalyst directly, as catalyst precursor, modification, intercalation, supporting with other materials, or constructing heterojunctions. Although LDH and LDH-based catalysts have made great progress in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2, they are still worth studying in many aspects. The development prospects of LDH in this field are as follows:
(1) Because LDH is generally basic, it is conducive to the adsorption of CO2 molecules. The adsorption of CO2 molecules on LDH is the first step of the reaction, so we should pay attention to this process. However, current research on the adsorption of CO2 mainly focuses on the middle and high temperature. In the future, the adsorption of CO2 by LDH should be explored at low temperature.
(2) New catalyst synthesis methods to prepare highly active LDH-based functional materials with good composition, morphology and electronic structure should be explored. The existing synthesis methods are co-precipitation, ion exchange, hydrothermal, mechanochemical, and so on. Recently, template method, microwave synthesis and other new methods have been developed and applied, which make it possible to prepare some catalysts with specific morphology and electronic structure. However, whether these new methods have better controllability, easy accessibility and feasibility for large-scale generation needs to be further explored and verified.
(3) Experiments should be combined with theoretical calculations to explore the synergistic effect between multiple active sites and the properties of active centers in the process of catalytic reactions. This can provide good support for the design and development of LDH-based catalysts with higher activity in the future.
(4) The topological transformation in the process of LDH calcination to generate MMO should be monitored through advanced physicochemical techniques, in order to study the effect of lattice changes on the catalytic performance and the synergism between metals and metal oxide carriers.
(5) A C2 product with two carbon atoms has much higher added value and wider applications, but is rarely observed in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 on LDH due to its more difficult generation. Therefore, exploring an effective way to generate C2 products by LDH-based photocatalysts should also be further investigated.
In summary, LDH has many excellent properties and great advantages in the field of photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Through further research to solve the above problems, the application of LDH and LDH-based catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis can be expanded.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this article.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0605002) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21546014).
References
D. Adekoya, M. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 116, 109389 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Fan and M. Tahir, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131617 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fu, Q. Yang, Z. Liu, F. Chen, F. Yao, T. Xie, Y. Zhong, D. Wang, J. Li, X. Li and G. Zeng, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 63–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. Madi, M. Tahir and S. Tasleem, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 106264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Francis, S. S. Priya, S. H. Kumar, K. Sudhakar and M. Tahir, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 47, 101515 CrossRef CAS .
I. U. Din, M. S. Shaharun, M. A. Alotaibi, A. I. Alharthi and A. Naeem, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 20–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kipkorir, L. Tan, J. Ren, Y. Zhao and Y.-F. Song, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 127–133 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hong, R. Guo, Y. Yuan, X. Ji, Z. Li, Z. Lin and W. Pan, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 26 Search PubMed .
G. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Meng, G. Pan, Z. Ni and S. Xia, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123684 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, R. Guo, Z. Zhang, L. Hong, X. Ji, Z. Lin and W. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 13291–13303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Tang, X. Fu and Y. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6575–6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, I. Yang, Z. Li, X. Xia, W. I. Lee, S. Dai, D. W. Bahnemann and J. H. Pan, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 109, 100620 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, J. Huang and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16412–16421 RSC .
M. Tahir, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 37, 134–146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 15507–15522 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khan and M. Tahir, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 285, 119777 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, R. Guo, Y. Miao, Y. Liu, G. Wu, C. Duan and W. Pan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 10102–10112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, R. Guo, W. Zhou, C. Huang and W. Pan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 802–810 CrossRef CAS .
A. Muhammad, M. Tahir, S. S. Al-Shahrani, A. M. Ali and S. U. Rather, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 504, 144177 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, R. Guo, H. Qin, Z. Wang, X. Shi, W. Pan, J. Tang, P. Jia, Y. Miao and J. Gu, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 580, 123782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, W. Zhou, R. Guo, C. Huang and W. Pan, Catal. Commun., 2018, 107, 92–95 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu and M. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802943 CrossRef .
H. Li, Q. Deng, J. Liu, W. Hou, N. Du, R. Zhang and X. Tao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1028–1037 RSC .
J. Tao, X. Yu, Q. Liu, G. Liu and H. Tang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 585, 470–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saliba, A. Ezzeddine, R. Sougrat, N. M. Khashab, M. Hmadeh and M. Al-Ghoul, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 800–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Su, D. Shao, S. Zeng and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8366–8373 RSC .
X. Xiong, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, W. Yin, Y. Zhao, G. I. N. Waterhouse and T. Zhang, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Liu, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, X.-D. Wen and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002783 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wu, H. Hu and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 12795–12806 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiang, H. I. Hima, H. Wang and F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1173–1182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, Z. Li, Z. Qin, H. Sun, X. Jiao and D. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11770–11775 RSC .
M. U. Tahir, H. Arshad, H. Zhang, Z. Hou, J. Wang, C. Yang and X. Su, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 579, 195–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jing, B. Dong and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 346–379 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Tomboc, J. Kim, Y. Wang, Y. Son, J. Li, J. Y. Kim and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4528–4557 RSC .
H. Yi, S. Liu, C. Lai, G. Zeng, M. Li, X. Liu, B. Li, X. Huo, L. Qin, L. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Fu, Z. An and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002863 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Zhou, Y. Zheng, L. Li, C. Wu, H. Yang, M. Huang and X. An, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 583, 124004 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Jia, R. Liu, T. Cai and Z. Xu, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 7533–7549 RSC .
W. Xie, Z. Li, M. Shao and M. Wei, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2018, 12, 537–554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sherryna, M. Tahir and W. Nabgan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 862–901 CrossRef CAS .
C. Karthikeyan, P. Arunachalam, K. Ramachandran, A. M. Al-Mayouf and S. Karuppuchamy, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 828, 154281 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Carey, J. Lawrence and H. M. Tosine, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 1976, 16, 697–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Wei, G. Zeng, H. Zhang, X. Tan, C. Ma, X. Li, Z. Li and C. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 386, 154–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iguchi, Y. Hasegawa, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 15, 6–14 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lee, H. S. Jung and Y. T. Kang, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 163–177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Yang, Q. Sun, Z. Wang, B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Qin and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7654–7658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tahir, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467, 1170–1180 CrossRef .
L. Hong, R. Guo, Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, X. Ji, Z. Lin and W. Pan, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 51, 101650 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. An, K. H. Park, M. Khraisheh and J. Tang, Catal. Today, 2014, 224, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Xia, J. Ran, K. Davey and S. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903879 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim and E. E. Kwon, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 72–82 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Indrakanti, H. H. Schobert and J. D. Kubicki, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 5247–5256 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, B. C. Wood, V. R. Bhethanabotla and B. Joseph, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26236–26248 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Hori, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2008, pp. 89–189,  DOI:10.1007/978-0-387-49489-0_3 .
J. Fu, K. Jiang, X. Qiu, J. Yu and M. Liu, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 222–243 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Yaashikaa, P. S. Kumar, S. J. Varjani and A. Saravanan, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 131–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, K.-i. Katsumata, J. Hong, A. Yamaguchi, K. Nakata, C. Terashima, N. Matsushita, M. Miyauchi and A. Fujishima, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 783–790 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iguchi, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 521, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahmed, M. Morikawa and Y. Izumi, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 263–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Handoko, K. Li and J. Tang, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 200–206 CrossRef .
G. R. Dey, A. D. Belapurkar and K. Kishore, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 163, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, J. Sun, Y. Yao, M. Du and Q. Zheng, Prog. Chem., 2020, 32, 2049–2063 Search PubMed .
Y. Miao, R. Guo, J. Gu, Y. Liu, G. Wu, C. Duan and W. Pan, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 4902–4911 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, H. N. Miras and Y. Song, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 260 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Jia, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Wu, C. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501974 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, R. Guo, Y. Yuan, X. Ji, L. Hong and W. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 567, 150805 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Shit, I. Shown, R. Paul, K.-H. Chen, J. Mondal and L.-C. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 23301–23332 RSC .
K. Yan, Y. Q. Liu, Y. R. Lu, J. J. Chai and L. P. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1622–1645 RSC .
A. H. Iglesias, O. P. Ferreira, D. X. Gouveia, A. G. S. Filho, J. A. C. d. Paiva, J. M. Filho and O. L. Alves, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 142–152 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10744–10766 RSC .
G. Fan, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7040–7066 RSC .
D. Tichit, G. Layrac and C. Gerardin, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 302–332 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, F. Wang, C. Zhang, G. Zeng, X. Tan, Z. Yu, Y. Zhong, H. Wang and F. Cui, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 79415–79436 RSC .
S. J. Palmer, H. J. Spratt and R. L. Frost, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2009, 95, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ng, M. L. Lau and W. Ong, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000535 CrossRef CAS .
M. Flores-Flores, E. Luevano-Hipolito, L. M. T. Martinez, G. Morales-Mendoza and R. Gomez, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 363, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tsukanov and S. G. Psakhie, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Bravo-Suárez, E. A. Páez-Mozo and S. T. Oyama, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 67, 1–17 CrossRef .
J. Hong, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Zhou and R. Xu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan, S.-M. Xu, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Wang, X. Hao, S. Bai, C. Ning, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. K. Jo, S.-J. Hwang, X. Cao, X. Zheng, H. Yan, Y. Zhao, H. Duan and Y.-F. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11860–11867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mori, T. Taga and H. Yamashita, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Wu, T. Xiao, Z. Tang, J. Shen, H. Li, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117771 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kikhtyanin, R. Bulanek, K. Frolich, J. Cejka and D. Kubicka, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 424, 358–368 CrossRef CAS .
G. Busca, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2217–2249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 4100–4108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
J. An, T. Shen, W. Chang, Y. Zhao, B. Qi and Y. Song, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 996–1004 RSC .
Y. Tokudome, M. Fukui, S. Iguchi, Y. Hasegawa, K. Teramura, T. Tanaka, M. Takemoto, R. Katsura and M. Takahashi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9684–9690 RSC .
L. Tang, R. Chen, X. Meng, B. Lv, F. Fan, J. Ye, X. Wang, Y. Zhou, C. Li and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5126–5129 RSC .
H. Li, F. Li, J. Yu and S. Cao, Acta Phys. –Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2010073 Search PubMed .
S. Bai, Z. Wang, L. Tan, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Y. Zhao and Y.-F. Song, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 5848–5857 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, M. A. Isaacs, R. Trofimovaite, L. Durndell, C. M. A. Parlett, R. E. Douthwaite, B. Coulson, M. C. R. Cockett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 394–404 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S.-M. Xu, L. Tan, G. Liu, T. Shen, C. Yu, H. Wang, Y. Tao, X. Cao, Y. Zhao and Y.-F. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118884 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, J. Huang, Y. Yang, J. Wu, J. Shen, X. Liu, A. Sun and Z. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2020, 268, 127560 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Miao, R. Guo, J. Gu, Y. Liu, G. Wu, C. Duan, X. Zhang and W. Pan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 527, 146792 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Z. Zhu, J. Zheng, Z. Liu, Q. Wang and Y. Yan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 555, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, J. Xu, L. Liu, G. Rao, C. Zhao and Y. Li, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 15, 15–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan, K. Peter, J. Ren, B. Du, X. Hao, Y. Zhao and Y.-F. Song, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2021, 15, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, Q. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Liu and Z. Zhao, Catal. Commun., 2016, 77, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, B. Han, Y. Xie, S. Liang, H. Deng and Z. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tonda, S. Kumar, M. Bhardwaj, P. Yadav and S. Ogale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2667–2678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. J. Wang, Y. M. A. Wu, R. M. J. Jacobs, J. H. Warner, G. R. Williams and D. O'Hare, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 171–180 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Meng, G. Pan and S. Xia, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 17722–17731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, J. Wu, B. Li, T. Su and H. Ji, Acta Phys. –Chim. Sin., 2021, 37, 2005027 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, G. Chen, T. Bian, C. Zhou, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung, L. J. Smith, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7824–7831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6301–6303 RSC .
S. Wang, B. Guan, X. Wang and X. W. D. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15145–15148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Reddy, M. Hassan and V. G. Gomes, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 489, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fazal, A. Iqbal, Y. Cao, J. Zai, N. Ali, Y. Zhang, X. Wu, X. Zhang and X. Qian, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 1234–1242 RSC .
L. Hou, Q. Du, L. Su, S. Di, Z. Ma, L. Chen and G. Shao, Mater. Lett., 2019, 237, 262–265 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Gong, J. Liu, T. Chen, Q. Liu, Y. Zhu, L. Niu, C. Li, X. Liu, C. Q. Sun and S. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 831, 154723 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, J. Low, T. Liu, J. Yu and S. Cao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 413, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Li, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Small, 2014, 10, 4469–4486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Coenen, F. Gallucci, G. Pio, P. Cobden, E. van Dijk, E. Hensen and M. V. Annaland, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 314, 554–569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mantilla, F. Tzompantzi, J. L. Fernandez, J. Gongora and R. Gomez, Catal. Today, 2010, 150, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, Q. Wang, P. Yao, X. Liu and Y. Li, Acta Chim. Sin., 2011, 69, 529–535 CAS .
L. Zou, X. Xiang, J. Fan and F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6518–6527 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, F. Li, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei, L. Zhong and Y. Sun, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 468, 442–452 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Wei, J. Hong, L. Wang, S. Chen, G. Wang and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 570–581 RSC .
W. L. Suchanek, J. M. Garces, P. F. Fulvio and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6564–6574 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Thomas, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1683–1734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Hong, J. Cai and Z. Li, ChemCatChem, 2021, 13, 656–663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, Y. He, Y. Liu, Y. Du and D. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5291–5319 RSC .
S. He, Z. An, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5912–5920 RSC .
H. Lee, J. Kim and D. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 594, 117461 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, C. Chen, H. Jia, Y. Li, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Song, T. Du and L. Liu, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 95, 16–27 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lee, C. W. Lai, K. S. Ngai and J. C. Juan, Water Res., 2016, 88, 428–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Goncalves, P. R. Martins, L. Angnes and K. Araki, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 9981–9997 RSC .
L. Huang, Y. Zou, D. Chen and S. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 1822–1840 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ning, Z. Wang, S. Bai, L. Tan, H. Dong, Y. Xu, X. Hao, T. Shen, J. Zhao, P. Zhao, Z. Li, Y. Zhao and Y.-F. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 412, 128362 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Khan and M. Tahir, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 8922–8943 CrossRef .
X. Hao, L. Tan, Y. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Wang, S. Bai, C. Ning, J. Zhao, Y. Zhao and Y.-F. Song, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 3008–3015 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lv and H. Q. Liu, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 227, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zang, Y. Wang, F. Gao, J. Gu and J. Qu, Fuel, 2021, 299, 120929 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Bai, L. Tan, Y. Xu, X. Hao, J. Wang, A. H. Mahadi, Y. Zhao, L. Zheng and Y.-F. Song, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 46, 1–7 CrossRef .
H. Abdolmohammad-Zadeh and M. Zamani-Kalajahi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1061, 152–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Huang, P. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Wang, N. Zhu, J. Wu and P. Li, Appl. Clay Sci., 2012, 65–66, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aisawa, H. Hirahara, K. Ishiyama, W. Ogasawara, Y. Umetsu and E. Narita, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 174, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
N. Baliarsingh, K. M. Parida and G. C. Pradhan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 3834–3841 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. Fahel, P. Durand, E. Andre and C. Carteret, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 669–678 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Shi, L. Wu, J. Zhang and J. Lu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2021, 2021, 620–627 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parida, L. Mohapatra and N. Baliarsingh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22417–22424 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Mortaheb, M. H. Amini, F. Sadeghian, B. Mokhtarani and H. Daneshyar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 160, 582–588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Hou and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4327–4335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, X. Zhao, C. Feng, B. Li, T. Chen, W. Lu, X. Lei and S. Xu, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 232–237 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, H. Kim, Y. S. Lee and D. Y. Jung, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. Meng, T. Wang, D. Wang and J. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601657 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, H. Shang, B. Zhang, D. Yan and X. Xiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16536–16544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawamura, M. C. Puscasu, Y. Yoshida, Y. Izumi and G. Carja, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 238–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iguchi, Y. Hasegawa, K. Teramura, S. Kidera, S. Kikkawa, S. Hosokawa, H. Asakura and T. Tanaka, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1740–1747 RSC .
X. Fang, Y. Men, F. Wu, Q. Zhao, R. Singh, P. Xiao, T. Du and P. A. Webley, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 29, 57–64 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Huang, X. Fu, T. Wang, X. Liu, A. Sun, J. Ge, J. Shen, Y. Zhou and Z. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 59, 9–18 CrossRef .
W.-K. Jo, S. Kumar and S. Tonda, Composites, Part B, 2019, 176, 107212 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Zhao, I. Ullah, L. Gao, J. Zhang and J. Lu, Catal. Lett., 2020, 151, 1683–1692 CrossRef .
S. Kumar, L. J. Durndell, J. C. Manayil, M. A. Isaacs, C. M. A. Parlett, S. Karthikeyan, R. E. Douthwaite, B. Coulson, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1700317 CrossRef .
D. Lu, H. Wang, X. Zhao, K. K. Kondamareddy, J. Ding, C. Li and P. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 1436–1445 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, W. Zhou, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Liu and D. Zhen, Adv. Compos. Lett., 2019, 28, 10 Search PubMed .
Q. A. Drmosh, A. Hezam, A. H. Y. Hendi, M. Qamar, Z. H. Yamani and K. Byrappa, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 499, 143938 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mei, F. Zhang, N. Wang, W. Lu, X. Su, W. Wang and R. Wu, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 35, 1321–1339 CAS .
R. R. Ikreedeegh and M. Tahir, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 43, 101381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, R. Guo, L. Hong, X. Ji, Z. Li, Z. Lin and W. Pan, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 611, 125836 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitsudome, Y. Mikami, M. Matoba, T. Mizugaki, K. Jitsukawa and K. Kaneda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 136–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Liu, K. L. Yeung and J. Qiu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 10906–10913 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1044–1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, Y. He, X. Du, P. Chu and Y. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3262–3273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Yu, S. Liang, X. Peng, Z. Yang, Y. Wang and Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1788–1794 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, B. Ma, S. Xu, D. Li, S. He, Y. Zhao, J. Han, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Jo, S. Moru and S. Tonda, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8020–8032 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The band gap structure of conductors, semiconductors and insulators.	 
CO2 + e− → ˙CO2− −1.90 V	(1)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O −0.53 V	(2)
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH −0.61 V	(3)
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCOH + H2O −0.48 V	(4)
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O −0.38 V	(5)
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O −0.24 V	(6)
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4 + 4H2O −0.35 V	(7)
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H5OH + 3H2O −0.33 V	(8)
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O −0.27 V	(9)
3CO2 + 18H+ + 18e− → C3H7OH + 5H2O −0.31 V	(10)
2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+ +0.81 V	(11)
2H+ + 2e− → H2 −0.42 V	(12)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the LDH structure. Adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2017) MDPI.	 

 	Fig. 3  CO2 adsorption isotherms of (a) MgAl-LDH, (b) C3N4, (c) NiAl-LDH, (d) ZnAl-LDH, and (e) ZnCr-LDH at room temperature. Adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2014) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  Selectivity of CH4, CO and H2 in CO2PR on NiAl-LDH under irradiation above 400 nm. Adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2019) Wiley.	 

CoZnAl-LDH/RGO/g-C3N4 (0.1 g)	Hydrothermal, in situ loading	Urchin-like	300 W Xe	4.2 cm2 glass reactor	Deionized water	CO: 10.11	96%	
84

HC-NiCo-LDH	Template method	Hollow nanocage	300 W Xe	40 mL closed stainless reactor	Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O	CH4: 560	62.66%	
89

400 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm	CH3CN:TEOA:H2O = 6: 1: 3 (v/v/v)
NiAl-LDH	Hydrothermal	Xerogels	400 W Hg	Quartz glass reactor	H2O (vapor)	CO: 50 μmol h−1	80%	
90

10 wt% ZnCr-LDH/BiOCl	Electrostatic interaction	—	300 W Xe	4.0 cm2 quartz reaction cell	Ultrapure water	CH4: 0.86	100%	
91

4% (w) FeNi-LDH/g-C3N4	Hydrothermal	—	300 W Xe	200 mL double-neck Pyrex reactor	H2O	CH3OH: 1.64	—	
92

CoAl-LDH	Titration	Ultrathin	300 W Xe	50 mL sealed reactor	TEOA:H2O:CH3CN = 1:1:3 by volume	CO: 2.52 × 103	60.93%	
93

400 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm	Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O
20 wt% P25@CoAl-LDH	Hydrothermal	—	300 W Xe	Sealed 320 ml stainless steel photoreactor	H2O	CO: 2.21	94%	
94

UV-vis
NiAl-275	Calcination	—	300 W Xe	50 mL closed stainless reactor	TEOA:H2O:CH3CN = 1:1:3 by volume	CH4: 95	22.8%	
95

400 ≤ λ ≤ 800 nm	Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O
g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH	self-sacrificing template	Urchin-like	300 W Xe	—	Deionized water	CO: 27.02	—	
96

30% In2S3/NiAl-LDH	Hydrothermal	Ball-flower	300 W Xe	—	Deionized water	CH4: 36.1	90%	
97

10 wt% Fe3O4/MgAl- LDH	Coprecipitation	(2D) ultrathin	Ultraviolet light	300 mL custom-made quartz reactor	NaOH	CO: 442.2	—	
98

254 nm	C2H3N	CH4: 223.9
HT150MgAlTi-LDH	Coprecipitation hydrothermal	—	400 W UV	Quartz tube reactor	H2O (vapor)	CO: 10	—	
99

200–1000 nm
Mg6Al1.85Ce0.15-LDH	Hydrothermal	—	300 W Xe	50 mL closed stainless reactor	TEOA:H2O:CH3CN = 1:1:3 by volume	CO: 85	42.1%	
100

Visible light	Ru(bpy)3Cl2·6H2O
B-ZnO@LDH	Coprecipitation	Belt	450 W Xe	Quartz glass reactor	H2O	CH4: 68.88	—	
101

R-ZnO@LDH	Rod	
λ = 320–780 nm	CH4: 73.92	—	

CoCo-LDH/Ti3C2Tx-15 mg	
In situ MOF-derived strategy	—	5 W LED	gas-closed quartz reactor	[Ru(bpy)3]Cl2·6H2O	CO: 1.25 × 104	63.9%	
102

MeCN/H2O/TEOA (3 mL/2 mL/1 mL)
ZnTi-LDH	Coprecipitation	Ultrathin	300 W Xe	Teflon-lined stainless reactor	H2O (vapor)	CH4: 1.2	CH4: 68%	
28

200–800 nm	H2: 0.7	H2: 31%
ZnAl-LDH	CO: 1.3	90%
ZnGa-LDH	CO: 1.6	78%
g-C3N4/NiAl-LDH 10 wt%	
In situ hydrothermal	—	300 W Xe	250 mL stainless steel photoreactor	H2O (vapor)	CO: 8.2	—	
103


λ ≥ 420 nm
0.1Cu2O@Zn1.8Cr LDH	
In situ reduction	—	200 W Hg—Xe	290 mL glass reactor	H2O	CO: 1.31	62.3%	
59


F(7.5) NiAl-LDH	Coprecipitation	—	400 W high-pressure Hg	Quartz inner-irradiation type reaction vessel	NaCl solution	CO: 9.33	80%	
60


 	Fig. 5  Fractional densities of states for bulk-LDH (A) and monolayer-LDH (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright (2020) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Ni K-edge XANES spectra, (B) Ni L3-edge soft XAS, (C) magnitude of weighted FT of Ni K-edge EXAFS, (D) XRD patterns, and (E) PAS spectra of b-NiAl-LDH, f-NiAl-LDH, m-NiAl-LDH, respectively; (F) schematic illustration of VM and VOH on m-NiAl-LDH. (G) PL spectra of the above catalysts in solution containing 14.7 × 10−6 M [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2·6H2O. Adapted from ref. 82. Copyright (2019) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images (A) and TEM images (B) of bulk-NiCo-LDH; SEM images (C and D) and TEM images (E) of HC-NiCo-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright (2021) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of MgAlTi-LDH (CP) and calcination + reconstruction treatment (R400, R500, and R600). Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 

0.3CuMgAl-LDH-400	33.50	>99.8	<0.2
0.5CuMgAl-LDH-400	30.43	>99.8	<0.2
0.7CuMgAl-LDH-400	27.03	>99.8	<0.2
0.9CuMgAl-LDH-400	25.20	>99.8	<0.2

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of Ni/Al2O3@Al with core–shell microstructure. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of CoMgAl-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright (2021) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  With the increase of La content, the effect on the structure of the synthesized LDH and the composition of subsequent extra-LDH compounds. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright (2021) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of fluorinated NiAl-LDH. Adapted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 


0	7.76	75.1	18.8	20.6	47
2.5	7.75	83.4	30.0	8.0	79
5.0	7.75	113	36.8	7.0	84
7.5	7.74	113	47.3	12.0	80
10	7.73	120	31.7	14.1	69
20	7.70	86.3	18.5	12.6	59

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of possible structure of Ni2Mn-DAS, DNS-n; (B) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy of pristine Ni2Mn-LDH, NDS, DAS and Ni2Mn-DAS, DNS. Adapted with permission from ref. 143. Copyright (2021) Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  The rate (A), selectivity (B) and ratio (C) of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO and H2 on CoAl-LDH, Pd/CoAl-0.55, Pd/CoAl-2.46 and Pd/CoAl-7.57. Adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Electron transfer process in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by Fe3O4/MgAl-LDH Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of CoCo-LDH/TNS nanosheets. Adapted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2020) Elsevier. (B) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the 3D hierarchical NiAl-LDH/Ti3C2 hybrid. Adapted with permission from ref. 155. Copyright (2021) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Schematic illustration of a type-II heterojunction. (B) Schematic illustration of the electron transfer process for photocatalytic reduction reaction of CO2 in the N-doped C dot/CoAl-LDH/g-C3N4. Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of (A) and (B) the separation and transfer of electron–hole pairs in a Z-scheme heterojunction, (C) type-II and (D) Z-scheme mechanism during the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by NiFe-LDH/Cu2O. Adapted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2020) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of a Z-scheme heterojunction for LDH/RGO/CN; (B) transient photocurrent responses for all the samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration of (A) the preparation of Cu2O@ZnCr-LDH photocatalysts with core–shell structure and (B) the separation and transfer of electron–hole pairs in the Cu2O@ZnCr-LDH system. Adapted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright (2017) Elsevier.	 

TiO2 hollow spheres	108.5	6.5	0.278
TiO2/LDH core–shell	115.2	10.8	0.312
NiAl-LDH	35.9	48.7	0.396
TiO2 NPs	47.3	38.4	0.354

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
