Recent progress in quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes for multivalent metal-ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA06606D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06606D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 24175-24194Recent progress in quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes for multivalent metal-ion batteries

        
          
            Jiahui 
            Lu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Pauline 
            Jaumaux†
b, 
      
        
          
            Tianyi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chengyin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guoxiu 
            Wang
          
        
      *b
aThe College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Environmental Engineering and Monitoring, Yangzhou University, 180 Si-Wang-Ting Road, Yangzhou, 225002, China. E-mail: yzwangtianyi@foxmail.com
bCentre for Clean Energy Technology, School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Technology Sydney, City Campus, Broadway, Sydney, NSW 2007, Australia. E-mail: guoxiu.wang@uts.edu.au
Received 
      4th August 2021
    , Accepted 7th October 2021First published on 12th October 2021AbstractThe increasing demand for alternative energy sources has prompted the rapid development of new energy storage technologies. Multivalent ion batteries (MIBs) such as zinc (Zn), calcium (Ca), aluminum (Al), and magnesium (Mg)-ion batteries are promising for large-scale energy storage owing to the abundance and low cost of raw materials. Moreover, the multivalent chemistry of such batteries is of great interest for achieving high-energy-density storage systems. However, some conundrums such as low electrochemical reversibility and sluggish reaction kinetics hinder their practical applications. More importantly, the safety of metal-based batteries is jeopardized by side reactions with the flammable and toxic organic liquid electrolyte, leading to uncontrollable dendrite growth. Recently, quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes have attracted intensive interest as safe alternatives to overcome these issues. Herein, we present a comprehensive review of the latest progress of quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes applied in multivalent metal-ion batteries including Zn, Ca, Al, and Mg-ion batteries. The synthesis, performance and characteristics of such electrolytes are systematically analyzed. Finally, the remaining challenges and issues faced by MIBs are also summarized. We believe this review will provide a solid foundation for the ongoing and future development of quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes towards safer MIBs.Jiahui LuJiahui Lu is currently a Ph.D. student under the supervision of Professor Guoxiu Wang and Professor Chengyin Wang at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, China. Her research mainly focuses on the field of electrochemical energy storage materials and their applications.Pauline JaumauxPauline Jaumaux is currently a Ph.D. student at the Center for Clean Energy Technology at the University of Technology Sydney. Her research focuses on electrolyte engineering including non-flammable liquid and quasi-solid electrolytes for Li and Zn-based batteries.Tianyi WangTianyi Wang received his Ph.D. from the Centre for Clean Energy Technology at the University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Australia. Currently, he is working in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University (YZU) and has devoted himself to the exploration of Li-ion batteries, sensors, Li–S batteries, Li metal anodes and biomaterials.Chengyin WangChengyin Wang is a Professor in chemistry at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University. He received his Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from Yangzhou University in 2007. His major research interests include electrochemical sensor materials and materials chemistry for energy storage and conversion.
1. Introduction
The energy transition towards renewable energy (e.g., wind and solar) requires the development of reliable, safe, and inexpensive large-scale energy storage systems.1–5 In 2019, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to M. Stanley Whittingham, John B. Goodenough, and Akira Yoshino for their extensive research on the development of lithium (Li)-ion batteries.6–10 Li-ion batteries have largely dominated the energy storage market over the past three decades; however, they are facing several issues for large-scale energy storage: (1) safety issues due to the high reactivity of the flammable and toxic liquid organic electrolytes; (2) limited energy density of Li-ion batteries based on Li transition metal oxide cathodes and graphite anodes (<300 W h kg−1). In addition, some multivalent ionic metals have a theoretical specific capacity similar to that of lithium metal (i.e., Zn: 820 mA h g−1, Ca: 1340 mA h g−1, Al: 2980 mA h g−1 and Mg: 2205 mA h g−1); (3) high cost owing to the scarce resources of indispensable metals for their fabrication (e.g., Li, cobalt).11–14 From the perspective of future consumption rates, lithium metal resources will not be able to meet people's increasing demand for batteries.15 In addition, lithium metal ores are unevenly distributed across the world, which makes the use of lithium metal more inconvenient.16,17 These serious shortcomings have nourished a curiosity for safe, cost-effective, and high-energy-density rechargeable battery alternatives.
Amongst many energy storage systems, multivalent ion batteries (MIBs) including zinc (Zn), calcium (Ca), aluminum (Al), and magnesium (Mg)-ion batteries are of particular interest. This can be attributed to the natural abundance of Al, Ca, Mg and Zn in the Earth's crust (Al, Ca, Mg and Zn are ranked 3rd, 5th, 7th and 25th, respectively, while Li is ranked 33rd) and their low redox potentials (i.e., Zn/Zn2+: –0.76 V; Ca/Ca2+: –2.87 V; Al/Al3+: −1.68 V; Mg/Mg2+: –2.36 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE)).2,15–21 Moreover, the multivalent feature of these metals implies electrochemical reactions transferring several electrons per metallic cation, thus increasing the energy density of such MIBs.22–24 Furthermore, multivalent metals benefit from high inherent safety.25–27 Zn is stable in water while Al metal forms a protective passivation layer of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) when in contact with water; therefore, Zn and Al metals can be directly applied as anodes with aqueous electrolytes. Although Ca and Mg metal anodes cannot be directly applied in aqueous electrolytes due to the slow reaction between these metals and water, which forms metal oxides and hydrogen gas, they are nonetheless much less reactive than alkali metals (e.g., Li, Na, or K).28–30 The development of MIBs is still hindered by some obstacles such as irreversible metal stripping and plating (e.g., dendritic metal plating, inactive metal, and dissolution of metal) and therefore low coulombic efficiency. These problems are related to the liquid electrolyte commonly employed in MIBs. The cyclic reversibility of metal anodes in the liquid electrolyte is poor, and repeated plating/stripping will lead to serious anode dendrite growth. Dendrite growth will inactivate metal anodes and produce a large amount of “dead metal”.31 More importantly, the liquid electrolytes in MIBs lead to side reactions (e.g., water evolution in aqueous electrolytes, metal corrosion, and dissolution), instability of the electrolyte against current collectors (e.g., corrosion of current collectors), and electrolyte leakage.32–35 Quasi-solid and solid-state electrolytes are regarded as promising electrolytes owing to their tunable properties to alleviate the above-mentioned problems.
Quasi-solid electrolytes are usually composed of a polymer matrix that contains liquid electrolyte in its pores. The preparation techniques of such gel electrolyte can be divided into two methods: (i) the physical method. The polymer is simply dissolved in the electrolyte (e.g., polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), polyacrylamide (PAM), etc.); and (ii) the chemical approach. The monomers, crosslinkers, and initiators are dissolved in the liquid electrolyte to prepare a precursor solution.13,36–40 Subsequently, the polymerization is initiated under certain conditions, depending on the initiator employed (radiation (UV), heat, etc.). Quasi-solid electrolytes possess many advantages, including high safety, improved ionic conductivity, good wettability towards electrodes, and capability to block the dendrite growth of metal anodes. Moreover, introducing polymers into aqueous electrolytes can enlarge the electrochemical stability window, thus inhibiting corrosion and hydrogen evolution at the electrodes.41–46 However, they usually lack mechanical strength and need to be combined with a separator to ensure electrical insulation between the electrodes.
Solid-state electrolytes can be categorized into inorganic ceramic electrolytes and organic polymer electrolytes.47 The former generally includes oxides and sulfides such as granite and transition metal sulfide-type electrolytes. However, research on these electrolytes remains restrained for MIBs and therefore we will only consider quasi-solid and organic polymer electrolytes in this review.48–53 Organic polymer electrolytes are commonly based on a polymer matrix (e.g., PEO, polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), PAN, etc.) that incorporates metallic salts (e.g., Zn(CF3SO2)2, Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2, etc.). Employing solid-state electrolytes is the ultimate goal to achieve high safety in batteries because they provide advantages such as elimination of leakage, high thermal and mechanical strength, and low-cost manufacturing. When applied in metal-based batteries, solid electrolytes can also efficiently reduce dendrite growth, and improve cycling performance and coulombic efficiency.54 However, the ionic conductivity and the contact between the electrolyte and electrode of such solid electrolytes are generally inferior to those of quasi-solid electrolytes (Fig. 1).55Table 1 summarizes the performance of some quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes in MIBs.
 Fig. 1  The advantages and disadvantages of solid polymer and quasi-solid electrolytes. 
Table 1 A summary of MIBs with quasi-solid state/solid polymer electrolytes




Cathode
Anode
Electrolyte
State of the electrolyte
Ionic conductivity S m−1
Capacity
Cycling performance
Energy and power density
Advantages
Ref.




LiMn2O4
Zn
Gelatin/0.5 M Li2SO4/0.5 M ZnSO4
Quasi-solid
0.61
110.2 mA h g−1 (25 mA g−1)
90% capacity retention (100 cycles at 25 mA g−1)
—
Durable, flexible, self-standing

63



Sodium vanadate hydrate
Zn
Gelatin/1 M ZnSO4/Na2SO4
Quasi-solid
—
380 mA h g−1
82% capacity retention (over 1000 cycles)
300 W h kg−1
Flexible

64



PPy/MnO2/SS yarn
Zn/NT
Gelatin/borax/1 M ZnSO4/1 M MnSO4
Quasi-solid
2
174.2 mA h g−1 (0.5C)
100 cycles (2C)
—
Flexible, shape memory

65



MnOx/PPy/ITO/PET
Zn/ITO/PET
Gelatin/borax/1 M ZnSO4/CdTe QDs
Quasi-solid
—
0.11 mA h g−1 (0.2 mA cm−2)
High CE (200 cycles)
21 mW h cm−3
Photoluminescent

66



MnO2-modified textile
Zn-modified textile
Gelatin/2 M ZnSO4/2 M MnSO4
Quasi-solid
10 ∼ 102
93 mA h g−1 (20C)
91% capacity retention (1000 cycles at 1C)
15 mW cm−3
Flexible

67



MoO3
VOPO4
Gelatin/PAM
Quasi-solid
2
88 mA h g−1
86.2% capacity retention (over 2800 cycles)
—
Flexible

68



MnO2/CNT
Zn/CNT
PAM/2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M MnSO4
Quasi-solid
1.73
302.1 mA h g−1 (60 mA g−1)
98.5% capacity retention (500 cycles at 2 A g−1)
53.8 mW h cm−3
Waterproofness tailorable

50



Co(III)-rich Co3O4/CFC
Zn/CFC
PAM/2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M CoSO4
Quasi-solid
12
178.6 mA h g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
94.6% capacity retention (2000 cycles at 2 A g−1)
—
Flexible

69



[EMIM]PF6-PEDOT:PSS/Bi2S3
Zn/CC
PAM/1 M Zn(TFSI)2/21 M LiTFSI
Quasi-solid
—
101 mA h g−1 (0.3 A g−1)
92% capacity retention (5300 cycles at 1 A g−1)
315 W h kg−1, 232 W kg−1
Stretchable

70



Co3O4/Co3O4−x/CFC
Zn/CFC
PAM/KOH/0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2
Quasi-solid
—
178 mA h g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
99.2% capacity retention (after 20 h in water); 93.2% capacity retention after a 1 h washing test
1600 W h kg−1, 3200 W kg−1
Waterproof, washable, wearable

71



Flake graphite
Al
PAM/AlCl3
Solid polymer
—
103 mA h g−1 (0.1 A g-1)
88.6% capacity retention; 93% CE (100 cycles at 0.06 A g−1)
—
Flexible, stable

58



PANI nanorods
Zn
PVA/2 M Zn(CF3SO3)2
Quasi-solid
1.26 × 103
123 mA h g−1 (0.1 A g−1)
97.1% capacity retention; about 100% CE (1000 cycles at 1 A g−1)
5089 W kg−1
Self-healing

72



MnO2/CNT fibers
Zn wire
PVA/2 M ZnCl2//1.5 M LiCl
Quasi-solid
—
290 mA h g−1 (0.1 A g−1)
75% capacity retention (300 cycles at 1 A g−1)
360 W h kg−1
Flexible

73



MnO2@PEDOT
Zn
PVA/ZnCl2/MnSO4
Quasi-solid
—
282.4 mA h g−1 (0.37 A g−1)
77.7% capacity retention; about 100% CE (300 cycles at 1.86 A g−1)
504.9 W h kg−1
Flexible, ultrahigh energy density

74



CNTF@Ni@MnO2
CNTF@Zn
PVA/3 M LiCl/2 M ZnCl2/0.4 MnSO4
Solid polymer


0.718 mA h g−1 (0.1 mA cm−1)
42.9% capacity retention (0.1 mA cm−1 gradually increased 10 times)
0.98 mW h cm−2
Flexible

75



Stainless steel (SS)
Stainless steel
PVA/Mg(Tf)2/EMITf
Solid polymer
2.1 × 10−2
—
—
—
Biodegradable gel

76



MnO2/CNT
Zn
Zwitterionic sulfobetaine/cellulose
Quasi-solid
24.6
148 mA h g−1 (6.5C)
90.42% capacity retention (1200 cycles at 6.5C)
386 W h kg−1
Biocompatible electrolyte

77





Quasi-solid and solid-state electrolytes are considered to be able to replace liquid electrolytes because of their advantages of effectively inhibiting anode dendrites and eliminating electrolyte leakage.56,57 However, the polymer electrolytes commonly employed in MIBs are still limited by some shortcomings (e.g., poor chemical and thermal stability, low mechanical stability and flexibility, and low ionic conductivity and migration number).58,59 Researchers have employed some strategies to overcome these problems (such as introducing ionic liquids, using additives, and physically enhancing the crosslinking), and these strategies are described in the following sections.60–62
In this review, we present the state of the art of quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes applied in multivalent batteries (i.e., Zn, Ca, Al and Mg-ion batteries). The synthesis and development of quasi-solid electrolytes for MIBs are firstly introduced and systematically analyzed. Then, the recent advances in solid polymer electrolytes are summarized and investigated from the perspectives of electrochemical properties, transport mechanisms, and their utilization in MIBs. Finally, the remaining challenges and issues faced by quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes in MIBs are also emphasized. This review paper will provide a holistic view for the ongoing and future development of quasi-solid and solid electrolytes towards safer MIBs.
2. Quasi-solid electrolytes for multivalent metal-ion batteries
2.1 Zinc-ion batteries

2.1.1 Biopolymers. 
Gelatin. 
Gelatin is a polymer made from partial hydrolysis of collagen in animal skin, bone, tendon, and other connective tissues. Gelatin is an amphoteric polyelectrolyte with a molecular weight of about 300 kDa, consisting of three types of polymer chain in a triple helix.78 Recently, gelatin was introduced into liquid electrolytes to form a gel owing to numerous hydrophilic groups such as –OH and –CO–NH in the gelatin structure, which can provide physical crosslinking points and effectively improve ionic conductivity.59,79 Gelatin is easily dissolved in an aqueous electrolyte under heating and stirring. Upon cooling down, the gel electrolyte is formed, thereby avoiding leakage of electrolyte. Gelatin-based hydrogel electrolytes (GHEs) have advantages such as environment friendliness, high ionic conductivity, and good mechanical strength.56,80
Wan et al. dissolved 1.5 g of gelatin in 6 mL of 1 M ZnSO4 aqueous solution to prepare a quasi-solid polymer Zn‖NaV3O8·1.5H2O (NVO) battery.64 The Na2SO4 additive not only limits the continuous dissolution of NVO by changing the dissolution balance of Na+ on the NVO electrode but also limits the growth of Zn dendrites with the electrostatic shielding mechanism because the reduction potential of Na+ is lower than that of Zn2+. In the Zn‖NVO battery, simultaneous H+ and Zn2+ insertion/extraction processes occur, which is different from traditional Zn-ion batteries (ZIBs) with only Zn2+ insertion/extraction and some Zn‖MnO2 systems with H+ or two-step H+/Zn2+ insertion/extraction processes. This mechanism yields reversible capacity as high as 380 mA h g−1 (corresponding to an energy density of 300 W h kg−1), and capacity retention as high as 82% after 1000 cycles at 4 A g−1. In addition to gelling the liquid electrolyte, gelatin can also endow the battery with resistance to cutting and bending. Han et al. used a fast cooling method to prepare a strong, flexible, and self-standing gelatin hydrogel electrolyte for quasi-solid Zn metal batteries.63 The GHE was coated on the surface of the cathode and formed a stable membrane after solidification (Fig. 2a–c). Such GHE provides high mechanical strength which not only alleviates Zn dendrite growth but also withstands mechanical abuse such as bending, twisting, and crimping. Moreover, the battery continued to work after being soaked or cut. The capacity of the Zn|GHE|LiMn2O4 (LMO) full battery was as high as 110 mA h g−1 at 25 mA g−1. After 100 cycles, it still maintained 90% of the capacity at 25 mA g−1.
 Fig. 2  (a) The optical image of a Zn electrode after cycling in a symmetrical cell. (b), (c) Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of (a) (b: surface, c: cross-section).63 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The rated capacity of a Zn@NT‖MnO2@SS-PPy wire battery in gelatin–borax electrolyte from 0.5 to 4C. (e) The cycling stability of the wire battery in gelatin–borax electrolyte at 2C. (f) The discharge capacity and capacity retention of the wire battery tested at 2C for 5 consecutive bending/recovery cycles.65 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photo of ZnSO4/MnSO4 solution after adding 10 wt% polymers of PEO, PVA, agar, gelatin, PANa, and XG. (h) Original Zn anode. (i), (j) SEM images of the Zn anode after charge/discharge cycles in 2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M MnSO4 aqueous electrolyte at 5C. (i) Zn anode after 50 cycles in the electrolyte without 20 wt% XG electrolyte. (j) SEM image of the Zn anode after 1000 cycles in the electrolyte with 20 wt% XG electrolyte.81 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One of the strategies to improve the ionic conductivity of polymer electrolytes is to enhance the cross-linking of a polymer by chemical methods. Cross-linking agents can generally hydrate with ions by hydrogen bonds, which strengthen the crosslinking degree of the polymer by complexing. To enhance the ionic conductivity and water retention capability of gelatin-based GHEs, Wang et al. added borax to the GHE in the mass ratio of gelatin:borax = 10:1. The wire-shaped flexible Zn@Nitinol (NT)-MnO2‖polypyrrole (PPy)@stainless steel (SS) battery provided high electrochemical performance.65 The maximum discharge capacity of the battery was 174.2 mA h g−1 at 0.5C (Fig. 2d) and it could achieve 1000 cycles at 2C with excellent cycling stability (Fig. 2e). Moreover, this battery still recovered its shape and retained 96.8% of the initial capacity after five consecutive bending/recovery cycles (Fig. 2f). The polymer framework of the GHE can accommodate a certain amount of water, which improves ionic mobility, while keeping a gel structure to prevent electrolyte leakage.
Xanthan gum. 
Xanthan gum (XG) is a water-soluble biopolymer from the polysaccharide family. It has been widely used as a food additive and for medical applications.82 Compared with other polymers, XG has many merits such as nontoxicity, low cost, ease of processing, and outstanding biocompatibility.83
Zhang et al. successfully prepared a very stable sulfate-tolerant gum bio-electrolyte by mixing 20 wt% XG in 3 M ZnSO4 and 0.1 M MnSO4 aqueous sulfate solutions.81 As shown in Fig. 2g, when 10 wt% PEO, PVA, agar, gelatin, and sodium polyacrylate (PANa) are introduced into 2 M ZnSO4 and 0.1 M MnSO4 aqueous solutions, severe precipitation occurs. In contrast, when 10 wt% XG is dissolved in 2 M ZnSO4 and 0.1 M MnSO4 aqueous solutions, a stable and homogeneous gel electrolyte is obtained. The ionic conductivity of this quasi-solid electrolyte was as high as 1.65 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature. The XG hydrogel even maintained an ionic conductivity of 2.5 × 10−3 S cm−1 at a low temperature of −8 °C. Furthermore, the as-prepared XG gel electrolyte can significantly alleviate the corrosion of the Zn metal surface and mitigate the growth of Zn dendrites during charge/discharge cycling. Fig. 2i and j display the SEM images of the Zn anodes retrieved from the Zn|XG gel electrolyte|Zn battery and Zn|2 M ZnSO4 + 0.1 M MnSO4|Zn battery after 1000 cycles and 50 cycles at 5C, respectively. The Zn anode retrieved from batteries cycled with liquid electrolyte exhibits sharp dendrites while that cycled in XG gel electrolyte demonstrates a smooth and dense Zn deposition morphology confirming the beneficial effect of XG gel electrolyte on the regulation of Zn plating and stripping.
Kappa-carrageenan. 
Kappa-carrageenan (κ-carrageenan) is a polysaccharide sulfate composed of galactose and anhydrated-galactose, which is mainly extracted from natural red edible seaweeds (e.g., eucheuma, gelidium, and carrigeenin). Similar to the XG-based electrolytes, κ-carrageenan is non-toxic, eco-friendly, and bio-compatible. Huang et al. prepared a flexible Zn‖MnO2 battery with κ-carrageenan gel polymer electrolyte (GPE).84 Such bio-electrolyte was synthesized by mixing κ-carrageenan, 2 M ZnSO4, and 0.1 M MnSO4. To improve the mechanical strength of κ-carrageenan electrolytes, they employed rice paper as a scaffold. The ionic conductivity of the κ-carrageenan electrolyte can reach 3.32 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature. The Zn‖MnO2 battery exhibited a capacity of 291.5 mA h g−1 at 6 A g−1 for 450 cycles, proving the viability of such electrolyte.


2.1.2 Synthetic polymers. 
Polyacrylamide. 
PAM polymer contains many hydrophilic groups such as amide (–CONH2) that enable a high density of hydrogen bonds between PAM chains and water molecules. Moreover, the numerous crosslinking points in the PAM hydrogel endow PAM with outstanding mechanical properties85–87 while forming a porous skeleton to encapsulate the liquid electrolyte. When coupled with a high concentration electrolyte, PAM-based gels have a high tensile strength and high bending resistance.88 Moreover, PAM-based electrolytes can also maintain good ionic conductivity at room temperature.45,54,85,89
Zhao et al. presented a sandwich structure consisting of quasi-solid PAM hydrogel (HCPAM) electrolyte employed in a Zn‖Bi2S3 battery (Fig. 3d).70 The HCPAM is a PAM hydrogel containing 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 and 21 M LiTFSI electrolyte. It has excellent stretchability (up to 400% strain) (Fig. 3a–c). Owing to its high structural strength, this hydrogel can be employed as both a robust separator and electrolyte with high ionic conductivity. As a result, the flexible battery can operate under a 180° bent state. Notably, the battery maintained capacity retention of approximately 92% at 1 A g−1 for more than 5300 cycles.
 Fig. 3  (a) Relaxation state of HCPAM. (b) Photograph of individual flexible quasi-solid state Zn|[EMIM]PF6-PEDOT:PSS|Bi2S3 batteries. (c) Tensile state of HCPAM. (d) Schematic diagram of the flexible quasi-solid state Zn|[EMIM]PF6-PEDOT:PSS|Bi2S3 battery assembly.70 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Long cycle performance at 2 A g−1 current density.69 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f), (g) SEM images of a yarn ZIB electrode after charging–discharging under knotting.50 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Ma et al. reported a quasi-solid Zn‖Co(III)-rich Co3O4 battery employing an HCPAM which contained 80 mM ZnSO4 and 8 mM CoSO4 electrolyte.69 After 2000 cycles at a current density of 2 A g−1, the capacity retention of the battery is as high as 94.6% (Fig. 3e). Owing to the porous network structure of the HCPAM, the gel electrolyte achieved excellent ionic conductivity of 0.12 S cm−1 and maintained improved interface contact between the electrolyte and the electrode while immobilizing the aqueous electrolyte.
Li et al. prepared a PAM gel electrolyte that can be stretched to 3000% strain and maintain 95.4% of the original ionic conductivity (17.3 × 10−3 S cm−1) at 300% strain.50 They prepared a cross-linked PAM electrolyte by mixing acrylamide monomers, potassium persulfate, and N,N′-methylenebis(acrylamide). The as-prepared PAM gel electrolyte demonstrated high water retention and high elasticity through free radical polymerization. This PAM gel electrolyte was coated on the surface of electrodes and employed as an electrolyte in a stretchable and flexible ZIB which was waterproof and resistant to cuts. As shown in the SEM images (Fig. 3f and g), the elastic PAM-based electrolyte stuck to the electrode surface and efficiently protected the anode. The discharge specific capacity of the yarn ZIB was 302.1 mA h g−1 while the specific energy density of the battery was 53.8 mW h cm−3 and it showed excellent cycling stability. Even under extreme deformation conditions, such as bending, knotting, twisting, stretching, or even soaking, the electrodes still displayed a smooth surface after cycling. This is due to the elastic PAM-based electrolyte used as a protective layer on the electrodes to disperse the stress when the ZIB is subjected to different mechanical deformations. The crosslinked PAM-based electrolyte has excellent mechanical durability for flexible MIB applications.51,90 Moreover, by freeze-drying PAM, nanoscale pores are formed which can assist the fast transportation of ions, thus improving the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte.
Polyvinyl alcohol. 
The PVA chain is composed of a large number of hydrophilic functional groups which can form hydrogen bonds with water molecules.91,92 PVA also presents numerous merits such as non-toxicity, excellent mechanical properties (i.e., stretchability and flexibility), and ease of handling (i.e., easily dissolves in aqueous electrolyte upon heating). In recent years, PVA has been widely employed in polymer electrolytes for energy storage flexible devices.73–75,93
Zeng et al. fabricated a quasi-solid electrolyte by dissolving PVA in an aqueous solution of 3 M LiCl, 2 M ZnCl2, and 0.4 M MnSO4.74 The assembled Zn| GPE|MnO2@poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT) flexible quasi-solid battery delivered a high specific capacity of 282.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.37 A g−1 (2 mA cm−2) (Fig. 4a). It can be seen from Fig. 4b that nearly 100% of the coulombic efficiency of the quasi-solid-state battery could be retained after 300 cycles at 1.86 A g−1 while retaining more than 77% of the initial capacity.
 Fig. 4  (a) Cycling performance of Zn‖MnO2@PEDOT at 1.11 A g−1. (b) Comparison of the rate performance and corresponding CE discharge curves of the Zn‖MnO2 and Zn‖MnO2@PEDOT batteries.74 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag. (c) An ultrathin Ni@MnO2‖Zn micro-battery–sensor integrated device assembled in the series integrated device was attached to a subject's arm. (d), (e) The real-time ΔI−t curves of the integrated device exhibiting a gradual and periodic synchronous increase and decrease.75 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Illustration of the structure of self-healing integrated ZIBs based on a PVA/ZnOTf hydrogel.72 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag. 
Wang et al. discovered that ZnOTf (Zn(CF3SO3)2) could avoid PVA crosslinking owing to its high molecular weight.73 The specific capacity of the Zn‖MnO2 battery using ZnTFS-PVA gel can reach 188 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1.
As highly safe and flexible gels, PVA-based quasi-solid electrolytes have attracted attention for wearable device battery applications. He et al. designed a flexible micro-battery based on a PVA/LiCl–ZnCl2–MnSO4 quasi-solid electrolyte. The micro-battery was connected in series with a sensor to form a micro-battery–pressure sensor integrated system.75 This device can be connected to the human arm to monitor the muscle activity of the arm. The change in the ΔI−t curve output by the device corresponds to the change in the subject's arm activity (Fig. 4c–e). Therefore, flexible batteries using PVA-based electrolytes are a promising candidate for wearable devices and medical applications.
According to previous literature, simple physical methods can improve the ionic conductivity of polymer electrolytes. Repeated freezing and thawing during the polymer polymerization can form more crystalline microdomains in the hydrogel, thereby forming a mesoporous network structure to assist the rapid transport of zinc ions in the electrolyte.30 Huang et al. prepared trifluoromethane-sulfonate hydrogel (PVA/ZnOTf2) electrolyte by a freezing/thawing method.72 The ionic conductivity of the PVA/ZnOTf2 is as high as 12.6 S cm−1 at room temperature. Moreover, owing to the numerous hydrogen bonds between the polymer chains, this hydrogel can self-heal (Fig. 4f) and bear mechanical stress.
Polyacrylic acid. 
Polyacrylic acid (PAA) is one of the most commonly used synthetic homopolymers for preparing hydrogels. Similar to PAM, PAA is rich in hydrophilic functional groups, such as hydroxyl, carboxyl, and amide groups. Many carboxyl groups (–COOH) in the PAA chain are hydrophilic and can ionize to produce carboxyl ion functional groups (–COO−). A series of studies on PAA as ZIBs solid polymer electrolyte have been reported.54
Owing to its excellent mechanical properties, PAA-GPE can be employed as an aqueous electrolyte in flexible ZIBs. Berchmans et al. made a wearable Ag–Zn tattoo battery using screen-printed electrodes, temporary tattoo paper as a support, alkaline PAA gel as an electrolyte, and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to seal the battery.94 The PAA gel was obtained by dissolving 6 M KOH, 1 M LiOH, and 3 wt% PAA in water. The liquid solution trapped inside the PAA gel matrix improves the ionic conductivity and the electrode/electrolyte contact while the PAA network endows the battery with flexibility and leak-proof properties.
Poly(vinylidene fluoride). 
Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) is composed of a long organic chain (C–C) on which electronegative fluorine atoms are grafted.95–97 However, PVDF is not soluble in water, and the gelation process could be difficult and suffer from poor ionic conductivity due to its highly crystalline structure. Therefore, PVDF-derivatives such as poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) are more frequently employed. Copolymerizing PVDF with hexafluoropropylene (HFP) can not only lower the crystallization of PVDF and therefore improve the ionic conductivity but also improve the flexibility of electrolytes.98,99
Guisao et al. synthesized a GPE composed of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (EMIM TFSI) ionic liquids (ILs), PVDF-HFP, and ZnOTf2 in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent, and fabricated a Zn|GPE|MnO2 battery.100 They found that the retention of NMP molecules in the polymer matrix can improve the ionic conductivity of the GPE due to abundant interactions between the carbonyl group of the NMP molecules and the Zn2+ cations. The discharge specific capacity of the Pt|GPE|Zn battery containing GPE retaining NMP is 125mA h g−1 at 1 mA cm−2.
Acrylate polymers. 
Acrylic acid (AA) is a liquid monomer composed of a carboxyl functional group that can easily react in the presence of a base such as LiOH or NaOH to form lithium or sodium acrylate. Subsequently, the corresponding polymer (i.e. lithium polyacrylate and PANa) can easily be in situ prepared by radical polymerization. Recently, PANa has been considered an ideal polymer electrolyte for MIBs owing to (i) its high ionic conductivity, excellent stretchability, and compressibility, and (ii) good mechanical properties (e.g., tensile deformation of up to 1700%).
Liu et al. in situ developed a PANa hydrogel electrolyte for a NiCo‖Zn battery.101 PANa-GPE was obtained after polymerization of the AA/NaOH precursor solution in the presence of 6 M KOH, 0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2, and ammonium persulphate (APS) as the initiator (Fig. 5a). When PANa-GPE underwent mechanical abuse such as stretching or compression, the battery capacity increased simultaneously. When the stretching ratio of the battery increased from 0% to 400%, the capacity increased from 53.7 mA h g−1 to 72.9 mA h g−1 (Fig. 5b). Similarly, when the battery was compressed by 50%, the capacity was 109% that of the initial state (Fig. 5c). During the stretching process, the deformation of the gel improves the contact between the electrolyte and the electrode, which may be the reason for the increase in capacity. The small increase in capacity during compression may be due to the closer contact between the electrode and the electrolyte. Moreover, Wang et al. found that NiCo‖Zn batteries using PANa as the GPE can operate in a wide temperature range from −20 °C to 50 °C.102Fig. 5d compares the mechanical properties of PANa hydrogel soaked in a concentrated solution of KOH and Zn(CH3COO)2 (left panel) and those of PANa soaked in deionized water (right panel). When the hydrogel was infused with the concentrated solution, PANa demonstrated high antifreeze activity and heat resistance, and improved elasticity. The improvement of PANa is attributed to the reduction of water content and freezing point of the gel by concentrated ions. Due to the decrease of water content, the molecular chain density per unit cross-section of PANa increases, so the mechanical strength of PANa improves. As shown in Fig. 5g, the ionic conductivity of the PANa hydrogel electrolyte at −20 °C and 50 °C is 5.7 S m−1 and 16.3 S m−1, respectively. Fig. 5e and f show the SEM images of the PANa hydrogel electrolyte at −20 °C and 50 °C. It can be seen that PANa presents numerous and large micropores that can benefit the diffusion of ions at high temperatures.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of PANa-GPE preparation. (b) Change of battery capacity upon stretching from 0% to 400%. (c) Change of battery capacity upon compressing from 0% to 50%.101 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Tensile properties of PANa hydrogels infused with concentrated ions and deionized water at −50, −20, and 50 °C, respectively. (e), (f) SEM images of PANa hydrogel at −20 and 50 °C. (g) Ionic conductivity of the PANa hydrogel at −20 and 50 °C.102 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (h) Charge/discharge cycling performance of a fiber Zn–air battery with PANa-CMC-based hydrogel electrolyte at 2 mA cm−2 current density. (i) Tensile stress versus strain curves of PANa-CMC hydrogel with 6 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 intake. (j) Schematic diagram of the PANa-GPE stretching process.103 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag. 
Chen et al. synthesized a quasi-solid dual-network PANa-cellulose (CMC) based hydrogel electrolyte.103 Introducing CMC into PANa enables amelioration of PANa-gel mechanical properties owing to additional hydrogen bond cross-linking between CMC and PANa. When the hydrogel is stretched to more than 800% strain, no break or cracks can be spotted on the surface or inside the electrolyte (Fig. 5i and j). These electrolytes were employed in a Zn–air battery and delivered a maximum power density of 128 mW cm−2. The Zn–air batteries maintained a stable cycling performance for more than 110 h and 600 cycles at a current density of 2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 5h).
Zwitterionic sulfobetaine. 
Zwitterionic sulfobetaine is a polymer containing both anionic and cationic groups on the same chain. These charged groups can generate strong electrostatic interactions with ions present in the electrolyte, therefore promoting ion transport.
However, sulfobetaine hydrogels suffer from poor mechanical strength. Mo et al. introduced CMC into a zwitterionic sulfobetaine GPE to ameliorate its flexibility.77 Zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC gel is prepared by mixing CMC and poly[2-(methacryloyloxy)ethyl]diethy-(3-sulopropyl) (PMAEDS) (Fig. 6a). The zwitterionic groups on the polymer matrix can form ion migration channels which reduce the energy loss during the ion migration process and therefore effectively improve the ion migration efficiency (Fig. 6b). The zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC semi-interpenetrating networks were applied in a Zn‖MnO2 full battery. The as-fabricated battery demonstrated a high specific capacity of 74 mA h g−1 over 10000 cycles at 30C. Moreover, a uniform protective layer was formed on the Zn anode (quasi-SEI), which effectively inhibited the nucleation of Zn dendrites (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of a zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC-gel electrolyte. (b) The mechanism of ion migration channel formation by the zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC-gel electrolyte under an external electric field. (c) Schematic diagram of the principle of forming a quasi-SEI layer along with the zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC-gel on the anode surface under the action of an electric field.77 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag. 

2.2 Aluminium-ion batteries
Al is abundant on earth and possesses a valency of +3, therefore forming Al3+ cations. Al-ion batteries (AIBs) have attracted tremendous attention in recent decades for battery applications.

2.2.1 Biopolymers. 
Xanthan gum. 
Migliardini et al. studied the XG-GPE with a high concentration of HCl (solid/liquid ratio of 1.4 g mL−1). This acidic electrolyte could inhibit dendrite growth and anode self-corrosion in Al–air batteries.104 The XG-GPE has a high ionic conductivity of 1.9 × 10−2 S cm−1 and a corrosion inhibition rate of 96%. Such an Al–air battery employing the quasi-solid XG-GPE achieved a high capacity of 40 mA h cm−2 and an anodic efficiency of 80% at 2 mA.
Kappa-carrageenan. 
κ-Carrageenan is both a biocompatible and non-toxic polymer. Palma et al. compared the results of X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and SEM of hydrogel electrolytes prepared from KOH solution with XG and κ-carrageenan, respectively.82 GEL01 and GEL02 are XG-based hydrogels containing 1 M and 8 M KOH aqueous solution, respectively, while GEL03 is a κ-carrageenan gel containing 8 M KOH solution. It can be seen from the patterns of XRD (Fig. 7a) that the highly concentrated hydrogels (i.e., GEL02 and GEL03) exhibit an amorphous structure with a rough morphology as seen in the SEM images (Fig. 7b and c). During the discharge test, Al/air cells using κ-carrageenan-GPE (i.e., GEL03) delivered an energy density of 33 mW h cm−2 while the batteries using XG-GPE (i.e., GEL02) as an electrolyte only achieved 18 mW h cm−2. They claim that the difference in energy densities achieved could be due to the gel structure of κ-carrageenan-GPE which favors the formation and transfer of the reaction product through the bulk electrolyte.
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of XG, κ-carrageenan, GEL01, GEL02, and GEL03. (b), (c) SEM images of GEL02 and GEL03 after charge/discharge cycles.82 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. 


2.2.2 Synthetic polymer. 
Polyacrylamide. 
Wang et al. reported flexible AIBs with gelatin-HCPAM as an electrolyte.68 The hybrid polymer hydrogel was synthesized by grafting PAM onto gelatin chains through free radical polymerization in a solution of 1 M Al(NO3)3 (Fig. 8a). When applied in a MoO3‖VOPO4 battery, the AIB demonstrated outstanding flexibility with high safety (Fig. 8b). The as-prepared battery could deliver a specific capacity of 55 mA h g−1 even under extreme mechanical abuse such as squeezing, twisting, folding, and even after cutting several times or drilling (Fig. 8c and d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Gelatin-HCPAM electrolyte synthesis route for AIBs. (b) Schematic diagram of the composition of flexible AIBs. (c) Power supply performance of flexible AIBs in flat (c1), folded (c2, 3), and squeezed states (c4). (d) Power supply performance of flexible AIBs after primary cutting (d1), secondary cutting (d2), and tertiary cutting (d3), and in series (d4).68 Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. 
Acrylate polymers. 
Zhang et al. synthesized a PAA-based alkaline GPE by mixing KOH solution, AA, and N,N′-methylene-bisacrylamide (MBA). The obtained quasi-solid electrolyte not only presented high mechanical strength and leak-free properties but also exhibited high ionic conductivity of 4.60 × 10−5 S cm−1 (Fig. 9a).105 When applied in an Al–air battery, the maximum capacity and energy density achieved were 1166 mA h g−1 and 1230 mW h g−1, respectively (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  (a) Ionic conductivity of PAA gels with different amounts of KOH. (b) Capacity and energy density of AIBs during constant current discharge.105 Copyright 2013, Elsevier B.V. (c) Synthetic route of PANa-CMC electrolyte. (d) Power density curve of an Al–air battery with PANa-5% CMC as an electrolyte.106 Copyright 2020, The Electrochemical Society. (e) Nyquist impedance plots of gel electrolyte membranes with different amounts of EMITf ionic liquid.76 Copyright 2017, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Sun et al. prepared a sodium PANa-CMC electrolyte for an Al–air battery.106 First, sodium acrylate (ANa) was synthesized by adjusting the AA monomer pH to 7 with a solution of NaOH. Subsequently, the sodium carboxymethyl CMC, the initiator APS, and the crosslinker MBA were introduced into the precursor solution. The gel was then in situ polymerized (Fig. 9c). CMC reduces the self-corrosion of the Al anode while enhancing the mechanical properties of the GPE. Moreover, the power density of the battery employing PANa as an electrolyte was greatly improved after the addition of CMC, reaching 137 mW cm−2 (Fig. 9d). When the battery was discharged under a current density of 10 mA cm−2, the discharge voltage of the Al–air battery with PANa-CMC electrolyte was 1.72 V while that of the Al–air battery with pure PANa electrolyte was only 1.60 V.

2.3 Magnesium-ion batteries
Mg-ion batteries have attracted great attention recently owing to numerous advantages such as no growth of metal dendrites, high volumetric energy density (3833 mA h cm−3), and low electrode potential (−2.37 V vs. NHE).

2.3.1 Polyvinyl alcohol. 
An ionic liquid is a liquid composed entirely of cations and anions and is usually an inorganic/organic salt solution. Ionic liquids are used to modify polymer electrolytes due to their non-flammability, high thermal/chemical stability, wide electrochemical window, and high ionic conductivity. The ionic liquid encapsulated in polymer electrolytes can form a complex containing two kinds of ionic conductor. The ionic liquid as an auxiliary ionic conductor can play an important role in improving the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte and wetting the electrode/electrolyte interface.
Wang et al. reported a gel electrolyte membrane made of PVA, Mg(Tf)2, and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium trifluoromethanesulfonate (EMITf) ILs for Mg-ion batteries.76 By introducing an ionic liquid into the polymer matrix, the ionic conductivity of PVA-GPE increased from 2.36 × 10−6 S cm−1 to 2.10 × 10−4 S cm−1 (Fig. 9e). Moreover, the electrochemical stability window of the membrane is close to 5.0 V, which is suitable for Mg-ion battery applications. This cheap and environmentally friendly PVA electrolyte makes Mg-ion batteries more promising.
Poly(vinylidene fluoride). 
β-Phase PVDF possesses a large number of electronegative functional groups (−CF) which are beneficial for dissociating metal salts in a solvent. In addition, β-phase PVDF has outstanding piezoelectric, pyroelectric and ferroelectric properties. However, the large crystallinity of the β-phase PVDF prevents it from reaching high ionic conductivity. Amongst numerous methods to improve ionic conductivity, reducing the crystallinity of the polymer through co-polymerization has been widely explored. By copolymerizing β-phase PVDF with HFP, PVDF-co-HFP with high ionic conductivity, excellent flexibility, and electrochemical stability can be obtained. Singh et al. prepared a PVDF-co-HFP membrane by electrospinning technology. This synthesis technique enables control of the polymer phase without post-processing, thereby producing β-phase PVDF more easily.107 This membrane swells when immersed in a liquid electrolyte of 0.3 M magnesium perchlorate (Mg(ClO4)2) with an average fiber diameter (AFD) of 508 ± 20 nm. The PVDF-co-HFP membrane can absorb a large amount of liquid electrolyte which improves the ionic conductivity of the membrane up to 1.62 mS cm−1. Owing to the dipole–dipole interaction between the polar β-phase and polar liquid electrolyte, the voltage stability of the PVDF-co-HFP membrane reaches 5.5 V.

2.4 Calcium-ion batteries
Ca-Ion batteries (CIBs) not only have a similar standard reduction potential to that of LIBs, but also Ca2+ can provide higher energy density than Li+. In addition, compared with Mg-ion batteries, CIBs possess a higher power density.22,108 However, research on polymer electrolytes for CIBs is still in its infancy due to important challenges that need to be overcome such as improving ionic conductivity and thermal stability, and enlarging the electrochemical stability of polymer electrolytes for CIBs. Moreover, Ca batteries also suffer from slow insertion/extraction kinetics of Ca ions in the cathode in organic electrolytes.

2.4.1 Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate. 
Biria et al. synthesized an ionic liquid polymer gel electrode (IL-GE) for CIBs by photopolymerization and swelling poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate (PEGDA) in EMITf ILs with 0.2 M Ca salt.109 The ionic conductivity of the IL-GE ranged from 10−4 to 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature (Fig. 10a). When Ca3Co4O9 and V2O5 were used as the cathode and anode, respectively, and the IL-GE was used as an electrolyte and separator to assemble a battery, the initial discharge capacity of the battery was as high as 140 mA h g−1 (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity of IL-GEs containing 0.2 M concentration of Ca salt. (b) The galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of a Ca3Co4O9/Solid polymer electrolyte (SPE)/V2O5 battery.109 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) The galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of a S/C|PVA gel electrolyte|Ca0.4MnO2 battery. (d) The long cycle performance of the S/C‖Ca0.4MnO2 battery at a current density of 0.2C. The mass ratio of Ca0.4MnO2 cathode to S/C anode is 1.6:1.28 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 
Polyvinyl alcohol. 
Tang et al. designed CIBs with a Ca0.4MnO2 cathode, sulfur/carbon (S/C) anode and a highly concentrated hydrogel electrolyte prepared by dissolving 10 wt% PVA in a saturated Ca(NO3)2 solution.28 CIBs using this PVA gel electrolyte provided a capacity of 560 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1C (Fig. 10c). This is because the high concentration of salt decreased the water activity in the hydrogel and expanded the electrochemical window. Compared with a S/C|Ca(NO3)2 aqueous electrolyte|Ca0.4MnO2 battery, a S/C|PVA gel electrolyte|Ca0.4MnO2 battery demonstrated a better cycling stability. When the S/C|PVA gel electrolyte|Ca0.4MnO2 battery was cycled at a current density of 0.2C for 150 cycles, the capacity retention rate and the average coulombic efficiency reached 83% and 93%, respectively (Fig. 10d). Under the same conditions, the S/C|Ca(NO3)2 aqueous electrolyte|Ca0.4MnO2 battery exhibited capacity retention of 65% and coulombic efficiency of 86%. By immobilizing the liquid electrolyte with PVA, polysulfide shuttling was inhibited, thus improving the cycle life of the battery.

3. Solid-polymer electrolytes for multivalent metal-ion batteries
3.1 Zinc-ion batteries
Among ZIBs, aqueous ZIBs are widely regarded as next-generation batteries with high capacity, low cost, and safety.110 However, Zn anode corrosion, hydrogen evolution, and passivation reduce the utilization rate of the Zn anode.111 To improve the cycle life of ZIBs, methods such as using “water-in-salt” electrolytes, hydrate-melt electrolytes, and hydrogel electrolytes seem to minimize the above-mentioned issues.32,112,113 However, these electrolytes are costly due to the large amount of metal salt required. Solid polymer electrolytes (SPEs) have the advantages of flexibility, light weight, low cost, and excellent mechanical toughness.67 More importantly, SPEs do not contain water, which fundamentally eliminates the side reaction between electrodes and aqueous electrolytes.114 However, the strong electrostatic bonding properties of Zn2+ ions hinder SPEs from achieving high ionic conductivity.53

3.3.1 Poly(1,3-dioxolane). 
Ma et al. in situ polymerized 4 M Zn tetrafluoroborate (Zn(BF4)2)/DOL with 2 × 10−3 M Al(OTf)3 to form a poly(1,3-dioxolane, DOL)/Zn(BF4)2 SPE.115 The as-prepared SPE demonstrated high ionic conductivity of 19.6 mS cm−1 at room temperature. The Zn|SPE|CoHCF battery showed a specific capacity of 105.8 mA g−1 after 20000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1 with a coulombic efficiency above 99.75% (Fig. 11a). This SPE approach endows ZIBs with high stability and long cycle life by alleviating the problems caused by aqueous electrolytes.
 Fig. 11  (a) The long cycle performance of a Zn|SPE|CoHCF battery at a current density of 0.5 A g−1.115 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) The long-cycle performance of a Zn|SPE|MnHCF battery at 2C. (c) The discharge capacity of the Zn|SPE|MnHCF battery at different temperatures.116 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Poly(methyl acrylate). 
Chen et al. employed MXene with poly(methyl acrylate) (PMA) and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP) to prepare an SPE.116 They prepared PMA-grafted MXene (MXene-g-PMA) by in situ surface polymerization, and used the abundant H atoms in the PMA side chain to form F–H hydrogen bonds with PVHF, and finally obtained PVHF/MXene-g-PMA SPE. Thanks to the good dispersibility of MXene, the SPE can provide excellent ionic conductivity (2.69 × 10−4 S cm−1) at room temperature. Therefore, the Zn|SPE|MnHCF battery demonstrated excellent cycling performance achieving 10000 cycles at a rate of 2C, and could even operate over a wide temperature range of –35 °C to 100 °C (Fig. 11b and c). The as-prepared SPE offers high safety, durability, and long storage life for ZIBs while eliminating the side reactions occurring with liquid electrolytes in ZIBs.

3.2 Magnesium-ion batteries
PEO is a linear polymer prepared by the polymerization of an ethylene oxide monomer. Depending on its molecular weight, the PEO state ranges from viscous liquid (molecular weight of about 400 g mol−1) to a solid pallet (molecular weight > 100000 g mol−1). As it is easily dissolved in an aqueous electrolyte, PEO has been widely employed in quasi-solid and solid-state polymer electrolytes.117,118 Moreover, PEO can easily form a film which makes it an ideal choice for preparing solid electrolytes.119,120

Poly(ethylene oxide). 
Shao et al. synthesized a new SPE based on PEO, MgO nanoparticles, and magnesium borohydride (Mg(BH4)2) for Mg batteries.121 The nanocomposite polymer film with PEO:MgO:Mg(BH4)2 in a mass ratio of 8:1:1 displays a smooth morphology with MgO uniformly distributed in PEO, as observed by SEM (Fig. 12a and b). The Mo6S8|SPE|Mg battery demonstrated excellent electrochemical performance at 100 °C with a stable specific capacity of 90 mA h g−1 and a coulombic efficiency close to 100% over 150 charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 12d). However, SPEs for Mg-ion batteries suffer from low ionic conductivity at room temperature.
 Fig. 12  (a), (b) SEM images of a Mg(BH4)2–MgO–PEO polymer electrolyte. (c) CV (20 mV s−1) curve of Mg plating–stripping in SS/Mg(BH4)2–MgO–PEO/Mg cells. (d) Capacity stability of a Mo6S8|Mg(BH4)2–MgO–PEO|Mg battery during charge/discharge cycling.121 Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd. 
To overcome this issue, Rathika et al. synthesized a PEO–PVDF–Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)] solid polymer electrolyte by mixing PEO and PVDF in a mass ratio of 9:1. Compared with pure PEO or PVDF, the crystallinity of the PEO–PVDF mixture is much lower, thus improving the ionic conductivity of the SPE. Furthermore, they analyzed the crystallinity and resistance of the PEO–PVDF–Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)] electrolyte by XRD for several Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)] concentrations.122 As shown in Fig. 13a, the crystallinity of the polymer blend can be greatly improved when the Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)] content is more than 9 wt%. Therefore, the ionic conductivity is also expected to be improved with higher Mg salt content. The ionic conductivity improves from 7.8 × 10−7 S cm−1 to 1.2 × 10−5 S cm−1 when the concentration of Mg salt increases from 3 wt% to 15 wt%, respectively. EIS was employed to measure the bulk resistance (Rb) (Fig. 13b and c); when the content of Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)] is 15 wt%, the bulk resistance is at its lowest, and thus the ionic conductivity reaches a maximum value of 1.2 × 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature. PEO–PVDF polymer blends can also be adapted to ZIBs by adding Zn salts as metal salts in the SPE.
 Fig. 13  (a) XRD patterns of PEO, PEO–PVDF blend, and PEO–PVDF blends with different amounts of Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)]. (b), (c) Complex impedance spectra of PEO–PVDF blends with different amounts of Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)].122 Copyright 2016, The Polymer Society of Korea and Springer. 

3.3 Calcium-ion batteries

3.3.1 Polytetrahydrofuran. 
In comparison with Zn and Mg batteries, there are only a few studies on SPEs for Ca batteries. Wang et al. copolymerized polytetrahydrofuran (PTHF) with 3,4-epoxycyclohexylmethyl 3′,4′-epoxycyclohexane carboxylate (epoxy) (1:1) using UV light employing a 2.5 wt% camphorquinone (CQ) photoinitiator and 1.5 wt% (4-octyloxyphenyl)phenyl iodonium hexafluoroantimonate (OPPI) cationic initiator.123 The highest conductivity of the PTHF–epoxy SPE at room temperature is 1.14 × 10−4 S cm−1, and the transference number of the Ca cation at 70 °C is 0.359. The SPE possesses high ionic conductivity and thermal stability and remains stable in the temperature range of 30 to 120 °C. Their work provides a new approach to synthesize SPEs suitable for CIBs; however, it is yet to be applied in full batteries.

3.4 Aluminium-ion batteries
Among multivalent metal battery systems such as Zn, Mg, Ca, and Al ones, AIBs have attracted much attention due to their extremely low raw material costs, long cycle life, and stable performance. The development of solid-state AIBs can avoid issues related to aqueous electrolytes (side reaction, leakage, etc.) and improve the electrochemical stability and safety performance of AIBs.

3.4.1 Polyacrylamide. 
Yu et al. reported an AIB using PAM dissolved in AlCl3 and CH2Cl2 as a solid polymer electrolyte.58 This battery demonstrated excellent safety owing to the non-flammable and leak-free SPE even under harsh operation. Moreover, when applied in a full battery with graphite as a cathode and Al metal as an anode, the AIB can provide a specific capacity of 120 mA h g−1 at a current density of 60 mA g−1. The AIB achieved 100 cycles at a current density of 60 mA g−1, maintaining a coulombic efficiency of more than 90% and a capacity of about 109 mA h g−1.

4. Summary and outlook
This review summarizes the development of quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes applied in MIBs in recent years. MIBs are promising alternatives to large-scale energy storage owing to the abundance and low cost of raw materials, the multivalent chemistry, and the safer operation than commercially available Li-ion batteries. The safety of metal-based batteries is always a pre-requisite for practical applications. The development of quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes is of paramount importance. These electrolytes can alleviate the dendrite growth of metal anodes and leakage issue related to the use of liquid electrolytes. Moreover, other properties such as heat resistance, flexibility, etc. can also be achieved with quasi-solid and solid polymer electrolytes.
Although quasi-solid electrolytes have excellent water retention and accommodate many electrolyte solutions in the polymer matrix, they still suffer from lower mechanical strength and lower safety (compared with solid-state electrolytes). Meanwhile, although solid polymer electrolytes are leakage-free and have outstanding safety and mechanical strength, they face the problems of low ionic conductivity at room temperature and poor electrode/electrolyte contact. In summary, the remaining challenges are outlined below:
(1) The ionic conductivity of polymer electrolytes is too low for practical applications. High ionic conductivity is crucial to achieving a high rate and long cycling performance. The improvement of the ionic conductivity of polymer electrolytes can be achieved by several measures such as the highly concentrated electrolyte approach, freeze-drying treatment, and introducing other compounds (e.g., co-polymers or co-salts).
(2) The mechanical strength of quasi-solid electrolytes is insufficient. Batteries in flexible wearable devices have high requirements regarding the durability of electrolytes. Therefore, polymer electrolytes can ensure high mechanical strength while achieving high ionic conductivity. Combining several polymers to utilize the advantage of each component polymer is an interesting path that needs to be further explored. For instance, the preparation of dual-network gel has been demonstrated to improve the mechanical strength of the electrolyte. Other methods such as using a scaffold to increase the strength are also interesting approaches.
(3) The mechanical properties are quite important for MIBs. Normally, solid electrolytes enjoy high ionic conductivity which is quite essential for high power electric devices (e.g. large-scale energy storage systems and EVs). However, the excellent electrochemical performance of high stiffness solid electrolytes and effective inhibition of metal dendrites are based on the sacrifice of battery flexibility and unstable contact of interfacial metal surfaces. Quasi-solid electrolytes which enjoy both good flexibility and high ionic conductivity have been regarded as a most promising candidate for next-generation MIBs. The ideal stiffness and reasonable Young's modulus can suppress the growth of dendrites while maintaining tight interfacial contact. They are more suitable for flexible wearable devices, while solid electrolytes with higher mechanical strength are suitable for large-scale energy storage systems and electric vehicles. The problem of interfacial contact between solid-state electrolytes and electrodes can be alleviated by other strategies, such as improving the cathode material or designing “anode-free batteries”.
(4) The interface transport mechanism of the SEI layer formed by the electrolyte on the multivalent metal anode is still unclear. Side reactions may occur at the electrolyte–electrode interface to form a surface film that prevents the transport of multivalent metal ions. Therefore, research on the interfacial chemistry of MIBs is very important. Using specific and advanced electrochemical and analytical characterization techniques such as in situ analysis will help elucidate the remaining issues.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. H. Lu and P. Jaumaux contributed equally to this work. C. Y. Wang is grateful for the financial support from a project funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions. T. Y. Wang would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO. 22102141) for their support in this research.
References
H. Lv, S. Yang, C. Li, C. Han, Y. Tang, X. Li, W. Wang, H. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 39, 412–418 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, H. Dong, D. Aurbach and Y. Yao, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 646–656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, G. He, H. Jiang, I. P. Parkin, P. R. Shearing and D. J. L. Brett, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010445 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, L. Yang, X. Ni, J. Han, R. Guo and C. John, Carbon, 2016, 107, 629–637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Han, L. Fan, Y. Li and R. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 8064–8067 RSC .
C. Han, H. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhu and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Tang, J. Zhu, H. Lv, Y. Xu, W. Wang, C. Zhi and H. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003714 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2757–2759 CrossRef .
H. Ji, T. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Lu, G. Yang, W. Ding and W. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12725–12728 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Han, L. Fan, M. Wang, S. Tao and R. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3053–3056 RSC .
G. Liang, F. Mo, X. Ji and C. Zhi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 109–123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, M. A. Schroeder, O. Borodin, T. P. Pollard, M. S. Ding, C. Wang and K. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 743–749 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jaumaux, J. Wu, D. Shanmukaraj, Y. Wang, D. Zhou, B. Sun, F. Kang, B. Li, M. Armand and G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–28 CrossRef .
L. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Fang and L. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13151–13154 RSC .
S. Chen, L. Shen, P. A. Van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605650 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wu, V. Srot, S. Chen, S. Lorger and P. A. Van Aken, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1905146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Wu, L. Shen, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, K. Xi, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–21 Search PubMed .
L. Cao, D. Li, T. Deng, Q. Li and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19292–19296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, L. Liu, J. Yue, Q. Zhang, A. Zhou, O. Borodin, L. Suo, H. Li, L. Chen, K. Xu and Y. S. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Xie and Q. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1–20 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, B. Tang, X. Gu and L. Feng, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10928–10931 RSC .
A. Ponrouch, J. Bitenc, R. Dominko, N. Lindahl, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacin, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 253–262 CrossRef .
S. Zheng, X. Guo, H. Xue, K. Pan, C. Liu and H. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10904–10907 RSC .
T. Yang, L. Yin, M. He, W. Wei, G. Cao, X. Ding, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, T. Yu, H. Zhao and D. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14343–14346 RSC .
X. Ji, J. Chen, F. Wang, W. Sun, Y. Ruan, L. Miao, J. Jiang and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6441–6448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, F. Wu, L. Shen, Y. Huang, S. K. Sinha, V. Srot, P. A. Van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7018–7027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, H. Li, J. Li, Z. Sun, K. He, H. M. Cheng and F. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11978–11996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, D. Zhou, B. Zhang, S. Wang, P. Li, H. Liu, X. Guo, P. Jaumaux, X. Gao, Y. Fu, C. Wang, C. Wang and G. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gao, X. Liu, A. Mariani, G. A. Elia, M. Lechner, C. Streb and S. Passerini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2559–2569 RSC .
M. J. Baran, M. E. Carrington, S. Sahu, A. Baskin, J. Song, M. A. Baird, K. S. Han, K. T. Mueller, S. J. Teat, S. M. Meckler, C. Fu, D. Prendergast and B. A. Helms, Nature, 2021, 592, 225–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, J. Hao, C. Kao, C. Wu and H. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 1–15 CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Guo, Y. Ma, D. Bin, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1–20 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, Y. Han, X. Wu, P. Ji, M. Zhou, G. Diao and M. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 56, 141–144 RSC .
R. Zhao, R. Zhao, Y. Han, W. Li, J. Li, J. Li, M. Chen, L. Chen and L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6798–6801 RSC .
X. Wu, C. Qian, H. Wu, L. Xu, L. Bu, Y. Piao, G. Diao and M. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7629–7632 RSC .
J. Xiang, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, L. Yuan, X. Liu, Z. Cheng, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Shen, J. Jiang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3510–3521 RSC .
R. Sahore, Z. Du, X. C. Chen, W. B. Hawley, A. S. Westover and N. J. Dudney, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2240–2247 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, L. Zou, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 301–331 RSC .
M. Chen, X. Shen, K. Chen, Q. Wu, P. Zhang, X. Zhang and G. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 195, 94–105 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Shen, Q. Wu, X. Zhang, L. Huan and G. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 204, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Liu, X. Lin, H. M. Law, G. Zhou, S. C. T. Kwok, M. J. Robson, J. Wu and F. Ciucci, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 37, 609–618 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, L. Shen, S. Deng, P. Cui and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2100353, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, K. E. K. Sun and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41677–41691 RSC .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, H. Zhang, W. Cai, M. Ni, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2056–2080 RSC .
Z. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Chen, K. Li, G. Zhao, C. Sun, W. Chen, L. Ni and G. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 527–533 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Yao, J. Ou, M. Li, D. Luo, H. Dou, Z. Li, K. Amine, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8790–8839 RSC .
Z. Li, X. Ji, J. Han, Y. Hu and R. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 477, 46–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Z. Xu, Y. Lian, C. Ban and H. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, B. Li and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3140–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, A. Tkacheva, X. Tang, B. Sun, D. Shanmukaraj, P. Li, F. Zhang, M. Armand and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6001–6006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miroshnikov, K. Mahankali, N. K. Thangavel, S. Satapathy, L. M. R. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and G. John, ChemSusChem, 2020, 2186–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, G. Fang, H. Cao and X. Duan, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 16079–16086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Li, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Ruan, L. Ma, Q. Yang, D. Wang and C. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–30 Search PubMed .
H. Li, C. Han, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, F. Kang, B. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 941–951 RSC .
J. Zhao, H. Ren, Q. Liang, D. Yuan, S. Xi, C. Wu, W. Manalastas, J. Ma, W. Fang, Y. Zheng, C. F. Du, M. Srinivasan and Q. Yan, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lu, T. Jiang, H. Hu and M. Wu, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, S. Jiao, S. Li, X. Chen, W. L. Song, T. Teng, J. Tu, H. Sen Chen, G. Zhang and D. N. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Park, M. Park, G. Nam, J. S. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1396–1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, J. Zhu, J. Tian and Z. Niu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 14480–14494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Power Sources, 2002, 110, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, J. Ding, B. Liu, X. Liu, X. Han, Y. Deng, W. Hu and C. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Q. Han, X. Chi, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, J. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23046–23054 RSC .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Ruan, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Tang, H. Li, M. Zhu, T. F. Hung, J. Liu, Z. Shi and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8549–8557 RSC .
M. Zhu, Z. Wang, H. Li, Y. Xiong, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Huang, A. L. Rogach and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2414–2422 RSC .
T. Zhao, G. Zhang, F. Zhou, S. Zhang and C. Deng, Small, 2018, 14, 1–13 Search PubMed .
P. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Wang, Z. Ji, Y. Feng, J. Wang, J. Liu, M. Hu, J. Fei, W. Gan and Y. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 426–435 CrossRef .
L. Ma, S. Chen, H. Li, Z. Ruan, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2521–2530 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. Ma, Y. Zhu, P. Qin, H. Li, F. Mo, D. Wang, G. Liang, Q. Yang, W. Liu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7270–7280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, Z. Pei, H. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8597–8605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, F. Wan, S. Bi, J. Zhu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4313–4317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Han, X. Zhang, X. Sun, C. Li, W. Liu, Q. Li and Y. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24573–24582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, Y. Meng, M. Yu, J. Yi, Y. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
B. He, Q. Zhang, L. Li, J. Sun, P. Man, Z. Zhou, Q. Li, J. Guo, L. Xie, C. Li, X. Wang, J. Zhao, T. Zhang and Y. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14594–14601 RSC .
J. Wang, S. Song, R. Muchakayala, X. Hu and R. Liu, Ionics, 2017, 23, 1759–1769 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mo, Z. Chen, G. Liang, D. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1–12 Search PubMed .
Y. Mao, H. Duan, B. Xu, L. Zhang, Y. Hu, C. Zhao, Z. Wang, L. Chen and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7950–7955 RSC .
T. M. Benedetti, T. Carvalho, D. C. Iwakura, F. Braga, B. R. Vieira, P. Vidinha, J. Gruber and R. M. Torresi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 132, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
H. McEvoy, S. B. Ross-Murphy and A. H. Clark, Polymer, 1985, 26, 1483–1492 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, N. Yu, S. Zeng, S. Zhou, M. Chen, J. Di and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12237–12243 RSC .
T. M. Di Palma, F. Migliardini, D. Caputo and P. Corbo, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 157, 122–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Di Palma, F. Migliardini, M. F. Gaele and P. Corbo, Ionics, 2019, 25, 4209–4217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Jin, Y. Jiang, S. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Zhi, G. Du and H. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 16313–16319 RSC .
W. J. Song, S. Lee, G. Song and S. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 177–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Konarov, N. Voronina, J. H. Jo, Z. Bakenov, Y. K. Sun and S. T. Myung, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2620–2640 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, G. Liang, F. Mo, Q. Yang, L. Ma and C. Zhi, Small, 2018, 14, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Chi, Y. Du, Q. Qiu and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4008–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, R. Bai, B. Chen and Z. Suo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–27 Search PubMed .
D. Zhou, D. Shanmukaraj, A. Tkacheva, M. Armand and G. Wang, Chem, 2019, 5, 2326–2352 CAS .
T. L. Sun, T. Kurokawa, S. Kuroda, A. Bin Ihsan, T. Akasaki, K. Sato, M. A. Haque, T. Nakajima and J. P. Gong, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 932–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Briscoe and P. Luckham, Polymer, 2000, 41, 3851–3860 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiu, Y. Li, A. You, Z. Zhang, G. Li, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14838–14846 RSC .
S. Berchmans, A. J. Bandodkar, W. Jia, J. Ramírez, Y. S. Meng and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15788–15795 RSC .
J. S. Oh, J. M. Ko and D. W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 903–906 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Pandey, R. C. Agrawal and S. A. Hashmi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2011, 72, 1408–1413 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Pandey, R. C. Agrawal and S. A. Hashmi, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 2253–2264 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Pandey and S. A. Hashmi, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 627–634 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girish Kumar and N. Munichandraiah, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 128, 203–210 CrossRef .
J. P. T. Guisao and A. J. F. Romero, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 1447–1453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Hu, J. Wang, N. Nie, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 338–346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Liu, J. Wang, M. Hu, Y. Feng, P. Wang, Y. Wang, N. Nie, J. Zhang, H. Chen, Q. Yuan, J. Wu and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 49–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, L. Ma, S. Wu, S. Wang, Z. Li, A. A. Emmanuel, M. R. Huqe, C. Zhi and J. A. Zapien, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–9 Search PubMed .
F. Migliardini, T. M. Di Palma, M. F. Gaele and P. Corbo, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 2901–2916 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Zuo, Z. Liu, Y. Yu, Y. Zuo and Y. Song, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 470–475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, C. Fu, J. Ren, M. Jiang, M. Guo, R. Cheng, J. Zhang and B. Sun, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 080502 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh, S. Janakiraman, A. Agrawal, S. Ghosh, A. Venimadhav and K. Biswas, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 858, 113788 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, C. Frontera, F. Bardé and M. R. Palacín, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 169–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Biria, S. Pathreeker, F. S. Genier and I. D. Hosein, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 2111–2118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ming, J. Guo, C. Xia, W. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2019, 135, 58–84 CrossRef .
K. Wu, J. Huang, J. Yi, X. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1–32 CAS .
S. Horike, D. Umeyama and S. Kitagawa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2376–2384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Bae, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 335–348 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Yuan, Y. Xia, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, L. Liu, N. Yu, Q. Huang, B. Wang, X. Hu, Y. Wu and T. van Ree, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, X. Li, A. Chen, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23836–23844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Li, D. Wang, Q. Yang, L. Ma, Z. Huang, G. Liang, A. Chen, Y. Guo, B. Dong, X. Huang, C. Yang and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3492–3501 RSC .
A. Patrick, M. Glasse, R. Latham and R. Linford, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 1063–1067 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Yang, R. Huq, G. C. Farrington and G. Chiodelli, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 291–294 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Fenton, J. M. Parker and P. V. Wright, Polymer, 1973, 14, 589 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. G. Martins and C. A. C. Sequeira, J. Power Sources, 1990, 32, 107–124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, N. N. Rajput, J. Hu, M. Hu, T. Liu, Z. Wei, M. Gu, X. Deng, S. Xu, K. S. Han, J. Wang, Z. Nie, G. Li, K. R. Zavadil, J. Xiao, C. Wang, W. A. Henderson, J. G. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. T. Mueller, K. Persson and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 750–759 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rathika and S. A. Suthanthiraraj, Macromol. Res., 2016, 24, 422–428 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. S. Genier, H. Li, S. Biria and I. D. Hosein, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2019, 1, 1837–1844 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Jiahui Lu	Jiahui Lu is currently a Ph.D. student under the supervision of Professor Guoxiu Wang and Professor Chengyin Wang at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, China. Her research mainly focuses on the field of electrochemical energy storage materials and their applications.
Pauline Jaumaux	Pauline Jaumaux is currently a Ph.D. student at the Center for Clean Energy Technology at the University of Technology Sydney. Her research focuses on electrolyte engineering including non-flammable liquid and quasi-solid electrolytes for Li and Zn-based batteries.
Tianyi Wang	Tianyi Wang received his Ph.D. from the Centre for Clean Energy Technology at the University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Australia. Currently, he is working in the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University (YZU) and has devoted himself to the exploration of Li-ion batteries, sensors, Li–S batteries, Li metal anodes and biomaterials.
Chengyin Wang	Chengyin Wang is a Professor in chemistry at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University. He received his Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from Yangzhou University in 2007. His major research interests include electrochemical sensor materials and materials chemistry for energy storage and conversion.

 	Fig. 1  The advantages and disadvantages of solid polymer and quasi-solid electrolytes.	 

LiMn2O4	Zn	Gelatin/0.5 M Li2SO4/0.5 M ZnSO4	Quasi-solid	0.61	110.2 mA h g−1 (25 mA g−1)	90% capacity retention (100 cycles at 25 mA g−1)	—	Durable, flexible, self-standing	
63

Sodium vanadate hydrate	Zn	Gelatin/1 M ZnSO4/Na2SO4	Quasi-solid	—	380 mA h g−1	82% capacity retention (over 1000 cycles)	300 W h kg−1	Flexible	
64

PPy/MnO2/SS yarn	Zn/NT	Gelatin/borax/1 M ZnSO4/1 M MnSO4	Quasi-solid	2	174.2 mA h g−1 (0.5C)	100 cycles (2C)	—	Flexible, shape memory	
65

MnOx/PPy/ITO/PET	Zn/ITO/PET	Gelatin/borax/1 M ZnSO4/CdTe QDs	Quasi-solid	—	0.11 mA h g−1 (0.2 mA cm−2)	High CE (200 cycles)	21 mW h cm−3	Photoluminescent	
66

MnO2-modified textile	Zn-modified textile	Gelatin/2 M ZnSO4/2 M MnSO4	Quasi-solid	10 ∼ 102	93 mA h g−1 (20C)	91% capacity retention (1000 cycles at 1C)	15 mW cm−3	Flexible	
67

MoO3	VOPO4	Gelatin/PAM	Quasi-solid	2	88 mA h g−1	86.2% capacity retention (over 2800 cycles)	—	Flexible	
68

MnO2/CNT	Zn/CNT	PAM/2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M MnSO4	Quasi-solid	1.73	302.1 mA h g−1 (60 mA g−1)	98.5% capacity retention (500 cycles at 2 A g−1)	53.8 mW h cm−3	Waterproofness tailorable	
50

Co(III)-rich Co3O4/CFC	Zn/CFC	PAM/2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M CoSO4	Quasi-solid	12	178.6 mA h g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	94.6% capacity retention (2000 cycles at 2 A g−1)	—	Flexible	
69

[EMIM]PF6-PEDOT:PSS/Bi2S3	Zn/CC	PAM/1 M Zn(TFSI)2/21 M LiTFSI	Quasi-solid	—	101 mA h g−1 (0.3 A g−1)	92% capacity retention (5300 cycles at 1 A g−1)	315 W h kg−1, 232 W kg−1	Stretchable	
70

Co3O4/Co3O4−x/CFC	Zn/CFC	PAM/KOH/0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2	Quasi-solid	—	178 mA h g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	99.2% capacity retention (after 20 h in water); 93.2% capacity retention after a 1 h washing test	1600 W h kg−1, 3200 W kg−1	Waterproof, washable, wearable	
71

Flake graphite	Al	PAM/AlCl3	Solid polymer	—	103 mA h g−1 (0.1 A g-1)	88.6% capacity retention; 93% CE (100 cycles at 0.06 A g−1)	—	Flexible, stable	
58

PANI nanorods	Zn	PVA/2 M Zn(CF3SO3)2	Quasi-solid	1.26 × 103	123 mA h g−1 (0.1 A g−1)	97.1% capacity retention; about 100% CE (1000 cycles at 1 A g−1)	5089 W kg−1	Self-healing	
72

MnO2/CNT fibers	Zn wire	PVA/2 M ZnCl2//1.5 M LiCl	Quasi-solid	—	290 mA h g−1 (0.1 A g−1)	75% capacity retention (300 cycles at 1 A g−1)	360 W h kg−1	Flexible	
73

MnO2@PEDOT	Zn	PVA/ZnCl2/MnSO4	Quasi-solid	—	282.4 mA h g−1 (0.37 A g−1)	77.7% capacity retention; about 100% CE (300 cycles at 1.86 A g−1)	504.9 W h kg−1	Flexible, ultrahigh energy density	
74

CNTF@Ni@MnO2	CNTF@Zn	PVA/3 M LiCl/2 M ZnCl2/0.4 MnSO4	Solid polymer	
	0.718 mA h g−1 (0.1 mA cm−1)	42.9% capacity retention (0.1 mA cm−1 gradually increased 10 times)	0.98 mW h cm−2	Flexible	
75

Stainless steel (SS)	Stainless steel	PVA/Mg(Tf)2/EMITf	Solid polymer	2.1 × 10−2	—	—	—	Biodegradable gel	
76

MnO2/CNT	Zn	Zwitterionic sulfobetaine/cellulose	Quasi-solid	24.6	148 mA h g−1 (6.5C)	90.42% capacity retention (1200 cycles at 6.5C)	386 W h kg−1	Biocompatible electrolyte	
77


 	Fig. 2  (a) The optical image of a Zn electrode after cycling in a symmetrical cell. (b), (c) Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of (a) (b: surface, c: cross-section).63 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The rated capacity of a Zn@NT‖MnO2@SS-PPy wire battery in gelatin–borax electrolyte from 0.5 to 4C. (e) The cycling stability of the wire battery in gelatin–borax electrolyte at 2C. (f) The discharge capacity and capacity retention of the wire battery tested at 2C for 5 consecutive bending/recovery cycles.65 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photo of ZnSO4/MnSO4 solution after adding 10 wt% polymers of PEO, PVA, agar, gelatin, PANa, and XG. (h) Original Zn anode. (i), (j) SEM images of the Zn anode after charge/discharge cycles in 2 M ZnSO4/0.1 M MnSO4 aqueous electrolyte at 5C. (i) Zn anode after 50 cycles in the electrolyte without 20 wt% XG electrolyte. (j) SEM image of the Zn anode after 1000 cycles in the electrolyte with 20 wt% XG electrolyte.81 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Relaxation state of HCPAM. (b) Photograph of individual flexible quasi-solid state Zn|[EMIM]PF6-PEDOT:PSS|Bi2S3 batteries. (c) Tensile state of HCPAM. (d) Schematic diagram of the flexible quasi-solid state Zn|[EMIM]PF6-PEDOT:PSS|Bi2S3 battery assembly.70 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Long cycle performance at 2 A g−1 current density.69 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f), (g) SEM images of a yarn ZIB electrode after charging–discharging under knotting.50 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Cycling performance of Zn‖MnO2@PEDOT at 1.11 A g−1. (b) Comparison of the rate performance and corresponding CE discharge curves of the Zn‖MnO2 and Zn‖MnO2@PEDOT batteries.74 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag. (c) An ultrathin Ni@MnO2‖Zn micro-battery–sensor integrated device assembled in the series integrated device was attached to a subject's arm. (d), (e) The real-time ΔI−t curves of the integrated device exhibiting a gradual and periodic synchronous increase and decrease.75 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Illustration of the structure of self-healing integrated ZIBs based on a PVA/ZnOTf hydrogel.72 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of PANa-GPE preparation. (b) Change of battery capacity upon stretching from 0% to 400%. (c) Change of battery capacity upon compressing from 0% to 50%.101 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Tensile properties of PANa hydrogels infused with concentrated ions and deionized water at −50, −20, and 50 °C, respectively. (e), (f) SEM images of PANa hydrogel at −20 and 50 °C. (g) Ionic conductivity of the PANa hydrogel at −20 and 50 °C.102 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (h) Charge/discharge cycling performance of a fiber Zn–air battery with PANa-CMC-based hydrogel electrolyte at 2 mA cm−2 current density. (i) Tensile stress versus strain curves of PANa-CMC hydrogel with 6 M KOH + 0.2 M Zn(CH3COO)2 intake. (j) Schematic diagram of the PANa-GPE stretching process.103 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation of a zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC-gel electrolyte. (b) The mechanism of ion migration channel formation by the zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC-gel electrolyte under an external electric field. (c) Schematic diagram of the principle of forming a quasi-SEI layer along with the zwitterionic sulfobetaine/CMC-gel on the anode surface under the action of an electric field.77 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD patterns of XG, κ-carrageenan, GEL01, GEL02, and GEL03. (b), (c) SEM images of GEL02 and GEL03 after charge/discharge cycles.82 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Gelatin-HCPAM electrolyte synthesis route for AIBs. (b) Schematic diagram of the composition of flexible AIBs. (c) Power supply performance of flexible AIBs in flat (c1), folded (c2, 3), and squeezed states (c4). (d) Power supply performance of flexible AIBs after primary cutting (d1), secondary cutting (d2), and tertiary cutting (d3), and in series (d4).68 Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Ionic conductivity of PAA gels with different amounts of KOH. (b) Capacity and energy density of AIBs during constant current discharge.105 Copyright 2013, Elsevier B.V. (c) Synthetic route of PANa-CMC electrolyte. (d) Power density curve of an Al–air battery with PANa-5% CMC as an electrolyte.106 Copyright 2020, The Electrochemical Society. (e) Nyquist impedance plots of gel electrolyte membranes with different amounts of EMITf ionic liquid.76 Copyright 2017, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity of IL-GEs containing 0.2 M concentration of Ca salt. (b) The galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of a Ca3Co4O9/Solid polymer electrolyte (SPE)/V2O5 battery.109 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) The galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of a S/C|PVA gel electrolyte|Ca0.4MnO2 battery. (d) The long cycle performance of the S/C‖Ca0.4MnO2 battery at a current density of 0.2C. The mass ratio of Ca0.4MnO2 cathode to S/C anode is 1.6:1.28 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The long cycle performance of a Zn|SPE|CoHCF battery at a current density of 0.5 A g−1.115 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. (b) The long-cycle performance of a Zn|SPE|MnHCF battery at 2C. (c) The discharge capacity of the Zn|SPE|MnHCF battery at different temperatures.116 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a), (b) SEM images of a Mg(BH4)2–MgO–PEO polymer electrolyte. (c) CV (20 mV s−1) curve of Mg plating–stripping in SS/Mg(BH4)2–MgO–PEO/Mg cells. (d) Capacity stability of a Mo6S8|Mg(BH4)2–MgO–PEO|Mg battery during charge/discharge cycling.121 Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) XRD patterns of PEO, PEO–PVDF blend, and PEO–PVDF blends with different amounts of Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)]. (b), (c) Complex impedance spectra of PEO–PVDF blends with different amounts of Mg[(CF3SO2)2N2)].122 Copyright 2016, The Polymer Society of Korea and Springer.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
