Atomic Spectrometry Update. Environmental analysis  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B010194J View PDF VersionPrevious Article  DOI: 10.1039/B010194J
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16, 194-235Atomic Spectrometry Update. Environmental analysisMark R. Cave*a, Owen Butlerb, Simon R. N. Chenerya, Jennifer M. Cooka, Malcolm S. Cresserc and Douglas L. MilesaaBritish Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GGbHealth and Safety Laboratory, Broad Lane, Sheffield, UK S3 7HQcThe University of York, Heslington, York, YO10
5DDReceived 9th December 2000First published on 1st February 2001Contents1 Air analysis1.1 Sample collection and pretreatment1.2 Instrumental analysis1.3 Method validation, standardisation
and data quality1.4 Future requirements2 Water analysis2.1 Sample preparation2.2 Speciation2.3 Instrumental analysis3 Analysis of soils, plants and related
materials3.1 Sample preparation3.2 Reference materials3.3 Instrumental methods of analysis4 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Sample treatment4.2 Instrumental analysisReferencesAbstractThis is the sixteenth annual review published in JAAS of the application
of atomic spectroscopy to the chemical analysis of environmental samples.
In line with last year's review there have been no major breakthroughs in
atomic spectrometry. Developments in environmental analysis have mainly been
confined to improvements of existing techniques to produce more reliable and
robust analytical methods. Developments in ICP-MS applications for environmental
analysishave been the most active area of research where its low detection
limits and isotopic measurement capabilities have again been widely exploited.
In the analysis of air, the most promising advances are in the area of continuous
emission monitoring and portable XRF instrumentation. Water analysis continues
to be dominated by pre-instrument chemistries studies for preconcentration
and speciation. The variety of metal and non-metal species being studied has
significantly increased this year. The need for risk assessments of brown
field sites has raised the profile of methods to determine the chemical form
and bioavailability of metals in contaminated soils. In geological analysis,
aided by the improved stability of modern instruments and the wider availability
of high resolution spectrometers, isotope ratio determinations by ICP-MS are
becoming increasingly important. Over all areas of environmental analysis
there has been a small but significant increase in the use of chemometric
methods to aid data interpretation and reduce interference effects.1 Air analysisThis section of the Update covers the analysis of aerosols, particulates
and gases by analytical atomic spectrometry. Papers published in the last
12 months are summarised in Table 1.
Noteworthy areas of research and development are highlighted below. Five useful
reviews have been published: a review of mass spectrometry techniques for
the characterisation of aerosols,1 containing
204 references; development of on-line Hg analysers for stack gas analysis2
(five commercially available instruments plus
a further six prototypes assessed); application of XRF techniques for
the analysis of ambient air,3 containing 58
references; measurement methods for the determination of Ni in workplace air,4 containing 14 references; and the use of AAS in the
fossil fuel power industry,5 containing 64
references.
Table 1 Summary of analyses of air and particulates

ElementMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationaSample treatment/commentsRef.a Hy indicates
hydride and S, L, G and Sl signify solid, liquid, gaseous or slurry atomization,
respectively. Other abbreviations are listed elsewhere.AsAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;LBomb digestion method using HNO3 + H2O2 + HF
validated using four reference materials including NIST 1648 (urban particulate
matter) and BCR 176 (waste incineration ash)38CAmbient air and point source samplesMS;-;SAccelerator MS (14C) used to provide
direct fossil versus biomass C source discrimination data in a metropolitan
area57CAir samplesMS;-;GGC-IR technique developed for the high precision isotopic
analysis of 13C in atmospheric CO2.42CdStack gasesAE;MIP;GDevelopment of a continuous emission monitor. Self absorption
at Cd 228.8 nm and Hg 253.65 nm lines examined11CBreath samplesMS;-;G13CO2∶12CO2
ratio determined by IRMS and by a cheaper non-dispersive IR technique. Patients
administered with 1-13C-phenylalanine and duplicate samples taken.
Data showed a good correlation between the two techniques. IRMS superior when
concerned with 13CO2 kinetics over longer time periods43CrIndustrial exhaust streamsAE;LIPS;SDevelopmentof an on-line monitoring system attempted using
a Nd:YAG laser. Measurements made at 520.4, 520.6 and 520.8 nm lines
in a total measurement time of 20 s. Good correlation found with analysis
by filtration/ICP-AES (r2 = 0.84).
LOD 14 µg m−358CrAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;SLaser ablation of PTFE filters attempted. Good correlation
with results obtained using a bomb digestion procedure (HNO3 + HClO4
mixture). LOD 0.05 µg per filter28CrWelding fumeAE;ICP;LAnalytical techniques for the measurement of CrVI
in welding fume compared (colorimetric, IC and ICP-AES)59CuSedimented dustAE;ICP;LSamples collected at varying distances from selected point
and line sources within a mining community19HgAmbient airAFS;CV;S, GQuartz filter filtration system for particulate phase compared
to a filtration system with a front ended denuder (Au coated) to
remove gaseous phase Hg. Denuder based system gave higher results in parallel
sampling trials. Result attributed to Hg-coated Au particles flaking off the
denuder56HgStack emissionsAA;-;GContinuous emission monitoring instrumentation for Hg reviewed.
Five commercially available instruments reviewed as well as six further instruments
under development. Cold vapour AAS found to be the dominant mode of operation2HgStack gasesAES;MIP;GDevelopment of a continuous emission monitor using an atmospheric
microwave sustained plasma. Self absorption of Cd 228.8 nm and Hg 253.65 nm
lines examined11HgAir samplesAF;CV;GAu amalgamation trapping system discussed60HgFlue gasesXRF;-;GSilvered quartz fibre filters used for collection with
efficiencies of 88% in laboratory tests. Average capacity of the filters
determined to be 15 µg cm−2 and that
ageing of the filters for up to 96 hours had no effect on collection
efficiency6HgEnvironmental-;-;-Overview of the environmental analysis in China including
the determination in air61HgUrban airAA;-;GPrototype cavity ringdown laser absorption spectrometer
developed and evaluated in laboratory trials. LOD 0.5 ppt62HgFlue gasAF;CV;GAutomated measurement system with Au amalgamation sampler
utilised. System set up to measure elemental and total concentrations thus
giving ionic concentrations by difference63KrAtmospheric samplesMS;-;GAccelerator sytem used to establish that 81Kr
is a long-lived cosmogenic radionuclide essentially unaffected by anthropogenic
contributions and therefore suited for dating applications64MnSedimented dustAE;ICP;LSamples collected at varying distances from selected point
and line sources within a mining community19MnAirborne particulate matterAA;ET;LGraphite furnace method developed. Mg(NO3)2
used a modifier. Measurement precision < 3.0%. LOD (3σ)
0.3 µg per filter16NAir samplesMS;-;GMeasurement of 15N in NO enhanced by preconcentration
using cyrogenic trapping65NiAirborne particulate matterAA;ET;L MS;ICP;LOperationally defined speciation carried out in both laboratory
and field trials52NiWorkplace air-;-;-Review of methods used at BIA (Germany) for monitoring
Ni in airborne dusts. Role played by the methods in the meeting of legal requirements
in workplace air monitoring discussed4OAir samplesMS;-;GDevelopment of a continuous flow IRMS system for the measurement
of stable isotopic composition in air samples, soil gas samples and in water
samples. Field sampling techniques for gaseous and dissolved O2
described66PbAirborne particulate matterTIMS;-;SAerosols sampled onto acid washed 0.45 µm
PTFE filters. Low blanks of 15 pg Pb enabled reliable isotopic data
to be obtained on filter samples containing 400 pg Pb (for sectioned
filters). Blanks were lower for uncut filters (11 ± 8 pg),
enabling samples containing as little as 120 pg Pb to be examined29PbAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;LPb isotopic measurements made using magnetic sector multi-collector
system. Solution nebulisation and laser ablation approaches studied30PbWorkplace airXRF;-;SEvaluation of portable system described. Study led to the
development of a standardised method (NIOSH 7702)23PbAirborne particulate matterAA;F;L XRF;-;SComparison of two analytical techniques reported. NIST
SRM 1648 (urban particulate matter) used in the evaluation process.
Sequential extraction based on the method of Tessier et al. also
attempted67PbPaint particleXRF;-;SOn-site measurements made during operations to remove paint
from bridges. Comparable performance obtained with traditional laboratory
analysis using ICP-AES25PbAirborne particulate matter-;-;-Airborne concentrations correlated to blood levels found
in school children68PbAtmospheric particulatesMS;ICP;LNature of 206Pb∶207Pb isotopic
ratio in rainwater, particulates, pine needles and leaded petrol in Scotland
examined over the period 1982–1998. Data collected suggested that the
contribution of leaded petrol to atmospheric Pb in urban environments has
declined from 84–86%
(1989–1991) to 48–58%
(1997–1998)33PbAerosol samplesMS;ICP;SIsotopic measurements made on samples collected on an impactor
sampler. Enhanced measurement precision with a multi-collector instrument
allowed slight variations to be detected between samples collected with different
prevailing wind directions32PbAtmospheric particulate matterMS;ICP;SIsotopic measurements made on samples collected on membrane
filters with a high volume sampler. Microwave assisted dissolution utilised (HNO3 + HClO4 + HF)31PbHouse dustAA;F;LHigh throughput microwave assisted dissolution (using
disposable digestion vessels) compared to traditional hotplate procedure (ASTM
method). NIST SRM 2582 (low lead paint) and NIST SRM 1648 (urban
particulate matter) used during the evaluation process69PdAirborne particulate matterAA;ET;LSamples collected on glass fibre filters subjected to a
microwave assisted dissolution. Samples preconcentrated on the inner wall
of a graphite tube through electrodeposition. Precision at the 1.01 µg l−1
was 5.1%. LOD 0.06 µg l−170PtAirborne particulate matterAA;ET;LSee Pd, ref.7070SBreath samplesAE;GD;GSpeciation of volatile compounds from anaerobic bacteria
in the mouth carried out using a GC coupled system71SiAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;L XRF;-;SLA technique compared to direct analysis by XRF. Calibration
standards prepared by loading aliquots of NIST 1648 CRM onto PTFE filters39SbAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;LSpeciation (III and V)
carried out on aqueous extracts using a silica based anion exchange column
connected on-line. Precision at 5.0 µg l−1 <5%.
LOD 100 pg ml−1 SbV and 300 pg ml−1
SbIII72VAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;LBomb digestion method using HNO3 + H2O2 + HF
validated using 4 reference materials including NIST 1648 (urban particulate
matter) and BCR 176 (waste incineration ash). Sector field
instrument used. See As, ref. 3838VariousCar exhaust fumesMS;ICP;LExhaust fumes analysed for PGE content following EUDC drive
cycles on cars (gasoline and diesel) equipped with catalytic converters.
Microwave assisted dissolution using aqua regia–HF mixture. NIST SRM
2557 (used auto catalyst monolith) used for quality control34VariousAirborne particlesMS;-;SParticle spectra classified and interrogated using commercial
and in-house software packages73VariousAerosol particlesMS;-;SNear-surface examination of particles carried out on samples
collected with size selective sampler. Fine particles (<1 µm)
had Na and S dominated shell of 13 nm around a C core (traffic
soot). Coarse particles (>1 µm) consisted of
soil dust, fly ash and Na salt containing particles55VariousDiesel exhaust particulatesTXRF;-;LTrace element distribution examined. Quartz fibre filter
most suitable for sample collection. Wear metal content of particulates emitted
during engine start up higher than particulates emitted during normal engine
working temperature74VariousLaboratory air sampleAE;LIPS;GDevelopment of a calibration-free procedure for quantitative
analysis described10VariousAerosolsAE;LIPS;SLaser beam focused onto filter surface. System used with
an on-line filter sampling interface monitoring emissions from a waste incineration
facility. LOD typically <0.4 µg cm−2
for a sample size of 1 m3 sampled onto a 3 cm2
filter75VariousAtmospheric aerosol samplesAA;F;LFilter samples subjected to a microwave assisted dissolution (HNO3 + H2O2 + HF). High sensitivity Pt–Ir nebuliser used
to enhance performance17VariousArctic airMS;ICP;SParticulates collected on graphite impaction plates within
a cascade impactor sampler. ETV used to vaporise from impaction plates8VariousAirborne particulate matterAA;-;LEight heavy metals determined in samples collected on membrane
filter18VariousAerosol depositsPIXE;-;SDevelopment of a new analysis chamber with a rotating target
to handle film targets from Berner-type impactors described27VariousAirborne particulatesPIXE;-;SLower impaction stages (fine particle collection)
of cascade impactors not ideal thin targets for PIXE analysis. SEM used to
measure density and target thickness in order to calculate thick target correction
factors46VariousAerosol depositsPIXE;-;SSpray technique for preparing uniform large area calibration
standards from standard solutions evaluated48VariousAerosol depositsPIXE;-;STime resolved air sampling system described. Sequential
samples (1 h) taken using a 14 channel system (each
with its own sampling nozzle, impaction plate and pumping system)76VariousAntarctic aerosol depositsPIXE;-;SSnow samples melted and evaporated on polycarbonate foil.
Complementary analysis carried out using SEM-EDAX following filtration of
thawed samples through a nucleopore filter77VariousAerosol samplesSIMS;-;SPreparation of standards from pure metal salts. Results
compared to analysis by ICP-AES, <20% error found47VariousAerosol samplesPIXE;-;SInteractive software packaged developed to aid quantitative
analysis of samples of intermediate thickness78VariousAerosolsMS;-;-Review of mass spectrometric techniques for the analysis
of aerosols and their constituents (204 references)1VariousCombustion particlesAA;ET;LParticulates from combustion of waste mineral oil sieved,
wet ashed and analysed in order to determine environmental safety of particles
escaping from filters in combustion plants20VariousClassroom airXRF;-;SElemental composition of PM10 samples measured. High indoor
PM10 concentrations attributed to resuspension of soil derived particles79VariousAtmospheric aerosolsXRF;-;SMetals and common cations/anions determined. Three
factors isolated: particulates from anthropogenic emissions, resuspended soil
particulates and sea-salt particles80VariousAerosol particlesTXRF;-;SDevelopment of an electrostatic precipitator sampler described7VariousVehicle exhaust particulate matterXRF;-;SElements determined averaged between 3–9%
of PM10 mass from gasoline and diesel engined cars tested using Federal Test
Urban Dynamometer Driving Cycles81VariousUrban aerosolsPIXE;-;SPrinciple component analysis carried out to apportion measured
air pollution to sources82VariousIndoor particulate matterMS;ICP;LLow flow rate cascade impactor sampler with either quartz
filters or coated (apiezon grease) PTFE filters used for sampling.
HNO3 + HClO4 + HF
acid mixture used for digestion83VariousAmbient air samplesAE;ICP;LResearch into the effect of metal catalysed oxidative stress.
Catalytically active metals measured in water soluble and insoluble particulate
fractions with their oxidant generation ability measured by in-vitro
testing54VariousAir samples-;-;-ASU environmental update84VariousMarine aerosolsMS;ICP;SConcentration, distribution and occurrence of metals in
airborne particulate matter interrogated using LA sample introduction. Crustal
elements lower in winter months due to frozen land masses. Concentrations
of crustal and anthropogenic elements lower in summer than in spring due to
dilution of offshore winds with oceanic winds85VariousAirborne particulate matterAES, MS;GD;SDirect introduction of particulates into AE/MS systems via
particle beam/momentum separator device described. Feasibility of this
approach demonstrated by collection of emission spectra for NIST 1648 CRM
and mass spectra from a caffeine powder doped with PAHs14VariousAirborne particulate matterAA;F,ET;LDeposits collected using a water layer surface sampler.
Water filtered and analysed. Filter wet ashed and analysed21VariousAirborne dust samplesTXRF;-;LOxygen ashing procedure (directly onto TXRF carrier)
compared to two high pressure acid digestion procedures. Elemental recoveries
for the ashing procedure in the range 90–97% for NIST 1648 SRM (urban
particulate matter)9VariousAtmospheric dustAA;F;LSamples collected on PVC membrane filters, subsequently
dry ashed with carbonised residues, treated with HNO3 and re-ashed,
and finally taken up in 1 M HCl22VariousAmbient airXRF;-;SReview of the application use of XRF techniques for air
quality studies with 58 refs.3VariousMarine aerosolsXRF;-;SLight elements determined in aerosol samples collected
using a 5-stage Battelle impactor86VariousAtmospheric particulatesXRF;-;SResearch into the weathering mechanisms of marble and granite
monuments carried out87VariousStack gas emissionsXRF;-;SFilter calibration standards prepared by nebulisation of
standard solutions49VariousAirborne particulate matterXRF;-;SSamples analysed following collection using a Gent-type
PM10 stacked filter unit. Maximum concentrations determined below WHO guideline
values88VariousAirborne particulate matterNAA;-;SPM10 and TSP samples collected and analysed from three
Indonesian sites89VariousStack gasXRF;-;SOn-line instrument used with particulates collected on
quartz fibre filters. System also used to monitor toxic elements in ambient
air15VariousAmbient aerosolsXRD;-;SElemental distribution on filter samples obtained with
high volume samplers examined. 150 mm diameter filters sub-sampled (32
mm diameter) and examined. Loading differences between centre and edge
of filter found (8–10% decrease for course particulates;
2–4% for fine particulates).45VariousDust samplesXRF;-;SVirtues of using portable XRF extolled26VariousAirborne particulate matter and road dustMS;ICP;LEnvironmental samples analysed following dissolution. USN
equipped quadrupole and sector instruments used. Authors conclude that, following
examination of this data and data from samples collected in 1991, emission
of PGEs from catalytic converters into the environment can no longer be neglected36VariousCleanroom airMS;-;STOF-SIMS instrument used to monitor contamination from
ionic and organic species90VariousOccupational dust particlesMS;-;SSIMS spectra recorded for individual particles of dust
emitted from nuclear plants giving chemical and isotopic information91VariousAirborne particulate matterMS;ICP;LInterferences in the determination of Pd, Pt and Rh using
a quadrupole instrument examined. Microwave dissolution utilising aqua
regia + HF. Conclusion that Pt could be measured without
major errors and that Rh could be measured after mathematical correction.
Pd analysis hampered by high contribution from coexisting interferent elements37VariousCoastal aerosolsMS;ICP;LHigh volume air sampling at selected sites in NW England.
Hotplate dissolutions employed (HNO3 + HF).
Al and Fe determined alternately by FAAS92VariousFly ashAA;-;LUse of methods in the fossil fuel power industry discussed5VariousIndoor/workplace airAE;-;GDevelopment of continuous emission monitoring instrumentation
described. Field tests carried out over chrome plating baths and at an indoor
shooting range. LOD for Cr and Pb 10 µg m−312VariousClean room airMS;ICP;SDroplet scanning ICP-MS methodology used to investigate
surface contamination93VariousAtmospheric particulate matterMS;ICP;SInterrogation of tree bark pockets using LA sample introduction
for the retrospective monitoring of the atmosphere94VariousElectric arc furnace dustAE;ICP;LSequential operationally defined speciation carried out
to assess environmental impact of fugitive emissions53VariousWorkplace airXRF;-;SGeneration of filter calibration standards through aerosol
generation from standard solutions using a desolvated USN system described50VariousAtmospheric samplesMS;-;GStable isotope concentrations in CO2 and O3
measured by a laboratory built quadrupole instrument44VariousAir particlesAE;MIP;SDevelopment of a novel portable on-site instrument with
CCD detector and efficient in situ sampling system. Characterisation,
optimisation and calibration carried out in the laboratory with aerosols generated
from an in-house high efficiency nebulisation/desolvation system13VariousSediment coreMS;ICP,LHistoric atmospheric deposition measured by the analysis
of sectioned core samples. Samples digested in a HNO3 + H2O2
mixture in a microwave oven digestion bomb95VariousCar exhaust fumesMS;ICP;SExhaust fumes analysed for PGE content on cars (gasoline
and diesel) equipped with catalytic converters. Catalytic surface examined
using SEM-EDX and LIBS techniques. PGE content of exhaust fume found to decrease
with ageing of catalyst351.1 Sample collection and pretreatmentFor the measurement of gas phase Hg by EDXRF, Kurunczi and co-workers6 assessed the efficiency of collection using silver-coated
quartz fibre filters. Collection efficiencies were found to average 88%
in laboratory tests with an average filter capacity of 15 µg cm−2.
Ageing of the filters for up to 96 hours had no effect on collection
efficiency.Dixkens and his group7 evaluated an electrostatic
precipitator for the collection of representative samples on analytically
suitable sample plates for subsequent off-line analysis by SEM and TXRF. The
use of graphite targets within cascade impactors and subsequent analysis by
ETV-ICP-MS, previously reported at conferences, has now been published.8 A number of workers continue to compare dissolution
procedures and an example of this type of work is the efforts of Theisen and
co-workers in Germany.9 They assessed the performance
of a low pressure oxygen ashing procedure against more conventional high pressure
acid dissolution procedures. Good recoveries were obtained (90–97%)
in studies using NIST SRM 1648 (urban particulate matter).1.2 Instrumental analysis1.2.1 On-line measurements. The development of continuous
emission monitoring (CEM) instruments goes from strength to
strength. A number of workers are actively developing portable atomic emission
spectrometers using a variety of excitation sources, e.g., LIP, MIP,
SIB.10,11–13 These
technologies are still at an early stage with much work focusing on instrument
optimisation within a laboratory setting. Furthermore, the limited number
of field trials carried out so far have often taken place under simulated
conditions.A group at Clemson University14 is currently
investigating glow discharge based systems. They are developing a
system with both AES and MS systems that enables both elemental and molecular
information to be obtained. A particle beam/momentum separator device
is being developed to sample airborne particulates. Initial experiments have
concentrated on introducing NIST SRM materials into the prototypes. However,
they believe that strengths such as (potential) small size, low
power consumption, ease of use and multimode analysis could be applied to
the development of field instruments.Dannecker and his group15 continue to develop
their on-line EDXRF system. This half way house approach (particulates
are collected on filter media and analysed shortly afterwards) nevertheless
remains a promising compromise for commercial development.1.2.2 Atomic absorption and atomic emission spectrometry. Such is the established nature of these techniques that no novel papers
have appeared over the last year. The majority of papers reviewed were concerned
with the use of these techniques for routine monitoring/survey work.16–221.2.3 X-ray techniques. X-ray techniques remain popular
for the analysis of airborne particulate matter. The portability of small energy
dispersive XRF instruments has enabled a number of workers to make onsite
field measurements, most notably in the United States under the Lead Abatement
Scheme.23–26 Measurement
of lead on air filter samples has been aided by the production of a standardised
method—NIOSH 7702. For the analysis of bulk (sedimented) dust,
good correlation is obtainable with laboratory based techniques provided that
the samples are sieved i.e., control of particle size.Impactor samplers are often used for particle size classification
studies. In an interesting paper, Halder et al.27
developed a rotating target holder for the analysis of sample spots on targets
from such samplers.1.2.4 Mass spectrometry. Determination of lead isotope
ratios, using ICP-MS and thermal ionisation mass spectrometers, for source
apportionment studies continues to attract interest.28–33
Increasing use of automobiles fitted with catalytic converters has led groups
to undertake determinations of PGE in car exhaust fumes,34,35
in airborne particulate matter and road dust36
and to assess the extent of interferences in the determination of PGE using
quadrupole based instruments.37Laser ablation as a means of presenting sample to the plasma from
a filter surface continues to be reported.28,38–40
Whilst the ability to present sample directly without a dissolution step is
attractive, this approach does not compete well with X-ray techniques for
routine monitoring purposes. However the ability to interrogate filter samples
quickly and to generate qualitative data is useful for certain fingerprinting
or apportionment type studies.Specialised mass spectrometry techniques continue to be used and
developed for the determination of stable isotope composition in molecules
such as CH4,41 CO2,42–44 N2O42
and O3.441.3 Method validation, standardisation
and data qualityOften overlooked with filter based samplers is the inhomogeneity of
particulate deposition. Dannecker and co-workers45
analysed the radial distribution of elements collected on a 150 mm
diameter filter from a high volume air sampler by subsampling and analysing
by EDXRF. They found that elemental concentrations decrease 8–10%
from the centre to the edge of the filter for coarse particulates and 2–4%
for fine particulates. In a similar vein, for smaller diameter filters that
fit directly into XRF instruments, consideration of the XRF beam profile is
required.An assumption often used in the analysis of filter samples by XRF and PIXE
is that these samples can be considered as thin films. Orlic and
co-workers46 attributed discrepancies found
between concentrations, as measured by PIXE, of lighter elements in particulate
matter collected in a PM2.5 sampler and the lower stages of a single-orifice
cascade impactor sampler to this assumption not holding true. They used optical
and scanning transmission ion microscopic techniques to measure the density
and thickness of these lower target stages in the impactor sampler and to
calculate a thick-target correction factor for each of the elements in question.Generation of filter samples for the calibration of X-ray techniques
continues to interest a number of groups.47–50
The approach is essentially the same in each laboratory. Aerosols are generated
from standard solutions using various nebulisers, or jet spraying techniques
are carried out. Filter loadings are determined (after generation of
an instrument calibration) by an alternative technique such as ICP-AES.It was disappointing to note the lack of sampling/instrumental intercomparisons
reported as compared to previous years. However, workers at the GKSS institute
in Geesthacht, Germany,51 carried out an international
field intercomparision measurement of atmospheric mercury. Eleven laboratories
took part and measured gaseous and particulate phase mercury as well as mercury
in precipitation samples. Good agreement was found for measurements carried
out on gaseous and precipitation samples but significant differences in the
levels of particulate phase mercury were observed.1.4 Future requirementsA study of the accompanying table demonstrates that many analysts rely
heavily on a small range of certified reference materials such as
NIST SRM 1648 (urban particulate matter). As highlighted in previous
reviews there is a pressing need for new bulk reference materials and, more
importantly, filter-based reference materials with more realistic loading
and particle sizes. Some progress has been made such as the development of
a road tunnel dust certified for PGE content and the production of new NIST
materials. There is a need for more round robin trials to be carried out,
although a number of laboratories, where possible, produce complementary data
using alternative techniques.As in other measurement fields, there is a need for speciation studies,
particularly in the area of workplace air monitoring, where exposure to pollutants
is generally higher than in ambient environments. Some work in this field
has been carried out over the period of this review: investigation into operationally
defined speciation protocols for Ni in ambient air52
and metals in electric furnace dust;53 investigation
into the potential role of metals associated with particulate matter to catalyse
an oxidative stress;54 and the use of SNMS
to probe the surfaces of particulates.55There is a need to consider sampling technologies where mixed phase
aerosols can exist, especially within a workplace setting. The challenge
to sample concurrently gaseous and particulate phases can be illustrated by
the work of a Canadian group.56 They compared
the performance of a quartz filter filtration system for the collection of
particulate phase Hg against a similar filtration system fitted with a front
ended denuder (gold coated) to remove gaseous phase Hg. The denuder
based system gave higher results in parallel sampling trials. This they attributed
to Hg-coated gold particles flaking off the denuder and ending up on the filter.2 Water analysisThe application of atomic spectrometry to the analysis of water samples
continues to produce a wide range of applications in the published literature.
Papers published in this area in the last 12 months are summarised in Table 2. As with last year's environmental
update,84 a large proportion of the publications
involve the development of techniques for preconcentrating the analyte
prior to instrumental determination. Given the ever-decreasing detection limits
of methods such as ICP-MS, the author cannot decide whether this trend is
driven by a true analytical need or by the fact that the variety of methods
available for preconcentration makes it a fruitful area to gain publications.
Table 2 Summary of the analyses of water

ElementMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationaSample treatment/commentsRef.a Hy indicates hydride
and S, L, G and Sl signify solid, liquid, gaseous or slurry atomization, respectively.
Other abbreviations are listed elsewhere.AgWaste waterAA;MIP;LETA of small samples from W filament204AgDrinking waterAA;ETA;slurrySeparation and pre-concentration on N,N-diethylaminoepoxypropyl–crosslinked
chitin chelate resin from solution buffered to pH 11 with NaOH. Resin
re-suspended as slurry for analysis112AgWaste waterMS;ICP;LStandard additions and sequential injection analysis280AlEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LSpeciation and size fractionation on-line with HPLC after
chemical modification177AsSaline waterAA;ETA;LGaseous hydride generation used and dried using Nafion
tube. Passed over negatively charged W or Pt electrode. Electrostatic deposition
on atomizer. LOD 30 pg148AsWaterXRF;-;SDifferent As species collected on specific metal loaded
activated charcoals. LOD 0.02 mg l−1164AsMine waterMS;ICP;LIon chromatography used for speciation157AsSaline waterAA;-;LSamples filtered and microwave digested. Mixed in FI system
with buffered quinolin-8-ol–sulfonic acid before sorption onto alumina
column. HCl used for separation and desorption281AsSaline waterAA;-;LSpeciation method using chelation with quinolin-8-ol–5-sulfonic
acid, separation using alumina micro-column. HCl used as eluent and coupled
into HG system282AsSaline waterAA;ETA;LGaseous hydride generation mixed with He flow used with
in-furnace trapping. LOD 14 pg ml−1149AsEnvironmental and drinking waterAE;ICP;LAs speciation carried out using chemical pre-treatment
and hydride generation. LOD 1 µg l−1155AsEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LCapillary electrophoresis used for speciation161AsSaline waterMS;ICP;LCollision/reaction cell to used to remove chloride
interference246AsSaline waterMS;ICP;LIon chromatography used for speciation. Ultrasonic nebulisation
and membrane desolvation aided sensitivity158AsWaterAA;-;LSpeciation using FI-hydride generation152AsSaline waterMS;ICP;LNa and Ca removal by cation exchange column and collision
cell used to remove chloride interference283AsEnvironmental waterFID;GC;LSpeciation study performed using complexation with buffered
thioglycollic acid methylester and extraction with cyclohaxane prior to analysis284AsDrinking waterAA;ETA;LAsIII and AsV speciation carried
out. AsIII complexed with 2,3 dimercaptopropane-1-sulfonate, separated
on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and eluted with methanol. AsV
reduced to AsIII with L-cysteine before separation.
LOD AsIII0.11 µg l−1 and AsV
0.15 µg l−1162AsWaterAA;-;LMethodology for quantification of 6 species using HG described153AsWaterAA;F;LHG sample introduction used with electrolytic flow through
cell145AsEnvironmental waterAA;-;LSpeciation carried out using HG coupled with GC before
determination285AsSaline and environmental waterMS;ICP;L AF;Hy;LComparison of speciation using HPLC-HG with both detectors
carried out156AsEnvironmental waterAA;-;LSpeciation performed using microwave assisted distillation
and hydride generation143AsEnvironmental waterAA;-;LSpeciation methodology using HCLO4 reaction
matrix described154AsEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LW-coated furnace used with large 100 µl sample
and Pd chemical modifier286AsEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LHG sample introduction used thiourea for improved sensitivity.
LOD 0.02 µg l−1150AsWaterMS;ICP;LSpeciation carried out using ion chromatography187AsWaterMS;ICP;LUse of collision/reaction cell to remove chloride interference250AuSaline waterAA;F;LSeparation and preconcentration carried out in xylene using
diethyldithiophosphate as complexing agent. LOD 2.9 ng l−1287BWaterMS;ETA;LConversion to sodium metaborate carried out prior to loading
on filament for isotopic analysis288BeEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LCalcium used as matrix modifier289BeDrinking waterAA;ETA;LDeterminand chelated with acetylacetone and separated onto
Sep-Pak C18 cartridge. Chelate eluted with methanol. LOD 0.23 ng133BiSaline waterAA;ETA;LMo chemical modifier used290BiEnvironmental waterAE;ICP;LEffects of various acids on HG tested with respect to efficiency
and minimisation of interferences. LOD 0.3 µg l−1291BrEnvironmental waterTXRF;-;LBromate ions separated by ion chromatography and dried
onto quartz substrate189BrDrinking waterMS;ICP;LCoupled ion chromatography used to separate bromate186BrWaterMS;ICP;Lsee As, ref. 187187BrEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LComparison of techniques made when coupled to ion chromatography
for determination of bromate292BrWaterMS;ICP;LComparison of ion chromatography coupled to different detection
systems188CSaline waterAMS;-;-Tandem type AMS developed for determination of 14C276CaWaterAE;F;LLOD 0.5 µg ml−1293CdSaline waterAA;ETA;LTwo-step graphite furnace developed. First stage used a
transverse heated vaporiser linked to a second end-heated atomizer. Background
absorption interferences reduced212CdSaline waterMS;ICP;LSample mixed with HCl and thioacetamide and isotope dilution
spikes. ETA sample introduction used247CdWaterAA;ETA;LSample mixed with 5-sulfo-8-hydroxyquinoline followed by
separation and pre-concentrated on C18 silica gel column. LOD 0.7 ng l−1129CdWaste waterAA;MIP;Lsee Ag, ref. 204204CdSaline waterAA;ETA;LMuromac A-1 chelating resin used for matrix separation
and preconcentration. Elution using HNO3. LOD 1.2 × 10−4 µg l−1294CdEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSeparation and preconcentration using anion ion chromatography295CdDrinking waterAA;ETA;LCustom made W coil atomiser used. LOD 0.2 l−1206CdDrinking waterAA;F;LBuffered samples complexed with ammonium diethyldithiophosphate
and separated on C18 silica column. Eluted with ethanol130CdSnowMS;ICP;LMagnetic sector spectrometer used in low resolution mode
for best sensitivity242CdEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSpeciation using multiple column system and flow injection197CdSaline waterAA;ETA;L(NH4)2HPO4 and
NH4NO3 chemical modifiers used with 20 µl
sample injection. LOD 0.005 µg l−1214CdWaste waterMS;ICP;LSee Ag, ref. 280280CdEnvironmental and saline waterAA;ETA;LCo-precipitation with Ni–diethyldithiocarbamate from
buffered sample. Precipitate dissolved in HNO3 + acetone296CdEnvironmental waterAE;ICP;LSample pre-concentrated by evaporation297CdSaline waterAA;ETA;LOn-line preconcentration used by sorption of Cd-APDC complex
onto C18 micro-column and elution with ethanol. LOD 0.5 ng l−1132ClEnvironmental waterAMS;-;Lδ36Cl ratios measured for atmospheric
tracer studies277ClWaterAE;ICP;LUse of far UV (134–136 nm) lines
made sub-ppm detection possible298CoSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 294294CoEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LPreconcentration carried out using sorption in knotted
reactor precoated with 1-phenyl-3-methylbenzoylpyrazol-5-one119CoEnvironmental waterAA;F;LSample solution mixed with Nitroso-R salt + cetyltrimethylammonium
bromide and buffered. Benzophenone added and solid collected. Solid dissolved
in ethanol for analysis. LOD 3.9 ng ml−1299CoSaline waterAA;ETA;LPreconcentration using 8-quininol and Ni co-precipitation
carrier with 1-nitroso-2-naphthol auxiliary complexation. Direct solid analysis
used. LOD 1 ng l−1139CrDrinking waterAA;F;LSimultaneous preconcentration of CrVI and CrIII
species on C18 column and sorption loop. Separated carried out
at elution stage.300CrWaterMS;ICP;LAutomated column chelation system for speciation described171CrEnvironmental waterAA;F;LSpeciation carried out using melamine–urea resin.
CrVI eluted with sodium acetate. CrIII determined by
difference after oxidation165CrWaterMS;ICP;LSolid phase chelation column technique used for speciation172CrWaterMS;ICP;LDual membrane on-line system for simultaneous extraction
of CrIII and CrVI species301CrDrinking waterAA;ETA;LTransverse atomiser used302CrWaste and saline waterAA;ETA;LSelective flow injection of CrVI using solvent
extraction IBMK + APDC303CrDrinking and environmental waterMS;ICP;LIon chromatography used to speciate CrIII from
CrVI173CrSaline waterAA;F;LSpecies separated into different chelating agents, then
removed from the matrix by micelle formation of surfactants168CrEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSpeciation performed using acidic activated alumina columns170CrEnvironmental and saline waterAA;ETA;LSamples pre-concentrated by precipitation with quinolin-8-ol,
Pd and tannic acid. LOD 20 ng l−1138CrEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSpeciation study using chelation/extraction of CrVI
with APDC169CrWaterMS;ICP;LSee As, ref. 187187CrWaste waterAA;-;LPreconcentration and speciation carried out using complexation
with EDTA and separation on SAX resin followed by elution with aqueous NaCl166CuEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LNovel atomisation source used which allowed sequential
metal vapour elution into a gas stream203CuWaterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 129129CuDrinking waterAA;ETA;LSee Cr, ref. 302302CuDrinking waterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 206206CuEnvironmental waterAA;F;LSeparation and preconcentration performed using XAD-2 column
loaded with calmagite114CuDrinking waterAA;F;LSee Cd, ref. 130130CuSaline waterAA;F;LSeparation performed on-line using XAD-2 resin followed
by elution with HCl117CuSaline waterAA;ETA;LAmmonium nitrate as chemical modifer. Injection 20 µl
aliquot. LOD 0.06 µg l−1.214CuEnvironmental waterAA;F;LSee Co, ref. 299299CuSaline waterAA;F;LBuffered sample complexed with 1-nitroso-2-naphthol with
separation on RP-C18 micro-column and eluted with ethanol. LOD
2 µg l−1131FeEnvironmental waterAA;-;LRelationship between Fe and Mn concentrations and turbidity
investigated304FeEnvironmental waterAA;F;LSee Co, ref. 299299FeDrinking and environmental waterMS;ICP;LSelective determination of FeIII by on-line
formation and sorption of pyrrolidine carbodithionate complex in knotted reactor
followed by elution with HNO3201HgWaterAE;ICP;LSeparation and preconcentration carried out using quinine
impregnated cation exchange resin. Gas phase analysis performed using HG305HgDrinking waterMS;ICP;LUse of Au as a routine long term preservative investigated104HgSaline waterMS;ICP;LSee Cd, ref. 247247HgSaline waterAA;-;LFI and HG sample introduction. Air segmentation used to
reduce reagent consumption. LOD 0.1 µg l−1146HgEnvironmental waterAA;CV;LSeparation and preconcentration of species using 2-mercaptobenzothiazole
loaded onto Bio-Beads. LOD 10 ng l−1123HgWaterAF;ETA;LMiniature system for field use described306HgEnvironmental waterAA;CV;LExtraction using dithizone in CHCl3. Various
pretreatments for speciation investigated198HgEnvironmental waterAA;CV;LSeparation from HCl acidified water carried out using polyamide
resins and elution with thiourea124HgSaline waterMS;ICP;LID coupled with vapour generation to minimise interferences
while maximising sensitivity and accuracy307HgSaline and drinking waterAA;CV;LVarious dithioacetal derivitives synthesised and immobilised
on silica gel. HgII sorption properties evaluated125HgWaterAA;ETA;LSeparation and preconcentration carried out prior to analysis308IWaterAA;ETA;LSeparated as ion pair followed by indirect determination
of I− through quantification of Hg208IWaterAE;ICP;LSpeciation study using chemical separation and vapour generation184IRain waterAMS;-;-129I determined278ISaline waterAMS;-;-See C, ref. 276276InSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee Bi, ref. 290290InEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSolvent extraction used with buffered 5-sulfo-8-quinolinol
and zephiramine309MnSaline waterAA;ETA;LSeparation and preconcentration carried out on Chelex-100
resin. Interference correction performed using multiple linear regression
techniques213MnEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSee Cu, ref. 203203MnEnvironmental waterAA;-;LSee Fe, ref. 304304MoEnvironmental and saline waterMS;MIP;LID determination used after 8-hydroxyquinoline separation266NiSaline waterAA;ETA;LOptimisation carried out on-line micro-column separation
using chelation on 1-(di-2-pyridyl)methylene thiocarbonohydrazide
modified silica gel. LOD 0.06 ng ml−1111NiEnvironmental and saline waterMS;ICP;LID and separation from matrix as volatile metal carbonyl
used to maximise accuracy and minimise interference258NiSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 294294NiSaline waterAA;F;LComplexation using dimethylglyoxime and separation on C18
column. Elution using ethanol containing HNO3310OSoil waterMS;-; LSamples equilibrated with CO2 prior to analysis273PEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LCoupled capillary zone electrophoresis methods developed
for speciation199PbSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 212212PbDrinking waterAE;ICP;LDithiocarbamate complex collected in PTFE knotted reactor
and desorbed with HCl. Ultrasonic nebulisation used to increase sensitivity.
LOD 0.2 ng ml−1128PbEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LElectrochemical preconcentration used with W coil for subsequent
ETA sample introduction215PbSaline waterMS;ICP;LSee Cd, ref. 247247PbSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee Bi, ref. 290290PbEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LIsotope ratios directly measured using ultrasonic nebulisation
for improved sensitivity and magnetic sector instrument for best precision256PbWaterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 129129PbEnvironmental waterAA;F;LSee Cd, ref. 295295PbDrinking waterAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 206206PbDrinking waterAA;F;LSee Cd, ref. 130130PbDrinking waterAA;ETA;LComparison of drinking water Pb with that found in bone311PbWaterAA;F;LSpeciation study carried out using complexation with diethyldithiocarbamate
and separation on C60 column194PbSnowMS;ICP;LSee Cd, ref.
242242PbEnvironmental waterAA;-;LSamples treated with acetic media, sorbed onto C60
columns as dithiocarbamate complexes and eluted with IBMK195PbWaterMS;ES;LCoupled separation of species using in-tube solid phase
micro-extraction and HPLC.196PbWaterAA; ETA;LThermal desorption of tetraethyl species from solid phase
micro-extraction fibres described118PbEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LImproved isotope ratio measurements made through the use
of a hot–cold tandem spray chamber arrangement255PbWaste waterMS;ICP;LSee Ag, ref. 280280PbSaline waterMS;ICP;LMg(OH)2 co-precipitation used for
separation and preconcentration260PdSnowMS;ICP;LDouble focusing magnetic sector instrument allowed exceptional
sensitivity241PtSnowMS;ICP;LSee Pd, ref. 241241REEEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LUltrasonic nebulisation used for sensitivity.312RhSnowMS;ICP;LSee Pd, ref. 241241RuEnvironmental and waste waterAA;ETA;LCo-precipitation with chitosan at pH 8 for preconcentration
followed by re-dissolution in acetic acid136SSaline waterMS;ICP;LCollision/reaction cell used to reduce polyatomic interferences.
Isotope ratios determined313SbSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee As, ref. 148148SbWaterAA;F;LSee As, ref. 145145SbWaterAF;Hy;LSpeciation using HPLC and hydride generation192SbDrinking waterMS;ICP;LOn-line HPLC used to separate SbIII and SbV
using a phthalic acid–EDTA mobile phase on a silica based anion exchange
column. LOD SbIII 30 pg for 100 µl and SbIII
10 pg for 100 µl72SbEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LSpeciation study performed using HG sample introduction
and magnetic sector instrument for improved sensitivity. LOD SbIII
4.2 ng l−1 and SbV 17 ng l−1191SbEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LSpeciation carried out using HPLC separation193SeSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee As, ref 148148SeSaline waterAA;ETA;LSee As, ref. 149149SeEnvironmental waterAA;-;LSe speciation performed using chemical pre-treatment and
HG. LOD 0.5 µg l−1178SeEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LSee As, ref. 161161SeSaline waterMS;ICP;LSee As, ref. 158158SeWaterAA;F;LSee As, ref. 145145SeWaterAF;Hy;LA LC-UV-HG coupled system for speciation described181SeWaterAA;ETA;LSpeciation study with complexation by pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
and sorbtion onto C18 micro-column followed by elution using ethanol.
LOD 4.5 ng l−1314SeSaline waterAA;ETA;LChemical interference study carried out211SeWaterAA;ETA;LAnalysis performed using standard additions method.315SeWaste waterAF;Hy;LSpeciation study using coupled FIA and HG, both on and
off-line, described182SeWaterMS;ICP;LID and ETA sample introduction used for improved accuracy
and sensitivity and for removal of interferences316SeEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LSee As, ref. 150150SeWaste waterMS;ICP;LAnion exchange columns tested for suitability in speciation
studies.317SeWaterMS;ICP;LSee As, ref. 250250SnSaline waterAA;ETA;LSn separated from matrix by hydride generation. LOD 130 ng l−1147SnEnvironmental and waste waterAA;ETA;LOrgano species separated with toluene in presence of acetic
acid and NaCl. Hot injection and chemical modification used for analysis.318SnWaterAA;-;LOrganic species ethylated and extracted into hexane. Speciation
performed using coupled gas chromatography175SnEnvironmental, waste and saline waterAA;ETA;LSpeciation study carried out by chemical separation174SnEnvironmental waterAA;ETA;LSeparation and preconcentration of tributyl species, using
tropolone sorbed onto XAD-2 resin, described176TeEnvironmental and drinking waterAA;F;LPulsed flame system with quartz tube atom trapping described319TlSaline waterMS;ICP;LID and HG used for improved accuracy and minimisation of
matrix effects257TlSaline waterMS;ETA;LID used to demonstrate existence of dimethyl species200UEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LCellulose based chelating resin used for separation and
preconcentration of the determinand. Problems of organic complexation in the
sample considered320VSnowMS;ICP;LSee Cd, ref.
242242ZnEnvironmental waterAA;F;LPreconcentration carried out from acidic media (pH 3)
as thiocyanate complex onto polyurethane foam. Determinand eluted using acetone + HNO3.
LOD 0.85 µg l−1140VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LSample mixed with buffered bis(2-hydroxyethyl)dithiocarbamate
and complexes sorbed onto C18 resin. Metals eluted with methanolic
HNO3. LODs typically pM127VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;L AF;-;LOn-line serially coupled Sephadex A-25, Chelex 100 and
Dowex 1X8/Chelamine Metalfix used to separate and pre-concentrate and
determine metal–humic complexes and free metal ions321VariousSaline waterAA;ETA;LElements electroplated onto graphite probes at various
pH and voltage conditions. CrIII and CrVI speciation
performed. LOD CrIII 14 ng l−1 and
CrVI 17 ng l−1134VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LNormal sample introduction used but spectrometer fitted
with high sensitivity interface261VariousWaterAE;ICP;LSeparation and preconcentration using iminoacetate–agarose
absorbent322VariousEnvironmental waterXRF;-;L AE;ICP;LAmidoxime chelating groups bound to poly (acrylnitrile)
textile, used to separate various traces. Elemental determination carried
out by either direct XRF analysis or after extraction in 1% HNO3
for ICP-AES141VariousEnvironmental waterAE;ICP;LLow TDS samples allowed the use of ultrasonic nebulisation.
Array detector spectrometer gave simultaneous spectral background correction323VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LField flow fractionation used to study colloid size fractions.324VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LDithiocarbamate complexation and separation on phenyl column
described with elution of determinands with HNO3126VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LMulti-element standard additions methodology described262VariousWaterMS;ICP;LReview covering detection and speciation of metals presented325VariousDrinking waterMS;ICP;LPerformance test of technique using NS-30 protocol.326VariousEnvironmental and drinking waterAA;ETA;LSystem for simultaneous elemental determinations described205VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LBatch separation and preconcentration using Chelex 100
resin performed105VariousWaterMS;ICP;LFIA system for on-line dilution described327VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LMethod for producing semi-quantitative data using chemometrics
described328VariousWaterMS;ICP;LEvaluation of an axial TOF type instrument described329VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LA comparison of imminodiacetate and 8-hydroxyquinoline
micro-columns for matrix separation and analyte preconcentration was made107VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LEvaluation of TOF spectrometer for transient signals, in
particular when coupled to GC, described330VariousEnvironmental waterAA;F;L AA;ETA;L AE;ICP;LNational water quality survey presented331VariousEnvironmental waterAE;GC;LSolid phase microextraction used to collect and separate
organometallic species332VariousEnvironmental waterAE;ICP;L AA;ETA;L AA;F;LWell water quality assessment study carried out333VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LMultivariate calibration technique developed to correct
for interferences248VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LStrategies for coping with saline matrices described245VariousWaterMS;ICP;LCapillary electrophoresis used to study metal–humic
substance binding334VariousWaterMS;ICP;LAdvantages of magnetic sector instruments over quadrupole
instrument discussed253VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LInfluence of filtration on the analysis of crystalline
bedrock groundwater tested102VariousEnvironmental waterAA;F;LFunctionalization of XAD-2 resin with chromotropic acid
for preconcentration of metals described120VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LDescription of on-line separation and preconcentration
using buffered samples and Metpac-CC1 column given106VariousUltra-pure waterMS;ICP;L AA;F;L AA;ETA;LReview of blank optimisation for elemental analysis presented98VariousWaterAE;ICP;LTedlar bags tested and found suitable for sampling and
storing water. Minimal absorption of six trace elements found over a wide
pH range100VariousWaterMS;ICP;LCoupled ion chromatography to used to separate anions.
Ultrasonic nebuliser with desolvation improved sensitivity185VariousEnvironmental and waste waterAA;F;LDeterminands pre-concentrated on 5-amino-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thiol
modified silica gel and eluted with HCl121VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LInfluence of bottle type and acid washing on trace element
analysis investigated101VariousSaline waterXRF;-;LElectro-deposition of analytes on pure Nb disk carried
out prior to analysis231VariousSaline waterTXRF;-;LSamples pre-concentrated by precipitation as dithiocarbamates.
Precipitate deposited on filter for direct analysis237VariousEnvironmental water-;ICP;LIsocratic separation of cations and anions performed on
CS12 and AS14 columns using methanesulfonic acid and NaHCO3335VariousEnvironmental waterAA;F;LChemical modification used to reduce interferences336VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LMagnetic sector instrument used to avoid interferences254VariousEnvironmental waterXRF;-;LPIXE analysis of freeze dried water residues used for characterisation
of pollution337VariousDrinking waterXRF;-;LTotal reflectance form of technique used.228VariousWaterXRF;-;LMicro-analysis using ultra-thin droplets on low scattering
substrate described232VariousUltra-pure waterMS;ICP;LRoutine analysis used standard additions method99VariousWaterMS;ICP;LWater quality testing application described338VariousWaterMS;ICP;LSeparation and preconcentration carried out with iminodiacetate
chelation. Improved sample throughput achieved using air-segmented FI sample
introduction339VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LFI and chelating resin columns used for matrix removal
and preconcentration340VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LLa co-precipitation used for separation and preconcentration
of hydride and oxyanion forming elements341VariousSaline waterAA;ETA;LCoupled HG used for simultaneous determination of As, Bi,
Se and Sn342VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LUltrasonic nebulisation and magnetic sector instrument
used for high sensitivity determinations243VariousEnvironmental waterMS;ICP;LComparison of Norwegian groundwater concentrations with
health limits made264VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LEvaluation of interferences, internal standardisation and
standard addition analysis reported244VariousWaterXRF;-;LAsymmetric flow field flow fractionation used to separate
collodial humic substances prior to analysis343VariousWaterMS;ICP;LSeparation carried out using TRU-SPEC resin110VariousSaline waterMS;ICP;LEvaluation of three column materials; basic alumina, iminodiacetate
and nitrotriacetate carried out. On the basis of throughput, matrix elimination
and recovery108VariousSnow waterMS;ICP;LCold plasma conditions used to avoid interferences and
sensitivity of microconcentric nebuliser allowed determination of major elements240VariousEnvironmental waterXRF;-;LDroplet of water evaporated onto polymer film for analysis233VariousEnvironmental waterTXRF;-;LSamples evaporated onto siliconized quartz carrier with
internal standard227VariousWaste waterAE;MIP;LAnalytical system developed for on-site monitoring226VariousWaterAE;ICP;LMatrix effects from Ca and Na studied in an axial plasma221VariousWaterAA;ETA;LReview of the application of Zeeman graphite furnace AA
in chemical laboratories and toxicology applications presented344The other main area of work, for which there is a clearly defined need,
and which is producing an ever increasing number of publications is that of speciation.
There have been some significant advances in producing more robust methods
for speciation and the variety of metal/non-metal species that have been
identified and quantified has shown a marked increase over the period of this
review.ICP-MS continues to be the dominant instrumentation used for water analysis.
More emphasis has been put on understanding and removing isobaric interferences
from molecular ions by the use of techniques such as matrix removal, collision
cells and the use of high resolution instruments.Conspicuous by their absence have been the lack of papers addressing the
area of data quality. Although there are many water CRMs certified for total
element concentrations, the lack of RMs for speciation studies has not been
addressed in the literature covered in this review.2.1 Sample preparation2.1.1 Reagents. For ultra-trace analysis of water
samples it is essential that ultra-pure water is used for the preparation
of standards and blanks. Dabouret et al.96–98
describe the operation of the latest Milli-Q™ ultra-pure water system,
the methods used for the removal of difficult impurities such as B and Si,
and have reviewed methods for analysis ultra-pure water. Hoelzl et al.99 have outlined how ICP MS can be used to routinely
check the quality of ultra-pure water.2.1.2 Sample collection and preservation. The collection
and storage of water samples must be designed so that modifications of their
chemical composition through contamination or loss of analytes are minimised.
The use of Tedlar bags for the collection of water samples was investigated.100 Under low pH conditions the bags showed no measurable
adsorption from 100 ppb solutions over 24 h. The effect of bottle
type and acid washing on trace element analyses of water samples by ICP-MS
was investigated.101 Four bottle types and
62 elements were covered by the study. Final recommendations suggested that
the best procedure was to use factory new, unwashed HDPE bottles. The same
author102 investigated the influence of filtration
on the concentrations of 62 elements analysed by ICP-MS in groundwater samples
from 15 selected wells in crystalline bedrock. Analysis of unfiltered and
filtered samples was compared (<0.45 µg and <0.1 µg).
Differences between filtered and unfiltered samples were noticeable but generally
small. Results for Sn, however, suggested that filtration was introducing
significant contamination. Differences between <0.45 µm and <0.1 µm
filtered samples were generally negligible.The chemical stability of large organic molecule metal complexes
dissolved in natural water were investigated by on-line size exclusion chromatography
ICP-MS. Acidification of the samples with HNO3 was found to have
a marked effect on the size exclusion chromatograms. The partitioning of major
to ultra-trace elements in coastal sea-water sequentially filtered to 0.45 µg
and subsequently ultra-filtered to a molecular weight permeation limit of
10000 Da was investigated by analysing the particulates and
filtrates obtained at each stage using a combination of ICP-AES and ICP-MS.103 A detailed account of the fractionation of a
wide range of metals is given. Hg is well known for its ability to ‘plate-out’
onto the walls of sample storage containers. Fateman et al.104 carried out a study in which they found that
the addition of AuCl was an effective preservative reagent for Hg in potable
water up to a concentration of 1 µg l−1
when using either glass or poly(ethylene terephthalate) containers.
Although this preservative reagent is acceptable for ICP-MS determination,
AuCl is known to cause a severe suppressive interference when used with CVAFS,
a widely used methodology for Hg determination.2.1.3 Preconcentration and separation procedures. As
previously discussed, preconcentration of the analyte prior to atomic spectrometry
measurement is a preoccupation of many research groups working in water analysis.
Apart from reasons expressed earlier in this review, this may be explained
by the fact that the preconcentration step is often accompanied by separation
of the analyte from the sample matrix, which is often more important, in terms
of the reduction in interference effects, than the increase in sensitivity
from the preconcentration.Solid phase microextraction methods (SPME) are one of
the most popular preconcentration techniques. This relates to the ready availability
of proprietary solid phase adsorbents and the ease with which the technique
can be interfaced to on-line, automated systems. This methodology divides
into two areas: direct methods, in which the target analyte or species is
reversibly adsorbed or complexed onto the solid substrate which is designed
to be element/species specific; and indirect methods, where the target
analyte is complexed in solution (often with an organic reagent)
and adsorbed onto a solid substrate designed for adsorption of organic compounds e.g.,
C18 silica columns.A wide range of direct SPME preconcentration methods have been
reported. In a batch adsorption approach for multi-element preconcentration,105 sea-water was mixed with Bio-Rad Chelex 100 resin
and, following filtration and washing of the resin, the analytes were eluted
with 2 M HNO3. Thirty-three elements were determined by
ICP-MS with a preconcentration factor of 41.7. Using an on-line method, chelation
ion chromatography106 was used to preconcentrate
17 trace elements using an iminodiacetate (IDA) chelating resin.
A comparison of mini-columns107 prepared
from IDA resin and 8-hydroxyquinoline immobilised on a microporous silica
frit showed that both types were suitable for on-line ICP-MS preconcentration,
although the latter gave slightly shorter analysis times. Other work using
preconcentration with IDA resin followed by ICP-MS analysis include a comparison
with basic alumina and nitrotriacetate adsorbents108
and a FI on-line system with an IDA-agarose column. Tetsushi et al.109 used an on-line nitrilo-triacetate resin adsorbent
and Truscott et al.110 used an actinide
specific resin for actinides in their ICP-MS applications. In applications
using AES, Hg was preconcentrated on a new quinine impregnated cation exchange
resin before elution and HG introduction into the ICP. Chlorinated organic
compounds were collected on an organic-specific solid phase extraction cartridge
prior to GC separation and MIP AES determination. A number of ET-AAS methods
with SPME have also been published. Co and Ni were preconcentrated from a
sea-water matrix with a Muromac A-1 micro-column built into the tip of the
auto-sampler. A similar idea was used by Siles Cordero et al.111 who used a silica gel chelating resin functionalised
with 1-(di-2-pyridyl)methylene thiocarbonohydrazide in the auto-sampler
head to separate and preconcentrate Ni from sea-water. SIMPLEX optimisation
was used to obtain the best furnace operating conditions. Slurried chelating
resin (N,N-diethylaminoepoxypropyl-crosslinked chitin)
bound to Ag extracted from tap water was directly injected into the graphite
furnace prior to determination.112 Filter
discs (3 mm diameter) supporting finely pulverised anion-exchange
resin with Bromopyrogallol Red as the chelating resin were used to preconcentrate
Sb from river water. The discs were analysed directly in the specially designed
graphite furnace with Zeeman background correction.113
FAAS, although less fashionable, has not been ignored. Element/species
specific applications have used solid phase adsorbents for Cu,114,115
Pb116,117 and tetraethyllead.118 The performances of APDC, 8-hydroxyquinoline,
1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoylpyrazol-5-one and 2-nitroso-1-naphthol-4-sulfonic
acid were compared as chelating reagents for Co. The chelates were pre-coated
onto the walls of a PTFE knotted reactor in a FI manifold. The best chelating
reagent was found to be 1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoylpyrazol-5-one, giving a
28-fold enrichment.119 Other FAAS applications
have developed multi-element preconcentration methods: Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni
and Zn;120 CuII, FeIII,
HgII, NiII, PbII and ZnII;121 and Cd, Co, Fe, Ni and Zn.122
CVAAS methods for Hg include the use of 2-mercaptobenzothiazole loaded Bio-Beads
SM-7 to separate and preconcentrate inorganic and alkylmercury species123 and polyamide resin for inorganic Hg;124 silica gel immobilised dithioacetal derivatives
have been used for for HgII.125Indirect SPME preconcentration methods have also been reported
but are not as numerous as their indirect counterparts. Preconcentration of
metals from sea-water has been used in a number of applications. Klemm et
al.126 preconcentrated 10 metals (Cd,
Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, Tl, U and Zn) by the addition of NaDDC and APDC
to form an organic complex which was adsorbed onto a phenyl column. HNO3
was used to elute the metals prior to ICP-MS analysis. Wells et al.127 used bis-(2-hydroxyethyl)dithiocarbamate
as their complexing reagent and a polystyrene based hydrophobic C18
resin as the solid phase extractant. They obtained pM detection limits for
Cd, Co, Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn using high resolution ICP-MS for the final determination.
Arsenic was preconcentrated from sea-water using quinolin-8-ol-5-sulfonic
acid as the complexing reagent and activated alumina as the adsorbent with
final As quantification by HGAAS. Various combinations of complexing reagents,
solid phase adsorbents and As method have been used for Cd, Cu and Pb.128–132 Ni has
been determined using a dimethylglyoxime complexing reagent in a FI manifold
with a C18 column for preconcentration and FAAS for quantification.
Peng et al.133 preconcentrated Be
from drinking water as its acetylacetone complex prior to ETAAS determination.In ETAAS applications the graphite atomisation cell can be used as
a suitable substrate for direct preconcentration. Electrodeposition onto
a graphite ridge probe was used to pre-concentrate Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni and Pb from
sea-water134. Oreshkin et al.135 preconcentrated metals onto a micro-column crucible
that was subsequently used as the ET atomiser.Hydride and oxoanion forming elements were coprecipitated from
sea-water with La and, after separation and dissolution, were determined by
ICP-MS. In applications using ETAAS determinations of dissolved co-precipitates,
Minamisawa et al.136 used chitosan
to co-precipitate Ru, and Oh et al.137
reacted Co and Cu with Nitroso-R and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide and co-precipitated
the resultant complexes with benzophenone. Other workers138,139
used direct solid sampling of the co-precipitate to determine Cr and Co respectively,
by ETAAS.A number of less conventional preconcentration methods and substrates
have also been reported. Zn was preconcentrated from acidic medium as its
thiocyanate complex onto a foam mini-column placed in the loop of a four-way
valve and eluted with 30% acetone in 2% HNO3 into
a FAAS system for quantification.140 McComb
and Gesser141 used amidoxime chelating groups
covalently bound to the surface of a textile encased in a 35 mm XRF
slide holder. The slide holder was placed in the water to be analysed to complex
the metals of interest and removed for XRF determination. Comparisons of the
results with ICP-AES showed good correlations with those elements having a
high complex stability constant (e.g., Pb) and poor agreement
for low stability constant complexes (e.g., Mg). They concluded
that the method could be used for fast semi-quantitative analysis of trace
metals in water. Romero-Gonzalez et al.142
used a micro-column packed with dealginated seaweed biomass to carry out on-line
preconcentration of CdII, CrIII, CuII, PbII
and chemical speciation of CrIII and CrVI. The method
was validated using two Lake Ontario reference waters, TMDA 51.2 and TMDA
54.2. Microwave assisted distillation was used in conjunction with HG-AAS
to separate inorganic As species from natural waters from Chile.143
It was shown that the method was statistically indistinguishable from an ion-exchange
HG-AAS method and provided a simple and inexpensive method for preconcentrating
As from water samples. A novel liquid–liquid extraction methodology
for organotin compounds has been described by Eberhardt et al.144. A 5 µl volume of sample was successfully
processed in a containerless environment, using acoustic levitation.2.1.4 Hydride generation methods. HG as a method for
sample introduction, continues to be used widely in AS applications involving
the analysis of waters. A number of these have been reported in other parts
of this review. This section brings together new developments in the HG process
and other HG applications that have not been reviewed elsewhere.Laborda et al.145 described a
new electolytic process of producing hydrides using a low dead volume
flow through cell. Coupled to a flame heated quartz tube, As, Se and Sb were
determined by AAS with low ng ml−1 detection limits.Other HG applications involving AAS determination have also been
reported. A low-consumption air-segmented sequential-injection HG method for
Hg determination has been designed.146 The
method reduced the NaBH4 reductant consumption by a factor of 25
compared with conventional methods and allowed 90 samples h−1
to be analysed with a LOD of 0.1 µg l−1.
Sn was determined in sea-water using a heated quartz furnace atomiser with
Zeeman background correction.147 Moreno Camero et
al.148 generated hydrides of As, Sb
and Se which were passed over a negatively charged W or Pt electrode inserted
into the graphite furnace producing a 40-fold concentration factor. In another
ETAAS application, the operating conditions for simultaneous HG of Sb, As,
Bi, and Se were optimised. The hydrides were preconcentrated directly on the
graphite furnace prior to determination.On-line FI methods coupled to ICP-MS have been described for As
and Se in sea-water and reference waters.149,150A study of the effect of six different reaction media on the determination
of Bi by HG-ICP-AES was carried out.151
Tartaric acid was found to be the most efficient reaction medium in terms
of efficient HG and control of interferences; a sub-µg l−1
LOD was obtained.2.2 SpeciationDetermination and quantification of the chemical form of a number of analyte
elements in water samples continues to be a fertile area for research.The differential sensitivity of As species when reacting with reducing
agents to form As hydrides and hence allow their speciation to be
quantified, has been well known for many years and has continued to be exploited
in a number of novel applications. Using the relative differences in sensitivity
of AsIII, AsV, monomethylarsenic acid (MMA)
and dimethylarsenic acid (DMA), FIA-HG-AAS152
combined with chemometric data processing was successfully used to identify
the number and quantity of As species in solutions containing different amounts
of the aforementioned forms of As. Shraim et al.,153
using HG-AAS, varied the concentrations of the HCl acid matrix, the L-cysteine
pre-reducing agent, the NaBH4 reducing agent and the pre-reduction
time to obtain conditions that were selective for total As, AsIII,
AsV, DMA, and MMA. The same authors154
carried out a similar study in which they replaced the HCl reaction matrix
with HClO4 and, using the same pre-reduction and reducing agents,
arrived at conditions that were not only selective for the previously described
As species but also found one set of conditions that gave total inorganic
As. In a similar approach,155 but this time
only varying the concentration of the NaBH4 reducing reagent, conditions
where AsIII, and AsV could be selectively determined
were found. ICP-AES was used for determination.A number of researchers have used chromatography combined with on-line
atomic spectrometry for As speciation. In a study of AFS and ICP-MS detectors
for HPLC-HG speciation of As156 both methods
were found to be comparable and were able to determine AsIII, AsV,
DMA and TMA directly whilst, with the addition of on-line UV photo-oxidation,
arsenobetaine could also be quantified. Ion chromatography ICP-MS has been
successfully used157–159
for AsIII and AsV speciation. In one such application
involving mine tailings waters157 an iron
arsenate species was identified. Cation exchange chromatography ICP-MS160 was used to determine AsIII, AsV,
MMA, TMA, trimethlylarsine oxide, tetramethylarsonium ion and arsenobetaine.
The determination of all species was carried out in 20 min using a
sulfonic acid type cation exchange resin column with HNO3, NH4NO3,
and pyridinecarboxylic acid eluent. Arsenic anionic species were also investigated
by CE-ICP-MS.161ETAAS based methods for As speciation have also been reported.
AsIII was separated with a 2,3-dimercaptopropane-1-sulfonate reagent162 which specifically complexed with AsIII.
Total As was determined by reduction of AsV to AsIII
with L-cysteine prior to complexation. AsV was determined
by difference. The complex was concentrated on a Sep-Pak C18 column,
eluted with methanol, and determined by ETAAS using a Ni matrix modifier and
Zeeman background correction. In a similar approach using different complexation
media,163 AsIII was complexed
with APDC and adsorbed onto Dianion PA316 anion exchange resin in the presence
of sodium perchlorate. The resin was filtered from the mixture and ultrasonically
mixed with a Ni matrix modifier solution prior to the resulting suspension
being directly injected into the ETAAS. Again AsV was obtained
by difference by determining total As by pre-reduction of the AsV
to AsIII before the complexation step.Latva et al.164 describe a sequential
extraction technique where AsIII, AsV, DMA and phenylarsonic
acid were sequentially collected from one sample solution by adsorbing the
different As species on metal loaded activated charcoal. The As concentration
in activated charcoal fractions was directly determined by EDXRF.A number of different methods for CrIII/CrVI
speciation with FAAS detection have been described. CrVI was
preconcentrated and separated from CrIII by absorption on melamine–urea
resin and eluted with 0.1 M sodium acetate.165
If the Cr concentration was high enough, total Cr could be determined directly;
for low concentrations, CrIII was converted to CrVI
by oxidation with H2O2 and preconcentrated on the resin.
CrIII was calculated as the difference between total Cr and CrVI.
Adria-Cerezo et al.166 formed an
anionic complex of CrIII with EDTA. CrIII and CrVI
were then retained on a strong anionic resin and sequentially eluted with
0.5 M NaCl. The method gave low µg l−1
detection limits and was tested on waste water samples. Gaspar et al.167 preconcentrated and separated CrVI
in a FI manifold by complexation with 0.1 M APDC which was sorbed onto
the internal walls of a PEEK sample loop. The loop was washed with water and
eluted with IBMK before passing into the FAAS. With the addition of potassium
hydrogenphthalate to the sample, complexed CrIII was collected
on a C18 column and eluted into the flame with methanol. This arrangement
gave sub-µg l−1 detection limits for both forms
of Cr. A micelle-mediated method for CrIII/CrVI
speciation has been described by Paleologos et al.168
Triton X-114 was used as a surfactant and APDC and 8-hydroxyquinoline were
used to form hydrophobic complexes with CrIII and CrVI,
respectively, again giving low µg l−1 detection
limits for both species.Chromium speciation with ETAAS detection has also been reported.
An on-line FI manifold was used to complex CrVI with APDC and to
extract the resulting complex into IBMK with a PTFE knotted reactor using
an air-flow to deliver the organic concentrate to the graphite tube. A detection
limit of 3.3 µg l−1 was achieved. An
off-line method169 using the same complexing
reagent and organic solvent used multiple injections achieved a detection
limit of 0.057 µg l−1 Cr. In another
approach,170 activated alumina packed in
a mini-column was used to adsorb both CrV and CrVI,
which were eluted separately with 1 M HNO3 and 1 M
NH4OH, respectively. Using Zeeman background correction and a MgNO3
matrix modifier, ppt detection limits were obtained.An on-line automated liquid handling system171,172
was used with ICP-MS for CrIII/CrVI
speciation. A solid phase chelation resin column with an iminodiacetic
acid functional group retained CrIII, CrVI was determined
directly; CrIII was eluted with 1 M HNO3. Using
IC-ICP-MS, Sacher et al.173 determined
both CrIII and CrVI using RhIII as an internal
standard. Stability of the samples was found to be a particular problem and
minimum storage time in the dark at 4°C with a neutral pH was
recommended.The speciation of organic and inorganic Sn using ETAAS174 was determined in two steps. First, the total
Sn content of water samples was quantified by GFAAS with direct injection
into a Zr-coated graphite tube. Secondly, after adjustment of the sample to
pH 5.5 and the addition of KBH4, organic Sn was extracted
from the sample by solvent extraction with dichloromethane. The Sn content
of the organic extract was determined by ETAAS. Inorganic Sn was determined
by difference. In another approach using solvent extraction,175
the sample, with the NaBEt4 added and adjusted to pH 5.5,
was extracted into hexane. Using GC connected on-line to a quartz furnace
FAAS system, mono-, di- and tri-alkyltin compounds were measured in the hexane
extract. Tributyltin (TBT) was selectively retained as a chelate
on tropolene immobilised on a non-ionic polymeric adsorbent.176
The TBT chelate was eluted with IBMK and determined by ETAAS on a Zr-coated
graphite tube.Procedures were developed for the speciation of Al in waters percolating
through forest soil using on-line HPLC-ICP-MS.177
Inorganic and organic Al were separated on a cation exchange column. Polymeric
Al hydroxides were complexed with Pyrocatechol Violet prior to cation exchange
chromatography. Size fractionation of the organic Al species was obtained
by size exclusion chromatography.The dual role of Se as either an essential or toxic element, depending
on its concentration and chemical form, continues to drive the need for methods
for Se speciation. The majority of methods are based on the gaseous
introduction of the hydride into the AS system. Zang et al.178 determined SeIV, SeVI and
organic Se in agricultural drainage waters by HG-AAS. SeIV was
determined on an untreated sample, total Se was measured by digestion with
H2O2 followed by acid reduction to SeVI and
organic Se were determined after the sample was oxidised to SeVI
with persulfate under alkaline conditions. SeVI was measured by
difference. Both As and Se species were determined in contaminated groundwater179 by HPLC separation and fraction collection prior
to HG-AAS. The less commonly studied trimethylselenonium ion was determined
by conventional HG-AAS; although recoveries in tap water were low and SeIV
gave a strong positive interference. Methods for speciation by AAS have also
been reviewed by Farkasovska.180AF methods when combined with HG are found to have high sensitivity
for Se and have been found suitable for speciation studies. Vilano and Rubio181 developed an on-line HPLC-UV irradiation system
that allowed SeIV, SeVI, selenocystine and selenomethionine
to be separated and determined. Moreno et al.182
describe a FI manifold utilising on-line reduction of SeVI to SeIV
in a microwave oven for inorganic Se speciation.In a study to investigate the use of microbes for Se reduction in industrial
waste water, Kristof et al.183 used
on-line ion chromatography ICP-MS to determine selenate and selenite.
The addition of 2% v/v methanol gave a five-fold enhancement in
sensitivity.The ability of ICP-MS to determine Br and I sensitively has lead to the
development of ICP-MS methods for the speciation of halides. Using
on-line vapour generation of I by oxidation with NaNO2 in concentrated
H2SO4, iodine, iodide and iodate were determined in
saline and fresh-water matrices.184 Disinfection
of potable water by UV irradiation can lead to trace bromate contamination.
A popular choice for this application has been the use of ion chromatography
ICP-MS.185–188
In addition to bromate determination, Divjak et al.185
also determined halogens, oxyhalogens, sulfate, phosphate, selenite, selenate,
and arsenate in a single 4 min chromatogram and Panstar et al.187 to speciate As and Cr. Bromate analysis has also
been carried out189 using IC separation followed
by collection of the bromate fraction onto a quartz reflector; after drying,
bromate was determined by TXRF.As with As and Se, the ability of Sb to form a gaseous hydride from its
reduced oxidation state forms the basis of a powerful method for speciating
and determining Sb in water samples. HG-ICP-MS190,191
and HG-AFS192 were used for SbIII
and SbV speciation. Other workers72,193
used HPLC combined with ICP-MS to carry out the species separation and determination.The widespread use of the toxic trialkyllead compounds as an anti-knocking
agent in fuels continues to leave a legacy that requires sensitive methods
for determining triethyllead (TEL)
and trimethyllead
(TML)
in environmental waters. Baena et al.194 developed a continuous preconcentration technique
to determine inorganic Pb, TML and TEL in water. Inorganic Pb was precipitated
as PbCrO4, which was redissolved in acid, TEL and TML were complexed
with NaDDC and adsorbed onto a C60 fullerene column and desorbed
sequentially with n-hexane and IBMK. The separated and preconcentrated species
were determined by FAAS. The same author195
developed a screening technique for rainwaters using the C60 column
to trap TEL and TML and to measure their combined concentration by FAAS. If
the compounds were found to be present above a certain threshold then further
investigation was carried out using derivatisation and GC-MS determination.
Zoltan et al.196 describe a solid-phase
micro-extraction methodology combined with HPLC and ESMS that allowed elemental
Pb (208Pb+) and the molecular ions of
TEL and TML (m/z 253 and 295, respectively)
to be monitored simultaneously.Metal humic complexes in water have been studied by ion exchange
column separation and determination by ICP-MS and AFS, whereas Stewart et
al.334 approached the problem using
capillary electrophoresis ICP-MS. Cd complexes in natural water197
were divided into methodologically defined fractions according to the adsorption
media used for preconcentration and separation; Chelex 100 labile fraction (Cd
ions and weak Cd complexes) and silica C18 fraction (stable
Cd organic complexes). The fractions were determined with a FI-ETAAS
system.Other noteworthy speciation studies include an investigation of
the forms of Hg carried in river streams198
where a sequential extraction scheme was devised to measure Hg in suspended
particulates, organic complexes and as dissolved inorganic Hg. CVAAS was used
for quantification. P compounds in natural aquatic systems were studied by
capillary zone electrophoresis ICP-MS.199
Schedlbauer et al.200 showed the
presence of dimethylthallium in ocean water using ID-MS. An ICP-MS method
for FeII/FeIII speciation201
has been reported, although it is suggested that this is an over complicated
approach as there are good colorimetric methods with equally good performance
for carrying out this determination.2.3 Instrumental analysisThe most significant developments in methodology and equipment are discussed
in this part of the review.2.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. A third edition
of Welz's excellent book on all aspects of AA has recently been published.202 FAA continues to be used widely in many laboratories
but there seem to be very few advances in the field. Many of the papers being
published are mainly routine where there is more emphasis on the application
than the methodology. A few unusual AAS methodologies and applications
have been reported. Ohta et al.203
used sequential metal vapour elution for the determination of Cu and Mn. Metals
vaporised from the sample at 1950°C are passed into a Mo 1.22 mm
id column heated to 1900°C. Interaction of the metal chlorides
with the column causes different elements to pass through at different rates
before being quantified by AAS. Cu and Mn were successfully separated from
the matrix elements, allowing interference free determination. Ag and Cd were
measured in waste water204 using ETV introduction
into an argon MIP, which was used as an atomiser for AAS.In the past, the major justification for ETAAS analysis has been its very
low detection limits. This was balanced, however, by the method being inherently
slow and subject to many interferences. The detection limit advantage of ETAAS
has now been superseded by the routine use of ICP-MS in many laboratories.
Despite this, the relatively low cost and the richness of areas for research
in the use of ETAAS continues to produce a wide range of publications
in water analysis. The introduction of simultaneous AA instruments with
multi-element light sources and array detectors has led to improvements in
sample throughput. A method for the simultaneous measurement of Pb, Cd, Cr,
Cu and Ni in potable water205 has been described
which produces LODs that meet the most stringent international regulations
for surface and groundwaters. A W-coil AAS instrument has been used for the
simultaneous determination of Cu, Cd and Pb in drinking water.206
Murphy et al.207 have used a simultaneous
instrument to measure various combinations of the hydride forming elements
As, Bi, Sb, Se and Te after in-atomiser trapping of the hydrides on an Ir
coated graphite tube.Bermejo-Barrera et al.208 used
an indirect ETAAS method for the determination of I. An ion pair
between 1,10-phenanthroline, HgII and I− was selectively
extracted into IBMK. The determination of Hg in the extract gave an indirect
measurement of I− in solution. Cl was measured by monitoring
the absorbance of diatomic AlCl molecules using a Pb HCL at 216.4 nm.209 Calibration graphs were linear over the range
0.03–3 mg l−1. Pesticides, thiuram, disulfiram
and ziram in water210 were determined by
reaction with CuSO4 and adsorption of their Cu complex on a cellulose
ester membrane which was then subsequently dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol prior
to ETAAS determination of Cu content.Studies of methods for reducing interference effects in ETAAS
have been carried out by a number of researchers. Cabon et al.211 have made a very detailed study of the effects
of Na, Mg, Ca and Sr in their nitrate, chloride and sulfate forms and of sea
salt on the determination of Se. Under optimised conditions in a sea-water
matrix, with a Pd matrix modifier, they obtained an LOD of 0.8 µg l−1
for a 10 µl sample, using a two step atomiser212
consisting of an end heated graphite atomiser and a transverse heated graphite
tube vaporiser connected together to form a T-joint.
Samples were vaporised in the vaporiser tube and swept through with an Ar
flow into the atomiser for measurement. The device reduced background interference
in the determination of Cd and Pb in sea-water. A mathematical approach to
reducing interferences has been described by Grotti et al.213 A multiple linear regression model was successfully
used to correct for the effects of Na, K, Mg and Ca on the Mn calibration.
For this approach to be successful, however, the major element composition
of each sample must be known. The success of ETAAS analysis is illustrated
in the determination of Cd and Cu in sea-water.214
Under optimised conditions with a transversely heated graphite atomiser with
longitudinal Zeeman effect background correction, interferences were negligible
and LODs of 0.06 µg l−1 and 0.005 µg l−1
were obtained for Cu and Cd respectively.Preconcentration of the analyte prior to ETAAS has been described
by Barbosa.215 The standard graphite furnace
was replaced by a W coil which, in conjunction with a FI system, was used
to electrochemically preconcentrate Pb from natural water samples prior to
ETAAS determination.2.3.2 Atomic emission and atomic fluorescence. ICP
AES has reached the stage of a mature technique that is used widely in many
laboratory environments. Recently, however, the instrumentation for this technique
has changed significantly. With the introduction of reliable and sensitive
array technology a number of manufacturers are adopting a combination
of echelle spectrometers with array detectors. This instrumentation has
overcome old arguments as to whether users should choose scanning sequential
analysis systems or simultaneous direct reader type systems by combining the
advantages of both in one instrument. Olesik216
has produced a tutorial article on the basic principles of echelle systems
with charge transfer detectors. Manufacturers217–219
have published applications showing the suitability of this type of instrumentation
for carrying out environmental analysis to the US Environmental Protection
Agency specifications. The spectrometers of these systems allow users access
to many more emission lines than on older systems, giving a greater emphasis
on the necessity for reliable atomic spectral libraries. To help satisfy this
need Wiese et al.220 have produced
a review of databases currently available on the World Wide Web.Many ICP-AES systems now have the ability to view the plasma axially
as well as radially. The advantage of axial viewing is that it allows
better detection limits for many transition metals, but it is generally not
as robust as radial viewing and suffers more from ionisation effects from
matrix elements such as EIEs and Ca, as discussed by Brenner et al.221. Some manufacturers advocate the use of both
axial and radial viewing as described Mitko et al.222
in their study of the analysis of salinated water. Others219
suggest that this ‘dual viewing’ option compromises the true simultaneous
nature of signal measurement and that axial viewing alone under the correct
conditions with an ionisation suppressing buffer, such as Cs, is a more superior ‘modus
operandi’.A number of AE applications on the analysis of halides have been
reported. Tyler223 describes an ICP-AES system
that used CaF2 and MgF2 optics, allowing far UV lines
of Cl and Br to be used for the quantification of halides in oils. A survey
of available halide emission lines from the far UV to the IR was carried out
using a DCP system with a CID Echelle Spectrometer.224
Leo et al.225 used a GC-MIP-AE system
to identify chlorinated compounds in municipal waste-water.Duan et al.226 have described
a low powered MIP-AE system designed to be a field portable system for on-line
liquid stream monitoring. The instrument was shown to have pg ml−1
LODs for As, Be, Cu, Hg, Mg, Mn and Zn.2.3.3 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. XRF techniques
are usually associated with the analysis of solids but reports of methods
for water analysis are increasing. TXRF has been used for the analysis
of As and other heavy metals in groundwaters of the Argentine Pampas Plain227 and the determination of heavy metals in Damascus
drinking water.228 Colloidal humic substances
have been investigated by a combination of field-flow fractionation and TXRF.229 Yasuko et al.230
used synchrotron TXRF to obtain fg detection limits for As in river water.
Electrochemical preconcentration of trace metals on a Nb disc substrate was
used in combination with TXRF231 to reduce
matrix effects and produce pg−1 LODs.Micro-sample analysis using XRF techniques has been addressed
in a number of publications. A 50 µl sample was deposited on
an ultra-thin (0.15 µm) polyimide film support232 prior to XRF analysis. A similar approach233 gave results comparable to ICP and AA techniques.
Cheburkin et al.234 used an energy-dispersive
miniprobe multielement analyser, originally designed for the analysis of single
mineral grains, for the analysis of 150 µl water samples.The technique of grazing emission XRF has been applied to mineral
water235 and marine aerosols.86Other XRF applications include the determination of As and Se
in drinking water with a solvent extraction preconcentration step,236 the characterisation of estuarine waters237 and a fast method (5 min per sample)
for the determination of major and minor ions in marine pore-water.2382.3.4 Mass spectrometry. 2.3.4.1 ICP-MS analysis. The introduction of second
and third generation of instrumentation with improved detection limits, reliability
and decreasing costs has allowed many laboratories to adopt ICP-MS as the
method of choice for water analysis. Ying et al.239
have developed warning diagnostics for ICP-MS to indicate abnormal
operation of the instrumentation. The method uses a decision tree approach
based on monitoring Ar-based signals during normal operation and partial least
squares modelling of the signals from a solution containing Ba, Bi, In, and
Li during the instrument warm up stage.The very low detection limits of ICP MS are ideally suited for the analysis
of low total dissolved solids samples that would require preconcentration
of the analytes before analysis by other less sensitive techniques. Examples
of this are a number of studies involving ICP-MS for the determination
of metals in snow. Major metals (Na, Mg, Al, K, Ca and Fe)
were determined in arctic snow240 using a
cool plasma and microconcentric nebulisation. Barbante et al.241 determined Pd, Pt and Rh in polar and alpine
snow using a double focusing ICP-MS. High resolution ICP-MS was also used
for Cd, Pb and V in Antarctic snow.242 Using
a combination of ICP sector field MS and ultrasonic nebulisation the ultra-trace
elements Mn, Ni, Cu and U were determined.243A number of research groups are addressing the problems presented by high
salinity matrices in the analysis of sea-water samples by ICP-MS.
Masanao et al.244 used internal
standardisation and standard addition as appropriate methods to overcome spectral
interferences. Wilbur245 suggested that there
is no single approach for all analytes and a combination of methods including
vapour generation sample introduction and standard addition are required to
overcome matrix effects. For As determination in sea-water, Shakra246 used a combination of cation exchange to remove
Na and Ca prior to analysis and hexapole technology in the instrumentation
to remove ArCl+ interferences. A two stage process for the
determination of As and Se149 used a FI-HG
manifold to separate and preconcentrate the As and Se hydrides on a Pd coated
graphite furnace followed by ETV into the ICP-MS. Liu et al.247 combined ETV sample introduction with ID to determine
Cd, Hg and Pb. Danzer et al.248
adopted a very different approach by using multivariate calibration techniques.
They advocate the use of a partial least squares algorithm, which includes
data from both analytes and the interfering species, to produce a calibration
model to reduce spectral interferences. They suggest that this methodology
has the potential to rival high resolution ICP-MS.Reaction cell technology of different designs for the reduction
of polyatomic isobaric interferences in ICP-MS are now being supplied on commercial
instruments. Two manufacturers have published results of the figures of merit
obtained when using these devices. Feldman et al.249
describe an ion-guiding hydrogen-filled hexapole which substantially reduces
interferences on elements such as As, Ca, Cr, Fe, K and Se. Tanner et
al.250 discuss the practical use of
their rf/dc quadrupole dynamic reaction cell.The issue of isobaric interferences in ICP-MS can also be alleviated
by the use of high resolution (HR) mass spectrometers. Sector
field instruments are now more widely available and this is reflected in the
number of published applications for water analysis.251–255
Poitrasson and Dundas256 used a combination
of HR ICP-MS with an ultrasonic nebuliser to measure 206Pb/207Pb, 206Pb/208Pb and 207Pb/208Pb
in synthetic and riverine waters at Pb concentrations from 1–1000 ng l−1
with precisions ranging from 0.3 to 3% RSD.ID ICP MS is considered to be a definitive analytical technique
capable of providing improved accuracy and precision over alternative methods
and has shown an increase in publications over the period of this review. 239Pu/240Pu
and 240Pu/239Pu ratios were measured using on-line
separation with a combination of Sr-Spec™ and TEVA-Spec™
resins and a micro-concentric glass nebuliser. Vapour generation methods were
used for Te (hydride generation),257
Ni (carbonyl vapour generation)258
and Hg in sea-water by CV generation.259
ETV sample introduction methods were used for the determination of Hg and
Pb in sea-water and Se in rain, soft and hard drinking water reference materials.The ability of isotopic ratios to provide information on the age and source
of water samples has provided the impetus for researchers to use ICP-MS
for isotopic ratio measurements. Pb isotopic ratios have been measured
in water,256 sea-water260
after coprecipitation with Mg(OH)2 and rainwater.33 Sulfur isotope ratios were determined in waters
using an instrument with hexapole ion optics to reduce the interferences from
O2+ and NO+ molecular ions.The variety of other applications of ICP-MS to water analysis
clearly shows that the technique is becoming established in the analytical
community. The analytical characteristics of a high efficiency ion transmission (S
mode) ICP-MS for reference waters has been described.261
The determination of size and trace element distribution of colloidal material
in natural water by on-line field-flow fractionation ICP-MS has been reported.
Macro and trace elements in lake Baikal water have been determined.262,263 A survey of trace elements in 476
crystalline bedrock groundwaters in Norway has been published.264
Barwick et al.265 have applied a
rigorous cause and effect approach, from the preparation of standards and
samples to the final ICP-MS measurement, to the determination of uncertainty
in the determination of 60Ni in aqueous samples. Unsurprisingly,
the dominant components to the overall uncertainty were method precision,
instrument drift and bias.2.3.4.2 Other MS methods. ID-MIP-MS has been used
for the determination of Mo in water samples after extraction as the 8-hydroxyquinoline
complex.266The measurement of the stable O and H isotopes ratios of water
is important in many areas of science from geochemistry to biology for determining
mechanisms of water transport through physico-chemical processes such as evaporation
or equilibration with other O and H containing compounds. Begley and Scrimgour267 describe a fast on-line flow system for converting
the water sample to gaseous H and O before quantification by isotope ratio
MS. The method can be used on samples as small as 1 µl. A new
method for accurate determination of δ17O and δ18O
using electrolysis from CuSO4 solution to produce O gas prior to
isotope ratio MS quantification has been reported.268
Ward et al.269 present a rapid and
inexpensive method for the production of H gas from water using LiAlH4.
Standardisation problems in O isotope measurements has been discussed by Kornexl.270 Other O and H stable isotopic measurements in
a wide range of applications have been reported.66,271–275Tandem accelerator MS is an important technique for a number of
environmentally important isotopes including 14C, 36Cl
and 129I. Mizushima et al.276
describe the processes in setting up a new facility; measurement of 36Cl
in South American rainwater has been reported277
and 129I determinations in environmental waters have also been
presented.278,2793 Analysis of soils, plants and related
materialsSince the publication of the 15th environmental update in JAAS
a year ago,84 ongoing concerns over environmental
pollution have resulted in a further steady flow of publications and conference
papers exploiting the capabilities of atomic spectrometry. This is reflected
in Table 3. However, real progress
with methodology for soil and plant analysis has, as last year, been less
dramatically obvious. Also as last year, many analytical “developments”
have often involved only minor tinkering with existing methods, although improvements
are sometimes claimed.
Table 3 Summary of applications of atomic spectrometry
to the analysis of soils, plants and related materials

ElementMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationaSample treatment/commentsRef.a Hy indicates hydride
and S, L, G and Sl signify solid, liquid, gaseous or slurry atomization, respectively.
Other abbreviations are listed elsewhere.AlSoilAA;F, air-C2H2;LAl supposedly determined after Na2CO3
fusion with 94–104% recovery417AlForest soil waterMS;ICP;LSystem described for on-line speciation177AlVicia faba root cellsXRF;-;SSIMS and electron microprobe used to study Al distribution405AsSoilMS;ICP;GGC used to separate volatile As species evolved from soils
prior to determination361AsKelp extractsMS;Hy, ICP;LArsenosugars separated by chromatography prior to detection359AsContaminated soilXRF;-;SAs contamination at a German military site studied with
mobile XRF system418AsSeaweedsMS;ICP;LAnion exchange HPLC tested for As speciation but size-exclusion
HPLC preferred for organoarsenic species fractionation and matrix removal357AsPlant leavesAE;Hy, ICP;LFIA system described for simultaneous determination of
As and Hg. RSD at 10 µg l−1 was 1.4 and
1.3% for As and Hg, respectively382AsAlgaeMS;ICP;LAs species separated by cation exchange chromatography160AsSoils, plantsMS;ICP;LIon chromatography used to separate As species159AsKelp powder extractMS;ICP;LAs species separated by narrow bore HPLC prior to on-line
detection360AsAlgal extractsMS;ICP;LArsenosugars separated by HPLC358AsPlant digestsMS;Hy, ICP;LSystem described for rapid sequential determination of
As and Se; sample mixed alternately with thiourea or HCl for As or Se determinations150AsSeagrassMS;ICP;LDigestion with HNO3 + H2O2419AsSoilsXRF;-;SPollution near Cornish mine workings studied420AsSoilsAF;Hy;LMicrowave-assisted distillation procedure described to
pre-concentrate As as AsCl3392BBrown rice, soil extractsMS;ICP;LB concentrations and isotope ratios measured; B separated
from matrix elements by ion exchange421BeSoilAE;ICP;L AA;ETA;L3 digestion methods compared, and gave slightly different
results422CaWheat flourAA;F;SlCa and Mg determined in agar and dibutyl phthalate containing
La423CaRice, beansAE;F;SlSlurry prepared in La and agar solution; Ca and K measured424CdPlantsMS;ICP;LSize-exclusion chromatography used for Cd speciation in
cytosols of plant tissues and cell cultures369CdTomato leafAA;ETA;SlSlurry prepared in PTFE–plant glue–HNO3
matrix387CdSoilAA;ETA;LMatrix modifiers compared425CdSoils, vegetablesAA;F;LSoil soaked with aqua regia + HClO4
prior to digestion; 3 different acid digestions all worked for Cd426CdCropsAE;ICP;L AA;ETA;LEffect of soil additives on Cd uptake studied427CdPlant extractsMS;ICP;LCd complexes separated by size exclusion chromatography368CdSoilAA;ETA;SlAmmonium oxalate used as dispersant, and Pd as modifier;
LOD 0.15 pg428CdSoil, apple leavesAA;CV;LCold vapour determination described in detail390CdSoil solutionAA;F;LCirculating dialysis system described for studying organic
complex species of Cd, Cu and Pb429CdPlant materialsAA;F;LCd and Pb separated at diethyldithiophosphate complexes
on C18 column at pH 1 in FIA system; oxalic acid and thiourea
used to mask Fe and Cu317CdSoilsAE;ICP;L AA;ETA;LInterference found from As in both techniques378CrTomato plantsMS;-;SSIMS used to study Cr distribution430CrTobaccoAA;F;LOn-line preconcentration procedure described for Cr speciation431CuHumic acidsAA;-;-Generation of hydroxyl radicals in soils loaded with CuII
and FeIII examined432CuSoil solutionAA;F;LSee Cd, ref. 429429FeMaize flourAA;F;SlFe and Zn determined using flour slurry in agar433FeHumic acidsAA;-;-See Cu, ref. 432432HgSoilAA;CV;LDifferent acid extraction systems compared for a CRM434HgSoilsAA;Hy;GOrganomercury compounds separated by capillary GC coupled via
hydride generation system to spectrometer435HgAquatic plantsAA;CV;SlSlurry prepared in 15% m/m HNO3 with
0.02% v/v Triton X-100; mixture subjected to ultrasonic treatment
prior to injection into FI manifold436HgContaminated soilAE;MIP;GOrganometallic compounds of Hg, Pb and Sn converted to
volatile derivatives with NaBEt4; compounds purged with He, and
preconcentrated onto Chromosorb 102; trapped compounds thermally desorbed
and passed to GC with MIP detector383HgSoilsAA;-;-Soil sequentially extracted with ammonium acetate, hydroxylamine
hydrochloride in acetic acid, dilute HCl, NaOH and finally 8 mol l−1
HNO3375HgLichensAA;CV;G3 digestion procedures compared; open tubes gave low results353HgPlant leavesAE;Hy, ICP;LSee As, ref. 382382HgEnvironmental samplesAA;CV;GUse of Au amalgamation preconcentration critically evaluated437KPlant partsMS;TI;-Application of 26Mg and 41K and TIMS
to the assessment of K and Mg uptake by Scots pine406KBeans, riceAE;F;SlSee Ca, ref. 424424MgPlant partsMS;TI;-See K, ref. 406406MgWheat flourAA;F;SlSee Ca, ref. 423423MnTeaAE;MIP;LSample digested with HNO3, then HClO4;
Mn and P determined384MoGrass, cloverAA;ETA;LPt-group metals studied as modifiers. Characteristic mass
3.1 pg with Ir modifier388MoSoilAA;ETA;LMetal preconcentrated by extraction of thiocyanate complex
into IBMK355PTeaAE;MIP;LSee Mn, ref. 438438PbContaminated soilsXRF;-;SSEM and XRF used to study Pb speciation in soil solid phase439PbContaminated soilsXRA;-;SXRA fine structure spectroscopy used to identify Pb solid
compounds in soils370PbPolytrichum formosumMS;ICP;LPb isotope ratios measured in attempt to identify sources
of Pb pollution399PbContaminated soilAE;MIP;GSee Hg, ref. 383383PbAlgaeAF;Hy;LKBH4 used as reductant, and HCl + K3Fe(CN)6
as carrier393PbHumic and fulvic acid complexesMS;ICP;SLA used to study 206Pb complex position on gel
plates after gel electrophoretic separation of complexes366PbPine needlesMS;ICP;LFactors influencing isotope ratios critically discussed.33PbEnvironmental samplesAA;F;LMicrocolumn preconcentration procedure described and evaluated
in detail for Pb356PbSoilMS;ICP;LIsotope ratios used to elucidate anthropogenic contributions
to soil Pb400PbSoilXRF;-;SCone penetrometer XRF tool described for quantifying sub-surface
heavy metal contamination415PbGrapesAA;ETA;LNH4H2PO4 and MgNO3
used as modifier; temperature raised in series of steps440PbSoil solutionAA;F;LSee Cd, ref. 429429PbPlant materialsAA;F;LSee Cd, ref.317317PbSoil, house dustAA;F;LHot acid leaching used69PtPlant materialMS;-;-Speciation methods reviewed363PuSoil, dustMS;ICP;LProcedure described to separate Pu from U to prevent interference
from 238UH+ in 239Pu determination441RaSoilMS;ICP;L226Ra pre-concentrated from acid digest by co-precipitation
with Pb252REESoilsMS;ICP;LMicrowave-assisted digestion using HF + HCl + HNO3
and EDTA361REESoilsMS;ICP;LMicrowave-assisted digestion with HNO3–HF–HCl;
digest mixed with EDTA, and mixture digested with HClO4. Re used
as internal standard; 14 REE determined442REESoilsAE;ICP;LSoluble REE studied after preconcentration with MgCl2
as carrier, by adjusting to pH 10–11354SbPlantsAA;furnace;GQuartz furnace used for atomization after NaBH4
used to volatilise methylantimony species364SbSoilMS;ICP;LOpen vessel wet digestion evaluated for soil near mining
area193SeCerealsAA;Hy;LVarietal and geographic differences studied443SeSoil drainage water, soil sedimentAA;Hy;LProcedure described for oxidation of organic Se compounds;
detection limit was 0.008 mg kg−1 for soil178SeSpirulinaAA;Hy;LSample decomposed with HNO3 + HClO4;
residue taken up in 6 mol l−1 HCl plus FeCl3
prior to FIA; LOD 17 ng g−1444SeSoilsAA;Hy;LRelationship between bioavailable Se in soils and Se in
blood serum studied445SePlantsMS;ICP;LSamples extracted with hot water or using enzymatic extraction
for speciation. HPLC conditions described. 75% of eluted Se in identified
compounds365SePlant digestsMS;Hy, ICP;LSee As, ref. 150150SnContaminated soilAE;MIP;GSee Hg, ref. 383383TcSoilsMS;ICP;LTrapping system described to preconcentrate 99Tc446ThSoil, plantsMS;ICP;LDetermination of Th and U by ICP-MS and gamma counting
compared in high natural radiation area; ICP-MS was more accurate and precise447TlPlant materials, soilMS;ICP;LID used with 203Tl spike; good results obtained
for 3 CRMs; external calibration with Rh as internal standard also gave good
recovery401ZnMaize flourAA;F;SlSee Fe, ref. 433433ZnGrey mangrove leavesXRF;-;SSEM and microanalysis used to study distribution of Zn
in different forms448VariousSoilsMS;ICP;Sl1 mol l−1 HNO3
leaching was used in an attempt to improve recoveries of elements using slurry
nebulisation449VariousTea leavesAE;ETV, ICP;LVarious fluorine-containing compounds tested as modifiers
for ETV; 6% PTFE was best381VariousAlgaeXRF;-;SHeterogeneity problems associated with single cell analysis
assessed450VariousWood pulpAE;ICP;SSolid samples analysed directly on graphite probe introduced
to plasma, after in situ pre-treatment and ashing379VariousMacrofungiAA;F, air-C2H2;L AA;CV;LSliced samples digested with 4 + 1 + 1HNO3 + H2SO4 + H2O; residue taken up in water; Cd,
Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pd and Zn determined in digest. Hg determined in separate
digest451VariousPlantsAE;ICP;LFive digestion procedures, dry ashing, ashing + alkali
fusion, HNO3 + H2SO4 + HClO4,
HNO3 + H2SO4 + HClO4 + HF
and H2SO4 + H2O2
compared452VariousLeaves, soilsAA;Hy, ETA;GSystem described for trapping hydrides of As, Sb and Se
in Ir-lined furnace389VariousSoilsAE;-;SSystem described for producing thin film of particles for
determination of 15 elements by PIXE407VariousApple leavesXRF;-;-Instrument adjusted to detect selected trace elements only453VariousRiceAA;F;L MS;ICP;L AE;ICP;L14 elements determined in Vietnamese rice survey454VariousAgricultural cropsMS;ICP;LMicrowave-assisted digestion with HNO3 described455VariousWild berriesAE;ICP;L MS;ICP;LTrace element distributions studied in northern Sweden;
effects of mining activities and roads were confirmed456VariousSoilsMS;ICP;LStable isotope exchange used to identify labile pools of
elements in soils457VariousTea, coffeeAA;ETA;SlSlurries prepared in HNO3 and Triton X-100;
RSD ca. 8%458VariousPonderosa Pine phloemAE;ICP;L15 elements determined in samples from 149 trees in study
of selective herbivory459VariousHumic acidsMS;ICP;LSamples digested with HNO3; Al, As, Cu, Mn,
Pb and Zn determined460VariousSoilsAE;ICP;LSoil contamination studied in urban New Orleans; Cd, Mn,
Ni, Pb and Zn determined461VariousSoilsMS;ICP;L AE;ICP;L XRF;-;- AA;-;LPrecision, accuracy, detection limits and recovery compared
between different techniques and different laboratories462VariousPlant species in parksAE;ICP;L11 elements determined in urban park pollution study463VariousSoilsXRF;-;SPortable spectrometer used to analyse contaminated soils464VariousIndustrial soilsAA;-;L AE;ICP;L XRF;-;SDifferent methods critically compared347VariousPlantsAA;ETA;LTetrabutylammonium hydroxide used at 90°C for
2 h; digest diluted with water and analysed for Cd, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni
and Pb350VariousSoils, cane plantsAA;F;LSugar and soil compositions compared in Egypt465VariousVegetablesAA;F;LSamples digested with 10 + 1 + 1
HNO3 + H2SO4 + HClO4466VariousVegetablesAA;-;LVery high concentrations of Cu and Zn found in red beets467VariousMushroomsAE;ICP;L15 elements determined in 92 specimens to look for bioaccumulation468VariousPlant tissuesAA;ETA;SlSlurry formed in 1% HNO3; Cd, Cu, Cr,
Mo, Ni and Pb determined469VariousSludge-treated soilsAE;ICP;LRedistribution of heavy metals between species studied
after sludge applied to soil470VariousSoilsAA;-;L AE;-;-Results of inter-laboratory comparison showed up problems
for Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb, V and Zn471VariousPlants, soilAA;-;-10 elements measured in parts of Oenothera biennis
plants472VariousPlants, soilAA;-;-10 elements measured in Oenothera biennis and
underlying soil473VariousAlgaeAA;-;-Binding of Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn by Chlorella vulgaris
studied474VariousSoilAA;-;-Samples digested with HNO3 + HCl;
soils near motorway studied475VariousSoilsXRF;-;SSample preparation for use with portable XRF spectrometer
described414VariousCelastrus paniculatus seedsAA;-;LSamples were ashed476VariousVine leavesAE;ICP;LMicrowave-assisted digestion with HNO3 + HF + H2O2
or dry ashing used; Cu, Pb and Zn from industrial pollution studied477VariousPutranjiva roxburghii seedsAA;-;-Samples ashed; Co, Cu, Fe, K, Na, Ni, Pb and Zn determined478VariousSoils-;-;-Significance of difference in spatial heterogeneity of
pollutant and background element distributions discussed for assessment of
polluted sites479VariousSoilsAA;F;LResults of pseudo-total analysis using HNO3 + H2O2
and HCl + HNO3 digestions compared; silicates
were more soluble in aqua regia480VariousTree barkMS;ICP;SLA used to study Al, Ca, Cd, Ce, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, P, Pb,
S, Ti and Zn in bark403VariousTree ringsMS;-;SSIMS used to study As, Cd, Cr and Pb in tree rings481VariousCucumber plantsTXRF;-;LRoots dissolved using microwave-assisted digestion; sap
analysed directly; heavy metal effects on nutrient uptake and transport studied482VariousScots pine fine rootsXRF;-;LSamples digested with HNO3 and Ga used as internal
standard for TXRF analysis416VariousPeatTXRF;-;LTXRF applied to solutions from operationally defined fractionation
procedure483VariousSoils, sedimentXRF;-;SSamples simply dried at 105°C484VariousPlantsMS;ICP;LMagnetic sector instrument used to overcome polyatomic
interferences associated with transition metal isotopes397VariousSpruce woodXRF;-;SA synchroton radiation microbeam system used to study element
distributions485VariousSoils on waste sitesXRF;-;SUse of mobile ED-XRF system described486VariousPlantsAE;ICP;LInterference problems due to lowering of plasma temperature
when using axially viewed plasma assessed377VariousBarley leavesXRF;-;SCa, Cl and K determined for rapid screening487VariousVegetation, soilXRF;-;SPolygonal graphic representations applied to semi-quantitative
analysis for 3 and 4 elements488VariousSoilXRF;-;SPortable spectrometer evaluated26VariousSoil, sedimentMS;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion; 14 elements determined328VariousSoils, rocksAE;ETV, ICP;S AA;ETA;SETA used for Cd, Pb and Zn; ETV-ICP-AES with high-temperature
halogenation suitable for Cr, Cu, Ni. Pb and Zn380VariousLibyan soilsXRF;-;S INAA;-;SResults obtained by two methods compared489VariousSoilsMS;-;SSIMS used to characterise U and Pu particles in soils;
samples transferred to conductive graphite support404VariousSoilsXRF;-;SComputer program described that corrects for matrix effects
in trace element determinations413VariousSoil humic acidsMS;ICP;LComplexing properties of humic acids studied using size
exclusion chromatography367VariousRice, soilsAA;ETA;LCd, Cu and Zn concentrations compared in rice and soil
samples from Japan, Indonesia and China; samples acid digested490VariousAlgae, cabbageAA;ETA;LOpen and microwave digestion compared for Cd, Cr, Cu and
Pb; results were in agreement at 95% confidence level491VariousSoilsAA;F, air-C2H2;LPotentially toxic elements extracted with dilute HCl, and
preconcentrated prior to determination of Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn492VariousPlant samplesMS;ICP;LDescribed procedure gave 95–105% recovery
for SRM analyses493VariousSoilsXRF;-;SPollution from highways studied in Moscow494VariousTeaAE;ICP;L MS;ICP;LReport of use of pattern recognition to trace tea origins495VariousSoilsAA;-;LSequential extraction procedure assessed for operational
speciation of Cd, Cr, Ni, Pb and Zn496VariousPlants, soilsMS;ICP;LMicrowave-assisted digestion with HCl + HNO3 + HF;
precision typically better than 6 and 10% RSD for soil and plant samples,
respectively497VariousSoilAE;ICP;LPCA used to identify polluted areas498VariousSpruce seeds, plant CRMsAA;ETA;SlSlurries prepared in 0.14 mol l−1
HNO3. CRM data confirmed accuracy for Al, Cu, Li and Mn386VariousWild mushroomsAA;-;LSamples homogenized and sub-samples ashed499VariousSoilsLIBS;-;-Effect of plasma temperature discussed500Once real progress attains a near-plateau, well-written reviews
become quite useful. Haraguchi345 has reviewed
recent progress in applications of atomic spectrometry for multi-element profiling
of environmental and geochemical samples. Another review, but in Chinese,
covered the analysis of agricultural samples346
in China between 1994 and 1998.Several analytical techniques for analysis of industrial soils
have been critically compared by Anderson et al.347
The techniques covered included XRF, ICP-AES and AAS; the portable XRF spectrometer
gave results within a factor of two of those for certified standards for most
elements, but for V gave very high (7-fold) results compared with
those from ICP-AES. Cave, both individually348
and with co-workers,349 has stressed the
importance of assessment of bioavailability and of speciation of toxic elements
in surveys of contaminated soils. This is especially true as a growing body
of legislation forces local authorities to make proper and appropriate risk
assessments of contaminated sites.3.1 Sample preparation3.1.1 Sample dissolution procedures. Sample preparation
and dissolution are the most time consuming and labour intensive stages
of soil and plant analyses. Silva and colleagues350
have advocated the use of solubilisation of plant materials with 25%
tetramethylammonium hydroxide by heating at 90°C for 2 h
before analysis by AAS using ETA. Digests could be stored for up to 3 years
without changes being detected in determinant concentrations.Several papers using microwave-assisted digestion as a routine
tool are listed in Table 3, but
there have been fewer claims of exciting advantages this year than there were
last year. In one possibly noteworthy paper, a focused microwave digestion
procedure was described for plant materials which used a new-generation state-of-the-art
system prior to determination by ICP-MS.351
Lavilla et al.352 compared low and
medium pressure microwave-assisted digestion of plant samples with high pressure
digestion of the same samples; for the 5 elements studied, the three methods
gave similar results.A comparison has been made of digestion methods for determination of
Hg in lichen.353 Digestion in open tubes
in an Al block gave lower (50–61%) recoveries than
either digestion in a glass reflux apparatus or microwave-assisted digestion
in teflon containers, whereas these two methods yielded similar results.3.1.2 Preconcentration. As sensitivities of analytical
techniques have improved over the past decade or two, there has perhaps been
less need for preconcentration methods than hitherto. Nevertheless,
new or improved methods worth noting still appear from time to time. A procedure
has been described, for example, for concentration of REE, using MgCl2
as a carrier, at pH 10–11.354
A solvent extraction procedure has been suggested for extraction of Mo from
soil digests as its thiocyanate complex into IBMK;355
subsequent determination was by ETAAS. Automation of preconcentration steps
using FIA methodology has been a focus of interest for several years now.
An example of this interest is a paper on the use of a macrocycle immobilized
silica gel sorbent for microcolumn preconcentration and separation in the
determination of Pb by FAAS.356 Lead was
retained on the column over a wide range of sample acidities, and then was
eluted from the column with dilute EDTA at pH 10.5.3.1.3 Speciation. Interest in speciation of toxic
elements in soils and sediments was highlighted in last year's review84 and has shown no sign of abating over the past
year. Arsenic speciation again has continued to figure prominently,
as indicated in Table 3. Noteworthy
studies this year include one using bidimensional size-exclusion anion exchange
HPLC for quantification of arsenosugars in seaweeds by ICP-MS.357
Some problems with retention time matching and spiking experiments were initially
encountered in anion exchange HPLC-ICP-MS because of co-elution with other
arsenic species. Size exclusion HPLC was therefore proposed for a preliminary
fractionation step. In another study, of brown alga (Fucus serratus)
extracts, HPLC-ICP-MS and LC-ES-MS were used together to identify arsenosugars.358 For the same group of compounds in kelp extracts,
IC-ES ionization-MS-MS was used along with IC-membrane- hydride generation
ICP-MS.359 The use of the hydride system
indicated that three unknown arsenosugar peaks were not hydride active, which
simplified the chromatographic resolution needed to quantify more toxicologically
important As compounds. Another study of kelp extracts used narrow-bore HPLC
on line with ICP-MS to speciate four arsenosugars.360
In other reports, diverse As species in water, soils and plants have apparently
been successfully quantified by ion chromatography-ICP-MS.159,160
Finally, for As, a procedure based on LC and GC-ICP-MS has been described
for characterisation of gaseous As compound emissions from soil microcosms.361An interesting speciation paper this year was on the determination of organomercury
compounds in soils from orchards and wheat fields by capillary GC coupled
with an AA spectrometer via an in-situ hydride generation
system.362 The polar organomercuric halides
in 0.1 mol l−1 ethanoic acid–sodium ethanoate
buffer at pH 4 were reacted with KBH4 and the volatile derivatives
in the headspace were determined.Because of the risks associated with environmental contamination from continued
use of catalytic converters, methods for preconcentration and speciation
of Pt are currently of particular interest. The past year saw the publication
of a short but useful review of the characterisation of Pt species and possible
species transformations in grass extracts.363Craig et al.364 have described
a procedure for the detection of methylantimony species in environmental
samples; the system used NaBH4 as a derivatizing reagent and purge
and trap quartz-furnace AAS. For the generation of trimethylantimony, rigorous
exclusion of air and rapid purging of the derivative into the cold trap was
found to be important.Selenium speciation has been performed on hot water and enzymatic
extracts from Se-enriched plants, using HPLC-ICP-MS and HPLC-electrospray
ionization-MS.365 The HPLC was mostly carried
out with 0.1% heptafluorobutanoic acid as ion-pairing agent in methanol–water
solution, but for some compounds trifluoroethanoic acid was necessary. The
authors were able to identify around three quarters of the compounds eluted.Use of atomic spectrometry for characterization of organic complexing
properties of natural compounds seems to have been attracting more attention
over the review year. For example, gel electrophoresis was used with LA-ICP-MS
to measure the binding of Pb to various molecular size fractions of humic
and fulvic acids;366 this study used 206Pb
as a stable isotope tracer. Similarly, HP size exclusion chromatography coupled
to ICP-MS has also been used to study the metal complexing properties of molecular
size fractions of soil-derived humic acid.367
Size exclusion chromatography-ICP-MS has been used to study Cd complexation
in plants, both with368 and without369 electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (ES-MS-MS).3.1.4 Selective extraction methods. In the previous
section, speciation of elements either in soil or plant solution phases or
in the gas phase was considered. Identification of elements in different
chemical forms in the solid phase is also of interest, however. Welter et
al.370 have used X-ray absorption fine
structure to establish the presence of PbCO3, PbSO4,
PbO and basic PbCO3 as key components in Pb-contaminated soil.
Dharmasri and Hudnall371 have described an
ICP-OES-based method for the determination of pyrites in coastal soils in
Louisiana and acid sulfate soil from Sri Lanka.Operationally defined element fractionation procedures are still
attracting attention in the soils area, both through application of tried
and tested methods, and as new and hopefully improved methodology.372 Davidson and Délevoye373
found ultrasonic treatment useful for speeding up soil extraction steps. Cave et
al.374 have described a novel stepwise (concentration
gradient-based) extraction system using leaching with HNO3 + H2O2
from soil samples supported on a porous membrane in a centrifuge tube. Initial
results using the system, developed at the British Geological Survey, were
encouraging. A 4-stage sequential extraction for Hg in soils has been recommended,
based upon NH2OH.HCl in 25% ethanoic acid, HCl, NaOH and
HNO3.3753.2 Reference materialsNew research on reference materials in environmental atomic spectrometry
research is nearly always worthy of attention. An interesting concept being
developed over the past year for candidate reference materials was that of
an uncertainty budget.376 Uncertainty
budgets allowed all the most significant sources of potential error to be
identified, and facilitated more meaningful comparison of results between
laboratories. The approach was tested on an algae reference material.3.3 Instrumental methods of analysisThis section discusses particularly noteworthy applications of, or developments
in, atomic spectrometric analysis of soils, plants and related materials.
Many additional but more routine examples of applications of particular analytical
techniques are listed in Table 3.3.3.1 Atomic emission spectrometry. Applications of
ICP-AES to soil and plant analysis are now commonplace. Axially viewed ICPs
are also now in regular use, and following our report last year of systematic
studies of matrix element interferences when they are employed for
plant analysis,84 further work on this topic
has now appeared.377 Again plasma temperature
shifts seemed to pose a problem. Another noteworthy interference study is
one by Lambkin and Alloway378 on the problem
of determination of Cd in As-contaminated soils.Direct analysis of solid samples by ICP spectrometric methods
still has a select collection of devotees, and laser ablation methodology
can be a powerful auxiliary tool in some specialised applications.94 However, direct insertion of solid wood pulp samples
into an ICP via a pyrolytically coated graphite sample probe has
also been suggested;379 drying and ashing
were performed by inductive heating in the plasma prior to plasma ignition.Some researchers prefer to use electrothermal vaporisation for solid
sample analysis. High temperature vapour halogenation is often recommended
for improved precision and accuracy when employing ETV in ICP-OES.380 In one such study it was reported that best results
were obtained using 6% PTFE as a modifier added to the sample.381Hydride generation and cold vapour sample introduction are sometimes
used to enhance sensitivity in ICP-OES. For example, this approach has been
adopted for the determination of low concentrations of As and Hg in plant
samples.382As mentioned in last year's update,84plasmas
other than the ICP are not widely used in AES. However a MIP has been
used as emission source in a GC detector in the determination of organometallic
forms of Hg, Pb and Sn in contaminated soil.383
A MIP has also been used for the determination of P and Mn at concentrations
down to 8 and 95 ng ml−1 in acid digests of
tea leaves.3843.3.2 Atomic absorption spectrometry. Atomic absorption
spectrometry, even using electrothermal atomisation, is widely regarded
as a mature and reliable technique. However, results from round robin tests
analysing solid samples by ETAAS seem to suggest that optimism still outweighs
achievable skill at times.385 Inspired by
RSDs of 1.7–7% for Al, Cu, Li and Mn in plant CRMs, authors of
one recent paper nevertheless suggested a slurry-based ETA method for spruce
seeds.386 A slurry method, using PTFE as
modifer, has also apparently been successfully applied to the determination
of Cd in tomato leaves.387 The importance
of using an appropriate modifier was highlighted in a recent study of the
determination of Mo in grass and clover.388
For the hydride-forming elements As, Sb and Se, hydride generation has been
advocated as a method for introducing the determinands from soil, sediment
and leaf samples to an Ir-lined graphite furnace atomiser.389In flame atomic absorption spectrometry, little should be expected
in the way of exciting innovation. Some may still be interested in further
reports of the determination of Cd by cold vapour sample introduction, now
using FIA.390 Those excited by a report of
determination of Ca, Mg and Sr by FIA-AAS, unless known to be addicted to
Sr chemistry, might be regarded as bordering on the eccentric. Nevertheless,
a useful and thorough report on this topic has just been published.3913.3.3 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. In last year's
update, the point was made that atomic fluorescence spectrometry
is seen largely as a bit of an academic curiosity, which has great potential
for a handful of elements, but not enough to ever make it commercially viable.
Applications still appear in the literature, however. Over the past 12 months,
for example, it has been used to determine Hg in soil after microwave-assisted
distillation,392 and algal Pb concentrations
using hydride generation.3933.3.4 Mass spectrometry. As might be expected, ICP-MS
has dominated the literature which includes atomic MS data for soils and plant
tissues, as in other recent years.84 This
is reflected in its abundant appearance as the technique of choice in Table 3, especially for multi-element analysis
under the “various” elements category. This reflects the maturity
of the technique for plant and soil analysis. Newcomers and seasoned practitioners
alike still may benefit from reading good current reviews of the
technique, however, be they comprehensive reviews394
or short overviews.395MS techniques are also currently attracting considerable attention in the
environmental sphere because of the information that may be gleaned by exploiting
biologically or physico-chemically driven isotope discrimination processes.
Interest centres around 18O/16O discrimination272,274 and 14N/15N
ratios,396 although Sr isotopes are also
important.3.3.4.1 Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. Isobaric interferences may pose problems in ICP-MS analysis of
real samples. Townsend397 has therefore pointed
out the merits of sector-field ICP-MS over quadrupole MS in this context.Much of the interest in ICP-MS still seems to be arising as a consequence
of its capability for measuring isotope ratios. For example, stable
isotope exchange now seems to be being seriously considered for quantifying
labile pools of elements in soils.398 Isotope
ratios are of course also now being considered as a fingerprinting tool for
identifying origins of both products and pollutants: for example for Pb in
mosses,399 soils400
or pine needles.33 For elements such as Tl,
the potential to use isotope dilution techniques is also very attractive.401In terms of instrumental development, there seems to be little
major to report. Papers have appeared on hydride generation for As and Se,150 an FIA system for on-line dilution,327
and LA for soil402 and bark403
samples.3.3.4.2 Secondary ionisation mass spectrometry. Secondary
ionisation mass spectrometry has proved to be a valuable technique for
the characterisation of U- and Pu-containing particulates in Russian top soils,
swipes and forensic samples.404 Isotopic
composition was typically measured with an accuracy of 0.5%. SIMS has
also been used in a study of the subcellular localization of Al in Vicia
faba root cells.4053.3.4.3 Thermal ionisation mass spectrometry. Thermal
ionisation mass spectrometry has been exploited in a study of nutrient
uptake by Scots Pine, using 26Mg and 41K as tracers.4063.3.5 Laser ionisation breakdown spectrometry. An
atomic spectrometric method of analysis probably regarded by many as being
in the “rather exotic” league is laser ionisation breakdown
spectrometry. This reputation does not detract from its potential to
analyse soils directly in the field, however. Recently reported studies using
LIBS in a simulated Martian atmosphere (5–7 torr pressure
of CO2) suggest that it would not even matter if the field
was on Mars! This will do nothing to bring its rather exotic image more down
to earth.3.3.6 Particle-induced X-ray emission spectrometry. Particle-induced X-ray emission spectrometry has been used by
a number of researchers over the past year. Examples in the soil and plant
analysis field include: analysis of agricultural soil samples for 15 elements;407 the study of Cd distribution in Cd accumulating Brassica
juncea L;408 and mapping of elemental
distribution in arbuscular mycorrhizal roots of the grass Cynodon dactylon
from the vicinity of gold and uranium mine tailings.409
The same technique has been used to study element distributions in seeds of Silene
vulgaris.410 The full potential of micro-PIXE
for element mapping has yet to be recognised.3.3.7 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. Applications
of X-ray fluorescence spectrometry in general,411
and in the analysis of vegetation in particular, have recently been reviewed.412 Attempts are still being made to improve software
used to correct for matrix effects,413 and
to improve calibration methodology for portable field instruments.414 Whereas such systems are usually used to analyse
surface soils, a system has now been developed in the USA based upon a cone
penetrometer to allow sub-surface metal contamination to be investigated.415Total reflection XRF spectrometry has been used for the analysis
of fine roots of Scots Pine.416 Dried samples
were digested with HNO3 and Ga added as an internal standard. The
mixture was placed on a quartz plate and allowed to dry for analysis for 14
major and trace nutrient/potentially toxic elements. Detection limits
were mostly in the range 0.5–23 µg g−1.4 Analysis of geological materialsThis section considers the trends and advances made in the application
of atomic spectrometry to the understanding of the composition of geological
materials in the widest sense. Judged solely from the volume of published
literature in the period under review, it would appear that the most active
areas of instrumental research are ICP-MS, often combined with laser ablation
sample introduction, and X-ray techniques.However, the geochemist has a large array of analytical techniques at his
disposal, particularly for microanalysis. Ottolini501
published a useful review of the characteristics and limitations of various microprobe
techniques including EMPA, PIXE, SIMS and ASM. Any assessment of the
comparability of data obtained by these different techniques relies on the
availability of certified reference materials that are homogeneous on a micrometre
scale. To this end, Hinton502 used an ion
probe to check the homogeneity of the range of the NIST multi-element SRM
600 series of glass standards, which are used extensively as microprobe standards.
He concluded that although the absolute concentrations of analytes are significantly
lower than the nominal values, these differences were due to difficulties
encountered in the manufacture of the glasses and unlikely to be due to inhomogeneities
in the material itself. The consistency between the ratios of random samples
of glasses (SRM 610/612 and SRM 611/613) was supporting
evidence for a high degree of homogeneity on all scales.Reference materials are the cornerstone of much geochemical analysis.
Over 300 such materials are available to date, but only relatively few satisfy
the more stringent criteria for certified reference materials as defined by
ISO. Kane and Potts502 present a valuable
interpretation of these ISO guidelines and advocate that all new reference
materials should be prepared with the guidelines in mind. The Geological Survey
of Japan has published a compilation of analytical data received by October
1998 for five reference materials, giving recommended and preferred values
for 65 elements.503 It is good to see that
this information is also published on the Internet.4.1 Sample treatment4.1.1 Solid sample introduction. 4.1.1.1 Laser ablation. The current generation of UV
laser ablation systems possess characteristics such as a flat beam energy
profile to produce flat-bottomed craters, dynamic focusing to maintain the
focus at the sample surface during ablation and stage reposition accuracies
of <1 µm.504 All these features
are valuable assets when the laser system is employed as a microprobe.Although none of these applications is particularly novel, laser ablation
ICP-MS has recently provided data on the chemical composition of a variety
of geological materials, from basalts,505
tephras,506 apatite507
and coal508 to Egyptian artefacts509 and molluscs.510
Strictly speaking, the last material should only be deemed to be geological
if it is fossilised, but many geochemists are aware that growth structures
in shells and other biogenic carbonates contain chemical information which
can be related to the environmental conditions under which they grew. In this
work the ICP-MS instrument was optimised on 88Sr, using a piece
of natural calcite, and calibrated using BCS CRM 393 prepared as a pressed
limestone powder.Craig et al.511 have assessed
alternative calibration strategies for the analysis of carbonate-rich
materials by LA-ICP-MS. They compared commercially available glass RMs, geological
RMs and high purity calcium carbonate powder spiked with the analytes of interest.
Their preferred strategy was to use geological RMs, with calcium as the internal
standard as it proved more reliable than indium. Ødegård512 has developed a method of preparing synthetic
calibration materials for mineral analysis by LA-ICP-MS and other microtechniques.
It is based on direct fusion in high-purity graphite electrodes and has been
tested on quartz and rutile (TiO2) spiked with a relatively
large range of elements including the REE. Promising results have been obtained
so far and it is hoped to extend the method to other oxide minerals.As reported in last year's Update, there is still much interest in
the bulk analysis of geological materials by ablating lithium borate/metaborate
glass disks to determine a wide range of trace elements, and even a few major
elements as well.513–515
Günther and co-workers515 used the glass
standard NIST 612 as an external calibration standard and silica as an internal
standard to correct for the different masses of material ablated. Although
the precision was not as good as XRF, they were able to determine 40 isotopes
with a reproducibility of better than 5% for the major and minor elements.
A method to determine Zr and Hf in a flux-free fusion of whole rocks by LA-ICP-MS
using isotope dilution calibration has been proposed by Reid et al.516 The samples were prepared by adding a known amount
of Zr/Hf spike solution to the rock powder, drying, grinding to homogenise
the spike with the sample and then fusing on an iridium strip heater at 1600°C
for 2 min before cooling quickly. By using isotope dilution, the need for
external calibration using a CRM is eliminated.There is increasing interest in the use of laser sampling coupled to magnetic
sector ICP-MS, particularly multiple collector (MC) instruments,
to perform high precision isotopic measurements with the minimum
of sample preparation. This has opened the door to much more rapid methods
for U–Pb and Pb–Pb age determinations of single zircon crystals517–521 with precisions
comparable to those obtained by the SHRIMP technique for homogeneous zircons.
Griffin et al.522 determined the
Hf isotope composition in zircon megacrysts by MC-ICP-MS using a fixed detector
array of 12 Faraday cups and 3 ion counters.The detection limits offered by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
(LIBS)
are in the range 30–300 mg kg−1, considerably
higher than those obtained with laboratory techniques such ICP or XRF. However,
LIBS comes into its own in real-time applications that require less precise
analyses without the time and cost of sample preparation. Bolger523
investigated its use for rapid on-line determination of major and minor constituents
of mineral drill core samples. A novel normalization scheme based on integrating
the total plasma emission was demonstrated as a method for correcting signal
variations caused by the uneven surface of the rock. LIBS has also been used
for the rapid identification of the origin of particulate geological material
by comparison of the data obtained against an electronic library of spectra.524Laser-based techniques have been assessed for their potential use in space
exploration.525,526 Brinckerhoff
and co-workers525 describe a prototype miniature
reflection time-of-flight mass spectrometer with a mass of about 2 kg
and volume < 2 × 103 cm3
that could be used in-situ to measure the elemental and isotopic
composition of regolith materials on other planets. Microscopic surface samples
are obtained with a short-pulse laser and repeated pulses could be used to
access unweathered subsurface materials. LIBS has also been evaluated with
a view to its potential application in space exploration.526
Two instrumental systems are described, one for close range (175 mm)
analysis at reduced pressure and the other for measurements at distances up
to 19 m. Detection limits were generally in the range 1.2–88 mg kg−1
for close range work and 1.9–95 mg kg−1
for greater distances.4.1.1.2 Slurry nebulisation. This is still an attractive
approach to the analysis of geological materials as it significantly reduces
sample preparation time and minimises the risk of contamination or loss of
analyte. Many of the recent advances centre on the introduction of slurries
into electrothermal atomisers. Direct solid sampling for the analysis
of soils and sediments for Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn by ETAAS and ETV-ICP-AES
have been systematically investigated.380
Two Brazilian groups independently optimised the experimental conditions for
the determination of trace elements in coal using ETAAS527
and ETV-ICP-MS.528A third group of workers from Brazil concluded that the use of a tungsten–rhodium chemical
modifier offered improvements over existing methods for the determination
of Pb in sediment slurries by ETV-AAS.529
The permanent W–Rh modifier remained stable for approximately 250 firings
when 20 µl of a 0.5% m/v sediment slurry were delivered
to the atomiser.In ETV-ICP-MS, significant analyte signal suppression is observed if microgram
quantities of silicate materials are vaporised directly into the plasma. A
Canadian team530 has determined the optimum
conditions for the removal of silica by the addition of HF as a matrix
modifier to drive off the silica as the tetrafluoride at temperatures below
480°C. They concluded that 20 µl of 50% HF,
and a reaction hold time of 150 s for the digestion to occur, was effective
in completely removing 0.125 g of silica while maintaining the integrity
of the graphite tube for over 200 firings. It will be interesting to see whether
this method is widely adopted.An ultrasound-assisted extraction procedure has been proposed
as an alternative to slurry sampling and sample digestion for the determination
of Cd in sediments.531 Slurries were sonicated
in nitric acid for 2–5 min using a titanium probe, centrifuged
and 20 µl of the liquid phase introduced into a graphite tube
previously treated with a W–Rh permanent modifier. Although good agreement
with reference values was demonstrated, it is clear that the technique was
really designed for the analysis of biological samples. A method employing
slurry sampling combined with ultrasonic pretreatment for the determination
of mercury by FI-CV-AAS has also been reported.4364.1.2 Sample dissolution. An HF-based mixture of acids
is normally required if microwave-assisted digestion procedures are
to be successful in the total dissolution of silicate minerals.532–535
Whilst such sample digestion procedures can minimise contamination and lower
the analytical blank, there seems to be little mention of the problems posed
by the analysis of the resulting solutions which may contain significant amounts
of HF even after dilution. A novel application of microwave-assisted digestion
has been a sequential extraction scheme for the direct determination of sulfate-S,
pyritic-S and organic-S concentrations in bituminous or sub-bituminous coal.536 The initial extraction using 5 M HCl was
analysed for sulfate-S. The residue from the initial digestion was treated
with 2 M HNO3 to obtain a solution containing pyritic-S,
and the organic-S content was determined on a solution obtained by an HF-based
acid mixture attack on the second residue and quenching with boric acid.The use of xenon difluoride as a reagent for the digestion of
sediments has been investigated.537 Although
the authors report an improvement in detection limits for many elements compared
with an HF vapour phase digestion, its use does have severe limitations in
that it should only be handled under dry gas conditions.Sequential extraction schemes are often used to obtain information
about the distribution of trace elements between different physico-chemical
phases. In such cases where the results are operationally defined, it is difficult
to ensure comparability between laboratories. Therefore data on elemental
concentrations derived from partial and sequential extractions of commonly
available reference materials are welcome. Lynch538
has compiled a set of provisional elemental concentrations derived from partial
extractions (dilute HNO3–dilute HCl; concentrated HNO3–concentrated
HCl; concentrated HNO3–concentrated HClO4)
and a five-step sequential extraction of eight CCRMP sediment reference materials.
Twenty North American laboratories contributed data to this study, most of
which were obtained by ICP-AES. Workers from the Geological Survey of Japan539 used a five-step extraction scheme with ETAAS
to determine the partitioning of Au in geological reference materials. Values
for Cd distributions in three coal fly ash, soil and sediment reference materials
by ETAAS following sequential extractions has also been reported.5404.1.3 Separation and preconcentration. Yang and Pin
have investigated new methods for the separation of trace amounts of Zr and
Hf from the major constituents of silicate rocks based on extraction chromatography.541,542 They used a single stage extraction
with a tertiary amine or quaternary ammonium salt as the stationary phase.541 Although they successfully separated Zr and Hf
from matrix elements such as Al, Fe, Ti, Ca, etc., it was found that
trace amounts of fluoride introduced by acid digestion of the rock samples
had a detrimental effect on the separation. Further work with N-benzoyl-N-phenylhydroxylamine (BPHA)
yielded a superior method capable of producing detection limits of 0.02 and
0.07 µg g−1 for Zr and Hf, respectively,
from a LiBO2 fusion rather than dissolution with HF.542The determination of precious metals almost invariably involves
preconcentration and separation of the analytes of interest because of their
low abundance in most silicate phases. In a detailed review containing 116
references, Reddi and Rao543 summarise the
main advantages and disadvantages of the methods in current use for the quantification
of Au and the platinum group elements (PGE). A shorter review by
Hoffman et al.544 examines the alternatives
to fire assay for the determination of Au. They conclude that although fire
assay remains the reference method for Au it is not foolproof for recovering
100% of the gold present. Akatsuka and McLaren545
discuss preconcentration and separation methods for the determination of trace
Pt in environmental samples by ICP-MS.Several groups of workers have been seeking to make improvements on
published procedures. The method to determine Au, Ir, Pd, Pt, Rh, and
Ru by ICP-MS after fusion with sodium peroxide and separation with tellurium
co-precipitation has been modified by Jin and Zhu.546
They claim enhanced recoveries of Ru and Au, with detection limits of 1–9 pg g−1
using 20 g of sample. The chlorination technique using a Carius tube
has been developed by a group at Durham University to incorporate solvent
extraction and anion exchange separation for the determination of the PGE
including Os and Re–Os isotopes in geological samples by isotope dilution
ICP-MS.547,5484.1.4 Speciation studies. A combination of cation
exchange chromatography and ICP-MS has been employed for the simultaneous
measurement of arsenic species in various matrices including river
sediments;160 a detection limit of 0.14 µg l−1
As was reported. In a comparison of the performance of ICP-MS and AFS detection,
based on the use of HPLC and hydride generation, comparable detection limits
of the order of 0.1–0.3 µg l−1
As were obtained.156 The chemical stability
and oxidation behaviour of cationic arsenic compounds in a microwave sample
preparation system using nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide have also been
investigated.549A novel piece of research has looked at the possibility of using a low
pressure (LP) ICP ion source for organomercury speciation
in sediments.550 Atomic mass spectra for
methylmercury were obtained when the plasma was sustained in pure helium between
9 and 12 W power. Molecular spectra were obtained under soft ionisation
conditions at 5 W power in the presence of a reagent gas; ammonia was
found to yield the best stability and sensitivity when employed to modify
the ionization conditions in the LP-ICP.There is still much interest in methods for the measurement of organotin
species. HPLC coupled with ICP-MS is an attractive solution, but problematical
because of matrix effects and potential changes in the chemical form of the
analyte during sample extraction. The latter difficulty has been tackled by
spiking the sample with tributyltin iodide enriched in 116Sn prior
to extraction551 and optimising a microwave-assisted
acid extraction.552 Alternative approaches
using multicapillary GC with ICP-AES553 or
ICP-MS detection554 have been reported recently.4.1.5 Vapour generation. A multi-element approach
based on atom-trapping ETAAS for As, Sb and Se has been developed
for a range of materials including soils and sediments.389
Gaseous hydrides of the elements of interest formed by reaction with sodium
tetrahydroborate are introduced into a graphite tube coated with iridium.
The hydrides are preconcentrated at 300°C in the tube before measurement.
Murphy and co-workers207 adopted a similar
approach; they included an off-line reduction process to ensure that the analyte
was in its most sensitive and favourable oxidation state. However, so far,
they have only applied their method to waters. The use of hydride generation
for the determination of bismuth at trace levels is an attractive alternative
to conventional modes of sample introduction to ICP-AES in order to improve
sensitivity. However, relatively strong interferences have been observed in
the generation of BiH3 in comparison with other hydride-forming
elements. A comprehensive study of the effect of hydrochloric, tartaric, oxalic,
citric, sulfosalicylic and acetic acids on the efficiency of BiH3
formation and the interfering effect of transition metals and other hydride-forming
elements concluded that tartaric acid was the most suitable reaction medium.1514.2 Instrumental analysis4.2.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. For an up-to-date
text on atomic absorption spectrometry the reader need look no further
than the third edition of Welz's book on the subject,202
which contains chapters on its application to the analysis of a multitude
of sample types including rocks, minerals and ores. Although AAS is still
widely employed for geochemical analysis, as witnessed by the papers in Table 4, it is hard to divine much that is
new. The method of co-precipitating Ag from sea-water with cobalt (II)
pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate, prior to measurement by ETAAS, has been applied
to the determination of Ag at pg g−1 levels in road
salt samples.555 A procedure claiming to
be new and rapid for the determination of Hg, involving pyrolysis of the sample
in a combustion tube at 750°C under an oxygen atmosphere, collection
on a gold amalgamator and detection by AAS using a silicon UV dioxide detector,
has been reported recently.437
Table 4 Summary of the analyses of geological materials

ElementMatrixTechnique; atomization; presentationaSample treatment/commentsRef.a Hy indicates hydride
and S, L, G and Sl signify solid, liquid, gaseous or slurry atomization, respectively.
Other abbreviations are listed elsewhere.AgLead oreAA;-;LDissolved in HNO3 and HClO4632AgSedimentAA;ETV;LDigested with aqua regia. Ru deposited on platform
as permanent modifier559AlSedimentAE;arc;SGround to ca. 3.8 µm. Slurried with
H2SO4 and La as internal standard633AsEnvironmental materialAA;-;HyStability of cationic As compounds during microwave assisted
digestion studied549AsSedimentMS;ICP;LSpecies eluted from sulfonic acid type cation exchange
column160AsCoalAF;-;GContinuous on-line extraction with subcritical water560AsSoil and sedimentAA;ETA;HyAutomated hydride generation followed by preconcentration
on Ir coated walls of furnace at 300°C389AsEnvironmental materialAA;-;HyReaction conditions for speciation examined153AsSedimentMS;ICP;- AF;-;-Comparison of ICP-MS and AFS detection for speciation studies156AuGeological material-;-;-Review with 9 refs. of fire assay and other techniques544AuGeological materialAE;ICP;L10 g calcined at 650°C for 1 h.
Digested with 30 ml 50%
aqua regia, followed by on-line
FI preconcentration634AuGeological RMsAA;ETA;LFive-step sequential extraction539AuSulfidesMS;-;S XRF;-;SComparison between SIMS and synchrotron XRF635BTourmalineMS;-;SMatrix effects on the determination of B, H and Li investigated636BiGeological materialAE;ICP;HySix reaction media compared151CGraphiteMS;-;SSIMS used to measure C isotopic ratios in study of crustal
fluids598CGeological materialsMS;-;SImpure CO2 reduced to graphite, re-oxidised
at 500°C to pure CO2 and reduced to amorphous carbon. 14C∶12C
ratio determined by AMS637CDiamondMS;-;SSIMS study of variations C isotope composition and N abundance599CGeological materialMS;-;SDescription of the geological, archaeological and environmental
applications of the Erlangen, Germany, AMS system606CaCarbonatesMS;ICP;LDissolved in 3 M HCl, centrifuged, supernatant evaporated
to dryness and dissolved in 2 M HNO3. Isotope ratios measured
with high precision using multiple collector ICP-MS586CaHaliteMS;ICP;LNd∶YAG laser (266 nm) used to ablate
single fluid inclusions638CdFly ash, soil and sedimentAA;ETA;LMicrowave assisted digestion with HNO3, HCl
and HF425CdCoalAA;ETA;SSlurried with a mixture of 5% v/v HNO3,
0.05% Triton X-100 and 10% ethanol527CdSediment RMsMS;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion with HF and HNO3.
Isotope dilution and mass bias corrections used with sector field ICP-MS577CdSedimentAA;ETA;LW–Rh permanent chemical modifier used557CdFly ash, soil and sedimentAA;ETA;LForms of Cd studied using sequential extraction540CdSedimentAA;ETA;LComparison of ultrasound-assisted extraction, microwave-assisted
digestion and slurry sampling531CuGeological materialMS;ICP;LDissolved in 5 M HNO3. Isotope ratios
measured using multiple collector ICP-MS585CuSedimentAA;ETA;LSee Cd, ref. 531531EuEnvironmental materialAE;ICP;GSeparated and preconcentrated on micro-column of immobilized
1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoyl-5-pyrene. ETV sample introduction639FHumite-group mineralsEMPA;-;SComparison of accuracy of EMPA, SIMS and SREF in the determination
of high concentrations of F640FeGeological materialMS;ICP;LDissolved in 6 M HCl, purified by double precipitation
with aqueous NH3. Isotope ratios measured with high precision using
double focusing multiple collector ICP-MS584FeNIST SRMsMS;ICP;LSee Pb, ref. 589589GaGeological materialXRF;-;SAnalytes preconcentrated onto macroporous resins loaded
with 5-phenylazoquinolin-8-ol. Resins deposited on Millipore filters, covered
with Mylar film and analyzed by WDXRF610HTourmalineMS;-;SSee B, ref. 636636HfIron rich geological materialMS;ICP;L AE;ICP;LDigested with HNO3, HF and HClO4.
Hf, Zr and Fe separated from major elements on anion exchange column541HfRockMS;ICP;SPowder mixed with enriched spike solution, dried and ground.
Fused twice without flux. Hf and Zr determined by LA-ICP-MS using Nd∶YAG (266 nm)
and ArF (193 nm) excimer lasers516HfBasaltAE;ICP;LTwo chromatographic separation techniques are compared542HfZirconMS;ICP;SAblated with frequency quadrupled Nd∶YAG laser at
266 nm. Isotope composition determined by multicollector ICP-MS522HgEnvironmental materialXRF;-;SAmalgam formed with thin layer of gold deposited on quartz
reflector. TXRF data processed to resolve overlapping Hg and Au peaks623HgCoalAF;-;GSee As, ref.
560560HgSedimentAA;-;GSlurried with 9 + 1 mixture of 15%
HNO3 and 15% HCl containing 0.02% v/v Triton
X-100. Ultrasonic treatment prior to FI sample introduction436HgSedimentAE;-;-Comparison of GC and detection techniques for speciation
studies641HgSedimentMS;ICP;-Comparison of extraction methods and use of a low pressure
He plasma for the determination of organomercury species550HgEnvironmental materialMS;ICP;-Species separated by microcolumn multicapillary GC554HgSedimentAA;-;GReduction with stannous chloride642HgZinc oreAAS;-;CV0.1–0.2 g dried and powdered sample wetted
with H2O, mixed with 10 ml HCl, heated on a hotplate for
10 min to remove H2S, mixed with 10 ml HCl and 4 ml
HNO3, heated for 30 min and diluted to 100 ml with
H2O643HgEnvironmental materialAA;-;GPyrolysed in a combustion tube at 750°C under
O. Hg collected on Au437HgEnvironmental material-;-;-Review with 57 refs. of Chinese work61InGeological materialXRF;-;SSee Ga, ref. 610610LaEnvironmental materialAE;ICP;GSee Eu, ref. 639639LiBasaltMS;ICP;LDigested with concentrated HF∶HNO3
(3∶1).
Isotopic composition measured using multi-collector ICP-MS582LiTourmalineMS;-;SSee B, ref. 636636LiBasaltMS;ICP;LIsotopic composition measured using multicollector sector
ICP-MS583MoGeological materialMS;ICP;LDigestion with HF and mixed Mo, Sb and W spike. Measurement
involved ID-FI-ICP-MS576MoMolybdeniteMS;-;LMo isotopes determined by TIMS596NbGeological materialMS;-;S60 mg mixed with 30 mg graphite spiked with 91Zr,
milled and pressed into electrodes. Nb, Y and Zr determined by spark source
MS with multiple ion counting603NbGeological RMsXRF;-;SComparison of direct WDXRF analysis of pressed powder pellets
with separation and collection of analyte on anion-exchange membranes611NbMeteoritesMS;-;SNb, Y and Ta determined by spark source MS with multiple
ion counting602OEmeraldMS;-;SSIMS used to measure O isotopic ratios to identify origin
of gems644OsGeological materialMS;ICP;LIsotope dilution used with three different nebulisers590OsMolybdeniteMS;ICP;-Os-Os dating method studied using ICP-MS and negative ion
TIMS591OsGeological materialMS;ICP;GOsO4 introduced directly into the plasma of
a multicollector ICP-MS. Picogram levels of Os and Re determined by isotope
dilution592PbSedimentAA;ETV;LW–Rh permanent chemical modifier used558PbSedimentAA;ETV;LSee Ag, ref. 559559PbZirconMS;ICP;SInstrumental conditions and calibration strategies for
Pb–Pb age determination by LA-ICP-MS discussed518PbOreAA;-;LDecomposed with HCl and HNO3645PbGeological materialMS;ICP;SDiscussion of errors in LA-ICP-MS and other techniques
of U–Pb age determination519PbSedimentAA;ETA;SSlurried with 0.5% v/v HNO3 containing
0.04% Triton X-100. W–Rh permanent chemical modifier used529PbSedimentAA;ETA;LMicrowave assisted digestion with aqua regia and
HF556PbCoalAA;ETA;SSee Cd,  ref. 527527PbZirconMS;ICP;SSingle grains pressed into epoxy disc and polished. U–Pb
age determined by LA-ICP-MS520PbZirconMS;ICP;SU–Pb age determined by LA-ICP-MS521PbNIST SRMsMS;ICP;LPrecision of isotope ratio measurements improved by collisional
damping in a dynamic reaction cell. See Fe, ref.
589589PbSedimentAA;ETA;LSee Cd,  ref. 531531PdDust and sedimentMS;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion with aqua regia.
Ultrasonic nebulisation used with sector field ICP-MS579PdCopper-nickel oresAAS;-;LPd adsorbed on silica treated with N-allyl-N′-propylthiourea.
Eluted with thiourea solutions in HCl646PtDust and sedimentMS;ICP;LSee ref. 579579PtGeological and environmental materialMS;ICP;-Discussion of preconcentration and separation methods presented545PuEnvironmental materialsMS;ICP;LLow-flow microconcentric nebuliser587PuEnvironmental RMsMS;ICP;LOn-line separation of 238U with two extraction
resins. Measurement involving isotope dilution and HR-ICP-MS441RbHaliteMS;ICP;LSee Ca, ref. 638638RbGeological materialAA;-;SAblated with Nd∶YAG laser. Isotope spectrum obtained
by scanning plasma with narrow band Ti∶sapphire laser647RhDust and sedimentMS;ICP;LSee Pd, ref. 579579REERockMS;ICP;LDecomposed in a mixture of HF + HClO4
at 150°C568REEGeological materialMS;ICP;LDirect injection nebuliser used with sector field instrument648SCoalMS;-;SChemical form of sulfur investigated by SIMS649SCoalAE;ICP;LForms of S determined following sequential microwave assisted
acid extraction536SbSoil and sedimentAA;ETA;HySee As, ref. 389389SbGeological materialMS;ICP;LSee Mo, ref. 576576SeCoalAF;-;GSee As, ref. 560560SeSoil and sedimentAA;ETA;HySee As, ref. 389389SeSedimentAA;-;HySix different extraction solutions compared650SeRockAA;-;HyDigested with HF, HClO4 and HNO3
at 140°C for 2 h651SeEnvironmental materialAA;-;-Review in Czech with 130 refs.180SnSedimentAA;ETV;LSee Ag, ref. 559559SnSedimentMS;-;-Extracted with 1 M HCl in methanol and ethyl acetate (1∶1).
Organotin compounds detected by GC-MS652SnSedimentAE;-;-Microwave assisted digestion with acetic acid followed
by solvent extraction and derivatization. Organotin compounds separated by
multicapillary GC653SrSilicate rockMS;ICP;LDissolved in a mixture of 28 M HF and 14 M
HNO3 in a PTFE vessel, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 2 M
HCl. Sr separated on Dowex 50W-X8 cation exchange column. Precision of isotope
ratios measured by quadrupole instrument shown to be adequate where variations
are large654SrHaliteMS;ICP;LSee Ca, ref. 638638TaMeteoritesMS;-;SSee Nb, ref. 602602ThEnvironmental materialsMS;ICP;LSee Pu, ref. 587587ThGeological materialMS;-;LImproved chromatographic procedure for the separation of
Th and U using TRUSPEC resins in acidic media594ThOreMS;ICP;LOn-line matrix separation with 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic
acid. Isotopes measured by sector field ICP-MS580TiSilicate RMsMS;ICP;LDigested with HF. ID and FI used with sector field instrument575TlGeological materialMS;ICP;LTwo-stage anion exchange separation. Isotopic data obtained
by multiple collector instrument. Method claimed to be an improvement over
that from TIMS581UEnvironmental materialsMS;ICP;LSee Pu, ref. 587587UGeological materialMS;ICP;SSee Pb, ref. 519519UZirconMS;ICP;SSee Pb, ref. 520520UUranium oreMS;-;LHigh precision measurement of natural U isotope ratios
resulting in proposed IUPAC reference values655UGeological materialMS;-;LSee Th, ref. 594594UEnvironmental materialMS;ICP;LDigested with HF + HNO3 + HClO4.
Pt used as internal standard566UZirconMS;ICP;SSee Pb, ref. 521521UOreMS;ICP;LSee Th, ref. 580580UPhosphogypsumMS;ICP;LRefluxed with HNO3 for 2 h at 120–140°C.
U separated by column chromatography588UMinerals-;-;-Review of spectroscopic techniques656WGeological materialAE;ICP;LFused with KHSO4. Comparison made with derivative
spectrophotometry564WGeological materialMS;ICP;LSee Mo, ref. 576576YGeological materialMS;-;SSee Nb, ref. 603603YMeteoritesMS;-;SSee Nb, ref. 602602ZnOreAA;-;LSee Pb, ref. 645645ZrGeological materialMS;-;SSee Nb, ref. 603603ZrIron rich geological materialMS;ICP;L AE;ICP;LSee Hf, ref. 541541ZrBasaltAE;ICP;LSee Hf, ref. 542542VariousGeological material-;-;-Review with 134 refs. of techniques for multi-element analysis,
emphasizing ICP-MS and ICP-AES345VariousZirconMS;ICP;SU–Pb and Pb–Pb ages and 25 trace elements determined
by LA-ICP-MS517VariousGeological and environmental samplesMS;-;SExamples of recent developments and applications of RIMS600VariousGeological material-;-;-Review with 97 refs. of advances in the determination of
Au and the PGEs from 1990–1998657VariousEnvironmental materialsAA;ETA;HyAs, Bi, Sb, Se and Te determined by in-atomiser trapping
in Ir-coated graphite tube207VariousGeological materialMS;-;-Review of atomic mass spectrometry394VariousRock, ore and concentratesAE;ICP;LDigestion in aqua regia followed by fusion with
Na2O2. Au, Pd, Pt and Rh determined after reductive
co-precipitation using Se as collector658VariousFeldsparAE;ICP;LDecomposed with HF + H2SO4 + HNO3.
Fused with Na2CO3 and Na2B4O7
at 1000°C for 15 min, cooled and dissolved in HCl (1∶1).
Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Ti determined659VariousGeological materialAA;-;-Book reviewing AAS, 964 pp.202VariousGeological materialMS;ICP;SStudy of the use of HF to remove Si in ETV slurry sample
introduction530VariousGeological and environmental materialsXRF;-;SAnnual review of XRF spectrometry with 537 refs.411VariousSepiolitesAE;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion with HNO3, HCl
and HF532VariousNiobium–tantalum oreXRF;-;SPelletised with cellulose binder616VariousObsidian artefactsXRF;-;SDiamond polished, mounted in epoxy-resin and subjected
to PIXE analysis and fission track dating660VariousRubiesXRF;-;SProvenance examined using trace element fingerprinting
of PIXE data625VariousGeological materialsEPMA;-;SInteractive program used to choose matrix correction model
for data from a CAMECA SX50 microprobe661VariousGeological and environmental materialXRF;-;SNovel method of EDXRF signal deconvolution for gas-filled
proportional counters described662VariousSedimentAE;ICP;L MS;ICP;LMajor and trace elements determined after fusion with LiBO2663VariousBasaltMS;ICP;S28 trace elements determined by LA-ICP-MS to fingerprint
ancient Egyptian quarries509VariousGeological materialMS;-;SFused into glass, powdered, pressed into electrodes and
18 elements determined by spark source MS with multiple ion counting664VariousSoilAA;F;L AA;ETA;LRapid partial dissolution proposed for geochemical exploration665VariousGeological materialsXRF;-;SPrinciples and applications of micro-XANES and micro-XRF
using synchrotron radiation explained666VariousPlatinum group mineralsXRF;-;SPIXE and EPMA trace element data from cooperite and braggite
compared628VariousGold oreXRF;-;SPIXE microanalysis used to examine Au–pyrite associations
in the Kimberley reefs629VariousSulfidesXRF;-;SMicro-PIXE evaluated for the identification of chemical
signatures and textural types630VariousZirconsXRF;-;SPIXE analysis used to discriminate zircons from S-, I-
and A-type granites627VariousCoral and sedimentXRF;-;SVarious EDXRF methods, including TRXRF, discussed for the
determination of marine pollution indicators615VariousSoil gasMS;ICP;LUse of trace metals sorbed onto activated carbon collectors
over ca. 100 d as an exploration tool for buried mineralization667     VariousGeological material-;-;-Discussion of techniques for the determination of Au, Ir,
Os, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru presented543VariousGeological RMsMS;-;LFigures of merit for ICP-TOF-MS discussed330VariousGeological RMsMS;ICP;SFused with Li2B4O7. Minor
and trace elements determined by LA sample introduction using NIST 612 glass
for calibration and Si as internal standard515VariousCoalAE;GD;SAshed and pressed into pellets without binder668VariousPhosphate rockAE;-;SGround and pressed into pellets. LIBS used in near-line
process monitoring669VariousSedimentXRF;-;S0.3 g mixed with 3 drops of organic solvent and
pelletised. Trace elements determined by EDXRF using 925 MBq 109Cd
source670VariousOreXRF;-;SGround to <300 mesh and pelletised with cellulose
binder. Ba, I, In, Mo, Sb, Sn and Sr determined by EDXRF using 241Am
source617VariousSedimentAA;F;LMicrowave assisted digestion with HNO3. Cr,
Cu, Pb and Zn determined by EPA methods671VariousSoil and sedimentAE;ICP;LStudy of spectral interferences in the determination of
trace elements562VariousTrapiche rubiesXRF;-;SSpatial variability of Al, Ca, Cr, Fe, Si and Ti examined626VariousMartian rockXRF;-;SDirect analysis by alpha proton X-ray spectrometry at Pathfinder
landing site613VariousCoalMS;ICP;STrace elements determined by LA-ICP-MS508VariousGeological materialMS;ICP;LREEs determined by isotope dilution574VariousGeological materialMS;ICP;-Review with 13 refs. of geochemical applications of sector
based ICP-MS672VariousGeological material-;-;-Review with 859 refs.84VariousClinopyroxeneMS;ICP;SComparison of LA-ICP-MS with other techniques for the determination
of incompatible trace elements673VariousSynthetic glassesMS;ICP;SSynthetic calibration glasses for LA-ICP-MS prepared by
fusion of spiked TiO2 and SiO2 in high purity graphite
electrodes512VariousGeological RMs-;-;-An interpretation of ISO guidelines for certification presented502VariousCoalMS;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion in concentrated HNO3571VariousGeological materialMS;-;SCompact benchtop SIMS instrument described597VariousGeological materialMS;-;SDescription of the AUSTRALIS AMS system incorporating a
30 µm Cs beam source and its applications for trace element and
isotopic measurement given608VariousForaminiferaMS;ICP;LElement-calcium ratios measured precisely on single shells
using sector field instrument674VariousSedimentAE;ICP;L, XRF;-;SSamples dried, homogenized and leached sequentially with
ammonium nitrate, ammonium acetate, hydroxylamine hydrochloride, ascorbic
acid and HNO3 + H2O2.
Ba, Ca, Fe, Mn, and Sr determined by ICP-AES. Undissolved residue filtered
off, dried and pellitized. Ca, Fe, K, Mn, Rb, Si, Sr, Ti, Y, Zn and Zr determined
by EDXRF614VariousSedimentTXRF;-;S200 mg microwave-digested in PTFE bomb with HNO3,
HF, H2O and Ga as internal standard, diluted with water and 10 µl
pipetted onto a quartz sample carrier237VariousGeological materialMS;ICP;SFused with Li2B4O7 and
LiBO2
(9∶1) at 1050°C. Trace elements
determined by LA-ICP-MS513VariousSoil and sedimentXRF;-;SDried at 105°C. Reasons for not fusing discussed.
Matrix correction based on α-coefficients calculated for homogeneous
materials484VariousGeological RMsMS;ICP;L100 mg samples microwave digested with 2 ml
HF and 0.5 ml HNO3 at 130°C for 48 h397VariousSilicatesXRF;-;SComparison of software packages for processing data from
analysis of fusion disks675VariousMoon rockXRF;-;SDescription of the CCD-based X-ray spectrometer to be launched
in 2003 aboard the SELENE orbiter given612VariousMonaziteXRF;-;SEvaluation of WDXRF operating parameters for the determination
of 32 elements including the REEs619VariousSedimentXRF;-;SVarious X-ray techniques compared in pollution studies624VariousBlack shaleMS;ICP;LDigested with HNO3 + HF in
a PTFE bomb at 190°C for 3 h. Cd, Ga, Ge, In, Re, Se, Te
and Ti determined573VariousSedimentMS;ICP;L0.1 g dried at 120°C and digested with
1.5 g XeF2 in the vapour phase at 190°C and
9 × 106 Pa, followed aqua regia
digestion537VariousExtra terrestrial regolithMS;-;SDescription of compact (ca. 2 kg)
laser ablation TOFMS for direct analysis of planetary surfaces525VariousGraniteMS;ICP;L100 mg digested with 1 ml HF and 0.5 ml
HNO3 in PTFE-lined stainless steel bombs at 190°C for
12 h. Insoluble residue dissolved in 40% HNO3 at
110°C for 3 h. Rh used as internal standard567VariousSilicate RMsXRF;-;SFigures of merit given for the analysis of six RMs using
synchrotron-XRF with a standard-free fundamental parameter approach to quantification676VariousSoil and sedimentMS;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion with HF + HNO3535VariousGeological materialAA;F;LCd, Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn preconcentrated on columns of Aspergillus
niger immobilized on sepiolite677VariousRock, soil and sedimentAA;ETV;SCr, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn determined using direct solid sample
introduction380VariousGeological materialAE;-;SUse of LIBS for the direct determination of Cr, Cu, Fe,
Mn and Ni in drill core523VariousRock RMsMS;ICP;LMicrowave assisted digestion. REEs separated on Dowex AG-50WX-12
cation exchange column569VariousLigniteMS;ICP;-38 elements determined along with mineralogical studies678VariousGeological materialMS;ICP;SFused with Li2B4O7. 35
elements determined by LA-ICP-MS514VariousCoal and fly ashMS;ICP;L1-Methylpyrrolidin-2-one used to extract organically associated
trace elements572VariousIron oreAE;-;SLIBS used for the rapid identification of particles524VariousRockTXRF;-;SAblated under Ar with Nd∶YAG laser directly onto
sample carrier622VariousGeological materialMS;ICP;LAu and the PGEs determined after fusion with Na2O2
and co-precipitation with Te546VariousRock, soil and sedimentXRF;-;S0.25 g powder mixed with 1 g H3BO3
and pellitised. Ba, Fe, Sr and Zr determined using 3.7 GBq 241Am
source and Si(Li) detector679VariousColemanite oreXRF;-;SAs, Ba, Cs, I, In, Sb, Sn and Sr determined by EDXRF using
100 mCi 241Am source618VariousSoil and sedimentAE;-;STwo LIBS systems evaluated for space exploration526VariousSedimentMS;ICP;-Four methods used: microwave digestion, NiS fire assay,
acid leaching and Carius tube digestion. Os and the PGEs determined593VariousGeological and environmental materialsMS;-;SRecent advances in AMS reviewed605VariousRockMS;ICP;LHigh pressure digestion with HF + HNO3
in a Teflon bomb. 43 trace elements determined using double focusing instrument578VariousMeteoritesMS;-;SAu, Ir, Os and Pt determined by SIMS680VariousGeological material-;-;-Use of chemometric techniques to maximise information from
multi-element measurements348VariousFluid inclusionsXRF;-;SCa, Cl, K, Mg and SO4 ions determined on frozen
samples by EDXRF attached to a scanning electron microscope620VariousRock and soilXRF;-;SSamples dried, ashed at 1000°C, ground in agate
and Pd–C powder added as internal standard. Mixture deposited on 4 µm
thick polypropylene sheet and fixed with 10% collodion solution. A
2.9 MeV proton beam provided by a small cyclotron. Correction for self-absorption
examined681VariousGarnetTXRF;-;SSample digested. Results compared with those obtained directly
on the minerals by EMPA621VariousGeological materialXRF;-;SReview with 37 refs. of micro-PIXE and Rutherford backscattering
spectrometry capabilities631VariousSulfide mineralsAA;F;LDecomposed with HCl, H2SO4 and HNO3682VariousCarbonatesMS;ICP;SCalibration strategies for the determination of Ba, Cd,
Fe, Mg, Mn, Pb, Sr, U and V by LA discussed511VariousCoalAA;ETA;SAs, Mn, Pb and Se determined in 5% v/v HNO3
slurries528Chemical modifiers still provide a fruitful area of research in
ETAAS.425,556 As noted in Section
4.2.1.2, a tungsten carbide–rhodium coating has been advocated as a
permanent chemical modifier for the determination of Cd and Pb in dissolved
sediments as well as slurries.557,558
Ruthenium has also been proposed as a permanent modifier for the analysis
of Ag, Pb and Sn in aqua regia extracts.5594.2.2 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. Atomic fluorescence
spectrometry has excellent detection limits for As, Hg and Se and is routinely
used for their detection in geological samples including coal.560,561 In their search for an alternative
to the standard methods of sample preparation, Fernández-Pérez
and co-workers560 used subcritical water
extraction, at temperatures of 100–374°C and pressures high
enough to maintain the liquid state, as the basis of a rapid, clean and efficient
method for the extraction of trace metals from coal prior to measurement by
AFS.4.2.3 Atomic emission spectrometry. A review of multielemental
analysis with 134 references,345 which includes
the application of both ICP-AES and ICP-MS to geochemistry, as well as environmental
and biological materials, has been published recently. Although tables of
spectral lines with an assessment of possible interferences in inductively
coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry have been available for decades,
Daskalova and Boevski562 have compiled a
table of interferences from Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Ti specifically for soils and
sediments. It is available on the Internet.Although other techniques may have superior detection limits, ICP-AES has
many attributes that make it well suited to the rapid analysis of geochemical
exploration samples.563 An ICP-AES method
has been developed to determine W in niobate–tantalate and tin slag
samples.564 The steps involved in the sample
dissolution depend on the exact nature of the sample but essentially they
are fused with KHSO4 and dissolved in citric acid, except when
high levels of Nb and Ta are present. In this case the KHSO4 fusion
is dissolved in ammonium oxalate solution, Nb and Ta precipitated as the hydroxides
and then the solution boiled to destroy the oxalate before aspiration into
the plasma.4.2.4 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Quadrupole ICP-MS is in routine use world-wide for the determination
of trace elements in silicate rocks,565–567
particularly the REE.568–570
Potential pitfalls for the unwary lie in the choice of a method of dissolution
appropriate to the sample type and the elements of interest. Thirty-eight
elements including the REE were determined in granite after a HF–HNO3
acid digest in PTFE-lined stainless steel bombs at 190°C for 12 h.567 Sample types as diverse as wood and coal,571,572 black shale573
and benthic material from estuaries340 are
all amenable to analysis by ICP-MS once they have been digested by appropriate
means.Separation of the REE may be necessary if very low detection limits are
required.569,574 To this end, Griselin
and co-workers574 developed a relatively
simple isotope dilution ICP-MS method for the analysis of geological
samples containing between 1 and 10 ng g−1
REE; any variation in yield from the chromatography step was accounted for
by the isotope dilution spikes. Makishima and Nakamura have successfully employed
isotope dilution with FI-ICP-MS to tackle the challenging tasks of determining
Ti at µg g−1 levels575
and Mo, Sb and W at ng g−1 concentrations576
in a range of silicate rocks. In both methods a spike solution is added during
sample decomposition and the final solution stabilised with HF before direct
introduction into the ICP-MS instrument via a FI manifold. To avoid
the isobaric interferences on 47Ti+, a high resolution
ICP-MS instrument with a mass resolution of >3000 was used to determine
Ti.575 Park and co-workers577
employed ID-ICP-MS for their very accurate measurement of Cd in sediment reference
materials.577When operated in high resolution (HR) mode, magnetic sector
ICP-MS is often able to resolve isotopes of interest from various polyatomic
ions that are known to interfere in quadrupole ICP-MS. Thus, the ArCl interferences
on 75As and 77Se can be separated with a resolution
of m/Δm of 7500.251
Many of the polyatomic interferences associated with the isotopes of the first
row transition metals can be overcome using medium resolution (ca.
3000), with improved accuracy as a consequence.397
A Chinese group claim to have devised a simple method to determine 43 trace
elements in rock samples by HR-ICP-MS578
but it remains to be seen whether this will be the method of choice for routine
work of this type. Rauch and co-workers579
demonstrated that ultrasonic nebulisation combined with HR-ICP-MS provides
sufficient sensitivity for the determination of PGEs at ng g−1
levels in road dusts and river sediments. Interferences on Pt were resolved
at a resolution of 10100, Hf being the main interferent, but interferences
on Pd from oxides of Rb, Sr, Zr and Y remain, even in HR-ICP-MS, so that reported
values of Pd should be treated with caution unless a separation has been performed
first. HR-ICP-MS, combined with on-line sample pre-treatment, has also been
applied to the determination of trace quantities of 239Pu, 240Pu, 242Pu
and 238U in soil and sediment RMs.441
Separation of 238U and preconcentration of Pu were performed sequentially
on two extraction resins, Sr-Spec™ and TEVA-Spec™, using a fully
automated liquid handling system. In addition, the use of a microconcentric
nebuliser was found to reduce the UH+/U+
ratio by about 5-fold over a conventional pneumatic nebuliser. Detection limits
reported for 239Pu, 240Pu and 242Pu by this
method were 4, 3 and 6 fg ml−1, respectively.
High performance ion chromatography (HPIC) combined with HR-ICP-MS
has been employed in the measurement of U isotopes and Th in industrial ores
containing high levels of REE580 using 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic
acid as a complexing agent.The wider availability of magnetic sector (MS) ICP-MS instruments,
particularly those fitted with multiple collectors (MC), is reflected
in recent developments in the measurement of isotopes by HC-ICP-MS.
As indicated in last year's Update on atomic mass spectrometry,394 MC-ICP-MS now equals or surpasses the precision
of TIMS for some applications, such as the measurement of Tl isotopic compositions
of geological materials and meteorites.581
Lithium isotopic ratios in basalts from island arcs582,583
have been determined with a throughput of 8 min per sample and a precision
of ±1.1 parts per thousand, similar to the precision of other methods
in current use. High precision measurement of 57Fe∶54Fe
ratios in meteoritic iron, haematite and siderite by MC-ICP-MS584
were achieved by matching the Fe concentrations in the sample and standard
solutions to minimise the influence of the 40Ar14N+
polyatomic ion on 54Fe. The isobaric interference from 54Cr+
was corrected for by monitoring 52Cr+; the IRMM-14
Fe isotope standard was used to correct for mass bias. The same group of workers
from Oxford has also explored the possibility of using Cu stable isotope ratios
as tracers in geological and planetary processes.585
They ascertained that the natural variation in 65Cu∶63Cu
is more than 30 times the 2σ analytical uncertainty of the
technique employed. The performance of MC-ICP-MS has also been evaluated for
Ca isotope ratio measurement.586 With suitable
precautions and correction for potential isobaric interferences on 42Ca, 43Ca
and 44Ca, it was shown to equal the precision and accuracy of the
best results obtained by TIMS but with a throughput of 12–15 samples
per day compared to 2–3 for TIMS.In spite of improved access to magnetic sector ICP-MS instruments, isotope
measurements by quadrupole ICP-MS are still of interest, particularly
in environmental applications.587,588
It would appear that internal precisions limited only by the error in counting
statistics can be achieved by judicious optimisation of the parameters in
quadrupole instruments fitted with a dynamic reaction cell (DRC).589 The usual polyatomic interferences on the isotopes
of Fe were removed by the ion–molecule reaction induced by adding ammonia
to the reaction cell, whereas neon was used to pressurise the cell when measuring
Ag and Pb.Various strategies have been devised to improve the determination of osmium
isotopic ratios by ICP-MS.590–593
Pearson and co-workers590 evaluated three
different nebulisers in terms of their memory for Os and concluded that a
direct injection nebuliser (DIN) was superior to conventional or
desolvating nebulisers. Other workers592,593
also introduced OsO4 directly into their magnetic sector ICP-MS
instruments.4.2.5 Other mass spectrometric techniques. The spate
of activity in magnetic sector ICP-MS has probably deflected attention from thermal
ionisation mass spectrometry
(TIMS); developments in this and
other mass spectrometric techniques are described in the recent Update on
this subject.394 The advantages of using
Tru-SPEC resins in acidic media for the separation of U and Th from geological
matrices prior to measurement by TIMS have been recognised by You and Bickle.594 James and Palmer595
have discussed the use of TIMS for the determination of Li isotope ratios
in low concentration samples and potential modifications to sample preparation
methods, and Wieser and Laeter596 have described
their sample preparation procedures for the determination of Mo isotopes by
TIMS.An important application of secondary ion mass spectrometry
(SIMS)
is the production of two-dimensional chemical maps of the surface of a sample
or an investigation of sub-surface atomic layers. With this in mind, a compact
benchtop imaging SIMS instrument has been developed597
which is fully automated and designed for operation by a laboratory technician.
Because of the reduced costs associated with this instrument, compared to
a full SIMS system, it could represent a breakthrough in terms of ease of
access to the technique in many disciplines, including geochemistry. Determination
of 12C∶13C in graphite by SIMS has been used in
conjunction with other information to fingerprint graphite precipitation mechanisms
and carbon chemistry of crustal fluids.598
Similarly, a SIMS study of carbon isotopes and nitrogen abundance within complex
diamonds from Colorado, USA, has revealed in single stones large variations
of a magnitude normally found in entire diamond suites elsewhere.599Recent developments in and applications of resonance ionisation mass
spectrometry
(RIMS) have been reviewed by Wendt and co-workers.600 They consider that the technique, with experimental
detection limits as low as 106 atoms per sample, has reached
the status of a routine method for fast and sensitive detection of ultra-trace
amounts of long-lived radioactive isotopes. They provide experimental details
for the determination of radiotoxic isotopes such as 236–244Pu, 89,90Sr
and 99Tc in environmental samples and the very rare radioisotope 41Ca
for cosmochemical and radiodating purposes. The high sensitivity and selectivity
of RIMS makes it well suited for the detection of many heavy elements in solar
material collected by NASA space missions.601A recently developed spark source mass spectrometric (SSMS) technique
using multiple ion counting has been used to determine Nb, Y and Ta in carbonaceous
chondrites602 and Y, Zr and ultra-low concentrations
of Nb in geological materials.603 The latter
application603 had an analytical precision
of 2–5% for concentrations down to 0.020 µg g−1
and 10% for lower concentrations. The accuracy of the method is influenced
by the interference corrections made on 91Zr and 93Nb,
with Al-rich samples being particularly problematical. A comparison showed
that ICP-MS gave systematically lower values than SSMS; the authors had no
explanation for this and speculated that there may have been loss of Nb during
the chemical dissolution of the samples prior to ICP-MS measurement.Accelerator mass spectrometry
(AMS) is the analytical
method of choice for the detection of long-lived radionuclides that cannot
be practically analysed with decay counting or conventional mass spectrometry.
Merchel and Herpers604 have provided an update
on the radiochemical separation techniques required prior to the determination
of such radionuclides by AMS, with improved procedures for the separation
of nuclides such as 53Mn, 59Ni and 60Fe.
Recent advances in AMS have been reviewed605
in terms of its sensitivity, precision and standardisation. The use of AMS
for the analysis of nuclides of heavy mass, such as actinides, with important
applications in the field of nuclear waste disposal is also discussed. One
of the most frequent uses of AMS is for radiocarbon analysis; the method and
its application to the dating of sediment samples, macrofossils, humic acids
and archaeological samples has been addressed by Kretschmer.606Rucklidge and co-workers607 have reviewed,
with 14 references, the application of AMS to the in situ analysis
of trace elements in solids such as electrically conducting mineral phases
with a minimum grain size of 0.5 mm, including graphite, sulfides,
oxides, native copper and nickel–iron alloys. Their emphasis was on
the analysis of precious metals with practical detection limits ranging from
0.005 to 50 ppb using Cs+ sputter sources of negative
ions. The current programme of research into in situ microanalysis
in support of mineral exploration on the AUSTRALIS system includes the determination
of stable isotopes such as 34S.608
This high-energy system features a novel isotope switching method that circumvents
source instabilities. The source for this instrument currently produces a
30 µm Cs beam routinely, but the authors hope to achieve 1 µm
resolution ultimately.4.2.6 X-ray techniques. As indicated in previous updates
in this series, XRF is employed as a routine method of analysis of geological
materials and the maturity of the technique is such that relatively few advances
are reported compared to its widespread usage. As with any analytical technique,
there has been a drive to improve detection limits. Various separation
procedures have been developed to preconcentrate the elements of interest
onto a filter or membrane prior to analysis by XRF.609–611
Inevitably this requires the analyst to dissolve the sample first, which would
seem to negate much of the advantage of using XRF, rather than ICP or other
solution techniques, in the first place.Some of the biggest challenges for XRF lie in the arena of solar exploration.
A CCD-based XRF instrument, due for launch in 2003, has been designed with
the aim of mapping the major element composition of 90% the Moon's
crust.612 Interpretation of some of the data
from the Mars Pathfinder site obtained by alpha-proton XRF have been published.613 The linear chemical trends in the rock compositions
were interpreted as mixing lines between rock and adhering dust.A number of applications of energy dispersive XRF
(EDXRF)
are given in Table 4, including
lake sediments,614 marine corals and sediments615 and ores.616–618
From the varied locations of the authors, it is tempting to conclude that
this technique is now more affordable and more widely used.Willis and McNew619 took on the challenge
of evaluating WDXRF for the analysis of monazite and other REE compounds.
They examined line selection, X-ray tubes and their operating voltage, as
well as problems of infinite thickness, mineralogical and particle size effects,
spectral line overlap, crossing of major element absorption edges, lack of
suitable standards and lack of influence coefficient software to handle up
to 32 elements in a single run.An improved method for the determination of the major element composition
of individual fluid inclusions in halite using a scanning electron
microscope (SEM) with an attached EDXRF has been described.620 The improvements include a newly designed brass
sample holder and modified methods for the preparation and freezing of saline
standard solutions. Because of the low-vacuum environment in the SEM the sample
does not need a conductive coating, thus permitting direct observation of
the inclusion surface to be analysed.The reader is referred to another Update in this series411
for a comprehensive review of recent developments in all aspects of XRF, including total
reflection XRF
(TRXRF) spectrometry. Ebert and co-workers621 have obtained results by EMPA and TRXRF on single
crystals of garnet, which were in good agreement. One of the more novel pieces
of work published in the year under review was use of laser ablation as a
sampling technique for the analysis of solids by TRXRF.622
Previous work suggested that several practical difficulties needed to be solved.
These include the likelihood of fractional vaporization during ablation and
the removal, by shock waves of the laser plume from successive laser shots,
of material already collected on the carrier. An improved configuration of
the sample and quartz glass or Plexiglas® carrier, together with careful
control over the laser ablation process, was used to analyse both metallic
and non-metallic materials. Although the technique was less sensitive than
LA-ICP-MS, the authors claimed that its easy and reliable quantification by
internal standardization was important in certain circumstances.The usual sample preparation procedures are not suitable for the
determination of Hg by TRXRF. Bennun and co-workers623
developed a method whereby a thin layer of gold fixed to a quartz reflector
was dipped into an ionic solution of mercury, thereby forming an amalgam that
was then amenable to traditional TRXRF analysis. Since the Hg and gold peaks
overlap, it was necessary to develop a data processing scheme to improve the
precision. Sample preparation techniques are also discussed in relation to
the analysis of estuarine sediments by TRXRF.237,624Although access to particle-induced X-ray emission
(PIXE)
instrumentation is relatively limited, a number of varied geological applications
are noted in Table 4. These include
the elemental mapping and fingerprinting of rubies,625,626
analyses of zircons as indicators of granite type,627
distribution of trace elements in minerals in platinum ores628
and analyses of sulfides from gold deposits.629,630
The performance characteristics of PIXE, and other nuclear spectrometric techniques
for the study of multilayered solids, is the subject of a recent review with
37 references.6315 ReferencesD.
T. Suess and K. A. Prather, Chem. Rev. Washington, 1999, 99, 3007 Search PubMed .N. B. French, S. J. Prieve and W. J. Haas Jr, Anal.
Chem., 1999, 71, 470A CAS .J. G. Watson, J.
C. Chow and C. A. Frazier, Adv. Environ., 1999, 1, 67 Search PubMed .J. U. Hahn, Gefahrstoffe - Reinhalt. Luft, 2000, 60, 21 Search PubMed .P. L. Boar, Spectrochim. ActaPart B, 1999, 54, 1989 CrossRef .S. Kurunczi, S. Torok and J.
W. Beal, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 352 CrossRef CAS .J. Dixkens and H. Fissan, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1999, 30(5), 438 CrossRef CAS .C. Ludke, E. Hoffmann, J. Skole and M. Kriews, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1685 RSC .M. Theisen and R. Niessner, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 332 CrossRef CAS .A. Cuicci, M. Corsi, V. Palleschi, S. Rastelli, A. Salvetti and E. Tognoni, Appl. Spectrosc., 1999, 53, 960 Search PubMed .K. Hadidi, P. Woskov, K. Green and P. Thomas, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 601 RSC .A. J. R. Hunter, S. J. Davis, L. G. Piper, K.
W. Holtzclaw and M. E. Fraser, Appl. Spectrosc., 2000, 54, 575 Search PubMed .Y. X. Duan, Y. X. Su, Z. Jin and S. P. Abeln, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 1672 CrossRef CAS .R. K. Marcus, M. A. Dempster, T. E. Gibeau and E. M. Reynolds, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 3061 CrossRef CAS .R. Harmel, O. Haupt and W. Dannecker, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 178 CrossRef CAS .F. R. Moreira and F. Pivetta, At. Spectrosc., 1998, 19, 137 Search PubMed .S. Moreno-Grau, A. Perez-Tornell, J. Moreno, J. Bayo, J. M. Angosto and J. Moreno-Clavell, At. Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 113 Search PubMed .Z. W. Wang, W. Zhu, H.
F. Zhu, J. Y. Pan and Y. Y. Chen, Guangpuxue
Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 385 Search PubMed .V. Viman, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando,
FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .C. Nerin, C. Domeno, J. I. Garcia and A. Del Alamo, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 1533 CrossRef CAS .L. Morselli, L. Barilli, P. Olivieri, M. Cecchini, R. Aromolo, V. di Carlo, R. Francaviglia and L. Gataleta, Ann. Chim. (Rome), 1999, 89, 739 Search PubMed .Y.
F. Zhang, X. L. Zhang, X. G. Zhang and Z. J. Wu, Lihua
Jianyan, 1999, 35, 449 Search PubMed .J. C. Morley, C.
S. Clark, J. A. Deddens, K. Ashley and S. Roda, Appl.
Occup. Environ. Hyg., 1999, 14, 306 CrossRef CAS .S. Clark, W. Menrath, M. Chen, S. Road and P. Succop, Ann. Agric. Environ.
Med., 1999, 6, 27 Search PubMed .J. Zamurs, J. Bass, B. Williams, R. Fritsch, D. Sackett and R. Heman, Transp. Res. Rec., 1641, 1998, 29 Search PubMed .S. Clark, W. Menrath, M. Chen, S. Roda and P. Succop, in Warsaw '98, Int. Symp. Exhib. Environ. Contam.
Cent. East. Eur., Symp. Proc., 4th., Florida State University, Tallahassee,
FL.  1998, pp. 313. Search PubMed .H. Halder, N. Menzel, B. Hietel and K. Wittmaack, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.
Res., 1999, B150, 90 Search PubMed .C. F. Wang, C. J. Chin, S. K. Luo and L. C. Men, Anal.
Chim. Acta, 1999, 389, 257 CrossRef CAS .A. Bollhofer, W. Chisholm and K. J. R. Rosman, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 390, 227 CrossRef CAS .S. Chenery, G. Nowell, A. Boix, D. Milton and J. Cook,
presented at Atomic Spectrometry Updates Joint Meeting with Atomic Spectroscopy
Group, Teddington, UK, March 18,  1999. .H. Kawamura, H. Tagomori, N. Matsuoka, Y. Takashima, S. Tawaki and N. Momoshima, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1999, 242, 717 CAS .C. R. Widmer, U. Krahenbuhl, J. Kramers and L. Tobler, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 171 CrossRef CAS .J.
G. Farmer, L. J. Eades, M. C. Graham and J. R. Bacon, J. Environ. Monit., 2000, 2, 49 RSC .M. Moldovan, M.
M. Gomez and M. A. Palacios, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1163 RSC .M.
A. Palacios, M. M. Gomez, M. Moldovan, G. Morrison, S. Rauch, C. McLeod, R. Ma, J. Laserna, P. Lucena, S. Caroli, A. Alimonti, F. Petrucci, B. Bocca, P. Schramel, S. Lustig, M. Zischka, U. Wass, B. Stenbom, M. Luna, J. C. Saenz, J. Santamaria and J. M. Torrens, Sci. Total
Environ, 2000, 257, 1 CrossRef CAS .F. Petrucci, B. Bocca, A. Alimonti and S. Caroli, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 525 RSC .M. B. Gomez, M.
M. Gomez and M. A. Palacios, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 404(2), 285 CrossRef CAS .C.
F. Wang, C. Y. Chang, C. J. Chin and L. C. Men, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 392, 299 CrossRef CAS .C.
F. Wang, F. H. Tu, S. L. Jeng and C. J. Chin, J. Radioanal.
Nucl. Chem., 1999, 242, 97 CAS .Y. Narita, S. Tanaka and S. J. Santosa, J. Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 26859 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Jackson, G. H. Morgan, A. D. Morse, A. L. Butterworth and C. T. Pillinger, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 1999, 13, 1329 CrossRef CAS .D. F. Ferretti, D. C. Lowe, R.
J. Martin and G. W. Brailsford, J. Geophys. Res., 2000, 105, 6709 CrossRef CAS .E. Barth, I. Tugtekin, H. Weidenbach, U. Wachter, J. Vogt, P. Radermacher, G. Adler and M. Georgieff, Isot. Environ.
Health Stud., 1998, 34, 209 Search PubMed .T. Rosenorn, J. Monster and M. S. Johnson, Asian Chem. Lett., 2000, 4, 101 Search PubMed .G. Steinhoff, O. Haupt and W. Dannecker, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 174 CrossRef CAS .I. Orlic, S. Y. Chiam, J. L. Sanchez and S. M. Tang, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 465 Search PubMed .X. Chen, R. Liu, L. Cha, M. Baril, D. Michaud and A. Adnot, Zhenkong Kexue Yu
Jishu, 1998, 18, 188 Search PubMed .N. Menzel, B. Hietel, M. Leirer, W. Szymczak and K. Wittmaack, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 96 Search PubMed .O. Haupt, R. Harmel and W. Dannecker, Adv. X Ray Anal, 1999, 41, 760 Search PubMed .R. D. Foster, presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium,
Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .R. Ebinghaus, S. G. Jennings, W. H. Schroeder, T. Berg, T. Donaghy, J. Guentzel, C. Kenny, H. H. Kock, K. Kvietkus, W. Landing, T. Muehleck, J. Munthe, E.
M. Prestbo and D. Schneeberger, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 3063 CrossRef .L. Fuchtjohann, N. Jakubowski, D. Gladtke, C. Barnowski, D. Klockow and J. A. C. Broekaert, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 142 CrossRef CAS .G. Mullett,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .A. J. Ghio, J. Stonehuerner, L. A. Dailey and J. D. Carter, Inhalation
Toxicol., 1999, 11, 37 Search PubMed .J. Goschnick, C. Natzeck and M. Sommer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1999, 144, 201 CrossRef .J. Y. Lu and W. H. Schroeder, Talanta, 1999, 49, 15 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Klinedinst and L. A. Currie, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 4146 CrossRef CAS .R. E. Neuhauser, U. Panne, R. Niessner and P. Wilbring, Fresenius' Z. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 720 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Yoon, N. W. Paik, J.
H. Kim, D. U. Park, S. J. Choi, S. B. Kim and H. B. Chae, Anal. Sci. Technol., 1999, 12, 447 Search PubMed .J. Camats, Aliment., 1998, 17, 127 Search PubMed .J. H. Chen, L. T. Chen, Y.
H. Lin and W. Shi, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1999, 73, 153 Search PubMed .S. Spuler, M. Linne, A. Sappey and S. Snyder, Appl. Opt., 2000, 39, 2480 Search PubMed .W. T. Corns, D. W. Bryce and P.
B. Stockwell, presented at Tenth Biennial
National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .P. Collon, D. Cole, B. Davids, M. Fauerbach, R. Harkewicz, W. Kutschera, D. J. Morrissey, R. C. Pardo, M. Paul, B. M. Sherrill and M. Steiner, Radiochim.
Acta, 1999, 85, 13 Search PubMed .I. Sich and R. Russow, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 1998, 34, 279 Search PubMed .L.
I. Wassenaar and G. Koehler, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 4965 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Talebi, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1998, 72, 1 Search PubMed .P. Gidikova and R. Deliradeva, Int.
J. Environ. Health Res., 1998, 8, 303 CrossRef CAS .S. Howden, C. Schneider and Z. Grosser, Lab. News, 2000,(601), B2 Search PubMed .J. Komarek, P. Krasensky, J. Balcar and P. Rehulka, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 1999, 54,  .J. Rodriguez-Fernandez, N. G. Orellana, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, presented at Tenth Biennial National
Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .J. Zheng, M. Ohata and N. Furuta, Anal. Sci., 2000, 16, 75 Search PubMed .K. P. Hinz, M. Greweling, F. Drews and B. Spengler, J. Am. Soc. Mass
Spectrom., 1999, 10, 648 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Vilhunen, A. von Bohlen, M. Schmeling, L. Rantanen, S. Mikkonen, R. Klockenkaemper and D. Klockow, Mikrochim. Acta, 1999, 131, 219 CAS .R. E. Neuhauser, U. Panne and R. Niessner, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 392, 47 CrossRef CAS .G. Papaspiropoulos, B. Mentes, P. Kristiansson and B.
G. Martinsson, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 356 Search PubMed .G. Ghermandi, P. Laj, M. Capotosto, R. Cecchi and C. Riontino, Nucl. Instrum.
Methods Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 392 Search PubMed .I. Orlic, S. Zhou and F. Watt, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 505 Search PubMed .N. A. H. Janssen, G. Hoek, B. Brunekreef and H. Harssema, Occup. Environ. Med., 1999, 56, 482 CrossRef CAS .K. Matsuda, S. Nakae and K. Miura, Taiki Kankyo Gakkaishi, 1999, 34, 251 Search PubMed .S.
H. Cadle, P. A. Mulawa, E. C. Hunsanger, K. Nelson, R. A. Ragazzi, R. Barrett, G. L. Gallagher, D. R. Lawson, K. T. Knapp and R. Snow, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2328 CrossRef CAS .H. K. Bndhu, S. Puri, M. L. Garg, B. Singh, J. S. Shahi, D. Mehta, E. Swietlicki, D.
K. Dhawan, P. C. Mangal and N. Singh, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., , 126 Search PubMed .T. Sugiyama, T. Amagai, H. Matsushita and M. Soma, Kankyo
Kagaku, 1999, 9, 617 Search PubMed .M. R. Cave, O. Butler, J. M. Cook, M. S. Cresser and D. L. Miles, J. Anal.
At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 181 RSC .N. Grignon, J. Jeusset, E. Lebeau, C. Moro, A. Gojon and P. Fragu, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 1999, 17, 477 Search PubMed .M. Schmeling and R. Van Grieken, in Proc. EUROTRAC Symp. '98:
Transp. Chem. Transform. Troposphere 1998, WIT Press, Southampton.  1999,
p. 340. Search PubMed .A. Chabas and R. A. Lefevre, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 34, 225 CrossRef .M. C. S. Seneviratne, P. Mahawatte, R.
K. S. Fernando, R. Hewamanna and C. Sumithrarachchi, Biol. Trace Elem. Res., 1999, 71, 189 Search PubMed .A. Hidayat, H. Djojosubroto and S. Rukihati, JAERI Conf, 1999, 99, 156 Search PubMed .G.
G. Goodman, P. M. Lindley and L. A. McCaig, Proc. Inst. Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 45, 131 Search PubMed .N. N. Veniaminov, J. Anal. Chem. (Transl. of Zh. Anal. Khim.), 2000, 55, 263 Search PubMed .R. Chester, M. Nimmo, G. R. Fones, S. Keyse and Z. Zhang, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 949 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Wang and M. K. Balazs, Semicond. Int., 2000, 23, 99 Search PubMed .C. W. McLeod, presented at Tenth
Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .Y. Gelinas, M. Lucotte and J. P. Schmit, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 1797 CrossRef CAS .D. Darbouret and I. Kano, Lab. News, 1999, 10 Search PubMed .I. Kano and D. Darbouret, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .D. Darbouret and I. Kano, Ultrapure
Water, 1999, 16, 53 Search PubMed .R. Hoelzl, L. Fabry, L. Kotz and S. Pahlke, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 64 CrossRef CAS .A. M. H. DeBruyn and J.
B. Rasmussen, Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 1999, 18, 1932 CAS .C. Reimann, U. Siewers, H. Skarphagen and D. Banks, Sci. Total
Environ., 1999, 239, 111 CrossRef CAS .C. Reimann, U. Siewers, H. Skarphagen and D. Banks, Sci.
Total Environ., 1999, 234, 155 CrossRef CAS .S. Ji, T. Yabutani, A. Itoh and H. Haraguchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2000, 73, 1179 CrossRef CAS .E. Fatemian, J. Allibone and P.
J. Walker, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1233 RSC .T. Yabutani, S. Ji, F. Mouri, H. Sawatari, A. Itoh, K. Chiba and H. Haraguchi, Bull. Chem.
Soc. Jpn., 1999, 72, 2253 CAS .M. Nicolai, C. Rosin, N. Tousset and Y. Nicolai, Talanta, 1999, 50, 433 CrossRef CAS .S.
D. Lofthouse, G. M. Greenway and S. C. Stephen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1839 RSC .G. D. Woods, R. Ma and C. W. McLeod, presented at Tenth Biennial National
Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .M. Yamanka, T. Sakai, H. Kumagi and E. Bakowska, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando,
FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .J. B. Truscott, P. Jones, B. Fairman and E.
H. Evans, presented at Tenth Biennial
National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .M. T. Siles Cordero, E. I. Vereda
Alonso, P. Canada Rudner, A. Garcia de Torres and J. M. Cano Pavon, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1033 RSC .Y. Liang, Y. W. Tang and C. Y. Wang, Fenxi Shiyanshi, 1999, 18, 41 Search PubMed .J. Shida and S. Umeki, Anal.
Sci., 1999, 15, 1033 Search PubMed .S. L. C. Ferreira, J.
R. Ferreira, A. F. Dantas, V. A. Lemos, N. M. L. Araujo and A. C. Spinola Costa, Talanta, 2000, 50, 1253 CrossRef CAS .H. Cesur and B. Bati, Anal. Lett., 2000, 33, 489 CAS .A. N. Araujo, R. C. C. Costa and J. L. F. C. Lima, Anal. Sci., 1999, 15, 991 Search PubMed .S.
L. C. Ferreira, V. A. Lemos, B. C. Moreira, A. C. S. Costa and R. E. Santelli, Anal.
Chim. Acta, 2000, 403, 259 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Fragueiro, F. Alava-Moreno, I. Lavilla and C. Bendicho, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 705 RSC .K. Benkhedda, H. Goenaga Infante, E. Ivanova and F. Adams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 429 RSC .P. K. Tewari and A. K. Singh, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1847 RSC .P. de Magalhaes Padilha, L. A. de Melo Gomes, C.
C. Federici Padilha and N.
L. Dias Filho, Anal. Lett., 1999, 32, 1807 CrossRef CAS .P. Kumar Tewari and A. Kumar
Singh, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1847 RSC .J. Chwastowska, A. Rogowska, E. Sterlinska and J. Dudek, Talanta, 1999, 49, 837 CrossRef CAS .H. L. Liu and W.
F. Xing, Fenxi Huaxue, 1999, 27, 1013 Search PubMed .M. E. Mahmoud and G. A. Gohar, Talanta, 2000, 51, 77 CrossRef CAS .W. Klemm, G. Bombach and K. P. Becker, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 429 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Wells and K. W. Bruland, Mar.
Chem., 1998, 63, 145 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Salonia, R.
G. Wuilloud, J. A. Gasquez, R. A. Olsina and L. D. Martinez, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1239 RSC .X. G. Su, H. Q. Zhang, F. Liang and Q. H. Jin, Fenxi Ceshi Xuebao, 1999, 18, 32 Search PubMed .S. M. Sella, A. K. Avila and R.
C. Campos, Anal. Lett., 1999, 32, 2091 CAS .A. Ali, Y. X. Ye, G.
M. Xu and X. F. Yin, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 642 CrossRef CAS .Z. R. Xu, H. Y. Pan, S. K. Xu and Z. L. Fang, Spectrochim. Acta Part B, 2000, 55, 213 CrossRef .H. W. Peng and M. S. Kuo, Anal.
Sci., 2000, 16(2), 157 Search PubMed .J. Komarek and J. Holy, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 733 CrossRef .V.
N. Oreshkin, G. I. Tsizin and G. L. Vnukovskaya, J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 54, 1028 Search PubMed .H. Minamisawa, H. Kuroki, N. Arai and T. Okutani, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 398, 289 CrossRef CAS .B. Pokorny and C. Ribaric-Lasnik, Bull.
Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2000, 64, 20 CrossRef CAS .Q. B. Zhang, H. Minami, S. Inoue and I. Atsuya, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 401, 277 CrossRef CAS .Q. B. Zhang, H. Minami, S. Inoue and I. Atsuya, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 407, 147 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Cassella, D. T. Bitencourt, A. G. Branco, S.
L. Costa Ferreira, D. Santiago de Jesus, M. Souza
de Carvalho and R. E. Santelli, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1749 RSC .M. E. McComb and H. D. Gesser, Talanta, 1999, 49, 869 CrossRef CAS .M.
E. Romero-Gonzalez, C. J. Williams and P. H. E. Gardiner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1009 RSC .O. Munoz, D. Velez, R. Montoro, A. Arroyo and M. Zamorano, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 711 RSC .R. Eberhardt, B. Neidhart, H.
D. Wunsch and J. Kuballa, presented at Instrumental Methods of
Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki,
Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .F. Laborda, E. Bolea and J. R. Castillo, J. Anal. At.
Spectrom., 2000, 15, 103 RSC .H. B. Ma, Z. L. Fang, J. F. Wu and S. S. Liu, Talanta, 1999, 49, 125 CrossRef CAS .P. Bermejo-Barrera, M. Ferron-Novais, G. Gonzalez-Campos and A. Bermejo-Barrera, At.
Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 120 Search PubMed .R. Moreno Camero and R.
E. Sturgeon, Spectrochim. Acta, Part
B, 1999, 54, 753 CrossRef .J. W. Lam and R. E. Sturgeon, At. Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 79 Search PubMed .A. A. Menegario and M. F. Gine, Spectrochim.
Acta, 2000, 55, 355 Search PubMed .J. Marrero, S. Perez Arisnabarreta and P. Smichowski, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1875 RSC .X.
F. Yin, G. M. Xu, X. Gu, W. C. Yang and A. Ali, Fenxi Huaxue, 1999, 27, 798 Search PubMed .A. Shraim, B. Chiswell and H. Olszowy, Talanta, 1999, 50, 1109 CrossRef CAS .A. Shraim, B. Chiswell and H. Olszowy, Analyst, 2000, 125, 949 RSC .J. Muller, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 363, 572 CrossRef .J.
L. Gomez-Ariza, D. Sanchez-Rodas, I. Giraldez and E. Morales, Talanta, 2000, 51, 257 CrossRef CAS .J. MattuschH.-J. StarkR. Wennrich and U. Frankhanel,
in Spurenanal. Bestimm. Ionen: Ionenchromatogr. Kapillarelektrophor.,
Proc. Fachtag. “Ionenanal. Chromatogr. Kapillarelektrophor.”,
1996., ed. A. Kettrup, J. Weiss
and D. Jensen, Ecomed Verlagsgesellschaft AG &
Co. KG, Landsberg.  1997, p. 42. Search PubMed .P. R. Lythgoe, D. A. Polya and C. Parker, Spec.
Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 141 Search PubMed .J. Mattusch, R. Wennrich, A. C. Schmidt and W. Reisser, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 200 CrossRef CAS .T. Sakai, Y. Date and Y. Inoue, Kogyo Yosui, 1999, 493, 9 Search PubMed .D. Schlegel and J. Mattusch,
in Spurenanal. Bestimm. Ionen: Ionenchromatogr. Kapillarelektrophor.,
Proc. Fachtag. “Ionenanal. Chromatogr. Kapillarelektrophor.”,
1996., ed. A. Kettrup, J. Weiss
and D. Jensen, Ecomed Verlagsgesellschaft AG &
Co. KG, Landsberg.  1997, pp. 42. Search PubMed .C. J. Hsieh, C. H. Yen and M. S. Kuo, Anal.
Sci., 1999, 15, 669 Search PubMed .K. Anezaki, I. Nukatsuka and K. Ohzeki, Anal. Sci., 1999, 15, 829 Search PubMed .S. Latva, S. Peraniemi and M. Ahlgren, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1105 RSC .B. Demirata-Ozturk, presented at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and
Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .D. M. Adria-Cerezo, M. Llobat-Estelles and A. R. Mauri-Aucejo, Talanta, 2000, 51, 531 CrossRef CAS .A. Gaspar, C. Sogor and J. Posta, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 363, 480 CrossRef CAS .E. K. Paleologos, C. D. Stalikas, S. M. Tzouwara-Karayanni, G. A. Pilidis and M.
I. Karayannis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 287 RSC .D. Baralkiewicz and J. Siepak, Chem. Anal. (Warsaw), 1999, 44, 879 Search PubMed .S. J. Kumar, P. Ostapczuk and H. Emons, At. Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 194 Search PubMed .M.
K. Donais, R. Henry and T. Rettberg, Talanta, 1999, 49, 1045 CrossRef CAS .M. K. Donais and T. Rettberg, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando,
FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .F. Sacher, B. Raue, J. Klinger and H. J. Brauch, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1999, 74, 191 Search PubMed .B. He, D. Wu and G. B. Jiang, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 718 Search PubMed .N. S. Thomaidis, F. C. Adams and T.
D. Lekkas, presented at Instrumental Methods
of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki,
Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .P. Bermejo-Barrera, R. M. Anllo-Sendin, E. M. Lorenz, M.
J. Cantelar-Barbazan and A. Bermejo-Barrera, presented at Tenth Biennial
National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .A. Hils, M. Grote, E. Janssen and J. Eichhorn, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 457 CrossRef CAS .Y. Zhang, J. N. Moore and W. T. Frankenberger Jr., Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 1652 CrossRef CAS .M. Rassler, B. Michalke, P. Schramel, S. Schulte-Hostede and A. Kettrup, Int.
J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1998, 72, 195 Search PubMed .I. Farkasovska and M. Zemberyova, Chem. Listy, 1999, 93, 633 Search PubMed .M. Vilano and R. Rubio, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 177 RSC .M. E. Moreno, C. Perez-Conde and C. Camara, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 681 RSC .K. Tirez, W. Brusten, S. Van Roy, N. De Brucker and L. Diels, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1087 RSC .K. A. Anderson and P. Markowski, J. AOAC Int., 2000, 83, 225 Search PubMed .B. Divjak, M. Novic and W. Goessler, J. Chromatogr., 1999, 862, 39 CrossRef CAS .F. Sacher, B. Raue and H.
J. Brauch, Spec. Publ. - R. Soc.
Chem., 1999, 245, 91 Search PubMed .M. Pantsar-Kallio and P.
K. G. Manninen, Int. J. Environ.
Anal. Chem., 1999, 75(1–2), 43 Search PubMed .G. Schminke and A. Seubert, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 387 CrossRef CAS .N. Kallithrakas-Kontos and G. Kavelaki, presented at Instrumental
Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99),
Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .H. B. Hou and H. Narasaki, Anal. Sci., 1999, 15, 911 Search PubMed .Y. L. Feng, H. Narasaki, L.
C. Tian and H. Y. Chen, At. Spectrosc., 2000, 21, 30 Search PubMed .A. Sayago, R. Beltran and J.
L. Gomez-Ariza, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 423 RSC .M.
J. Nash, J. Maskall and S. J. Hill,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .J. R. Baena, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, Spectrochim. Acta Part B, 1999, 54, 1869 CrossRef .J. R. Baena, S. Cardenas, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 1510 CrossRef CAS .Z. Mester, H. Lord and J. Pawliszyn, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 595 RSC .F.
M. Fernandez, M. B. Tudino and O. E. Troccoli, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 687 RSC .N. N. Roeva and V. V. Ispravnikova, J.
Anal. Chem. (Transl. of Zh. Anal. Khim.), 1999, 54, 772 Search PubMed .L. Bennett, V. J. Salters
and W. T. Cooper, presented
at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .O. F. Schedlbauer and K. G. Heumann, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 5459 CrossRef CAS .X. P. Yan, M. J. Hendry and R. Kerrich, Anal. Chem., 2000, 72, 1879 CrossRef CAS .B. Welz and M. Sperling, 3rd ed., Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999, p. 964. .K. Ohta, H. Uegomori, S. Kaneco and T. Mizuno, Talanta, 1999, 48, 943 CrossRef CAS .X. G. Du, Y. X. Duan and Q. H. Jin, Fenxi Shiyanshi, 1999, 18, 10 Search PubMed .M. Feuerstein and G. Schlemmer, At. Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 149 Search PubMed .A. Salido and B.
T. Jones, Talanta, 1999, 50, 649 CrossRef CAS .J. Murphy, G. Schlemmer, I. L. Shuttler, P. Jones and S. J. Hill, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1593 RSC .P. Bermejo-Barrera, R. M. Anllo-Sendin, M. Aboal-Somoza and A. Bermejo-Barrera, Mikrochim.
Acta, 1999, 131, 145 CrossRef CAS .P. Parvinen and L. H.
J. Lajunen, Talanta, 1999, 50, 67 CrossRef CAS .S. Taguchi, A. Kakinuma and I. Kasahara, Anal.
Sci., 1999, 15, 1149 Search PubMed .J. Y. Cabon and A. le Bihan, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 402, 327 CrossRef CAS .I. L. Grinshtein, Y. A. Vilpan, L. A. Vasilieva and V. A. Kopeikin, Spectrochim.
Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 745 CrossRef .M. Grotti, R. Leardi, C. Gnecco and R. Frache, Spectrochim.
Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 845 CrossRef .M. S. Chan and S. D. Huang, Talanta, 2000, 51, 373 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Barbosa, F. J. Krug and E. C. Lima, Spectrochim. Acta,
Part B, 1999, 54,  .J. W. Olesik, Spectroscopy,
Eugene Oreg., 1999, 14, 36 Search PubMed .M. Sousa Bispo, B. Ferreira Dos Santos, M. G. A. Korn and S. L. C. Ferreira, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .Z. A. Grosser, L. Davidowski, J. Latino and D. Sears, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando,
FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .S. Bridger and M. Knowles,
Varian Australia Pty Ltd, Mulgrave, Victoria, Australia 3170.,  2000. .W. L. Wiese and D. E. Kelleher, Spectrochim. Acta, 1999, 54, 1769 Search PubMed .I. B. Brenner, A. Le Marchand, C. Daraed and L. Chauvet, Microchem. J., 1999, 63, 344 CrossRef CAS .K. Mitko and M. Bebek, At.
Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 217 Search PubMed .Z. Palacz, P. J. Turner, C. Haines, F. Abou-Shakra
and D. Churchman, presented
at 17th Australian and New Zealand Society for Mass Spectroscopy Conference,
Thredbo, Australia, January 31–February 4,  1999. .G. N. Coleman, G. R. Dulude, R. W. Starek and R.
L. Stux, presented at Pittcon.'99,
Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .L. L. P. van Stee, P. E. G. Leonards, R. J. J. Vreuls and U. A. T. Brinkman, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1547 RSC .Y.
X. Duan, Y. X. Su, Z. Jin and S. P. Abeln, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2000, 71, 1557 CrossRef CAS .C. Vazquez, S. F. de
Funes, A. Casa and P. Adelfang, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2000, 18, 73 Search PubMed .E. H. Bakraji and J. Karajo, Water
Qual. Res. J. Can., 1999, 34, 305 Search PubMed .A. Exner, M. Theisen, U. Panne and R. Niessner, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 254 CrossRef CAS .Y. Terada, N. Kondo, M. Kataoka, M. Izumiyama, I. Nakai and S. Goto, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 461 CAS .A. Ritschel, P. Wobrauschek, E. Chinea, F. Grass and C. Fabjan, Spectrochim. Acta Part B, 1999, 54, 1449 CrossRef .K. Sugihara, K. Tamura, M. Sato and K. Ohno, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 446 CrossRef CAS .D.
C. Turner, M. Benson, A. Wilson, J. Moore and W. Watson, Am. Lab., 2000, 32, 92 Search PubMed .A. K. Cheburkin and W. Shotyk, X-Ray
Spectrom., 1999, 28, 379 CrossRef CAS .M. Claes, K. van Dyck, H. Deelstra and R. van Grieken, Spectrochim. Acta Part B, 1999, 54, 1517 CrossRef .Y. N. Makarovskaya, L. P. Eksperiandova and A. B. Blank, J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 54, 1031 Search PubMed .M.
M. Costa, M. A. Barreiros, M. L. Carvalho and I. Queralt, X-Ray
Spectrom., 1999, 28, 410 CAS .R. Wehausen, B. Schnetger, H. J. Brumsack and G. J. De Lange, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 168 CAS .H. Ying, J. Murphy, J. W. Tromp, J. M. Mermet and E. D. Salin, Spectrochim.
Acta Part B, 2000, 55, 311 CrossRef .G. H. Tao, R. J. Yamada, Y. Fujikawa, R. J. Kojima, J. Zheng, D.
A. Fisher, R. M. Koerner and A. Kudo, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2000, 76, 135 Search PubMed .C. Barbante, G. Cozzi, G. Capodaglio, K. Van
de Velde, C. Ferrari, A. Veysseyre, C. F. Boutron, G. Scarponi and P. Cescon, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 4125 CrossRef CAS .F. Lanza and P. R. Trincherini, Ann. Chim. (Rome), 2000, 90, 61 Search PubMed .M. Bensimon, J. Bourquin and A. Parriaux, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 731 RSC .S.
Y. Masanao, Annu. Rep. Osaka City
Inst. Public Health Environ. Sci., 1999, 61, 83 Search PubMed .S. M. Wilbur,
presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .F. A. Shakra, Spec. Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 120 Search PubMed .H.
W. Liu, S. J. Jiang and S. H. Liu, Spectrochim.
Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 1367 CrossRef .K. Danzer, I. Thielen, C. Fischbacher and M. Paul,
presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .M. Ezer, H. L. Pacquette and J. B. Simeonsson, Spectrochim.
Acta Part B, 1999, 54, 1755 CrossRef .S. D. Tanner, V.
I. Baranov and U. Vollkopf, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1261 RSC .A. T. Townsend, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 521 CrossRef CAS .Y. J. Kim, C. K. Kim, C.
S. Kim, J. Y. Yun and B. H. Rho, J.
Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1999, 240, 613 CAS .R. Henry and D. Koller, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando,
FL, USA, March 7–12, 1999. .J. Riondato, F. Vanhaecke, L. Moens and R. Dams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 341 RSC .R. S. Olofsson, I. Rodushkin and M. D. Axelsson, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 727 RSC .F. Poitrasson and S. H. Dundas, J. Anal. At.
Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1573 RSC .M. T. Wei and S. J. Jiang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1177 RSC .C. J. Park and S. A. Yim, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1061 RSC .M. T. Wei and S. J. Jiang, J. Chin.
Chem. Soc. (Taipei), 1999, 46, 871 Search PubMed .D. Weiss, E. A. Boyle, V. Chavagnac, M. Herwegh and J. Wu, Spectrochim.
Acta, Part B, 2000, 55, 363 CrossRef .I. B. Brenner, M. Liezers, J. Godfrey, S. Nelms and J. Cantle, Spectrochim. Acta,
Part B, 1999, 54, 991 CrossRef .V. N. Epov, I. E. Vasil'eva, V. I. Lozhkin, E. N. Epova, L. F. Paradina and A. N. Suturin, J. Anal. Chem. (Transl.
of Zh. Anal. Khim.), 1999, 54, 837 Search PubMed .V. N. Epov, I.
E. Vasil'eva, A. N. Suturin, V. I. Lozhkin and E. N. Epova, J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 54, 1034 Search PubMed .B. Frengstad, A. K. Mitgard Skrede, D. Banks, J. R. Krog and U. Siewers, Sci. Total Environ., 2000, 246, 21 CrossRef CAS .V. J. Barwick, S. L. R. Ellison and B. Fairman, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 394, 281 CrossRef CAS .T. Shirasaki, H. Sakamoto, Y. Nakaguchi and K. Hiraki, Bunseki
Kagaku, 2000, 49, 175 Search PubMed .I. S. Begley and C.
M. Scrimgeour, Isot. Environ. Health
Stud., 1998, 34, 231 Search PubMed .H. A. J. Meijer and W.
J. Li, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 1998, 34, 349 Search PubMed .S. Ward, M. Scantlebury, E. Krol, P. J. Thomson, C. Sparling and J. R. Speakman, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2000, 14, 450 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Richards, S. H. Bottrell, R. A. Cliff, K. Strohle and P. J. Rowe, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1998, 62, 3683 CrossRef CAS .R. M. P. White, P. F. Dennis and T. C. Atkinson, Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrom., 1999, 13, 1242 CrossRef CAS .G. Houerou, S. D. Kelly and M. J. Dennis, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 1999, 13, 1257 CrossRef CAS .C. McConville, R. M. Kalin and D. Flood, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 1999, 13, 1339 CrossRef CAS .B. Smith and L. Menchaca, US Pat., U.S. US 5,979,228 (Cl. 73–53.01, G01N37/00),
9 Nov 1999, US Appl. 36,709, 20 Dec 1996,  1999, 10 pp. .K. Revesz, J. K. Bohlke, R. L. Smith
and T. Yoshinari, in Water-Resour.
Invest.Rep., U.S. Geol. Surv.  1999, p. 323. Search PubMed .T. Mizushima, O. Togawa, Y. Mizutani, S. Kabuto and T. Yamamoto, JAERI-Tech., 2000, 1 Search PubMed .J. O. F. Niello, D.
E. Alvarez, A. M. J. Ferrero, O. A. Capurro, D. Abriola, G. V. Marti, A. J. Pacheco, J. E. Testoni, R. G. Liberman, K. Knie and G. Korschinek, Acta Phys. Pol., 1999, 30, 1629 Search PubMed .J. M. Lopez-Gutierrez, H. A. Synal, M. Suter, C. Schnabel and M. Garcia-Leon, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2000, 53, 81 Search PubMed .N. Buraglio, A. Aldahan and G. Possnert, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.,
Sect. B, 2000, 161, 240 Search PubMed .N. M. Al-Andis, J. King Saud
Univ., 1998, 10, 85 Search PubMed .Z. Wang, B. Chen, P. Fan and X. Chen, Proc.
SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 1998, 3443, 137 Search PubMed .S. Karthikeyan, T. Prasada Rao and C. S. P. Iyer, Talanta, 1999, 49, 523 CrossRef CAS .F. Abou-Shakra, Z. Palacz, D. Churchman
and P. Turner, presented
at 17th Australian and New Zealand Society for Mass Spectroscopy Conference,
Thredbo, Australia, January 31–February 4,  1999. .S. M. Talebi, presented at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and
Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .N. Molenat, A. Astruc, M. Holeman, G. Maury and R. Pinel, Analusis, 1999, 27, 795 Search PubMed .S. Imai, K. Fujikawa, A. Yonetani, N. Ogawa and Y. Kikuchi, Anal.
Sci., 2000, 16, 163 Search PubMed .E. Carasek, Talanta, 2000, 51, 173 CrossRef CAS .S. Ahmed, M. A. Awan and U. u. A. M. Rehman, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2000, 243, 723 CrossRef CAS .X. Sun, Guangpuxue
Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 607 Search PubMed .O. Acar, A. R. Tuerker and Z. Kilic, Talanta, 1999, 49, 135 CrossRef CAS .L. Paama and P. Peramaki, presented at Instrumental Methods of
Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki,
Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .A. Seubert, G. Schminke, M. Nowak, W. Ahrer and W. Buchberger, J. Chromatogr., 2000, 884, 191 CrossRef CAS .J. Q. Song, Lihua Jianyan, 1999, 35, 520 Search PubMed .H. J. Chang, Y.
H. Sung and S. D. Huang, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1695 RSC .A. Viitak and V. Lepane, presented at Instrumental
Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99),
Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .H. Sato and J. Ueda, Anal.
Sci., 2000, 16(3), 299 Search PubMed .R. Abbu, A.
E. Pillay and K. G. Moodley, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 2000, 18(1), 83 Search PubMed .G. Tyler, A. Cosnier, N. Le
Corre and D. Sheppard, presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium,
Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .H. W. Oh and H. S. Choi, Anal. Sci., 2000, 16, 183 Search PubMed .Y. Inoue, K. Yoshida and G. Endo, Chromatography, 1999, 20, 138 Search PubMed .R. Thibault, S. J. Chalk
and M. K. Donais, presented
at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .Z. H. Wang, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 616 Search PubMed .S.
C. Nielsen, S. Sturup, H. Spliid and E. H. Hansen, Talanta, 1999, 49, 1027 CrossRef CAS .S.
P. Huang, R. Du and G. J. Zhang, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 402 Search PubMed .J. M. Sun, H. Z. Liu, Z.
H. Liao and Z. C. Jiang, Fenxi Kexue Xuebao, 1998, 14, 288 Search PubMed .J. T. Sharples, G. Mew and A. NathanV. Karanassios, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .U. Watjen, I. Barsony and C. Ducso, Mikrochim. Acta, 2000, 132, 521 CrossRef CAS .N.
I. Petrova and T. M. Korda, Zavod. Lab., 1999, 65, 19 Search PubMed .H. Kawaguchi, T. Okamoto, K. Miura, T. Shimizu and T. Shirakashi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1999, 72, 2445 CAS .A. Ali, Y. X. Ye, G. M. Xu, X. F. Yin and T. Zhang, Microchem.
J., 1999, 63, 365 CrossRef CAS .V. Potula, J. Serrano, D. Sparrow and H. Hu, J.
Occup. Environ. Med., 1999, 41, 349 Search PubMed .L. Halicz, I. Segal and O. Yoffe, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1579 RSC .P. R. D. Mason, K. Kaspers and M.
J. van Bergen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1067 RSC .X.
P. Yan, M. Sperling and B. Welz, Anal.
Chem., 1999, 71, 4353 CrossRef CAS .Y. G. Dong and H. J. Shen, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 864 Search PubMed .J. Turner, S. J. Hill, E. H. Evans, B. Fairman and C.
S. J. Wolff Briche, J. Anal. At.
Spectrom., 2000, 15, 743 RSC .S. Walas, E. Borowska, M. Herda, M. Herman and H. Mrowiec, Int. J. Environ.
Anal. Chem., 1998, 72, 217 Search PubMed .N. S. Thomaidis, A. Stasinakis and T. D. Lekkas, presented at Instrumental Methods of
Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki,
Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .J. G. Miao, X. H. Wu and J. R. Chen, Fenxi
Shiyanshi, 1999, 18, 27 Search PubMed .E. R. Unsworth, P. Jones, S. J. Hill and J. Cook,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .P. K. Appelblad, D. C. Baxter and J. O. Thunberg, J. Environ. Monit., 1999, 1, 211 RSC .P. Hashemi, B. Noresson and A. Olin, Talanta, 1999, 49, 825 CrossRef CAS .V. Gurev, S. Atanasov, K. Georgieva and D. Balabanski, Anal. Lab., 1998, 7, 227 Search PubMed .M. Hasselloev, B. Lyven, C. Haraldsson and W. Sirinawin, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 3497 CrossRef CAS .J. Yoshinaga, Mizu Kankyo Gakkaishi, 1999, 22, 330 Search PubMed .G. D. Woods and E. McCurdy, Spec.
Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 108 Search PubMed .J. A. G. Neto, J. B. B. Silva, I.
G. Souza and A. J. Curtius, Lab. Rob. Autom., 1999, 11, 240 CrossRef .J. I. Garcia Alonso, M. Montes Bayon and A. Sanz Medel, Spec.
Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 95 Search PubMed .X. Tian, H. Emteborg and F. C. Adams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1807 RSC .F. C. Adams, H. Emteborg, M. Heisterkamp and X. Tian, presented at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and
Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .D. Voutsa, G. Zachariades, A. Kouras, A. Anthemides and C. Samara, presented at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and
Applications (IMA '99), Chalkidi, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .S. Mothes, S. Tutschku
and R. Wennrich, presented
at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99),
Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .T. Devine and J. Ratliff,
presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .I. I. Stewart, X. D. Bu, S. V. Olesik and J.
W. Olesik, presented at Pittcon.'99,
Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .M. A. Saleh, E. Ewane and B. L. Wilson, Chemosphere, 1999, 39, 2357 CrossRef CAS .W. Yan, Lihua
Jianyan, 1999, 35, 513 Search PubMed .T. Pinheiro, M. F. Araujo, P. M. Carreira, P. Valerio, D. Nunes and L. C. Alves, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 150, 306 Search PubMed .N. Saito, S. Hayashizaki, M. Endo, H. Sasaki, T. Nakamura and K. Chiba, Iwate ken Eisei Kenkyusho Nenpo, 1998, 41, 20 Search PubMed .K. H. Lee, M. Oshima, T. Takayanagi and S. Motomizu, J. Flow Injection Anal., 1999, 16, 255 Search PubMed .B. R. Topping and J.
S. Kuwabara, in Water-Resour. Invest.
Rep.,, U.S. Geol. Surv.  1999, p. 131. Search PubMed .T. Yabutani, S. Ji, F. Mouri, A. Itoh, K. Chiba and H. Haraguchi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2000, 73, 895 CrossRef CAS .M. Elsayed, E. Bjorn and W. Frech, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 697 RSC .J. Singh, D. E. Pritchard, D. L. Carlisle, J. A. McLean, A. Montaser, J. M. Orenstein and S. R. Patierno, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 1999, 161, 240 CrossRef CAS .J. L. De Vries, Adv. X Ray Anal, 1997, 39, 1 Search PubMed .H. Haraguchi, Bull.
Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1999, 72, 1163 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wu, S. Liu and F. Xie, Fenxi Shiyanshi, 1998, 17, 88 Search PubMed .P. Anderson, C. M. Davidson, D. Littlejohn, A.
M. Ure, L. M. Garden and J. Marshall, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 1998, 71, 19 Search PubMed .M. R. Cave,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .J. Wragg, M. R. Cave, A. M. Kelleher and P. Nathanail, presented at Tenth Biennial National
Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .R. G. L. Silva, S. N. Williw, R. E. Sturgeon, R. E. Santelli and S. M. Sella, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1843 RSC .E. Curdova and R. Koplik, CHEMagazin, 1999, 9, 15 Search PubMed .I. Lavilla, A. V. Filgueiras and C. Bendicho, J. Agric. Food
Chem., 1999, 47, 5072 CrossRef CAS .J. Falandysz, H. Ishihashi, A. Dembowska and D. Danisiewicz, Bromatol. Chem. Toksykol., 1998, 31, 191 Search PubMed .X. Cao, G. Zhao, L. Zha, N. Fang and J. Wang, Huanjing
Kexue, 1998, 19, 66 Search PubMed .M. Zhang, Lihua Jianyan, 2000, 36, 10 Search PubMed .X. P. Yan, M. Sperling and B. Welz, Anal.
Chem., 1999, 71, 4216 CrossRef CAS .S. McSheehy and J. Szpunar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 79 RSC .A. D. Madsen, W. Goessler, S. N. Pedersen and K. A. Francesconi, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 657 RSC .P. A. Gallagher, X. Wei, J. A. Shoemaker, C. A. Brockhoff and J. T. Creed, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1829 RSC .S. Wangkarn and S. A. Pergantis, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 627 RSC .T. Prohaska, M. Pfeffer, M. Tulipan, G. Stingeder, A. Mentler and W.
W. Wenzel, Fresenius' J. Anal.
Chem., 1999, 364, 467 CrossRef CAS .B. He and G. B. Jiang, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 615 CrossRef CAS .G. Weber, N. Jakubowski and D. Stuewer, in A combination of chromatography, elemental mass spectrometry
and electrochemistry. Anthropog. Platinum-Group Elem. Emiss., Springer-Verlag, Berlin.  2000, p. 183. Search PubMed .P. J. Craig, S. N. Forster, R. O. Jenkins and D. Miller, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1243 RSC .M. Kotrebai, M. Birringer, J. F. Tyson, E. Block and P.
C. Uden, Analyst, 2000, 125, 71 RSC .R. D. Evans and J. Y. Villeneuve, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 157 RSC .S. A. Bhandari, D. Amarasiriwardena and B. Xing, Spec. Publ. - R.
Soc. Chem., 1999, 247, 203 Search PubMed .V. Vacchina, R. Lobinski, M. Oven and M. H. Zenk, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 529 RSC .V. Vacchina, K. Polec and J. Szpunar, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1557 RSC .E. Welter, W. Calmano, S. Mangold and L. Troeger, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 238 CrossRef CAS .L. C. Dharmasri and W. H. Hudnall,
in Tailings Mine Waste '99, Proc. Int. Conf., 6th., Ed., Balkema, Rotterdam.  1999, pp. 551. Search PubMed .M. Zemberyova, in Proc. - Semin. At. Spectrochem.,
14th., ed. E. Krakovska, R. S., Stroffek
Publishing, Kosice.  1998, p. 91. Search PubMed .C. M. Davidson and G. Delevoye,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .M. R. Cave, J. Wragg and J. Wollan, presented at Tenth Biennial
National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .M. Zavadska, M. Zemberyova and I. Farkasovska, Chem.
Listy, 1999, 93, 391 Search PubMed .M. J. Campbell and A. Toervenyi, presented at Tenth Biennial National
Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .P. Masson, D. Orignac, A. Vives and T. Prunet, Analusis, 1999, 27, 813 Search PubMed .D. C. Lambkin and B. J. Alloway, Sci. Total Environ, 2000, 256, 77 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Rybak, P. Hatsis, K. Thurbide and E. D. Salin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1715 RSC .W. Schron, A. Liebmann and W. Nimmerfall, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 79 CrossRef CAS .B. Hu, Z. Jiang, T. Peng and Y. Qin, Talanta, 1999, 49, 357 CrossRef CAS .X. Yu, Z. H. Liao, Z.
C. Jiang, J. G. Chen and S. Q. Wang, Anal. Lett., 1999, 32, 2105 CAS .R. Reuther, L. Jaeger and B. Allard, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 394, 259 CrossRef CAS .P. H. Liang and A. M. Li, Guangpuxue
Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 2000, 20, 61 Search PubMed .U. Kurfuerst, GIT Labor-Fachz., 1999, 43, 1075 Search PubMed .C. Engelsen and G. Wibetoe, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 494 CrossRef CAS .W. Fuyi and J. Zucheng, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 391, 89 CrossRef CAS .E.
A. Piperaki, N. S. Thomaidis and I. Demis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1901 RSC .D. Boewe, H. Gleisner, H. Pawlik and F. Wendler, LaborPraxis, 1999, 23, 82 Search PubMed .C. Vargas-Razo and J. F. Tyson, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 182 CrossRef CAS .Z. Arslan and J. F. Tyson, Talanta, 1999, 50, 929 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Barra, M. L. Cervera, M. de la Guardia and R. E. Santelli, Anal. Chim.
Acta, 2000, 407, 155 CrossRef CAS .G. Sui, G. Zhuang, K. Xu and B. Chen, Guangdong
Weiliang Yuansu Kexue, 1998, 5, 30 Search PubMed .J. R. Bacon, J.
S. Crain, L. Van
Vaeck and J. G. Williams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1633 RSC .T. Kishimoto, Nippon Bunseki Senta Koho, 1998, 33, 49 Search PubMed .R. Russow and G. Schmidt, Isot.
Environ. Health Stud., 1999, 35, 274 Search PubMed .A. T. Townsend, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 307 RSC .G. Marx and K.
G. Heumann, Fresenius' J. Anal.
Chem., 1999, 364, 489 CrossRef CAS .M. Kunert, K. Friese, V. Weckert and B. Markert, Environ.
Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 3502 CrossRef CAS .T. Prohaska, M. Watkins, C. Latkoczy, W. W. Wenzel and G. Stingeder, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 365 RSC .O. Mestek, R. Koplik, H. Fingerova and M. Suchanek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 403 RSC .M. Bi, A. M. Ruiz, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, Appl. Spectrosc., 2000, 54, 639 Search PubMed .U. Narewski, G. Werner, H. Schulz and C. Vogt, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 167 CrossRef CAS .G. Tamborini and M. Betti, Mikrochim.
Acta, 2000, 132, 411 CrossRef CAS .P. Mangabeira, I. Mushrifah, F. Escaig, D. Laffray, M. G. C. Franca and P. Galle, Cell. Mol. Biol., 1999, 45, 413 Search PubMed .A. J. Midwood, M. F. Proe and J. J. Harthill, Analyst, 2000, 125, 487 RSC .P.
E. Cruvinel, R. G. Flocchini, P. Artaxo, S. Crestana and P. S. P. Herrmann Jr., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 478 Search PubMed .T. Schneider, A. Haag-Kerwer, M. Maetz, M. Niecke, B. Povh, T. Rausch and A. Schussler, Nucl. Instrum.
Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 329 Search PubMed .I. M. Weiersbye, C. J. Straker and W.
J. Przybylowicz, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 335 Search PubMed .J. Mesjasz-Przybylowicz, K. Grodzinska, W.
J. Przybylowicz, B. Godzik and G. Szarek-Lukaszewska, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 306 Search PubMed .P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1773 RSC .J. Ivanova, R. Djingova and I. Kuleff, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1999, 242, 569 CAS .T. Horvath, Z. Hartyani, V. Szilagyi and E. David, Magy. Kem.
Foly., 1999, 105, 500 Search PubMed .R. J. VanCott, B.
J. McDonald and A. G. Seelos, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 422, 801 Search PubMed .B.
J. McDonald, C. W. Unsell, W. T. Elam, K. R. Hudson and J. W. Adams, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 422, 805 Search PubMed .M. Olsson, A. Viksna and H.
S. Helmisaari, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 335 CAS .S.
L. Deng, X. F. Li and X. L. Guo, Guangpuxue
Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 411 Search PubMed .J. F. Schneider, D. Johnson, N. Stoll and K. Thurow, At.-Process, 1999, 4, 12 Search PubMed .Y. Cai, M. Georgiadis and J. Fourqurean, Prepr.
Ext. Abstr. ACS Natl. Meet., 1999, 40, 15 Search PubMed .P. J. Potts, M. H. Ramsey and J. Carlisle, presented at Tenth Biennial National
Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .A. Kawasaki and H. Watanabe-Oda, Spec. Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 173 Search PubMed .M. Ogura, Kanagawa
ken Kankyo Kagaku Senta Kenkyu Hokoku, 1998, 21, 37 Search PubMed .L. H. Liu, Q. K. Zhang and Y. Hu, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 424 Search PubMed .L.
H. Liu, J. Li and M. J. Wang, Fenxi
Shiyanshi, 2000, 19, 36 Search PubMed .I. Rucaniro and D. Petit, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 541 CrossRef .J.
J. Ma, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 613 Search PubMed .B.
D. Traulsen, T. Strumpf and G. Schoenhard, Nachrichtenbl. Dtsch. Pflanzenschutzdienstes (Braunschweig), 1998, 50, 263 Search PubMed .W.
E. Gan, M. Sui and Y. Z. He, Guangpuxue
Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 861 Search PubMed .K. Novotny, A. Turzikova and J. Komarek, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 209 CrossRef CAS .P. Mangabeira, I. Mushrifah, F. Escaig, D. Laffray, P. Louguet, M. G. Franca and P. Galle, Zhenkong
Kexue Yu Jishu, 1998, 18, 66 Search PubMed .A. Gaspar, C. Sogor and J. Posta, Magy. Kem. Foly., 1999, 105, 22 Search PubMed .M. D. Paciolla, G. Davies and S.
A. Jansen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 1814 CrossRef CAS .L.
H. Liu, S. B. Luan and Q. K. Zhang, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 419 Search PubMed .E. Wieteska and A. Drzewinska, Chem.
Anal. (Warsaw), 1999, 44, 547 Search PubMed .K. Wittmaack, Zhenkong
Kexue Yu Jishu, 1998, 18, 41 Search PubMed .S. Rio-Segade and C. Bendicho, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1907 RSC .C.
T. Costley, K. F. Mossop, J. R. Dean, L. M. Garden, J. Marshall and J. Carroll, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 405, 179 CrossRef CAS .L. F. Porta, L. A. Gonzalez, O. I. Villegas, R. O. Lopez and J. C. Merodio, An. Asoc. Quim. Argent., 1999, 87, 1 Search PubMed .C. F. Chai, X. Y. Mao, Y. Q. Wanbg, J. X. Sun, Q.
F. Qian, X. L. Hou, P. Q. Zhang, C. Y. Chen, W.
Y. Feng, W. J. Ding, X. L. Li, C. S. Li and X. X. Dai, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 363, 477 CrossRef CAS .Y.
L. Sun, Y. Lu, F. Wei, Y. P. Wang and X. L. Zhang, Lihua Jianyan, 1999, 35, 542 Search PubMed .C. S. Kim, C. K. Kim, J. I. Lee and K. J. Lee, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 247 RSC .X. Cao, M. Yin, X. Wang and G. Zhao, Fenxi Huaxue, 1999, 27, 679 Search PubMed .A. Mad'aric and J. Kadrabova,
in Proc. - Semin. At. Spectrochem., 14th. edn., ed. E.
Krakovska and S. Ruzickova, Stroffek Publishing, Kosice,  1998, p. 222. Search PubMed .B. J. Liu and L. C. Qian, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 610 Search PubMed .I. Farkasovska, M. Zemberyova
and J. Klimek, in Proc.
- Semin. At. Spectrochem., 14th. edn., ed. E. Krakovska, R.
S., Stroffek Publishing, Kosice.  1998, pp. 216. Search PubMed .K. Tagami and S. Uchida, Radioact.
Radiochem., 1999, 10, 30 Search PubMed .M. Yukawa, Y. Watanabe, Y. Nishimura, Y. Guo, Z. Yongru, H. Lu, W. Zhang, L. Wei and Z. Tao, Fresenius' J.
Anal. Chem., 1999, 363, 760 CrossRef CAS .G. R. MacFarlane and M.
D. Burchett, Environ. Exp. Bot., 1999, 41, 167 CrossRef CAS .A.
T. Persaud, D. Beauchemin, H. E. Jamieson and R. J. C. McLean, Can.
J. Chem., 1999, 77, 409 CrossRef CAS .C. U. Ro, S. Hoornaert and R. Van
Grieken, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1999, 389, 151 CrossRef CAS .E. Sesli and M. Tuzen, Food
Chem., 1999, 65, 453 CrossRef CAS .J. Z. Wu and Y. Ge, Guangpuxue Yu Guangpu Fenxi, 1999, 19, 369 Search PubMed .A.
K. Cheburkin and W. Shotyk, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 145 CrossRef CAS .S. Kokot and T. D. Phuong, Analyst, 1999, 124, 561 RSC .A. Bibak, S. Sturup, V. Haahr, P. Gundersen and V. Gundersen, J.
Agric. Food Chem., 1999, 47, 2678 CrossRef CAS .I. Rodushkin, F. Odman and H. Holmstrom, Sci. Total Environ., 1999, 231, 53 CrossRef CAS .H. E. Gabler, A. Bahr and B. Mieke, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 409 CrossRef CAS .C.
E. C. Magalhaes, E. C. Lima, F. J. Krug and M. A. Z. Arruda, Mikrochim. Acta, 1999, 132, 95 CrossRef CAS .N. W. Bower, M.
A. Snyder and Y. B. Linhart, presented at 217th ACS National Meeting,
Anaheim, CA, USA, March 21–25,  1999. .S. Bhandari, D. Amarasiriwardena and B. Xing,
presented at Humic Substances Seminar III, Boston, MA, USA, March 23–23,  1999. .H. W. Mielke, M. K. Smith
and C. R. Gonzales, presented
at 38th Annual Meeting of the Society of Toxicology, New Orleans, LA, USA,
March 14–18,  1999. .C. Moor, T. Lymberopoulou
and V. J. Dietrich, presented
at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99),
Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .R. Djingova, P. Kovacheva
and I. Kuleff, presented
at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99),
Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .M. Ridings, A. J. Shorter and J. Bawden-Smith,
in Contam. Site Rem.: Challenges Posted Urbn Ind. Contam., Proc. Contam.
Site Rem. Conf., ed. C. D. Johnston, Centre
for Groundwater Studies, Wembley.  1999, p. 213. Search PubMed .A. E. Mohamed, Food Chem., 1999, 65, 503 CrossRef CAS .A. Golcz and S. Dlubak, Rocz.
Akad. Roln. Poznaniu, 1998, 304, 95 Search PubMed .C. Jasiewicz, R. Sendor and J. Buczek, Rocz. Akad. Roln. Poznaniu, 1998, 304, 117 Search PubMed .D. Michelot, E. Siobud, J. C. Dore, C. Viel and F. Poirier, Toxicon, 1998, 36, 1997 CrossRef CAS .Z. N. Kakhnovich, Agrokhimiya, 1998, 78 Search PubMed .F. M. Salas, M. Chino, S. Goto, H. Masujima and K. Kumazawa, Tokyo
Nogyo Daigaku Nogaku Shuho, 1998, 43, 115 Search PubMed .J. Salkauskas, in Proc. - Semin. At. Spectrochem., 14th., ed.:
E. Krakovska,Stroffek Publishing, Kosice,  1998, p. 235. Search PubMed .Y. Z. J. Shi, K. Luo and J. He, Guangdong
Weiliang Yuansu Kexue, 1998, 5, 59 Search PubMed .H. He, B. Liang and Q. Wang, Zhongguo Fangzhi Daxue Xuebao, 1998, 24, 17 Search PubMed .E. G. Soto and M. V. G. Rodriguez, Ann.
Chim. (Rome), 1999, 89, 323 Search PubMed .M. Soylak and O. Turkoglu, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 1999, 17, 209 Search PubMed .K. Vajpai, S. K. Vajpai and D. K. Shrivastava, Orient. J. Chem., 1998, 14, 487 Search PubMed .V. Angelova, G. Bekyarov and K. Ivanov, Lozar. Vinar., 1998, 46, 14 Search PubMed .K. Vajpai, S. K. Vajpai and D. K. Shrivastava, Orient.
J. Chem., 1998, 14, 467 Search PubMed .S. Squire, M. H. Ramsey and M. J. Gardner, Analyst, 2000, 125, 139 RSC .H. Hodrejarv and A. Vaarmann, Anal.
Chim. Acta, 1999, 396, 293 CrossRef CAS .D. J. Brabander, N. Keon, R. H. R. Stanley and H. F. Hemond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 14635 CrossRef CAS .A. Varga, R. M. Garcinuno Martinez, G. Zaray and F. Fodor, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 1455 CrossRef .B. Holynska, B. Ostachowicz and L. Samek, X-Ray
Spectrom., 1999, 28, 372 CrossRef CAS .T. S. Aisueva and T.
N. Gunicheva, J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 54, 1085 Search PubMed .A. Berglund, H. Brelid, A. Rindby and P. Engstrom, Holzforschung, 1999, 53, 474 Search PubMed .J. Flachowsky, A. Rammler, T. Arthen-Engeland and J. Stach, At-Process, 1999, 4, 152 Search PubMed .M. Y. Miah, M. K. Wang and M. Chino, J.
Plant Nutr., 1999, 22, 229 Search PubMed .M. Garcia and R. Figueroa, Adv. X Ray Anal., 1999, 41, 788 Search PubMed .U. El-Ghawi, N. Vajda and G. Patzay, J. Radioanal. Nucl.
Chem., 1999, 241, 605 CAS .N. Herawati, S. Suzuki, K. Hayashi, I. F. Rivai and H. Koyama, Bull.
Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 2000, 64, 33 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Meeravali and S. J. Kumar, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 2000, 366, 313 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Basargin, Z.
S. Svanidze, Y. G. Rozovskii and D. G. Chichua, Zavod. Lab., 1999, 65, 15 Search PubMed .J. Dombovari, J. S. Becker, A. J. Kuhn, W. H. Schroder and H. J. Dietze, At. Spectrosc., 2000, 21, 37 Search PubMed .N. V. Alov,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .A. Moreda-Pineiro, A. Fisher
and S. J. Hill, presented
at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield, UK, July
17–20,  2000. .K. F. Mossop and C. M. Davidson,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .X. Cao, Y. Chen, Z. Gu and X. Wang, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2000, 76, 295 Search PubMed .G. Crisponi, F. Cristiani, R. Leardi and V. M. Nurchi, Ann. Chim. (Rome), 2000, 90, 201 Search PubMed .L. Svoboda, K. Zimmermannova and P. Kalac, Sci.
Total Environ, 2000, 246, 61 CrossRef CAS .R. Barbini, F. Colao, R. Fantoni, A. Palucci and F. Capitelli, Appl. Phys.
A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, S175 Search PubMed .L. P. Ottolini, Mikrochim. Acta, 2000, 132, 467 CrossRef CAS .J. S. Kane and P.
J. Potts, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 209 Search PubMed .N. Imai, S. Terashima, S. Itoh and A. Ando, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 223 Search PubMed .F. Keenan, D. Keller and P. Shaw,
presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .G. M. Thompson and J. Malpas, Mineral. Mag., 2000, 64, 85 Search PubMed .C. J. Bryant, R. J. Arculus and S. M. Eggins, Geology, 1999, 27, 1119 CrossRef CAS .L.
K. Sha and B. W. Chappell, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1999, 63, 3861 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Booth, D. A. Spears, P. Krause and A. G. Cox, Fuel, 1999, 78, 1665 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Mallory-Greenough, J. D. Greenough, G. Dobosi and J.
V. Owen, Archaeometry, 1999, 41, 227 Search PubMed .H. Toland, B. Perkins, N. Pearce, F. Keenan and M. J. Leng, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1143 RSC .C. A. Craig, K. E. Jarvis and L. J. Clarke, J. Anal. At.
Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1001 RSC .M. Odegard, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 173 Search PubMed .J.
S. Becker and H. J. Dietze, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 429 CrossRef CAS .X.
R. Liang, X. H. Li, Y. Liu and C. Y. Lee, Fenxi
Ceshi Xuebao, 2000, 19, 33 Search PubMed .D. Gunther, A. Quadt, R. Frishknecht and V. J. Dietrich,
presented at Instrumental Methods of Analysis. Modern Trends and Applications (IMA '99),
Chalkidiki, Greece, 19–22 September,  1999. .J. E. Reid, I. Horn, H. P. Longerich, L. Forsythe and G.
A. Jenner, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 149 Search PubMed .X. Liang, X.-h. Li, M. Sun, Y. Liu and X. Tu, Chem. Lett., 1999, 639 CrossRef CAS .P. Xu, H. Guan, M. Sun, C. Yuan, X. Zhou and J. Malpas, Diqiu Huaxue, 1999, 28, 136 Search PubMed .W. Compston, Mineral. Mag., 1999, 63, 297 Search PubMed .X. Liang, X. Li, G. Wei, X. Tu and G. Wang, Fenxi Huaxue, 1999, 27, 1121 Search PubMed .X. R. Liang, X. H. Li, Y.
K. Liu, B. Q. Zhu and H. X. Zhang, Diqiu Huaxue, 2000, 29, 1 Search PubMed .W. L. Griffin, N. J. Pearson, E. Belousova, S. E. Jackson, E. van Achterbergh, S. Y. O'Reilly and S. R. Shee, Geochim. Cosmochim.
Acta, 2000, 64, 133 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Bolger, Appl. Spectrosc., 2000, 54, 181 Search PubMed .I.
B. Gornushkin, A. Ruiz-Medina, J. M. Anzano, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 581 RSC .W. B. Brinckerhoff, G. G. Managadze, R.
W. McEntire, A. F. Cheng and W. J. Green, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2000, 71, 536 CrossRef CAS .A. K. Knight, N. L. Scherbarth, D. A. Cremers and M.
J. Ferris, Appl. Spectrosc., 2000, 54, 331 Search PubMed .M.
M. Silva, M. Goreti, R. Vale and E. B. Caramao, Talanta, 1999, 50, 1035 CrossRef CAS .S.
M. Maia, J. B. Borba
da Silva, A. J. Curtius and B. Welz, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 1081 RSC .E. C. Lima, F. Barbosa Jr. and F. J. Krug, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1913 RSC .M.
E. Ben Younes, D. C. Gregoire and C. L. Chakrabarti, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1703 RSC .E. C. Lima, F. Barbosa Jr., F. J. Krug, M. M. Silva and M. G. R. Vale, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 995 RSC .G. Doner and F. Coban, Ann. Chim. (Rome), 1999, 89, 445 Search PubMed .F. Monna, J. Dominik, J. L. Loizeau, M. Pardos and P. Arpagaus, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2850 CrossRef CAS .Y.
J. Ma, C. Q. Liu, L. Qi, R. G. Huang and J. H. Peng, Yankuang Ceshi, 1999, 18, 189 Search PubMed .R. Falciani, E. Novaro, M. Marchesini and M. Gucciardi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 561 RSC .K.
L. Laban and B. P. Atkin, Fuel, 2000, 79, 173 CrossRef CAS .E. Hoffmann, C. Ludke, J. Kurner, H. Scholze, E. Ullrich and H. Stephanowitz, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 365, 592 CrossRef CAS .J. Lynch, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 251 Search PubMed .S. Terashima and M. Taniguchi, Bunseki Kagaku, 1999, 48, 847 Search PubMed .M. D. Petit and M. I. Rucandio, Anal.
Chim. Acta, 1999, 401, 283 CrossRef CAS .X. J. Yang and C. Pin, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 1706 CrossRef CAS .X. J. Yang and C. Pin, Analyst, 2000, 125, 453 RSC .G.
S. Reddi and C. R. M. Rao, Analyst, 1999, 124, 1531 RSC .E. L. Hoffman, J. R. Clark and J.
R. Yeager, Explor. Min. Geol., 1999, 7, 155 Search PubMed .K. Akatsuka and J. W. McLaren, in Anthropog. Platinum-Group Elem. Emiss, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.  2000, p. 123. Search PubMed .X. D. Jin and H. P. Zhu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 747 RSC .S. J. Woodland and D. G. Pearson, Spec.
Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 267 Search PubMed .D. G. Pearson and S. J. Woodland, Chem. Geol., 2000, 165, 87 CrossRef CAS .A. Chatterjee, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 753 RSC .B. Rosenkranz, G. O'Connor and H. E. Evans, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 7 RSC .C. F. Harrington,
presented at Atomic Spectrometry Updates Joint Meeting with Atomic Spectroscopy
Group, Teddington, UK, March 18,  1999. .R. M. Annlo
Sendin, A. Fisher and S. J. Hill,
presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium, Sheffield,
UK, July 17–20,  2000. .S. E. Woodbury, R. P. Evershed and J. B. Rossell, J. Chromatogr., 1998, 805, 249 CrossRef CAS .I. Rodriguez, S. Mounicou, R. Lobinski, V. Sidelnikov, Y. Patrushev and M. Yamanaka, Anal.
Chem., 1999, 71, 4534 CrossRef CAS .M. G. Baron, R. T. Herrin and D. E. Armstrong, Analyst, 2000, 125, 123 RSC .J. J. B. Nevado, L. F. G. Bermejo and R. C. Rodriguez Martin-Doimeandios, Fresenius' Z. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 732 CrossRef .E. C. Lima, F. Barbos Jr. and F. J. Krug, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2000, 409, 267 CrossRef CAS .E.
C. Lima, F. Barbosa
Jr., F. J. Krug and U. Guaita, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1601 RSC .J. B. Borba da Silva, M. A. Mesquita da Silva, A. J. Curtius and B. Welz, J. Anal.
At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1737 RSC .V. Fernandez-Perez, M.
M. Jimenez-Carmona and M. D. Luque de Castro, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1761 RSC .D.
W. Bryce, W. T. Corns and P. B. Stockwell, presented at Tenth Biennial National Atomic Spectroscopy Symposium,
Sheffield, UK, July 17–20,  2000. .N. Daskalova and I. Boevski, Spectrochim.
Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 1099 CrossRef .L. W. Qui, L. Yu and B. Y. Lu, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando FL, March 7–12,  1999. .V. Padmasubashini, M. K. Ganguly, K. Satyanarayana and R. K. Malhotra, Talanta, 1999, 50, 669 CrossRef CAS .J. Vander Auwera, G. Bologne, I. Roelandts and J. C. Duchesne, Geol.
Belg., 1998, 1, 49 Search PubMed .M. Ogura, Kankyo Kagaku, 1999, 9, 939 Search PubMed .Q. Liang, H. Jing and D. C. Gregoire, Talanta, 2000, 51, 507 CrossRef CAS .H. Satoh, D. Ishiyama, T. Mizuta and Y. Ishikawa, Akita Daigaku
Kogaku Shigengakubu Kenkyu Hokoku, 1999, 20, 1 Search PubMed .K. H. Lee, M. Oshima, T. Takayanagi and S. Motomizu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2000, 73, 615 CrossRef CAS .C. R. M. Rao, G. S. Reddi, T.
A. S. Rao, S. Vijaylakshmi, R. K. Prabhu and T. R. Mahalingam, Indian
Miner., 1999, 52, 277 Search PubMed .R. Richaud, H. Lachas, M. J. Lazaro, L. J. Clarke, K. E. Jarvis, A. A. Herod, T. C. Gibb and R. Kandiyoti, Fuel, 1999, 79, 57 CrossRef .R. Richaud, M.
J. Lazaro, H. Lachas, B. B. Miller, A. A. Herod, D.
R. Dugwell and R. Kandiyoti, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2000, 14, 317 CrossRef CAS .L. Qi, J. Hu and H. L. Deng, Chin. Sci. Bull., 1999, 44, 173 Search PubMed .M. Griselin, D. G. Pearson, C. Ottley and G.
R. Davies, in Spec. Publ. - R.
Soc. Chem. (Plasma Source Mass Spectrometry), Vol. 241, R.
Soc. Chem., Cambridge,  1999, p. 246. Search PubMed .A. Makishima and E. Nakamura, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 263 RSC .A. Makishima and E. Nakamura, Geostand.
Newsl., 1999, 23, 137 Search PubMed .C. J. Park, K. H. Cho, J. K. Suh and M. S. Han, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 567 RSC .X. D. Jin and H.
P. Zhu, Fenxi Huaxue, 2000, 28, 563 Search PubMed .S. Rauch, M. Motelica-Heino, G. M. Morrison and O. F. X. Donard, J. Anal.
At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 329 RSC .S. Hann, T. Prohaska, G. Koellensperger, C. Latkoczy and G. Stingeder, J.
Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 721 RSC .M. Rehkamper and A. N. Halliday, Geochim. Cosmochim.
Acta, 1999, 63, 935 CrossRef CAS .P. B. Tomascak, R.
W. Carlson and S. B. Shirey, Chem. Geol., 1999, 158, 145 CrossRef CAS .P. B. Tomascak, F. Tera, R. T. Helz and R. J. Walker, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1999, 63, 907 CrossRef CAS .N.
S. Belshaw, X. K. Zhu, Y. Guo and R. K. O'Nions, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2000, 197, 191 CrossRef CAS .X. K. Zhu, R. K. O'Nions, Y. Guo, N. S. Belshaw and D. Rickard, Chem. Geol., 2000, 163, 139 CrossRef CAS .L. Halicz, A. Galy, N.
S. Belshaw and R. K. O'Nions, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1835 RSC .J.
S. Becker and H. J. Dietze, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 482 CrossRef CAS .S. Uchida, R. Garcia-Tenorio, K. Tagami and M. Garcia-Leon, J. Anal. At.
Spectrom., 2000, 15, 889 RSC .D. R. Bandura, V.
I. Baranov and S. D. Tanner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 921 RSC .D. G. Pearson, C. J. Ottley and S. J. Woodland, Spec.
Publ. - R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 277 Search PubMed .H. T. Gao, D.
M. Zhao, A. D. Du, W. J. Qu and D. Y. Liu, Yankuang Ceshi, 1999, 18, 176 Search PubMed .R. Schoenberg, T. F. Nagler and J. D. Kramers, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2000, 197, 85 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Hassler, B. Peucker-Ehrenbrink and G. E. Ravizza, Chem.
Geol., 2000, 166, 1 CrossRef CAS .C. F. You and M. J. Bickle, J. Geol. Soc. China, 1999, 42, 319 Search PubMed .R. H. James and M. R. Palmer, Chem. Geol., 2000, 166, 319 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Wieser and J. R. De Laeter, Int. J. Mass
Spectrom., 2000, 197, 253 CrossRef CAS .J. Eccles, Mater. World, 1999, 7, 619 Search PubMed .J. Farquhar, E. Hauri and J. Wang, Earth Planet. Sci.
Lett., 1999, 171, 607 CrossRef CAS .I. C. W. Fitzsimons, B. Harte, I. L. Chinn, J. J. Gurney and W. R. Taylor, Mineral.
Mag., 1999, 63, 857 Search PubMed .K. Wendt, K. Blaum, B. A. Bushaw, C. Gruning, R. Horn, G. Huber, J. V. Kratz, P. Kunz, P. Muller, W. Nortershauser, M. Nunnemann, G. Passler, A. Schmitt, N. Trautmann and A. Waldek, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 471 CrossRef CAS .W. F. Calaway, M. P. McCann and M. J. Pellin, Mater. Res.
Soc. Symp. Proc., 1999, 551, 83 Search PubMed .K. P. Jochum, A.
J. Stolz and G. McOrist, Meteorit. Planet. Sci., 2000, 35, 229 Search PubMed .J. A. Pfander, K. P. Jochum, A. Sassen, B. Stoll, P. Maissenbacher and M. Murmann, Fresenius'
J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 376 CrossRef CAS .S. Merchel and U. Herpers, Radiochim. Acta, 1999, 84, 215 Search PubMed .M. Hotchkis, D. Fink, C. Tuniz and S. Vogt, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2000, 53, 31 Search PubMed .W. Kretschmer, Acta Phys. Pol., 2000, 31, 123 Search PubMed .J. C. Rucklidge, G. C. Wilson, A. E. Litherland, W.
E. Kieser, J. A. Krestow and I. Tomski, AIP Conf. Proc., 1999, 475, 629 Search PubMed .S. H. Sie, D. A. Sims, T.
R. Niklaus, F. Bruhn, G. Suter and G. Cripps, Nucl. Instrum.
Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 201 Search PubMed .I. E. De Vito, A. N. Masi and R. A. Olsina, Talanta, 1999, 49, 929 CrossRef CAS .A. N. Masi and R. A. Olsina, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 1999, 17, 315 Search PubMed .J. Etoubleau, P. Cambon, H. Bougault and J. L. Joron, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 187 Search PubMed .T. Okada, M. Kato, A. Fujimura, H. Tsunemi and S. Kitamoto, Adv. Space Res., 1999, 23, 1833 CrossRef CAS .H. Y. McSween Jr., S. L. Murchie, J. A. Crisp, N. T. Bridges, R. C. Anderson, J. F. Bell III, D. T. Britt, J. Bruckner, G. Dreibus, T. Economou, A. Ghosh, M.
P. Golombek, J. P. Greenwood, J. R. Johnson, H. J. Moore, R. V. Morris, T. J. Parker, R. Rieder, R. Singer and H. Wanke, J.
Geophys. Res., 1999, 104, 8679 CrossRef .I. Szaloki, A. Somogyi, M. Braun and A. Toth, X-Ray
Spectrom., 1999, 28, 399 CAS .A. Mendoza, R. Cesareo, M. Valdes, J. J. Meitin, R. Perez and Y. Lorente, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1999, 240, 459 CAS .I.
I. Funtua, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 1999, 17, 189 Search PubMed .G. Budak, A. Karabulut, O. Dogan and M. Levent, J. Trace Microprobe
Tech., 1999, 17, 309 Search PubMed .A. Karabulut and G. Budak, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2000, 55, 91 CrossRef .J. P. Willis and E. B. McNew, Adv. X Ray Anal, 1999, 41, 829 Search PubMed .M. N. Timofeeff, T. K. Lowenstein and W. H. Blackburn, Chem. Geol., 2000, 164, 171 CrossRef CAS .M. Ebert, V. Mair, R. Tessadri, P. Hoffmann and H.
M. Ortner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part
B, 2000, 55, 205 CrossRef .J. Spanke, A. von Bohlen, R. Klockenkaemper, A. Quentmeier and D. Klockow, J. Anal.
At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 673 RSC .L. Bennun, V. H. Gillette and E. D. Greaves, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 1291 CrossRef .I. Queralt, M. A. Barreiros, M. L. Carvalho and M.
M. Costa, Sci. Total Environ., 1999, 241, 39 CrossRef CAS .T. Calligaro, J. P. Poirot and G. Querre, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 628 Search PubMed .K. Schmetzer, Z. Beili, G. Yan, H. J. Bernhardt and H. A. Hanni, J. Gemmol., 1999, 26, 289 Search PubMed .R. Scheepers, L.
E. Cousin, W. J. Przybylowicz and V. M. Prozesky, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 599 Search PubMed .C. B. Franklyn and R. K. W. Merkle, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 550 Search PubMed .S. N. Foya, W. U. Reimold, W. J. Przybylowicz and R.
L. Gibson, Nucl. Instrum. Methods
Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 588 Search PubMed .W. U. Reimold, W. Przybylowicz and C. Koeberl, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 593 Search PubMed .P. Trocellier, P. Berger, B. Berthier, E. Berthoumieux, J. P. Gallien, N. Metrich, C. Moreau, M. Mosbah and M. E. Varela, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 221 Search PubMed .C. H. Zhong, M. Y. Zheng, Z. G. Lu, P.
L. Chen and B. L. He, Fenxi Shiyanshi, 2000, 19, 75 Search PubMed .C. E. C. Magalhaes, C. Pasquini and M.
A. Z. Arruda, Lab. Rob. Autom., 2000, 12, 46 CrossRef CAS .S. Q. Cao, H. T. Chen, J. Liu and X. J. Zeng, Fenxi Ceshi Xuebao, 1999, 18, 17 Search PubMed .I. M. Steele, L. J. Cabri, J. C. Gaspar, G. McMahon, M.
A. Marquez and M. A. Z. Vasconcellos, Can. Mineral., 2000, 38, 1 Search PubMed .L. Ottolini and F. C. Hawthorne, Eur. J. Mineral., 1999, 11, 679 CAS .Y. Haruhara, K. Kobayashi, K. Yoshida, S. Hatori and C. Nakano,
in Tokyo Daigaku Genshiryoku Kenkyu Sogo Senta Shinpojumu,  1998, p. 169. Search PubMed .A. M. Ghazi and S. Shuttleworth, Analyst, 2000, 125, 205 RSC .H. C. Xiong, B. Hu, T.
Y. Peng, S. Z. Chen and Z. C. Jiang, Anal. Sci., 1999, 15, 737 Search PubMed .L. Ottolini, F. Camara and S. Bigi, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 89 Search PubMed .A. M. Carro and R. A. C. R. Lorenzo, LC-GC, 1998, 16, 926 Search PubMed .J.
A. G. Neto, L. F. Zara, A. Santos, J. C. Rocha and A. A. Cardoso, Lab.
Rob. Autom., 1999, 11, 304 CrossRef .L. M. Jiang, Lihua Jianyan, 1999, 35, 565 Search PubMed .G. Giuliani, M. Chaussidon, C. France-Lanord, C. Rollion, D. Mangin and P. Coget, Analusis, 1999, 27, 203 Search PubMed .Q. Y. Shu, Lihua Jianyan, 1999, 35, 326 Search PubMed .V. N. Losev, G.
V. Volkova, N. V. Maznyak, A. K. Trofimchuk and E. Y. Yanovskaya, J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 54, 1109 Search PubMed .L. A. King, I. B. Gornushkin, D. Pappas, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 1999, 54, 1771 CrossRef .T. Prohaska, S. Hann, C. Latkoczy, G. Stingeder, S. Yin and H. Shirahata, Spec. Publ.
- R. Soc. Chem., 1999, 241, 237 Search PubMed .H. Liang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 1999, 44, 1242 Search PubMed .Y. Zhang, W. T. Frankenberger
Jr. and J. N. Moore, Sci. Total Environ., 1999, 229, 183 CrossRef CAS .C. K. Kim, H. J. Sung, K.
S. Chung and K. Yamaya, Anal. Sci. Technol., 1999, 12, 484 Search PubMed .T. Iwamura, K. Kadokami, D. Jin-ya, Y. Hanada and M. Suzuki, Bunseki
Kagaku, 1999, 48, 555 Search PubMed .I. R. Pereiro, A. Wasik and R. Lobinski, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 363, 460 CrossRef CAS .F. Vanhaecke, G. De Wannemacker, L. Moens and J. Hertogen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1999, 14, 1691 RSC .S. Richter, A. Alonso, W. De Bolle, R. Wellum and P.
D. P. Taylor, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 1999, 193, 9 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Hanchar, Rev. Mineral., 1999, 38, 499 Search PubMed .R. R. Barefoot and J. C. Van Loon, Talanta, 1999, 49, 1 CrossRef CAS .R. K. Malhotra, K. Satyanarayana and G. V. Ramanaiah, At. Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 92 Search PubMed .Y. Li and H. Y. Zhao, Lihua Jianyan, 1999, 35, 228 Search PubMed .L. Bellot-Gurlet, T. Calligaro, O. Dorighel, J. C. Dran, G. Poupeau and J. Salomon, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, B150, 616 Search PubMed .J. C. G. Trincavelli, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 194 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Boyle, X-Ray Spectrom., 1999, 28, 178 CAS .R. Wei and H. Haraguchi, Anal. Sci., 1999, 15, 729 Search PubMed .B. Stoll and K. P. Jochum, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1999, 364, 380 CrossRef CAS .V. Balaram, P. V. Sunder Raju, S. I. Ramesh, K.
V. Anjaiah, B. Dasaram, C. Manikyamba, M. Ram Mohan and D. S. Sarma, At. Spectrosc., 1999, 20, 155 Search PubMed .M. Mosbah, J. P. Duraud, N. Metrich, Z. Wu, J. S. Delaney and A. San
Miguel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1999, 158, 214 Search PubMed .H. Pauwels, J. C. Baubron, P. Freysinet and M. Chesneau, J. Geochem.
Explor., 1999, 66, 115 CrossRef CAS .W. Luesaiwong and R.
K. Marcus, presented at Pittcon.'99,
Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999. .G. E. Potts, I. Gornushkin, S. Claggett, H. Nasjpour, B. W. Smith and J. D. Winefordner, presented at Pittcon.'99, Orlando, FL, USA, March 7–12,  1999 .I. J. Funtua, J. Trace Microprobe Tech., 1999, 17, 293 Search PubMed .J. Aucoin, R. Blanchard, C. Billiot, C. Partridge, D. Schultz, K. Mandhare, M. J. Beck and J. N. Beck, Microchem. J., 1999, 62, 299 CrossRef CAS .T. Hirata, Bunseki, 1999, 727 Search PubMed .P. R. D. Mason, K. E. Jarvis, H. Downes and R. Vannucci, Geostand. Newsl., 1999, 23, 157 Search PubMed .Y. Rosenthal, M. P. Field and R. M. Sherrell, Anal.
Chem., 1999, 71, 3248 CrossRef CAS .H. C. C. Cloete, Adv. X Ray
Anal, 1999, 41, 743 Search PubMed .T. H. Hansteen, P.
M. Sachs and F. Lechtenberg, Eur. J. Mineral., 2000, 12, 25 CAS .H. Bag, A. R. Turker and M. Lale, Anal. Sci., 1999, 15, 1251 Search PubMed .A. I. Karayigit and R. A. Gayer, Energy Sources, 2000, 22, 13 CrossRef CAS .I. Kuleff, R. Djingova and J. Ivanova, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1999, 242, 787 CAS .W. Hsu, G. R. Huss and G. J. Wasserburg, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2000, 64, 1133 CrossRef CAS .K. Sera, S. Futatsugawa and D. Ishiyama, Int. J. PIXE, 1999, 9, 63 Search PubMed .K. Khan and M.
A. Qaiser, Pak. J. Sci. Ind. Res., 1999, 42, 24 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
Table Content:


As	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;L	Bomb digestion method using HNO3 + H2O2 + HF
validated using four reference materials including NIST 1648 (urban particulate
matter) and BCR 176 (waste incineration ash)	38
C	Ambient air and point source samples	MS;-;S	Accelerator MS (14C) used to provide
direct fossil versus biomass C source discrimination data in a metropolitan
area	57
C	Air samples	MS;-;G	GC-IR technique developed for the high precision isotopic
analysis of 13C in atmospheric CO2.	42
Cd	Stack gases	AE;MIP;G	Development of a continuous emission monitor. Self absorption
at Cd 228.8 nm and Hg 253.65 nm lines examined	11
C	Breath samples	MS;-;G	13CO2∶12CO2
ratio determined by IRMS and by a cheaper non-dispersive IR technique. Patients
administered with 1-13C-phenylalanine and duplicate samples taken.
Data showed a good correlation between the two techniques. IRMS superior when
concerned with 13CO2 kinetics over longer time periods	43
Cr	Industrial exhaust streams	AE;LIPS;S	Developmentof an on-line monitoring system attempted using
a Nd:YAG laser. Measurements made at 520.4, 520.6 and 520.8 nm lines
in a total measurement time of 20 s. Good correlation found with analysis
by filtration/ICP-AES (r2 = 0.84).
LOD 14 µg m−3	58
Cr	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;S	Laser ablation of PTFE filters attempted. Good correlation
with results obtained using a bomb digestion procedure (HNO3 + HClO4
mixture). LOD 0.05 µg per filter	28
Cr	Welding fume	AE;ICP;L	Analytical techniques for the measurement of CrVI
in welding fume compared (colorimetric, IC and ICP-AES)	59
Cu	Sedimented dust	AE;ICP;L	Samples collected at varying distances from selected point
and line sources within a mining community	19
Hg	Ambient air	AFS;CV;S, G	Quartz filter filtration system for particulate phase compared
to a filtration system with a front ended denuder (Au coated) to
remove gaseous phase Hg. Denuder based system gave higher results in parallel
sampling trials. Result attributed to Hg-coated Au particles flaking off the
denuder	56
Hg	Stack emissions	AA;-;G	Continuous emission monitoring instrumentation for Hg reviewed.
Five commercially available instruments reviewed as well as six further instruments
under development. Cold vapour AAS found to be the dominant mode of operation	2
Hg	Stack gases	AES;MIP;G	Development of a continuous emission monitor using an atmospheric
microwave sustained plasma. Self absorption of Cd 228.8 nm and Hg 253.65 nm
lines examined	11
Hg	Air samples	AF;CV;G	Au amalgamation trapping system discussed	60
Hg	Flue gases	XRF;-;G	Silvered quartz fibre filters used for collection with
efficiencies of 88% in laboratory tests. Average capacity of the filters
determined to be 15 µg cm−2 and that
ageing of the filters for up to 96 hours had no effect on collection
efficiency	6
Hg	Environmental	-;-;-	Overview of the environmental analysis in China including
the determination in air	61
Hg	Urban air	AA;-;G	Prototype cavity ringdown laser absorption spectrometer
developed and evaluated in laboratory trials. LOD 0.5 ppt	62
Hg	Flue gas	AF;CV;G	Automated measurement system with Au amalgamation sampler
utilised. System set up to measure elemental and total concentrations thus
giving ionic concentrations by difference	63
Kr	Atmospheric samples	MS;-;G	Accelerator sytem used to establish that 81Kr
is a long-lived cosmogenic radionuclide essentially unaffected by anthropogenic
contributions and therefore suited for dating applications	64
Mn	Sedimented dust	AE;ICP;L	Samples collected at varying distances from selected point
and line sources within a mining community	19
Mn	Airborne particulate matter	AA;ET;L	Graphite furnace method developed. Mg(NO3)2
used a modifier. Measurement precision < 3.0%. LOD (3σ)
0.3 µg per filter	16
N	Air samples	MS;-;G	Measurement of 15N in NO enhanced by preconcentration
using cyrogenic trapping	65
Ni	Airborne particulate matter	AA;ET;L MS;ICP;L	Operationally defined speciation carried out in both laboratory
and field trials	52
Ni	Workplace air	-;-;-	Review of methods used at BIA (Germany) for monitoring
Ni in airborne dusts. Role played by the methods in the meeting of legal requirements
in workplace air monitoring discussed	4
O	Air samples	MS;-;G	Development of a continuous flow IRMS system for the measurement
of stable isotopic composition in air samples, soil gas samples and in water
samples. Field sampling techniques for gaseous and dissolved O2
described	66
Pb	Airborne particulate matter	TIMS;-;S	Aerosols sampled onto acid washed 0.45 µm
PTFE filters. Low blanks of 15 pg Pb enabled reliable isotopic data
to be obtained on filter samples containing 400 pg Pb (for sectioned
filters). Blanks were lower for uncut filters (11 ± 8 pg),
enabling samples containing as little as 120 pg Pb to be examined	29
Pb	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;L	Pb isotopic measurements made using magnetic sector multi-collector
system. Solution nebulisation and laser ablation approaches studied	30
Pb	Workplace air	XRF;-;S	Evaluation of portable system described. Study led to the
development of a standardised method (NIOSH 7702)	23
Pb	Airborne particulate matter	AA;F;L XRF;-;S	Comparison of two analytical techniques reported. NIST
SRM 1648 (urban particulate matter) used in the evaluation process.
Sequential extraction based on the method of Tessier et al. also
attempted	67
Pb	Paint particle	XRF;-;S	On-site measurements made during operations to remove paint
from bridges. Comparable performance obtained with traditional laboratory
analysis using ICP-AES	25
Pb	Airborne particulate matter	-;-;-	Airborne concentrations correlated to blood levels found
in school children	68
Pb	Atmospheric particulates	MS;ICP;L	Nature of 206Pb∶207Pb isotopic
ratio in rainwater, particulates, pine needles and leaded petrol in Scotland
examined over the period 1982–1998. Data collected suggested that the
contribution of leaded petrol to atmospheric Pb in urban environments has
declined from 84–86%
(1989–1991) to 48–58%
(1997–1998)	33
Pb	Aerosol samples	MS;ICP;S	Isotopic measurements made on samples collected on an impactor
sampler. Enhanced measurement precision with a multi-collector instrument
allowed slight variations to be detected between samples collected with different
prevailing wind directions	32
Pb	Atmospheric particulate matter	MS;ICP;S	Isotopic measurements made on samples collected on membrane
filters with a high volume sampler. Microwave assisted dissolution utilised (HNO3 + HClO4 + HF)	31
Pb	House dust	AA;F;L	High throughput microwave assisted dissolution (using
disposable digestion vessels) compared to traditional hotplate procedure (ASTM
method). NIST SRM 2582 (low lead paint) and NIST SRM 1648 (urban
particulate matter) used during the evaluation process	69
Pd	Airborne particulate matter	AA;ET;L	Samples collected on glass fibre filters subjected to a
microwave assisted dissolution. Samples preconcentrated on the inner wall
of a graphite tube through electrodeposition. Precision at the 1.01 µg l−1
was 5.1%. LOD 0.06 µg l−1	70
Pt	Airborne particulate matter	AA;ET;L	See Pd, ref.70	70
S	Breath samples	AE;GD;G	Speciation of volatile compounds from anaerobic bacteria
in the mouth carried out using a GC coupled system	71
Si	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;L XRF;-;S	LA technique compared to direct analysis by XRF. Calibration
standards prepared by loading aliquots of NIST 1648 CRM onto PTFE filters	39
Sb	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;L	Speciation (III and V)
carried out on aqueous extracts using a silica based anion exchange column
connected on-line. Precision at 5.0 µg l−1 <5%.
LOD 100 pg ml−1 SbV and 300 pg ml−1
SbIII	72
V	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;L	Bomb digestion method using HNO3 + H2O2 + HF
validated using 4 reference materials including NIST 1648 (urban particulate
matter) and BCR 176 (waste incineration ash). Sector field
instrument used. See As, ref. 38	38
Various	Car exhaust fumes	MS;ICP;L	Exhaust fumes analysed for PGE content following EUDC drive
cycles on cars (gasoline and diesel) equipped with catalytic converters.
Microwave assisted dissolution using aqua regia–HF mixture. NIST SRM
2557 (used auto catalyst monolith) used for quality control	34
Various	Airborne particles	MS;-;S	Particle spectra classified and interrogated using commercial
and in-house software packages	73
Various	Aerosol particles	MS;-;S	Near-surface examination of particles carried out on samples
collected with size selective sampler. Fine particles (<1 µm)
had Na and S dominated shell of 13 nm around a C core (traffic
soot). Coarse particles (>1 µm) consisted of
soil dust, fly ash and Na salt containing particles	55
Various	Diesel exhaust particulates	TXRF;-;L	Trace element distribution examined. Quartz fibre filter
most suitable for sample collection. Wear metal content of particulates emitted
during engine start up higher than particulates emitted during normal engine
working temperature	74
Various	Laboratory air sample	AE;LIPS;G	Development of a calibration-free procedure for quantitative
analysis described	10
Various	Aerosols	AE;LIPS;S	Laser beam focused onto filter surface. System used with
an on-line filter sampling interface monitoring emissions from a waste incineration
facility. LOD typically <0.4 µg cm−2
for a sample size of 1 m3 sampled onto a 3 cm2
filter	75
Various	Atmospheric aerosol samples	AA;F;L	Filter samples subjected to a microwave assisted dissolution (HNO3 + H2O2 + HF). High sensitivity Pt–Ir nebuliser used
to enhance performance	17
Various	Arctic air	MS;ICP;S	Particulates collected on graphite impaction plates within
a cascade impactor sampler. ETV used to vaporise from impaction plates	8
Various	Airborne particulate matter	AA;-;L	Eight heavy metals determined in samples collected on membrane
filter	18
Various	Aerosol deposits	PIXE;-;S	Development of a new analysis chamber with a rotating target
to handle film targets from Berner-type impactors described	27
Various	Airborne particulates	PIXE;-;S	Lower impaction stages (fine particle collection)
of cascade impactors not ideal thin targets for PIXE analysis. SEM used to
measure density and target thickness in order to calculate thick target correction
factors	46
Various	Aerosol deposits	PIXE;-;S	Spray technique for preparing uniform large area calibration
standards from standard solutions evaluated	48
Various	Aerosol deposits	PIXE;-;S	Time resolved air sampling system described. Sequential
samples (1 h) taken using a 14 channel system (each
with its own sampling nozzle, impaction plate and pumping system)	76
Various	Antarctic aerosol deposits	PIXE;-;S	Snow samples melted and evaporated on polycarbonate foil.
Complementary analysis carried out using SEM-EDAX following filtration of
thawed samples through a nucleopore filter	77
Various	Aerosol samples	SIMS;-;S	Preparation of standards from pure metal salts. Results
compared to analysis by ICP-AES, <20% error found	47
Various	Aerosol samples	PIXE;-;S	Interactive software packaged developed to aid quantitative
analysis of samples of intermediate thickness	78
Various	Aerosols	MS;-;-	Review of mass spectrometric techniques for the analysis
of aerosols and their constituents (204 references)	1
Various	Combustion particles	AA;ET;L	Particulates from combustion of waste mineral oil sieved,
wet ashed and analysed in order to determine environmental safety of particles
escaping from filters in combustion plants	20
Various	Classroom air	XRF;-;S	Elemental composition of PM10 samples measured. High indoor
PM10 concentrations attributed to resuspension of soil derived particles	79
Various	Atmospheric aerosols	XRF;-;S	Metals and common cations/anions determined. Three
factors isolated: particulates from anthropogenic emissions, resuspended soil
particulates and sea-salt particles	80
Various	Aerosol particles	TXRF;-;S	Development of an electrostatic precipitator sampler described	7
Various	Vehicle exhaust particulate matter	XRF;-;S	Elements determined averaged between 3–9%
of PM10 mass from gasoline and diesel engined cars tested using Federal Test
Urban Dynamometer Driving Cycles	81
Various	Urban aerosols	PIXE;-;S	Principle component analysis carried out to apportion measured
air pollution to sources	82
Various	Indoor particulate matter	MS;ICP;L	Low flow rate cascade impactor sampler with either quartz
filters or coated (apiezon grease) PTFE filters used for sampling.
HNO3 + HClO4 + HF
acid mixture used for digestion	83
Various	Ambient air samples	AE;ICP;L	Research into the effect of metal catalysed oxidative stress.
Catalytically active metals measured in water soluble and insoluble particulate
fractions with their oxidant generation ability measured by in-vitro
testing	54
Various	Air samples	-;-;-	ASU environmental update	84
Various	Marine aerosols	MS;ICP;S	Concentration, distribution and occurrence of metals in
airborne particulate matter interrogated using LA sample introduction. Crustal
elements lower in winter months due to frozen land masses. Concentrations
of crustal and anthropogenic elements lower in summer than in spring due to
dilution of offshore winds with oceanic winds	85
Various	Airborne particulate matter	AES, MS;GD;S	Direct introduction of particulates into AE/MS systems via
particle beam/momentum separator device described. Feasibility of this
approach demonstrated by collection of emission spectra for NIST 1648 CRM
and mass spectra from a caffeine powder doped with PAHs	14
Various	Airborne particulate matter	AA;F,ET;L	Deposits collected using a water layer surface sampler.
Water filtered and analysed. Filter wet ashed and analysed	21
Various	Airborne dust samples	TXRF;-;L	Oxygen ashing procedure (directly onto TXRF carrier)
compared to two high pressure acid digestion procedures. Elemental recoveries
for the ashing procedure in the range 90–97% for NIST 1648 SRM (urban
particulate matter)	9
Various	Atmospheric dust	AA;F;L	Samples collected on PVC membrane filters, subsequently
dry ashed with carbonised residues, treated with HNO3 and re-ashed,
and finally taken up in 1 M HCl	22
Various	Ambient air	XRF;-;S	Review of the application use of XRF techniques for air
quality studies with 58 refs.	3
Various	Marine aerosols	XRF;-;S	Light elements determined in aerosol samples collected
using a 5-stage Battelle impactor	86
Various	Atmospheric particulates	XRF;-;S	Research into the weathering mechanisms of marble and granite
monuments carried out	87
Various	Stack gas emissions	XRF;-;S	Filter calibration standards prepared by nebulisation of
standard solutions	49
Various	Airborne particulate matter	XRF;-;S	Samples analysed following collection using a Gent-type
PM10 stacked filter unit. Maximum concentrations determined below WHO guideline
values	88
Various	Airborne particulate matter	NAA;-;S	PM10 and TSP samples collected and analysed from three
Indonesian sites	89
Various	Stack gas	XRF;-;S	On-line instrument used with particulates collected on
quartz fibre filters. System also used to monitor toxic elements in ambient
air	15
Various	Ambient aerosols	XRD;-;S	Elemental distribution on filter samples obtained with
high volume samplers examined. 150 mm diameter filters sub-sampled (32
mm diameter) and examined. Loading differences between centre and edge
of filter found (8–10% decrease for course particulates;
2–4% for fine particulates).	45
Various	Dust samples	XRF;-;S	Virtues of using portable XRF extolled	26
Various	Airborne particulate matter and road dust	MS;ICP;L	Environmental samples analysed following dissolution. USN
equipped quadrupole and sector instruments used. Authors conclude that, following
examination of this data and data from samples collected in 1991, emission
of PGEs from catalytic converters into the environment can no longer be neglected	36
Various	Cleanroom air	MS;-;S	TOF-SIMS instrument used to monitor contamination from
ionic and organic species	90
Various	Occupational dust particles	MS;-;S	SIMS spectra recorded for individual particles of dust
emitted from nuclear plants giving chemical and isotopic information	91
Various	Airborne particulate matter	MS;ICP;L	Interferences in the determination of Pd, Pt and Rh using
a quadrupole instrument examined. Microwave dissolution utilising aqua
regia + HF. Conclusion that Pt could be measured without
major errors and that Rh could be measured after mathematical correction.
Pd analysis hampered by high contribution from coexisting interferent elements	37
Various	Coastal aerosols	MS;ICP;L	High volume air sampling at selected sites in NW England.
Hotplate dissolutions employed (HNO3 + HF).
Al and Fe determined alternately by FAAS	92
Various	Fly ash	AA;-;L	Use of methods in the fossil fuel power industry discussed	5
Various	Indoor/workplace air	AE;-;G	Development of continuous emission monitoring instrumentation
described. Field tests carried out over chrome plating baths and at an indoor
shooting range. LOD for Cr and Pb 10 µg m−3	12
Various	Clean room air	MS;ICP;S	Droplet scanning ICP-MS methodology used to investigate
surface contamination	93
Various	Atmospheric particulate matter	MS;ICP;S	Interrogation of tree bark pockets using LA sample introduction
for the retrospective monitoring of the atmosphere	94
Various	Electric arc furnace dust	AE;ICP;L	Sequential operationally defined speciation carried out
to assess environmental impact of fugitive emissions	53
Various	Workplace air	XRF;-;S	Generation of filter calibration standards through aerosol
generation from standard solutions using a desolvated USN system described	50
Various	Atmospheric samples	MS;-;G	Stable isotope concentrations in CO2 and O3
measured by a laboratory built quadrupole instrument	44
Various	Air particles	AE;MIP;S	Development of a novel portable on-site instrument with
CCD detector and efficient in situ sampling system. Characterisation,
optimisation and calibration carried out in the laboratory with aerosols generated
from an in-house high efficiency nebulisation/desolvation system	13
Various	Sediment core	MS;ICP,L	Historic atmospheric deposition measured by the analysis
of sectioned core samples. Samples digested in a HNO3 + H2O2
mixture in a microwave oven digestion bomb	95
Various	Car exhaust fumes	MS;ICP;S	Exhaust fumes analysed for PGE content on cars (gasoline
and diesel) equipped with catalytic converters. Catalytic surface examined
using SEM-EDX and LIBS techniques. PGE content of exhaust fume found to decrease
with ageing of catalyst	35


Ag	Waste water	AA;MIP;L	ETA of small samples from W filament	204
Ag	Drinking water	AA;ETA;slurry	Separation and pre-concentration on N,N-diethylaminoepoxypropyl–crosslinked
chitin chelate resin from solution buffered to pH 11 with NaOH. Resin
re-suspended as slurry for analysis	112
Ag	Waste water	MS;ICP;L	Standard additions and sequential injection analysis	280
Al	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Speciation and size fractionation on-line with HPLC after
chemical modification	177
As	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Gaseous hydride generation used and dried using Nafion
tube. Passed over negatively charged W or Pt electrode. Electrostatic deposition
on atomizer. LOD 30 pg	148
As	Water	XRF;-;S	Different As species collected on specific metal loaded
activated charcoals. LOD 0.02 mg l−1	164
As	Mine water	MS;ICP;L	Ion chromatography used for speciation	157
As	Saline water	AA;-;L	Samples filtered and microwave digested. Mixed in FI system
with buffered quinolin-8-ol–sulfonic acid before sorption onto alumina
column. HCl used for separation and desorption	281
As	Saline water	AA;-;L	Speciation method using chelation with quinolin-8-ol–5-sulfonic
acid, separation using alumina micro-column. HCl used as eluent and coupled
into HG system	282
As	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Gaseous hydride generation mixed with He flow used with
in-furnace trapping. LOD 14 pg ml−1	149
As	Environmental and drinking water	AE;ICP;L	As speciation carried out using chemical pre-treatment
and hydride generation. LOD 1 µg l−1	155
As	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Capillary electrophoresis used for speciation	161
As	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Collision/reaction cell to used to remove chloride
interference	246
As	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Ion chromatography used for speciation. Ultrasonic nebulisation
and membrane desolvation aided sensitivity	158
As	Water	AA;-;L	Speciation using FI-hydride generation	152
As	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Na and Ca removal by cation exchange column and collision
cell used to remove chloride interference	283
As	Environmental water	FID;GC;L	Speciation study performed using complexation with buffered
thioglycollic acid methylester and extraction with cyclohaxane prior to analysis	284
As	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	AsIII and AsV speciation carried
out. AsIII complexed with 2,3 dimercaptopropane-1-sulfonate, separated
on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and eluted with methanol. AsV
reduced to AsIII with L-cysteine before separation.
LOD AsIII0.11 µg l−1 and AsV
0.15 µg l−1	162
As	Water	AA;-;L	Methodology for quantification of 6 species using HG described	153
As	Water	AA;F;L	HG sample introduction used with electrolytic flow through
cell	145
As	Environmental water	AA;-;L	Speciation carried out using HG coupled with GC before
determination	285
As	Saline and environmental water	MS;ICP;L AF;Hy;L	Comparison of speciation using HPLC-HG with both detectors
carried out	156
As	Environmental water	AA;-;L	Speciation performed using microwave assisted distillation
and hydride generation	143
As	Environmental water	AA;-;L	Speciation methodology using HCLO4 reaction
matrix described	154
As	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	W-coated furnace used with large 100 µl sample
and Pd chemical modifier	286
As	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	HG sample introduction used thiourea for improved sensitivity.
LOD 0.02 µg l−1	150
As	Water	MS;ICP;L	Speciation carried out using ion chromatography	187
As	Water	MS;ICP;L	Use of collision/reaction cell to remove chloride interference	250
Au	Saline water	AA;F;L	Separation and preconcentration carried out in xylene using
diethyldithiophosphate as complexing agent. LOD 2.9 ng l−1	287
B	Water	MS;ETA;L	Conversion to sodium metaborate carried out prior to loading
on filament for isotopic analysis	288
Be	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Calcium used as matrix modifier	289
Be	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	Determinand chelated with acetylacetone and separated onto
Sep-Pak C18 cartridge. Chelate eluted with methanol. LOD 0.23 ng	133
Bi	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Mo chemical modifier used	290
Bi	Environmental water	AE;ICP;L	Effects of various acids on HG tested with respect to efficiency
and minimisation of interferences. LOD 0.3 µg l−1	291
Br	Environmental water	TXRF;-;L	Bromate ions separated by ion chromatography and dried
onto quartz substrate	189
Br	Drinking water	MS;ICP;L	Coupled ion chromatography used to separate bromate	186
Br	Water	MS;ICP;L	see As, ref. 187	187
Br	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Comparison of techniques made when coupled to ion chromatography
for determination of bromate	292
Br	Water	MS;ICP;L	Comparison of ion chromatography coupled to different detection
systems	188
C	Saline water	AMS;-;-	Tandem type AMS developed for determination of 14C	276
Ca	Water	AE;F;L	LOD 0.5 µg ml−1	293
Cd	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Two-step graphite furnace developed. First stage used a
transverse heated vaporiser linked to a second end-heated atomizer. Background
absorption interferences reduced	212
Cd	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Sample mixed with HCl and thioacetamide and isotope dilution
spikes. ETA sample introduction used	247
Cd	Water	AA;ETA;L	Sample mixed with 5-sulfo-8-hydroxyquinoline followed by
separation and pre-concentrated on C18 silica gel column. LOD 0.7 ng l−1	129
Cd	Waste water	AA;MIP;L	see Ag, ref. 204	204
Cd	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Muromac A-1 chelating resin used for matrix separation
and preconcentration. Elution using HNO3. LOD 1.2 × 10−4 µg l−1	294
Cd	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Separation and preconcentration using anion ion chromatography	295
Cd	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	Custom made W coil atomiser used. LOD 0.2 l−1	206
Cd	Drinking water	AA;F;L	Buffered samples complexed with ammonium diethyldithiophosphate
and separated on C18 silica column. Eluted with ethanol	130
Cd	Snow	MS;ICP;L	Magnetic sector spectrometer used in low resolution mode
for best sensitivity	242
Cd	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Speciation using multiple column system and flow injection	197
Cd	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	(NH4)2HPO4 and
NH4NO3 chemical modifiers used with 20 µl
sample injection. LOD 0.005 µg l−1	214
Cd	Waste water	MS;ICP;L	See Ag, ref. 280	280
Cd	Environmental and saline water	AA;ETA;L	Co-precipitation with Ni–diethyldithiocarbamate from
buffered sample. Precipitate dissolved in HNO3 + acetone	296
Cd	Environmental water	AE;ICP;L	Sample pre-concentrated by evaporation	297
Cd	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	On-line preconcentration used by sorption of Cd-APDC complex
onto C18 micro-column and elution with ethanol. LOD 0.5 ng l−1	132
Cl	Environmental water	AMS;-;L	δ36Cl ratios measured for atmospheric
tracer studies	277
Cl	Water	AE;ICP;L	Use of far UV (134–136 nm) lines
made sub-ppm detection possible	298
Co	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 294	294
Co	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Preconcentration carried out using sorption in knotted
reactor precoated with 1-phenyl-3-methylbenzoylpyrazol-5-one	119
Co	Environmental water	AA;F;L	Sample solution mixed with Nitroso-R salt + cetyltrimethylammonium
bromide and buffered. Benzophenone added and solid collected. Solid dissolved
in ethanol for analysis. LOD 3.9 ng ml−1	299
Co	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Preconcentration using 8-quininol and Ni co-precipitation
carrier with 1-nitroso-2-naphthol auxiliary complexation. Direct solid analysis
used. LOD 1 ng l−1	139
Cr	Drinking water	AA;F;L	Simultaneous preconcentration of CrVI and CrIII
species on C18 column and sorption loop. Separated carried out
at elution stage.	300
Cr	Water	MS;ICP;L	Automated column chelation system for speciation described	171
Cr	Environmental water	AA;F;L	Speciation carried out using melamine–urea resin.
CrVI eluted with sodium acetate. CrIII determined by
difference after oxidation	165
Cr	Water	MS;ICP;L	Solid phase chelation column technique used for speciation	172
Cr	Water	MS;ICP;L	Dual membrane on-line system for simultaneous extraction
of CrIII and CrVI species	301
Cr	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	Transverse atomiser used	302
Cr	Waste and saline water	AA;ETA;L	Selective flow injection of CrVI using solvent
extraction IBMK + APDC	303
Cr	Drinking and environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Ion chromatography used to speciate CrIII from
CrVI	173
Cr	Saline water	AA;F;L	Species separated into different chelating agents, then
removed from the matrix by micelle formation of surfactants	168
Cr	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Speciation performed using acidic activated alumina columns	170
Cr	Environmental and saline water	AA;ETA;L	Samples pre-concentrated by precipitation with quinolin-8-ol,
Pd and tannic acid. LOD 20 ng l−1	138
Cr	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Speciation study using chelation/extraction of CrVI
with APDC	169
Cr	Water	MS;ICP;L	See As, ref. 187	187
Cr	Waste water	AA;-;L	Preconcentration and speciation carried out using complexation
with EDTA and separation on SAX resin followed by elution with aqueous NaCl	166
Cu	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Novel atomisation source used which allowed sequential
metal vapour elution into a gas stream	203
Cu	Water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 129	129
Cu	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	See Cr, ref. 302	302
Cu	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 206	206
Cu	Environmental water	AA;F;L	Separation and preconcentration performed using XAD-2 column
loaded with calmagite	114
Cu	Drinking water	AA;F;L	See Cd, ref. 130	130
Cu	Saline water	AA;F;L	Separation performed on-line using XAD-2 resin followed
by elution with HCl	117
Cu	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Ammonium nitrate as chemical modifer. Injection 20 µl
aliquot. LOD 0.06 µg l−1.	214
Cu	Environmental water	AA;F;L	See Co, ref. 299	299
Cu	Saline water	AA;F;L	Buffered sample complexed with 1-nitroso-2-naphthol with
separation on RP-C18 micro-column and eluted with ethanol. LOD
2 µg l−1	131
Fe	Environmental water	AA;-;L	Relationship between Fe and Mn concentrations and turbidity
investigated	304
Fe	Environmental water	AA;F;L	See Co, ref. 299	299
Fe	Drinking and environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Selective determination of FeIII by on-line
formation and sorption of pyrrolidine carbodithionate complex in knotted reactor
followed by elution with HNO3	201
Hg	Water	AE;ICP;L	Separation and preconcentration carried out using quinine
impregnated cation exchange resin. Gas phase analysis performed using HG	305
Hg	Drinking water	MS;ICP;L	Use of Au as a routine long term preservative investigated	104
Hg	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	See Cd, ref. 247	247
Hg	Saline water	AA;-;L	FI and HG sample introduction. Air segmentation used to
reduce reagent consumption. LOD 0.1 µg l−1	146
Hg	Environmental water	AA;CV;L	Separation and preconcentration of species using 2-mercaptobenzothiazole
loaded onto Bio-Beads. LOD 10 ng l−1	123
Hg	Water	AF;ETA;L	Miniature system for field use described	306
Hg	Environmental water	AA;CV;L	Extraction using dithizone in CHCl3. Various
pretreatments for speciation investigated	198
Hg	Environmental water	AA;CV;L	Separation from HCl acidified water carried out using polyamide
resins and elution with thiourea	124
Hg	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	ID coupled with vapour generation to minimise interferences
while maximising sensitivity and accuracy	307
Hg	Saline and drinking water	AA;CV;L	Various dithioacetal derivitives synthesised and immobilised
on silica gel. HgII sorption properties evaluated	125
Hg	Water	AA;ETA;L	Separation and preconcentration carried out prior to analysis	308
I	Water	AA;ETA;L	Separated as ion pair followed by indirect determination
of I− through quantification of Hg	208
I	Water	AE;ICP;L	Speciation study using chemical separation and vapour generation	184
I	Rain water	AMS;-;-	129I determined	278
I	Saline water	AMS;-;-	See C, ref. 276	276
In	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See Bi, ref. 290	290
In	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Solvent extraction used with buffered 5-sulfo-8-quinolinol
and zephiramine	309
Mn	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Separation and preconcentration carried out on Chelex-100
resin. Interference correction performed using multiple linear regression
techniques	213
Mn	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	See Cu, ref. 203	203
Mn	Environmental water	AA;-;L	See Fe, ref. 304	304
Mo	Environmental and saline water	MS;MIP;L	ID determination used after 8-hydroxyquinoline separation	266
Ni	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Optimisation carried out on-line micro-column separation
using chelation on 1-(di-2-pyridyl)methylene thiocarbonohydrazide
modified silica gel. LOD 0.06 ng ml−1	111
Ni	Environmental and saline water	MS;ICP;L	ID and separation from matrix as volatile metal carbonyl
used to maximise accuracy and minimise interference	258
Ni	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 294	294
Ni	Saline water	AA;F;L	Complexation using dimethylglyoxime and separation on C18
column. Elution using ethanol containing HNO3	310
O	Soil water	MS;-; L	Samples equilibrated with CO2 prior to analysis	273
P	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Coupled capillary zone electrophoresis methods developed
for speciation	199
Pb	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 212	212
Pb	Drinking water	AE;ICP;L	Dithiocarbamate complex collected in PTFE knotted reactor
and desorbed with HCl. Ultrasonic nebulisation used to increase sensitivity.
LOD 0.2 ng ml−1	128
Pb	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Electrochemical preconcentration used with W coil for subsequent
ETA sample introduction	215
Pb	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	See Cd, ref. 247	247
Pb	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See Bi, ref. 290	290
Pb	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Isotope ratios directly measured using ultrasonic nebulisation
for improved sensitivity and magnetic sector instrument for best precision	256
Pb	Water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 129	129
Pb	Environmental water	AA;F;L	See Cd, ref. 295	295
Pb	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 206	206
Pb	Drinking water	AA;F;L	See Cd, ref. 130	130
Pb	Drinking water	AA;ETA;L	Comparison of drinking water Pb with that found in bone	311
Pb	Water	AA;F;L	Speciation study carried out using complexation with diethyldithiocarbamate
and separation on C60 column	194
Pb	Snow	MS;ICP;L	See Cd, ref.
242	242
Pb	Environmental water	AA;-;L	Samples treated with acetic media, sorbed onto C60
columns as dithiocarbamate complexes and eluted with IBMK	195
Pb	Water	MS;ES;L	Coupled separation of species using in-tube solid phase
micro-extraction and HPLC.	196
Pb	Water	AA; ETA;L	Thermal desorption of tetraethyl species from solid phase
micro-extraction fibres described	118
Pb	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Improved isotope ratio measurements made through the use
of a hot–cold tandem spray chamber arrangement	255
Pb	Waste water	MS;ICP;L	See Ag, ref. 280	280
Pb	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Mg(OH)2 co-precipitation used for
separation and preconcentration	260
Pd	Snow	MS;ICP;L	Double focusing magnetic sector instrument allowed exceptional
sensitivity	241
Pt	Snow	MS;ICP;L	See Pd, ref. 241	241
REE	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Ultrasonic nebulisation used for sensitivity.	312
Rh	Snow	MS;ICP;L	See Pd, ref. 241	241
Ru	Environmental and waste water	AA;ETA;L	Co-precipitation with chitosan at pH 8 for preconcentration
followed by re-dissolution in acetic acid	136
S	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Collision/reaction cell used to reduce polyatomic interferences.
Isotope ratios determined	313
Sb	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See As, ref. 148	148
Sb	Water	AA;F;L	See As, ref. 145	145
Sb	Water	AF;Hy;L	Speciation using HPLC and hydride generation	192
Sb	Drinking water	MS;ICP;L	On-line HPLC used to separate SbIII and SbV
using a phthalic acid–EDTA mobile phase on a silica based anion exchange
column. LOD SbIII 30 pg for 100 µl and SbIII
10 pg for 100 µl	72
Sb	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Speciation study performed using HG sample introduction
and magnetic sector instrument for improved sensitivity. LOD SbIII
4.2 ng l−1 and SbV 17 ng l−1	191
Sb	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Speciation carried out using HPLC separation	193
Se	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See As, ref 148	148
Se	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	See As, ref. 149	149
Se	Environmental water	AA;-;L	Se speciation performed using chemical pre-treatment and
HG. LOD 0.5 µg l−1	178
Se	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	See As, ref. 161	161
Se	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	See As, ref. 158	158
Se	Water	AA;F;L	See As, ref. 145	145
Se	Water	AF;Hy;L	A LC-UV-HG coupled system for speciation described	181
Se	Water	AA;ETA;L	Speciation study with complexation by pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate
and sorbtion onto C18 micro-column followed by elution using ethanol.
LOD 4.5 ng l−1	314
Se	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Chemical interference study carried out	211
Se	Water	AA;ETA;L	Analysis performed using standard additions method.	315
Se	Waste water	AF;Hy;L	Speciation study using coupled FIA and HG, both on and
off-line, described	182
Se	Water	MS;ICP;L	ID and ETA sample introduction used for improved accuracy
and sensitivity and for removal of interferences	316
Se	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	See As, ref. 150	150
Se	Waste water	MS;ICP;L	Anion exchange columns tested for suitability in speciation
studies.	317
Se	Water	MS;ICP;L	See As, ref. 250	250
Sn	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Sn separated from matrix by hydride generation. LOD 130 ng l−1	147
Sn	Environmental and waste water	AA;ETA;L	Organo species separated with toluene in presence of acetic
acid and NaCl. Hot injection and chemical modification used for analysis.	318
Sn	Water	AA;-;L	Organic species ethylated and extracted into hexane. Speciation
performed using coupled gas chromatography	175
Sn	Environmental, waste and saline water	AA;ETA;L	Speciation study carried out by chemical separation	174
Sn	Environmental water	AA;ETA;L	Separation and preconcentration of tributyl species, using
tropolone sorbed onto XAD-2 resin, described	176
Te	Environmental and drinking water	AA;F;L	Pulsed flame system with quartz tube atom trapping described	319
Tl	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	ID and HG used for improved accuracy and minimisation of
matrix effects	257
Tl	Saline water	MS;ETA;L	ID used to demonstrate existence of dimethyl species	200
U	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Cellulose based chelating resin used for separation and
preconcentration of the determinand. Problems of organic complexation in the
sample considered	320
V	Snow	MS;ICP;L	See Cd, ref.
242	242
Zn	Environmental water	AA;F;L	Preconcentration carried out from acidic media (pH 3)
as thiocyanate complex onto polyurethane foam. Determinand eluted using acetone + HNO3.
LOD 0.85 µg l−1	140
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Sample mixed with buffered bis(2-hydroxyethyl)dithiocarbamate
and complexes sorbed onto C18 resin. Metals eluted with methanolic
HNO3. LODs typically pM	127
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L AF;-;L	On-line serially coupled Sephadex A-25, Chelex 100 and
Dowex 1X8/Chelamine Metalfix used to separate and pre-concentrate and
determine metal–humic complexes and free metal ions	321
Various	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Elements electroplated onto graphite probes at various
pH and voltage conditions. CrIII and CrVI speciation
performed. LOD CrIII 14 ng l−1 and
CrVI 17 ng l−1	134
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Normal sample introduction used but spectrometer fitted
with high sensitivity interface	261
Various	Water	AE;ICP;L	Separation and preconcentration using iminoacetate–agarose
absorbent	322
Various	Environmental water	XRF;-;L AE;ICP;L	Amidoxime chelating groups bound to poly (acrylnitrile)
textile, used to separate various traces. Elemental determination carried
out by either direct XRF analysis or after extraction in 1% HNO3
for ICP-AES	141
Various	Environmental water	AE;ICP;L	Low TDS samples allowed the use of ultrasonic nebulisation.
Array detector spectrometer gave simultaneous spectral background correction	323
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Field flow fractionation used to study colloid size fractions.	324
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Dithiocarbamate complexation and separation on phenyl column
described with elution of determinands with HNO3	126
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Multi-element standard additions methodology described	262
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Review covering detection and speciation of metals presented	325
Various	Drinking water	MS;ICP;L	Performance test of technique using NS-30 protocol.	326
Various	Environmental and drinking water	AA;ETA;L	System for simultaneous elemental determinations described	205
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Batch separation and preconcentration using Chelex 100
resin performed	105
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	FIA system for on-line dilution described	327
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Method for producing semi-quantitative data using chemometrics
described	328
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Evaluation of an axial TOF type instrument described	329
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	A comparison of imminodiacetate and 8-hydroxyquinoline
micro-columns for matrix separation and analyte preconcentration was made	107
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Evaluation of TOF spectrometer for transient signals, in
particular when coupled to GC, described	330
Various	Environmental water	AA;F;L AA;ETA;L AE;ICP;L	National water quality survey presented	331
Various	Environmental water	AE;GC;L	Solid phase microextraction used to collect and separate
organometallic species	332
Various	Environmental water	AE;ICP;L AA;ETA;L AA;F;L	Well water quality assessment study carried out	333
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Multivariate calibration technique developed to correct
for interferences	248
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Strategies for coping with saline matrices described	245
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Capillary electrophoresis used to study metal–humic
substance binding	334
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Advantages of magnetic sector instruments over quadrupole
instrument discussed	253
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Influence of filtration on the analysis of crystalline
bedrock groundwater tested	102
Various	Environmental water	AA;F;L	Functionalization of XAD-2 resin with chromotropic acid
for preconcentration of metals described	120
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Description of on-line separation and preconcentration
using buffered samples and Metpac-CC1 column given	106
Various	Ultra-pure water	MS;ICP;L AA;F;L AA;ETA;L	Review of blank optimisation for elemental analysis presented	98
Various	Water	AE;ICP;L	Tedlar bags tested and found suitable for sampling and
storing water. Minimal absorption of six trace elements found over a wide
pH range	100
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Coupled ion chromatography to used to separate anions.
Ultrasonic nebuliser with desolvation improved sensitivity	185
Various	Environmental and waste water	AA;F;L	Determinands pre-concentrated on 5-amino-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-thiol
modified silica gel and eluted with HCl	121
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Influence of bottle type and acid washing on trace element
analysis investigated	101
Various	Saline water	XRF;-;L	Electro-deposition of analytes on pure Nb disk carried
out prior to analysis	231
Various	Saline water	TXRF;-;L	Samples pre-concentrated by precipitation as dithiocarbamates.
Precipitate deposited on filter for direct analysis	237
Various	Environmental water	-;ICP;L	Isocratic separation of cations and anions performed on
CS12 and AS14 columns using methanesulfonic acid and NaHCO3	335
Various	Environmental water	AA;F;L	Chemical modification used to reduce interferences	336
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Magnetic sector instrument used to avoid interferences	254
Various	Environmental water	XRF;-;L	PIXE analysis of freeze dried water residues used for characterisation
of pollution	337
Various	Drinking water	XRF;-;L	Total reflectance form of technique used.	228
Various	Water	XRF;-;L	Micro-analysis using ultra-thin droplets on low scattering
substrate described	232
Various	Ultra-pure water	MS;ICP;L	Routine analysis used standard additions method	99
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Water quality testing application described	338
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Separation and preconcentration carried out with iminodiacetate
chelation. Improved sample throughput achieved using air-segmented FI sample
introduction	339
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	FI and chelating resin columns used for matrix removal
and preconcentration	340
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	La co-precipitation used for separation and preconcentration
of hydride and oxyanion forming elements	341
Various	Saline water	AA;ETA;L	Coupled HG used for simultaneous determination of As, Bi,
Se and Sn	342
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Ultrasonic nebulisation and magnetic sector instrument
used for high sensitivity determinations	243
Various	Environmental water	MS;ICP;L	Comparison of Norwegian groundwater concentrations with
health limits made	264
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Evaluation of interferences, internal standardisation and
standard addition analysis reported	244
Various	Water	XRF;-;L	Asymmetric flow field flow fractionation used to separate
collodial humic substances prior to analysis	343
Various	Water	MS;ICP;L	Separation carried out using TRU-SPEC resin	110
Various	Saline water	MS;ICP;L	Evaluation of three column materials; basic alumina, iminodiacetate
and nitrotriacetate carried out. On the basis of throughput, matrix elimination
and recovery	108
Various	Snow water	MS;ICP;L	Cold plasma conditions used to avoid interferences and
sensitivity of microconcentric nebuliser allowed determination of major elements	240
Various	Environmental water	XRF;-;L	Droplet of water evaporated onto polymer film for analysis	233
Various	Environmental water	TXRF;-;L	Samples evaporated onto siliconized quartz carrier with
internal standard	227
Various	Waste water	AE;MIP;L	Analytical system developed for on-site monitoring	226
Various	Water	AE;ICP;L	Matrix effects from Ca and Na studied in an axial plasma	221
Various	Water	AA;ETA;L	Review of the application of Zeeman graphite furnace AA
in chemical laboratories and toxicology applications presented	344


Al	Soil	AA;F, air-C2H2;L	Al supposedly determined after Na2CO3
fusion with 94–104% recovery	417
Al	Forest soil water	MS;ICP;L	System described for on-line speciation	177
Al	Vicia faba root cells	XRF;-;S	SIMS and electron microprobe used to study Al distribution	405
As	Soil	MS;ICP;G	GC used to separate volatile As species evolved from soils
prior to determination	361
As	Kelp extracts	MS;Hy, ICP;L	Arsenosugars separated by chromatography prior to detection	359
As	Contaminated soil	XRF;-;S	As contamination at a German military site studied with
mobile XRF system	418
As	Seaweeds	MS;ICP;L	Anion exchange HPLC tested for As speciation but size-exclusion
HPLC preferred for organoarsenic species fractionation and matrix removal	357
As	Plant leaves	AE;Hy, ICP;L	FIA system described for simultaneous determination of
As and Hg. RSD at 10 µg l−1 was 1.4 and
1.3% for As and Hg, respectively	382
As	Algae	MS;ICP;L	As species separated by cation exchange chromatography	160
As	Soils, plants	MS;ICP;L	Ion chromatography used to separate As species	159
As	Kelp powder extract	MS;ICP;L	As species separated by narrow bore HPLC prior to on-line
detection	360
As	Algal extracts	MS;ICP;L	Arsenosugars separated by HPLC	358
As	Plant digests	MS;Hy, ICP;L	System described for rapid sequential determination of
As and Se; sample mixed alternately with thiourea or HCl for As or Se determinations	150
As	Seagrass	MS;ICP;L	Digestion with HNO3 + H2O2	419
As	Soils	XRF;-;S	Pollution near Cornish mine workings studied	420
As	Soils	AF;Hy;L	Microwave-assisted distillation procedure described to
pre-concentrate As as AsCl3	392
B	Brown rice, soil extracts	MS;ICP;L	B concentrations and isotope ratios measured; B separated
from matrix elements by ion exchange	421
Be	Soil	AE;ICP;L AA;ETA;L	3 digestion methods compared, and gave slightly different
results	422
Ca	Wheat flour	AA;F;Sl	Ca and Mg determined in agar and dibutyl phthalate containing
La	423
Ca	Rice, beans	AE;F;Sl	Slurry prepared in La and agar solution; Ca and K measured	424
Cd	Plants	MS;ICP;L	Size-exclusion chromatography used for Cd speciation in
cytosols of plant tissues and cell cultures	369
Cd	Tomato leaf	AA;ETA;Sl	Slurry prepared in PTFE–plant glue–HNO3
matrix	387
Cd	Soil	AA;ETA;L	Matrix modifiers compared	425
Cd	Soils, vegetables	AA;F;L	Soil soaked with aqua regia + HClO4
prior to digestion; 3 different acid digestions all worked for Cd	426
Cd	Crops	AE;ICP;L AA;ETA;L	Effect of soil additives on Cd uptake studied	427
Cd	Plant extracts	MS;ICP;L	Cd complexes separated by size exclusion chromatography	368
Cd	Soil	AA;ETA;Sl	Ammonium oxalate used as dispersant, and Pd as modifier;
LOD 0.15 pg	428
Cd	Soil, apple leaves	AA;CV;L	Cold vapour determination described in detail	390
Cd	Soil solution	AA;F;L	Circulating dialysis system described for studying organic
complex species of Cd, Cu and Pb	429
Cd	Plant materials	AA;F;L	Cd and Pb separated at diethyldithiophosphate complexes
on C18 column at pH 1 in FIA system; oxalic acid and thiourea
used to mask Fe and Cu	317
Cd	Soils	AE;ICP;L AA;ETA;L	Interference found from As in both techniques	378
Cr	Tomato plants	MS;-;S	SIMS used to study Cr distribution	430
Cr	Tobacco	AA;F;L	On-line preconcentration procedure described for Cr speciation	431
Cu	Humic acids	AA;-;-	Generation of hydroxyl radicals in soils loaded with CuII
and FeIII examined	432
Cu	Soil solution	AA;F;L	See Cd, ref. 429	429
Fe	Maize flour	AA;F;Sl	Fe and Zn determined using flour slurry in agar	433
Fe	Humic acids	AA;-;-	See Cu, ref. 432	432
Hg	Soil	AA;CV;L	Different acid extraction systems compared for a CRM	434
Hg	Soils	AA;Hy;G	Organomercury compounds separated by capillary GC coupled via
hydride generation system to spectrometer	435
Hg	Aquatic plants	AA;CV;Sl	Slurry prepared in 15% m/m HNO3 with
0.02% v/v Triton X-100; mixture subjected to ultrasonic treatment
prior to injection into FI manifold	436
Hg	Contaminated soil	AE;MIP;G	Organometallic compounds of Hg, Pb and Sn converted to
volatile derivatives with NaBEt4; compounds purged with He, and
preconcentrated onto Chromosorb 102; trapped compounds thermally desorbed
and passed to GC with MIP detector	383
Hg	Soils	AA;-;-	Soil sequentially extracted with ammonium acetate, hydroxylamine
hydrochloride in acetic acid, dilute HCl, NaOH and finally 8 mol l−1
HNO3	375
Hg	Lichens	AA;CV;G	3 digestion procedures compared; open tubes gave low results	353
Hg	Plant leaves	AE;Hy, ICP;L	See As, ref. 382	382
Hg	Environmental samples	AA;CV;G	Use of Au amalgamation preconcentration critically evaluated	437
K	Plant parts	MS;TI;-	Application of 26Mg and 41K and TIMS
to the assessment of K and Mg uptake by Scots pine	406
K	Beans, rice	AE;F;Sl	See Ca, ref. 424	424
Mg	Plant parts	MS;TI;-	See K, ref. 406	406
Mg	Wheat flour	AA;F;Sl	See Ca, ref. 423	423
Mn	Tea	AE;MIP;L	Sample digested with HNO3, then HClO4;
Mn and P determined	384
Mo	Grass, clover	AA;ETA;L	Pt-group metals studied as modifiers. Characteristic mass
3.1 pg with Ir modifier	388
Mo	Soil	AA;ETA;L	Metal preconcentrated by extraction of thiocyanate complex
into IBMK	355
P	Tea	AE;MIP;L	See Mn, ref. 438	438
Pb	Contaminated soils	XRF;-;S	SEM and XRF used to study Pb speciation in soil solid phase	439
Pb	Contaminated soils	XRA;-;S	XRA fine structure spectroscopy used to identify Pb solid
compounds in soils	370
Pb	Polytrichum formosum	MS;ICP;L	Pb isotope ratios measured in attempt to identify sources
of Pb pollution	399
Pb	Contaminated soil	AE;MIP;G	See Hg, ref. 383	383
Pb	Algae	AF;Hy;L	KBH4 used as reductant, and HCl + K3Fe(CN)6
as carrier	393
Pb	Humic and fulvic acid complexes	MS;ICP;S	LA used to study 206Pb complex position on gel
plates after gel electrophoretic separation of complexes	366
Pb	Pine needles	MS;ICP;L	Factors influencing isotope ratios critically discussed.	33
Pb	Environmental samples	AA;F;L	Microcolumn preconcentration procedure described and evaluated
in detail for Pb	356
Pb	Soil	MS;ICP;L	Isotope ratios used to elucidate anthropogenic contributions
to soil Pb	400
Pb	Soil	XRF;-;S	Cone penetrometer XRF tool described for quantifying sub-surface
heavy metal contamination	415
Pb	Grapes	AA;ETA;L	NH4H2PO4 and MgNO3
used as modifier; temperature raised in series of steps	440
Pb	Soil solution	AA;F;L	See Cd, ref. 429	429
Pb	Plant materials	AA;F;L	See Cd, ref.317	317
Pb	Soil, house dust	AA;F;L	Hot acid leaching used	69
Pt	Plant material	MS;-;-	Speciation methods reviewed	363
Pu	Soil, dust	MS;ICP;L	Procedure described to separate Pu from U to prevent interference
from 238UH+ in 239Pu determination	441
Ra	Soil	MS;ICP;L	226Ra pre-concentrated from acid digest by co-precipitation
with Pb	252
REE	Soils	MS;ICP;L	Microwave-assisted digestion using HF + HCl + HNO3
and EDTA	361
REE	Soils	MS;ICP;L	Microwave-assisted digestion with HNO3–HF–HCl;
digest mixed with EDTA, and mixture digested with HClO4. Re used
as internal standard; 14 REE determined	442
REE	Soils	AE;ICP;L	Soluble REE studied after preconcentration with MgCl2
as carrier, by adjusting to pH 10–11	354
Sb	Plants	AA;furnace;G	Quartz furnace used for atomization after NaBH4
used to volatilise methylantimony species	364
Sb	Soil	MS;ICP;L	Open vessel wet digestion evaluated for soil near mining
area	193
Se	Cereals	AA;Hy;L	Varietal and geographic differences studied	443
Se	Soil drainage water, soil sediment	AA;Hy;L	Procedure described for oxidation of organic Se compounds;
detection limit was 0.008 mg kg−1 for soil	178
Se	Spirulina	AA;Hy;L	Sample decomposed with HNO3 + HClO4;
residue taken up in 6 mol l−1 HCl plus FeCl3
prior to FIA; LOD 17 ng g−1	444
Se	Soils	AA;Hy;L	Relationship between bioavailable Se in soils and Se in
blood serum studied	445
Se	Plants	MS;ICP;L	Samples extracted with hot water or using enzymatic extraction
for speciation. HPLC conditions described. 75% of eluted Se in identified
compounds	365
Se	Plant digests	MS;Hy, ICP;L	See As, ref. 150	150
Sn	Contaminated soil	AE;MIP;G	See Hg, ref. 383	383
Tc	Soils	MS;ICP;L	Trapping system described to preconcentrate 99Tc	446
Th	Soil, plants	MS;ICP;L	Determination of Th and U by ICP-MS and gamma counting
compared in high natural radiation area; ICP-MS was more accurate and precise	447
Tl	Plant materials, soil	MS;ICP;L	ID used with 203Tl spike; good results obtained
for 3 CRMs; external calibration with Rh as internal standard also gave good
recovery	401
Zn	Maize flour	AA;F;Sl	See Fe, ref. 433	433
Zn	Grey mangrove leaves	XRF;-;S	SEM and microanalysis used to study distribution of Zn
in different forms	448
Various	Soils	MS;ICP;Sl	1 mol l−1 HNO3
leaching was used in an attempt to improve recoveries of elements using slurry
nebulisation	449
Various	Tea leaves	AE;ETV, ICP;L	Various fluorine-containing compounds tested as modifiers
for ETV; 6% PTFE was best	381
Various	Algae	XRF;-;S	Heterogeneity problems associated with single cell analysis
assessed	450
Various	Wood pulp	AE;ICP;S	Solid samples analysed directly on graphite probe introduced
to plasma, after in situ pre-treatment and ashing	379
Various	Macrofungi	AA;F, air-C2H2;L AA;CV;L	Sliced samples digested with 4 + 1 + 1HNO3 + H2SO4 + H2O; residue taken up in water; Cd,
Co, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pd and Zn determined in digest. Hg determined in separate
digest	451
Various	Plants	AE;ICP;L	Five digestion procedures, dry ashing, ashing + alkali
fusion, HNO3 + H2SO4 + HClO4,
HNO3 + H2SO4 + HClO4 + HF
and H2SO4 + H2O2
compared	452
Various	Leaves, soils	AA;Hy, ETA;G	System described for trapping hydrides of As, Sb and Se
in Ir-lined furnace	389
Various	Soils	AE;-;S	System described for producing thin film of particles for
determination of 15 elements by PIXE	407
Various	Apple leaves	XRF;-;-	Instrument adjusted to detect selected trace elements only	453
Various	Rice	AA;F;L MS;ICP;L AE;ICP;L	14 elements determined in Vietnamese rice survey	454
Various	Agricultural crops	MS;ICP;L	Microwave-assisted digestion with HNO3 described	455
Various	Wild berries	AE;ICP;L MS;ICP;L	Trace element distributions studied in northern Sweden;
effects of mining activities and roads were confirmed	456
Various	Soils	MS;ICP;L	Stable isotope exchange used to identify labile pools of
elements in soils	457
Various	Tea, coffee	AA;ETA;Sl	Slurries prepared in HNO3 and Triton X-100;
RSD ca. 8%	458
Various	Ponderosa Pine phloem	AE;ICP;L	15 elements determined in samples from 149 trees in study
of selective herbivory	459
Various	Humic acids	MS;ICP;L	Samples digested with HNO3; Al, As, Cu, Mn,
Pb and Zn determined	460
Various	Soils	AE;ICP;L	Soil contamination studied in urban New Orleans; Cd, Mn,
Ni, Pb and Zn determined	461
Various	Soils	MS;ICP;L AE;ICP;L XRF;-;- AA;-;L	Precision, accuracy, detection limits and recovery compared
between different techniques and different laboratories	462
Various	Plant species in parks	AE;ICP;L	11 elements determined in urban park pollution study	463
Various	Soils	XRF;-;S	Portable spectrometer used to analyse contaminated soils	464
Various	Industrial soils	AA;-;L AE;ICP;L XRF;-;S	Different methods critically compared	347
Various	Plants	AA;ETA;L	Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide used at 90°C for
2 h; digest diluted with water and analysed for Cd, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni
and Pb	350
Various	Soils, cane plants	AA;F;L	Sugar and soil compositions compared in Egypt	465
Various	Vegetables	AA;F;L	Samples digested with 10 + 1 + 1
HNO3 + H2SO4 + HClO4	466
Various	Vegetables	AA;-;L	Very high concentrations of Cu and Zn found in red beets	467
Various	Mushrooms	AE;ICP;L	15 elements determined in 92 specimens to look for bioaccumulation	468
Various	Plant tissues	AA;ETA;Sl	Slurry formed in 1% HNO3; Cd, Cu, Cr,
Mo, Ni and Pb determined	469
Various	Sludge-treated soils	AE;ICP;L	Redistribution of heavy metals between species studied
after sludge applied to soil	470
Various	Soils	AA;-;L AE;-;-	Results of inter-laboratory comparison showed up problems
for Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Mn, Ni, Pb, V and Zn	471
Various	Plants, soil	AA;-;-	10 elements measured in parts of Oenothera biennis
plants	472
Various	Plants, soil	AA;-;-	10 elements measured in Oenothera biennis and
underlying soil	473
Various	Algae	AA;-;-	Binding of Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn by Chlorella vulgaris
studied	474
Various	Soil	AA;-;-	Samples digested with HNO3 + HCl;
soils near motorway studied	475
Various	Soils	XRF;-;S	Sample preparation for use with portable XRF spectrometer
described	414
Various	Celastrus paniculatus seeds	AA;-;L	Samples were ashed	476
Various	Vine leaves	AE;ICP;L	Microwave-assisted digestion with HNO3 + HF + H2O2
or dry ashing used; Cu, Pb and Zn from industrial pollution studied	477
Various	Putranjiva roxburghii seeds	AA;-;-	Samples ashed; Co, Cu, Fe, K, Na, Ni, Pb and Zn determined	478
Various	Soils	-;-;-	Significance of difference in spatial heterogeneity of
pollutant and background element distributions discussed for assessment of
polluted sites	479
Various	Soils	AA;F;L	Results of pseudo-total analysis using HNO3 + H2O2
and HCl + HNO3 digestions compared; silicates
were more soluble in aqua regia	480
Various	Tree bark	MS;ICP;S	LA used to study Al, Ca, Cd, Ce, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, P, Pb,
S, Ti and Zn in bark	403
Various	Tree rings	MS;-;S	SIMS used to study As, Cd, Cr and Pb in tree rings	481
Various	Cucumber plants	TXRF;-;L	Roots dissolved using microwave-assisted digestion; sap
analysed directly; heavy metal effects on nutrient uptake and transport studied	482
Various	Scots pine fine roots	XRF;-;L	Samples digested with HNO3 and Ga used as internal
standard for TXRF analysis	416
Various	Peat	TXRF;-;L	TXRF applied to solutions from operationally defined fractionation
procedure	483
Various	Soils, sediment	XRF;-;S	Samples simply dried at 105°C	484
Various	Plants	MS;ICP;L	Magnetic sector instrument used to overcome polyatomic
interferences associated with transition metal isotopes	397
Various	Spruce wood	XRF;-;S	A synchroton radiation microbeam system used to study element
distributions	485
Various	Soils on waste sites	XRF;-;S	Use of mobile ED-XRF system described	486
Various	Plants	AE;ICP;L	Interference problems due to lowering of plasma temperature
when using axially viewed plasma assessed	377
Various	Barley leaves	XRF;-;S	Ca, Cl and K determined for rapid screening	487
Various	Vegetation, soil	XRF;-;S	Polygonal graphic representations applied to semi-quantitative
analysis for 3 and 4 elements	488
Various	Soil	XRF;-;S	Portable spectrometer evaluated	26
Various	Soil, sediment	MS;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion; 14 elements determined	328
Various	Soils, rocks	AE;ETV, ICP;S AA;ETA;S	ETA used for Cd, Pb and Zn; ETV-ICP-AES with high-temperature
halogenation suitable for Cr, Cu, Ni. Pb and Zn	380
Various	Libyan soils	XRF;-;S INAA;-;S	Results obtained by two methods compared	489
Various	Soils	MS;-;S	SIMS used to characterise U and Pu particles in soils;
samples transferred to conductive graphite support	404
Various	Soils	XRF;-;S	Computer program described that corrects for matrix effects
in trace element determinations	413
Various	Soil humic acids	MS;ICP;L	Complexing properties of humic acids studied using size
exclusion chromatography	367
Various	Rice, soils	AA;ETA;L	Cd, Cu and Zn concentrations compared in rice and soil
samples from Japan, Indonesia and China; samples acid digested	490
Various	Algae, cabbage	AA;ETA;L	Open and microwave digestion compared for Cd, Cr, Cu and
Pb; results were in agreement at 95% confidence level	491
Various	Soils	AA;F, air-C2H2;L	Potentially toxic elements extracted with dilute HCl, and
preconcentrated prior to determination of Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn	492
Various	Plant samples	MS;ICP;L	Described procedure gave 95–105% recovery
for SRM analyses	493
Various	Soils	XRF;-;S	Pollution from highways studied in Moscow	494
Various	Tea	AE;ICP;L MS;ICP;L	Report of use of pattern recognition to trace tea origins	495
Various	Soils	AA;-;L	Sequential extraction procedure assessed for operational
speciation of Cd, Cr, Ni, Pb and Zn	496
Various	Plants, soils	MS;ICP;L	Microwave-assisted digestion with HCl + HNO3 + HF;
precision typically better than 6 and 10% RSD for soil and plant samples,
respectively	497
Various	Soil	AE;ICP;L	PCA used to identify polluted areas	498
Various	Spruce seeds, plant CRMs	AA;ETA;Sl	Slurries prepared in 0.14 mol l−1
HNO3. CRM data confirmed accuracy for Al, Cu, Li and Mn	386
Various	Wild mushrooms	AA;-;L	Samples homogenized and sub-samples ashed	499
Various	Soils	LIBS;-;-	Effect of plasma temperature discussed	500


Ag	Lead ore	AA;-;L	Dissolved in HNO3 and HClO4	632
Ag	Sediment	AA;ETV;L	Digested with aqua regia. Ru deposited on platform
as permanent modifier	559
Al	Sediment	AE;arc;S	Ground to ca. 3.8 µm. Slurried with
H2SO4 and La as internal standard	633
As	Environmental material	AA;-;Hy	Stability of cationic As compounds during microwave assisted
digestion studied	549
As	Sediment	MS;ICP;L	Species eluted from sulfonic acid type cation exchange
column	160
As	Coal	AF;-;G	Continuous on-line extraction with subcritical water	560
As	Soil and sediment	AA;ETA;Hy	Automated hydride generation followed by preconcentration
on Ir coated walls of furnace at 300°C	389
As	Environmental material	AA;-;Hy	Reaction conditions for speciation examined	153
As	Sediment	MS;ICP;- AF;-;-	Comparison of ICP-MS and AFS detection for speciation studies	156
Au	Geological material	-;-;-	Review with 9 refs. of fire assay and other techniques	544
Au	Geological material	AE;ICP;L	10 g calcined at 650°C for 1 h.
Digested with 30 ml 50%
aqua regia, followed by on-line
FI preconcentration	634
Au	Geological RMs	AA;ETA;L	Five-step sequential extraction	539
Au	Sulfides	MS;-;S XRF;-;S	Comparison between SIMS and synchrotron XRF	635
B	Tourmaline	MS;-;S	Matrix effects on the determination of B, H and Li investigated	636
Bi	Geological material	AE;ICP;Hy	Six reaction media compared	151
C	Graphite	MS;-;S	SIMS used to measure C isotopic ratios in study of crustal
fluids	598
C	Geological materials	MS;-;S	Impure CO2 reduced to graphite, re-oxidised
at 500°C to pure CO2 and reduced to amorphous carbon. 14C∶12C
ratio determined by AMS	637
C	Diamond	MS;-;S	SIMS study of variations C isotope composition and N abundance	599
C	Geological material	MS;-;S	Description of the geological, archaeological and environmental
applications of the Erlangen, Germany, AMS system	606
Ca	Carbonates	MS;ICP;L	Dissolved in 3 M HCl, centrifuged, supernatant evaporated
to dryness and dissolved in 2 M HNO3. Isotope ratios measured
with high precision using multiple collector ICP-MS	586
Ca	Halite	MS;ICP;L	Nd∶YAG laser (266 nm) used to ablate
single fluid inclusions	638
Cd	Fly ash, soil and sediment	AA;ETA;L	Microwave assisted digestion with HNO3, HCl
and HF	425
Cd	Coal	AA;ETA;S	Slurried with a mixture of 5% v/v HNO3,
0.05% Triton X-100 and 10% ethanol	527
Cd	Sediment RMs	MS;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion with HF and HNO3.
Isotope dilution and mass bias corrections used with sector field ICP-MS	577
Cd	Sediment	AA;ETA;L	W–Rh permanent chemical modifier used	557
Cd	Fly ash, soil and sediment	AA;ETA;L	Forms of Cd studied using sequential extraction	540
Cd	Sediment	AA;ETA;L	Comparison of ultrasound-assisted extraction, microwave-assisted
digestion and slurry sampling	531
Cu	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Dissolved in 5 M HNO3. Isotope ratios
measured using multiple collector ICP-MS	585
Cu	Sediment	AA;ETA;L	See Cd, ref. 531	531
Eu	Environmental material	AE;ICP;G	Separated and preconcentrated on micro-column of immobilized
1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoyl-5-pyrene. ETV sample introduction	639
F	Humite-group minerals	EMPA;-;S	Comparison of accuracy of EMPA, SIMS and SREF in the determination
of high concentrations of F	640
Fe	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Dissolved in 6 M HCl, purified by double precipitation
with aqueous NH3. Isotope ratios measured with high precision using
double focusing multiple collector ICP-MS	584
Fe	NIST SRMs	MS;ICP;L	See Pb, ref. 589	589
Ga	Geological material	XRF;-;S	Analytes preconcentrated onto macroporous resins loaded
with 5-phenylazoquinolin-8-ol. Resins deposited on Millipore filters, covered
with Mylar film and analyzed by WDXRF	610
H	Tourmaline	MS;-;S	See B, ref. 636	636
Hf	Iron rich geological material	MS;ICP;L AE;ICP;L	Digested with HNO3, HF and HClO4.
Hf, Zr and Fe separated from major elements on anion exchange column	541
Hf	Rock	MS;ICP;S	Powder mixed with enriched spike solution, dried and ground.
Fused twice without flux. Hf and Zr determined by LA-ICP-MS using Nd∶YAG (266 nm)
and ArF (193 nm) excimer lasers	516
Hf	Basalt	AE;ICP;L	Two chromatographic separation techniques are compared	542
Hf	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	Ablated with frequency quadrupled Nd∶YAG laser at
266 nm. Isotope composition determined by multicollector ICP-MS	522
Hg	Environmental material	XRF;-;S	Amalgam formed with thin layer of gold deposited on quartz
reflector. TXRF data processed to resolve overlapping Hg and Au peaks	623
Hg	Coal	AF;-;G	See As, ref.
560	560
Hg	Sediment	AA;-;G	Slurried with 9 + 1 mixture of 15%
HNO3 and 15% HCl containing 0.02% v/v Triton
X-100. Ultrasonic treatment prior to FI sample introduction	436
Hg	Sediment	AE;-;-	Comparison of GC and detection techniques for speciation
studies	641
Hg	Sediment	MS;ICP;-	Comparison of extraction methods and use of a low pressure
He plasma for the determination of organomercury species	550
Hg	Environmental material	MS;ICP;-	Species separated by microcolumn multicapillary GC	554
Hg	Sediment	AA;-;G	Reduction with stannous chloride	642
Hg	Zinc ore	AAS;-;CV	0.1–0.2 g dried and powdered sample wetted
with H2O, mixed with 10 ml HCl, heated on a hotplate for
10 min to remove H2S, mixed with 10 ml HCl and 4 ml
HNO3, heated for 30 min and diluted to 100 ml with
H2O	643
Hg	Environmental material	AA;-;G	Pyrolysed in a combustion tube at 750°C under
O. Hg collected on Au	437
Hg	Environmental material	-;-;-	Review with 57 refs. of Chinese work	61
In	Geological material	XRF;-;S	See Ga, ref. 610	610
La	Environmental material	AE;ICP;G	See Eu, ref. 639	639
Li	Basalt	MS;ICP;L	Digested with concentrated HF∶HNO3
(3∶1).
Isotopic composition measured using multi-collector ICP-MS	582
Li	Tourmaline	MS;-;S	See B, ref. 636	636
Li	Basalt	MS;ICP;L	Isotopic composition measured using multicollector sector
ICP-MS	583
Mo	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Digestion with HF and mixed Mo, Sb and W spike. Measurement
involved ID-FI-ICP-MS	576
Mo	Molybdenite	MS;-;L	Mo isotopes determined by TIMS	596
Nb	Geological material	MS;-;S	60 mg mixed with 30 mg graphite spiked with 91Zr,
milled and pressed into electrodes. Nb, Y and Zr determined by spark source
MS with multiple ion counting	603
Nb	Geological RMs	XRF;-;S	Comparison of direct WDXRF analysis of pressed powder pellets
with separation and collection of analyte on anion-exchange membranes	611
Nb	Meteorites	MS;-;S	Nb, Y and Ta determined by spark source MS with multiple
ion counting	602
O	Emerald	MS;-;S	SIMS used to measure O isotopic ratios to identify origin
of gems	644
Os	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Isotope dilution used with three different nebulisers	590
Os	Molybdenite	MS;ICP;-	Os-Os dating method studied using ICP-MS and negative ion
TIMS	591
Os	Geological material	MS;ICP;G	OsO4 introduced directly into the plasma of
a multicollector ICP-MS. Picogram levels of Os and Re determined by isotope
dilution	592
Pb	Sediment	AA;ETV;L	W–Rh permanent chemical modifier used	558
Pb	Sediment	AA;ETV;L	See Ag, ref. 559	559
Pb	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	Instrumental conditions and calibration strategies for
Pb–Pb age determination by LA-ICP-MS discussed	518
Pb	Ore	AA;-;L	Decomposed with HCl and HNO3	645
Pb	Geological material	MS;ICP;S	Discussion of errors in LA-ICP-MS and other techniques
of U–Pb age determination	519
Pb	Sediment	AA;ETA;S	Slurried with 0.5% v/v HNO3 containing
0.04% Triton X-100. W–Rh permanent chemical modifier used	529
Pb	Sediment	AA;ETA;L	Microwave assisted digestion with aqua regia and
HF	556
Pb	Coal	AA;ETA;S	See Cd,  ref. 527	527
Pb	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	Single grains pressed into epoxy disc and polished. U–Pb
age determined by LA-ICP-MS	520
Pb	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	U–Pb age determined by LA-ICP-MS	521
Pb	NIST SRMs	MS;ICP;L	Precision of isotope ratio measurements improved by collisional
damping in a dynamic reaction cell. See Fe, ref.
589	589
Pb	Sediment	AA;ETA;L	See Cd,  ref. 531	531
Pd	Dust and sediment	MS;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion with aqua regia.
Ultrasonic nebulisation used with sector field ICP-MS	579
Pd	Copper-nickel ores	AAS;-;L	Pd adsorbed on silica treated with N-allyl-N′-propylthiourea.
Eluted with thiourea solutions in HCl	646
Pt	Dust and sediment	MS;ICP;L	See ref. 579	579
Pt	Geological and environmental material	MS;ICP;-	Discussion of preconcentration and separation methods presented	545
Pu	Environmental materials	MS;ICP;L	Low-flow microconcentric nebuliser	587
Pu	Environmental RMs	MS;ICP;L	On-line separation of 238U with two extraction
resins. Measurement involving isotope dilution and HR-ICP-MS	441
Rb	Halite	MS;ICP;L	See Ca, ref. 638	638
Rb	Geological material	AA;-;S	Ablated with Nd∶YAG laser. Isotope spectrum obtained
by scanning plasma with narrow band Ti∶sapphire laser	647
Rh	Dust and sediment	MS;ICP;L	See Pd, ref. 579	579
REE	Rock	MS;ICP;L	Decomposed in a mixture of HF + HClO4
at 150°C	568
REE	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Direct injection nebuliser used with sector field instrument	648
S	Coal	MS;-;S	Chemical form of sulfur investigated by SIMS	649
S	Coal	AE;ICP;L	Forms of S determined following sequential microwave assisted
acid extraction	536
Sb	Soil and sediment	AA;ETA;Hy	See As, ref. 389	389
Sb	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	See Mo, ref. 576	576
Se	Coal	AF;-;G	See As, ref. 560	560
Se	Soil and sediment	AA;ETA;Hy	See As, ref. 389	389
Se	Sediment	AA;-;Hy	Six different extraction solutions compared	650
Se	Rock	AA;-;Hy	Digested with HF, HClO4 and HNO3
at 140°C for 2 h	651
Se	Environmental material	AA;-;-	Review in Czech with 130 refs.	180
Sn	Sediment	AA;ETV;L	See Ag, ref. 559	559
Sn	Sediment	MS;-;-	Extracted with 1 M HCl in methanol and ethyl acetate (1∶1).
Organotin compounds detected by GC-MS	652
Sn	Sediment	AE;-;-	Microwave assisted digestion with acetic acid followed
by solvent extraction and derivatization. Organotin compounds separated by
multicapillary GC	653
Sr	Silicate rock	MS;ICP;L	Dissolved in a mixture of 28 M HF and 14 M
HNO3 in a PTFE vessel, evaporated to dryness and dissolved in 2 M
HCl. Sr separated on Dowex 50W-X8 cation exchange column. Precision of isotope
ratios measured by quadrupole instrument shown to be adequate where variations
are large	654
Sr	Halite	MS;ICP;L	See Ca, ref. 638	638
Ta	Meteorites	MS;-;S	See Nb, ref. 602	602
Th	Environmental materials	MS;ICP;L	See Pu, ref. 587	587
Th	Geological material	MS;-;L	Improved chromatographic procedure for the separation of
Th and U using TRUSPEC resins in acidic media	594
Th	Ore	MS;ICP;L	On-line matrix separation with 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic
acid. Isotopes measured by sector field ICP-MS	580
Ti	Silicate RMs	MS;ICP;L	Digested with HF. ID and FI used with sector field instrument	575
Tl	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Two-stage anion exchange separation. Isotopic data obtained
by multiple collector instrument. Method claimed to be an improvement over
that from TIMS	581
U	Environmental materials	MS;ICP;L	See Pu, ref. 587	587
U	Geological material	MS;ICP;S	See Pb, ref. 519	519
U	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	See Pb, ref. 520	520
U	Uranium ore	MS;-;L	High precision measurement of natural U isotope ratios
resulting in proposed IUPAC reference values	655
U	Geological material	MS;-;L	See Th, ref. 594	594
U	Environmental material	MS;ICP;L	Digested with HF + HNO3 + HClO4.
Pt used as internal standard	566
U	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	See Pb, ref. 521	521
U	Ore	MS;ICP;L	See Th, ref. 580	580
U	Phosphogypsum	MS;ICP;L	Refluxed with HNO3 for 2 h at 120–140°C.
U separated by column chromatography	588
U	Minerals	-;-;-	Review of spectroscopic techniques	656
W	Geological material	AE;ICP;L	Fused with KHSO4. Comparison made with derivative
spectrophotometry	564
W	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	See Mo, ref. 576	576
Y	Geological material	MS;-;S	See Nb, ref. 603	603
Y	Meteorites	MS;-;S	See Nb, ref. 602	602
Zn	Ore	AA;-;L	See Pb, ref. 645	645
Zr	Geological material	MS;-;S	See Nb, ref. 603	603
Zr	Iron rich geological material	MS;ICP;L AE;ICP;L	See Hf, ref. 541	541
Zr	Basalt	AE;ICP;L	See Hf, ref. 542	542
Various	Geological material	-;-;-	Review with 134 refs. of techniques for multi-element analysis,
emphasizing ICP-MS and ICP-AES	345
Various	Zircon	MS;ICP;S	U–Pb and Pb–Pb ages and 25 trace elements determined
by LA-ICP-MS	517
Various	Geological and environmental samples	MS;-;S	Examples of recent developments and applications of RIMS	600
Various	Geological material	-;-;-	Review with 97 refs. of advances in the determination of
Au and the PGEs from 1990–1998	657
Various	Environmental materials	AA;ETA;Hy	As, Bi, Sb, Se and Te determined by in-atomiser trapping
in Ir-coated graphite tube	207
Various	Geological material	MS;-;-	Review of atomic mass spectrometry	394
Various	Rock, ore and concentrates	AE;ICP;L	Digestion in aqua regia followed by fusion with
Na2O2. Au, Pd, Pt and Rh determined after reductive
co-precipitation using Se as collector	658
Various	Feldspar	AE;ICP;L	Decomposed with HF + H2SO4 + HNO3.
Fused with Na2CO3 and Na2B4O7
at 1000°C for 15 min, cooled and dissolved in HCl (1∶1).
Al, Ca, Fe, Mg and Ti determined	659
Various	Geological material	AA;-;-	Book reviewing AAS, 964 pp.	202
Various	Geological material	MS;ICP;S	Study of the use of HF to remove Si in ETV slurry sample
introduction	530
Various	Geological and environmental materials	XRF;-;S	Annual review of XRF spectrometry with 537 refs.	411
Various	Sepiolites	AE;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion with HNO3, HCl
and HF	532
Various	Niobium–tantalum ore	XRF;-;S	Pelletised with cellulose binder	616
Various	Obsidian artefacts	XRF;-;S	Diamond polished, mounted in epoxy-resin and subjected
to PIXE analysis and fission track dating	660
Various	Rubies	XRF;-;S	Provenance examined using trace element fingerprinting
of PIXE data	625
Various	Geological materials	EPMA;-;S	Interactive program used to choose matrix correction model
for data from a CAMECA SX50 microprobe	661
Various	Geological and environmental material	XRF;-;S	Novel method of EDXRF signal deconvolution for gas-filled
proportional counters described	662
Various	Sediment	AE;ICP;L MS;ICP;L	Major and trace elements determined after fusion with LiBO2	663
Various	Basalt	MS;ICP;S	28 trace elements determined by LA-ICP-MS to fingerprint
ancient Egyptian quarries	509
Various	Geological material	MS;-;S	Fused into glass, powdered, pressed into electrodes and
18 elements determined by spark source MS with multiple ion counting	664
Various	Soil	AA;F;L AA;ETA;L	Rapid partial dissolution proposed for geochemical exploration	665
Various	Geological materials	XRF;-;S	Principles and applications of micro-XANES and micro-XRF
using synchrotron radiation explained	666
Various	Platinum group minerals	XRF;-;S	PIXE and EPMA trace element data from cooperite and braggite
compared	628
Various	Gold ore	XRF;-;S	PIXE microanalysis used to examine Au–pyrite associations
in the Kimberley reefs	629
Various	Sulfides	XRF;-;S	Micro-PIXE evaluated for the identification of chemical
signatures and textural types	630
Various	Zircons	XRF;-;S	PIXE analysis used to discriminate zircons from S-, I-
and A-type granites	627
Various	Coral and sediment	XRF;-;S	Various EDXRF methods, including TRXRF, discussed for the
determination of marine pollution indicators	615
Various	Soil gas	MS;ICP;L	Use of trace metals sorbed onto activated carbon collectors
over ca. 100 d as an exploration tool for buried mineralization	667
 	 	 	 	 
Various	Geological material	-;-;-	Discussion of techniques for the determination of Au, Ir,
Os, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru presented	543
Various	Geological RMs	MS;-;L	Figures of merit for ICP-TOF-MS discussed	330
Various	Geological RMs	MS;ICP;S	Fused with Li2B4O7. Minor
and trace elements determined by LA sample introduction using NIST 612 glass
for calibration and Si as internal standard	515
Various	Coal	AE;GD;S	Ashed and pressed into pellets without binder	668
Various	Phosphate rock	AE;-;S	Ground and pressed into pellets. LIBS used in near-line
process monitoring	669
Various	Sediment	XRF;-;S	0.3 g mixed with 3 drops of organic solvent and
pelletised. Trace elements determined by EDXRF using 925 MBq 109Cd
source	670
Various	Ore	XRF;-;S	Ground to <300 mesh and pelletised with cellulose
binder. Ba, I, In, Mo, Sb, Sn and Sr determined by EDXRF using 241Am
source	617
Various	Sediment	AA;F;L	Microwave assisted digestion with HNO3. Cr,
Cu, Pb and Zn determined by EPA methods	671
Various	Soil and sediment	AE;ICP;L	Study of spectral interferences in the determination of
trace elements	562
Various	Trapiche rubies	XRF;-;S	Spatial variability of Al, Ca, Cr, Fe, Si and Ti examined	626
Various	Martian rock	XRF;-;S	Direct analysis by alpha proton X-ray spectrometry at Pathfinder
landing site	613
Various	Coal	MS;ICP;S	Trace elements determined by LA-ICP-MS	508
Various	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	REEs determined by isotope dilution	574
Various	Geological material	MS;ICP;-	Review with 13 refs. of geochemical applications of sector
based ICP-MS	672
Various	Geological material	-;-;-	Review with 859 refs.	84
Various	Clinopyroxene	MS;ICP;S	Comparison of LA-ICP-MS with other techniques for the determination
of incompatible trace elements	673
Various	Synthetic glasses	MS;ICP;S	Synthetic calibration glasses for LA-ICP-MS prepared by
fusion of spiked TiO2 and SiO2 in high purity graphite
electrodes	512
Various	Geological RMs	-;-;-	An interpretation of ISO guidelines for certification presented	502
Various	Coal	MS;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion in concentrated HNO3	571
Various	Geological material	MS;-;S	Compact benchtop SIMS instrument described	597
Various	Geological material	MS;-;S	Description of the AUSTRALIS AMS system incorporating a
30 µm Cs beam source and its applications for trace element and
isotopic measurement given	608
Various	Foraminifera	MS;ICP;L	Element-calcium ratios measured precisely on single shells
using sector field instrument	674
Various	Sediment	AE;ICP;L, XRF;-;S	Samples dried, homogenized and leached sequentially with
ammonium nitrate, ammonium acetate, hydroxylamine hydrochloride, ascorbic
acid and HNO3 + H2O2.
Ba, Ca, Fe, Mn, and Sr determined by ICP-AES. Undissolved residue filtered
off, dried and pellitized. Ca, Fe, K, Mn, Rb, Si, Sr, Ti, Y, Zn and Zr determined
by EDXRF	614
Various	Sediment	TXRF;-;S	200 mg microwave-digested in PTFE bomb with HNO3,
HF, H2O and Ga as internal standard, diluted with water and 10 µl
pipetted onto a quartz sample carrier	237
Various	Geological material	MS;ICP;S	Fused with Li2B4O7 and
LiBO2
(9∶1) at 1050°C. Trace elements
determined by LA-ICP-MS	513
Various	Soil and sediment	XRF;-;S	Dried at 105°C. Reasons for not fusing discussed.
Matrix correction based on α-coefficients calculated for homogeneous
materials	484
Various	Geological RMs	MS;ICP;L	100 mg samples microwave digested with 2 ml
HF and 0.5 ml HNO3 at 130°C for 48 h	397
Various	Silicates	XRF;-;S	Comparison of software packages for processing data from
analysis of fusion disks	675
Various	Moon rock	XRF;-;S	Description of the CCD-based X-ray spectrometer to be launched
in 2003 aboard the SELENE orbiter given	612
Various	Monazite	XRF;-;S	Evaluation of WDXRF operating parameters for the determination
of 32 elements including the REEs	619
Various	Sediment	XRF;-;S	Various X-ray techniques compared in pollution studies	624
Various	Black shale	MS;ICP;L	Digested with HNO3 + HF in
a PTFE bomb at 190°C for 3 h. Cd, Ga, Ge, In, Re, Se, Te
and Ti determined	573
Various	Sediment	MS;ICP;L	0.1 g dried at 120°C and digested with
1.5 g XeF2 in the vapour phase at 190°C and
9 × 106 Pa, followed aqua regia
digestion	537
Various	Extra terrestrial regolith	MS;-;S	Description of compact (ca. 2 kg)
laser ablation TOFMS for direct analysis of planetary surfaces	525
Various	Granite	MS;ICP;L	100 mg digested with 1 ml HF and 0.5 ml
HNO3 in PTFE-lined stainless steel bombs at 190°C for
12 h. Insoluble residue dissolved in 40% HNO3 at
110°C for 3 h. Rh used as internal standard	567
Various	Silicate RMs	XRF;-;S	Figures of merit given for the analysis of six RMs using
synchrotron-XRF with a standard-free fundamental parameter approach to quantification	676
Various	Soil and sediment	MS;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion with HF + HNO3	535
Various	Geological material	AA;F;L	Cd, Cu, Fe, Ni and Zn preconcentrated on columns of Aspergillus
niger immobilized on sepiolite	677
Various	Rock, soil and sediment	AA;ETV;S	Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, and Zn determined using direct solid sample
introduction	380
Various	Geological material	AE;-;S	Use of LIBS for the direct determination of Cr, Cu, Fe,
Mn and Ni in drill core	523
Various	Rock RMs	MS;ICP;L	Microwave assisted digestion. REEs separated on Dowex AG-50WX-12
cation exchange column	569
Various	Lignite	MS;ICP;-	38 elements determined along with mineralogical studies	678
Various	Geological material	MS;ICP;S	Fused with Li2B4O7. 35
elements determined by LA-ICP-MS	514
Various	Coal and fly ash	MS;ICP;L	1-Methylpyrrolidin-2-one used to extract organically associated
trace elements	572
Various	Iron ore	AE;-;S	LIBS used for the rapid identification of particles	524
Various	Rock	TXRF;-;S	Ablated under Ar with Nd∶YAG laser directly onto
sample carrier	622
Various	Geological material	MS;ICP;L	Au and the PGEs determined after fusion with Na2O2
and co-precipitation with Te	546
Various	Rock, soil and sediment	XRF;-;S	0.25 g powder mixed with 1 g H3BO3
and pellitised. Ba, Fe, Sr and Zr determined using 3.7 GBq 241Am
source and Si(Li) detector	679
Various	Colemanite ore	XRF;-;S	As, Ba, Cs, I, In, Sb, Sn and Sr determined by EDXRF using
100 mCi 241Am source	618
Various	Soil and sediment	AE;-;S	Two LIBS systems evaluated for space exploration	526
Various	Sediment	MS;ICP;-	Four methods used: microwave digestion, NiS fire assay,
acid leaching and Carius tube digestion. Os and the PGEs determined	593
Various	Geological and environmental materials	MS;-;S	Recent advances in AMS reviewed	605
Various	Rock	MS;ICP;L	High pressure digestion with HF + HNO3
in a Teflon bomb. 43 trace elements determined using double focusing instrument	578
Various	Meteorites	MS;-;S	Au, Ir, Os and Pt determined by SIMS	680
Various	Geological material	-;-;-	Use of chemometric techniques to maximise information from
multi-element measurements	348
Various	Fluid inclusions	XRF;-;S	Ca, Cl, K, Mg and SO4 ions determined on frozen
samples by EDXRF attached to a scanning electron microscope	620
Various	Rock and soil	XRF;-;S	Samples dried, ashed at 1000°C, ground in agate
and Pd–C powder added as internal standard. Mixture deposited on 4 µm
thick polypropylene sheet and fixed with 10% collodion solution. A
2.9 MeV proton beam provided by a small cyclotron. Correction for self-absorption
examined	681
Various	Garnet	TXRF;-;S	Sample digested. Results compared with those obtained directly
on the minerals by EMPA	621
Various	Geological material	XRF;-;S	Review with 37 refs. of micro-PIXE and Rutherford backscattering
spectrometry capabilities	631
Various	Sulfide minerals	AA;F;L	Decomposed with HCl, H2SO4 and HNO3	682
Various	Carbonates	MS;ICP;S	Calibration strategies for the determination of Ba, Cd,
Fe, Mg, Mn, Pb, Sr, U and V by LA discussed	511
Various	Coal	AA;ETA;S	As, Mn, Pb and Se determined in 5% v/v HNO3
slurries	528

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
