PEM Fuel cell and electrolysis cell technologies and hydrogen infrastructure development – a review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00790H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00790H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2288-2328PEM Fuel cell and electrolysis cell technologies and hydrogen infrastructure development – a review

        
          
            Yun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yiheng 
            Pang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Andrew 
            Martinez
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ken S. 
            Chen
          
        
      d
aRenewable Energy Resources Lab & National Fuel Cell Research Center, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. E-mail: yunw@uci.edu
bGiner Inc, Newton, MA 02466, USA. E-mail: hxu@ginerinc.com
cCalifornia Air Resources Board, Sustainable Transportation and Communities Division, California Environmental Protection Agency, 1001 I Street Sacramento, CA 95814, USA
dSandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94550, USA
Received 
      10th March 2022
    , Accepted 26th April 2022First published on 26th April 2022AbstractPolymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells or PEMFCs and PEM electrolysis cells or PEMECs are two closely related electrochemical devices having a similar structure: a PEM with catalyst layers (CLs) coated on its surfaces, flow fields, and bipolar plates (BPs). Both systems work at low temperatures (e.g. ∼60–80 °C) and can operate free of CO2 emissions. The PEMFC efficiency can reach as high as 65% with water as the only byproduct when using hydrogen as the fuel. PEMFCs have been considered for stationary, transportation, and portable applications. Several PEMFC products are commercially available, including back-up power and fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs). As of May 2021, over 10000 FCEVs were sold or leased in the U.S. and 48 fuel cell electric buses (FCEBs) currently operate in California. More than 3520 FCEVs and 22 FCEBs were sold or leased in Japan up to 2020 and China has more than 6000 FCEVs. The cost and the lack of a hydrogen infrastructure are the two main barriers to the worldwide deployment of PEMFCs. Currently, a PEMFC stack costs about $75 per kW at high volume production and its CLs account for over 40% of the overall cost due to the employment of precious platinum-group metals (PGMs) as catalysts. For FCEVs to be competitive cost-wise, the ultimate goal is $30 per kW for light-duty FCEVs and $60 per kW for heavy-duty FCEVs. Another challenge that prevents FCEVs from widespread application is that only a few hundred hydrogen refueling stations (HRSs) are available in the world. To help overcome this challenge, Japan has set a target of building 320 stations by 2025 and 900 by 2030. Europe has a roadmap of achieving 1500 stations by 2025. China has over 40 HRSs and has been reported to have invested $17 billion dollars in hydrogen infrastructure. PEMECs operate in the reverse process of PEMFCs, i.e. hydrogen production through water splitting using electrical energy, and provide a promising source of renewable hydrogen to supply the fueling infrastructure. They have been successfully commercialized with power varying from a few kW to multiple MW and efficiency around 60–80%. As of 2019, over 14 MW of PEMECs have been installed or are underway across the U.S. The cost of producing hydrogen via PEMECs, which is currently at about $4–6 per kg, has been a limiting factor that prevents large-scale deployment and application. The U.S. DOE has recently set a target to achieve $1 per kg within one decade through the Hydrogen Shot initiative. The objectives of this review are three-fold: (1) to present the current status of PEMFC and PEMEC technologies and their ongoing development, along with the hydrogen infrastructure, (2) to describe the similarities and differences in PEMFC and PEMEC structures, materials, and fundamentals, and (3) to outline the major challenges and opportunities in the widespread deployment of PEMFCs and PEMECs and hydrogen infrastructure development.
Yun Wang
Prof. Yun Wang received his BS and MS degrees in Mechanics and Engineering Science from Peking University in 1998 and 2001, respectively. He went to the Pennsylvania State University for a PhD degree in 2006, and then joined as faculty in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of the UC Irvine (UCI). Dr Wang has produced over 80 publications in the areas of PEM fuel cells, PEM electrolysis cells, Li–air batteries, and other energy systems. Several of his seminal studies are highly cited in major energy journals. Prof. Wang is currently a Professor at UCI and an RSC and ASME fellow.
Yiheng Pang
Yiheng Pang received his BS and MS in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from the UC Irvine in 2019 and 2020, respectively. He is now pursuing his PhD in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at UC Irvine. His research interests include PEM fuel cells, novel heat pipes, and advanced fabrication. His current research involves the application of machine learning for PEM fuel cells.
Hui Xu
Dr Hui Xu is currently Chief Technology Officer at Giner, Inc. In his capacity, he oversees component design and system development for a variety of energy technologies pertaining to fuel cells and electrolyzers. He is the principal investigator of multiple projects funded by the DOE and multiple industrial partners, worth $40 million. He has published nearly 50 peer-reviewed papers and filed 9 patents. Dr Xu was inducted to the Academy of Distinguished Engineers of the University of Connecticut in 2020. He received a Special Recognition Award in 2021 at the DOE's H2 and Fuel Cell Annual Merit Review Meeting.
Andrew Martinez
Andrew Martinez is the Hydrogen Program Expert at the California Air Resources Board. In this role, he has spent the past several years analyzing the development of the light-duty hydrogen fueling network in California, modeling scenarios for future development, and supporting hydrogen station incentive programs. Andrew's work also assesses the development and deployment of fuel cell electric vehicles. Andrew's past experience includes air quality modeling and research on high-temperature solid oxide fuel cells, including their application to freight rail locomotives. Andrew holds a PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California, Irvine.

Broader context
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from fossil fuels are a major concern and cause climate change. Using renewable hydrogen as an energy carrier is promising to mitigate or resolve this concern. Polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells or PEMFCs and PEM electrolysis cells or PEMECs play an important role in hydrogen utilization to decarbonize our energy use. PEMFCs electrochemically convert hydrogen to electrical energy with water as the byproduct whereas PEMECs produce pure hydrogen through water splitting using electrical energy sources, including renewables. They share similarities in structure, fundamentals, and materials and have high efficiency, and have been actively developed with major effort towards global decarbonization. At present, the high cost and the lack of a hydrogen infrastructure are two main barriers to the worldwide deployment of PEMFCs. The cost of producing hydrogen via PEMECs has been a limiting factor that prevents their large-scale deployment. This review presents the current status of the two technologies, describes their similarities and differences with respect to structures, materials, and fundamentals, and discusses the major challenges and opportunities in the widespread deployment of PEMFCs and PEMECs as well as hydrogen infrastructure development.

Part I. Introduction
1.1 PEM fuel cells
Fuel cells, which electrochemically convert chemical energy stored in fuels to electricity, are widely regarded as the next-generation power devices because of their high efficiency and low emissions. Polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells (or PEMFCs) are a major class of fuel cells, which operate at relatively low temperatures ranging from −40 °C to 120 °C. PEMFCs are currently being further developed or improved and commercialized for portable, transportation, and stationary power applications, and they have received the most attention in fuel-cell research and development (R&D). The operating principles of PEMFCs are schematically illustrated in Fig. 1. Hydrogen and air are fed into the anode and cathode gas flow channels, respectively. In the anode catalyst layer (CL), hydrogen is oxidized to protons and electrons, which are transported via the membrane and out-circuit, respectively, to the cathode CL and react with oxygen with water as the byproduct.
 Fig. 1  Schematics of the PEM fuel cell (left) and PEM electrolysis cell (right): operation principles, reactions, and structures (GDL − gas diffusion layer; MPL − microporous layer; CL − catalyst layer; PTL − porous transport layer). 
PEMFCs are constructed based on polymer electrolyte membranes or PEMs (notably Nafion®), which conduct protons and separate gaseous reactants at the anode and cathode sides, respectively. Electrocatalysts (usually precious metals from the platinum group) are required to catalyze the electrochemical reactions at low temperatures. Their noteworthy features include low operating temperature, high power density and efficiency when using hydrogen as the fuel, and easy scale-up, making PEMFCs suitable replacements for the internal combustion engines (ICEs) that provide propulsion for automobiles. Various PEM fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs) have been developed and commercialized, including the Toyota Mirai and Hyundai NEXO.1 A few fuel cell electric buses (FCEBs) have carried millions of passengers and achieved the durability target of 25000 hours. PEMFCs as backup power solutions for data centers, banks, hospitals, and telecommunication companies have received increasing attention because of stringent regulations on ICE-based backup systems. Some fuel cell backup units are available in the market, such as Fcgen®-H2PM (Ballard Power) and GenSure® (Plug Power). Portable PEMFCs can power laptops, chargers, wearable electronic units, and military radio/communication devices, and enable a much longer operation time than batteries.
1.2 PEM electrolysis cells
Water electrolysis is an electrochemical method for generating hydrogen from water, which has received growing attention in recent years due to increasing renewable energy installations and demands for renewable energy storage. Several electrolysis technologies have been widely studied, including alkaline liquid electrolysis cells (ALECs), alkaline membrane electrolysis cells (AMECs), PEM electrolysis cells (PEMECs), and solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs). Among them, AMECs and SOECs have unsatisfactory durability thus their immediate application is limited. Both ALECs and PEMECs have been successfully commercialized due to their superior performance and durability. However, ALECs suffer from low operating current density and high maintenance costs. Thus, PEMECs have gained increasing attention due to their high efficiency, low maintenance cost, fast dynamics, and high H2 purity. Additionally, PEMECs are significantly more compact than ALECs, enabling simplified system design, manufacture, and installation.
As schematically shown in Fig. 1, the electrochemical reactions in a PEMEC are the reverse of those in a PEMFC. PEMECs are also constructed similarly to PEMFCs and are based on PEMs with a similar structure such as bipolar plates and catalyst layers. They operate at relatively low temperatures (e.g. 60–80 °C) as well; but some differences do exist, such as the electrode reactions, catalyst materials, and operating pressure range. During operation, liquid water is fed into the anode flow field and is oxidized to oxygen via the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in the anode CL while releasing protons; protons transport across the membrane and are subsequently reduced to H2 in the cathode via the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Since the HER is a facile reaction even with low Pt loading, the main focus of research efforts is on the sluggish OER where a precious metal catalyst iridium (Ir) or iridium oxide (IrOx) is usually employed to decrease the overpotential. PEMECs have demonstrated good fast-response performance, making them ideal for direct integration with the electric grid and renewable solar or wind energy; the low-cost off-peak electricity can be used for H2 production. This is particularly meaningful in reducing interruptions in the existing electric grid operations caused by the intermittency in the generation of renewable energy.
1.3 Hydrogen infrastructure
PEMFCs rely on high-purity hydrogen gas for durable and efficient operation. Thus, a reliable hydrogen infrastructure is a crucial pre-requisite for worldwide deployment of PEMFCs, such as FCEVs. In the transportation sector alone, the infrastructure includes the full supply chain for hydrogen fuel, from production, transport and delivery, and storage at hydrogen refueling stations (HRSs), to safe and reliable dispensing into customers’ vehicles. However, infrastructure needs for the production and delivery of high-purity, high-pressure hydrogen required for the transportation application are extensive. Infrastructure development is currently a major bottleneck for commercializing FCEVs in the transportation sector. The light-duty sector has been launched in multiple countries worldwide, given the long-range (300+ miles) and fast-filling (typically within 5 minutes) capability of FCEVs while providing zero-emission operation. In the medium- and heavy-duty markets, infrastructure developments have recently begun and have enjoyed growing interest, though there are still a few commercially available products. Heavy-duty trucks may achieve long range (around 1000 miles or over) thanks to the ability to carry large amounts of hydrogen fuel on-board (>50 kg) without affecting the payload volume or weight limits. Because of zero-emission operation, when paired with low- or zero-carbon hydrogen fuel sources, worldwide PEMFC deployment and infrastructure development significantly contribute to achieving the global decarbonization goals.2 In many regions, heavy-duty vehicles also often operate in areas having high industrial activities, which lead to significant pollutant emissions in low-income communities that have historically been disproportionately affected by the emissions from commercial operations. Thus, heavy-duty FCEVs offer significant potential to reduce emissions and advance environmental justice goals in these regions.
Hydrogen is a widely used chemical in industry for crude oil upgrading and fertilizer production. Hydrogen fuel is usually transported and stored in either compressed tube trailers typically under 200–500 bar, or in a cryogenic liquid state, using trailers equipped with vacuum insulated multi-layer dewars. The most common method of hydrogen production is steam methane reformation (SMR) of either a fossil natural gas or a renewably-sourced methane feedstock. Seeking extensive decarbonization for the future hydrogen supply, many efforts are underway toward developing new renewable hydrogen production technologies and advancing existing technologies to commercial scale. PEMECs are a promising technology for producing hydrogen from renewable sources, which can be locally supplied to HRS and thus eliminate the need for hydrogen transportation. Additionally, PEMECs are capable of direct H2 production under high pressure (e.g. 10–50 bars), which can lead to a significant saving in subsequent hydrogen pressurization for HRSs.
1.4 Scope of the review

Fig. 1 and Tables 1 and 2 compare the multiple aspects of PEMFC and PEMEC systems, including operation conditions, durability and cost targets, and baseline materials such as membranes, electrodes, CL, and BP. The two systems operate in reverse of each other, as shown in their reactions, and are similar in structure, components, and materials. In fact, the first hydrogen fuel cell invented by Sir William Grove in 1839 was demonstrated by showing that the electrochemical dissociation of water was reversible using platinum strip electrodes (each 2 inches in length and 3/8 inch in width) in water acidulated with sulphuric acid.3,4 Recent studies have also explored water electrolysis for hydrogen production using PEMFCs directly, called reversible PEMFCs.5 In application, the two systems are highly related with PEMECs providing high-purity hydrogen to the infrastructure that PEMFCs rely on. However, differences in configuration and materials exist, including catalyst material, PEM thickness, flow field configuration, and porous transport layer (PTL)/gas diffusion layer (GDL) material/structure, as listed in Table 2. Differences also exist in their operating conditions and technical targets, such as the operating pressure and temperature ranges and cost target. The scope of this review is focused on the two technologies (namely PEMFCs and PEMECs), including their technical status, fundamentals, challenges and opportunities, along with the relevant or accompanying hydrogen infrastructure development. In this review, their similarities (e.g., thermodynamics, performance loss mechanisms, efficiency definition, electrochemical kinetics, two-phase flow, and PEM material properties) and their differences are described. Our goal is to share their R&D efforts with PEMFC or PEMEC researchers and promote cross-field communication. For example, the two-phase flow theories and porous material fundamentals established in PEMFCs in the past 15 to 20 years can be extended to PEMECs. In addition, lack of hydrogen infrastructure is currently a major barrier to PEMFC commercialization. PEMEC provides a clean hydrogen source for the infrastructure to support PEMFC applications. Numerous efforts have been made to develop hydrogen infrastructure globally. Multiple strategies are being pursued worldwide, with a main emphasis on PEMFC application in the transportation sector. The hydrogen fueling sector is evolving in many regions where an initial hydrogen fueling network has come into shape. Efforts are underway to evaluate, develop, and execute a path towards growing economies of scale and creating a self-sufficient business case for ongoing network development and operation. Funding, development, construction, and operation strategies are diversified across global markets. The current status, key features, and perspectives from these hydrogen-fueling-network developments are also discussed. Furthermore, this review aims at discussing the PEMFC and PEMEC technologies in the context of global hydrogen infrastructure development and presenting major R&D opportunities for the two systems and infrastructure.
Table 1 Operating conditions and cost/durability targets of PEMFCs and PEMECs






PEMFCs
PEMECs





a State-of-the-art performance.
b The US DOE targets.
c From a source other than the US DOE.





Electrochemical reactions
Anode: H2 → 2H+ + 2e−
Anode: H2O(liquid) →½O2 + 2e− +2H+


Cathode: ½O2 + 2e− + 2H+ → H2O
Cathode: 2H+ + 2e− → H2


Overall: H2 + ½ O2 → H2O
Overall: H2O(liquid) → H2 + ½ O2


Operating temperature
Capable of operation from −40 to 120 °C. Usually around 80 °C.
Capable of operation from 25–120 °C. Usually 60–90 °C.


Operating pressure
1–2 atm.
1–50 atm.


Durability target/performance6–8
8000 h and 30000 h for light-and heavy-duty FECVs.
20 yearsa or over.




Stationary fuel cell: 80000–130000 h.b
90000 hc by 2030.


Cost target6,9
Light-duty FCEV: $30 per kW.
$2 per kg hydrogen.




Heavy-duty FCEV: $60 per kW.
$1 per kg hydrogen within a decade (a recent US DOE H2 Shot target).




Table 2 Baseline PEMFC and PEMEC materials




Component
Baselinea Materials


PEMFC
PEMEC



10–14


15–20






a Popularly studied materials.





Membrane
10–50 μm thick PEM; Nafion is a popular PEM material.
100–200 μm thick PEM; Nafion is a popular PEM material.


Catalyst layer (CL)
0.1–10 μm thick. A porous layer consisting of Pt-based catalyst nanoparticles, a catalyst support (e.g. carbon black), and an ionomer. Catalyst and carbon particle sizes are about 1–5 nm and 10–100 nm, respectively. The CL's pore size is about 100 nm. Pt loading is about 0.1–0.4 mg cm−2.
1–10 μm thick. A porous layer with catalyst nanoparticles, e.g. Ir-based (anode) or Pt-based (cathode), and with/without catalyst support, e.g. semi-conductive metal oxides like doped titanium oxide and niobium oxide. The Ir-based catalyst particle size is 1–10 nm. Ir loading is about 0.2–2 mg cm−2.


Gas diffusion layer (GDL)/porous transport layer (PTL)
Carbon fiber based papers with hydrophobic agents (e.g. PTFE). A MPL is coated on the CL side of a GDL. The pore sizes are about 20–50 μm for GDLs and 0.1–1 μm for MPLs. The thicknesses are about 100–200 μm (GDL) and 50 μm (MPL).
A 50–500 μm thick sintered porous Ti sinter or perforated Ti sheet is used as an anode. The pore size is about 20–100 μm. Ti surface is plated with platinum or other materials (e.g. TiN and Au) for corrosion protection. Carbon fiber based porous layers (e.g. carbon cloth) are used as the cathode.


Bipolar plate (BP)
Metallic plate, graphite plate, or composite plate. It provides pathways for heat and electron transfer and mechanical support for electrodes. Metallic BPs need a proper protective coating.
Metallic or composite plate that must resist corrosion in an electrolysis environment. It provides pathways for heat and electron transfer and mechanical support for electrodes. Metallic BPs need a proper protective coating.


Flow field
Flow channel configuration or porous media flow fields for gas reactant distribution and water removal. Parallel, serpentine, and pin type flow fields are common. The channel depth is about 0.3–1 mm.
Flow channel configuration for liquid water supply and oxygen gas removal. Parallel flow fields or screens are common. The channel depth is about 1 mm.




Part II. Technology status and hydrogen infrastructure
2.1 Technology status

PEMFCs. 
In the past two decades, significant progress has been made towards advancing PEMFC technology, in terms of performance and durability improvement, cold-start capability, and cost reduction. PEMFCs are widely considered for transportation, stationary, and portable applications. Several PEMFC products have been successfully commercialized, including FCEVs and backup power units.
The transportation sector is predominantly considered as one of the most promising commercialization opportunities for PEMFC applications. The cost and durability targets of the United State Department of Energy (U.S. DOE) are $30 per kW and 8000 h, respectively, for light-duty FCEVs, which are comparable with those of traditional automobiles. Though these targets have not yet been reached simultaneously, light-duty FECVs have been successfully commercialized in recent years; examples of which include Toyota Mirai, Honda Clarity, and Hyundai NEXO.22 The Hyundai NEXO has a driving range of 380 miles and a stack power of 95 kW with a 3.1 kW L−1 power density. Early this year, Toyota launched a redesigned second-generation Mirai (herein named Mirai 2021) with a price tag of about $49.5 K, a driving range of 402 miles, a stack power of 128 kW, and a power density of 4.4 kW L−1; the redesign greatly improved its cost and performance as compared with the previous model (herein named Mirai 2020) (∼$59.5 K, 312 miles, 114 kW, and 3.1 kW L−1).
Some FCEBs have been operating on the road with a tank capacity of 30–59 kg of hydrogen and a driving range typically around 200 miles, serving millions of customers and reaching the durability target of 25 K miles. As of May 2021, it was estimated that more than 10000 FCEVs were sold (compared to approximately 8000 FCEVs by 2019) and 48 FCEBs currently operate in the state of California.23 In recent years, heavy-duty FCEVs such as Class 8 long-haul trucks have received increasing attention due to their potential to provide an economically favourable ZEV solution attributed to long driving range and fast fueling. Long-haul class 8 trucks typically carry 60–80 kg of hydrogen onboard (compared to typically 4–6 kg for light-duty vehicles), and a fuel cell system with rated power in the range of 150–400 kW, compared to 80–200 kW for passenger light-duty FCEVs. Heavy-duty FCEVs have inherent cost and refueling advantages over battery electric vehicles (BEVs), provided that only a larger tank is required to extend the FCEV range and that hydrogen refueling time is around ten minutes for large class 8 vehicles. However, technical challenges do exist for heavy-duty FCEVs, such as cost, durability, and performance. Several key players of heavy-duty FCEVs include Hyundai Motor, Hyzon Motor, Daimler Trucks, Kenworth, Cummins, and Nikola Corporation. In late 2019, the U.S. DOE published technical targets for hydrogen long-haul tractor-trailer trucks (the typical Class 8 truck for long-distance goods movement in the USA). By 2030, the targets aim at demonstrating a lifetime of 25000 hours, cost of $80 per kW, and peak efficiency of 68% for PEMFCs and a hydrogen refueling rate of 8 kg min−1. Ultimately, the goal is to reach a 30000 hour lifetime, $60 per kW, 72% efficiency, and a 10 kg min−1 fueling rate.24 The current cost of a PEMFC stack is about $76 per kW based on a recent analysis.25
Though PEMFCs are commonly discussed for transportation applications, stationary PEMFC systems were actually among the first commercial applications for backup power and residential power, by manufacturers such as Plug Power, Toshiba, Hydrogenics (recently acquired by Cummins), and previously UTC Power. Despite commercialization barriers such as cost and a lack of hydrogen infrastructure, some stationary applications, e.g. emergency backup power for hospitals and banks, demand a clean and reliable power source and reduced sensitivity to cost. In 2012, PEMFCs provided emergency power of hundreds of hours to signal towers in the Bahamas and Northeast United States during the crisis of Hurricane Sandy. In addition to electricity, the waste heat of PEMFCs can be utilized for onsite heating such as hot water and floor heating.26 This combined heat and power (CHP) mode has the potential to increase the overall energy efficiency to about 80–95%. In addition, portable PEMFCs have been commercialized due to the advantages of large energy capacity and fast recharging capability, which are determined by the hydrogen tank and its refuelling rate, respectively. They are capable of powering military devices or drones continuously over a duration of hours or days. Major developers include Lockheed Martin, Raytheon Technologies, Infinite fuel cell, UltraCell, and Intelligent Energy.


PEMECs. 
Due to their high performance and long durability, several PEMECs have been successfully commercialized and major suppliers include Nel H2, Plug Power, Cummins, and Siemens. The operating power of commercial units can vary from kW (for laboratory-scale hydrogen generation) to multiple MW (for hydrogen fuel production and renewable energy storage). The typical operating current density ranges from 2 to 5 A cm−2 with electrical efficiency around 60–80%. To date, the cost of PEMEC hydrogen production has been a limiting factor that prevents its large-scale deployment and application, which is largely dominated by the cost of the feed stock (i.e. electricity). But this challenge is evolving, due to the more prominent recent availability of less expensive off-peak renewable electricity. The typical energy consumption for H2 production is 48 kW h per kg H2. At an electricity price of 10 cents kW−1 h−1, the cost of electricity feedstock in hydrogen production via electrolysis is $4.8 per kg H2, which alone is far higher than the cost of H2 from methane reforming (less than $2.0 per kg H2). Therefore, PEMECs can only become commercially viable with low-cost renewable electricity (1–2 cents kW−1 h−1). When the operating cost becomes less significant, the capital cost factor will become more dominant. The current capital cost of a PEMEC system is around $1000–1500 per kW.27 It is likely that this high cost can be reduced to below $200 per kW with mass production, making the H2 cost from PEMECs comparable to that from SMR. Fig. 2 shows an analysis of the manufacturing costs of major PEMEC components in 1-MW systems, indicating a significantly reduced cost for annual production rates of 50000 units or more. The H2 cost can be reduced to less than $2 per kg with low renewable electricity prices and reduced capital cost. In addition, the U.S. DOE recently launched a hydrogen energy program, “H2 Shot”, to slash the cost of clean hydrogen by 80% to $1 per kg in one decade.9 As of 2019, over 14 MW in PEMEC capacity have been installed or underway across the U.S., as shown in Fig. 3. It has been suggested that the technology requires 65–75% cost reduction in order to meet a target of <$2 per kg for hydrogen production.28
 Fig. 2  Manufacturing cost curves for 1-MW PEMEC systems: (a) catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) manufactured by spray coating; (b) Ti-based PTL; (c) stainless-steel BPs fabricated by stamping; and (d) cost analysis for stack assembly production. In balance-of-plant (BOP), power electronics accounts for half of the BOP cost; and the water circulation and hydrogen processing subsystems each share about one-fifth of the cost, based on one analysis.15 
 Fig. 3  U.S hydrogen electrolysis cell distributions and capacity.29 

2.2 Hydrogen refueling stations and distribution
The lack of hydrogen infrastructure is a major hurdle to worldwide deployment of hydrogen-fueled FCEVs; to overcome this, a supporting network of conveniently located hydrogen refueling stations (HRSs) is required. Strategies for HRS network development pursued by public, private, or partnership efforts have varied widely. Some strategies facilitate the growth of FCEVs in the privately-owned passenger vehicle market whereas others focus on the state or local government fleets. Other varying aspects include the amounts of public versus private funding, use of mobile versus stationary stations, ownership and operation strategies, and individual station siting methodologies.
In California, approximately 50 HRSs are open through joint private and State funding that support around 10000 light-duty FCEVs.32 The State has awarded funding to develop more than 170 HRSs by 2026, as shown in Fig. 4(a); and the private industry has committed to fully self-funding at least 23 stations within the same timeframe. When completed, the total network capacity will be sufficient to support approximately 250000 FCEVs. For light-duty stations in California, the predominant model is to deliver liquid or gaseous hydrogen to stationary HRSs located on the property of existing gasoline stations. A few variations from this model exist, with some stations located on public land, some for greenfield development, and other stations utilizing on-site hydrogen generation to supply all or part of their daily fueling capacity. Approximately 50 FCEBs currently operate in the State of California, mostly at three transit agencies in the regions of San Francisco Bay, Palm Springs, and Orange County. Fig. 4 shows the number of HRSs and hydrogen dispensed at light-duty hydrogen fueling stations in the U.S (primarily California). Looking further into the future, the public–private California Fuel Cell Partnership has advanced a vision of 1000 stations by 2030 that could support the deployment of one million FCEVs.
 Fig. 4  (a) Number of HRSs and (b) hydrogen dispensed by quarter in the U.S.30 and projected HRSs.31 
In Japan, 137 HRSs are currently in operation;33 approximately one-third of these locations are not permanent installations but are sites where mobile hydrogen fuelers are available for designated portions of the day. Network development targets in Japan are 160 stations by the end of 2020, 320 by 2025, and 900 by 2030. In Europe, ∼1500 stations will become available by 2025 according to their roadmaps.34 Currently, Germany and France have about 90 and 41 HRSs according to a source,35 as shown in Fig. 5. South Korea and China have also made significant progress in recent years on developing HRS networks and establishing plans for future development. In South Korea, more than 45 stations were operational in late 2020; a more recent estimate yielded over 70 operating stations. The rapid development of the HRS network and strong government incentives in South Korea have also led to a recent surge in FCEV deployment. South Korea is now estimated to have the most FCEVs on the road of any global market, at over 10000 operating FCEVs, though California had previously led in FCEV deployment until 2020. China has 43 HRSs with over 6000 FCEVs, according to the International Partnership for Hydrogen and Fuel Cells in the Economy (see Fig. 5). A major Chinese FCEV company, SAIC Motor, recently released its first hydrogen strategy plan and announced that it will develop 10 K FCEVs per year by 2025.36 As with several other consolidated resources for tracking the status, exact numbers may vary in the figures from other sources referenced here and in other reports, especially as reporting and tracking standards vary among regions.
 Fig. 5  Numbers of HRSs and FCEVs and electrolysis hydrogen production capacity in various countries.35 
Public and private support for the development of HRS networks, along with support for other ZEV transportation technologies and the use of hydrogen in other applications, has increased significantly in recent years. Several analyses highlight a critical need to accelerate hydrogen infrastructure development in order to more rapidly develop the economies of scale and further expand infrastructure buildout and vehicle deployment.32–35 Financing efforts to support this expansion are now spreading across the globe. Several support programs now exist or are planned around the world, with varying emphasis on public and private financing, economic sectors (transportation, manufacturing, building power, etc.), and inclusion of other zero-emission technologies. An exhaustive collection of all ongoing and announced plans is beyond the scope of this review; however, the California Air Resources Board has recently published an overview of a representative selection of recent announcements, as shown in Table 3. Planned or committed investments are typically a small portion of GDP in each region, but the total amount of global expenditure could be substantial; the plans listed in the table alone account for more than $65 billion USD. In particular, China has been reported to have invested $17 billion on hydrogen to support PEMFC and hydrogen infrastructure development.
Table 3 Worldwide hydrogen investments




Region
Timeline
Recent announcement or report




California
2030
Self-sufficiency report: $300 M


Australia37
—
Advancing hydrogen fund: $300 M


British Columbia38
2025
BC hydrogen study recommended investment: $138 M


Canada39,40
2023, 2050
Charging and hydrogen stations: $150 M; low-carbon and zero emission fuels fund (includes H2 and other technologies): $1.5 B


Chile41
2025
National green hydrogen strategy: $50 M


China42
2030
Reported in 2019: $17 B


France43
2030
National hydrogen strategy: $8.5 B


Germany44
2030
National hydrogen strategy: $10 B


Japan45,46
2030
Hydrogen commercialization plan: $19 B






Reported fiscal year 2020 total: $670 M


Netherlands47,48
2030
Hydrogen production annual support: $43 M






Northern Netherlands plan (Public–Private): $11 B


Portugal49
2030
National hydrogen strategy (Public–Private): $7.7 B


Scotland50
2025, 2030
Hydrogen policy statement: $137 M


South Korea51,52
2026
Green new deal (includes H2 and other technologies: $62 B






Planned 2021 investment: $524 M


Spain53
2023
Green hydrogen recovery investment: $1.8 B


United Kingdom54
2030
Net zero hydrogen fund: $330 M




The cost for developing an HRS is much higher than that of a traditional gasoline station or a typical, publicly available Level 2 charging station (or a DC Fast Charging station); important differences do exist between electric charging and HRS stations, in terms of the number of vehicles that can be served in a day and the roles they play in customers’ fueling needs and in supporting vehicle deployment. High station-equipment capital and installation costs remain a challenge, but recent investigations into HRS economics reveal the larger impact of operational costs on lifetime station and network economics. Fig. 6 demonstrates the break-down of estimated operating costs for network development in a hypothetical scenario that achieves the California Fuel Cell Partnership's goal of 1000 stations by 2030. That same report revealed that the network-wide operating costs are between 4 and 7 times as large as the capital and installation costs across a wide range of scenarios with varying assumptions of future cost reductions (both capital and operating), station development pace, and FCEV deployment pace.
 Fig. 6  Relative station operating cost break-down for hydrogen station networks. Data obtained from in-operation stations and extensive interview/surveys of the HFS industry participants by the CARB from 2016–2021.55 
Capital expenses and operational costs for HRSs can also vary widely based on the daily fueling capacity of the station, the bulk storage and other technology options employed, and the location. Total station costs, including industry and government funds, have varied from approximately $1000000 to as much as $4500000 though the latter number is known to be an outlier from an early demonstration station. It has been shown that the cost per kilogram of installed dispensing capacity during California's early HRS program varied with station capacity, as shown by a simplified model or correlation:56 Cost ($/kg) = $28000(Capacity/100)−0.95 with R2 = 0.81. For 100 and 1000 kg day−1 station capacities, the total station costs are about $28000 and $3100 per kg, respectively, according to this model. An HRS that can serve a local fleet of nearly 1000 vehicles may cost approximately $3 million to install. Stations that have been awarded funding more recently in California, which are more commonly designed for liquid hydrogen delivery and storage, may result in lower capital and installation costs.
In the light-duty application, hydrogen as a zero-emission fuel offers the advantages of short refueling time and potentially lower cost for long-range vehicles on larger and heavier vehicle platforms. These advantages are even more evident in many heavy-duty applications, especially for commercial and freight cargo-carrying applications where the available cargo volume and operating (travel) time are of critical importance. Medium- and heavy-duty FCEVs have recently received accelerating research and commercial development attention. Strategies for HRS network development for freight-carrying and commercial vehicle applications will likely vary significantly from the light-duty applications. For many fleets, behind-the-fence fueling at operation centers (such as shipping warehouse and distribution center locations) will likely play a significant role. In addition, these vehicles tend to travel more often along common corridors, reducing the need for an extensive network composed of a large number of stations that provide consistent coverage for all potential customers in dispersed communities throughout a region. HRS network development for these applications could be economically viable with fewer HRSs than required for light-duty FECVs. Most recently, the California Fuel Cell Partnership published a heavy-duty FCEV and HRS vision document, outlining a network of 200 HRSs (located across the Western U.S. but primarily in California) supporting the deployment of 70000 fuel cell-powered trucks by 2035.57
2.3 Hydrogen production and transportation
Hydrogen is a widely used chemical in industry, with vast quantities being produced these days for such purposes as gasoline refining and fertilizer production.58,59 Today, the majority (over 95%) of the world's hydrogen is generated from steam-methane reformation (SMR) of fossil natural gas.60 This is largely driven by the prevalence of SMR in more conventional industries that utilize hydrogen as a process material for other products. Production of petroleum-based fuels and ammonia as fertilizers is by far the largest global consumer of hydrogen and has relied extensively on SMR largely due to the low cost of hydrogen production by this method. More recently, variations on SMR that deliver hydrogen with less environmental impact have been developed and implemented. These variations typically involve the use of methane-rich feedstock derived from renewable or biogenic resources. Examples include gases from wastewater treatment plant digesters, landfill gas, dairy waste, and biomass from a variety of sources.61 These alternative processes utilize much the same technology and equipment as conventional SMR (though sometimes additional processing steps are required to remove contaminants), but produce hydrogen with a lower carbon footprint than fossil fuel-derived SMR (in some cases, the lifecycle carbon emission is even negative). In order to fuel FCEVs, SMR needs to be coupled with pressure swing adsorption (PSA) processes62 for high-purity hydrogen production.
In addition to reformation of fossil, renewable, or bio-derived natural gas and syngas, electrolysis can contribute a sizable portion of hydrogen in today's global economy. In the context of hydrogen production, electrolysis involves splitting liquid water (or steam in some high-temperature technologies under development) using electric current. The technology for conventional electrolysis, accomplished using alkaline electrolyzers,63 is well-established and hydrogen production via this method has been employed for more than a century. Today, alkaline electrolyzers (similar in composition to an alkaline fuel cell but operating in reverse) account for the majority of installations. Alkaline electrolyzers are most often installed in centralized hydrogen production facilities or on-site at large production plants like refineries. Current technology is usually not well-suited for on-site installation at fueling stations.
Newer technology based on PEMECs has recently entered the commercial market and may be more amenable to hydrogen production on-site at fueling stations as well as other applications. PEMECs potentially offer more compact design, higher efficiency, and faster responsiveness to changes in demand. This last feature makes the technology particularly suitable for integration with the electric grid and renewable resources. The fast dynamics of PEMECs allows them to be an effective energy conversion technology enabling the storage of renewable energy as hydrogen. Hydrogen energy storage is one of the few technologies that offers long-term energy storage potential with a large capacity to shift energy across weeks, months, or even seasons. However, PEMECs are currently more expensive than their alkaline-based counterparts due to small-scale manufacture and expensive components.
Sources of hydrogen in the transportation fuel market rely far less on fossil-based SMR, and targets for future development demonstrate ambitions even for fully renewable and/or decarbonized hydrogen for transportation fuel use. California statutes require that at least 33% of hydrogen sold as transportation fuel is sourced from renewable feedstock; GHG emissions are reduced by one-third compared to gasoline; and emissions of criteria pollutants are reduced or limited for stations that receive State co-funding.64 In addition, the Low Carbon Fuel Standard recently added provisions to potentially accelerate in-state hydrogen fueling station development and these provisions increase the minimum renewable requirement to 40% for any participating operator's network of stations.65 Due to these requirements and additional private industry efforts, CARB recently reported that HRS operators in the state had secured enough renewable hydrogen supply to dispense 90% renewable hydrogen in late 2019 and early 2020.66 The Hydrogen Council (a collaborative organization of leaders from companies involved in global hydrogen efforts) has published a target of fully decarbonized hydrogen for transportation as early as 2030, predicated on supportive regulatory environments.67 New hydrogen production facility development in recent years has matched these aspirations, focusing on renewable production pathways.68,69
In today's market, hydrogen fuel is usually transported and stored in either a compressed or cryogenic liquid state. The former is transported in tube trailers typically under 200–500 bar with a 250–1000 kg hydrogen payload. The latter is delivered in trailers equipped with vacuum insulated multi-layer dewars capable of over 4000 kg payloads.70 On-site hydrogen production at fueling stations is advantageous in utilizing local renewable power and reducing hydrogen delivery cost. PEMEC technology is suitable for on-site hydrogen production due to its compactness, capability of coupling with renewable energy, and production of high purity hydrogen and pressurized hydrogen gas. In addition, using the existing electric grid infrastructure to deliver power for hydrogen on-site production, which is as convenient as battery charge stations, could significantly improve hydrogen supply reliability and reduce hydrogen transportation cost.
Part III. Materials, efficiencies, and fundamentals
3.1 PEM Materials
Both PEM fuel cells and electrolysis cells are constructed based on polymer electrolyte membranes (PEM), which serve as a proton conductor and a gas separator. The PEM is sandwiched between the anode and cathode CLs. They are not only impermeable to gases, but also mechanically robust. The PEM material must withstand the harsh operating conditions of PEMFCs or PEMECs and thus needs to be chemically stable also. Perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) is a popular PEM material for both PEMFCs and PEMECs. It has a backbone structure of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, known by the trade name Teflon), which provides the membrane with physical strength and has the sulfonic acid group as an end group of the side chain, as shown in Fig. 7. The sulfonic acid group is highly hydrophilic, allowing the adsorption of water which provides the main pathway for proton transport. The membrane hydration is essential for its ionic conductivity, as the lack of hydration will raise the ohmic loss due to ionic resistance. The length of the side chain is also an important factor in determining the stability and performance of the membrane. Nafion®, first developed by the DuPont Company in the 1960s, is a type of PFSA membrane that has been widely used in PEM fuel cells and electrolysis cells due to its excellent ionic conductivity, mechanical strength, and chemical stability.
 Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of Nafion; (b) schematic of the cluster–network model of hydrated Nafion,71 and (c) molecular structure of Nafion.72 
Two transport processes that occur in the membrane are a major concern in the operation of the two systems, i.e. proton and water transport. The PEM structure can be described using a cluster model − an inverted micellar structure with the ion-exchange sites separated from the fluorocarbon backbone, forming spherical clusters, and connected by short narrow channels, as shown in Fig. 7(b). The cluster sizes depend on local water content. The main driving force for proton transport is the gradient of the electrolyte phase potential via the migration mechanism. The current density can be given by:73,74 (1)where the Stokes–Einstein equation is applied to relate the diffusion coefficient to ion mobility; σm denotes the ionic conductivity, F is Faraday's constant, ci is the ion concentration, Di is the diffusivity, and Φ(m) is the phase potential. Water in the Nafion membrane is essential for proton transport. Two mechanisms have been proposed for proton transport, including proton “hopping” (Grotthus) and “vehicular” mechanisms.10 In the former, protons hop from one hydrolyzed ionic site, i.e. SO3−H3O+, to another. This takes place when sufficient water is present so that the side chains of sulfonic groups are connected, forming the percolation mechanism which permits protons to move directly from one site to another. In the latter, by forming hydronium ions (H3O+) protons can transport from high to low proton concentration regions. This mechanism largely depends on the diffusivity of water in membranes. A popular ionic conductivity correlation as a function of the water content λ and temperature was proposed by Springer et al.75 using Nafion® 117 measurement data. At subfreezing temperatures, Nafion® membranes remain proton-conductive, permitting PEMFC operation under freezing conditions. The water uptake λ, usually defined as the number of moles of water per mole of acid sites in the membrane (namely SO3H−), is determined by the water activity of the surrounding at equilibrium, as shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Equilibrium water uptake λ for Nafion® membranes (Zawodzinski 199176 and Hinatsu 199477 for N117; Peron 2010 for NR21178). 
Water is transported in a PEM mainly by three mechanisms, including the concentration-gradient driven diffusion, the electro-osmotic drag (EOD), and hydraulic permeation. In PEMFCs, water back-diffusion is important to hydrate the anode side of the MEA, which loses water to the cathode by the EOD. Water is transported with the proton flux via EOD from the anode to cathode CLs with the coefficient (nEOD) being a function of water content, such as a linear or stepwise correlation. The EOD can lead to significant dryness in the anode for thick membranes or due to some transient events.79 Hydraulic permeation is driven by the liquid–water pressure differential across the membrane, which is determined by the gas and the capillary pressures in the local CL pores. The hydraulic permeability Km relates the hydraulic water flux to the liquid water pressure (Pl) by , where Mw denotes the water molecular weight and vl the kinematic viscosity. In PEMECs, the EOD and hydraulic permeation are the two main mechanisms for water transport in PEMs. Table 4 summarizes several membrane properties and correlations.
Table 4 Physical properties and correlations of Nafion membranes




Property
Values or correlations




Water content [# of H2O/SO3H− groups]

 where a is the water activity (Nafion 117)75


Density [kg m−3]


80



Ionic conductivity [S m−1]


75







81,82






σ

m
 = 9.2 (λ = 11.5) at 20 °C with the Activation energy from Arrhenius plot Ea = 1.87 kcal mol−183




For −30 to 0 °C:





84


Water diffusivity [m2 s−1] or [cm2 s−1]

85,86






75






81,87





85





88


Electro-osmotic drag coefficient

89





75





81,82





n

d
 = 0.0134 × T + 0.0390





88


Hydraulic permeability, Km [cm2]
About 4 × 10−16 at 23 °C (Nafion 115, 1110 and 212)91


Gas diffusivity [m2 s−1]

;92,93





 for dry Nafion (117) at 1 atm upstream pressure and 35 °C;





 for dry Nafion (NRE 211) at 2 atm and 35 °C;94





 for dry Nafion (1035) at 2 atm and 35 °C;95





 for wet Nafion 117 at 25 °C;96





 for wet Nafion 117 at 25 °C;97





 for wet Nafion 117 at 20 °C;98





D

O2

m
 = 0.24 × 10−10 for wet Nafion 117 at 30 °C.99


Thermal conductivity [W m−1 K−1]

k = (0.177 ± 0.008) + (3.7 ± 0.6)10−3λ for Nafion 112, 115, 117 and 1110100




Proton and water transport in PEMs play an important role in the operation of the two systems. The former determines the ohmic voltage loss and the associated Joules heating in the PEM. The Joules heating will increase the local temperature, and if not properly managed, will cause the formation of hot spots on sites of high ionic resistance or current density. In PEMFCs, part of the membrane on the anode side may be subject to dry operation due to the EOD, causing considerable water loss from the anode to the cathode. This is particularly severe for thick membranes which resist water back-diffusion. In transient events such as sudden ramp up in current density, the anode dryness can occur in a brief period: a fraction of a second (the time constant , where δm denotes the PEM thickness and water diffusivity79), due to the time delay for anode rehydration by water back-diffusion to compensate for the EOD water loss.
In PEMECs, the ohmic loss usually contributes a major portion of the voltage loss due to the use of much thicker membranes (e.g. Nafion 115 or 117 in PEMECs) in order to hold the large pressure differences between the anode (H2) and cathode (O2) sides. Operation pressure can reach 50 bars or higher during the production of pressurized hydrogen gas. PEM dryness is not a concern due to the use of liquid water in the anode channel reactant flow.
3.2 PEMFCs

Fig. 1 shows the major components of a PEMFC that is composed of the catalyst layers (CL) and PEM (together, CLs and PEM are called the membrane electrode assembly or MEA), gas diffusion layers or GDLs (which are coated with micro-porous layers or MPLs on their CL-side surfaces), and bipolar plates or BPs (which are embedded with reactant flow fields and possible cooling channels). Table 2 lists the common materials and dimensions for each component. A single PEMFC is typically made relatively thin, around 1–2 mm or less, and is capable of producing power around 1 W cm−2. Thus, its power density can potentially reach 10 kW L−1. In the Toyota Mirai 2021, the power density, excluding the endplates, reaches 4.4 kW L−1. During operation, hydrogen and air are fed into the anode and cathode gas flow channels and then diffuse towards the CLs for the electrochemical reactions via the GDL/MPL. Protons and electrons are generated in the anode CL through the HOR and conducted, via PEM and out-circuit, to the cathode for water production by the ORR. Simultaneously, waste heat is generated by multiple mechanisms, including the irreversible heating and entropy heating of the reactions and Joule heating, and removed by the BP surface or cooling channels.
CLs are the thin components (which have thicknesses usually ranging from 0.1 to about 10 μm) in which the HOR or ORR takes place. A CL consists of several phases that are key to the electrochemical reactions: (1) a carbon support with electrocatalyst nanoparticles dispersed on the surface, (2) an ionomer binder, and (3) a porous network. The electrocatalyst plays a critical role in reducing the reaction activation barrier. Platinum or its alloys are popular catalysts for both the ORR and HOR, which contributes to a significant portion of fuel cell cost. The DOE target for the costly catalysts is 0.125 mg cm−2 for light-duty FCEVs; and the state-of-the-art CLs use about 0.35–0.4 mg cm−2, e.g. 0.365 mg cm−2 as in the Toyota Mirai 2020.
GDLs play multiple roles: (1) electric connection between the BP and CL, (2) pathways for reactant transport and heat/water removal, (3) mechanical support for the MEA, and (4) protection of the CL from erosion by gas flows or other factors. Physical processes in GDLs include diffusive transport, bypass flow induced by in-plane pressure differential between neighboring channels, through-plane flow induced by mass source/sink in CLs, heat transfer, two-phase flow, and electron conductance. The GDL thickness usually ranges from 100 to 300 μm. A popular GDL material is PTFE-treated carbon paper with a mean pore size of around 10–50 μm. MPLs, coated on the GDL surface at the CL side, are composed of carbon black powder and binder such as PTFE with pore size ranging from 0.1 to 1 μm; and they provide good physical contact between the GDL and CL and can improve water management and cell performance.
Flow fields are usually characterized by a set of gas flow channels (GFCs) with a cross-sectional dimension of 0.3–1 mm, which distribute gaseous reactants and remove byproduct water out of PEMFCs. They are usually fabricated on one side of a bipolar plate (BP) and placed over a GDL. Several flow fields are widely studied, including parallel, serpentine, pin-type, and their modifications, such as a zigzag or wavy flow field and varying cross-section GFCs, which are adopted in the Toyota Mirai 2021 for the anode and cathode sides, respectively. In addition, porous media flow fields have received growing research attention recently, and utilize their porous structure for reactant supply and water removal. Their solid matrix provides pathways for heat and electron transport and mechanical support to GDLs. Carbon/metal foams and 3D metal meshes are popular porous materials and the latter is adopted in the cathode side of the Toyota Mirai 2020. This type of flow fields has been reported to improve mass transport under a high current density; however, these fields have concerns of high pressure drop (hence pumping power) for reactant flows and difficulty in liquid water removal.
Bipolar plates (BPs) provide mechanical support for PEMFCs and conductive pathways, respectively, for heat and electron conduction. Popular BP materials include non-porous graphite, carbon composites, aluminum, stainless steel, and titanium. Graphite is a popular BP material with advantages of corrosion resistance and relatively high electrical conductivity. Its drawbacks include high gas permeability and brittle structure, making it difficult for mass production and long-term use. Carbon composites consist of polymer binder (e.g. epoxy resin and polypropylene) and carbon fillers (e.g. graphite powder and carbon black): the former provides mechanical strength and gas impermeability and the latter forms the pathways for electron and heat conduction. Their fractions in the composite determine the final BP properties and thus can be optimized to improve overall conductivities and mechanical strength. Conductive polymers,101,102 such as poly(acetylene)s and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), are potential binders, which provide additional pathways for electric conduction. Metallic BPs are advantageous in multiple aspects, such as easy machining, high electric and thermal conductivities, low gas permeability, and mechanical robustness. Their main drawback is corrosion in the acidic environment of PEMFCs; thus, a protective film needs to be coated. In the Toyota Mirai 2020, carbon coating was adopted to protect the titanium BP in PEMFCs.
3.3 PEMECs
A typical PEMEC is composed of a PEM, CLs, a porous transport layer (PTL), BPs, and flow fields, as shown in Fig. 1. During operation, liquid water is injected into the anode flow fields and then transported, via the PTL, towards the anode CL for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In the OER, water is oxidized to O2 bubbles, releasing protons and electrons that are conducted, via the PEM and out-circuit, respectively, to the cathode CL for hydrogen production by the HER.
CLs are porous layers with thicknesses usually around 1–10 μm, in which the electrochemical reactions take place. CL materials are selected to optimize the electrochemical reaction kinetics. The HER in the cathode is a fast process; therefore, low Pt-loading is sufficient to catalyze the HER. Despite some efforts made for alternative, platinum-group metal (PGM)-free HER catalysts, the majority of the R&D activities are focused on the anode catalyst for the sluggish OER. Iridium (Ir) and its oxide (IrOx) are currently popular OER catalysts with an Ir loading of around 0.2–2 mg cm−2. Other catalysts, such as Ir alloys and Ru-based or PGM-free materials (e.g. SrRuxO3−x and Fe-MOFs), have been studied for CL cost reduction. The CL porosity is usually around 0.3–0.5 to enable adequate fluid conductance. Some CLs are thin, such as 3M's nano-structure thin film (NSTF) CLs which are about 500 nm thick.16
PTLs are porous layers that bridge the CLs and BPs, similar to GDLs in PEMFCs. PTLs serve multiple functions, including mechanical support for the MEAs, pathways for electric conduction, liquid water supply, and removal of product hydrogen/oxygen and waste heat. PTLs are typically thin layers with porosity usually around 0.3–0.6. The solid matrix provides the pathways for electron and heat conduction whereas the porous network facilitates two-phase flows. Titanium (Ti) is the most widely used PTL material due to its high conductivity, corrosion resistance, and mechanical robustness. They are usually 100–500 μm thick. Thinner PTLs, e.g. ∼10 μm thick, have been explored and they showed promising performance under low current.103 Ti sinter, mesh, and perforated sheets have also been studied as PTL substrates. Metallic coatings (e.g. Pt, Au, or TiN) are usually applied to protect the anode PTLs. Carbon-fiber porous layers (e.g. carbon cloth) are frequently used as cathode PTLs/GDLs to reduce the material cost.
BPs provide the mechanical support and pathways for the transport of heat and electrons in PEMECs as in PEMFCs. BPs need to be impermeable to liquid and gas, which is more important in PEMECs than PEMFCs, since commercial PEMECs usually operate under much higher pressure, e.g. 10–50 bar versus 1–2 bar in PEMFCs. Popular anode BP materials are titanium, stainless steel, and carbon composites. For metallic BPs, corrosion is a major concern: formation of an oxide layer in the anode increases the interfacial resistances for heat and electric current. This can be mitigated by adding a protective coating. Carbon composites are a potentially cost-effective solution, suitable for mass production by molding or other methods.
Flow fields are usually embedded in the BPs to supply liquid water and remove gaseous products. Because liquid water is used as the reactant, reactant starvation is of less concern in PEMECs than in PEMFCs. Due to pure oxygen production and pressurized operation, the gas volumetric flow rates are usually less than those in PEMFCs. Flow fields, such as parallel, serpentine, and mesh, are common patterns in PEMECs. Flow fields can be eliminated in a PEMEC structure by using the PTL's pore network for water supply and gas removal104 for compactness and cost reduction. However, this strategy increases the pressure drop across the cell and exacerbates the difficulty of bubble removal under high current.
3.4 Efficiencies
The anode and cathode electrochemical reactions of PEMFCs and PEMECs are shown in Fig. 1. The overall electrochemical reaction, including the electrical energy We and heat Q, is given as below: (2)where We = 237.2 kJ and Q = 48.6 kJ per mole of H2 under the thermodynamic reversible potential (Erev) and standard conditions using pure oxygen. For PEMECs with a voltage > Erev, more electrical energy needs to be supplied. For PEMFCs with an output voltage < Erev, less electrical energy and more waste heat will be generated.
In the overall reaction of eqn (2), the Gibbs free energy (G), corresponding to the maximum useful energy that is available, is related to the entropy (S) and enthalpy (H) by: ΔH + ΔG + TΔS(3)The Gibbs free energy determines the thermodynamic reversible potential Erev: ΔG = nFErev(4)where n is the number of moles of electrons transferred per mole of hydrogen and F is Faraday's constant (96485 C mol−1). Under standard conditions, ΔG is about 237.2 kJ per mole, and thus Erev is approximately 1.23 V. In addition, the thermal–neutral voltage Etn can be defined based on enthalpy as below: ΔH = nFEtn(5)which considers both Gibbs free energy and entropy heat in eqn (2). Under standard conditions, ΔH is about 285.8 kJ per mole, leading to an Etn of 1.48 V.
The correlations between these voltages and different forms of energy are shown in Fig. 9. The thermal–neutral voltage Etn barely changes with temperature in the common temperature range of 20–90 °C, whereas the reversible voltage Erev decreases inversely with temperature. Consequently, increasing temperature reduces the electrical energy required by PEMECs and the potential of electrical power output in PEMFCs.
 Fig. 9  Correlations between different forms of voltage or energy and temperature based on data.74,105,106 The subfreezing operation (−40 to 0 °C) is for PEMFCs, e.g. cold start. PEMECs are free of subfreezing operation due to the use of a liquid water reactant. The dashed lines represent the cases for water in the liquid state. 
In order to measure energy conversion, a series of efficiencies can be defined, including the voltage efficiency, current efficiency, and electrical efficiency.
In PEMECs, hydrogen is produced via electrochemical conversion of electricity to chemical energy. The chemical energy of hydrogen is usually evaluated by the heat release in combustion based on the enthalpy change, e.g. the lower heating value (LHV) or higher heating value (HHV), which are about 242 kJ mol−1 and 286 kJ mol−1, respectively. The voltage efficiency can be defined based on the thermal–neutral voltage: ηvoltage,PEMEC = Etn/Vcell(6)where Vcell refers to the cell operating voltage.
For PEMFCs, the voltage efficiency is usually defined based on the reversible voltage Erev − the maximum achievable voltage in thermodynamics, i.e. ηvoltage,PEMEC = Vcell/Erev(7)
Note that this voltage efficiency excludes the reversible entropy heat. In order to make a reasonable comparison with internal combustion engines (ICEs), voltage efficiency can be modified considering Etn, i.e. ηvoltage,PEMEC = Vcell/Etn(8)which is the inverse of eqn (6) for PEMECs. For a FCEV with >50% efficiency, Vcell needs to be over half of Etn, i.e. about 0.7 V.6
Because of the dependence of Vcell on the electric current density, the voltage efficiencies change with operating current density.
For PEMECs, the current efficiency (ηcurrent), also called Faraday's efficiency, is defined as the ratio between the amount of actually produced H2 and the theoretical value. In operation, most electric current is utilized to split water to produce H2 and O2 and generally no other side reactions occur. Therefore, the current efficiency is high (>95%) and the loss of current efficiency is primarily due to H2 leakage (such as cross-over) particularly under operation at high accumulated H2 pressure. Note that H2 cross-over will reduce the cell voltage, similar to that in PEMFCs. In PEMFCs, the voltage loss due to H2 or current cross-over is already included in the voltage efficiency. The current efficiency can be defined following the fuel utilization: in operation, excess hydrogen is fed to avoid fuel starvation.74 The anode stoichiometric ratio (ξ) is usually around 1.2–1.5 per pass, i.e. 20–50% more hydrogen is fed into PEMFCs. The fuel utilization per pass can then be calculated by: (9)To recycle unused hydrogen, a unit of anode hydrogen recirculation is equipped with the anode outlet, which can increase the overall ηfuel to nearly 100%. In practice, a very small amount of hydrogen is sacrificed by releasing it to the environment without recycling in some designs (e.g. the purge method) to avoid nitrogen accumulation.107
The overall electrical efficiency is the product of the voltage efficiency and current efficiency. For PEMECs, a typical electrical efficiency ranges from 85% to 60% in the current density range of 2–5 A cm−2. For PEMFCs, the overall efficiency can reach as high as 65%.
3.5 Multiphysics processes and fundamentals
In both PEMFCs and PEMECs, multi-physics phenomena occur in operation; specifically, they involve heat transfer, species and charge transport, multi-phase flows, and electrochemical reactions, as listed in Table 5 for each component. These processes determine overall cell performance and are influenced by the cell design, materials, and operating conditions. Though most are fundamentally similar between the two systems, such as the three performance loss mechanisms, electrochemical kinetics, and two-phase flow, some differences do exist. For example, gas diffusion plays an important role in the transport loss of PEMFCs, whereas it is generally unimportant in PEMECs. Electrode “flooding” is a major concern in PEMFCs whereas the OER in the PEMEC anode needs adequate liquid water (or the anode needs to be “flooded”). In what follows, we describe in detail the three performance loss mechanisms and two main processes that are of concern to both systems, including the electrochemical kinetics and two-phase transport.
Table 5 Major physical and electrochemical processes in PEMFCs and PEMECs




Component
Physical and electrochemical processes


PEMFC
PEMEC




Membrane
Water transport (diffusion, EOD, & hydraulic permeation);
Water transport (usually hydraulic permeation and EOD);


Gas (H2, O2, N2) cross-over;
Hydrogen cross-over;


Heat production (Joule heat);
Heat production (Joule heat);


Heat transport (conduction).
Heat transport (conduction).


Catalyst layer (CL)
HOR in anode; ORR in cathode;
HER in cathode; OER in anode;


H+ transport in ionomer network;
H+ transport;


e− transport in carbon network;
Liquid water flow in pore network;


Water transport in the pore and ionomer networks;
e− transport in the catalyst network;


Oxygen diffusion in the pore network and across the ionomer thin film;
O2 gas flow in the pore network;


Heat production (reversible entropy heat, irreversible heat due to overpotential, Joule heat, and latent heat during phase change);
Heat production (reversible heat due to entropy change, irreversible heat due to overpotential, Joule heat, and latent heat during phase change);


Heat transport (mainly conduction).
Heat transport (mainly conduction).


Gas diffusion layer (GDL) or porous transport layer (PTL)
Oxygen and water vapor transport (usually diffusion dominates) in the cathode;
Oxygen–water vapor gas flow in the anode;


Hydrogen and water vapor transport (usually diffusion dominates) in the anode;
Hydrogen–water vapor gas transport in the cathode;


Liquid water transport;
Liquid water flow;


Heat transport (mainly conduction) including heat pipe effect;
Heat transport (mainly conduction);


Electron conduction.
Electron conduction.


Bipolar plate
Heat transport (conduction); Electron conduction


Flow field
Liquid water droplet dynamics on the GDL surface;
Gas bubble dynamics on the anode PTL surface;


Two-phase flow in channels (usually mist or film flow) and at heterogeneity (e.g. expansion to manifold).
Two-phase flow in channels (usually bubble flow).





Performance loss mechanisms. 
The main sources of performance loss are essentially the same for the two systems, including the following: (1) activation loss, (2) ohmic loss, and (3) mass transport loss. The activation loss is primarily caused by the sluggish kinetics of the anode OER for PEMECs or the cathode ORR for PEMFCs. The activation loss in the other electrode, as in the HER or HOR, is usually negligible when no impurities such as carbon monoxide (CO) are present. The activation loss mainly depends on the exchange current density i0 and the specific surface area of the electrocatalyst. For the former, PGM materials (e.g. Pt) have a large i0 and thus are good catalyst candidates. For the latter, the use of nanoparticles and rough CL structures can increase the specific area by 100–1000 folds.11
The ohmic loss is caused by the protonic and electric currents. The former usually dominates due to the much larger ionic resistance of PEM compared to the electric resistance in the electron pathways of CLs, GDL, and BPs. Commercial PEMECs usually adopt thick membranes like Nafion 115 and 117 to hold a high H2 pressure at the anode and to reduce H2 cross-over from the anode to the cathode. Therefore, the ohmic loss contributes a large portion to the overall loss in PEMECs under a high current density. For example, at 4 A cm−2, the ohmic loss could reach 400 mV using Nafion 117. For PEMFCs, thin membranes (about 10–20 μm) are popular for lowering the transport resistances of protons and water. The ohmic loss is a concern when the PEM or anode CL is dry.
The mass transport loss in PEMFCs primarily arises at the cathode side, and becomes important under relatively high current operation (e.g. >1 A cm−2) when oxygen supply limits the cell performance. The oxygen diffusivity and the liquid fraction in the cathode are among the main factors controlling the transport loss. In PEMECs, the transport loss is usually small due to the use of a liquid water reactant and is independent of gas diffusion, as shown in Fig. 10. Only under very high current (e.g. over 5 A cm−2), oxygen is produced at a high rate, which may block liquid water access to the catalyst and increase the transport loss.
 Fig. 10  Sources of performance loss in PEMECs at 80 °C.108 


Electrochemical kinetics. 
The detailed electrochemical reaction mechanisms are complex, involving multiple steps. In general, the kinetics of the electrochemical reactions (e.g. the ORR & OER, and HOR & HER) can be described using the Butler–Volmer (B–V) equation: (10)where αa and αc are the anodic and cathodic charge transfer coefficients, respectively, and a denotes the specific area that measures the surface-to-volume ratio of the active catalyst. The surface overpotential is given by: (11)where ai denotes the activity of species i. For liquid water, aH2O = 1. Due to the sluggish ORR or OER, eqn (10) can be approximated using the Tafel equation, while for the HER or HOR, linear approximation can be adopted due to their rapid kinetics.73
The phase potentials Φ(s) and Φ(m) are the driving forces for electron and proton transport, respectively, following the law of conservation of charge: 0 = ∇·(σeffs∇Φ(s)) − j and 0 = ∇·(σeffm∇Φ(m)) + j(12)where σeffs and σeffm denote the conductivity for electrons and protons, respectively. In CLs, the ion pathways, such as the ionomer and water, enable proton conductance; and the effective ionic conductivity follows the Bruggeman correlation. In PEMFCs, liquid water or ice on the catalyst surface will reduce the specific area a for the ORR reaction; an empirical power correlation is usually adopted to describe the effect of liquid water or ice coverage,109,110 a = a0(1 − s)τs(13)where τs is determined by the coverage morphology. Similarly, in PEMECs, oxygen bubble coverage at the catalyst surface hinders the anode OER reaction; the specific area a can be modified following the power correlation; for example, a = a0sτs.111 The power correlation was also applied to model the coverage of oxide deposits in the cathode of lithium-air batteries.112
The electrochemical reaction rate varies spatially, depending on local operating conditions and cell design. Fig. 11 presents the current density and temperature distributions in a PEMEC and PEMFC, showing significant variations from the inlet to the outlet. For the PEMECs, despite the low current density conditions, a large variation occurs when the stoichiometric ratio approaches 1. For stoichiometric ratios over 5, the current density is almost uniform. In PEMFCs, the relative humidity (RH) can greatly impact the current distribution by affecting local PEM hydration and hence the ionic resistance.
 Fig. 11  (a) Current density and (b) temperature distributions at 0.5 A cm−2 in a PEMEC;113 and (c) local current density from inlet to outlet at 353.15 K and 1.0 A cm−2 and (d) at two temperatures in a PEMFC.87,114 


Multiphase flow. 
One of the most complex phenomena in PEMFCs or PEMECs is multi-phase transport, originating from the ORR's water production in PEMFCs or OER's oxygen production in PEMECs. Fig. 12 shows the multiphase flows in both systems as observed using optical devices and neutron radiography. In PEMFCs, liquid water emerges under saturated conditions, hampering oxygen supply and increasing the transport loss. In the cathode, oxygen and liquid water are transported in opposite directions with the former from the GFC to the CL and latter from the CL to the GFC. In PEMECs, oxygen bubbles are produced, hindering liquid water supply; under severe conditions, they can block the pore pathways for liquid water, resulting in reactant starvation. In the anode, oxygen and liquid water flow in opposite directions with the former from the CL to the flow field and the latter from the flow field to the CL. At the two-phase interface, water evaporation or condensation induces mass exchange. The mass conservation of each phase gives: (14)where g and l are the superficial velocities of gas and liquid, respectively, and Sfgm denotes the phase change rate. Srm is the mass source due to the electrochemical reaction and transport (e.g. the water electro-osmotic drag), which is non-zero in CLs.
 Fig. 12  (a) A two-phase flow in the GFCs of a PEMFC;115 (b) water thickness contours in a PEMFC detected by neutron radiography under 50% and 100% inlet RH and 1.2 A cm−2;116 (c) bubble production in a PEMEC at 2 A cm−2;117 (d) gas distribution in the anode Ti fiber PTL during PEMEC power up, voltage jump from 0 to 1.5 V;118 (e) liquid water distribution in a PEMEC under 2.0 and 2.5 A cm−2.119 
Porous components. 
In the porous components (e.g. PTLs, GDLs, MPLs, and CLs), two-phase flows are driven by the gradients of capillary and body forces. The bond number (Bo), defined as the ratio of the body force to the surface tension, describes the relative impact of the two forces: (15)where Δρ and τ denote the density difference between the two phases and surface tension, respectively. The pore size Lp is about 10–100 μm in PTLs or GDLs, 0.1–1 μm in MPLs, and 1–100 nm in CLs, leading to Bo being smaller than 0.001. Thus, the gravitational force can be neglected. Assuming Darcy's law is applicable to individual phases, the flow equations can be simplified as: (16)where the relative permeabilities, krg and krl, are defined as the ratio of the intrinsic permeability of individual phases to the total permeability of a porous medium. The liquid pressure Pl is determined using the gas and capillary pressures: (17)The above expression for capillary pressure, Pc, is known as the Leverett function,21 where J(s) for a hydrophilic or hydrophobic medium (e.g. PTL or GDL/MPL) is given as a function of the liquid saturation s: (18)Note that the Leverett J-function was originally developed for flows in soils. Other porous structures, such as sintered, fibrous, and perforated media, or with non-uniform wettability may significantly deviate from the Leverett correlation.
In PEMFCs, the cathode gas flow contains nitrogen, oxygen, and water vapor species. Thus, oxygen transport in the multi-component system needs to be optimized to ensure adequate reactant supply to CLs; and this is controlled by the material properties (e.g. porosity and tortuosity) and operation conditions (e.g. the liquid saturation, stoichiometry, and current density). The flow rate is determined by the operating conditions, such as the stoichiometric ratio, operating pressure/temperature, and current density. In PEMECs, the anode gas flow consists of oxygen and water vapor. Thus, the gas flow rate can be determined by the oxygen production rate and the vapor content. The water vapor can account for a considerable volume fraction under low pressure (e.g. 47% at 1 atm and 80 °C). Though the transport loss is usually not a concern in PEMECs, a large transport resistance may occur locally, leading to gas accumulation and liquid water starvation.
GDL/PTL-channel interface. 
In the PEMFC cathode, through the GDL-channel interface, oxygen transports towards the CL for the ORR while the water product enters the GFC to be removed out of the cell. Optical visualization shows that water droplets may emerge and attach on the GDL surface, eventually being taken away by the gas flow in the GFC or liquid film flow on the channel wall, as shown in Fig. 13(a) and (b). The droplet behaviors include (1) emerging and growth; (2) removal via detachment or evaporation; and (3) droplet merging.125,126 The presence of droplets will increase the interfacial resistance for oxygen transport and block the channel flow, as shown in Fig. 13(a) for both the entrance length and fully developed stage. Smaller droplets are more difficult to remove due to the lower air velocity near the wall, particularly in the fully developed stage. In addition to the increased interfacial resistance for oxygen transport, droplets will increase the pressure drop in the GFC, raising a concern of flow maldistribution among parallel channels. Thus, droplet detachment needs to be investigated, which is influenced by the operating conditions (e.g. the gas flow rate) and the physical (e.g. surface roughness) and chemical (e.g. wettability) material characteristics of the GDL surface. The gravitational force is usually small compared to the surface tension, as indicated by the Eötvos number (Eö): (19)where d denotes the droplet diameter, usually about 100s μm or less, leading to an Eö less than 0.1 under PEMFC conditions. By neglecting the gravitational force, droplet detachment is primarily governed by the balance of the drag force from the gas flow (e.g. pressure and viscosity) and wall adhesion force. The former is affected by the droplet shape, and it also causes shape deformation, which can be derived to yield: (20)where Wer denotes the Weber number , R is the local curvature of the droplet surface, R0 is the droplet radius without deformation, and ζ is the area fraction of the gas flow due to droplet blockage. In typical operation, dR/R is small <10% for a gas flow velocity u < 5 m s−1. The drag coefficient (CD) can be introduced (by following general fluid mechanics) as a function of the Reynolds number (Re) (e.g., where , u is the average gas velocity, and H is the channel depth). As to wall adhesion, it keeps the droplet stationary on a GDL surface with its maximum tangential component determined by the static contact angle, contact-angle hysteresis, and surface tension. The detachment velocity can be defined as that when the two forces are equal, which is plotted in Fig. 13(c) as a function of the droplet size.
 Fig. 13  (a) Droplet blockage and interaction with air flow on the GDL in two regions of channel flow, (b) droplet dynamics on the GDL surface,120 and (c) the detachment velocity as a function of droplet size in PEMFCs;121,122 (d) schematic of the oxygen bubble on the anode PTL surface,123 (e) radiographs of an oxygen bubble on the PTL surface for a time sequence of 0–800 ms (the scale bar is 200 μm.); and (f) bubble diameter vs. time at three current densities.124 
In PEMECs, through the anode PTL–channel interface, liquid water in the channel transports towards the anode CL for the OER and the oxygen bubbles produced by the OER enter the GFC to be removed out of the cell. Optical and X-ray visualizations revealed that oxygen emerges as bubbles on the PTL surface and is taken away by the channel liquid flow,127 as shown in Fig. 13(d and e). Similar to the liquid droplets at the GDL surface in PEMFCs, the presence of bubbles at the PTL surface increases the interfacial transport resistance for liquid water from the channel to the CL and bubble removal is governed by the force balance (e.g. the water drag force and PTL surface adhesion force).123 In addition, it has been proposed to model the interfacial transport resistance by following general convective mass transport108 through a mass transfer coefficient hmass, which is a function of Re, current density, and PTL surface properties.
Flow channels in a flow field. 
During PEMFC operation, a two-phase flow emerges in flow fields under saturated conditions. Liquid water may accumulate in the flow field, increasing the pressure drop and causing channel blockage and flow maldistribution. Flow field heterogeneities, such as the channel-to-manifold transition, may cause two-phase flow instability. Various flow patterns were experimentally observed, including annulus, wavy annulus, wavy, and slug flows. The flow pattern greatly influences the pressure drop,128–131 and thus flow maldistribution will be induced when parallel GFCs are subject to different patterns. Volume of fluids (VOF) and lattice Boltzmann methods (LBM) have been widely applied to study two-phase flow in PEMFCs, including the two-phase interface. Two-fluid and mixed multiphase (M2) models have also been developed, which are usually more computationally effective and suitable for integration with other components for full-cell investigation.132 In addition, porous media flow fields were adopted in the Toyota Mirai 2020, in which the two-phase flow can be studied by following the theory established for porous media.132,133 To increase PEMFC power density, thin flow fields (e.g. 0.3 mm or less deep) are desirable, which enable thin BPs and hence reduce the PEMFC volume. The two-phase flow control can be more important in thin flow fields, such as liquid blockage in channels128 and flow instability at heterogeneity.115
During PEMEC operation, a two-phase flow is always encountered in flow fields due to oxygen production in the anode. Gas removal in the channel is driven by the liquid water reactant flow, which is usually much easier than liquid removal by the gas flow in PEMFCs. The bubble-water flow is a popular flow pattern and slug flow may occur under high current density or low stoichiometry.124,127 In general, the impact of the two-phase flow in the flow fields on PEMEC performance is expected to be less than that on PEMFCs. In addition, it was proposed to remove flow fields by utilizing the PTL's pore network for directly feeding liquid water.104 This design, however, may cause concerns of inadequate oxygen removal under high current density and CL erosion by the two-phase flow. Lastly, oxygen bubbles may be trapped in the anode PTL's porous network, similar to liquid droplets in the porous media flow field of PEMFCs,134 which can cause local water starvation in the anode CL.

Part IV. Challenges and opportunities
Despite the major progress achieved in the past few decades, barriers to worldwide deployment of both PEMFCs and PEMECs remain, especially in terms of their costs. To overcome these challenges, tremendous R&D efforts have been made, including alternative PEM materials, PGM-catalyst loading reduction, development of non-PGM catalyst materials, and operation strategies of high current density. In addition, the lack of hydrogen infrastructure greatly limits the customer adoption of PEMFCs. Advancement of the PEMEC technology, which is suitable for onsite hydrogen production and integration with renewable resources, can facilitate the hydrogen infrastructure development. In this section, challenges and opportunities pertinent to the advancement of PEMFCs and PEMECs, and the development of hydrogen infrastructure are discussed.
4.1 PEM fuel cells

Catalyst layers. 
Catalyst layers (CLs) account for a major portion of cost (more than 40% at a production rate of 500000 units per year) due to the use of PGM-based electrocatalysts.1,135 The state-of-the-art loading is around 0.35 mg Pt cm−2 (e.g. the Toyota Mirai 2020 has about 0.365 mg Pt cm−2total).12,136 The DOE ultimate targets are 0.125 and 0.3 mg cm−2, respectively, for light- and heavy-duty FCEVs.6 Several major efforts have been made to reduce the CL cost, including the reduction of Pt loading, the use of PGM-free catalysts, and the improvement of catalyst activity.
To reduce Pt loading, efforts have been made to design highly active ORR catalysts, including the development of Pt alloying and high surface carbon materials. Fig. 14 shows various strategies for catalyst development. Two types of catalyst activity have been popularly employed: one is mass activity that is pertaining to the number of active sites per unit and the other is intrinsic activity which measures the activity per active site. Mass activity can be enhanced by catalyst nano-structuring, supporting and reshaping. Increasing mass activity can help lower the catalyst loading. Intrinsic activity can be improved by alloying, core–shell structure, and element confinement. Increasing intrinsic activity can help lower the overpotential thus increasing electrical efficiency. Pt alloying catalysts, such as Pt–Ni138–140 and Pt–Co,13 have showed some promise in boosting the catalytic activity by 10–100 fold compared to the commercial Pt catalyst in rotating disk electrodes (RDEs). A mass activity of 6.98 A mgPt−1, a 73-fold enhancement, was reported using Mo-Pt3Ni/C138 in comparison with the commercial Pt/C catalyst (0.096 A mgPt−1). In addition, the shape of catalyst nanoparticles (e.g., octahedral or spherical) can also affect the intrinsic activity. In the single crystal study performed by Stamenkovic et al.,141 Pt3Ni(111) showed higher intrinsic activity than (100) and (110); the (111) surface was maximized in an octahedron of the fcc crystal phase. However, few of these RDE results regarding activity enhancement have been replicated in PEMFC testing.142 Therefore, additional work is needed to identify proper CL parameters in the MEA design and implement them into PEMFCs to realize the potential of these promising catalysts.
 Fig. 14  Strategies for catalyst development.137 
Another area that needs significant improvement is long-term durability. For example, cobalt (Co) in the Pt–Co/C catalyst can be leached out during PEMFC operation, reducing the catalytic activity. Although dealloying methods can partially mitigate the leaching issue,143 additional effective steps need to be made to further improve catalyst durability. For catalyst supports, high surface carbon (HSC) is a viable support for Pt-based catalysts in order to achieve desirable catalytic activities.144–146 However, it has been reported that the activity of HSC-supported Pt catalysts decreases rapidly in accelerated stress testing (AST) and PEMFC operation. By contrast, low surface carbon (LSC)-supported catalysts, though having low initial catalytic activity, are more stable due to reduced carbon corrosion and Pt dissolution/aggregation. Thus, a trade-off between HSC and LSC supports for Pt-based catalysts may be called for. In addition, it has been reported that impregnation with high-oxygen-solubility species such as ionic liquids (e.g. [MTBD][beti]) significantly enhances the catalyst activity.147–149
As for PGM-free catalysts, significant progress has been made in the past decade, with most materials being based on Fe, Ni, Co, or Mn and having a metal–organic framework (MOF) structure.152–154 In the MOF structure, a central metal atom is coordinated to organic ligands acting as cross-linkers to other metal centers, which leads to a 3-D network with a large surface area and high accessibility to catalytic sites. State-of-the-art performance shows an activity close to that of a Pt/C catalyst with a half-wave potential of larger than 0.90 V in RDE testing.155 PEMFCs with these catalysts have achieved 100 mA cm−2 (0.8 V) and 400 mA cm−2 (0.7 V).151,156Fig. 15 shows cell performance using Mn–N–C and Fe–N–C catalysts, indicating a peak power density greater than 0.6 W cm−2 when using pure oxygen. A similar performance was reported for Fe–N–C electrocatalysts (NC_Ar + NH3 and MOF_FeNx_Ar + NH3).157 Despite this promising performance, poor durability is a major concern with these PGM-free catalysts, most of which decay quickly in just a few hours of operation and may show more than 50% performance loss after several hundred hours. The rapid performance decay is believed to be caused by such mechanisms as de-metallization, metal oxidation, carbon corrosion, and dissolution of active metal sites.153,158 Some mechanisms are likely associated with H2O2 oxidative attack or by protonation of the doped N neighboring the active metal sites, followed by anion adsorption.159 Carbon corrosion will promote dissolution of the metal sites160,161 and induce significant charge- and mass-transport resistances due to the altered carbon lattice structure and morphology.162 An additional concern for Fe–N–C catalysts arises from their participation in and/or promotion of the Fenton reactions (Fe2+ + H2O2), where dissolved Fe ions combine with H2O2, a byproduct of the two-electron ORR, thus accelerating membrane degradation.150,163 It has been widely regarded as a great challenge to improve the stability of PGM-free catalysts in acid media compared with alkaline media.164,165
 Fig. 15  PEMFC performance with various catalysts: (a) 20Mn-NC-second and 20Fe-NC-second catalysts. Error bars represent the standard deviation from at least three independent measurements.150 (b) Fe–N–C catalyst of 100 nm size under 4.0 mg cm−2 loading, I/C of 0.6, N211 PEM, 94 °C, H2/air or O2 flow rate of 200/1000 sccm, and 1.7 atm H2/air or O2 partial pressure.151 
In addition, the ionomer thin film covering the catalyst particles may contribute to a large transport resistance for oxygen supply, limiting the current density under low Pt loading.166–168 The ionomer phase in CLs, serving as a binder for carbon/catalyst particles, provides the pathways for proton transport. On the catalyst surface, it is in the form of a nano-thickness film that the reactant oxygen needs to permeate for the ORR reaction. Commercial PEMFCs typically rely on the same type of perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) ionomers in CLs as used for PEM. On the Pt surface, adsorption of sulfonic acid groups on the Pt catalyst immobilizes the ionomer, lowering its degree of freedom and leading to the formation of an ultra-thin dense sublayer. This dense sublayer features a tight arrangement of PFSA chains with a density ∼1.5–2 times larger than that of the PEM, imposing a considerable oxygen resistance and a low O2 content at the Pt surface.72,169 It has been shown that oxygen in the dense sublayer mainly permeates via the water sites,72 thus the oxygen resistance decreases as the water content in the ionomer increases.170–172 Both molecular dynamics (MD)72 and density-functional theory (DFT) simulation173 showed that the dense sublayer is formed as a result of the polymer–metal attractive interaction. To reduce the transport resistance, mitigation strategies can be developed to suppress the dense sublayer formation (or polymer folding) or enrich dissolved oxygen molecules, e.g. by modifying the ionomer molecular structure. It has also been reported that the corner/edge area of a polyhedral Pt nanoparticle has lower ionomer absorption than the planar surface, thereby providing preferable routes for oxygen transport to the catalyst, as shown in Fig. 16. Some CL structures have no ionomer phase and thus are free of the ionomer thin-film resistance under low Pt loading; for example, 3 M's nano-structured thin-film (NSTF) CLs achieved 0.172 g kW−1 under 1.5 bar and 0.102 mg Pt cm−2total loading;174 and the CLs fabricated by a photo-driven approach that deposits the Pt catalyst directly over a PEM achieved a cell performance above 1.0 W cm−2 under ∼53 μg Pt cm−2cathode,175 though the long-term durability is a major concern.
 Fig. 16  The number of O2 molecules reaching Pt nanoparticles via the ionomer film (a and b) and portions of O2 fluxes at different locations (c and d). The symbol colors (a and b) match the bead colors in the different locations of Pt nanoparticles; and (e) schematics of O2 permeation routes.176 


PEM. 
Dupont's Nafion® is a widely employed PEM material, which is expensive due to its complex fabrication process. In addition, there are other commercial PEMs including Gore-Select® and Solvay Aquivion®”. In particular, Gore-Select® membranes are chemically stabilized and mechanically reinforced thereby demonstrating excellent durability even with small thickness (<15 μm). PEM contributes to about 8% of the cost of a PEMFC under high volume production.135 Nafion is a good proton conductor only in a well-hydrated state. Thus, to reduce the PEM's ionic resistance and hence the ohmic loss, inlet reactants are usually humidified before being fed into a PEMFC. However, this humidification raises the concern of electrode “flooding”, which reduces cell performance and durability. To mitigate the “flooding” risk, high-temperature PEM materials have been explored, which enables PEMFCs to operate in the temperature range of 120–180 °C. High temperature operation also benefits the electrochemical reaction kinetics, mass transport, tolerance to CO poisoning for the anode catalyst, and waste-heat rejection to the environment.74,177 Materials, such as polysulfones (PSF), polyetheretherketones (PEEK), and polybenzimidazoles (PBI), are widely studied as high temperature PEM materials.12,178 Specifically, acid-doped PBI PEMs showed great promise for operation free of humidification. However, they are subject to acid leaching due to evaporation loss and a steam distillation mechanism,179,180 thereby raising a concern of long-term durability. Recently, a poly(2,3,5,6-tetrafluorostyrene-4-phosphonic acid) membrane that is free of anhydride formation, was reported; this membrane maintains its ionic conductivity above 200°C and achieves peak powers of 1130 and 1740mW cm−2 at 160°C and 240°C, respectively, using O2 reactant.181
Another approach is to use thin PEMs, which reduces ionic resistance. They also improve water back-diffusion to compensate for the anode water loss caused by the EOD. However, thin PEMs are susceptible to mechanical damage. Thus, reinforced structures or robust PEM materials are highly desirable. In the Toyota Mirai 2020, the PEM is about 10 μm thick, containing about 2.5 μm thick ePTFE (expanded polytetrafluoroethylene) in the middle for mechanical reinforcement.182 In addition, a platform of dimension-stabilized membrane (DSMTM) was developed, in which ionomers are impregnated into porous polymers with much better mechanical properties than the PEM itself, as an alternative to ePTFE for PEM support.183,184 The thermal perforation process of DSM™ is illustrated in Fig. 17(a). Polysulfone (PSU) is an excellent DSM substrate due to its favorable mechanical properties, good solubility in a variety of solvents, high dimensional stability, and ease of micro-molding at a process temperature as low as 190 °C. PBI, PSF, PEEK, and polyimide (PI) are alternative substrates, which have much higher Young's modulus than PTFE's (∼400 MPa) and Nafion (∼300 MPa for dry Nafion 112 @ 20 °C, and ∼70 MPa for wet Nafion 112 @ 80 °C), e.g. PBI (∼5900 MPa), PSF (∼2600 MPa), PEEK (∼2700 MPa), and polyimide (PI) (∼2900 MPa).185Fig. 17(b) and (c) show a 20 μm-thick DSM™ membrane and the cost projection for the DSM™ support, indicating about $5 per m2 at high-volume production using the Roll-to-Roll (R2R) method. Furthermore, porous media flow fields provide better mechanical support to the MEAs and thus enable the use of thin PEMs.133
 Fig. 17  (a) The thermal perforation process scheme in DSM™ fabrication; (b) SEM image of a 20 μm thick DSM™ with its support and ionomer constituents; and (c) cost projection for DSM™ fabrication.184 


High current density operation. 
A viable strategy to reduce PEMFC cost per kW is to increase the power output or operating current density towards the peak power. In general, a high current density corresponds to a low output voltage and hence efficiency; and the cell performance is controlled by the transport loss due to the high rate of reactant consumption. Thus, to increase fuel cell efficiency under a high current density, it is crucial to reduce the transport-related performance loss. On local sites, such as in the CLs under the lands of a fuel cell with a channel–land structure or near the outlets, the reactant supply is greatly reduced when approaching the limiting current density. Three-dimensional (3-D) simulations show that the oxygen content in the CL drops to vanishingly small values (close to zero) under the land at 2 A cm−2, significantly reducing the local ORR rate and CL performance.186 To reduce the transport resistance, thin GDLs having large porosity and small tortuosity are desirable; and narrow lands/ribs are beneficial to the in-plane transport characteristics. In addition, it has been reported that adoption of porous media flow fields significantly reduces the transport loss under high current due to enhanced convection and flow mixing and elimination of lands in the structure.133,187,188 The Toyota Mirai 2020 uses a porous media flow field (3-D mesh), which was reported to considerably increase the oxygen concentration under high current.189
In the CL, a large variation of the ORR rate can occur under a high current density. The parameter h is defined to measure the through-plane variation of the ORR rate—the dimensionless difference between the PEM/CL and CL/MPL interfaces:190 (21)where αc denotes the cathode transfer coefficient, R is the universal gas constant, and δCL is the CL thickness. From the above equation, it can be seen that h increases linearly with the current density I when other parameters are kept constant. Fig. 18 shows the spatial profiles of the ORR rate, indicating that the ORR rate changes significantly under 2 A cm−2 and the catalyst near the CL/MPL interface is less utilized. To mitigate the ORR variation, thin CLs are preferable, as shown in Fig. 18(b) using the performance of a 2 μm thick CL as an example. Note that the CLs fabricated by a photo-driven method are ∼60 nm thick and the NSTF CLs are typically about 200 nm,191 achieving a Pt loading close to or lower than the DOE target.192 However, thin CLs are susceptible to cold-start failure due to the limited pore space for water (ice) storage, as measured by the time constant of CL's ice storage ( where εCL is the CL porosity, ρice is the ice density, and α is the net water transfer coefficient).109,193–195
 Fig. 18  ORR rate profiles across a cathode CL: (a) 10 μm thick & (b) 2 μm thick.186 
Another critical issue under high current density is water and thermal management. Both waste heat and water generation increase with current density.196 For a PEMFC efficiency of 50%, the heat generation rate is equal to the power output.74,197,198 The majority of the waste heat is generated in the MEA through the irreversible reaction process (to overcome the surface overpotential) and removed by a cooling unit, such as cooling channels in the BP. The GFC flows are only capable of removing a very small portion of the waste heat under typical operation conditions, as estimated by the ratio:74 (22)where ρ denotes the gas density, cp,g is the gas specific heat, ΔT is the increase in temperature from the inlet to the outlet, ξ is the stoichiometry, and C is the species concentration. For typical operation (e.g. ξ = 1.5), the ratio is less than 5% even for ΔT = 10 °C, i.e. the GFC streams can only remove <5% of the waste heat. Thus, most of the heat under GFCs relies on in-plane conductance for removal whereas that under lands is removed by through-plane transport.199,200 The former is determined by multiple factors including the GDL thickness, in-plane conductivity, and GFC width whereas the latter is controlled by the GDL through-plane conductivity. For GDLs having low thermal conductivities, such as SIGRACET 25BC (0.26–0.45 W m−1 °C−1), a temperature difference of greater than 10 °C can arise across the GDL under high current, raising the major concerns of hot-spot formation and material degradation. In addition, electrode “flooding” will more likely occur under high current due to the high water-production rate. It is usually a concern under the lands/ribs due to the large transport resistance and heat-pipe effects. The latter is driven by the temperature gradients in a GDL from the GFC to the land.201 Under GFCs, a high current density may result in the reduction or avoidance of “flooding” stemming from the local waste heat generation, which promotes water removal by vapor phase diffusion due to heat-pipe effects.116,200 To ensure desirable local operating conditions and uniform catalyst utilization under high power density, multi-dimensional multi-physics modeling110,202 and artificial intelligence (AI) methods203 are extremely valuable in the design and operational control of PEMFCs.
It is worth noting that in PEMFC applications such as FCEVs, operation under low current density is preferred when power demand is low. This operation mode corresponds to high voltage and hence efficiency. In general, low-current density operation is controlled by the activation polarization that is closely related to the catalyst layers.

4.2 PEM electrolysis cells

Catalyst layers. 
In the MEAs or catalyst coated membranes (CCMs), catalyst layers (CLs) account for about half of the total cost (about $30 per kW for a 1 MW PEMEC at a production rate of 50000 units per year, see Fig. 215) primarily due to the use of iridium (Ir) or iridium oxide (IrOx) as the OER catalyst. This high CL cost has partially contributed to the prohibitive overall cost of PEMECs. Moreover, global supplies and production of iridium are very limited (only 6–7 Tons per year),17,18 far less than the amount required for large-scale deployment of PEMECs. For example, a 10 GW PEMEC plant needs 2–3 Tons of iridium, assuming Ir loading to be 2 mg cm−2. In fact, the global Ir price ($6000 per oz) recently surpassed that of Pt ($1200 per oz).204,205 Furthermore, the high overpotential even with an Ir catalyst reduces the electrical efficiency and increases the operating cost of PEMECs. It has been shown that by alloying iridium with other metals or by modifying the CL microstructures, the OER catalyst activity can be improved by 2–3 orders of magnitude.206,207 Meanwhile, a ruthenium (Ru) catalyst has demonstrated a tremendously lower onset potential and higher activity for the OER,208 but it is not stable due to Ru dissolution. The stability of Ru can be enhanced by alloying with other metals.209 Efforts for PEMEC catalyst development have focused on two main strategies, including Ir-loading reduction and Ir-free catalysts.
In the first strategy, the main effort is focused on enhancing the activities of Ir-based catalysts (see Fig. 14 for general strategies), including the adoption of high surface are supports and nanostructures. A recent study introduced a surfactant-free polyol reduction method to disperse iridium nanoparticles on a tungsten doped titanium oxide (WxTi1−xO2) support.210 This leads to an OER catalyst with 38 wt% Ir (Ir38%/WxTi1−xO2) that demonstrated five times higher mass activity than the Ir-black baseline (the industry standard catalyst) in RDE testing. When tested in PEMECs, the catalyst enables the Ir loading to be lowered by an order of magnitude while retaining similar electrolysis performance of the baseline Ir-black catalyst (see Fig. 19). The Ir38%/WxTi1−xO2 catalyst also demonstrated remarkable stability, e.g., only a small voltage increase (<20 mV) was observed during a 1200 hour durability test at a constant current density of 1.5 A cm−2.
 Fig. 19  (a) and (c) HAADF-STEM images and (b) and (d) the corresponding EDS elemental map of Ir38%/W-TiO2 (Ti = red; Ir = green); (e) atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image showing an interlinked chain/island of Ir nanoparticles with dispersed single atoms of Ir (bright dots marked by yellow arrow) on the surface of the WxTi1−xO2 support particle (darker background); and (f) single cell polarization curves comparing MEAs (Nafion@ 115) with low PGM loading (0.4 mgIr cm−2 – red), Ir38%/W-TiO2 (0.4 mgIr cm−2 – green), and industrial baseline Ir-black (2 mgPt cm−2 + 2 mgIr cm−2 – black) with the Pt/C cathode (0.4 mgPt cm−2) at 80 °C.210 
3 M's NSTF electrocatalysts, which have achieved remarkable performance in PEMFCs under low Pt loading,191 were also introduced to PEMECs.16,211,212 The NSTF CLs use a thin film of Ir deposited on an organic pigment support. The manufacturing process for NSTF supports consists of vacuum sublimation deposition of support precursor (PR149) followed by vacuum thermal annealing to form support whiskers. In one scenario, the NSTF Ir enables reduction of Ir loading to 0.4 mg cm−2 while achieving a performance similar to that of commercial PEMECs using 2–3 mg cm−2 PGM catalysts. The current density can be enhanced to 10 A cm−2 (<2 V) or higher although long-term durability needs to be further investigated.213,214 In another scenario, 3 M developed an NSTF dispersed anode formulation, which can lower the overpotential by 50 mV at 2 A cm−2 with an Ir loading of 0.5 mg cm−2, thereby improving the electrical efficiency.
In order to further reduce Ir loading, non-precious metals (M) can be integrated with iridium to make an M–Ir core–shell structure. The formation of the core–shell structure not only can reduce the Ir loading tremendously, but also can enhance the OER catalyst activity. For example, one can develop metal (Ni, Co or Mn)-leached IrM@IrOx core–shell nanoparticles. Leaching of the Ni, Co or Mn element during catalyst activation generates lattice vacancies, which in turn produce uniquely shortened Ir–O metal–ligand bonds and an unusually large number of d-band holes in the iridium oxide shell. This increase in the formal iridium oxidation state drives the formation of holes on the oxygen ligands in direct proximity to lattice vacancies. Their electrophilic characteristic renders these oxygen ligands susceptible to nucleophilic acid–base-type O–O bond formation with a lower kinetic barrier, resulting in strongly enhanced reactivity. As shown in Fig. 20, the IrNi@IrOx catalyst demonstrates a 50 times higher OER activity than IrO2.207
 Fig. 20  (a) 3-D model of an IrNiOx core–shell nanoparticle with a metallic IrNi alloy core and an Ir oxide shell. Oxygen atoms are shown in red, iridium in grey, and nickel in green; and (b) Ir-mass-based OER activities (jmass) in acidic electrolyte of IrNiOx nanoparticles compared with those of commercial IrO2 nanoparticles.207 
In the second strategy, efforts have been concentrated on completely eliminating iridium from the OER catalyst by introducing chemically-stabilized Ru catalysts via alloying, confinement, and intercalation.137 This newly developed Ru-based catalyst can retain remarkable stability under high-voltage operation. As shown in Fig. 21, Ru demonstrates a 100 mV lower onset potential and tremendously higher activity (i.e. current density at 1.55 V) than Ir (see Fig. 21(a)). A variety of strategies can be used to enhance the chemical stability of the Ru-based OER, as shown in Fig. 14. These strategies can help either form strong bonds between Ru and the other element or protect Ru from exposure to detrimental surroundings. These measures may prevent Ru from dissolving under acidic and high voltage operation conditions. Therefore, one can develop Ru-based alloy catalysts, such as SrRuxO3−x (SRO), with increased Ru stability. It has been reported that the RuxSr1−xO3 and RuxLa1−xO3 catalysts are more stable than RuO2 with their stability being dependent on the ratio of Ru to Sr or La and the morphology of the catalyst. Other Ru-based catalysts were also investigated for the OER in acidic media,215 including Ru40Co60/Ru60Co40,216 Rd–Ru core–shell,217 Co-doped RuO2,218 Cr0.6Ru0.4O2,219 and Y2Ru2O7.220
 Fig. 21  Comparison of (a) Ru activity with Ir and Pt;208 and (b) activity of Ru-based OER catalysts.206 
The relationship between the stability and reactivity of Ru-based oxide catalysts has been investigated for strontium ruthenate films. It was discovered that for strontium ruthenate films with the same conductance, the degree of stability decreases in this order: (001) > (110) > (111); and stability is inversely proportional to the activity. Both stability and reactivity are governed by the potential-induced transformation of stable Ru4+ to unstable Run>4+. This transition from ordered (Ru4+)-to-disordered (Run>4+) states and the development of active OER sites are determined by a synergy between electronic and morphological effects.209Fig. 22 shows the activity and stability of various Ru and SrRuxO3−x (SRO) catalysts; both the activity and stability can be tuned by varying the morphology and structure of Ru catalysts.
 Fig. 22  (a–c) Schematics of the SrRuO3 (SRO) films with different crystal structures grown on Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STO) substrates (001), (110), and (111) respectively; (d) CVs of the SRO (001), (110), and (111) films; (e) schematics and current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the SRO/Nb:STO interface. Samples with and without a side contact (SC) between the SRO top surface and the backside of the substrate are denoted by SRO|SC (red line) and SRO (grey line), respectively; and (f) activity and stability of different Ru catalysts.231 
In addition to Ru-based catalysts, PGM-free catalysts, based on Fe-MOFs, were investigated for PEMECs,221 which consist of a highly porous, yet stable transition metal composite derived from the MOFs. They are integrated into a porous nanonetwork electrode architecture to further improve conductivity, mass transport, and durability against oxidative corrosion. Activity and durability were evaluated by the RDE method in an acidic electrolyte. The catalysts demonstrated promising performance when integrated into MEAs and tested in PEMECs.222 The catalysts achieved an OER potential of 1.584 V vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2, which is 29 mV higher than that of Ir black benchmark. Their MEAs demonstrated a current density >200 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V. Other materials,223,224 including metal phosphides,225 phosphosulfides,226 nitrides,227 oxides,228,229 and (oxy)hydroxides,230 were also explored as PGM-free catalysts. In addition, the real active sites in PGM-free catalysts are still controversial. Additional effort is needed to investigate and fully evaluate the active sites for the OER.223
Although the reduction of Ir loading or replacement of Ir with other Ir- or PGM-free catalysts shows good promise, their long-term durability in PEMECs has not been fully investigated. Studies through constant voltage holding and accelerated stress testing (AST), such as voltage cycling, show that a significant amount of Ir can diffuse into the membrane and even reach the cathode, thereby resulting in anode CL thinning. Similar phenomena were also observed in PEMFCs for Pt, which is subject to dissolution, migration, and redeposition.232 The anode CL thinning may not affect the PEMEC performance under high Ir loading (e.g. >2 mg cm−2); however, at low Ir loading (e.g. <0.4 mg cm−2), the Ir loss from the anode can lead to significant performance loss.233 However, constant voltage or current hold can take thousands of hours in order to observe any apparent performance decay. Therefore, it is highly meaningful to develop appropriate AST protocols that can be used to accelerate performance decay,234 similar to those for PEMFCs.235 Different AST protocols, including triangle wave, square wave and saw-tooth wave, have been explored to study their impacts on catalyst degradation. In addition, since large-scale PEMEC deployment heavily relies on its integration with renewable energy, such as solar or wind energy, the development of AST protocols for PEMECs needs to take into consideration the intermittency of these renewable energy technologies.236


PEM. 
In commercial PEMECs, Nafion membranes are baseline PEM materials due to their good ionic conductivity, chemical stability and mechanical strength. However, Nafion is unsuitable for high temperature operation, which leads to material degradation. In addition, thick PEMs, such as Nafion 115 and 117, are usually chosen in commercial PEMECs, which contributes to a large ionic resistance and hence ohmic loss. Two main efforts have been initiated to address these issues:
(1) High-temperature PEMs: PEMECs usually operate at low temperatures (<100 °C), which produces hydrogen at a moderate efficiency of around 60–85%. In comparison, solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) operate above 600 °C, which requires much less electricity for the same amount of hydrogen production. However, commercialization of SOECs is limited currently due to material degradation and the severe restriction on the materials that can be used.237 Additionally, the high operating temperatures greatly limit the ability to on/off cycle or follow intermittent loads, making SOECs a poor choice for integration with renewable sources. Intermediate-temperature electrolysis with an operating range of 120–300 °C is not included in the current hydrogen production portfolio primarily because of the limited availability of stable PEM materials in this temperature range. Sulfonated polymers such as Nafion are not stable in this temperature range under high water pressure. Phosphoric acid doped PBI (PA-PBI) membranes also decay due to the loss of phosphoric acid in the presence of water.238 Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) recently demonstrated high-temperature proton conductors that have excellent PA retention in the presence of water above 100 °C.239 They also investigated the PA loss mechanisms, concluding that stronger interactions between the ammonium cation and phosphate anion could stabilize PA in the polymer cluster due to thermodynamically equilibrated high PA partition composition. In addition, Aili et al. proposed a procedure for the preparation of PA-doped Nafion® and PBI blend membranes and tested their PEMECs at 130 °C.240 Aquivion™, another type of polymer in the PFSA family, differs from Nafion® in terms of the equivalent weight and the length of the sulfonic acid terminated side groups. It exhibits considerably higher softening temperatures than Nafion241 and has shown good performance242 with current densities up to 775 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V and 130 °C in PEMEC testing. These chemically and thermally stable membranes present a promising opportunity for developing high-efficiency PEMEC technology.
(2) Thin PEMs with improved mechanical properties: thick PEMs are commonly used in commercial units due to the non-balanced pressure between the anode and the cathode. For example, O2 produced in the anode is released into the ambient environment whereas H2 produced in the cathode is stored under high pressure for later use or further pressurization. Therefore, the PEM must retain a certain thickness to reduce H2 crossover so as to avoid physical damage to the membrane. However, the adoption of thick PEMs leads to a significant penalty of increased ohmic loss. For example, the area specific resistance (ASR) using Nafion 117 (about 183 μm thick) is about 0.1 Ohm cm2 and the ohmic loss is 300 mV at a current density of 3 A cm−2. The ohmic loss will be reduced by 150 mV when replacing it with Nafion 1135 (about 89 μm thick). Additionally, using thin PEMs also reduces the capital cost of PEMECs. To improve mechanical strength, cross-linked hydrocarbon membranes have been developed. The hydrocarbon membranes are less expensive than PFSA membranes and have less swelling upon water uptake,243 thereby improving the mechanical stability of PEMECs. The cross-linked structures can further improve the membrane mechanical robustness. The hydrocarbon membranes have demonstrated some success in PEMFCs with their MEA outperforming the Nafion® membrane under certain conditions.244 Recently, sulfonated poly(arylene ether sulfone) PEMs with a degree of sulfonation of 50 mol% (SPAES50) were reported for PEMEC applications;245 and they demonstrated excellent mechanical properties and ionic conductivity. PEMECs with a 20 μm thick SPAES membrane showed 1.07 A cm−2 at 1.6 V, which was claimed to be better than that of Nafion-based cells. Another study19 involved hydrocarbon random and multi-block copolymers, which have the same chemical structures as biphenol-based sulfonated poly(arylene ether sulfone) in the proton form (BPSH). PEMECs with a random BPSH achieved better performance (5.3 A cm−2) than that with similarly thick (∼50 μm) Nafion 212 (4.8 A cm−2) at 1.9 V, but degradation resulted in a decay of 951 μV h−1versus 613 μV h−1 for Nafion in their AST testing. In addition, the DSMTM membrane has demonstrated much better mechanical properties than the PEM itself, as discussed in the PEMFCs section, which can be directly applied to PEMECs. The PEMEC stack built with DSMTM membranes demonstrated up to 2000 psi balanced pressure reactants.246 DSMTM-based PEMs were also applied to electrolysis at 105 °C and 150 psig, showing better performance than that at 80 °C with >0.05 V lower voltage at 2 A cm−2.247


Porous transport layer (PTL). 
The most commercially used PTLs are based on titanium (Ti), such as powder/fiber Ti sinters and Ti felts, due to their chemical stability under electrolysis conditions. However, their commercial availability is limited, often sole-sourced with currently unsustainable supply. Ti PTLs are also costly, which may impose a hurdle to the large-scale manufacture of PEMECs in an economically viable way. More critically, the current Ti sinter PTLs lack sufficient flexibility for continuous R2R processing; this imposes a limitation in their automated integration with PEMEC industrial fabrication. It is technically challenging to directly deposit a CL onto the PTL to make a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) by using the labor-efficient R2R method, which has been extensively implemented in the PEMFC industry. In a typical MW PEMWE stack, the cost of a PTL and anode electrode accounts for half of the repeat element cost.15 Therefore, it is of paramount importance to reduce their cost via material/component optimization and process automation. Specifically, stainless steel PTLs, which are much more cost effective than Ti-based PTLs, were investigated in a harsh oxidative environment of PEMECs.248 A stainless steel (SS) mesh and carbon paper were used as the anode and cathode PTLs, respectively. Formation of iron and nickel oxides was observed on the fibers of the cathode PTL, which is likely due to the transport of the corrosion elements (iron and nickel) from the anode PTL to the cathode via the PEM. Thus, an appropriate coating, such as Pt or Au, is required for corrosion protection in the electrolysis environment.20 Some Ti-coated SS felts have been reported.241 In addition, carbon fiber based PTLs, such as carbon paper, were also used in the anode in experiments,249–251 which are suitable for short term operation due to the concern of carbon corrosion under the high anode potential (>1.23 V) vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).252
In addition, PEMEC performance depends partly on the morphology, structure, and properties of the PTL; however, most of these characteristics are currently empirically determined. Few science-based correlations are available for rational PTL design, which relate the transport properties, two-phase flow characteristics, and impacts on PEMEC performance to the PTL morphology and structure. For example, the electric and thermal conductivities are usually evaluated using the Bruggeman correlation for their porosity dependence but they are also dependent on other structural properties, as recognized in many PEMFC GDL studies.14,253,254 The Leverett J-function is widely adopted to describe the capillary pressure Pc as a function of the mean pore size, permeability, and contact angle (see eqn (17)). However, the correlation was originally developed for soils, and its applicability to sintered, perforated, or fiber-based porous media needs additional investigation.21 It has been reported that the PTL structure and morphology, e.g. mean pore size, porosity, wettability, pore-graded feature,255 addition of Ti-based MPLs,256 and felt/powder structure, can greatly influence PEMEC performance.252,257,258 However, fundamental guidelines have not been fully developed for PTL design and optimization.


High current density operation. 
High current density operations (i.e. those with high hydrogen production rates) have been investigated as a viable strategy to reduce the PEMEC cost,259 similar to that for PEMFCs. Previous studies have mostly been focused on operations at current densities up to 2 A cm−2. In this current-density range, the transport loss is usually small mainly due to the use of liquid water reactant, which contains a large number of water molecules per unit volume relative to vapor. In more recent studies, PEMFC operations at 5 A cm−2260 or higher (e.g. 10–20 A cm−2 by 3 M NSTF259) have been investigated; and a large transport loss was observed under certain conditions, such as thin PTLs, large land width, small PTL porosity, low stoichiometry, or low pressure. The transport loss primarily arises from the anode side, where the counter flows of liquid water and oxygen bubbles are present: at high current, oxygen is produced at a high rate, which increases the gas pressure and volume fraction in the CL and PTL, resisting water inflow for the OER. The transport loss is more severe in the CL under the lands/ribs due to the larger transport resistance. To mitigate the transport loss, two physical dimensions need to be considered simultaneously, namely, the through- and in-plane transport resistances. For the former, thin PTLs are preferred. However, thin PTLs narrow the in-plane transport pathways under the lands/ribs and consequently increase the in-plane resistance. The water in-plane profiles (which were computed by a 3-D model using the Leverett J function) for three PTL thicknesses and at 4.5 and 5 A cm−2, respectively, are presented in Fig. 23(a), and the results indicate that the water saturation − the water volume fraction in the pore space − drops to nearly 0 under the land. This local water starvation significantly reduces the OER rate and overall PEMEC performance, as shown in Fig. 23(b) and (c). Additionally, oxygen bubbles are attached to the PTL surface, as shown in Fig. 23(d), and more bubbles will be present under higher current density, increasing the gas coverage over the interface and the interfacial resistance for liquid water supply. The PTL properties (e.g. surface roughness, wettability, and pore size) can be tailored to improve the two-phase flow and bubble detachment characteristics, similar to the GDL's for PEMFCs.252,261,262 For example, mixed wettability PTLs, where the hydrophilic and hydrophobic pore networks coexist, provide separate pathways for liquid water and gaseous product flows, mitigating flow blockage and transport loss.
 Fig. 23  (a) Liquid water saturation profiles across the anode PTLs; (b) current density in-plane profiles from the channel to land;111 (c) polarization curves with three anode PTL thicknesses; and (d) image from visualization and schematic of oxygen bubble formation in an anode PTL.117 
In addition, waste heat is produced at a high rate under high operating current, which will increase the local temperature and result in hot-spot formation if not properly managed. Similar to that in PEMFCs, most of the waste heat in PEMEC operation is generated in the MEA and removed via the PTLs and lands by the cooling unit in the BP. Thus, temperatures are higher in the MEA under the flow channels, which may reduce MEA performance and degrade materials. To mitigate temperature increase, the PTL structure and dimensions can be optimized to reduce the thermal resistance, as done for GDLs in PEMFCs.263,264 Unlike PEMFCs in which the cathode GFC flow is air, the liquid water in the channel has a much larger specific heat and conductivity; thus, the flow rate/temperature and channel design can be optimized to reduce the increase in local temperature. The interfacial resistance, e.g. between the PTL and BP, can significantly increase local temperatures. It is, however, more unpredictable when interfacial corrosion occurs,20,265 especially in long-term operations or under high current densities. Strategies such as real-time monitoring of the interfacial resistance and local temperature can be implemented to ensure proper operation of PEMECs under high current density. Similar to that for PEMFCs, multi-dimensional, multi-physics modeling,266,267 capable of probing local phenomena such as transport and reaction processes and local temperatures, is highly desirable for component design and operational control for high current density operations.

Summary and concluding remarks
In this review, the current status of PEMFC and PEMEC technologies is presented and discussed, along with hydrogen infrastructure development and several aspects of fundamentals and technical challenges. Both systems operate at relatively low temperatures (e.g. 60–80 °C) with similar structures and key components, including membranes (notably Nafion), flow fields, and PGM electrocatalysts as in current commercial units (e.g. Pt in PEMFCs and Ir in PEMECs). PEMFCs convert the chemical energy in hydrogen directly to electricity with an efficiency as high as 65% whereas PEMECs produce hydrogen through water splitting using electrical energy with efficiency around 60–80%. Both systems can be made compact and modularized and capable of high power density operation and fast dynamic response. Commercial PEMFCs use much thinner PEMs (e.g. about 10 μm) than PEMECs (e.g. about 100–200 μm). The former operate under a lower pressure (around 1–2 bar) than the latter (about 1–50 bar).
Cost remains a major challenge for both PEMECs and PEMFCs: for PEMFCs, the DOE targets are $30 per kW and $60 per kW, respectively, for light- and heavy-duty FECVs against the current status of $76 per kW. For PEMECs, the US DOE has recently set a target of $1 per kg H2 as compared with the current status of about $4–6 per kg. PGM materials are popular electrocatalysts for the two systems. For PEMFCs, catalyst layers account for approximately 40% of the cost under high volume production. The Pt loading in the Toyota Mirai 2020 is about 0.365 mg cm−2, almost three times the DOE target (0.125 mg cm−2) for light-weight FCEVs. The current capital cost of a PEMEC system is around $1000–1500 per kW, which can be reduced to below $200 per kW at the mass production stage. The catalyst-coated membrane component accounts for about half of this cost at a production rate of 50000 MW per year. HRS development is costly at present, but is projected to fall as the infrastructure scale grows. It was estimated that a HRS capable of supporting 1000 vehicles costs approximately $3 million and its development/operation can be financially self-sufficient by 2030; potentially, the hydrogen price can reach parity with today's gasoline or become even lower.
PEMFCs and PEMECs share the same fundamentals in many ways. For example, (1) they can be analyzed following the same thermodynamic concepts (e.g. the Gibbs free energy, enthalpy, voltages, and efficiencies), electrochemical kinetics (e.g. Butler–Volmer equation and Tafel approximation), and performance loss (e.g. the activation, ohmic, and transport losses); (2) proton transport can be analyzed following conservation of charge, using the widely available property correlations for PEMs (e.g., Nafion); (3) two-phase flows are important to both PEMFC and PEMEC operations. The theories established in PEMFCs (e.g. two-phase flow modeling in GDLs and GFCs and droplet detachment at the GDL surface) can be extended to PEMECs, such as the anode PTL and flow field modeling and the bubble removal at the PTL/channel interface. In the flow fields, various two-phase flow patterns have been observed, including mist, film and slug flows in PEMFCs and bubble and slug flows in PEMECs. In the PEMFC cathode or the PEMEC anode, excess liquid water or gas will cause electrode “flooding” or “dryness”, increasing the transport loss. Capillary action plays an important role in the two-phase flows of both systems. On the cathode GDL or anode PTL surface, liquid droplets or gas bubbles have been observed, which increase the interfacial transport resistance, and their detachments from the interface can be analyzed through force balances.
Several main challenges and future opportunities are discussed, including low-cost CLs, PEM development, and high current density operation. CLs account for a major portion of the overall cost due to the use of PGM-based catalysts (e.g. Pt in PEMFCs and Ir in PEMECs). For PEMFCs, PGM-loading reduction or PGM-free material development are currently an active area of research for cost reduction. For example, Fe-, Ni-, Co-, or Mn-based MOF structures are being explored as alternative ORR catalysts, and a catalytic activity close to that of a Pt/C catalyst with a current density greater than 400 mA cm−2 at 0.7 V at the MEA level has been reported by some researchers. However, poor durability is a major drawback for these PGM-free catalysts; in addition, the ionomer phase has a dense sublayer at the Pt surface, which is less than 1 nm thick and creates a major barrier to oxygen permeation. For PEMECs, 3 M's NSTF using 0.4 mg cm−2 Ir loading has achieved similar performance to commercial units that use 2–3 mg cm−2 of Ir catalysts. For PEM development, robust thin membranes are widely adopted in PEMFCs (e.g. ∼10 μm thickness), which improve proton conductance and internal humidification. Thick membranes are popularly used in commercial PEMECs due to the pressure imbalance between H2 and O2, but thinner PEMs are especially critical to reducing ohmic performance loss. Cross-linked structures or dimension-stabilized platforms show great promise in PEM reinforcement and thickness reduction. Additionally, high-temperature PEMs enable elevated temperature operation, which improves the electrochemical kinetics, transport properties for protons and gas species, and heat removal. For PEMFCs, high temperatures also improve the CO tolerance and enable operations that are free of “flooding”. For PEMECs, high temperature operation reduces the required amount of electricity input thus improving the electrical efficiency. PSF, PEEK, and PBI are widely studied materials for high temperature PEMs. For PEMECs, anode PTLs are commonly based on Ti (e.g. Ti sinters) due to chemical stability under electrolysis conditions. However, Ti-sintered PTLs lack flexibility, making it difficult to adopt a continuous R2R process for catalyst coating. Thus, improvements in materials and fabrication methods are highly needed, along with the fundamental property–structure correlations. Furthermore, high current density operation (e.g. about 2 A cm−2 for PEMFCs and 5 A cm−2 for PEMECs) has been investigated as a viable strategy to reduce cost for both systems. In this operation mode, the transport loss will be important or dominant due to insufficient oxygen (in PEMFCs) or liquid water (in PEMECs) on the reaction sites. A large spatial variation in the ORR/OER reactions may occur, reducing local catalyst utilization. Waste heat generation may considerably increase the local temperature, reducing performance and material durability. Multi-dimensional, multi-physics modeling and artificial intelligence (AI) methods are extremely valuable to the optimal design and operational control of PEMFCs at high currents.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
Y. Wang, H. Yuan, A. Martinez, P. Hong, H. Xu and F. R. Bockmiller, Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Station Network for Automobiles: Status, Technology, and Perspectives, Adv. Appl. Energy, 2021, 100011 CrossRef .

          F. Cell and H. J. Undertaking ( 2019). Hydrogen Roadmap Europe: A Sustainable Pathway for the European Energy Transition Search PubMed .
W. R. Grove, XXIV. On voltaic series and the combination of gases by platinum, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1839, 14(86–87), 127–130 CrossRef .
F. T. Bacon, Fuel cells, past, present and future, Electrochimica Acta, 1969, 14(7), 569–585 CrossRef CAS .
B. Paul and J. Andrews, PEM unitised reversible/regenerative hydrogen fuel cell systems: State of the art and technical challenges, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 79, 585–599 CrossRef .
D. A. Cullen, K. C. Neyerlin, R. K. Ahluwalia, R. Mukundan, K. L. More, R. L. Borup and A. Kusoglu, New roads and challenges for fuel cells in heavy-duty transportation, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6(5), 462–474 CrossRef CAS .
R. Abbasi, B. P. Setzler, S. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Xu and Y. Yan, A Roadmap to Low-Cost Hydrogen with Hydroxide Exchange Membrane Electrolyzers, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(31), 1805876 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bertuccioli, A. Chan, D. Hart, F. Lehner, B. Madden and E. Standen, Study on development of water electrolysis in the EU, Fuel Cells Hydrogen Joint Undertaking, 2014, 1–160 Search PubMed .
Secretary Granholm Launches Hydrogen Energy Earthshot to Accelerate Breakthroughs Toward a Net-Zero Economy. Department of Energy. https://www.energy.gov/articles/secretary-granholm-launches-hydrogen-energy-earthshot-accelerate-breakthroughs-toward-net & https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-shot.
S. J. Peighambardoust, S. Rowshanzamir and M. Amjadi, Review of the proton exchange membranes for fuel cell applications, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35(17), 9349–9384 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Larminie, A. Dicks and M. S. McDonald ( 2003). Fuel cell systems explained, Vol. 2, pp. 207–225. J. Wiley, Chichester, UK Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. F.-R. Diaz, K. S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. C. Adroher, Materials, technological status, and fundamentals of PEM fuel cells–a review, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 178–203 CrossRef CAS .
D. Banham and S. Ye, Current status and future development of catalyst materials and catalyst layers for proton exchange membrane fuel cells: an industrial perspective, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2(3), 629–638 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ozden, S. Shahgaldi, X. Li and F. Hamdullahpur, A review of gas diffusion layers for proton exchange membrane fuel cells—With a focus on characteristics, characterization techniques, materials and designs, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2019, 74, 50–102 CrossRef .

          A. T. Mayyas, M. F. Ruth, B. S. Pivovar, G. Bender and K. B. Wipke ( 2019). Manufacturing cost analysis for proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers, No. NREL/TP-6A20-72740. National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States) Search PubMed .
M. K. Debe, S. M. Hendricks, G. D. Vernstrom, M. Meyers, M. Brostrom, M. Stephens and E. B. Anderson, Initial performance and durability of ultra-low loaded NSTF electrodes for PEM electrolyzers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159(6), K165 CrossRef CAS .
C. Minke, M. Suermann, B. Bensmann and R. Hanke-Rauschenbach, Is iridium demand a potential bottleneck in the realization of large-scale PEM water electrolysis?, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46(46), 23581–23590 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Hobson, Tight supply and hydrogen hopes drive iridium up 160%. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-precious-iridium/tight-supply-and-hydrogen-hopes-drive-iridium-up-160-idUSKBN2AC1DG.
S. Y. Han, D. M. Yu, Y. H. Mo, S. M. Ahn, J. Y. Lee, T. H. Kim and S. So, Ion exchange capacity controlled biphenol-based sulfonated poly (arylene ether sulfone) for polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolyzers: comparison of random and multi-block copolymers, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 634, 119370 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rojas, M. Sánchez-Molina, G. Sevilla, E. Amores, E. Almandoz, J. Esparza and C. Colominas, Coated stainless steels evaluation for bipolar plates in PEM water electrolysis conditions, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46(51), 25929–25943 CrossRef CAS .
M. Leverett, Capillary behavior in porous solids, Trans. AIME, 1941, 142(01), 152–169 CrossRef .
Bryan Pivovar, 2020 DOE Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program Review, May 29, 2020. https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review20/h2000_pivovar_2020_p.pdf.
FCEV Sales, FCEB, & Hydrogen Station Data. California Fuel Cell Partnership. https://cafcp.org/by_the_numbers.
J. Marcinkoski, R. Vijayagopal, J. Adams, B. James, J. Kopasz and R. Ahluwalia, Hydrogen Class 8 Long Haul Truck Targets. Subsection of the Electrified Powertrain Roadmap. Technical Targets for Hydrogen-Fueled Long-Haul Tractor-Trailer Trucks, DOE Adv. Truck Technol, 2019, 1–31 Search PubMed .

          D. Papageorgopoulos, Fuel Cell Technologies Overview, 2021 Annual Merit Review and Peer Evaluation Meeting, June 7, 2021 – Washington, DC.
T. Özgür and A. C. Yakaryılmaz, A review: Exergy analysis of PEM and PEM fuel cell based CHP systems, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(38), 17993–18000 CrossRef .

          N. Stetson, H2 Technologies Overview, 2021 Annual Merit Review and Peer Evaluation Meeting, June 7, 2021 – Washington, DC.

          Sunita Satyapal, DOE Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technologies Office and Global Perspectives, PIME Hydrogen Projects in Transport Workshop, Poland December 11, 2020. https://www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2021/01/f82/hfto-satyapal-PIME-dec11.pdf.

          Sunita Satyapal, Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Program Overview, 2019 Annual Merit Review, Crytal City, VA, April 28, 2019. https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review19/plenary_overview_satyapal_2019.pdf.

NREL Transforming Energy. https://www.nrel.gov/.

          Andrew Martinez, “California's LDV Hydrogen Network: 2021 HFTO Annual Merit Review.” DOE Hydrogen Program 2021 Annual Merit Review, United States Department of Energy, 10 June 2021. Conference Presentation.
AB-8 Alternative fuel and vehicle technologies: funding programs. California Legislative Information. https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billNavClient.xhtml?bill_id=201320140AB8.
Corpoate Credit Risk Trends inDeveloping Markets: A Loss Given Default (LGD) Perspective. S&P Global Market intelligence. https://www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/blog/corporate-credit-risk-trends-in-developing-markets-a-loss-given-default-lgd-perspective.
Notice of Proposed Awards Grant Funding Opportunity 19-602 1st Revised. California Energy Commission. https://www.energy.ca.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/NOPA_GFO-19-602_1st_Revised_12-08-<?pdb_no 2020?>2020<?pdb END?>_ADA.xlsx, 2020.

          https://www.iphe.net/last access: 4/25/2021
        .

          https://www.yicaiglobal.com/news/saic-to-make-sell-10000-hydrogen-cars-per-year-in-five-years last access: 10/19/2021.
Hon Angus Taylor MP, “Fast tracking renewable hydrogen projectes,” 15 April 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.minister.industry.gov.au/ministers/taylor/media-releases/fast-tracking-renewable-hydrogen-projects, Accessed 12 Feburary 2021.
Zen and the art of Clean Energy Solutions, “British Columbia Hydrogen Study,” 2019.
Natural Resources Canada, “Minister O'Regan Launches Hydrogen Strategy for Canada,” 16 December 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.newswire.ca/news-releases/minister-o-regan-launches-hydrogen-strategy-for-canada-818474032.html, Accessed 12 February 2021.

          P. Olexiuk, S. Duncanson, J. Kennedy, J. Baker, C. Brinker and S. Mckop, “Federal government announces Canada's hydrogen strategy,” 22 December 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.osler.com/en/resources/regulations/2020/federal-government-announces-canada-s-hydrogen-strategy#:~:text=On%20December%2016%2C%202020%2C%20Canada's,global%20leader%<?pdb_no 20in?>20in<?pdb END?>%20hydrogen%20technologies, Accessed 12 February 2021.
Ministry of Energy, Government of Chile, “National Green Hydrogen Strategy,” Santiago, 2020.
Bloomberg News, “China's Hydrogen Vehicle Dream Chased with $17 Billion of Funding,” 27 June 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-27/china-s-hydrogen-vehicle-dream-chased-by-17-billion-of-funding, Accessed 12 February 2021.
United States International Trade Administration, “France Renewable Hydrogen Technologies,” 23 September 2020. [Online].
Available: https://www.trade.gov/market-intelligence/france-renewable-hydrogen-technologies#:~:text=The%20French%20government%20will%20invest,%2C%20solar)%<?pdb_no 20or?>20or<?pdb END?>%20nuclear%20energy, Accessed 12 February 2021.

          F. Jordans, “German Government Agrees on National Hydrogen Strategy,” U.S. News & World Report, 10 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.usnews.com/news/business/articles/2020-06-10/german-government-to-agree-national-hydrogen-strategy#:~:text=The%20government%20plans%<?pdb_no 20to?>20to<?pdb END?>%20invest,to%20five%20Gigawatts%<?pdb_no 20by?>20by<?pdb END?>%202030, Accessed 12 February 2021.
Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis, “Japanese government to invest $19 billion to support 2030 hydrogen commercialization goal - report,” Reuters, 9 December 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ieefa.org/japanese-government-to-invest-19-billion-to-support-2030-hydrogen-commercialization-goal-report/#:~:text=December%209%2C%202020-,Japanese%20government%<?pdb_no 20to?>20to<?pdb END?>%20invest%20%2419%20billion,2030%20hydrogen%20commercialization%20goal%E2%80%94rep, Accessed 12 February 2021.

Strategic Hydrogen Roadmap Market Report, New Zealand Foreign Affairs & Trade, Japan,  2020 Search PubMed .
Hydrogen Europe, “The Northern Netherlands Hydrogen Investment Plan 2020,” 2020.

          Euractiv and D. Janssen, “Dutch outline clean hydrogen 'vision', aim at global market,” Euractiv, 1 April 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.euractiv.com/section/energy-environment/news/dutch-outline-clean-hydrogen-vision-aim-at-global-market/, Accessed 12 February 2021.
FuelCellsWorks, “Portugese Government Approves Hydrogen Strategy, 7B Euro Investments,” 25 May 2020. [Online]. Available: https://fuelcellsworks.com/news/portuguese-government-approves-hydrogen-strategy-e7b-investments/, Accessed 12 February 2021.
Scottish Government, “Building a new energy sector,” 21 December 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.scot/news/building-a-new-energy-sector/, Accessed 12 February 2021.

          H. Shin and S. Cha, “South Korea to spend $95 billion on green projects to boost economy,” Reuters, 14 July 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-southkorea-president-newdeal-idUKKCN24F0J8?edition-redirect=uk, Accessed 12 February 2021.

          J. Suk-yee, “South Korean Government to Invest More in Hydrogen Industry,” BusinessKorea, 20 August 2020. [Online]. Available: http://www.businesskorea.co.kr/news/articleView.html?idxno=50674, Accessed 12 February 2021.

          Reuters, “Spain to channel $1.8bln in EU rescue funds to ‘green’ hydrogen,” 19 November 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.reuters.com/article/spain-energy-hydrogen/spain-to-channel-1-8-bln-in-eu-rescue-funds-to-green-hydrogen-idINL8N2I55HU?edition-redirect=uk, Accessed 12 February 2021.
UK Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, “Energy white paper: Powering our net zero future,” 18 December 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/energy-white-paper-powering-our-net-zero-future/energy-white-paper-powering-our-net-zero-future-accessible-html-version, Accessed 12 February 2021.
Self-Sufficiency Report: Economic Analysis of Hydrogen Station Network Development Scenarios, The California Air Resources Board, 2021. Available: https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/resources/documents/self-sufficiency-report (Last Access: Oct. 31, 2021).
Hydrogen station network self-sufficiency analysis per assembly bill 8. https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/2020-11/ab_8_self_sufficiency_report_draft_ac.pdf.
Fuel cell electric trucks A Vision for Freight Movement in California —and Beyond, California Fuel Cell Partnership, 2021, Available: https://app.greenrope.com/content/Fuel-Cell-Electric-Trucks-Vision-CaFCP.pdf.

Captive, On-Purpose, Refinery Hydrogen Production Capacities at Individual U.S. Refineries. H2Tools, 2019, https://h2tools.org/hyarc/hydrogen-data/captive-purpose-refinery-hydrogen-production-capacities-individual-us.

Merchant Hydrogen Plant Capacities in North America. H2Tools, 2016, https://h2tools.org/hyarc/hydrogen-data/merchant-hydrogen-plant-capacities-north-america.

Hydrogen production: Natural gas reforming. Energy.gov. (n.d.). https://www.energy.gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-production-natural-gas-reforming.
C. Hatch, A. Center, A. S. Feitelberg, E. M. Fisher and P. F. Mutolo, Economic analysis of hydrogen production from wastewater and wood for municipal bus system, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38(36), 16002–16010 CrossRef CAS .
C. Voss, Applications of pressure swing adsorption technology, Adsorption, 2005, 11(1), 527–529 CrossRef .
M. Bodner, A. Hofer and V. Hacker, H2 generation from alkaline electrolyzer, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2015, 4(4), 365–381 CAS .
SB-1505 Fuel: hydrogen alternative fuel. California Legislative Informationhttps://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.xhtml?bill_id=200520060SB1505.
Legal Disclaimer & User's Notice. Unofficial electronic version of th Low Carbon Fuel Standard Regulation. https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/<?pdb_no 2020?>2020<?pdb END?>_lcfs_fro_oal-approved_unofficial_06302020.pdf.
2020 Annual Evaluation of Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Deployment and Hydrogen Fuel Station Network Development. https://ww2.arb.ca.gov/sites/default/files/2020-08/ab8_report_2020_temp.pdf.
Our Goal: 100% Decarbonised Hydrogen Fuel in Transport by 2030. https://hydrogencouncil.com/en/our-2030-goal/.

          https://www.ir.plugpower.com/Press-Releases/Press-Release-Details/2021/Plug-Power-to-Build-Largest-Green-Hydrogen-Production-Facility-on-the-West-Coast/default.aspx
        .

          https://www.sgh2energy.com/worlds-largest-green-hydrogen-project-to-launch-in-california
        .
Hydrogen Delivery Technical Team Roadmap. https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/08/f36/hdtt_roadmap_July2017.pdf; 2017.
K. A. Mauritz and R. B. Moore, State of understanding of Nafion, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(10), 4535–4586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, Y. Wang and K. Jiao, Oxygen Permeation Resistances and Routes in Nanoscale Ionomer Thin Film on Platinum Surface, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168(1), 014511 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Newman and K. E. Thomas-Alyea ( 2012). Electrochemical systems. John Wiley & Sons Search PubMed .

          Y. Wang and K. S. Chen ( 2013). PEM fuel cells: thermal and water management fundamentals. Momentum Press Search PubMed .
T. E. Springer, T. A. Zawodzinski and S. Gottesfeld, Polymer electrolyte fuel cell model, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138(8), 2334 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Zawodzinski Jr, M. Neeman, L. O. Sillerud and S. Gottesfeld, Determination of water diffusion coefficients in perfluorosulfonate ionomeric membranes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 1991, 95(15), 6040–6044 Search PubMed .
J. T. Hinatsu, M. Mizuhata and H. Takenaka, Water uptake of perfluorosulfonic acid membranes from liquid water and water vapor, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141(6), 1493 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peron, A. Mani, X. Zhao, D. Edwards, M. Adachi, T. Soboleva and S. Holdcroft, Properties of Nafion® NR-211 membranes for PEMFCs, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 356(1–2), 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and C. Y. Wang, Dynamics of polymer electrolyte fuel cells undergoing load changes, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51(19), 3924–3933 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. West and T. F. Fuller, Influence of rib spacing in proton-exchange membrane electrode assemblies, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1996, 26(6), 557–565 CrossRef CAS .

          H. P.-L. H. van Bussel, Experiments with a Symmetric Hydrogen Cell, ECN memo,  1997 Search PubMed .
H. P. van Bussel, F. G. Koene and R. K. Mallant, Dynamic model of solid polymer fuel cell water management, J. Power Sources, 1998, 71(1-2), 218–222 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Kopitzke, C. A. Linkous, H. R. Anderson and G. L. Nelson, Conductivity and water uptake of aromatic-based proton exchange membrane electrolytes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147(5), 1677 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. P. Mukherjee, J. Mishler, R. Mukundan and R. L. Borup, Cold start of polymer electrolyte fuel cells: Three-stage startup characterization, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55(8), 2636–2644 CrossRef CAS .
S. Motupally, A. J. Becker and J. W. Weidner, Diffusion of water in Nafion 115 membranes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147(9), 3171 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Yeo and A. Eisenberg, Physical properties and supermolecular structure of perfluorinated ion-containing (Nafion) polymers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1977, 21(4), 875–898 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, J. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Yin and K. Jiao, Investigation of current density spatial distribution in PEM fuel cells using a comprehensively validated multi-phase non-isothermal model, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 150, 119294 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Nguyen and R. E. White, A water and heat management model for proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140(8), 2178 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Zawodzinski, J. Davey, J. Valerio and S. Gottesfeld, The water content dependence of electro-osmotic drag in proton-conducting polymer electrolytes, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40(3), 297–302 CrossRef CAS .
K. Onda, T. Murakami, T. Hikosaka, M. Kobayashi and K. Ito, Performance analysis of polymer-electrolyte water electrolysis cell at a small-unit test cell and performance prediction of large stacked cell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149(8), A1069 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Duan, H. Wang and J. Benziger, Transport of liquid water through Nafion membranes, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 392, 88–94 CrossRef .
A. Parthasarathy, S. Srinivasan, A. J. Appleby and C. R. Martin, Temperature dependence of the electrode kinetics of oxygen reduction at the platinum/Nafion® interface—a microelectrode investigation, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139(9), 2530 CrossRef CAS .
C. Marr and X. Li, Composition and performance modelling of catalyst layer in a proton exchange membrane fuel cell, J. Power Sources, 1999, 77(1), 17–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mukaddam, E. Litwiller and I. Pinnau, Gas sorption, diffusion, and permeation in Nafion, Macromolecules, 2016, 49(1), 280–286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, D. Tongren and C. J. Cornelius, The role of a metal ion within Nafion upon its physical and gas transport properties, Eur. Polym. J., 2014, 50, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Haug and R. E. White, Oxygen diffusion coefficient and solubility in a new proton exchange membrane, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147(3), 980 CrossRef CAS .
A. Parthasarathy, C. R. Martin and S. Srinivasan, Investigations of the O2 Reduction Reaction at the Platinum/Nafion® Interface Using a Solid-State Electrochemical Cell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138(4), 916 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lehtinen, G. Sundholm, S. Holmberg, F. Sundholm, P. Björnbom and M. Bursell, Electrochemical characterization of PVDF-based proton conducting membranes for fuel cells, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43(12-13), 1881–1890 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ogumi, Z. Takehara and S. Yoshizawa, Gas permeation in SPE method: I. Oxygen permeation through Nafion and NEOSEPTA, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131(4), 769 CrossRef CAS .
O. Burheim, P. J.-S. Vie, J. G. Pharoah and S. Kjelstrup, 
            Ex situ measurements of through-plane thermal conductivities in a polymer electrolyte fuel cell, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195(1), 249–256 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Harlin and M. Ferenets ( 2006). Introduction to conductive materials. in Intelligent textiles and clothing. Woodhed Puhlishing in Textiles, pp. 217–237 Search PubMed .
C. D. Craver, C. E. Carraher Jr and E. E. McSweeney, HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY DIVISION OF POLYMERIC MATERIALS: SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, Appl. Polym. Sci., 2000, 3 Search PubMed .
Z. Kang, J. Mo, G. Yang, Y. Li, D. A. Talley, B. Han and F. Y. Zhang, Performance modeling and current mapping of proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells with novel thin/tunable liquid/gas diffusion layers, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Ojong, J. T.-H. Kwan, A. Nouri-Khorasani, A. Bonakdarpour, D. P. Wilkinson and T. Smolinka, Development of an experimentally validated semi-empirical fully-coupled performance model of a PEM electrolysis cell with a 3-D structured porous transport layer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(41), 25831–25847 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Borgnakke and R. E. Sonntag ( 2020). Fundamentals of thermodynamics. John Wiley & Sons Search PubMed .
C. K. Mittelsteadt, PEM electrolysis: ready for impact, ECS Trans., 2015, 69(17), 205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Chen, C. W. Yang and J. Y. Lee, Implementation and evaluation for anode purging of a fuel cell based on nitrogen concentration, Appl. Energy, 2014, 113, 1519–1524 CrossRef CAS .

          D. F. R. Diaz and Y. Wang, A Component-level Model of Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Electrolysis Cells for Hydrogen Production, Applied Energy, under review.
Y. Wang, Analysis of the key parameters in the cold start of polymer electrolyte fuel cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154(10), B1041 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Song and H. Meng, Numerical modeling and simulation of PEM fuel cells: progress and perspective, Acta Mech. Sin., 2013, 29(3), 318–334 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Yang and H. Xu, Two-dimensional multi-physics modeling of porous transport layer in polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzer for water splitting, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(58), 32984–32994 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and S. C. Cho, Analysis of air cathode performance for lithium-air batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(10), A1847 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, Y. Xiao, D. Liang, Z. Shao, H. Yu, M. Hou and B. Yi, Behaviors of a proton exchange membrane electrolyzer under water starvation, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(19), 14506–14513 RSC .
B. Carnes, D. Spernjak, G. Luo, L. Hao, K. S. Chen, C. Y. Wang and R. L. Borup, Validation of a two-phase multidimensional polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell computational model using current distribution measurements, J. Power Sources, 2013, 236, 126–137 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu and Y. Wang, Liquid blockage and flow maldistribution of two-phase flow in two parallel thin micro-channels, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2021, 182, 116127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mishler, Y. Wang, R. Mukundan, J. Spendelow, D. S. Hussey, D. L. Jacobson and R. L. Borup, Probing the water content in polymer electrolyte fuel cells using neutron radiography, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, J. Mo, G. Yang, S. T. Retterer, D. A. Cullen, T. J. Toops and F. Y. Zhang, Investigation of thin/well-tunable liquid/gas diffusion layers exhibiting superior multifunctional performance in low-temperature electrolytic water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(1), 166–175 RSC .
O. Panchenko, E. Borgardt, W. Zwaygardt, F. J. Hackemüller, M. Bram, N. Kardjilov and W. Lehnert, In situ two-phase flow investigation of different porous transport layer for a polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) electrolyzer with neutron spectroscopy, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 108–115 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seweryn, J. Biesdorf, T. J. Schmidt and P. Boillat, Communication—neutron radiography of the water/gas distribution in the porous layers of an operating electrolyser, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(11), F3009 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Cho, Y. Wang and K. S. Chen, Droplet dynamics in a polymer electrolyte fuel cell gas flow channel: Forces, Deformation and detachment. II: Comparisons of analytical solution with numerical and experimental results, J. Power Sources, 2012, 210, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Cho, Y. Wang and K. S. Chen, Droplet dynamics in a polymer electrolyte fuel cell gas flow channel: Forces, deformation, and detachment. I: Theoretical and numerical analyses, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
A. Theodorakakos, T. Ous, M. Gavaises, J. M. Nouri, N. Nikolopoulos and H. Yanagihara, Dynamics of water droplets detached from porous surfaces of relevance to PEM fuel cells, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 300(2), 673–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kai, R. Saito, K. Terabaru, H. Li, H. Nakajima and K. Ito, Effect of temperature on the performance of polymer electrolyte membrane water electrolysis: numerical analysis of electrolysis voltage considering gas/liquid two-phase flow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166(4), F246 CrossRef CAS .
E. Leonard, A. D. Shum, S. Normile, D. C. Sabarirajan, D. G. Yared, X. Xiao and I. V. Zenyuk, Operando X-ray tomography and sub-second radiography for characterizing transport in polymer electrolyte membrane electrolyzer, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 276, 424–433 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Benner, M. Mortazavi and A. D. Santamaria, Numerical simulation of droplet emergence and growth from gas diffusion layers (GDLs) in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell flow channels. in ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition. American Society of Mechanical Engineers,  2018, Vol. 52071, p. V06AT08A065 Search PubMed .
Y. Yoon, Y. Jo and H. S. Kim, Experimental investigation of liquid water droplet removal in a simulated polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell gas channel with gas diffusion layer characteristics, J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 2014, 28(12), 5221–5230 CrossRef .
Y. Li, G. Yang, S. Yu, J. Mo, K. Li, Z. Xie and F. Y. Zhang, High-speed characterization of two-phase flow and bubble dynamics in titanium felt porous media for hydrogen production, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 370, 137751 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bachman, M. Charvet, A. Santamaria, H. Y. Tang, J. W. Park and R. Walker, Experimental investigation of the effect of channel length on performance and water accumulation in a PEMFC parallel flow field, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(22), 17172–17179 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Cho and Y. Wang, Two-phase flow dynamics in a micro channel with heterogeneous surfaces, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2014, 71, 349–360 CrossRef .

          J. M. Lewis ( 2018). Two-phase Flow in High Aspect-ratio Microchannels. University of California, Irvine Search PubMed .
X. C. Adroher and Y. Wang, Ex situ and modeling study of two-phase flow in a single channel of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(22), 9544–9551 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Kim ( 2019). Modeling Micro-and Macro-Scale Two-Phase Flow in 3D Flow Channels of Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells. The Pennsylvania State University Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Porous-Media Flow Fields for Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells: II. Analysis of Channel Two-Phase Flow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156(10), B1134 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bao, Y. Wang and K. Jiao, Liquid droplet detachment and dispersion in metal foam flow field of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 229150 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Satyapal, BOP workshop introduction. 2017. https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2017/05/f34/fcto_bop_workshop_satyapal_0.pdf.

          R. L. Borup, K. L. More and D. J. Myers ( 2018). FC-PAD: Fuel Cell Performance and Durability Consortium Update to USCAR Analysis of Toyota Mirai Components Provided by USCAR, Los Alamos National Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States), No. LA-UR-18-24454 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Combining theory and experiment in electrocatalysis: insights into materials design, Science, 2017, 355, 6321 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Zhao, L. Cao, Y. Chen, E. Zhu, Z. Lin and Y. Huang, High-performance transition metal–doped Pt3Ni octahedra for oxygen reduction reaction, Science, 2015, 348(6240), 1230–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. I. Choi, S. Xie, M. Shao, J. H. Odell, N. Lu, H. C. Peng and Y. Xia, Synthesis and characterization of 9 nm Pt–Ni octahedra with a record high activity of 3.3 A/mgPt for the oxygen reduction reaction, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(7), 3420–3425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Carpenter, T. E. Moylan, R. S. Kukreja, M. H. Atwan and M. M. Tessema, Solvothermal synthesis of platinum alloy nanoparticles for oxygen reduction electrocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(20), 8535–8542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Improved oxygen reduction activity on Pt3Ni (111) via increased surface site availability, Science, 2007, 315(5811), 493–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Polani, F. Luo, S. Ott, P. Strasser and F. Dionigi, Advancements in cathode catalyst and cathode layer design for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12(1), 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Kongkanand ( 2014). High-Activity Dealloyed Catalysts. General Motors LLC, Warren, MI (United States), No. DOE-GM-EE0000458 Search PubMed .
F. Zhu, L. Luo, A. Wu, C. Wang, X. Cheng, S. Shen and J. Zhang, Improving the high-current-density performance of PEMFC through much enhanced utilization of platinum electrocatalysts on carbon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(23), 26076–26083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, W. Gu, J. M. Ziegelbauer and S. Kumaraguru, Carbon support microstructure impact on high current density transport resistances in PEMFC cathode, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167(6), 064515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ott, A. Orfanidi, H. Schmies, B. Anke, H. N. Nong, J. Hübner and P. Strasser, Ionomer distribution control in porous carbon-supported catalyst layers for high-power and low Pt-loaded proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19(1), 77–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Snyder, T. Fujita, M. W. Chen and J. Erlebacher, Oxygen reduction in nanoporous metal–ionic liquid composite electrocatalysts, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9(11), 904–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Benn, H. Uvegi and J. Erlebacher, Characterization of nanoporous metal-ionic liquid composites for the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162(10), H759 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiao, G. A. Ferrero, L. Fernández Velasco, W. Vern Hor, Y. Yang, H. Luo and M. M. Titirici, Boosting the oxygen reduction electrocatalytic performance of nonprecious metal nanocarbons via triple boundary engineering using protic ionic liquids, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(12), 11298–11305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, M. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Wang, B. Li and G. Wu, Atomically dispersed manganese catalysts for oxygen reduction in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1(12), 935–945 CrossRef CAS .
A. Uddin, L. Dunsmore, H. Zhang, L. Hu, G. Wu and S. Litster, High power density platinum group metal-free cathodes for polymer electrolyte fuel cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12(2), 2216–2224 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Du, V. Prabhakaran, X. Xie, S. Park, Y. Wang and Y. Shao, Low-PGM and PGM-free catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells: stability challenges and material solutions, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33(6), 1908232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, Current challenge and perspective of PGM-free cathode catalysts for PEM fuel cells, Front. Energy, 2017, 11(3), 286–298 CrossRef .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. DiAscro, Nonprecious metal catalysts for oxygen reduction in heterogeneous aqueous systems, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(5), 2313–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Litster (2018). Advanced PGM-free cathode engineering for high power density and durability. US DOE 2018 Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Program AMR Proceedings.
Y. Shao, J. P. Dodelet, G. Wu and P. Zelenay, PGM-free cathode catalysts for PEM fuel cells: a mini-review on stability challenges, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(31), 1807615 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang, R. Chenitz, M. Lefèvre, S. Sun and J. P. Dodelet, Is iron involved in the lack of stability of Fe/N/C electrocatalysts used to reduce oxygen at the cathode of PEM fuel cells?, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 111–125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferrandon, X. Wang, A. J. Kropf, D. J. Myers, G. Wu, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Stability of iron species in heat-treated polyaniline–iron–carbon polymer electrolyte fuel cell cathode catalysts, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 110, 282–291 CrossRef CAS .
D. Banham, S. Ye, K. Pei, J. I. Ozaki, T. Kishimoto and Y. Imashiro, A review of the stability and durability of non-precious metal catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cells, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 334–348 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, C. Baldizzone, J. P. Grote, A. K. Schuppert, F. Jaouen and K. J. Mayrhofer, Stability of Fe–N–C catalysts in acidic medium studied by operando spectroscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(43), 12753–12757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. I. Kramm, M. Lefèvre, P. Bogdanoff, D. Schmeißer and J. P. Dodelet, Analyzing Structural Changes of Fe–N–C Cathode Catalysts in PEM Fuel Cell by Mößbauer Spectroscopy of Complete Membrane Electrode Assemblies, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5(21), 3750–3756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Goellner, C. Baldizzone, A. Schuppert, M. T. Sougrati, K. Mayrhofer and F. Jaouen, Degradation of Fe/N/C catalysts upon high polarization in acid medium, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(34), 18454–18462 RSC .
C. Walling, Fenton's reagent revisited, Acc. Chem. Res., 1975, 8, 125–131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, X. Li, F. Yang, B. Li, T. Stracensky, S. Karakalos and H. Xu, Atomically Dispersed MnN4 Catalysts via Environmentally Benign Aqueous Synthesis for Oxygen Reduction: Mechanistic Understanding of Activity and Stability Improvements, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(18), 10523–10534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Jiao, E. Wegener, L. L. Richard, E. Liu, A. Zitolo and Q. Jia, Evolution pathway from iron compounds to Fe1(II)–N4 sites through gas-phase iron during pyrolysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 142(3), 1417–1423 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Karan, PEFC catalyst layer: recent advances in materials, microstructural characterization, and modeling, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 5(1), 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand and M. F. Mathias, The priority and challenge of high-power performance of low-platinum proton-exchange membrane fuel cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(7), 1127–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, N. S. Suraweera, D. C. Joy and D. J. Keffer, Structure of the ionomer film in catalyst layers of proton exchange membrane fuel cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. C, 2013, 117(48), 25305–25316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kurihara, T. Mabuchi and T. Tokumasu, Molecular analysis of structural effect of ionomer on oxygen permeation properties in PEFC, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164(6), F628 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Choo, K. H. Oh, J. K. Park and H. T. Kim, Analysis of oxygen transport in cathode catalyst layer of low-pt-loaded fuel cells, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2(3), 382–388 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kudo, R. Jinnouchi and Y. Morimoto, Humidity and temperature dependences of oxygen transport resistance of Nafion thin film on platinum electrode, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 209, 682–690 CrossRef CAS .
D. Novitski and S. Holdcroft, Determination of O2 mass transport at the Pt|PFSA ionomer interface under reduced relative humidity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(49), 27314–27323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jinnouchi, K. Kudo, N. Kitano and Y. Morimoto, Molecular dynamics simulations on O2 permeation through Nafion ionomer on platinum surface, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 767–776 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Haug, I. Zenyuk, J. Allen, M. Lindell, F. Sun, J. Abulu and I. Khan ( 2020). Novel Ionomers and electrode structures for improved PEMFC electrode performance at low PGM loadings, (No. DOE-3M-0007650). 3M Company, Maplewood, MN (United States) Search PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Qin, T. Rockward, J. Wu, J. Li, G. Li and Y. Song, Photo-driven growth of a monolayer of platinum spherical-nanocrowns uniformly coated on a membrane toward fuel cell applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(44), 23284–23292 RSC .
L. Fan, Y. Wang and K. Jiao, Oxygen transport routes in ionomer film on polyhedral platinum nanoparticles, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(12), 17487–17495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chandan, M. Hattenberger, A. El-Kharouf, S. Du, A. Dhir, V. Self and W. Bujalski, High temperature (HT) polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEMFC)–A review, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 264–278 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Araya, F. Zhou, V. Liso, S. L. Sahlin, J. R. Vang, S. Thomas and S. K. Kær, A comprehensive review of PBI-based high temperature PEM fuel cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41(46), 21310–21344 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. Li, D. Aili, H. A. Hjuler and J. O. Jensen ( 2016). High temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells. Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London, Springer, p. 545 Search PubMed .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, H. Becker, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup and J. O. Jensen, Long-term durability of PBI-based HT-PEM fuel cells: effect of operating parameters, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165(6), F3053 CrossRef .
V. Atanasov, A. S. Lee, E. J. Park, S. Maurya, E. D. Baca, C. Fujimoto and Y. S. Kim, Synergistically integrated phosphonated poly(pentafluorostyrene) for fuel cells, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20(3), 370–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. L. Borup, K. L. More and A. Z. Weber FC-PAD: Fuel Cell Performance and Durability Consortium (Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program Annual Merit Review Proceedings, 2018. https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review18/fc135_borup_2018_o.pdf.

          B. D. James, J. M. Huya-Kouadio, C. Houchins and D. A. DeSantis ( 2016). Mass Production Cost Estimation of Direct H2 PEM Fuel Cell Systems for Transportation Applications (2012-2016), (No. DOE-StrategicAnalysis-5236-1). Strategic Analysis Inc., Arlington, VA (United States) Search PubMed .

          C. K. Mittelsteadt, A. Argun, C. Lacier and J. Willey Dimensionally Stable High Performance Membranes. Annual Progress Report. https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review14/fc036_mittelsteadt_2014_p.pdf.

          D. Marghitu ( 2001). Mechanical Engineer's Handbook, 1st edn Search PubMed .
J. Zhou, B. Seo, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, Investigation of a cost-effective strategy for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells: high power density operation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46(71), 35448–35458 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, H. Kim and H. Kim, Application of carbon felt as a flow distributor for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166(2), F74 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, W. Hwang, M. S. Lim, S. Kim, C. Y. Ahn, O. H. Kim and Y. E. Sung, Achieving breakthrough performance caused by optimized metal foam flow field in fuel cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(39), 22074–22084 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Yoshizumi, H. Kubo and M. Okumura ( 2021). Development of High-Performance FC Stack for the New MIRAI, (No. 2021-01-0740). SAE Technical Paper Search PubMed .
Y. Wang and X. Feng, Analysis of the reaction rates in the cathode electrode of polymer electrolyte fuel Cells: II. Dual-Layer electrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156(3), B403 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Tutorial on the fundamental characteristics and practical properties of nanostructured thin film (NSTF) catalysts, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(6), F522 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Haug, Novel ionomers and electrode structures for improved PEMFC electrode performance at low PGM loadings, US Department of Energy Annual Merit Review, June 13–15,  2018, in Washington, D.C., 2018, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/progress18/fc_haug_2018.pdf.
J. Ko and H. Ju, Comparison of numerical simulation results and experimental data during cold-start of polymer electrolyte fuel cells, Appl. Energy, 2012, 94, 364–374 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mishler, Y. Wang, R. Lujan, R. Mukundan and R. L. Borup, An experimental study of polymer electrolyte fuel cell operation at sub-freezing temperatures, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(6), F514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo and K. Jiao, Cold start of proton exchange membrane fuel cell, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 64, 29–61 CrossRef .
Y. Tabuchi, T. Shiomi, O. Aoki, N. Kubo and K. Shinohara, Effects of heat and water transport on the performance of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell under high current density operation, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56(1), 352–360 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Sasmito, E. Birgersson and A. S. Mujumdar, Computational study of thermal, water and gas management in PEM fuel cell stacks, Hydrogen Energy: Challenges Perspect., 2012, 305 CAS .
F. J. Asensio, J. I. San Martín, I. Zamora, G. Saldaña and O. Oñederra, Analysis of electrochemical and thermal models and modeling techniques for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 113, 109283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, G. Maranzana, S. Didierjean, J. Dillet and O. Lottin, Measurements of electrode temperatures, heat and water fluxes in PEMFCs: conclusions about transfer mechanisms, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160(2), F191 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and K. S. Chen, Elucidating two-phase transport in a polymer electrolyte fuel cell, Part 1: characterizing flow regimes with a dimensionless group, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2011, 66(15), 3557–3567 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and M. Gundevia, Measurement of thermal conductivity and heat pipe effect in hydrophilic and hydrophobic carbon papers, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 60, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Demuren and R. L. Edwards ( 2020). Modeling Proton Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells—A Review. 50 Years of CFD in Engineering Sciences, pp. 513–547 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, B. Seo, B. Wang, N. Zamel, K. Jiao and X. C. Adroher, Fundamentals, materials, and machine learning of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell technology, Energy AI, 2020, 100014 CrossRef .

          http://www.platinum.matthey.com/prices/price-charts
        .
Daily Metal Prices. https://www.dailymetalprice.com/metalprices.php?c=ir&u=kg&d=10 (last access 5/14/2021).
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z. Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao and Y. Li, Engineering the electronic structure of single atom Ru sites via compressive strain boosts acidic water oxidation electrocatalysis, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2(4), 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Nong, T. Reier, H. S. Oh, M. Gliech, P. Paciok, T. H.-T. Vu and P. Strasser, A unique oxygen ligand environment facilitates water oxidation in hole-doped IrNiOx core–shell electrocatalysts, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1(11), 841–851 CrossRef CAS .
T. Reier, M. Oezaslan and P. Strasser, Electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (OER) on Ru, Ir, and Pt catalysts: a comparative study of nanoparticles and bulk materials, ACS Catal., 2012, 2(8), 1765–1772 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chang, N. Danilovic, K. C. Chang, R. Subbaraman, A. P. Paulikas, D. D. Fong and N. M. Markovic, Functional links between stability and reactivity of strontium ruthenate single crystals during oxygen evolution, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, A. Stocks, B. Rasimick, K. More and H. Xu, Highly active, durable dispersed iridium nanocatalysts for PEM water electrolyzers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165(2), F82 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Steinbach, Low-cost, High Performance Catalyst Coated Membranes for PEM Water Electrolyzers. U.S. DOE 2020 Annual Merit Review (2020) https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review20/ta026_steinbach_2020_o.pdf.
K. A. Lewinski, D. van der Vliet and S. M. Luopa, NSTF advances for PEM electrolysis-the effect of alloying on activity of NSTF electrolyzer catalysts and performance of NSTF based PEM electrolyzers, ECS Trans., 2015, 69(17), 893 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Lewinski, F. Sun, S. Luopa, J. Park, R. Masel and L. Nereng (2017, June). Operation of low-temp electrolyzers at very high current densities: a pipe dream or an opportunity? In 1st International Conference on Electrolysis.

          K. A. Lewinski and S. M. Luopa, High power water electrolysis as a new paradigm for operation of PEM electrolyzer, in ECS Meeting Abstracts, IOP Publishing,  2015, No. 36, p. 1948 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. He, G. Yang, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Recent advances and prospective in ruthenium-based materials for electrochemical water splitting, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(11), 9973–10011 CrossRef CAS .
R. Forgie, G. Bugosh, K. C. Neyerlin, Z. Liu and P. Strasser, Bimetallic Ru electrocatalysts for the OER and electrolytic water splitting in acidic media, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13(4), B36 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, S. Cheong, R. F. Webster, C. E. Marjo, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, Pd–Ru core–shell nanoparticles with tunable shell thickness for active and stable oxygen evolution performance, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(32), 15173–15177 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Ji, R. Yin, Y. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Transition metal-doped ultrathin RuO2 networked nanowires for efficient overall water splitting across a broad pH range, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(11), 6411–6416 RSC .
Y. Lin, Z. Tian, L. Zhang, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, B. J. Deibert and L. Chen, Chromium-ruthenium oxide solid solution electrocatalyst for highly efficient oxygen evolution reaction in acidic media, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, P. C. Shih, K. C. Tsao, Y. T. Pan, X. Yin, C. J. Sun and H. Yang, High-performance pyrochlore-type yttrium ruthenate electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution reaction in acidic media, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(34), 12076–12083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/progress19/h2f_p157_liu_2019.pdf
        .

          L. Chong, H. Wang and D. J. Liu ( 2019). PGM-Free Oer Catalysts for PEM Electrolyzer Application. in ECS Meeting Abstracts, No. 29, p. 1443. IOP Publishing Search PubMed .
L. Du, L. Xing, G. Zhang, M. Dubois and S. Sun, Strategies for engineering high-performance PGM-free catalysts toward oxygen reduction and evolution reactions, Small Methods, 2020, 4(6), 2000016 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, Recent trends and perspectives in electrochemical water splitting with an emphasis on sulfide, selenide, and phosphide catalysts of Fe, Co, and Ni: a review, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(12), 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, C. T. He, S. Zhao, J. Li, W. Lin, Z. Yuan and D. Yu, A general approach to cobalt-based homobimetallic phosphide ultrathin nanosheets for highly efficient oxygen evolution in alkaline media, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(4), 893–899 RSC .
Z. Liu, Y. Wang, R. Chen, C. Chen, H. Yang, J. Ma and S. Wang, Quaternary bimetallic phosphosulphide nanosheets derived from prussian blue analogues: origin of the ultra-high activity for oxygen evolution, J. Power Sources, 2018, 403, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Qiao, N. Chen, W. Chen and S. Sun, Ultra-long life rechargeable zinc-air battery based on high-performance trimetallic nitride and NCNT hybrid bifunctional electrocatalysts, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, A perovskite oxide optimized for oxygen evolution catalysis from molecular orbital principles, Science, 2011, 334(6061), 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, J. Suntivich, Y. L. Lee and Y. Shao-Horn, Influence of oxygen evolution during water oxidation on the surface of perovskite oxide catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3(22), 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, W. Tu, Y. Sheng, Y. Du, M. Kraft, A. Borgna and R. Xu, A Highly Efficient Oxygen Evolution Catalyst Consisting of Interconnected Nickel–Iron-Layered Double Hydroxide and Carbon Nanodomains, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(5), 1705106 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Chang, J. G. Connell, N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, K. C. Chang, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Activity–stability relationship in the surface electrochemistry of the oxygen evolution reaction, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 176, 125–133 RSC .
Y. Cui, Y. Wu, Z. Wang, X. Yao, Y. Wei, Y. Kang and L. Gan, Mitigating metal dissolution and redeposition of Pt–Co catalysts in PEM fuel cells: impacts of structural ordering and particle size, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167(6), 064520 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Alia, B. Rasimick, C. Ngo, K. C. Neyerlin, S. S. Kocha, S. Pylypenko and B. S. Pivovar, Activity and durability of iridium nanoparticles in the oxygen evolution reaction, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(11), F3105 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bernt, A. Hartig-Weiß, M. F. Tovini, H. A. El-Sayed, C. Schramm, J. Schröter and H. A. Gasteiger, Current challenges in catalyst development for PEM water electrolyzers, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2020, 92(1–2), 31–39 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Yuan, H. Li, S. Zhang, J. Martin and H. Wang, A review of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell durability test protocols, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(22), 9107–9116 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gowrisankaran, S. S. Reynolds and M. Samano, Intermittency and the value of renewable energy, J. Political Economy, 2016, 124(4), 1187–1234 CrossRef .
P. Moçoteguy and A. Brisse, A review and comprehensive analysis of degradation mechanisms of solid oxide electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38(36), 15887–15902 CrossRef .
Y. S. Kim, Polymer electrolytes with high ionic concentration for fuel cells and electrolyzers, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3(3), 1250–1270 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Li, Y. S. Kim and A. S.-S. Lee ( 2021). U.S. Patent Application, No. 17/025,493 Search PubMed .
D. Aili, M. K. Hansen, C. Pan, Q. Li, E. Christensen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Phosphoric acid doped membranes based on Nafion®, PBI and their blends–Membrane preparation, characterization and steam electrolysis testing, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36(12), 6985–6993 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Hansen, D. Aili, E. Christensen, C. Pan, S. Eriksen, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, PEM steam electrolysis at 130 C using a phosphoric acid doped short side chain PFSA membrane, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(15), 10992–11000 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Aricò, A. Di Blasi, G. Brunaccini, F. Sergi, G. Dispenza, L. Andaloro and D. J. Jones, High temperature operation of a solid polymer electrolyte fuel cell stack based on a new ionomer membrane, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10(6), 1013–1023 CrossRef .
J. R. Rowlett, Y. Chen, A. T. Shaver, O. Lane, C. Mittelsteadt, H. Xu and J. E. McGrath, Multiblock poly (arylene ether nitrile) disulfonated poly (arylene ether sulfone) copolymers for proton exchange membranes: Part 1
synthesis and characterization, Polymer, 2013, 54(23), 6305–6313 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Rowlett, V. Lilavivat, A. T. Shaver, Y. Chen, A. Daryaei, H. Xu and J. E. McGrath, Multiblock poly (arylene ether nitrile) disulfonated poly (arylene ether sulfone) copolymers for proton exchange membranes: Part 2 electrochemical and H2/Air fuel cell analysis, Polymer, 2017, 122, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Park, J. Kim, J. Han, K. Kim, S. Park, S. Kim and Y. E. Sung, High-performance proton-exchange membrane water electrolysis using a sulfonated poly (arylene ether sulfone) membrane and ionomer, J. Membr. Sci., 2021, 620, 118871 CrossRef CAS .

          A. K. Kisor, M. Errico, T. I. Valdez, M. Hamdan, J. Willey, T. Norman and M. Hoberecht ( 2012). Testing of 17-Cell Dimensionally Stable Membrane (DSA) High-Pressure Electrolysis Stack. in Electrochemical Society Meeting Abstracts 222. The Electrochemical Society, Inc., No. 13, pp. 1703–1703 Search PubMed .

          C. K. Mittelsteadt ( 2013). High Temperature PEM Electrolysis. in ECS Meeting Abstracts, No. 15, p. 1342. IOP Publishing Search PubMed .
J. Mo, S. M. Steen III, F. Y. Zhang, T. J. Toops, M. P. Brady and J. B. Green Jr, Electrochemical investigation of stainless steel corrosion in a proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40(36), 12506–12511 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bender, M. Carmo, T. Smolinka, A. Gago, N. Danilovic, M. Mueller and D. Stolten, Initial approaches in benchmarking and round robin testing for proton exchange membrane water electrolyzers, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(18), 9174–9187 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Bonino, J. J. Concepcion, J. A. Trainham, T. J. Meyer and J. Newman, Water electrolysis with a homogeneous catalyst in an electrochemical cell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(10), F1143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, G. Yang, J. Mo, Y. Li, S. Yu, D. A. Cullen and F. Y. Zhang, Novel thin/tunable gas diffusion electrodes with ultra-low catalyst loading for hydrogen evolution reactions in proton exchange membrane electrolyzer cells, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 434–441 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, S. M. Alia, J. L. Young and G. Bender, Effects of various parameters of different porous transport layers in proton exchange membrane water electrolysis, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 354, 136641 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Fadzillah, M. I. Rosli, M. Z.-M. Talib, S. K. Kamarudin and W. R.-W. Daud, Review on microstructure modelling of a gas diffusion layer for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 1001–1009 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, Z. Niu, H. Li, K. Jiao and Y. Wang, Recent progress of gas diffusion layer in proton exchange membrane fuel cell: two-phase flow and material properties, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46(2021), 8640–8671 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lettenmeier, S. Kolb, N. Sata, A. Fallisch, L. Zielke, S. Thiele and K. A. Friedrich, Comprehensive investigation of novel pore-graded gas diffusion layers for high-performance and cost-effective proton exchange membrane electrolyzers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10(12), 2521–2533 RSC .
P. Lettenmeier, S. Kolb, F. Burggraf, A. S. Gago and K. A. Friedrich, Towards developing a backing layer for proton exchange membrane electrolyzers, J. Power Sources, 2016, 311, 153–158 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ito, T. Maeda, A. Nakano, C. M. Hwang, M. Ishida, A. Kato and T. Yoshida, Experimental study on porous current collectors of PEM electrolyzers, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(9), 7418–7428 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Grigoriev, P. Millet, S. A. Volobuev and V. N. Fateev, Optimization of porous current collectors for PEM water electrolysers, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34(11), 4968–4973 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Lewinski, S. M. Luopa, F. Sun, C. Jentzsch and D. F. van der Vliet ( 2018). High Power Water Electrolysis as a New Paradigm for Operation of PEM Electrolyzer–The Story Continues. in ECS Meeting Abstracts, No. 29, p. 1637. IOP Publishing Search PubMed .
T. Lickert, M. L. Kiermaier, K. Bromberger, J. Ghinaiya, S. Metz, A. Fallisch and T. Smolinka, On the influence of the anodic porous transport layer on PEM electrolysis performance at high current densities, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45(11), 6047–6058 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, J. Wu, Z. Bao, Y. Wang, Y. Yin and K. Jiao, Two-phase flow and oxygen transport in the perforated gas diffusion layer of proton exchange membrane fuel cell, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 139, 58–68 CrossRef CAS .
P. Randive, A. Dalal and P. P. Mukherjee, Probing the influence of superhydrophobicity and mixed wettability on droplet displacement behavior, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2014, 17(4), 657–674 CrossRef .
N. Ge, S. Chevalier, J. Lee, R. Yip, R. Banerjee, M. G. George and A. Bazylak, Non-isothermal two-phase transport in a polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell with crack-free microporous layers, Int. J. Heat Mass Trans., 2017, 107, 418–431 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Sun, K. Jiao and Y. Wang, Thermal management of polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells: a review of cooling methods, material properties, and durability, Appl. Energy, 2021, 286, 116496 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jang, S. Chung and J. Lee, In situ demonstration of anodic interface degradation during water electrolysis: corrosion and passivation, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 365, 137276 CrossRef CAS .
P. Olivier, C. Bourasseau and P. B. Bouamama, Low-temperature electrolysis system modelling: a review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 78, 280–300 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Falcão and A. M.-F. R. Pinto, A review on PEM electrolyzer modelling: guidelines for beginners, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 261, 121184 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yun Wang
	Prof. Yun Wang received his BS and MS degrees in Mechanics and Engineering Science from Peking University in 1998 and 2001, respectively. He went to the Pennsylvania State University for a PhD degree in 2006, and then joined as faculty in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering of the UC Irvine (UCI). Dr Wang has produced over 80 publications in the areas of PEM fuel cells, PEM electrolysis cells, Li–air batteries, and other energy systems. Several of his seminal studies are highly cited in major energy journals. Prof. Wang is currently a Professor at UCI and an RSC and ASME fellow.

Yiheng Pang
	Yiheng Pang received his BS and MS in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering from the UC Irvine in 2019 and 2020, respectively. He is now pursuing his PhD in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at UC Irvine. His research interests include PEM fuel cells, novel heat pipes, and advanced fabrication. His current research involves the application of machine learning for PEM fuel cells.

Hui Xu
	Dr Hui Xu is currently Chief Technology Officer at Giner, Inc. In his capacity, he oversees component design and system development for a variety of energy technologies pertaining to fuel cells and electrolyzers. He is the principal investigator of multiple projects funded by the DOE and multiple industrial partners, worth $40 million. He has published nearly 50 peer-reviewed papers and filed 9 patents. Dr Xu was inducted to the Academy of Distinguished Engineers of the University of Connecticut in 2020. He received a Special Recognition Award in 2021 at the DOE's H2 and Fuel Cell Annual Merit Review Meeting.

Andrew Martinez
	Andrew Martinez is the Hydrogen Program Expert at the California Air Resources Board. In this role, he has spent the past several years analyzing the development of the light-duty hydrogen fueling network in California, modeling scenarios for future development, and supporting hydrogen station incentive programs. Andrew's work also assesses the development and deployment of fuel cell electric vehicles. Andrew's past experience includes air quality modeling and research on high-temperature solid oxide fuel cells, including their application to freight rail locomotives. Andrew holds a PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the University of California, Irvine.

Broader context
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from fossil fuels are a major concern and cause climate change. Using renewable hydrogen as an energy carrier is promising to mitigate or resolve this concern. Polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells or PEMFCs and PEM electrolysis cells or PEMECs play an important role in hydrogen utilization to decarbonize our energy use. PEMFCs electrochemically convert hydrogen to electrical energy with water as the byproduct whereas PEMECs produce pure hydrogen through water splitting using electrical energy sources, including renewables. They share similarities in structure, fundamentals, and materials and have high efficiency, and have been actively developed with major effort towards global decarbonization. At present, the high cost and the lack of a hydrogen infrastructure are two main barriers to the worldwide deployment of PEMFCs. The cost of producing hydrogen via PEMECs has been a limiting factor that prevents their large-scale deployment. This review presents the current status of the two technologies, describes their similarities and differences with respect to structures, materials, and fundamentals, and discusses the major challenges and opportunities in the widespread deployment of PEMFCs and PEMECs as well as hydrogen infrastructure development.


 	Fig. 1  Schematics of the PEM fuel cell (left) and PEM electrolysis cell (right): operation principles, reactions, and structures (GDL − gas diffusion layer; MPL − microporous layer; CL − catalyst layer; PTL − porous transport layer).	 


Electrochemical reactions	Anode: H2 → 2H+ + 2e−	Anode: H2O(liquid) →½O2 + 2e− +2H+
Cathode: ½O2 + 2e− + 2H+ → H2O	Cathode: 2H+ + 2e− → H2
Overall: H2 + ½ O2 → H2O	Overall: H2O(liquid) → H2 + ½ O2
Operating temperature	Capable of operation from −40 to 120 °C. Usually around 80 °C.	Capable of operation from 25–120 °C. Usually 60–90 °C.
Operating pressure	1–2 atm.	1–50 atm.
Durability target/performance6–8	8000 h and 30000 h for light-and heavy-duty FECVs.	20 yearsa or over.

	Stationary fuel cell: 80000–130000 h.b	90000 hc by 2030.
Cost target6,9	Light-duty FCEV: $30 per kW.	$2 per kg hydrogen.

	Heavy-duty FCEV: $60 per kW.	$1 per kg hydrogen within a decade (a recent US DOE H2 Shot target).




Membrane	10–50 μm thick PEM; Nafion is a popular PEM material.	100–200 μm thick PEM; Nafion is a popular PEM material.
Catalyst layer (CL)	0.1–10 μm thick. A porous layer consisting of Pt-based catalyst nanoparticles, a catalyst support (e.g. carbon black), and an ionomer. Catalyst and carbon particle sizes are about 1–5 nm and 10–100 nm, respectively. The CL's pore size is about 100 nm. Pt loading is about 0.1–0.4 mg cm−2.	1–10 μm thick. A porous layer with catalyst nanoparticles, e.g. Ir-based (anode) or Pt-based (cathode), and with/without catalyst support, e.g. semi-conductive metal oxides like doped titanium oxide and niobium oxide. The Ir-based catalyst particle size is 1–10 nm. Ir loading is about 0.2–2 mg cm−2.
Gas diffusion layer (GDL)/porous transport layer (PTL)	Carbon fiber based papers with hydrophobic agents (e.g. PTFE). A MPL is coated on the CL side of a GDL. The pore sizes are about 20–50 μm for GDLs and 0.1–1 μm for MPLs. The thicknesses are about 100–200 μm (GDL) and 50 μm (MPL).	A 50–500 μm thick sintered porous Ti sinter or perforated Ti sheet is used as an anode. The pore size is about 20–100 μm. Ti surface is plated with platinum or other materials (e.g. TiN and Au) for corrosion protection. Carbon fiber based porous layers (e.g. carbon cloth) are used as the cathode.
Bipolar plate (BP)	Metallic plate, graphite plate, or composite plate. It provides pathways for heat and electron transfer and mechanical support for electrodes. Metallic BPs need a proper protective coating.	Metallic or composite plate that must resist corrosion in an electrolysis environment. It provides pathways for heat and electron transfer and mechanical support for electrodes. Metallic BPs need a proper protective coating.
Flow field	Flow channel configuration or porous media flow fields for gas reactant distribution and water removal. Parallel, serpentine, and pin type flow fields are common. The channel depth is about 0.3–1 mm.	Flow channel configuration for liquid water supply and oxygen gas removal. Parallel flow fields or screens are common. The channel depth is about 1 mm.

 	Fig. 2  Manufacturing cost curves for 1-MW PEMEC systems: (a) catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) manufactured by spray coating; (b) Ti-based PTL; (c) stainless-steel BPs fabricated by stamping; and (d) cost analysis for stack assembly production. In balance-of-plant (BOP), power electronics accounts for half of the BOP cost; and the water circulation and hydrogen processing subsystems each share about one-fifth of the cost, based on one analysis.15	 

 	Fig. 3  U.S hydrogen electrolysis cell distributions and capacity.29	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Number of HRSs and (b) hydrogen dispensed by quarter in the U.S.30 and projected HRSs.31	 

 	Fig. 5  Numbers of HRSs and FCEVs and electrolysis hydrogen production capacity in various countries.35	 

California	2030	Self-sufficiency report: $300 M
Australia37	—	Advancing hydrogen fund: $300 M
British Columbia38	2025	BC hydrogen study recommended investment: $138 M
Canada39,40	2023, 2050	Charging and hydrogen stations: $150 M; low-carbon and zero emission fuels fund (includes H2 and other technologies): $1.5 B
Chile41	2025	National green hydrogen strategy: $50 M
China42	2030	Reported in 2019: $17 B
France43	2030	National hydrogen strategy: $8.5 B
Germany44	2030	National hydrogen strategy: $10 B
Japan45,46	2030	Hydrogen commercialization plan: $19 B

	
	Reported fiscal year 2020 total: $670 M
Netherlands47,48	2030	Hydrogen production annual support: $43 M

	
	Northern Netherlands plan (Public–Private): $11 B
Portugal49	2030	National hydrogen strategy (Public–Private): $7.7 B
Scotland50	2025, 2030	Hydrogen policy statement: $137 M
South Korea51,52	2026	Green new deal (includes H2 and other technologies: $62 B

	
	Planned 2021 investment: $524 M
Spain53	2023	Green hydrogen recovery investment: $1.8 B
United Kingdom54	2030	Net zero hydrogen fund: $330 M

 	Fig. 6  Relative station operating cost break-down for hydrogen station networks. Data obtained from in-operation stations and extensive interview/surveys of the HFS industry participants by the CARB from 2016–2021.55	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Chemical structure of Nafion; (b) schematic of the cluster–network model of hydrated Nafion,71 and (c) molecular structure of Nafion.72	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 8  Equilibrium water uptake λ for Nafion® membranes (Zawodzinski 199176 and Hinatsu 199477 for N117; Peron 2010 for NR21178).	 

Water content [# of H2O/SO3H− groups]	
 where a is the water activity (Nafion 117)75
Density [kg m−3]	

80

Ionic conductivity [S m−1]	

75


	

81,82


	
σ

m
 = 9.2 (λ = 11.5) at 20 °C with the Activation energy from Arrhenius plot Ea = 1.87 kcal mol−183

	For −30 to 0 °C:

	
84
Water diffusivity [m2 s−1] or [cm2 s−1]	
85,86

	

75


	
81,87

	
85

	
88
Electro-osmotic drag coefficient	
89

	
75

	
81,82

	
n

d
 = 0.0134 × T + 0.0390

	
88
Hydraulic permeability, Km [cm2]	About 4 × 10−16 at 23 °C (Nafion 115, 1110 and 212)91
Gas diffusivity [m2 s−1]	
;92,93

	
 for dry Nafion (117) at 1 atm upstream pressure and 35 °C;

	
 for dry Nafion (NRE 211) at 2 atm and 35 °C;94

	
 for dry Nafion (1035) at 2 atm and 35 °C;95

	
 for wet Nafion 117 at 25 °C;96

	
 for wet Nafion 117 at 25 °C;97

	
 for wet Nafion 117 at 20 °C;98

	
D

O2

m
 = 0.24 × 10−10 for wet Nafion 117 at 30 °C.99
Thermal conductivity [W m−1 K−1]	
k = (0.177 ± 0.008) + (3.7 ± 0.6)10−3λ for Nafion 112, 115, 117 and 1110100
	(2)
ΔH + ΔG + TΔS	(3)
ΔG = nFErev	(4)
ΔH = nFEtn	(5)

 	Fig. 9  Correlations between different forms of voltage or energy and temperature based on data.74,105,106 The subfreezing operation (−40 to 0 °C) is for PEMFCs, e.g. cold start. PEMECs are free of subfreezing operation due to the use of a liquid water reactant. The dashed lines represent the cases for water in the liquid state.	 
ηvoltage,PEMEC = Etn/Vcell	(6)
ηvoltage,PEMEC = Vcell/Erev	(7)
ηvoltage,PEMEC = Vcell/Etn	(8)
	(9)


Membrane	Water transport (diffusion, EOD, & hydraulic permeation);	Water transport (usually hydraulic permeation and EOD);
Gas (H2, O2, N2) cross-over;	Hydrogen cross-over;
Heat production (Joule heat);	Heat production (Joule heat);
Heat transport (conduction).	Heat transport (conduction).
Catalyst layer (CL)	HOR in anode; ORR in cathode;	HER in cathode; OER in anode;
H+ transport in ionomer network;	H+ transport;
e− transport in carbon network;	Liquid water flow in pore network;
Water transport in the pore and ionomer networks;	e− transport in the catalyst network;
Oxygen diffusion in the pore network and across the ionomer thin film;	O2 gas flow in the pore network;
Heat production (reversible entropy heat, irreversible heat due to overpotential, Joule heat, and latent heat during phase change);	Heat production (reversible heat due to entropy change, irreversible heat due to overpotential, Joule heat, and latent heat during phase change);
Heat transport (mainly conduction).	Heat transport (mainly conduction).
Gas diffusion layer (GDL) or porous transport layer (PTL)	Oxygen and water vapor transport (usually diffusion dominates) in the cathode;	Oxygen–water vapor gas flow in the anode;
Hydrogen and water vapor transport (usually diffusion dominates) in the anode;	Hydrogen–water vapor gas transport in the cathode;
Liquid water transport;	Liquid water flow;
Heat transport (mainly conduction) including heat pipe effect;	Heat transport (mainly conduction);
Electron conduction.	Electron conduction.
Bipolar plate	Heat transport (conduction); Electron conduction
Flow field	Liquid water droplet dynamics on the GDL surface;	Gas bubble dynamics on the anode PTL surface;
Two-phase flow in channels (usually mist or film flow) and at heterogeneity (e.g. expansion to manifold).	Two-phase flow in channels (usually bubble flow).

 	Fig. 10  Sources of performance loss in PEMECs at 80 °C.108	 
	(10)
	(11)
0 = ∇·(σeffs∇Φ(s)) − j and 0 = ∇·(σeffm∇Φ(m)) + j	(12)
a = a0(1 − s)τs	(13)

 	Fig. 11  (a) Current density and (b) temperature distributions at 0.5 A cm−2 in a PEMEC;113 and (c) local current density from inlet to outlet at 353.15 K and 1.0 A cm−2 and (d) at two temperatures in a PEMFC.87,114	 
	(14)

 	Fig. 12  (a) A two-phase flow in the GFCs of a PEMFC;115 (b) water thickness contours in a PEMFC detected by neutron radiography under 50% and 100% inlet RH and 1.2 A cm−2;116 (c) bubble production in a PEMEC at 2 A cm−2;117 (d) gas distribution in the anode Ti fiber PTL during PEMEC power up, voltage jump from 0 to 1.5 V;118 (e) liquid water distribution in a PEMEC under 2.0 and 2.5 A cm−2.119	 
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 13  (a) Droplet blockage and interaction with air flow on the GDL in two regions of channel flow, (b) droplet dynamics on the GDL surface,120 and (c) the detachment velocity as a function of droplet size in PEMFCs;121,122 (d) schematic of the oxygen bubble on the anode PTL surface,123 (e) radiographs of an oxygen bubble on the PTL surface for a time sequence of 0–800 ms (the scale bar is 200 μm.); and (f) bubble diameter vs. time at three current densities.124	 

 	Fig. 14  Strategies for catalyst development.137	 

 	Fig. 15  PEMFC performance with various catalysts: (a) 20Mn-NC-second and 20Fe-NC-second catalysts. Error bars represent the standard deviation from at least three independent measurements.150 (b) Fe–N–C catalyst of 100 nm size under 4.0 mg cm−2 loading, I/C of 0.6, N211 PEM, 94 °C, H2/air or O2 flow rate of 200/1000 sccm, and 1.7 atm H2/air or O2 partial pressure.151	 

 	Fig. 16  The number of O2 molecules reaching Pt nanoparticles via the ionomer film (a and b) and portions of O2 fluxes at different locations (c and d). The symbol colors (a and b) match the bead colors in the different locations of Pt nanoparticles; and (e) schematics of O2 permeation routes.176	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The thermal perforation process scheme in DSM™ fabrication; (b) SEM image of a 20 μm thick DSM™ with its support and ionomer constituents; and (c) cost projection for DSM™ fabrication.184	 
	(21)

 	Fig. 18  ORR rate profiles across a cathode CL: (a) 10 μm thick & (b) 2 μm thick.186	 
	(22)

 	Fig. 19  (a) and (c) HAADF-STEM images and (b) and (d) the corresponding EDS elemental map of Ir38%/W-TiO2 (Ti = red; Ir = green); (e) atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image showing an interlinked chain/island of Ir nanoparticles with dispersed single atoms of Ir (bright dots marked by yellow arrow) on the surface of the WxTi1−xO2 support particle (darker background); and (f) single cell polarization curves comparing MEAs (Nafion@ 115) with low PGM loading (0.4 mgIr cm−2 – red), Ir38%/W-TiO2 (0.4 mgIr cm−2 – green), and industrial baseline Ir-black (2 mgPt cm−2 + 2 mgIr cm−2 – black) with the Pt/C cathode (0.4 mgPt cm−2) at 80 °C.210	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) 3-D model of an IrNiOx core–shell nanoparticle with a metallic IrNi alloy core and an Ir oxide shell. Oxygen atoms are shown in red, iridium in grey, and nickel in green; and (b) Ir-mass-based OER activities (jmass) in acidic electrolyte of IrNiOx nanoparticles compared with those of commercial IrO2 nanoparticles.207	 

 	Fig. 21  Comparison of (a) Ru activity with Ir and Pt;208 and (b) activity of Ru-based OER catalysts.206	 

 	Fig. 22  (a–c) Schematics of the SrRuO3 (SRO) films with different crystal structures grown on Nb-doped SrTiO3 (STO) substrates (001), (110), and (111) respectively; (d) CVs of the SRO (001), (110), and (111) films; (e) schematics and current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the SRO/Nb:STO interface. Samples with and without a side contact (SC) between the SRO top surface and the backside of the substrate are denoted by SRO|SC (red line) and SRO (grey line), respectively; and (f) activity and stability of different Ru catalysts.231	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Liquid water saturation profiles across the anode PTLs; (b) current density in-plane profiles from the channel to land;111 (c) polarization curves with three anode PTL thicknesses; and (d) image from visualization and schematic of oxygen bubble formation in an anode PTL.117	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
