Recent advances in interfacial solar vapor generation: clean water production and beyond  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA10083E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA10083E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 5978-6015Recent advances in interfacial solar vapor generation: clean water production and beyond

        
          
            Shudong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yuheng 
            Gu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xujiang 
            Chao
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Guanghan 
            Huang
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Dahua 
            Shou
          
          
        
      *bef
aSchool of Advanced Manufacturing, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China. E-mail: yushd6@mail.sysu.edu.cn
bSchool of Fashion and Textiles, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China. E-mail: dahua.shou@polyu.edu.hk
cSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710072, China
dState Key Laboratory of Precision Electronic Manufacturing Technology and Equipment, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
eResearch Institute for Smart Energy, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China
fFuture Intelligent Wear Centre, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China
Received 
      30th December 2022
    , Accepted 13th February 2023First published on 13th February 2023AbstractInterfacial solar vapor generation (ISVG) was first proposed in 2014 and it has gained more and more attention from academia due to its tremendous improvement in evaporation efficiency compared with previous bottom and volumetric heating designs. With significant efforts put into this field, the current evaporation rate of the system can attain 4 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation. To catch up with the up-to-date development of ISVG systems, we prepare this review article to summarize the recent development in this field. In this review, we first introduce the constituent elements of an ISVG system, namely substrates and photothermal materials. Following this, several fabrication techniques for ISVG systems are highlighted to enable all-in-one ISVG architecture designs. The central parts of this review include the design principles and optimization strategies of ISVG systems, salt rejection and condensation strategies. Finally, various application scenarios, including seawater desalination, sterilization, and water-electricity/water-fuel production, are introduced in detail, followed by conclusions and future perspectives. ISVG is a green and low-cost technique for producing clean water driven by solar energy, which shows great application potential in remote and off-grid regions. With continuous efforts and improvement, it is envisioned that ISVG will become a complementary technique to current water treatment technologies soon.Shudong YuDr Shudong Yu received his B.S. degree in 2014 and PhD degree in 2019 from South China University of Technology (SCUT). After working as a postdoc at SCUT and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for three years, he joined the School of Advanced Manufacturing, Sun Yat-sen University as an assistant professor in 2023. His research interests include biomimetics, solar energy (e.g., solar vapor generation and radiative cooling), light management for optoelectronics, etc.Yuheng GuYuheng Gu received his B.S. degree in 2019 from the University of Manchester and M.A. degree in 2020 from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Currently, he is pursuing a PhD degree under the supervision of Dr Dahua Shou at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include human thermal comfort, smart textiles, and human augmentation. He is conducting research on energy conversion textiles based on capillary evaporation and the dynamic thermal balance of the human body.Xujiang ChaoDr Xujiang Chao obtained his B.S. degree and PhD degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU) in 2014 and 2020, respectively. Then, he was awarded a distinguished postdoctoral fellowship by the Institute for Intelligent Wearable Systems (iWear) of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). In 2022, he joined the School of Mechanical Engineering at NPU as an associate professor. His research interests include the computational mechanics of composites and mechanical metamaterial design.Guanghan HuangDr Guanghan Huang obtained his first PhD degree (2018) in Mechanical Manufacture and Automation from South China University of Technology and his second PhD degree (2021) in Mechanical Engineering from the University of South Carolina. He conducted research as a postdoctoral fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for 2 years. He is now working as an associate research fellow at the School of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology. His research interests include heat pipes, flow boiling, enhanced heat transfer, flexible thermal management, and fluent flow simulation.Dahua ShouDr Dahua Shou is currently a Limin Endowed Young Scholar in Advanced Textile Technologies, an Assistant Professor in the School of Fashion and Textiles, and a member of the Research Institute for Smart Energy, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). He serves as the Head of Future Intelligent Wear Centre, SZRI. Dr Shou obtained his PhD from PolyU in 2013. He ranks among Top 2% Scientists Worldwide 2022 (Career & Single Year) by Stanford University. His research focuses on advanced textiles, smart wearables, and thermal and moisture management.
1. Introduction
As described in the United Nations World Water Development Report 2020, global water use has increased by six fold over the past 100 years. It continues to grow steadily at a rate of about 1% per year due to increasing population, economic development, and shifting consumption patterns. It is estimated that by 2050, 3.9 billion people (over 40% of the world's population) are projected to live under severe water stress, including almost the entire population of the Middle East and South Asia and significant parts of China and North Africa.1 To mitigate the water scarcity issue, various desalination technologies (e.g., membrane-based reverse osmosis, multi-stage flash distillation, and multi-effect distillation) have been developed for clean water production. However, such technologies are energy-intensive and high-cost, which are not suitable for off-grid and remote arid regions with insufficient clean water supplies.2 As an alternative, solar vapor generation (SVG) has the potential to be a game changer since it utilizes abundant, ubiquitous, and renewable solar energy to be the only energy input.3–5 It is well noted that the optical concentration setups commonly used for the solar-to-thermal process are usually removed in the SVG systems to avert high cost and bulky issues.
To date, SVG systems have gone through three generations. The first-generation system is based on a bottom-heating strategy, in which black light-absorbing materials are coated on the bottom of a basin. Due to the separation of the heating source and evaporation surface (water/air interface), most of the generated heat was lost to the environment, thus leading to a low evaporation efficiency of 30–45% and less than 5 L per m2 per day of freshwater production.6 A novel volumetric heating technique was utilized to further enhance the evaporation efficiency by dispersing light-absorbing nanoparticles into bulk water homogeneously.7 Though a higher efficiency was achieved for the second-generation system, a significant heat loss was still inevitable. Note that one sun irradiation is enough to induce thin-film evaporation instead of explosive boiling. For thin-film evaporation, one intuitive yet neglected fact is that it only occurs at the water/air interface, and heating bulk water does not effectively boost evaporation efficiency. By utilizing this effect, Chen's group proposed the third-generation SVG system based on interfacial heating in 2014 (namely interfacial SVG, ISVG), which stimulated various follow-up studies.8 The critical feature of the proposed ISVG system (see Fig. 1) was heat localization, which was achieved by ingenious bilayer structure design comprising an exfoliated graphite layer for light-absorption and a carbon foam for thermal insulation and water wicking. Since the generated heat from solar energy was effectively confined to a thin water film instead of bulk water, the evaporation efficiency was as high as 85% under ten sun irradiation, far exceeding efficiencies reported in the SVG systems before. It has been verified that three important parameters including light absorption, thermal management, and water transport performance, are mainly responsible for the ultimate evaporation efficiency.9 Through dedicated efforts, significantly high evaporation efficiencies approaching 100% are more and more common in the current studies. By taking the evaporation rate as a more intuitive index, a benchmarked evaporation rate of 4.0 kg m−2 h−1 based on a 2D evaporator has recently been achieved by Yu's group.10
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of an ISVG system: brine water is transported to the top surface of the upper porous photothermal material via a capillary effect and is turned into vapor through a photothermal effect; water vapor is condensed into water droplets, which are collected as fresh water in the neighboring chamber. 
Indeed, the SVG has become a hot research topic and is witnessing more and more publications yearly. Many review articles about this topic are also prepared and published from time to time. We would direct readers to reviews published by several prestigious groups in this field.3,9,11,12 Note that materials and structural engineering innovation boosted the development of ISVG systems. Recently, specific reviews on carbon-based materials,13 plasmonic metallic materials,14 hydrogel materials,15,16 aerogel materials,17 and natural materials,18 have been presented. Reviews on structure architecting,19–21 salt rejection strategies,22 strategies for breaking theoretical evaporation limitation,23 and hybrid evaporation systems,24 are also available. Other general introductions of ISVG systems can be further referred to in several reviews.25–28 Those reviews provide us with a detailed and in-depth understanding of the ISVG and help to boost its development.
Herein, we present more state-of-the-art developments in this field in this review article. The structure of the review is shown in Fig. 2. First, we will introduce several representative photothermal materials and their recently updated development. Next, several emerging photothermal materials are presented in this review. In addition, we highlight the fabrication technologies. Then, we focus on the design principles and optimization strategies of solar water evaporation. Furthermore, salt-rejection and condensation strategies are shown in detail, followed by the applications of ISVG systems. Finally, we summarize the full review and present our opinions on the future of this old yet revived technology.
 Fig. 2  Outline of this review article. The substrates are reproduced with permission.29,30 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. The photothermal materials are reproduced with permission.8,31,32 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. The schematic diagrams of the fabrication techniques are reproduced with permission.33,34 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. The schematic views of the design and optimization are reproduced with permission.8,12,35–39 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2019, The Authors. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. The schematic illustrations of the salt rejection are reproduced with permission.40–42 Copyright 2022, The Authors. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. The schematic views of the condensation are reproduced with permission.43,44 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. The schematic illustrations of the application are reproduced with permission.45–47 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
2. ISVG systems: materials and fabrication techniques
2.1 Substrates for ISVG systems

Fig. 1 shows two critical elements in the ISVG system: photothermal materials for light absorption and substrates for supporting photothermal materials, and achieving water transport and thermal insulation. Substrates are key components of an ISVG system, which usually possess several functions, including thermal insulaton, water transport, and self-floating.48 Indeed, the critical feature of an ISVG system is heat localization, which leads to its high evaporation efficiency and is enabled by substrates with good thermal insulation and well-designed water transport capabilities. The self-floating function enables the ISVG system to work flexibly since the level of open water varies from time to time in the real world. With all the characteristics mentioned above, porous materials are commonly adopted as the substrates of ISVG systems.49 The air pores inside the porous substrates endow them with excellent thermal insulating and lightweight abilities since air possesses relatively small thermal conductivity (∼0.026 W m−1 K−1) and mass density (∼1.3 kg m−3) simultaneously. However, porous substrates are filled with water to sustain continuous water evaporation during operation, which vastly increases the conductive heat loss due to a more significant thermal conductivity of water (∼0.6 W m−1 K−1). Therefore, engineering water transport channels into 2D or 1D configurations is commonly adopted to alleviate heat loss.50,51 Due to multiple scattering and reflection events occurring at the air-matrix interfaces, porous substrates possess nearly zero transmittance in the mid-infrared spectra.52 The property inhibits thermal irradiation from the photothermal surface, thus improving the thermal insulation capability of porous substrates. Further, when light impinges on the porous structure, it is scattered or reflected multiple times, thereby enhancing the light absorption capacity of photothermal materials.49 Since the partial vapor pressure difference between the water surface and ambient air drives natural evaporation, the utilization of porous substrates is conducive to vapor diffusion during water evaporation. Zhu's group demonstrated that substrates with interconnected porous structures could facilitate sufficient diffusion of vapor driven by convective flow and realized a significant evaporation rate of 10.9 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun irradiation.53
Currently, the most commonly used porous substrates are expanded polystyrene (EPS) and expanded polyethylene (EPE) foams, which show excellent thermal insulating (with a thermal conductivity of as low as ∼0.04 W m−1 K−1) and self-floating abilities enabled by their closed cell structure and hydrophobic surface.25 In addition, such materials are commercially available and low cost, which are conducive to the ultimate commercialization of ISVG systems. However, EPS and EPE substrates are hydrophobic, requiring additional water transport channel integration for transporting water toward the light-absorbing surface. Another widely used porous substrate is an aerogel, which exhibits various remarkable properties such as high porosity (>85%), low mass density (<0.5 g cm−3), and excellent thermal insulation properties even better than air.17 In contrast to the EPS and EPE substrates, aerogel substrates can be made with open interconnected porous structures, and tailored water wettability, which are more desired for ISVG systems since additional water transporting channels are preserved. Until now, various aerogel substrates, including carbon aerogels (graphene aerogels, carbon nanotube aerogels, etc.)29,54–59 and polymer aerogels (cellulose aerogels, melamine foam, etc.)60–70 have been developed for ISVG systems. Even though the materials' usage amount and cost for making aerogel substrates are low, freeze drying (a time-consuming, energy-intensive, and costly technique) is usually adopted to make highly porous architecture for aerogels, hindering their further real-world applications.
Another promising substrate is a hydrogel, which is indeed a three-dimensional cross-linked hydrophilic polymer network swollen with water molecules.15,71,72 Note that the thermal conductivity of the hydrogel is close to that of water since abundant water is captured in the hydrogel network, which is detrimental to the water evaporation performance of ISVG systems due to a significant heat loss.71 However, an extremely high evaporation rate is achieved in many hydrogel-based ISVG systems, which is intrinsically counter-intuitive.73 One reasonable explanation proposed by Yu's group is that the hydrogel enables part of water molecules to be in an intermediate state, in which water evaporates with less energy than in a free state (namely reducing vaporization enthalpy).12
In addition, numerous natural materials have been harnessed as effective substrates for ISVG systems without complicated treatment processes, representing a promising route for making sustainable, and environmentally friendly substrates.18 Typical natural materials include wood, bamboo, sugarcane, etc. We note that some issues still exist in the direct utilization of natural materials. First, it is common to use costly and time-consuming freeze-drying to preserve the natural porous structures,74,75 thereby hindering their practical applications. In addition, the long-term durability of natural materials is a great problem due to their vulnerability to microorganisms. Inspiringly, researchers have developed advanced processing techniques to circumvent the issue. For example, Zhang and co-workers developed a flexible and mildew-resistant wood-derived aerogel by removing lignin with alkaline treatment.76 Since the primary nutrients, starch, and monosaccharides required for mildew survival were chemically removed, the wood-derived aerogel possesses a mildew-resistant property, endowing it with long-term stability. Yang's group reported a facile immersion treatment by depositing polydopamine and silver nanoparticles on pristine wood to fabricate a novel ISVG device with self-desalting and high antibacterial activity. The deposited Ag–polydopamine composites could effectively kill the bacteria, promising long-term operation in natural water with abundant microorganisms.77
Other reported substrates include sponges (polyurethane (PU), melamine sponges, e.g.),38,54,78–82 paper substrates,83,84 metal foams (porous anode aluminum oxide, copper foam, Ni foam, and Ti foam),85–88 fabrics,89–96etc.
2.2 Photothermal materials for ISVG systems
The total solar absorptance is obtained by weighting the spectral absorptance of the photothermal material with the spectral irradiance of the standard solar spectrum (AM1.5) and integrating over the wavelength range of the solar spectrum from 300 to 2500 nm. The following equation describes the total solar absorptance of a solar absorber: (1)where the transmittance of the solar absorber is set as zero, A(λ) is the wavelength-dependent solar spectral irradiance, and R(λ) is the total reflectance at wavelength λ. The AM 1.5 standard spectrum describes the power distribution of solar energy received by the Earth's surface, which mainly includes three parts: the UV region (300–400 nm) comprising ∼3% of the power, the visible region (400–700 nm) comprising ∼45% of the power, and the near-infrared (NIR) range comprising ∼52% of the power. A qualified photothermal material should have a high absorptance in the wavelength range of the solar spectrum, with limited reflectance/transmittance for maximizing the captured solar energy.11 In the following sections, several kinds of typical photothermal materials, namely plasmonic materials, semiconducting materials, carbon materials, conjugated polymers, and their hybrid constitutes, are presented in detail.

2.2.1 Plasmonic materials. 
One common photothermal material is plasmonic metal nanoparticles with superior light absorption and photothermal properties provided by the localized surface plasmonic resonance (LSPR) effect. The LSPR occurs when the incident photon frequency matches the natural oscillation frequency of electrons on the metal nanoparticle surface, which triggers a collective excitation and oscillation phenomenon of the electrons and the subsequent generation of hot electrons. The plasmon-induced hot electrons are non-radiatively damped via the Landau damping mechanism. The harvested energy from incident photos is converted to heat through electron–electron and electron-phonon scattering.97
Typical LSPR materials include Au, Ag, Pd, Al, etc. Deng's group first utilized a self-assembled film of gold nanoparticles as an interfacial solar evaporator, which localized plasmonic heat at the air–water interface.31 The free-floating gold film achieved a high evaporation efficiency and a highly efficient usage of plasmonic nanoparticles. However, the self-assembled gold film possesses insufficient absorption of broadband solar energy. Tailoring the size and shape of metal nanoparticles can realize broadband absorption in the whole solar spectra. Bae et al. employed a large-scale self-assembly approach to fabricate flexible thin-film black gold membranes with broadband light absorption (average absorption of 91% in the wavelength range from 400 to 2500 nm).98 The as-prepared membranes consist of self-aggregated metallic nanowire bundles displaying 3D patterns like mountain ridges and valleys and cross-sections of microscale funnel shapes. The small taper angle of bundles and nanogaps with varying thicknesses between aggregated fibrils are responsible for the ultra-broadband absorption in the visible to near-infrared spectra. Zhu's group reported a plasmonic absorber with an average measured absorbance of ∼99% across the wavelength from 400 nm to 10 μm. The absorber was fabricated through the self-assembly of gold nanoparticles onto a nanoporous anodized alumina oxide (AAO) template by a one-step physical vapor deposition process.99 The significant absorption effect stems from the high density of plasmonic resonance modes, strong multiple scattering, and low effective refractive index provided by the nanoporous templates and gold nanoparticles. Specifically, the deposited gold nanoparticles are closely arranged in random distributions along the pore sidewall, and the LSPR of each gold nanoparticle overlaps and hybridizes, resulting in multiple overlapping plasmonic modes that give rise to broadband absorption. Zhang et al. developed a hierarchically structured black gold film with an ultrahigh porosity (>80%) using a remarkably dilute Cu99Au1 precursor and manipulating the dealloying process.100 The multi-scale porous structures comprise first-level nanoporous nanowires and second-level aligned nanogaps among the nanowires, endowing the gold film with exceptional broadband light absorption (300–2500 nm) and an excellent evaporation efficiency of 94.5%.
To reduce the cost of a plasmonic absorber, Zhu's group replaced the gold nanoparticles with aluminum nanoparticles by using the same technique as mentioned.101 The all-aluminum plasmonic absorber can efficiently absorb broadband solar light (>96%) and localize the absorbed energy at the air–water surface to enable efficient desalination. Recently, Lee's group proposed a new plasmonic absorber using nano-trepang-shaped gold nanostructures, avoiding the engineering of nanoparticle aggregation or constructing plasmonic architectures to achieve broadband light absorption.102 Gan's group adopted a facile galvanic-displacement-reaction-based fabrication method to synthesize plasmonic Cu nanoparticles with omnidirectional, and broadband optical absorption (>97%) properties.103 The group demonstrated the exceptional photothermal performance of Cu nanoparticles enabled by the high absorption in the solar spectrum and low emissivity in the mid-infrared spectrum, which was more remarkable than that of reduced graphene and black silicon. Note that some of the metal chalcogenides also feature LSPR effects, such as colloidal nonstoichiometric copper chalcogenides (e.g., Cu2−xS). One should be aware that copper chalcogenides show a significant LSPR effect in the near-IR and mid-IR regions, which is distinct from the visible LSPR effect of noble metallic nanoparticles and copper nanoparticles.104 Intriguingly, the chemical composition of copper chalcogenides significantly influences the LSPR effect, apart from typical parameters, including particle size and shape. Tao et al. developed CuS nanoflowers as a photothermal material, which realized an evaporation efficiency of 68.2% under one sun irradiation with the combination of a semipermeable collodion membrane.105 Similar plasmonic copper chalcogenides, such as Cu7S4 nanocrystals,106 Cu2ZnSnS4 nanosheet,107 and CZTSe nanocarambolas,108 were also developed.


2.2.2 Semiconducting materials. 
Semiconducting material is also a common type of photothermal material used for ISVG devices. The photon-to-heat mechanism is based on the photon-induced excitation of electrons for generating electron–hole pairs. Further, it induces electron relaxation, followed by energy release in the form of heat or vibrations by energy transfer to the material lattice (e.g., non-radiative relaxation via phonons). Only photons with energy larger than or equal to the bandgap of semiconducting materials can be absorbed. Therefore, the adopted semiconducting materials need to possess a narrow bandgap to enable broadband light absorption.
Wang et al. proposed nanosized titanium sesquioxide (Ti2O3) as a novel photothermal semiconducting material for solar water evaporation.32 In contrast to large-bandgap TiO2 (≈3 eV) with an average solar light absorption of 5%, the adopted Ti2O3 features an extremely small bandgap of ∼0.1 eV, which ensures a total absorption of 92.5% over the whole absorption spectrum. In addition, it was demonstrated that the reduced size of Ti2O3 particles induced by ball milling also contributes to light absorption owing to the light scattering effect of the nanosized particles. CuO is also a commonly used photothermal material with broadband absorption capacity. In the work from Zheng's group, an interconnected open-pore 2.5D Cu/CuO foam-based solar evaporator was proposed to achieve an evaporation rate of 4.1 kg m−2 h−1.87 Lu and co-workers developed 1D-O-doped MoS2−x nanosheet assembly via a one-pot solvothermal approach.109 In the structure of O–MoS2−x, the gaps formed during stacking were conducive to fast water transport, and the hydrophobic nanoconfined water molecule channels of 3.5 nm spacing between ultrathin O–MoS2−x nanosheets could reduce the vaporization enthalpy of water by facilitating water molecules to evaporate as clusters. This ISVG device possessed an evaporation rate of 2.50 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun with an energy efficiency of 89.6%. Ho's group proposed a spectrum-tailored solar harnessing aerogel composed of oxygen vacancy defect-rich semiconductor HNb3O8 nanosheets and polyacrylamide framework to perform all-in-one photochemical and photothermal full solar energy conversion.110 The synthesized HNb3O8 semiconductor can selectively utilize the whole solar spectrum, in which high-energy ultraviolet photon is converted into high redox potential electron–hole pairs. In contrast, low-energy visible-near infrared photons are transformed into heat.


2.2.3 Carbon materials and conjugated polymers. 
Carbon materials and some conjugated polymers possess abundant, loosely held electrons, namely π-bond electrons, which can be excited from the π orbital to the π* orbital via a low energy input. The photon-excited electrons can be promoted from the ground state (highest occupied molecular orbital) to a higher energy orbital (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) when a material is irradiated with light energy that matches the possible electronic transition within the molecule. The excited electrons relax back to the ground state via electron–phonon coupling, thereby transferring the light energy absorbed by the excited electrons to vibrational modes throughout the material lattices, leading to a temperature rise in the material.9,11
2.2.3.1 Carbon materials. 
Compared with plasmonic and semiconducting materials, carbon materials are more abundant, intrinsically black, and low-cost, which are conducive to the ultimate commercialization of ISVG systems. Numerous carbon materials including exfoliated graphite,8,111 carbon black,36,112–114 carbon nanotubes,52,115–120 and graphene-derived materials,55,121–130 as well as biomass-derived carbonized materials30,131–140 were utilized as photothermal materials for ISVG devices. Carbon nanotube and graphene-derived materials possess significantly large absorption cross-sections due to their nanosized scale toward several nanometers, indicating that fewer materials are required than other bulky carbon materials for achieving the same absorption. By finely tuning the assembly structure of graphene as a metamaterial, Jia's group fabricated a 90 nm-thick graphene metamaterial with approximately 85% absorptivity of unpolarized light in the entire solar spectrum (300–2500 nm).141 Currently, carbon nanotubes achieved an absorption record of ∼100% with good vertical alignment features at a relatively small thickness.142 However, the stringent and complex synthesis conditions lead to a high cost, which still hinders the large-scale application of such materials. Recently, more advanced low-cost synthesis methods, including laser-induced graphene143 and flash graphene synthesis,144 have been developed, which might speed up the commercialization of such brilliant materials and enable their application in the ISVG systems. In addition, reducing the usage amount of such expensive carbon materials is also a feasible method. For example, Storer and co-workers prepared a novel carbon aerogel composed of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) nanosheets, rice-straw-derived cellulose fibers, and sodium alginate for an ISVG device with an evaporation rate reaching 2.25 kg m−2 h−1.145 The use of rice straw fibers reduce the use of expensive RGO by 43.5%, turning biomass waste into a value-added material. Similarly, microwave-expanded graphite and coconut waste fibers were used for making ISVG systems.146 In comparison, carbon black, graphite, and biomass-derived carbon materials are more abundant and low-cost, which are more suitable for real-world applications in the current stage.
Specifically, biomass-derived materials are gaining more and more attention due to their huge abundance and facile carbonization process (the converted material is known as biochar).18 Biochar represents a promising type of carbon material since it can be converted from abundant, biodegradable, and low-cost natural materials, such as wood and bamboo. Wood possesses rich porous structures, aligned microchannels, good hydrophilicity, and low thermal conductivity.30 Moreover, wood is abundant on earth and is biodegradable and sustainable.147,148 Those aforementioned features enable its great potential as photothermal material for ISVG devices, making it the most popular natural photothermal material for ISVG systems.149 Hu's group was one of the pioneers in exploiting wood as photothermal materials for ISVG systems.9 They proposed a tree-inspired design based on surface-carbonized wood for effective water extraction from seawater and groundwater.150 The same group reported a scalable ISVG device based on surface carbonized longitudinal wood via a reverse-tree design, where water is transported perpendicular to what occurs in a natural tree.151 Due to the longitudinal wood's much lower thermal conductivity, an excellent evaporation rate of 12.6 kg m−2 h−1 at 10 kW m−2 irradiation was achieved. Another widely used biomass material is bamboo, which is also abundant in nature. Compared with wood, bamboo is more fast-growing, enabling a large-scale supply within a short time.152–154 Gu's group demonstrated that carbonized bamboo could be an excellent 3D ISVG device reaching an evaporation rate of 3.13 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.140 Other natural materials used for the ISVG systems include sugarcane stem,155 mushroom,156 loofah,157,158 corn straw,74,159 rice straw,160 pomelo peels,161 lotus seedpods,162 potato,75 corncob,137 carrot,163 sunflower heads,136 to name a few. Gan's group demonstrated that carbonized loofah could serve as excellent photothermal materials for highly efficient solar steam generation.164 The ground carbonized-loofah particles were coated on inexpensive paper tissues to form ISVG devices, featuring a high evaporation rate of 1.53 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation. Moreover, they demonstrated that the as-prepared device could work as a versatile energy converter. The same group developed a dehydration method to convert fallen leaves into carbon powders, which were then modified by hydrophilic PVA coatings.165 By further depositing the carbon powders on mixed cellulose ester membranes, they obtained a high evaporation rate of 1.36 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation for the ISVG device.
2.2.3.2 Conjugated polymers. 
Conjugated polymers including polypyrrole (PPy),166–169 polyaniline (PNAI),170 and polydopamine (PDA)171–173 are widely used as efficient photothermal materials in the ISVG systems. Those conjugated polymers can be in situ deposited on various porous substrates via the polymerization of corresponding monomers, forming a homogeneous and tightly attached photothermal coating on the surface. In terms of PDA, it is easily attached to the substrates via mussel-inspired catechol chemical bonding and numerous particles. For example, Ag nanoparticles can be simply grafted with the assistance of PDA.174 Recently, conjugated small molecules have been developed as efficient photothermal materials with broadband optical absorption via delicate structure tailoring.175,176
In addition, photothermal coatings possessing strong light-harvesting performance and close affinity with porous substrates have aroused increasing interest from researchers. Inspired by the formation of tea stains on metal substrates, Yang et al.177 prepared a series of photothermal coatings via in situ polymerization of tea polyphenols (catechol and pyrogallol) promoted by several metal ions (Cu(II), Fe(III), Ni(II), Zn(II)). The screened Cu(II)–polyphenolic coatings were in situ formed on silk fabrics for solar desalination, which showed excellent light-absorbing performance and strong adhesion to substrates. In the work of Li's group,178 tannic acid and Fe3+ could effectively transform pristine wood into light-absorbing photothermal materials via specific coordination interaction. The processed wood with deposited photothermal coatings exhibited outstanding stability and anti-crude-oil fouling performance. Furthermore, Li's group proposed a new coating recipe consisting of tannic acid, aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES), and Fe3+, which applies to various substrates, including wood, cotton, paper, and even hydrophobic polyvinylidene fluoride.179 The coating exhibited a true-black color rather than blue-grey color in the case without APTES. It was demonstrated that adding APTES can bring a more enormous amount of tannic acid on the substrates and enable a rougher surface, contributing to decreased diffuse reflection and increased absorption of solar light.


2.2.4 Hybrid photothermal materials. 
Hybrid photothermal materials are developed to fully utilize the strength and potential of various photothermal materials to enable broadband high-absorptance performance. To enhance the photothermal conversion efficiency of MXene material, Fan et al. proposed cobalt nanoparticle-carbonaceous nanosheets/MXene hybrid foam, in which 2D carbon nanoplates embedded with cobalt nanoparticles were decorated to boost light absorption and stabilize the MXene material.180 Han et al. demonstrated zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)-isolated graphene nanohybrids that leveraged ultrathin, heat-insulating ZIF layers, and nanohybrid interfacial nanocavity to synergistically improve solar energy absorbance and heat localization.181 Similarly, Cu3BiS3/MXene hybrid material,182 NiS2 nanotubes/Mxene nanosheet hybrids,183 and rGO/MXene hybrid hydrogels184 were also demonstrated as excellent photothermal materials. A carbonized loofah sponge architecture with inexpensive plasmonic Cu nanoparticles encapsulated in graphitic layers was developed by Ren et al. to enable an efficient hybrid solar evaporator.185 To reduce the usage amount of gold nanoparticles in the ISVG device, Cui et al. proposed hybrid gold nanoparticles grafted with carbonized organosilica.186 With the deposition of the hybrid materials onto the filter membrane, a superior photothermal conversion efficiency of 94.6% was successfully achieved with gold usage of only 25 μg cm−2. Wu et al. developed a nanostructured hybrid Ni–NiOx composite on Ni foam, which exhibited high solar absorbance due to the plasmonic effect of metal Ni nanoparticles and defects.187
Some hybrid photothermal materials were engineered to show additional functions such as decontamination capacity, which was desirable for treating polluted wastewater. Noureen et al. proposed BiVO4 and rGO composite hydrogels as a high-performance solar evaporator.188 The introduced BiVO4 nanostructures not only boosted the light absorption but also endowed the composite with outstanding photo-decontamination performance. Su et al. developed an N,S-doped graphene oxide hybrid foam by loading PPy, which achieved not only excellent broadband solar absorption, extremely low emissivity, and outstanding hydrophilicity but also strong absorption and reducing capability of heavy metal ions for treating wastewater.189 Recently, Qu's group developed hybrid graphene-wrapped Fe3O4 nanoparticles to further fabricate a reconfigurable and magnetically responsive conic-array evaporator.190 Under the applied variable magnetic field, the evaporator could achieve a dynamic evaporation process with a 23% higher evaporation rate than that of the static evaporation process, stemming from improved water vapor diffusion. It was demonstrated that the synergistic effect of hybrid graphene and Fe3O4 materials endowed the evaporator with distinct properties. In detail, Fe3O4 nanoparticles are magnetically responsive and light-absorbing. The coating of graphene on the Fe3O4 nanoparticles prevents their irreversible aggregation effect, which is critical for realizing magnetic assembly. This proof of concept confirms the versatility and superiority of hybrid photothermal materials.
Currently, most ISVG systems can realize evaporation rates close to or even more prominent than the maximum limit of 1.5 kg m−2 h−1, assuming a constant phase-change enthalpy of water, as shown in Table 1. Moreover, their evaporation efficiencies are usually larger than 80%, which exceed those of solar evaporators without interfacial heating engineering. Indeed, the photothermal performances of various photothermal materials are crucial to the ultimate evaporation efficiency of the ISVG systems. Therefore, numerous photothermal materials have been developed and their excellent photothermal efficiencies underpin the fast advancement of high-efficiency ISVG systems.
Table 1 Evaporation performance of ISVG systems based on various photothermal materials




Type
Materials
Solar irradiance (kW m−2)
Evaporation efficiency
Evaporation rate (kg m−2 h−1)
Reference




Plasmonic materials
Black gold membrane
20
57%
16.0

98



Gold-deposited AAO template
4
90%
5.8

99



Aluminum-nanoparticle-deposited AAO template
4
88.4%
5.7

101



Polymeric aerogels loaded with nano-trepang gold nanoparticles
1
79.3%
2.7

102



CuS nanoflowers/semipermeable collodion membrane composite
1
68.6%
1.1

105



3D Cu2ZnSnS4 nanosheet-assembled membrane
1
84.5%
1.5

107



Membrane assembled from copper–zinc–tin–selenide nano-carambolas
1
86.4%
1.5

108



Porous PDMS matrix embedded with Cu7S4–MoS2–Au nanoparticles
1
96.6%
3.8

191



Semiconducting materials
Cellulose membrane loaded with Ti2O3 nanoparticles
1
—
1.3

32



1D-O-doped MoS2−x nanosheet assembly
1
89.6%
2.5

109



Defective 2D HNb3O8 nanosheet aerogels
1
91%
1.4

110



Black titania nanocomposites
1
94%
1.5

192



3D cup-shaped evaporator loaded with CuFeMnO4 material
1
∼100%
2.0

193



2.5D Cu/CuO foam
1
—
4.1

87



Carbon materials and conjugated polymers
Bilayer structure made of carbon foam and exfoliated graphite layers
10
85%
12

8



3D evaporator coated with carbon black
1
>100%
1.6

36



Solar evaporator coated with carbon nanotubes
1
95.8%
1.4

52



Maize straw/graphene aerogels
1
95%
3.2

55



Surface-carbonized wood
10
80.4%
11.2

150



PPy-coated porous foam
1
88.3%
1.4

166



Cellulose nanofibril/polylactic acid/PAN hybrid aerogels
1
90%
1.6

170



Polydopamine-filled cellulose aerogels
1
86%
1.4

171



Hybrid photothermal materials
Cobalt nanoparticles–carbonaceous nanosheets/MXene hybrid foam
1
93.4%
1.4

180



Zeolitic imidazolate framework-isolated graphene
1
96%
1.8

181



Cu3BiS3/MXene hybrid material
1
90%
1.3

182



Nanostructured Ni–NiOx/Ni foam
1
94%
1.4

187



BiVO4 and rGO composite hydrogels
1
87%
1.6

188



PPy-reinforced N,S-doped graphene foam
1
90.5%
1.3

189






2.3 Fabrication techniques for ISVG systems
The ISVG systems mainly contain photothermal materials and substrates, most of which are commercially available and can be readily integrated for solar vapor generation. The most common way to fabricate ISVG systems is to assemble individual components (i.e., substrates, and photothermal layers). Photothermal materials are required to be coated on or be assembled with substrates, causing a complex and time-consuming process. To increase the system integrity and avert tedious assembly steps, there is a need to obtain an all-in-one design without the separation of photothermal materials and substrates.194
To make all-in-one ISVG systems instead of direct assembling, researchers have proposed various fabrication techniques to make ISVG systems. Herein, we highlight several fabrication techniques for ISVG systems as follows.

2.3.1 Laser processing. 
With facile, scalable, and versatile properties, laser treatment can be exploited to fabricate nanostructured metallic material and transform polymeric material into light-absorbing carbonaceous material.195,196 Guo's group utilized a femtosecond laser operating at 800 nm to transform shiny aluminum sheets into a super-light-absorbing metallic surface with micro-sized grooves and micro and nanoparticles.197 The microscale grooves were beneficial for the super-wicking capability of the aluminum sheet. The randomly formed aluminum nanoparticles enabled the hybridization of LSPR modes to achieve efficient and broadband solar light absorption. The authors claimed that the proposed black metallic sheet was a solar-trackable ISVG device. In addition, the open groove structures allowed the device to be easily cleaned and reused, thus alleviating the clogging problem in the long-term operation. Femtosecond laser treatment has also been applied to treat porous Ti foam.88 Hierarchical micro and nanostructures formed on the Ti foam surface after laser processing, which resulted in strong solar absorption and superhydrophilic surface. With rational water transport and thermal-insulating architectures, the obtained Ti-foam-based ISVG device achieved a high evaporation rate of 1.79 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.
As shown in Fig. 3(a), Jiang and co-workers demonstrated that the nanosecond laser operating at 1064 nm could be used to transform metal–organic framework (MOF) crystals into monolithic porous graphene with exceptional dispersion of metal nanoparticles.33 The highly efficient interaction between laser pulses and MOF crystals led to strongly localized temperature and pressure, and the following removal of laser irradiation created a rapid cooling and pressure quenching that produced a blackbody-like monolithic structure. Due to the efficient light trapping effect in the monolith, excellent solar absorption beyond 99% was realized. Kim and co-workers prepared a monolithic bilayer polyimide membrane consisting of a top hydrophobic porous graphite layer processed by pulsed CO2 laser treatment and a bottom hydrophilic porous polyimide layer.198 The self-floating Janus membrane showed outstanding solar desalination performance with an evaporation efficiency of 83.2% (one sun) and a high salt rejection ratio (99.9%). Similarly, Jang et al. used a CO2 laser to convert balsa wood surfaces into graphitic carbon layers with various grid patterns on top.199 The created grooves were conducive to solar absorption by enlarging the surface area. The water supply through the grooves endowed the solar evaporator with salt resistance and self-regenerating properties.
 Fig. 3  Typical fabrication techniques for ISVG systems: (a) laser treatment for transforming MOF crystals into light-absorbing graphene–metal-hybrid structure. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) 3D printing for making a biomimetic bridge-arch solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Electrospinning technique for fabricating a flexible and salt-resistant Janus solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Weaving craft for fabricating an all-in-one carbon-fiber-based solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.3.2 3D printing. 
Compared with conventional top-down fabrication techniques, 3D printing enables a more flexible design and fabrication of device architectures due to its bottom-up characteristics. Hu's group utilized direct ink writing (DIW) to fabricate an all-in-one solar evaporator with high evaporation efficiency.200 The integrated ISVG device contained distinct concave structures: porous CNT/GO, GO/nano fibrillated cellulose layer (NFC), and GO/NFC wall. With excellent light-absorbing ability, hydrophilic, and thermal-insulating properties, the 3D-printed solar evaporator showed a high solar vapor efficiency of 85.6% under one sun irradiation. Wang et al. developed a 3D GO-based ISVG device delicately designed and constructed via direct ink writing coupled with freeze drying.201 The as-fabricated ISVG device achieved an evaporation efficiency of 94.5% under one sun irradiation owing to a rippled upper surface decorated with stomata-like pores for efficient light absorption, and the lower structures comprised vertically oriented vessel-like channels for superb water transportation and localized heating. Yuan et al. harnessed the DIW technique to fabricate hierarchical porous cellulose/alginate/carbon black hydrogel, which realized a high evaporation rate of 1.33 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.202 Recently, Wu and co-workers have exploited digital-light-processing (DLP) continuous 3D printing to fabricate a biomimetic 3D solar evaporator.203 The spontaneously formed water film on the evaporator featured thickness nonuniformity and temperature gradient, efficiently utilizing the input energy through the Marangoni effect and resulting in localized salt crystallization. Finally, a water evaporation rate of 2.63 kg m−2 h−1 (evaporation efficiency of >96%) under one sun irradiation and high salinity (25 wt% NaCl), and a water collecting rate of 1.72 kg m−2 h−1 were obtained simultaneously. The same group utilized the DLP printing technique to fabricate a biomimetic bridge-arch solar evaporator as shown in Fig. 3(b), achieving 200 h continuous desalination operation in 10 wt% NaCl solution under ultrafast Marangoni convective flow.34


2.3.3 Spinning and weaving. 
Electrospinning is a versatile method to produce polymer nanofibers with sizes ranging from hundreds of nanometers to micrometers by charging and ejecting a polymer solution through a spinneret under a high-voltage electric field, which is suitable for fabricating porous substrates of ISVG devices. With light-absorbing materials doped into the electrospun fibers, the as-fabricated porous membranes are excellent photothermal layers for ISVG devices. As shown in Fig. 3(c), Zhu's group prepared a Janus membrane with excellent salt rejection performance using the electrospinning technique.42 Wang's group fabricated a highly flexible and washable nonwoven photothermal cloth composed of electrospun nylon nanofibers encapsulated with carbon black nanoparticles.112 Similar CNT-embedded PAN nonwoven fabrics,204 rGO/PAN membranes,205 and GO-functionalized nanofibrous membranes were produced by electrospinning.
Weaving technology is well known for making fabrics for garments. Currently, this technology is harnessed for making solar evaporators. As shown in Fig. 3(d), Zhang et al. fabricated a photothermal fabric by using a facile textile weaving technique, realizing a water evaporation rate of 1.87 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.89 Similarly, Li et al. fabricated a three-dimensional hierarchical tree-shaped flax fabric consisting of a float layer, basket weave layer, and plain layer by tailoring the weaving technique, demonstrating that weaving technology had large flexibility to make different-pattern fabrics for specific applications.94 Considering the great potential of fabrics in the real application of ISVG systems, weaving technology can be a universal tool to make high-performance fabric-based solar evaporators.90–93,95,96


2.3.4 Freeze casting and gas foaming. 
Freeze casting, known as ice templating, is a versatile technology used for preparing porous structures, especially those with vertically aligned channels that are quite suitable for ISVG systems.206 Inspired by porous wood structures, Wang et al. fabricated polyacrylonitrile and polyacrylonitrile/graphene oxide bilayer foam with vertically aligned hierarchical pore structures by using freeze casting and phase inversion methods. Owing to its refined design, the as-prepared bilayer foam had a large specific area. It showed excellent water-wicking ability, achieving a high evaporation rate of 2.27 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun.207 The gas foaming technique was used by Wang et al. to form porous structures, in which finely ground NH4HCO3 was mixed with liquid PDMS precursors, followed by heating at 135 °C for 2 h.191 The polymerization process of PDMS precursors was accompanied by the gas foaming reaction and continuously generated gases including NH3, H2O, and CO2 that would induce phase separation between the gases and solid PDMS matrix, resulting in 3D interconnected PDMS architectures. The as-prepared 3D porous hydrophobic PDMS was further coated with a thin layer of polyacrylic acid to tune the wettability from hydrophobicity to hydrophilicity. The obtained porous foams show excellent thermal insulation, water transporting, and vapor escape abilities.

3. Design principles and optimization strategies of solar water evaporation
3.1 Energy flow in the ISVG system
In a solar evaporation system, the main energy input is the thermal energy converted from the absorbed sunlight, denoted as αqsolar where α is the weighted average absorptance in the AM1.5G solar spectrum.208 The energy flow directions of the thermal energy consist of two parts, including the useful energy for the total enthalpy for water evaporation qvapor and the wasted energy dissipated into the outside environment qwaste. To achieve energy conservation, one should obtain αqsolar = qvapor + qwaste,(2) qvapor = ṁhlv,(3)where qsolar is the nominal direct solar irradiation under one sun, namely 1 kW m−2, hlv is the total enthalpy of the liquid–vapor phase change including sensible heat and liquid-to-vapor latent heat of water, and ṁ is the net water evaporation rate per unit area with the dark evaporation rate subtracted. We note that the total water evaporation rate includes two parts, namely net water evaporation rate and dark evaporation rate. With a well-tailored structure or morphology of the solar evaporator, the dark evaporation rate can be significantly enhanced, even surpassing the net evaporation rate and making a great contribution to the total evaporation rate value.209
The qwaste contains two parts, including the wasted energy dissipated upward into the air qair, and the part dissipated downward into the water qwater. From the viewpoint of thermal dynamics, the ways of heat transfer include heat conduction, convection, and radiation. As regards qair, the main heat transfer ways are heat convection and radiation since the heat conduction in the air is usually neglected considering the low thermal conductivity of air (0.026 W m−1 K−1). Therefore, qair can be re-written as qair = qconv + qrad = hconv(Tabs − Tamb) + εσ(Tabs4 − Tamb4),(4)where hconv stands for the convective heat transfer coefficient (W m−2 K−1), Tabs and Tamb denote the temperature values of the evaporation surface and ambient environment, respectively, ε is the effective thermal emissivity of evaporation surface, and σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant (5.67 × 10−8 W m−2 K−4).
Note that the adopted porous thermal insulating foam can primarily alleviate the heat convection and radiation downward from the interfacial solar evaporation system. As such, only heat conduction is taken into consideration in the calculation of qwater. Note that there are two ways to obtain qwater either using Fourier's Law or calculating the gained thermal energy of the underlying water: (5)where hcond denotes the thermal conductivity of thermal insulating foam, Tinsulator,upper and Tinsulator,bottom denote the temperature values of the upper and lower insulator surfaces, respectively, Twater,final and Twater,initial represent the final and initial temperature values of water, respectively. d denotes the insulator thickness, and A represents the area of the water container. t denotes the time duration of temperature rise.208
The evaporation efficiency η is used to evaluate the water evaporation performance and is denoted as follows: (6)where Copt is the optical concentration of solar energy.
3.2 Light management structures
Light management structures are essential to enable sufficient light absorption of incident solar light for the photothermal conversion layers, thereby realizing a high evaporation efficiency for ISVG systems. The absorption of a photothermal layer is dependent on its absorption coefficient and layer thickness. Therefore, it is intuitive to use materials with a high absorption coefficient and produce a large layer thickness when preparing photothermal materials. By contrast, it is a cost-effective strategy to decrease material usage through advanced light management structures. In addition, reflection occurs at the material/air interface, which decreases the ultimate light absorption and should be minimized with well-tailored light management structures. We notice that porous structures have strong scattering abilities to enhance the path length of the incident light, thereby increasing the light absorption of photothermal conversion materials. Two main light-management structures have been proposed, including macro-structures and micro-structures, which can reduce the interfacial reflection of a photothermal layer.
As regards macroscopic light-management structures, Wang's group proposed a cup-shaped solar evaporator with efficient light absorption, as shown in Fig. 4(a).193 The reflected light energy from the bottom surface of the evaporator can be well absorbed by its side surface. With such a multi-reflection effect, the surface can absorb the incident light efficiently. Since additional heat was gained from the environment, the 3D cup-shaped evaporator attained an extremely high vapor generation of ∼2 kg m−2 h−1. In addition, the same group developed a 3D origami-based solar evaporator capable of effective utilizing incident solar energy, as shown in Fig. 4(b).210 The origami-based solar evaporator contained periodic concavity formed from arrays of mountain-valley folds, which can capture and recycle diffuse reflected light for improved light absorption via a similar multi-reflection effect. The device yielded an extraordinary solar vapor efficiency close to 100% under one sun irradiation.
 Fig. 4  Light management structures for enhancing solar light absorption by photothermal materials: (a) macroscopic 3D cup-shaped structure with multiple light reflection effect. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) 3D origami-shaped structure with multiple light reflection effect. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Biomimetic wrinkled MXene structure with light scattering and multiple light reflection effects. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Compared with macroscopic structures, microscopic structures require less space and can be more efficient in light management. Fig. 4(c) shows that Li and co-workers developed biomimetic wrinkled MXene coatings for efficient light capturing.35 The hierarchical MXene coatings resulted in broadband light absorption of up to 95%, stemming from the intense light scattering and multiple internal reflections of the hierarchical wrinkles. Moreover, light fields were confined on the surface of MXene structures by the LSPR and then converted to thermal energy by ohmic loss of MXene structures. Finally, the MXene coating-based ISVG devices achieved a high solar evaporation rate at a relatively low materials loading (0.32 mg cm−2). Zhang's group directly deposited hybrid plasmonic Au–CuS nanoparticles on the wing scales of butterfly C. rubi, with distinct gyroid-structured photonic crystals.211 It was demonstrated that the interconnected nanopores of the gyroid template could enhance the solar absorption of as-deposited plasmonic nanoparticles and largely reduce reflection. The Au–CuS vapor generator required a much lower photothermal component loading (<1 mg cm−2). To enable efficient and broadband solar light absorption, Kim et al. reported a gold-coated hierarchical membrane incorporated with randomly distributed nanostructures with high aspect ratio and micro-through holes, which was prepared via scalable techniques combination of templating, plasma etching, and gold sputtering.212 Furthermore, with the combination of micro-cone array structures, the black gold membrane was endowed with exceptionally omnidirectional light absorption properties. The fabricated structures relied on the plasmonic effects provided by strong plasmonic resonance supported by thin 3D gold nanostructures, gradient refractive index-driven anti-reflective effects offered by the micro-cone shape, elongated optical path length of the incident light, and enhanced extinction of the incident photons assisted by the nano-scale high aspect ratio trench geometry. Finally, an efficient evaporation rate of 1.33 kg m−2 h−1 with an average of 91% solar–thermal conversion efficiency was achieved. Recently, Zhang et al. developed an inexpensive polyester fabric decorated with vertically aligned 3D forest-like Fe3O4 arrays using a facile magnetic field-assisted spray coating technique.213 With the guided multi-reflection effect, the delicate 3D structure promotes the light absorption of as-processed fabric, which exhibits a more significant solar absorptance (98.6%) than that of conventional 2D Fe3O4 array-covered fabric (91.1%). A higher evaporation rate (1.59 kg m−2 h−1) under one sun irradiation was achieved for the 3D structure-based fabric, exceeding that of the 2D structure-based fabric (1.33 kg m−2 h−1). Inspired by the high solar transmittance of cicada's wings, Cai et al. fabricated a SiO2 nanosphere-covered graphene film with improved absorptance by ∼10% compared with that of the pure graphene layer, stemming from the excellent anti-reflective effect of SiO2 nanospheres.214 The resulted hybrid graphene film realized a larger evaporation rate (1.41 kg m−2 h−1) than the conventional graphene layer (1.05 kg m−2 h−1) under one sun irradiation.
3.3 Thermal management strategies

3.3.1 Strategies to reduce heat losses. 
The whole process of vapor generation in the ISVG system is a heat and mass transfer process. Therefore, adopting advanced thermal management strategies is essential to achieve high evaporation efficiency for ISVG systems. The critical strategy for thermal management is heat localization, proposed by Chen's group in 2014,8 which has led to the fast development of ISVG systems with evaporation efficiencies exceeding 80%. The heat localization design is delicately utilized to heat up a thin-film water layer instead of bulk water so that a higher water temperature is attained to achieve faster evaporation. In such a heat-localization architecture, photothermal materials are integrated into porous substrates or directly shaped as porous media, which float on the water surface as an efficient ISVG system shown in Fig. 5(a).
 Fig. 5  (a) Bilayer solar evaporator with heat localization design, where the underlying porous substrate is used for good thermal insulation. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Three types of heat loss, including thermal conduction, radiation, and convection in a solar evaporator with well-designed thermal management. The comprehensive thermal design is harnessed for generating 100 °C water vapor in the solar evaporator, in which radiation and convection are suppressed by the SSA and air-bubble wrap, respectively, while thermal insulation is achieved by underlying porous EPS foam. (c) Corresponding solar evaporator shown in (b). (b) and (c) Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
Based on the energy flow described above, there are three main types of heat loss in the ISVG system, including thermal conduction toward lower water, convection, and radiation loss toward the upper air environment. Using porous substrates (e.g., EPS, EPE, and aerogels) as thermal insulating layers can effectively reduce thermal conduction toward lower bulk water. Other commonly used substrates for thermal insulating functions include sponges and natural porous materials (e.g., wood, bamboo). In terms of water wettability, these thermal-insulating substrates can be divided into hydrophobic and hydrophilic substrates. When contacted with water, these hydrophobic substrates can maintain their low thermal conductivity. In contrast, such hydrophilic substrates are usually filled with abundant water, accompanied by an increased thermal conductivity close to that of water. Due to their hydrophobic nature and low-cost properties, EPS and EPE foams are the most-commonly used thermal insulating substrates in the ISVG systems. One issue is that those petroleum-derived plastics can cause additional “white pollution” problems, which goes against the motivation of developing green and sustainable ISVG systems. In this case, those substrates obtained directly from nature (e.g., wood) or made from natural materials (e.g., cellulose aerogels) should be good candidates. However, their thermal insulating performance is usually compromised, and long-term durability has not yet been demonstrated. To solve this issue, Zhao et al. developed a 3D patulous truss sponge with a fairly low thermal conductivity endowed by the hierarchical microporous skeleton, which achieved a high evaporation rate of 2.33 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.215
As regards radiation loss, it is wise to use photothermal materials that can perfectly harvest full-spectrum solar light in the wavelength range of 0.3–2.5 μm and reflect infrared light beyond 2.5 μm, namely well-known solar selective absorbers (SSAs).216 As shown in Fig. 5(b) and (c), Chen's group first demonstrated that SSAs can be used in the ISVG system for reducing radiation loss from the photothermal surface, in which bubble wrap and EPS foam were used to reduce convective and conduction heat loss, respectively.208 Further, they utilized a heat-concentration strategy to generate 100 °C water vapor under one sun irradiation. A similar SSA was adopted by Zhao et al. to reduce radiation loss for generating saturated steam (>121 °C and >205 kPa).46 Their device demonstrated a high energy efficiency (47%) under low-intensity sun irradiation (2× higher than those previously reported at 100 °C), which enabled an effective sterilization process. Recently, Wang's group utilized SSAs as an efficient photothermal layer in their cup-shaped solar crystallizer for real seawater brine treatment with zero liquid discharge.217 Currently, those SSAs used in ISVG systems still show compromised performance. Delicate optical designs (e.g., optical cavity design and plasmon resonance nanostructure) are beneficial for improving the ultimate performance.216 Jia's group proposed a structured graphene metamaterial selective absorber to reduce thermal radiation loss for high-efficiency and omnidirectional photothermal conversion.127 The proposed absorber pairs wavelength selectivity from metallic trench-like structures, broadband dispersion-free properties, and outstanding thermal conductivity in an ultrathin graphene film to achieve an impressive solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency of 90.1% and solar-to-vapor efficiency of 96.2%. Yang's group et al. proposed a scalable “dip and dry” technique to enable a wide-angle plasmonic SSA for high-efficiency solar–thermal energy conversion.218 Furthermore, the same group demonstrated a scalable dealloying technique to fabricate thermally stable plasmonic nickel SSAs.219 Though numerous SSAs have been designed and fabricated, they are not widely used in the current ISVG systems due to their non-porous morphology in most cases and high price, as well as compromised long-term durability.
It is usually not a primary goal to reduce convective heat loss in the ISVG systems since convection is only sometimes detrimental to vapor generation. In a recent study, Wang's group proposed a “more from less” strategy to enhance the water evaporation rate by removing a part of the evaporation surface, as they demonstrated that the central zone of a large-size evaporator contributed little to the ultimate evaporation performance due to the insufficient convection.220 In addition, some literature studies show that airflow can enhance evaporation performance due to quick vapor evacuation.53,221,222 The aforementioned examples benefit from natural or forced convection, resulting in enhanced water evaporation rates. In a scenario that requires high-temperature vapor, one should reduce convective heat loss. In Chen's work,208 a bubble wrap was used to separate the photothermal surface and external air environment for reducing convective loss. However, such bubble wrap brought a great optical loss. Instead of using bubble wrap, Zhao et al. adopted an ultra-transparent silica aerogel to reduce convective loss and maintain high transmittance of the upper surface.46 In addition, they developed a new thermal concentration strategy to generate high-temperature vapor under insufficient irradiation. With such a thermal concentration architecture, a large surface area was used to receive sun irradiation, while water was only heated over a small region at a much higher thermal intensity. For example, slit on the surface208 and tube-fin absorbers46 have been demonstrated as effective thermal concentration architectures. Recently, Cao et al. developed a gradient heating strategy (similar to thermal concentration) by engineering hydrophobic/hydrophilic CNT structures with an ultrafast solar vapor generation rate of 4.2 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.117


3.3.2 Collecting environmental energy using 3D architectures. 
For a long time, it has been generally believed that the maximum evaporation efficiency in the ISVG process is 100%, limited by the input solar irradiation. As shown in Fig. 6(a), Zhu's group first demonstrated that environmental energy could be a universal energy source for the ISVG device with a rational architecture design.36 Instead of using generally adopted 2D configurations, they designed a 3D cylindrical evaporator made of a cotton core wrapped by hydrophilic cellulose paper with carbon black nanoparticles. It was demonstrated that the side surface temperature of the evaporator was lower than the ambient temperature caused by the significant endothermic evaporation. Therefore, the side surface of the 3D evaporator can harvest energy from the environment by convective coupling and radiative heat transfer. Note that this effect is more pronounced when light intensity is low. With the contribution of environmental energy in the evaporation process, the evaporation efficiency can be larger than the theoretical limit, namely 100%. Similarly, Song et al. demonstrated that cold vapor generation was adequate to achieve >100% evaporation efficiency (see Fig. 6(b)), enabled by taking extra energy input from a warmer environment.223 In this work, they utilized two ways to lower the evaporation surface temperature below ambient temperature: low solar intensity input and enlarged evaporation surface under the same projection surface. As a result, the best evaporation rate was measured to be 2.2 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation. Recently, Xu's group has demonstrated that bulk water source can also be an energy supplier besides the ambient environment, which was realized by inserting a cold evaporation surface between the solar evaporation surface and the bulk water source, as shown in Fig. 6(c).224 With a well-tailored side area of the 3D cylindrical evaporator, the temperature of the cold evaporation surface can be lower than both the solar evaporation surface and bulk water. The evaporator could collect the energy loss from the solar evaporation surface and harvest the conductive energy from the bulk water with a reversed energy flow process.
 Fig. 6  3D architecture-based solar evaporators for collecting environmental energy: (a) 3D cylindrical solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Triangular structure-based solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, The Authors. (c) Cylinder-shaped solar evaporator for extracting energy from bulk water.224 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) Heatsink-shaped solar evaporator with zero energy loss for all-cold evaporation. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Various 3D architectures have been developed, including cup-shaped structures,193 spiral structures,225 cone-shaped structures,84 and sphere-shaped structures,226 to name a few. We note that more complex 3D structures were proposed to enhance the energy harvesting ability from the environment further. In a study by Xu's group, a novel heatsink-inspired solar evaporator with zero energy loss to achieve all-cold evaporation was developed (see Fig. 6(d)), producing an exceptionally high water evaporation rate of 4.1 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.83 It was demonstrated that the temperature of the evaporator surface was cooler than the environment temperature during the water evaporation process, which circumvented heat losses to achieve all-cold evaporation. Furthermore, the evaporator gained energy from the environment equivalent to ∼170% of the received solar energy, contributing to a significant evaporation efficiency. Inspired by the leaf fenestration of Monstera, Wang et al. developed a tree-shaped solar evaporator using a Chinese paper-cutting technique, which featured an evaporation rate of 2.3 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.227 The excellent evaporation performance of the solar evaporator was attributed to its good light harvesting ability under different oblique light incidences and other energy collection from the ambient environment.


3.3.3 Reducing water vaporization enthalpy. 
Indeed, the evaporation rate is a more meaningful parameter for the ISVG process than evaporation efficiency since purified water output is more relevant to the ISVG technique. According to the equation for calculating the evaporation efficiency, the evaporation rate ṁ is highly dependent on the total enthalpy of the liquid–vapor phase change hlv, when assuming a constant evaporation efficiency. Since a smaller hlv leads to a higher ṁ, it should be a highly effective strategy to enhance the evaporation rate by reducing hlv. Typically, it is commonly believed that hlv is only related to temperature. Increasing water temperature results in reduced latent heat and enhanced sensible heat, contributing little to the total enthalpy hlv. It was not until that Yu's group pioneered a seminal study by utilizing hydrogels as a water network that reducing hlv was possible.228 In this work, they developed a hierarchically nanostructured hydrogel-based polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and PPy that served as an independent solar vapor generator, as shown in Fig. 7(a). The as-fabricated hydrogel evaporator realized a water evaporation rate of 3.2 kg m−2 h−1 with an evaporation efficiency of 94% under one sun irradiation. Note that such an evaporation rate was based on a 2D configuration, which was a record value when reported at that time. The unprecedented evaporation rate was achievable due to the reduced latent heat of water evaporation in the molecular mesh of PVA hydrogels under natural sunlight.
 Fig. 7  (a) Hierarchically nanostructured solar evaporator based on polyvinyl alcohol hydrogels and polypyrrole. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Three states of water around hydrogel polymer chains, including bound water, intermediate water, and free water. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Yu's group proposed a self-consistent theory based on hydrogel-enabled water activation to unveil the mechanism for reduced vaporization enthalpy. It is believed that there exist three types of water in the hydrogel network, namely free, intermediate, and bound water, as shown in Fig. 7(b). Free water refers to water molecules behaving the same as in bulk water, whereas intermediate and bound water denote water molecules interacting weakly and firmly with the polymer network, respectively. Intermediate water requires less energy than bulk water to transform into vapor, and thus vaporizing intermediate water can vastly enhance the evaporation rate at a fixed energy input. They also argue that water tends to evaporate in clusters in hydrogel rather than single molecules, largely reducing the energy required for water evaporation. Though the theory has not yet been completely proven, research on hydrogels for ISVG application has indeed gained significant progress.229 In a further study, Yu's group exploited light-absorbing materials such as rGO and Ti2O3 to study their interactions with hydrogels during the evaporation process.230,231 As regards Ti2O3 nanoparticles, the energy nano-confinement was achieved, resulting in a high evaporation rate of 3.6 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun.230 In a report, a polymer network was demonstrated to influence the water state in the hydrogel polymerized with PVA and chitosan.232 The ratio of intermediate and free water gradually increases with the increasing chitosan concentration, verifying the tunability of the water state by engineering the polymer network. An enhanced portion of intermediate water contributes to an increased water evaporation rate of 3.6 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun. In a recent study by Yu's group, a record-high evaporation rate of ∼4.0 kg m−2 h−1 with 93% efficiency under one sun irradiation was obtained, which resulted from a hydrophilic hydrogel evaporator with hydrophobic island-shaped patches.10 A similar hydrophilic and hydrophobic combined architecture was also demonstrated by Ho's group to boost the evaporation rate significantly, confirming the superiority of the design.233 The surface topography of hydrogel was also demonstrated to significantly impact the evaporation process due to the enhanced evaporation area, heat concentration effect, and fast water replenishment to the evaporation front.233,234
Zhu and co-workers developed a hierarchically porous polyion complex hydrogel by complexing positive- and negative-charged polymers, which can trap salt ions in brine water to enable a more hydrated network with an increased amount of intermediate water.235 With the ion-activated effect, the as-prepared hydrogel-based solar evaporator achieved an evaporation rate of 2.79 kg m−2 h−1 in simulated brine (3.5 wt% NaCl solutions) under one sun illumination, 67% higher than that in pure water (1.67 kg m−2 h−1). Guan and co-workers reported a sustainable wood-based solar vapor generator with deposited bacterial cellulose nanocomposites, in which the 3D cellulose fiber network of the bacterial cellulose hydrogel significantly led to the reduced vaporization enthalpy from 2450 to 997 J g−1 and rapid water evaporation.236 Furthermore, three functional layers in the vapor generator, including a light-absorbing layer of carbon nanotubes/bacterial cellulose, a thermal insulation layer of glass bubbles/bacterial cellulose, and a wood substrate for supporting and water transporting, contributed to a significant evaporation rate of 2.9 kg m−2 h−1 and an evaporation efficiency of 80%. To overcome the inefficient osmotic water pumping and shape-morphing effect of hydrogel during water evaporation, Qiu et al. constructed a 3D foam-supported hydrogel evaporator with a combined capillary-osmosis water transport mode and shape-confined ability.237 When the hybrid evaporator losses water excessively, the hydrogel shrinks and further cracks in the 3D foam skeleton, forming interconnected open pores for timely water supply through capillary effect. The water through capillary pumping enables the fast evaporation of the hybrid evaporator. Moreover, the 3D skeleton can hold the shape of the hydrogel when it absorbs or loses water, which is of practical use in real-world application. Recently, a novel solar-driven membrane distillation system based on hydrogel material was proposed to achieve high-yield and low-cost water production. It was demonstrated that the high-rate vapor generation, energy-efficient vapor transfer, and exposed evaporation front contribute to a water collection rate as high as 2.4 kg m−2 h−1, much higher than the conventional hydrophobic-film-based membrane distillation system.238 Due to the intermittency of solar energy, water collection from solar-driven vapor generation is only available in the daytime for most ISVG systems, which leads to a low water yield.239 To enable all-day-round water production, Shi et al. developed a hydrogel membrane that contains hierarchical three-dimensional tree-shaped microstructures to serve as a fog harvester at night and an ISVG system during the daytime.240 At night, the hydrogel membrane efficiently captured fog droplets at a rate of ∼5.0 g cm−2 h−1 with directional transpor capability. During the daytime, the membrane functioned as an ISVG device with a high evaporation rate of 3.64 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun, which was facilitated by efficient thermal/vapor flow management.
Though a plethora of hydrogel materials have been investigated for efficient solar vapor generation, the intermediate water theory adopted by many researchers remains elusive.229 Therefore, more fundamental studies for improving our understanding at the microscopic level on the vaporization enthalpy reduction can be conducted. Furthermore, direct measurements about the water cluster evaporation are highly desired.


3.3.4 Recycling latent heat from water vapor. 
In conventional multi-stage flash and multi-effect distillation systems, the latent heat from the generated water vapor is recycled to heat the inlet cold water, significantly enhancing energy utilization efficiency. Therefore, it should be a hugely rewarding process if one can recycle the latent heat contained in the evaporated water vapor in the ISVG systems.241 As shown in Fig. 8(a), Chiavazzo et al. constructed a passive multi-stage solar-driven distiller capable of recycling the latent heat of vaporization before it was lost to the environment.242 Each distillation unit is composed of two hydrophilic layers separated by a hydrophobic microporous membrane (note that adopting a hydrophobic membrane instead of an air gap could help avoid distillate contamination). The upper hydrophilic layer was used for wicking seawater for evaporation, whereas the lower one was utilized for condensing water vapor and delivering purified water to the basin. The lower hydrophilic layer was attached to an aluminum plate, allowing the condensing latent heat to be reused for heating in the following stage. Finally, the distiller with ten units achieved a distillate flow rate of almost 3 L m−2 h−1 from seawater at less than one sun irradiation. Similarly, Xu and co-workers demonstrated a new ten-stage solar still with an optimized design enabled by a detailed investigation of the heat and mass transport mechanisms, leading to a record-high solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of 385% with a water production rate of 5.78 L m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.243
 Fig. 8  Multi-stage solar evaporators for latent heat recycling: (a) multi-stage solar distiller with the unit stage consisting of two hydrophilic layers separated by a hydrophobic microporous membrane. Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Photovoltaic panel attached with a multi-stage thermal distiller for electricity and water co-production. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
As displayed in Fig. 8(b), Wang's group demonstrated a photovoltaic-membrane distillation device that can stably produce clean water at an evaporation rate of 1.64 kg m−2 h−1 from seawater while simultaneously achieving uncompromised electricity generation performance (>11%) under one sun.37 Note that the high clean water production was realized by constructing a multi-stage membrane distillation device at the backside of the solar cell to recycle the latent heat of water vapor condensation in each distillation stage. Xu's group designed a novel 3D evaporator composed of a base evaporation surface and vertical fins located above the base surface to deliver an extremely highly efficient ISVG device.244 During the solar vapor generation, the vertical fins in the 3D evaporator worked as cold evaporation surfaces, which could simultaneously reduce energy loss, gain environmental energy and recycle both the released latent heat of vapor condensing and energy loss from beneath the warm evaporation surface, leading to an extremely high evaporation rate of 2.94 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun. Note that the recycled latent heat accounted for more than 80% of the total recycled energy, which was the largest part. The multi-stage solar evaporator is usually bulky and cumbersome, which hinders portable applications requiring lightweight and compact characteristics. Recently, Wang's group proposed a flexible and entirely passive multistage membrane evaporator for effective solar seawater distillation.245 With recycled paper as porous substrates and other membranes as components, their membrane evaporator was lightweight, rollable, and easy-carrying. In addition, a siphon effect was designed to pump water continuously from inlets to outlets, circumventing the salt-clogging issue in the dead-end mode design. It was demonstrated that an eight-stage distillation device exhibited a stable water production rate of 3.61 kg m−2 h−1, showing great potential as a portable solar distillation device.

3.4 Water path optimization
To enable efficient water evaporation, matched water supply to the evaporative surface in the ISVG device is warranted. In most of the evaporation configurations, one sun irradiation is adopted, which provides a maximum evaporation rate of 1.47 kg m−2 h−1 provided that the vaporization enthalpy is constant as 2453 kJ kg−1 at 20 °C. This value is significantly smaller than the transport-limited flow rates in typical hydrophilic porous materials above 1000 kg m−2 h−1.25 Excessive water supply will impair the thermal insulating performance of porous substrates since the thermal conductivity of water is as high as ∼0.6 W m−1 K−1, much larger than that of commercial polystyrene foam (0.04 W m−1 K−1). Hence, it is intuitive that reducing water supply through rational water path design may contribute to enhanced water evaporation.
The traditional water path is made of 3D interconnected pores with abundant water through the capillary effect.8 Zhu's group first proposed a novel concept known as a confined 2D water path, which decoupled water transporting and thermal insulating functionalities.51 Specifically, they wrapped polystyrene foam with water-wicking cellulose paper, which enabled an efficient evaporation efficiency of 80% under one sun irradiation. Due to decreased heat loss, the evaporation process is independent of the water quantity and can be maintained without thermal insulation of the container. Moreover, the same group utilized a 1D water path to further reduce heat loss by minimizing the contact area between the ISVG device and bulk water.50 Hu's group developed a jellyfish-like evaporator with vertical 3D-printed aligned GO pillars as one-dimensional linear water transport pathways, which significantly reduced heat loss by greatly decreasing the contact area between the evaporation layer and bulk water.130 Recently, Miao's group proposed a new energy-matching concept for boosting water evaporation in the ISVG device, a well-matched water supply for solar water evaporation.246 The optimized water path by adding wood sheets with various thicknesses eventually led to a high evaporation rate of up to 2.22 kg m−2 h−1 with an evaporation efficiency of 93.2% under one sun irradiation. In a study by Wang et al.,38 confinement capillarity of thin photothermal coating on porous sponge was proposed to enhance the evaporation performance of the ISVG system (see Fig. 9), in which an ultrathin water layer was formed in the interconnected pores of photothermal materials. The thin layer can generate as much evaporation area as possible by enlarging the vapor evacuation channels. The device achieved an efficient interfacial heating effect, contributing to a moderately high evaporation rate of 3.2 kg m−2 h−1.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the confinement capillarity enabled by a photothermal thin coating for enhancing solar vapor generation. PU sponge is covered with a thin coating comprising black/hydrophilic nanoparticles (BHNPs). Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
3.5 Theoretical modeling for ISVG systems
The interfacial evaporation process is a heat and mass transfer process driven by the input solar energy and water vapor pressure difference between the evaporation surface and the environment.247 There are multi-physics fields in the solar-driven evaporation process, including light absorption, capillary wicking of water, heat transfer, vapor diffusion, salt diffusion, etc. Water vapor condensation is an essential physical process in water production. Since experimental methodologies are limited, it is imperative to use theoretical modeling for illustrating the as-mentioned complex physical processes, which can not only interpret the experimental phenomenon but also guide the structure and architecture design of ISVG systems.
Light scattering and absorption occur when light impinges on the light-absorbing surface of the photothermal materials. To explicitly model such complex optical behaviors in the light-absorbing porous media, one should note that interaction with light can occur in multi-scales, including microscopic scale (i.e., wavelength scale) and macroscopic scale. Optical simulations based on wave optics are adopted in the wavelength scale, such as the Mie scattering theory and finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. In contrast, ray tracing simulation is usually conducted in the macroscopic domain where geometric optics holds valid. Zhu's group utilized the FDTD method to simulate the absorption features of self-assembled plasmonic gold absorbers, which had an average measured absorbance of ∼99% in the wavelength range from 400 nm to 10 μm.99 The simulation results demonstrated that the LSPR effects of gold nanoparticles were overlapped and hybridized, resulting in overlapping plasmonic modes that led to broadband absorption. The absorption was underestimated when constructing a 500 nm-thick nanoporous substrate (the actual thickness is 50 μm) in the simulation model limited by the costly FDTD simulation. Though FDTD modeling is accurate, it is usually limited to a small domain. When optical structures are far larger than the wavelength scale, ray tracing is usually used to simulate large-domain optical features, which still provides acceptable results with the omission of wavelength-scale optical effects. For example, a ray tracing simulation tool was leveraged by Geng et al. to illustrate the light trapping effect of macroscale holes induced by multi-reflection mode.161
The finite element method (FEM) has been widely used for analyzing thermal,161,248 fluid,249,250 and vapor transfer processes41,53 in the vapor generation process, which provides detailed and visualized field distributions for further in-depth analysis and interpretation. Researchers have recently been focused on simulating the whole ISVG system to illustrate the heat and mass transfer processes by using advanced theoretical modeling tools. Luo et al. developed a transient heat and mass transfer model to study the difference between interfacial heating and volumetric heating in an open environment and a closed solar still, respectively.251 The model simplified the energy conservation equation, allowing direct numerical solving without complex FEM simulation. Though the model was quite ideal and might not accurately reproduce the experimental results, it provided several reasonable conclusions, which were helpful for the future design of ISVG systems: (1) the advantage of interfacial heating was that it had a much shorter transient time than volumetric heating, whereas their efficiencies were similar under an exemplary insulation configuration; (2) the evaporation temperature was the determining factor for interfacial solar evaporation efficiency; and (3) the high evaporation rate of interfacial heating was not transformed into a high water yield in a closed solar still with 100% relative humidity. Recently, Fillet et al. constructed a two-dimensional axisymmetric model for a solar evaporator based on explicit general control equations and boundary conditions, which was solved with FEM in Comsol Multiphysics, as shown in Fig. 10(a).252 The simulation results well reproduced the experimental results, demonstrating the model's accuracy and enabling a reliable study under varied parameters. They clarified the influence of air temperature and humidity, demonstrated the effectiveness of insulation for improving evaporation efficiency, and interpreted some confusing experimental phenomenon in the literature (i.e., high efficiency under high solar flux and enlarged evaporation area).
 Fig. 10  (a) Two-dimensional axisymmetric heat and mass transfer model of a solar evaporator based on a rigid biosourced foam on the water surface. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Circuit-inspired salt capacitance model for antifouling solar desalination by highlighting the importance of interfacial water layer thickness. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
In a nutshell, such accurate heat and mass models were proven effective in the ISVG system design, which deserves more attention for advancing the ISVG. Note that salt fouling has been perceived as the Achilles' heel of ISVG technology for seawater desalination; therefore, it is highly desired to model the salt crystallization process for a better understanding of the process and facilitating anti-fouling designs. As shown in Fig. 10(b), Shi et al. proposed a circuit-inspired salt capacitance model for efficient and antifouling interfacial solar desalination.39 The model highlighted the water layer thickness as a critical parameter in the antifouling system design. With the new understanding, they designed an ISVG system with long-term antifouling performance without compromising the evaporation efficiency by carefully tailoring the interfacial water layer thickness. All in all, theoretical modeling can not only provide us with a better physical understanding of solar vapor generation but also serves as an advanced tool for the rational design of ISVG systems.
4. Salt rejection strategies
Desalination is one of the main application scenarios of the as-developed ISVG systems. In the desalination process, salt fouling is usually an inevitable issue since fast water evaporation under solar irradiation leads to a dramatic increase of salt concentration in the saline water beyond its supersaturated salt concentration, inducing the salt crystallization process on the evaporative surface. The salt fouling issue has a notable influence on the ISVG system: first, it can cause the clogging of the porous channels for water transportation; second, the crystallized salt brings significant backward scattering, resulting in a decreased absorption of incident solar light by the photothermal conversion layer. Both factors are detrimental to the ultimate water evaporation performance of the ISVG system and might fail the whole water-generation system. Therefore, circumventing the salt fouling issue is highly desired to enable the long-term operation and ultimate practicality of the ISVG systems for targeted desalination applications. To date, numerous salt rejection strategies have been proposed, detailed in the latter description.
4.1 Flushing and self-cleaning
In the early stage, physical flushing is a common and effective method to remove the deposited salt particles in the porous media of the ISVG system. Nevertheless, such a method is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and not conducive to the continuous operation of ISVG systems.253 In addition, nighttime salt dissolution, termed as self-cleaning strategy, is also a popular method for removing crystallized salts, which is based on the intermittent evaporation cycle of the ISVG system.22 During the daytime with intensive solar irradiation, the ISVG system achieves fast water evaporation accompanied by salt crystallization, which is largely inhibited in the nighttime lacking any light irradiation; thereby, the salt dissolution process dominates in the nighttime to enable crystallized salts to re-distribute back into the bulk brine.
Recently, researchers have developed more advanced self-cleaning strategies for effective salt rejection. As shown in Fig. 11(a), Xia et al. demonstrated a novel approach based on the “evaporation-crystallization-self regeneration” cycle to manage salt accumulation and precipitation.254 As a proof of concept, they developed a self-rotating solar evaporator, which achieved ultrahigh salt tolerance (300 g L−1) and an evaporation efficiency of ∼90% simultaneously by periodic self-regeneration. Note that the self-rotation was triggered by the unbalance between the gravity and buoyancy of the crystalized salt. Xu's group also used a self-rotating strategy to achieve self-cleaning of a spherical evaporator. This approach resulted in excellent salt rejection performance during 8 hours of operation and a high evaporation rate exceeding 2 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.226 Furthermore, the self-rotation strategy was extended to a collective sphere-particles-based system, in which the self-assembled particles functioned together to reject the generated salt particles like the schooling behavior of fish (see Fig. 11(b)).255 In detail, this architecture was based on scalable self-assembled expanded polystyrene-core/GO-shell particles for solar-driven water–solute separation.255 With the assistance of surface tension, these engineered particles combine together spontaneously, forming an all-in-one system to function collectively and coordinatively. During the solar-driven water evaporation process, salt particles nucleate and grow on the top of the collective system, followed by autonomous rotating induced by the unbalanced torque and self-cleaning of nucleated salt until the complete separation of water and salt solute. The system realized a solar–vapor conversion efficiency of over 90% and a salt production rate as high as 0.39 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.
 Fig. 11  Solar evaporators with self-cleaning function: (a) self-rotating solar evaporator for continuous desalination in hypersaline brine. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fish-school inspired self-assembled particles system with self-rotation function, achieving solar-driven water–solute separation. Reproduced with permission.255 Copyright 2021, The Authors. 
4.2 Advection and diffusion
During the water evaporation process, salt concentration gradient and capillary flow usually exist between the evaporation surface and bulk saline water. Chen's group proposed a floating solar evaporator engineered to achieve salt rejection while maintaining heat localization for improving evaporation efficiency.256 In the solar evaporator, polystyrene foam was used as an insulation layer while cellulose fabric was adopted as water-wicking material. Note that the fabric wick to polystyrene foam's area ratio was optimized to reject salts efficiently while maintaining effective thermal insulation. It was demonstrated that the as-developed composite solar vapor generator exhibited excellent salt rejection performance, attributed to efficient advection and diffusion effect.
Hu's group developed a balsa-wood-based ISVG system with intrinsic bimodal porous microstructures to enhance the salt rejection ability of the wood-based evaporators.257 Specifically, the large vessel channels presented in the balsa wood enabled a rapid capillary pumping of water, and interconnected microchannels ensured sufficient advection and diffusion, which led to fast water replenishment that can circumvent the salt accumulation issue. In addition, artificial millimeter-sized drilled channels were introduced into natural woods with micro-sized channels by Hu's group to prepare self-regenerating solar evaporators.258 With such self-regenerating behavior, the evaporator exhibited excellent salt rejection ability even in 20 wt% NaCl solution. Liu and co-workers demonstrated that the carbonized porous loofah sponge had excellent salt-rejection performance when used for seawater desalination.259 After a 10 h desalination test in 20 wt% salt seawater, it was found that there was no evident salt accumulation on the loofah fiber surface and internal microchannels. It was demonstrated that the salt concentration gradient between the macropores and microchannels of the loofah sponge enabled efficient salt rejection in the loofah, thereby enabling long-term stability in the desalination process. Recently, a milestone for the ISVG system with a high evaporation rate (2.8 kg m−2 h−1@one sun) and excellent salt rejection has been achieved by Zhu et al.260 In the ISVG system, neither salt accumulation nor evaporation rate decrease was observed upon long-term evaporation of seawater over one month. Even under extreme operating conditions, such as continuous desalination in concentrated brine (20 wt% NaCl) for more than 400 h, the evaporation performance of the system could still be maintained. The superior performance was attributed to the combination of desired properties of a-MoC1−x@carbon bouquets and the salt-water loop.
In a conventional solar evaporator, a capillary wick structure is frequently adopted to enable fast water transport for efficient solar vapor generation. However, extra water-transport resistance is also brought by the wick structure, hampering the salt-rejecting capability of solar evaporator utilizing advection and diffusion scheme for avoiding salt crystallization, as shown in Fig. 12(a). It is intuitive to use wick-free structure to circumvent the salt-fouling issue, as demonstrated in the contactless design (see Fig. 12(b)). The drawback of such design is its huge heat loss due to a lack of water confinement. To achieve excellent salt-rejecting capability without compromising evaporation performance, Wang's group proposed a delicate wick-free architecture with a water confined layer, as shown in Fig. 12(c).40 They demonstrated that natural convection could be induced in the confined water layer, which is critical to salt rejection. Meanwhile, a regime enabling simultaneous heat localization and salt rejection was verified. Eventually, a highly efficient (with an evaporation efficiency of >80%) and salt-rejecting (20 wt% salinity) solar evaporator was demonstrated. By harnessing the salt backflow scheme, Yang et al. engineered a 3D open architecture decorated with mass transfer bridges capable of treating high-salinity (>10 wt%) brine water without compromising its evaporation performance, as shown in Fig. 12(d).261 The distinct evaporator contains a plethora of vertically aligned mass transfer bridges, through which excessive salt can flow back via diffusion and convection. Moreover, the vertical bridges separate light-absorbing surface and bulk water, forming a 3D open space to confine conductive heat in the upper position and facilitate additional water evaporation. This contributed greatly to the water evaporation process and the ultimate water collection part, leading to a significant water collection efficiency of >40%. The as-developed evaporator could retain exception evaporation performance for five consecutive days in both field (concentrated brine with a salinity of 8.7%) and ocean (Red Sea, salt content: 4.3%) tests, demonstrating its practicality in the real-world application.
 Fig. 12  (a) Conventional wick structure-based solar evaporator with good thermal insulation but poor salt-rejecting ability. (b) Contactless evaporation enabled by the separation of the light absorber and bulk water. Heat loss is large due to a lack of water confinement. (c) As-proposed wick-free structure with water confinement for good thermal insulation and excellent salt-rejecting. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2022, The Authors. (d) Left: Schematic diagram of the 3D salt-rejecting solar evaporator consisting of a solar absorber, vertically aligned mass transfer bridges, and a supporting frame; right: mass and heat transport scheme in the vertical bridge indicating that excessive salt can reflow back to bulk water via advection and diffusion from upper parts and heat is confined in the upper position for efficient vapor generation. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2022, The Authors. 
4.3 Localized salt crystallization
Localized salt crystallization has been proposed to actively enable the long-term continuous operation of the ISVG systems in saline water, which is based on the decoupling of the water-evaporation surface and the salt crystallization surface of the ISVG system. By designing a 3D cup-shaped solar evaporator, Wang's group solved the accumulation issue of salt crust layers in conventional 2D solar evaporators.262 Since the salt precipitation process was shifted to the external evaporator surface, the inner light-absorbing surface was no longer affected by the salt fouling, which enabled a stable evaporation process lasting at least 120 h in 25 wt% brine. Xia et al. proposed a solar vapor generator with an edge-preferential crystallization function consisting of a light-absorbing layer (carbon nanotube), a water-spreading layer (filter paper), a thermal insulating layer (polystyrene foam) and a water uptake thread (cotton thread).263 The hydrophilic cotton thread was intentionally integrated into the center of the evaporator, which enabled a radial gradient of salt concentration on the evaporator surface during the evaporation process, allowing salts to crystalize at the edge. It was demonstrated that 600 h-long steam generation was achieved in 3.5 wt% saline water in this solar evaporator.
As shown in Fig. 13(a), Li et al. proposed a highly salt-resistant hydrogel-based evaporator with a well-tailored localized salt crystallization function, enabled by a 3D conical frustum architecture.41 With the increasing cross-section area of the conical evaporator, the conical frustum structure synergistically facilitated radial brine transport and further edge-preferential salt deposition. Furthermore, the as-developed 3D conical ISVG system displayed improved brine transport ability enabled by fast capillary wicking and swelling of the adopted PVA hydrogel. With such a specific design, the ISVG system exhibited a high evaporation rate (∼2.1 kg m−2 h−1) and excellent salt-rejection ability over a long term (stable evaporation in 20 wt% brine under continuous 24 h irradiation). To achieve efficient zero liquid discharge, Wang's group proposed a cup-shaped solar crystallizer to treat actual seawater brine (21.6 wt% NaCl) by coupling a new crystallizer design and using a salt crystallization inhibitor, as shown in Fig. 13(b).217 The rational design endowed the solar crystallizer with a high water evaporation rate of 2.42 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation and long-term evaporation stability lasting 288 h. Finally, a high evaporation rate of 48.0 kg m−2 per day obtained by the solar crystallizer array in an outdoor field test confirmed its enormous potential for practical brine treatment.
 Fig. 13  Solar evaporators with localized salt crystallization function: (a) cone-shaped 3D hydrogel solar evaporator with localized salt crystallization function. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (b) Cup-shaped solar crystallizer with zero liquid discharge. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2021, The Authors. 
4.4 Janus design
One effective way to avert salt fouling issues is to design a Janus structure, comprising a top hydrophobic photothermal layer and a bottom hydrophilic layer for water transportation. The Janus design decouples the photothermal conversion function and water transportation function of the solar evaporator, which largely reduces the salt accumulation on the photothermal conversion layer.
Zhu's group first demonstrated the feasibility of such a Janus design by fabricating an electrospun bilayer membrane, as shown in Fig. 14, which can efficiently reject salt during evaporation. It was demonstrated that stable cycling evaporation over 16 days was achieved by the Janus design.42 By taking inspiration from the water lily, the same group proposed a Janus hierarchical design for stable and efficient solar evaporation in the high-salinity brine, which achieved complete separation of solute from water without fouling on the light absorber.264 Zhao and co-workers developed a lotus morphology-inspired biomimetic evaporator with Janus wettability and bimodal pores for efficient solar water evaporation.173 Like lotus leaves, the hydrophobic surface of the evaporator cuts off the water pathways, hence achieving high-efficient salt resistance, while the hydrophilic bottom layer provides fast water transportation. In addition, the bimodal-pore structures decrease density and thermal conductivity and reduce water vaporization enthalpy, resulting in a much higher evaporation rate at the same conversion efficiency. Li's group proposed Janus photothermal materials based on superhydrophilic and porous poly(ionic liquid) monolith coated with hydrophobic carbon soot for high-salinity water evaporation.265 The as-prepared porous monolith can withstand 6 h continuous desalination operation with no salt depositing on the top surface.
 Fig. 14  (a) Electrospun Janus membrane consisting of a top hydrophobic layer and a bottom hydrophilic layer for effective salt rejection and (b) the long-term evaporation performance of two absorbers (Janus absorber and non-Janus absorber). Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
4.5 Other emerging salt rejection strategies
There is a well-known Donnan effect, in which due to the fixed charge in the water channel, the counter-ions are confined within the water channel owing to electric neutrality and generate a high chemical potential to change the salt ion partition equilibrium between the water channel and bulk water. Under the Donnan effect, Zhu's group designed a hierarchical solar evaporator with excellent salt rejection ability, which consisted of a top solar absorber, a middle water supply layer, and a bottom insulated foam.266 The middle layer, namely polyelectrolyte hydrogel, had abundant fixed negative charge on the wall of the mesoporous structure, thereby creating confined Na+ ions at the interface between the water channel and bulk water due to the Donnan effect. Such confined Na+ ions can reduce the amount of the salt ions diffusing into the water channel and decrease the localized salt concentration, which endowed the solar evaporator with excellent salt rejection ability.
Inspired by the ability of water flow for salt transportation, Tan's group developed a novel fluidic photothermal structure, which manipulates unidirectional fluid flow for salt rejection in a continuous solar water evaporation process from brine.267,268 The elegant structure consists of three key components: an inlet for the brine solution, a photothermal conversion layer to generate clean water from the brine through it, and an outlet for high-salinity brine discharge. The unidirectional one-way water flow from the inlet to the outlet aggregates salt ions inside the solar absorber and discharges them into the outlet, which could avert salt crystallization in the solar absorber and ensure a stable water evaporation rate. Prasher's group proposed a solar umbrella scheme made of a selective solar absorber and a blackbody emitter, which converts sunlight into mid-infrared radiation where water is strongly absorptive and decouples the photothermal conversion layer and water evaporative surface.269 Compared with direct irradiation configuration, the water evaporation rate is much enhanced since heat is located at the water surface. The most distinctive property lies in the non-contact design, which makes the device suitable for treating a wide range of brine and wastewater without any contamination. Similar architecture has been utilized by Bian et al. to achieve sustainable solar evaporation while salt accumulation since the salt layer is transparent to mid-infrared radiation.270
5. Condensation development
The field has focused on developing the evaporation part of the ISVG systems, whereas the condensation component related to ultimate water output receives much less attention. In most ISVG systems, an enclosed transparent chamber with an inclined or dome-shaped top surface is used as the water collector, in which vapor condenses on the top surface. Then the formed water droplets flow along the chamber walls under gravity to be collected on the bottom side. Note that transparent acrylic plates, glass substrates, and plastic membranes are common raw materials for making such water collection chambers.256,260,264 Indeed, most ISVG systems have a low water collection efficiency of 30–40% at present.256 Even assuming a 100% evaporation efficiency, the ultimate effective energy ratio transferring from sunlight to collected water is still far below the current achievable evaporation efficiency.20 Two main factors are responsible for the low water yield rate. First, water vapor condenses in a closed chamber, where humidity is significantly larger than in an open space, largely lowering the water evaporation rate. Second, the generated water vapor and condensed water droplets on the upper space of the ISVG device can cause significant backscattering of incident solar light, significantly hampering the light-absorbing ability of photothermal materials.
Researchers have recently developed an effective strategy to boost the water yield by separating the light-absorbing surface and the vapor-condensation surface. The technique has dual advantages: first, the light absorbing capacity is not compromised since the generated water vapor and condensed water droplets do not interact with incident light; second, advanced condensation structures well developed by previous research can be leveraged to enhance vapor condensation efficiency, which is not limited by the transparent material in the conventional design. For example, Gong and co-workers proposed a unique vapor-guiding system based on carbonized bamboo stem to enable the downward diffusion of water vapor on the light-absorbing surface, ingeniously averting the light-blocking issue and simultaneously improving the water collection rate.271 The proposed system mainly consisted of a hollow bamboo stem with nodes and a transparent cover on the top surface. Under sun irradiation, the generated vapor in the node was stored in the closed chamber between the cover and the node surface, leading to increased vapor pressure and further downward diffusion into the underlying chamber. The water-to-vapor ratio was as high as 81%, significantly larger than those obtained by traditional collection setups.
As shown in Fig. 15(a), Zhu's group designed an inverted-structured, single-stage solar water purifier consisting of an upper selective absorber and a lower honeycomb water condenser based on hydrophobic nanostructured copper, achieving a well-separation between the water evaporation surface and the selective absorber surface.43 In their architecture, the generated water vapor was subject to pass through a hydrophobic porous membrane and was condensed in a lower copper chamber, avoiding contamination by the inlet water. Their inverted structure not only circumvented optical loss caused by the generated water vapor and condensed water droplets but also improved heat transfer and condensation abilities, which ultimately delivered a significant water yield rate of 1.063 kg m−2 h−1 corresponding to a solar-to-water conversion efficiency of ∼70% for single-stage solar purification system. Recently, Qu's group adopted a similar separation strategy to achieve a high water yield rate by designing a Janus ISVG system, as shown in Fig. 15(b).44 They demonstrated a high water evaporation rate of up to 2.21 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun. Further, they achieved a record high water yield rate of 1.95 kg m−2 h−1, corresponding to a condensation efficiency as high as 88% (the highest value in the reported single-stage ISVG system). In their design, several strategies were harnessed to achieve a high evaporation rate, including a micro–nano hybrid antireflective structure for efficient light absorption and a hydrophilic hydrogel with multi-level porous channels embedded in a high-conductivity copper mesh. Their system inherited the advantages of the separation strategy described above in terms of condensation efficiency.
 Fig. 15  Condensation setups for ISVG systems: (a) single-stage inverted structured solar water purifier consisting of a top light absorber and a honeycomb bottom water condenser based on hydrophobic nanostructured copper. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Janus-interface ISVG system separating the water evaporation and the photothermal conversion on the two sides of the membrane generator; evaporated water vapor is condensed on a metal plate. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6. Applications of ISVG systems
6.1 Seawater desalination and wastewater treatment
The most promising application of ISVG systems is seawater desalination, which currently depends on costly technologies, such as reverse osmosis, multistage flash distillation, multi-effect distillation, etc. We note that the average salinity of seawater across the world is ∼3.5 wt%, whereas the salt concentration of natural brine varies from 0.8 wt% in the Baltic Sea to 10 wt% in the Dead Sea. In addition, the salinity of real concentrated seawater reverse osmosis brine can be as high as 21.6%.217 Though the concentration of actual brine can vary, the ISVG technology can treat such complex brine since ISVG is indeed a thermal distillation method, with abundant solar energy as the only energy input. It is well noted that thermal distillation is an outstanding technology for treating high-concentration brine since salt concentration has only a minor influence on the distillation performance.
In previous studies, simulated seawater, NaCl solution, is usually used for desalination experiments. Hu's group developed a self-generating wood-based solar evaporator for continuous water desalination.258 In their work, NaCl solution with salt concentration up to 20 wt% was used for evaluating the desalination performance of the as-developed ISVG system. It was found that the concentration of Na+ in the purified water was four orders of magnitude lower than the initial ion concentration of the simulated seawater, meeting the requirements of the World Health Organization and the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency for safe drinking water standards. With a rationally designed channel-array structure, efficient salt exchange between the artificial drilled channels and the micro-sized wood natural wood channels was achieved during the solar water evaporation process, which produced excellent salt-rejection ability.
Using natural seawater for desalination is preferable since it represents a practical scenario in real-world applications. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that compared with 3.5 wt% NaCl solution used as a simulated seawater, desalinating real seawater is more challenging since seawater contains complex ingredients. Some minor species, e.g. MgSO4, can crystallize into abundant particles causing the clogging of water pathways and further leading to a large decrease in evaporation rate.217 As shown in Fig. 16(a), Wang's group adopted natural Red Sea seawater to test the desalination performance of their proposed ISVG system based on a multistage membrane.245 The evaporation performance deteriorated quickly in an 8 h operation due to the salt-clogging issue in a dead-end mode, which was later significantly enhanced by using a siphon-flow mode, benefitting from the effective discharge of concentrated brine and edge-preferred salt crystallization. Recently, Wang's group used actual concentrated seawater reverse osmosis brine (21.6 wt%) to verify the desalination performance of their as-proposed solar crystallizer, which achieved excellent zero liquid discharge.217 When used for treating salty brine, the evaporation performance of solar evaporator is usually compromised since brine has a lower vapor pressure than deionized water, which makes it challenging to evaporate water from brine. In addition, the salt clogging issue during the water evaporation process is also detrimental to the evaporation performance of solar evaporators. In a study by Wu's group, an intriguing hydrogel-based solar evaporator was developed to achieve an accelerated evaporation rate of 2.79 kg m−2 h−1 in the simulated brine (3.5 wt% NaCl solution) compared with an evaporation rate of 1.67 kg m−2 h−1 in the pure water.235 The ISVG system was built by the complexation of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes into a porous hydrogel structure, in which the oppositely charged group of the polyion complex can interact with the mobile ions in NaCl solution. The interaction altered the water state of the polymeric skeleton and further led to enhanced the hydrogel's hydration capacity.
 Fig. 16  (a) A flexible and fully passive multistage membrane system for seawater desalination. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2021, The Authors. (b) A PPy membrane with selective solution–diffusion for intercepting VOCs during solar water evaporation. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
The ISVG system can also be used for wastewater treatment. Conventional methods for treating wastewater include chemical precipitation, absorption, ion exchange, and membrane purification, which cause intensive energy and vast cost.50 Solar water evaporation is a promising technology to replace such conventional methods. Zhu's group demonstrated the ability of ISVG systems to treat waste water containing various heavy-metal ions (Cu2+, Cd2+, Pb2+, Zn2+) by designing a cone-shaped 3D evaporator.50 With a pristine heavy-metal concentration as high as 5000 mg L−1 in the wastewater (5000 times higher than drinking water standards set by the World Health Organization), the collected water after solar evaporation is clean enough to meet the drinking water standards of the World Health Organization. Furthermore, they demonstrated that the ISVG system could recover precious heavy metals from polluted water.
Removing organic compounds from wastewater is critical since contaminants are general in domestic and industrial polluted water.272 Wang et al. proposed a reversibly transformable 2D–3D photothermal evaporator that can remove organic compounds such as methylene blue and methylene orange.225 After water treatment, organic compounds can be effectively removed. In addition, it has been demonstrated that real waste water such as textile wastewater can also be treated effectively by the ISVG system.90 From a practical perspective, it is desired for solar evaporators to separate water from volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Zuo et al. synthesized heterostructured copper oxide/carbon nitride (CuO/CN) to enhance non-radiative relaxation and further improve photothermal performance by constructing a heterogeneous electric field.273 Interestingly, the CuO/CN heterostructures can effectively degrade VOCs in the wastewater by the photo-Fenton-like process, where VOC concentration was reduced from ∼10 mg L−1 to 0.39 mg L−1 after distillation, in contrast to an enhancement to ∼16 mg L−1 in a conventional distillation process. Inspired by selective permeable membranes in living organisms and chemical separation processes, Wang's group proposed a rationally designed micro-pyramid structured PPy membrane as the photothermal material with a VOC removal rate of 90%, which was attributed to selective permeability toward water and VOCs (see Fig. 16(b)).45 It was demonstrated that PPy has a protonated molecular structure and offers a stronger affinity for polar water molecules than typical VOCs such as phenol molecules. Namely, water is easier to dissolve in the PPy membrane than VOC molecules. Additionally, water molecules are smaller than VOC molecules, which facilitates their fast diffusion in the PPy membrane. When used in solar evaporation, the as-prepared PPy membrane allowed fast water evaporation (1.12 kg m−2 h−1@one sun), whereas VOCs were intercepted, and their evaporation was suppressed.
6.2 Sterilization
Saturated steam with high temperature and high pressure (>121 °C and >205 kPa) is extensively harnessed for medical sterilization, which is known as autoclaving.46 Typical autoclaving requires intensive electricity and complex equipment unavailable in undeveloped and off-grid areas. ISVG provides a low-cost and easily accessible solution for such a valued sterilization process. Deng's group274 first used ISVG for the autoclaving process, which showed excellent sterilization ability and promising application potential. However, the drawback of their system is that high solar intensity is necessary for generating high-temperature vapor, which commonly requires high-cost solar concentrators in real-world applications. Therefore, generating high-temperature vapor without using an expensive solar concentrator is of significant value. Chen's group first demonstrated that effective thermal management is essential for obtaining 100 °C water vapor under ambient one-sun solar intensity since combined radiation and convection heat loss (∼1480 W m−2) from 100 °C vapor already exceeds input solar flux (1000 W m−2).208 In their work, selective solar absorbers and bubble wrap were used to reduce radiation and convective heat loss, respectively, while underlying EPS foam was utilized for limiting conductive heat transfer. Furthermore, a heat concentration strategy was harnessed to heat the water layer in a small region by leveraging heat generated from a large-area photothermal surface. Finally, water vapor with a temperature of ∼100 °C was obtained.
Recently, Zhao et al. demonstrated a practical system that can indeed generate saturated steam for the medical sterilization process even under hazy and partly cloudy weather via using low-cost and off-the-shelf components, as shown in Fig. 17(a) and (b).46 In this work, they also used selective solar absorbers to reduce radiative heat loss. As an alternative to conventional bubble wrap, they adopted an ultra-transparent silica aerogel to reduce the convective heat loss, circumventing the light loss due to its transparency. By designing a tube-fin absorber, thermal concentration was achieved. Simultaneously, a simple non-tracking compound parabolic concentrator was further harnessed to enhance input power intensity. In the end, when connected to an autoclave, their prototype system can continuously deliver pressurized steam at 128 °C and 250 kPa, achieving a high solar-to-vapor efficiency of 47%. The steam could achieve effective sterilization of a tape as shown in Fig. 17(c). Further development for increasing efficiency and reducing cost will make such a technique attractive in remote and resource-limited regions.
 Fig. 17  Passive solar thermal device that can generate high-temperature and high-pressure vapor (128 °C and 250 kPa) for medical sterilization: (a) the thermal management design; (b) the whole setup for generating high-temperature and high-pressure vapor in Mumbai, India; (c) verification of effective sterilization. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
6.3 Water-electricity co-production
In the ISVG systems, potential energy sources, such as thermal and mechanical energy, are frequently missed and wasted. Harvesting scattered energy in the ISVG systems can achieve water-electricity co-production, representing a new direction for developing functionalized solar water generators. In principle, there are two types of energy, thermal energy, and photon energy, that can be harvested for generating electricity. To harvest thermal energy or thermal-induced energy, researchers have developed various generators, including thermoelectric generator (TEG), thermogalvanic generator (TGG), pyroelectric/piezoelectric generator (PyEG/PEG), triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), ion voltaic generator (IVG), etc.24 In comparison, harvesting photon energy is more direct and efficient by using photovoltaic panels.
Ho's group developed a porous PDMS sponge solar absorber with shape conformal and thermal insulating properties as an efficient water evaporator, which eventually achieved a water evaporation rate of 1.36 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.275 Meanwhile, with the porous solar absorber seamlessly attached to the commercial Bi2Te3 TEG, a significant temperature difference of 4.6 °C between the upper and lower TEG sides induced an output electric power density of 0.4 W m−2 due to the well-known Seebeck effect. Similar ISVG systems combined with TEG devices were also developed.139,276 Instead of attaching the TEG with a photothermal device, Zhu's group integrated the TEG with the vapor condensation surface of the ISVG system to recycle large enthalpy stored in the generated vapor.277 Under a solar power density of 30 kW m−2, the developed ISVG system obtained a water evaporation rate of 31.6 kg m−2 h−1 and an electric power density of ∼300 W m−2, which can easily power an electric fan and light-emitting diodes. To combine the ISVG system and TGG device, Deng's group first proposed an open thermo-electrochemical cell by integrating the I3−/I− redox couple into bulk water of the ISVG system, which generated an output electric power of ∼0.5 mW m−2.278 As shown in Fig. 18(a), Ho's group developed a modular deformable vapor electricity cogeneration system by combining the upper ISVG system and lower TGG device together.279 Their system utilized CuO/Cu foil as a photothermal layer and electrode simultaneously. A porous hydrogel was first coated on copper foil to wick water for solar evaporation, while a thermal-insulating hydrogel coupled with ion solution was attached to the lower part of the copper foil as an electrolyte for the TGG device. Their device achieved a high evaporation rate of 1.33 kg m−2 h−1 and synchronous thermogalvanic power output of ∼1.6 mW m−2 under one sun irradiation.
 Fig. 18  (a) Modular deformable vapor-electricity cogeneration based on a hydrogel/metal-oxide/polymer multilayer film. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Piezo-photo-thermal solar evaporator for simultaneous vapor and electricity generation based on a hybrid PVDF/graphene membrane. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Ho's group further constructed a PyEG/PEG based on ferroelectric fluoropolymer PVDF to capture thermomechanical responses from vapor generation and condensation processes, which produced an output electric power density of 240.7 μW m−2 under the predominant pyroelectric effect of the PVDF membrane.80 Recently, Huang et al. developed a composite PVDF/graphene membrane as an efficient solar evaporator and ocean wave energy harvester simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 18(b).47 The doped graphene in the PVDF membrane serves as an efficient photothermal material because of its intrinsic black properties and also transforms the PVDF crystal from the α-phase to the piezoelectric β-phase. The resulting composite membrane had an output energy density of 2.11 W m−2 for 1 Hz simulated waves and evaporated water at a high production rate of 1.2 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation. Intriguingly, the generated electricity could be well stored in a battery by using a power storage module circuit, which further produced water at a rate of 0.72 kg m−2 h−1 by Joule heating for a period of 0.89 h after 24 h of energy collection (no sun irradiation).
To harness the triboelectric energy generated from the flow of condensed water droplets, Ho's group built a prototype, consisting of inclined walls and a round bottom vessel lined with PTFE-membrane-based TENG devices.280 The device was intentionally designed to harness omnidirectional wind energy, which set it to swing in random directions and further induced the locomotion of water droplets in the round bottom to generate triboelectric signals. Their TENG device had a maximum peak power output of 0.63 μW, corresponding to a power density of 0.16 μW m−2. In addition, TENG devices were coupled with solar evaporators to collect water wave energy and to achieve water wave detection simultaneously.65,281
Tan's group reported a unique phenomenon of brine-drenching induced electricity through the disproportionate decoration of carbon black materials onto the capillary-wicking fabric.267 When the treated fabric is drenched with brine water, an electric potential difference between the dense core and the low-density areas is generated, which can be interpreted by electrokinetic theory. The electric double layer occurring at the interface between carbon black and liquid plays a crucial role in generating electric power. Various water sources, including seawater, human sweat, and groundwater, can be exploited to drench the treated fabric for electric induction, which makes the device particularly useful in desalination systems and other similar scenarios.
6.4 Water-fuel co-production
Producing non-fossil fuels from water via photocatalysis is of great interest to academia. Therefore, it makes sense to combine fuel (e.g., hydrogen) and clean water generation to meet the high demand for energy and drinking water in remote and off-grid areas, since green and abundant solar energy is the only energy input.24 It is essential to tailor the ISVG system by selecting proper materials and further processing them to realize efficient photothermal and photocatalytic processes. The challenging part might be the photocatalytic process, which has a relatively low conversion efficiency due to the limited solar light absorption and low charge transfer of photocatalytic materials.282 Extending the absorption wavelength range toward the visible or even infrared range is an effective method to enhance the solar-to-chemical conversion efficiency of the photocatalytic process. In addition, it is well noted that the conversion efficiency of the photocatalytic process can be largely promoted by harnessing solar heating, which serves as a unique technique route toward a high-efficiency photo-to-chemical process.
Ho's group is a pioneer in this research area. They proposed a photothermal catalytic gel integrated with a hydrophobic membrane to achieve a water-hydrogen co-production system.283 The well-designed gel consists of a porous chitosan network with aligned water channels and embedded TiO2/Ag nanofibers serving as photothermal and catalytic materials. It is well noted that the porous TiO2 nanofibers can realize an efficient photo-to-hydrogen process with Ag nanoparticles as a cocatalyst for improved charge transfer. In addition, Ag nanoparticles could harvest broadband solar light for the photothermal conversion process, which facilitated efficient solar vapor generation and localized heat at the active catalyst sites for hydrogen production. It was demonstrated that a vapor generation rate of ∼1.5 kg m−2 h−1 and hydrogen production rate of ∼3260 μmol m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation could be achieved in such a dual-function ISVG system. Recently, Ho's group designed a solar-driven water-electricity-hydrogen generation system based on a 3D hydrogel evaporator, which produced a water evaporation rate of 1.42 kg m−2 h−1, a power output of 4.8 W m−2 and hydrogen evolution of 0.3 mmol h−1 under one sun irradiation.233 Note that the electricity was generated by the TEG device, which directly drove electrochemical water splitting to produce hydrogen. Currently, most reports related to fuel generation are focused on hydrogen. Other chemical fuels, such as hydrocarbon fuel,284 and bioethanol,285 can be produced by using specific feedstocks in well-designed ISVG systems.
7. Conclusions and outlook
This review covers the recent progress of ISVG systems and their related applications. It is inspiring to witness that the evaporation rate of ISVG systems has improved significantly from ∼1 kg m−2 h−1 to ∼4 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation in a period of fewer than ten years. Currently, the evaporation efficiencies of most ISVG systems exceed 80%, with many surpassing 90%, which has never been achieved in previous volumetric-heating designs and highlights the vital role of interfacial heating. Such significant progress has been enabled by advancing materials engineering, fabrication techniques, light-trapping structures, thermal design, and vapor enthalpy re-utilization, to name a few. Recent research has been focused more on the condensation part and salt-rejection performance, which are highly relevant to the ultimate practicability of the ISVG systems. In addition, some new materials, such as natural biomass and hydrogel, are gaining more and more attention. Vapor enthalpy re-utilization has been demonstrated as an effective strategy to significantly enhance water production yield through well-tailored designs (i.e., multi-stage design). Moreover, various application scenarios have been explored in a broader regime, including seawater desalination, sterilization, and electricity generation. Since the current ISVG technology is engineered for remote and off-grid applications, the continuous progress achieved to date has made this green-clean-water dream closer to reality than ever before. Nevertheless, there still exist unsolved issues ahead, which are summarized as follows:
(1) Standard testing conditions should be unified to end the chaos in current literature, in which testing apparatus and environment differ greatly, making the direct comparison of their evaporation efficiencies impossible. Though there are not commonly recognized standards for testing, herein we would like to direct readers to an article by Zhu's group in which a standardized testing procedure was proposed as a helpful reference.286 In a recent comment article by Chiavazzo,229 a checklist table of operating conditions for comparing various systems in three different scenarios, including in-lab, in-field, and in-sea environments, also deserves careful attention. In another comment article by Tan's group,287 several measurement tips for ensuring fair comparison among different ISVG systems need to be paid attention to since they are frequently omitted by operators.
(2) The evaporation rate of ISVG systems has increased significantly, but the water production rate still needs to catch up. It is mainly caused by the significant difference in evaporation in an open environment and in a closed solar still, as well as the inefficient condensation part. Therefore, more efforts should be focused on the water production process to further increase the water yield of ISVG systems. The multi-stage design might be a suitable architecture for maximizing the water output, which can directly produce clean water with the rewarding process of vapor enthalpy re-utilization.
(3) Salt fouling is still hindering the ultimate practicability of ISVG systems. Though various designs have been enabled to improve the salt rejection performance of ISVG systems, their long-term performance in a natural open-water body is unknown. Like the standards used for testing the evaporation performance of ISVG systems, we call for similar testing standards to evaluate their anti-fouling performance effectively. Currently, the most used recipe for the anti-fouling test is NaCl solution, which is quite different from natural seawater. In addition, the test concentration is varied in different studies. In a strict test, both NaCl solution with well-defined concentration and natural seawater should be used. Simultaneously, continuous irradiation tests and irradiation-on-and-off cycle tests should be used to evaluate salt rejection performance. Moreover, a test in a natural open water body is recommended.
(4) To meet the requirements in practical application, the scalability and robustness of ISVG systems need to be investigated in detail. Note that many reported ISVG systems only have a size of several cm2. When scaled to m2 size or even larger size, their evaporation efficiency or water yield might fall due to the potential “crosstalk” effect among neighboring regions, especially for those 3D-shaped evaporators.220,229 Therefore, more efforts should be devoted to developing large-scale ISVG systems for systematic studies. In terms of robustness, years of operation are required for the practicality of the systems. One should carefully investigate the mechanical and integrity robustness upon cycling tests before the systems come to real life.
(5) Most studies on ISVG systems have been focused on experimental parts, whereas theoretical modeling still lacks a deep understanding of the physical process during evaporation. It is surprising that the water evaporation in the nano-confined network is still not well understood though it looks like a simple process. Some intriguing phenomena have been observed, like enthalpy reduction of evaporation, which requires accurate physical interpretation.
Looking back, we are still excited that many breakthroughs in developing ISVG systems occur in such a short time. On the roadmap of carbon neutralization, the ISVG technique is expected to reduce significant carbon emissions in producing clean water for home, agricultural and industrial use. Furthermore, considering the ISVG technique can produce clean water, green electricity, and fuel, it is promising to extract green energy from the process directly. It can even be combined with the Internet of Things to create an intelligent water-energy production grid.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the One-Hundred Talents Program of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou Science and Technology Research Project (202102020822), China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2020M672618), Open Fund of Hubei Key Laboratory of Mechanical Transmission and Manufacturing Engineering at Wuhan University of Science and Technology (MTMEOF2020B02) and Open Project of Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Technique and Equipment for Macromolecular Advanced Manufacturing (2021kfkt01) as well as International Training Program (Postdoctoral Program) for Young Excellent Talents of Guangdong Province. D. S. acknowledges the Innovation and Technology Fund of Hong Kong (ITS/315/21), Environment and Conservation Fund (91/2021), PolyU Endowed Young Scholars Scheme (84cc), and Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. PolyU 252029/19E; PolyU 152052/21E).
References

          WWAP, The United Nations World Water Development Report 2020: Water and Climate Change,  2020 Search PubMed.
A. D. Khawaji, I. K. Kutubkhanah and J.-M. Wie, Desalination, 2008, 221, 47–69 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
A. E. Kabeel and S. A. El-Agouz, Desalination, 2011, 276, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, X. Zhao, F. Zhao, Z. Jiao, X. Zhou and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2087–2095 RSC .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
T. Yang, H. Lin, K.-T. Lin and B. Jia, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, 25, e00182 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and C. Wang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2159–2166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Sharshir, A. M. Algazzar, K. A. Elmaadawy, A. W. Kandeal, M. R. Elkadeem, T. Arunkumar, J. Zang and N. Yang, Desalination, 2020, 491, 114564 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1907234 CrossRef .
R. Fillet, V. Nicolas, V. Fierro and A. Celzard, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 219, 110814 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Liu, P. Wang, L. Miao, J. Liu, A. Wei, X. Mu, J. Li and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Xiong, D. K. Nandakumar and S. C. Tan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Jiang, G. Xu, M. Zhu, W.-C. Law, K.-T. Yong, Y. Wang, C. Yang, B. Dong and F. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25571–25600 RSC .
K. Xu, C. Wang, Z. Li, S. Wu and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, s2007855 CrossRef .
X. Mu, Y. Gu, P. Wang, A. Wei, Y. Tian, J. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Sun, J. Liu, L. Sun, S. Tanemura and L. Miao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 220, 110842 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Mater. Today, 2020, 42, 178–191 CrossRef .
Y. Pang, J. Zhang, R. Ma, Z. Qu, E. Lee and T. Luo, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 437–456 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. D. Mishra, X. Wang, H. Peng and C. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17907–17937 RSC .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, Y. Huang, H. Cheng and L. Qu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 429–446 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, H.-Q. Liang, Z.-K. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, L. Cao, Y. Si, B. Ding and H. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 292, 1908269 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jia, Y. Li, Z. Yang, G. Chen, Y. Yao, F. Jiang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel, H. Xie, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Joule, 2017, 1, 588–599 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang and T. Deng, Small, 2014, 10, 3234–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jiang, L. Tong, H. Liu, J. Xu, S. Jin, C. Wang, X. Hu, L. Ye, H. Deng and G. J. Cheng, Matter, 2020, 2, 1535–1549 CrossRef .
M. Zou, Y. Zhang, Z. Cai, C. Li, Z. Sun, C. Yu, Z. Dong, L. Wu and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Li, T. H. Chang, Z. P. Li, H. T. Yang, F. F. Fu, T. T. Li, J. S. Ho and P. Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 14 Search PubMed .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, S. Hong, L. Shi, J. Chang, R. Li, Y. Jin, C. Ong, S. Zhuo and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3012 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, X. Wu, F. He, S. Peng and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, X. Luo, Z. Liu, J. Fan, Z. Luo, C. Zhao, X. Gu and H. Bao, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhong, A. Leroy, Z. Xu, L. Zhao and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, N. He, B. Jiang, K. Yu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, D. Tang and Y. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104380 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
F. Wang, N. Xu, W. Zhao, L. Zhou, P. Zhu, X. Wang, B. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2021, 5, 1602–1612 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao, P. Zhang, C. Yang, Q. Liao, X. Hao, Y. Huang, M. Zhang, X. Wang, T. Lin, H. Cheng, J. Yuan and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5330–5338 RSC .
D. Qi, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Luo, H. Xu, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Yang, W. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, L. Zhang, E. Strobach, A. Leroy, M. K. Yadav, S. Yang, T. A. Cooper, L. A. Weinstein, A. Modi, S. B. Kedare, G. Chen and E. N. Wang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2733–2745 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Huang, J.-X. Huang, Y.-H. Chiao, C.-M. Chang, W.-S. Hung, S. J. Lue, C.-F. Wang, C.-C. Hu, K.-R. Lee, H.-H. Pan and J.-Y. Lai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010422 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Kang, Z. Wang, S. Yuan, Y. Li, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6612–6633 RSC .
Q. Fan, L. Wu, Y. Liang, Z. Xu, Y. Li, J. Wang, P. D. Lund, M. Zeng and W. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2021, 292, 116871 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 5, 70–77 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, M. Gao, Z. Li, H. Yang, L. Jing, X. Tian, Y. Li, S. Li, H. Li, Q. Wang, J. S. Ho, G. W. Ho and P.-Y. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104875 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Lin, N. Xu, X. Li, J. Liang, W. Zhao, R. Lin, B. Zhu, G. Liu, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 928–937 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huo, D. Jiang, X. Cao, H. Liang, Z. Liu, C. Li and J. Liu, Carbon, 2019, 142, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kong, H. Dan, W. Kong, Y. Gao, Y. Shang, K. Ji, Q. Yue and B. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24734–24742 RSC .
L. Li, T. Hu, A. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32143–32153 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mu, Z. Zhang, W. Bai, J. He, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802158 CrossRef .
F. Wu, D. Liu, G. Li, L. Li, L. Yan, G. Hong and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5419–5428 RSC .
D. Xia, Y. Xu, J. Mannering, X. Ma, M. S. Ismail, D. Borman, D. L. Baker, M. Pourkashanian and R. Menzel, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 392–402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, X. Mu, P. Wang, X. Wang, J. Liu, J. Shi, A. Wei, Y. Tian, G. Zhu, H. Xu, J. Zhou and L. Miao, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, X. Mu, P. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Tian, A. Wei, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Sun, J. Zhou and L. Miao, Glob. Chall., 2021, 5, 2000063 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, W. Liang, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, C. Wang and A. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 361, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, X. Xu, C. Chen, H. Huang, C. Jia, X. Zhao, E. Hitz, Y. Zhou, R. Yang, L. Cui and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Zhou, Y. Jing, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 12181–12190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, L. Qiao, J. He, S. Wang, L. Yu, P. Murto, X. Li and X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2008681 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, R.-K. Qing, A.-Q. Xie, H. Liu, L. Zhu and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 18829–18837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mei, J. Chen, Q. Zhao and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42686–42695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mu, W. Bai, Y. Fan, Z. Zhang, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9673–9679 RSC .
W. Xu, Y. Xing, J. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Cui, D. Li, D. Guo, C. Li, A. Liu and H. Bai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7930–7938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, Z. Guo, Y. Xu, Z. Chen, M. S. Irshad, J. Qian, T. Mei and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 57155–57164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo and G. Yu, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Bae, Z. Fang, P. Li, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7642–7707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, P. Wang, R. Hong, X. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Pan, X. Qiu and Y. Qin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2209262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, L. Li, B. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, D. Tang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16503–16511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Li, K. Xu, T. Lei and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9528–9535 RSC .
Q. Zhang, L. Li, B. Jiang, H. Zhang, N. He, S. Yang, D. Tang and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28179–28187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Jia, Y. Li, S. Wang and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47029–47037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-F. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, Y. Gu, S. Chen, H. Cai, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, Appl. Energy, 2019, 241, 652–659 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gong, H. Li, W. Wang, J. Huang, D. Xia, J. Liao, M. Wu and D. V. Papavassiliou, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, W. Zhu, S. Shi, N. Hu, Y. Suo and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16220–16227 RSC .
X. Lin, J. Chen, Z. Yuan, M. Yang, G. Chen, D. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Hong and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4642–4648 RSC .
X. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Q. Li and H. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Cao, S. Lu, R. Yao, C. Liu, Q. Xiong, W. Qin and X. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125522 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Fan, F. Wang, Y. Su, X. Zhou, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, W. Liang and A. Li, Desalination, 2021, 505, 114982 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Tian, F. Chen, A. Caratenuto, J. A. DeGiorgis, M. Elsonbaty, Y. Wan, R. Ahlgren and Y. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100911 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yin, S. Yang, J. Wu, Y. Li, D. Chu, J. He and J.-A. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8361–8367 RSC .
Q. Zhang, X. Xiao, G. Zhao, H. Yang, H. Cheng, L. Qu, W. Xu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10945–10952 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Qi, J. Fan, W. Wang and D. Yu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 254, 117615 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin, H. Sun, Y. Tang, S. Yin, L. Yang, M. Xu and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 19467–19475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, J. Xu, X. Bai, G. Feng, X. Zeng, M. R. Ibn Raihan and H. Bao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 221, 110910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Zhong, N. Wu, H. Zhou, L. Wang, L. Zhu, N. Jiang, B. Zhu, Z. Chen and M. Zhu, Desalination, 2021, 509, 115072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Fan, R. Wang, W. Shou, L. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2248–2258 RSC .
C. Gao, J. Zhu, Z. Bai, Z. Lin and J. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7200–7207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Song, P. Mu, L. Geng, Q. Wang and J. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11845–11852 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Yu, K. Yin and Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, S. Li, X. Cui, Y. Wan, Y. Xiao, S. Tian, H. Wang, X. Li, Q. Zhao and C.-S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10742–10746 RSC .
Y. Lin, Z. Chen, L. Fang, M. Meng, Z. Liu, Y. Di, W. Cai, S. Huang and Z. Gan, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 015402 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ibrahim, D. H. Seo, A. M. McDonagh, H. K. Shon and L. Tijing, Desalination, 2020, 500, 114853 CrossRef .
F. Tao, Y. Zhang, S. Cao, K. Yin, X. Chang, Y. Lei, R. Fan, L. Dong, Y. Yin and X. Chen, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 285–294 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, C. Yan, Z. Xue, W. Yu, Y. Xie and T. Wang, Small, 2016, 12, 5320–5328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mu, Y. Song, K. Deng, S. Lin, Y. Bi, F. Scarpa and D. Crouse, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700064 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, W. Que, J. Zhao, Y. Han, M. Ju and X. Yin, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 955–962 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, W. Shi, H. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Q. Yang, C. F. Tan, W. Lu, K. Zeng and G. W. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Tariq, Z. Hanif, M. La, D. Choi and S. J. Park, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 45, 6395–6404 CrossRef .
Y. Jin, J. Chang, Y. Shi, L. Shi, S. Hong and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7942–7949 RSC .
S. Wang, S. M. Almenabawy, N. P. Kherani, S. N. Leung and P. G. O'Brien, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3378–3386 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yin, Y. Hsin, X. Guo, R. Zhang, X. Huang and X. Zhang, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 759, 143546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701756 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, X. Zhao, L. Li, T. Hu, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 584, 602–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cao, L. Zhao, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, P. Yuan, Y. Zhang and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 19109–19116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, S. Chen, Y. Jia, T. Qi, L. Xiao, X. Cui, D. Zhuang and J. Wei, Carbon, 2020, 169, 134–141 CrossRef CAS .
E.-D. Miao, M.-Q. Ye, C.-L. Guo, L. Liang, Q. Liu and Z.-H. Rao, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2019, 149, 1255–1264 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Guo, E.-D. Miao, J.-X. Zhao, L. Liang and Q. Liu, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 1283–1291 CrossRef .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, H. Li, D. Li, B. Wang, H. Wang, J. Bai, S. Ma and G. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 592, 77–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Xie, W. Han, X. Yan, X. Liu, L. He, P. Lin, Y. Xia, K. Zhang, J. A. Zapien and K.-B. Yoon, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 1916–1923 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li and J. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105682 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhuang, H. Fu, N. Xu, B. Li, J. Xu and L. Zhou, Nanophotonics, 2020, 9, 4601–4608 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, Q. Guan, C. You, J. Yu, Z. Yuan, P. Qiang, C. Zhou, Y. Ren, Z. You and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13927–13934 RSC .
K.-T. Lin, H. Lin, T. Yang and B. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, Q. Nie, Y. Wu, H. Fang, P. Zhang and Y. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26200–26212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao, Y. Ma, P. M. Ajayan, G. Shi and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 829–835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, C. Jia, E. M. Hitz, B. Yang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, B. Yuan, Y. Liang, L. Yang, L. Bai, H. Yang, D. Wei, W. Wang and H. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 227, 111127 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zafar, M. Zahid, A. Athanassiou and D. Fragouli, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2021, 5, 2100031 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. D. Mishra, Y. Li, L. Gao, H. Peng, L. Zhang and C. Hu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4571–4582 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, G. Jia, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou and K. Chang, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 13482–13488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tian, J. Liu, R. Ruan, X. Tian, X. Lai, L. Xing, Y. Su, W. Huang, Y. Cao and J. Tu, Small, 2020, 16, 2000573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sun, W. Zhang, I. Zada, Y. Zhang, J. Gu, Q. Liu, H. Su, D. Pantelić, B. Jelenković and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2171–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, H. Xie, X. Qiao, S. Hao, Z. Wu, D. Sun, Z. Liu, F. Cao, B. Wu and X. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 50397–50405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, J. Yu, C. Ma, C. Zhang, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. K. Ravi and S. C. Tan, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104006 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bian, Q. Du, K. Tang, Y. Shen, L. Hao, D. Zhou, X. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Zhao, S. Zhu, J. Ye, H. Lu, Y. Yang, R. Zhang, Y. Zheng and S. Gu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800593 CrossRef .
H. Lin, B. C. P. Sturmberg, K.-T. Lin, Y. Yang, X. Zheng, T. K. Chong, C. M. de Sterke and B. Jia, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Panagiotopoulos, E. K. Diamanti, L. E. Koutsokeras, M. Baikousi, E. Kordatos, T. E. Matikas, D. Gournis and P. Patsalas, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10475–10485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, F. Ruiz-Zepeda, R. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. X. Luong, K. V. Bets, W. A. Algozeeb, M. G. Stanford, C. Kittrell, W. Chen, R. V. Salvatierra, M. Ren, E. A. McHugh, P. A. Advincula, Z. Wang, M. Bhatt, H. Guo, V. Mancevski, R. Shahsavari, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2020, 577, 647–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Storer, J. L. Phelps, X. Wu, G. Owens, N. I. Khan and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15279–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Ovando-Medina, A. G. Escobar-Villanueva, H. Martinez-Gutierrez and O. Gonzalez-Ortega, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 10878–10893 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Yang, B. Dang, J. Tao, S. Li, S. Zhao, W. Li, J. Li, Z. Chen and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105322 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Liu, J. T. Aladejana, X. Wang, M. Niu, Q. Wei and Y. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19511–19518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, S. Fu, N. Lavoine and L. A. Lucia, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 247, 116722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, G. Chen, F. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, C. Wang, C. Jia, J. Wan, Y. Yao, A. Gong, B. Yang, Z. Yu, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704107 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Chen, G. Chen, Y. Kuang, X. Zhao, J. Song, C. Jia, X. Xu, E. Hitz, H. Xie, S. Wang, F. Jiang, T. Li, Y. Li, A. Gong, R. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701616 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. Yao, Y. Yuan, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Gu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 2000126 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Wang, T. Lei, H. Ma, J. Su, S. Ling and W. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800144 CrossRef .
C. Sheng, N. Yang, Y. Yan, X. Shen, C. Jin, Z. Wang and Q. Sun, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2020, 167, 114712 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Q. Liu, D. Ma, Y. Yuan, J. Yao, W. Zhang, H. Su, Y. Su, J. Gu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9034–9039 RSC .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, B. Yuan, Y. Liang, L. Yang, L. Bai, H. Yang, D. Wei, F. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Wang and H. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 258, 123998 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, X. Wang, D. Fan, H. Yang, H. Xu, H. Min and X. Yang, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, 25, e00180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Zhou, P. Mu, F. Wang, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, W. Li and A. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 798–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fang, T. Li, Z. Chen, H. Lin, P. Wang and F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10672–10679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Geng, W. Sun, P. Ying, Y. Zheng, J. Ding, K. Sun, L. Li and M. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2007648 CrossRef .
J. Fang, J. Liu, J. Gu, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Su and D. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6217–6221 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Long, S. Huang, H. Yi, J. Chen, J. Wu, Q. Liao, H. Liang, H. Cui, S. Ruan and Y.-J. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26911–26916 RSC .
X. Shan, A. Zhao, Y. Lin, Y. Hu, Y. Di, C. Liu and Z. Gan, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 1900153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shan, M. Xiong, Y. Sheng, A. Zhao, Y. Di, C. Liu and Z. Gan, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2020, 1, 2000034 CrossRef .
J. He, Z. Zhang, C. Xiao, F. Liu, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16308–16318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, W. Bai, P. Mu, Y. Su, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, W. Liang and A. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110347 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheng, Z. Yu, Z. Lin, L. Li, Y. Li and Z. Mao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 401, 126108 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, Y. He, Y. Guan, X. Liu, H. Liu, M. Xie, L. Zhou, C. Wei, C. Yu and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 4581–4591 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zou, J. Zhao, J. Zhu, X. Guo, P. Chen, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 7617–7624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, P. Yang, L. Yang, N. Li, G. Duan, X. Liu and Y. Li, Polymer, 2021, 217, 123464 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Zhao, J. Zhou, Z.-L. Yu, L.-F. Chen, H.-J. Zhan, H.-W. Zhu, J. Huang, L.-A. Shi and S.-H. Yu, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100074 CrossRef .
S. Chen, Z. Sun, W. Xiang, C. Shen, Z. Wang, X. Jia, J. Sun and C.-J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 104998 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Z. Huang, Y. Wan, J. Tan, C. Cao, S. Li and C.-S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2104–2110 RSC .
S. Tian, Z. Huang, J. Tan, X. Cui, Y. Xiao, Y. Wan, X. Li, Q. Zhao, S. Li and C.-S. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2698–2705 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Zou, W. Xia, H. Li, X. He, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, C. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2020, 14, 969–975 CrossRef .
F. He, M. Han, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Zhou, L. Jiang, S. Peng and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104650 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang, M. C. Han, F. He, S. Q. Peng, S. B. Darling and Y. X. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104886 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Yang, X. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Li, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2007110 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, L. V. Besteiro, C. S. L. Koh, H. K. Lee, I. Y. Phang, G. C. Phan-Quang, J. Y. Ng, H. Y. F. Sim, C. L. Lay, A. Govorov and X. Y. Ling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008904 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, K. Yu, S. Gong, H. Mao, R. Huang and Z. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 16246–16258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, W. Xu, K. Yu, S. Gong, H. Mao, R. Huang and Z. Zhu, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100183 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, X. Li, W. Chang, J. Wu, P. Liu, J. Wang, X. Yao and Z.-Z. Yu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3048–3056 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ren, X. Yi, Z. Yang, D. Wang, L. Liu and J. Ye, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1709–1715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cui, J. Wei, C. Du, S. Sun, C. Zhou, H. Xue and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13311–13319 RSC .
D. Wu, D. Qu, W. Jiang, G. Chen, L. An, C. Zhuang and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8485–8490 RSC .
L. Noureen, Z. Xie, M. Hussain, M. Li, Q. Lyu, K. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 222, 110952 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, Y. Ning, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Miao, J. Zhou, B. Wu and J. Qian, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, H. Ma, M. Wu, T. Lin, H. Yao, F. Liu, H. Cheng and L. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 4335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, R. Zhang, D. Yuan, S. Xu and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003995 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Cheng, Z. Guo, Q. Zhan, J. Qian and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39661–39669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, R. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhuo, L. Shi, J. Chang, S. Hong, K.-C. Ng and P. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1171–1186 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Yan, W. Zhang, P. Wang, W. Guan, S. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Feng, Z. Gan and L. Dong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2023, 630, 297–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sugioka, Int. J. Extreme Manuf., 2019, 1, 012003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Z. Chen, Q. Li and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 9766–9774 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Singh, M. ElKabbash, Z. Li, X. Li, B. Regmi, M. Madsen, S. A. Jalil, Z. Zhan, J. Zhang and C. Guo, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 938–946 CrossRef .
M. Kim, K. Yang, Y. S. Kim, J. C. Won, P. Kang, Y. H. Kim and B. G. Kim, Carbon, 2020, 164, 349–356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jang, J. Choi, H. Lee and S. Jeon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 30320–30327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Liu, F. Chen and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19387–19395 RSC .
J. Yuan, X. Lei, C. Yi, H. Jiang, F. Liu and G. J. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132765 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, H. Kou, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, D. K. Macharia, M. Zhu, B. Wu, X. Liu and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35005–35014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, B. Lv, Y. Xu, H. Huang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, J. Xiao and C. Song, Sol. Energy, 2020, 209, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shao, D. A. H. Hanaor, X. Shen and A. Gurlo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Xu, S. Ma, Y. Zhuang, W. Xu, W. Cui and H. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24328–24338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, Y. Xu, C. Wang, C. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Di, L. Yu, L. Dong and Z. Gan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 1885–1890 RSC .
S. Hong, Y. Shi, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Jin and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28517–28524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sun, W. Wang, W. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Gu, L. Yang, D. Pantelic, B. Jelenkovic and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34837–34847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. U. Kim, S. J. Kang, S. Lee, J. Ok, Y. Kim, S. H. Roh, H. Hong, J. K. Kim, H. Chae, S. J. Kwon and T.-i. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003862 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Ren, J. Xu, B. Shang, X. Liu and W. Xu, Small, 2022, 18, 2105198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, Y. Pan, X. Feng, X. Mu, W. Hu, L. Song, X. Wang and Y. Hu, Appl. Energy, 2022, 320, 119322 CrossRef .
H.-Y. Zhao, J. Huang, J. Zhou, L.-F. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Bai, J. Zhou, Y. Deng, W.-X. Dong, Y.-S. Li and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 3554–3562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Lin, J. Huang, C. Chi and B. Huang, Glob. Chall., 2021, 5, 2000058 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Shi, L. Shi, H. Li, R. Li, S. Hong, S. Zhuo, T. Zhang and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mandal, D. Wang, A. C. Overvig, N. N. Shi, D. Paley, A. Zangiabadi, Q. Cheng, K. Barmak, N. Yu and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702156 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, J. Mandal, Q. Ye, A. Li, Q. Cheng, T. Gong, T. Jin, Y. He, N. Yu and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6551–6557 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Wu, P. Wu, X. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Zhang, D. Zhang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2022, 67, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yin, Z. Wu, J. Wu, Z. Zhu, F. Zhang and J.-A. Duan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 211905 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. Han, Z.-D. Chen, J.-C. Li, J.-W. Mao, Z.-Z. Jiao, W. Wang, W. Zhang, Y.-L. Zhang and H.-B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25435–25443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, M. H. Singer, C. Li, A. R. Cheney, D. Ji, L. Zhou, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Bei, Z. Yu, S. Jiang and Q. Gan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800222 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, T. Gao, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105477 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Wang, P. Wu, J. Zhao, Y. Lu, X. Yang and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Zhang, B. Zhou, J. Shen and A. Du, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005513 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Chiavazzo, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, J. Bae, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7913–7919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, T. Ding, M. Gao, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, J. He and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Z. Chen and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2530–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhu, L. Wang, B. Demir, M. An, Z. L. Wu, J. Yin, R. Xiao, Q. Zheng and J. Qian, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 3187–3195 RSC .
Q.-F. Guan, Z.-M. Han, Z.-C. Ling, H.-B. Yang and S.-H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5699–5704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, Z. Zhou, C. Zhang, F. Jiang, Q. Zhang and J. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, W. Shi, F. Zhao, W. Zhang, P. Zhang, C. Zhao and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101036 CrossRef CAS .
L. Geng, L. Li, H. Zhang, M. Zhong, P. Mu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 15485–15496 RSC .
Y. Shi, O. Ilic, H. A. Atwater and J. R. Greer, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Schmid, A. Machorro-Ortiz, B. Jerome, A. Naldoni, N. J. Halas, P. D. Dongare and A. Alabastri, ACS Photonics, 2022, 9, 3764–3776 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chiavazzo, M. Morciano, F. Viglino, M. Fasano and P. Asinari, Nat. Sustain., 2018, 1, 763–772 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, B. Li, B. Bhatia, C. Wang, K. L. Wilke, Y. Song, O. Labban, J. H. Lienhard, R. Wang and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 830–839 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, M. Wu, S. Zhuo, S. Aleid and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 5068–5074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mu, Y. Gu, P. Wang, J. Shi, A. Wei, Y. Tian, J. Zhou, Y. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Sun, J. Liu, B. Peng and L. Miao, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000341 CrossRef .
G. Vaartstra, L. Zhang, Z. Lu, C. D. Diaz-Marin, J. C. Grossman and E. N. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 130901 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Ji, C. Hu, Z. J. Ren, H. Liu and J. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12089–12096 RSC .
M. Morciano, M. Fasano, S. V. Boriskina, E. Chiavazzo and P. Asinari, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3646–3655 RSC .
N. Ma, Q. Fu, Y. Hong, X. Hao, X. Wang, J. Ju and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18165–18173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, J. Shi, C. Zhao, Z. Luo, X. Gu and H. Bao, Appl. Energy, 2021, 302, 117581 CrossRef .
R. Fillet, V. Nicolas, V. Fierro and A. Celzard, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2021, 181, 121852 CrossRef .
G. Liu, T. Chen, J. Xu, G. Yao, J. Xie, Y. Cheng, Z. Miao and K. Wang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100310 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Li, S. Yuan, Y. Kang, M. Jian, Q. Hou, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16212–16217 RSC .
N. Xu, H. Zhang, Z. Lin, J. Li, G. Liu, X. Li, W. Zhao, X. Min, P. Yao, L. Zhou, Y. Song, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwab065 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, K. Hong, X. Sun, A. Natan, P. Luan, Y. Yang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12323–12333 RSC .
L. Zhu, L. Sun, H. Zhang, H. Aslan, Y. Sun, Y. Huang, F. Rosei and M. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2451–2459 RSC .
K. Yang, T. Pan, S. Dang, Q. Gan and Y. Han, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 6653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
N. Xu, J. Li, Y. Wang, C. Fang, X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, Z. Wu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiao, W. Liang, L. Chen, J. He, F. Liu, H. Sun, Z. Zhu and A. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8862–8870 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, H. Gong, Y. Song, B. Li, N. Xu, X. Min, G. Liu, B. Zhu, L. Zhou, X.-X. Zhang and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100025 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, T. Xiong, H. Qu, J. J. Koh, D. K. Nandakumar, J. Wang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4891–4902 RSC .
Y. Zhang, T. Xiong, L. Suresh, H. Qu, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Yang and S. C. Tan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3397–3404 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Menon, I. Haechler, S. Kaur, S. Lubner and R. S. Prasher, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 144–151 CrossRef .
Y. Bian, K. Tang, L. Tian, L. Zhao, S. Zhu, H. Lu, Y. Yang, J. Ye and S. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 4935–4942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gong, H. Yang, S. Wu, Y. Tian, X. Guo, C. Xu, W. Kuang, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Carbon, 2021, 171, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Heng and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3436–3442 RSC .
S. Zuo, D. Xia, Z. Guan, F. Yang, S. Cheng, H. Xu, R. Wan, D. Li and M. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 254, 117611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, D. Zhao, F. Yu, C. Yang, J. Lou, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu, C. Song and T. Deng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19384–19389 RSC .
L. Zhu, T. Ding, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900250 CrossRef .
L. Zong, M. Li and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 308–315 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
Q. Shen, Z. Ning, B. Fu, S. Ma, Z. Wang, L. Shu, L. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Xu, P. Tao, C. Song, J. Wu, T. Deng and W. Shang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6514–6521 RSC .
F. L. Meng, M. Gao, T. Ding, G. Yilmaz, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. K. Peh, H. T. Phan, L. Zhu and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800711 CrossRef .
G. Chen, N. Li, J. He, L. Qiao, F. Li, S. Wang, L. Yu, P. Murto, X. Li and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24664–24674 RSC .
M.-Q. Yang, M. Gao, M. Hong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802894 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gao, C. K. Peh, L. Zhu, G. Yilmaz and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000925 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Neumann, A. D. Neumann, S. Tian, C. Thibodeaux, S. Shubhankar, J. Müller, E. Silva, A. Alabastri, S. W. Bishnoi, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Ni, T. Cooper, N. Xu, J. Li, L. Zhou, X. Hu, B. Zhu, P. Yao and J. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1798–1803 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Nat. Sustain., 2022, 5, 554–556 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Shudong Yu	Dr Shudong Yu received his B.S. degree in 2014 and PhD degree in 2019 from South China University of Technology (SCUT). After working as a postdoc at SCUT and The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for three years, he joined the School of Advanced Manufacturing, Sun Yat-sen University as an assistant professor in 2023. His research interests include biomimetics, solar energy (e.g., solar vapor generation and radiative cooling), light management for optoelectronics, etc.
Yuheng Gu	Yuheng Gu received his B.S. degree in 2019 from the University of Manchester and M.A. degree in 2020 from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Currently, he is pursuing a PhD degree under the supervision of Dr Dahua Shou at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include human thermal comfort, smart textiles, and human augmentation. He is conducting research on energy conversion textiles based on capillary evaporation and the dynamic thermal balance of the human body.
Xujiang Chao	Dr Xujiang Chao obtained his B.S. degree and PhD degree from Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU) in 2014 and 2020, respectively. Then, he was awarded a distinguished postdoctoral fellowship by the Institute for Intelligent Wearable Systems (iWear) of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). In 2022, he joined the School of Mechanical Engineering at NPU as an associate professor. His research interests include the computational mechanics of composites and mechanical metamaterial design.
Guanghan Huang	Dr Guanghan Huang obtained his first PhD degree (2018) in Mechanical Manufacture and Automation from South China University of Technology and his second PhD degree (2021) in Mechanical Engineering from the University of South Carolina. He conducted research as a postdoctoral fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University for 2 years. He is now working as an associate research fellow at the School of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology. His research interests include heat pipes, flow boiling, enhanced heat transfer, flexible thermal management, and fluent flow simulation.
Dahua Shou	Dr Dahua Shou is currently a Limin Endowed Young Scholar in Advanced Textile Technologies, an Assistant Professor in the School of Fashion and Textiles, and a member of the Research Institute for Smart Energy, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). He serves as the Head of Future Intelligent Wear Centre, SZRI. Dr Shou obtained his PhD from PolyU in 2013. He ranks among Top 2% Scientists Worldwide 2022 (Career & Single Year) by Stanford University. His research focuses on advanced textiles, smart wearables, and thermal and moisture management.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of an ISVG system: brine water is transported to the top surface of the upper porous photothermal material via a capillary effect and is turned into vapor through a photothermal effect; water vapor is condensed into water droplets, which are collected as fresh water in the neighboring chamber.	 

 	Fig. 2  Outline of this review article. The substrates are reproduced with permission.29,30 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. The photothermal materials are reproduced with permission.8,31,32 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. The schematic diagrams of the fabrication techniques are reproduced with permission.33,34 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. The schematic views of the design and optimization are reproduced with permission.8,12,35–39 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. Copyright 2019, The Authors. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. The schematic illustrations of the salt rejection are reproduced with permission.40–42 Copyright 2022, The Authors. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. The schematic views of the condensation are reproduced with permission.43,44 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. The schematic illustrations of the application are reproduced with permission.45–47 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(1)

Plasmonic materials	Black gold membrane	20	57%	16.0	
98

Gold-deposited AAO template	4	90%	5.8	
99

Aluminum-nanoparticle-deposited AAO template	4	88.4%	5.7	
101

Polymeric aerogels loaded with nano-trepang gold nanoparticles	1	79.3%	2.7	
102

CuS nanoflowers/semipermeable collodion membrane composite	1	68.6%	1.1	
105

3D Cu2ZnSnS4 nanosheet-assembled membrane	1	84.5%	1.5	
107

Membrane assembled from copper–zinc–tin–selenide nano-carambolas	1	86.4%	1.5	
108

Porous PDMS matrix embedded with Cu7S4–MoS2–Au nanoparticles	1	96.6%	3.8	
191

Semiconducting materials	Cellulose membrane loaded with Ti2O3 nanoparticles	1	—	1.3	
32

1D-O-doped MoS2−x nanosheet assembly	1	89.6%	2.5	
109

Defective 2D HNb3O8 nanosheet aerogels	1	91%	1.4	
110

Black titania nanocomposites	1	94%	1.5	
192

3D cup-shaped evaporator loaded with CuFeMnO4 material	1	∼100%	2.0	
193

2.5D Cu/CuO foam	1	—	4.1	
87

Carbon materials and conjugated polymers	Bilayer structure made of carbon foam and exfoliated graphite layers	10	85%	12	
8

3D evaporator coated with carbon black	1	>100%	1.6	
36

Solar evaporator coated with carbon nanotubes	1	95.8%	1.4	
52

Maize straw/graphene aerogels	1	95%	3.2	
55

Surface-carbonized wood	10	80.4%	11.2	
150

PPy-coated porous foam	1	88.3%	1.4	
166

Cellulose nanofibril/polylactic acid/PAN hybrid aerogels	1	90%	1.6	
170

Polydopamine-filled cellulose aerogels	1	86%	1.4	
171

Hybrid photothermal materials	Cobalt nanoparticles–carbonaceous nanosheets/MXene hybrid foam	1	93.4%	1.4	
180

Zeolitic imidazolate framework-isolated graphene	1	96%	1.8	
181

Cu3BiS3/MXene hybrid material	1	90%	1.3	
182

Nanostructured Ni–NiOx/Ni foam	1	94%	1.4	
187

BiVO4 and rGO composite hydrogels	1	87%	1.6	
188

PPy-reinforced N,S-doped graphene foam	1	90.5%	1.3	
189


 	Fig. 3  Typical fabrication techniques for ISVG systems: (a) laser treatment for transforming MOF crystals into light-absorbing graphene–metal-hybrid structure. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) 3D printing for making a biomimetic bridge-arch solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Electrospinning technique for fabricating a flexible and salt-resistant Janus solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Weaving craft for fabricating an all-in-one carbon-fiber-based solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
αqsolar = qvapor + qwaste,	(2)
qvapor = ṁhlv,	(3)
qair = qconv + qrad = hconv(Tabs − Tamb) + εσ(Tabs4 − Tamb4),	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Light management structures for enhancing solar light absorption by photothermal materials: (a) macroscopic 3D cup-shaped structure with multiple light reflection effect. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) 3D origami-shaped structure with multiple light reflection effect. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Biomimetic wrinkled MXene structure with light scattering and multiple light reflection effects. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Bilayer solar evaporator with heat localization design, where the underlying porous substrate is used for good thermal insulation. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Three types of heat loss, including thermal conduction, radiation, and convection in a solar evaporator with well-designed thermal management. The comprehensive thermal design is harnessed for generating 100 °C water vapor in the solar evaporator, in which radiation and convection are suppressed by the SSA and air-bubble wrap, respectively, while thermal insulation is achieved by underlying porous EPS foam. (c) Corresponding solar evaporator shown in (b). (b) and (c) Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  3D architecture-based solar evaporators for collecting environmental energy: (a) 3D cylindrical solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Triangular structure-based solar evaporator. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, The Authors. (c) Cylinder-shaped solar evaporator for extracting energy from bulk water.224 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) Heatsink-shaped solar evaporator with zero energy loss for all-cold evaporation. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Hierarchically nanostructured solar evaporator based on polyvinyl alcohol hydrogels and polypyrrole. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Three states of water around hydrogel polymer chains, including bound water, intermediate water, and free water. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Multi-stage solar evaporators for latent heat recycling: (a) multi-stage solar distiller with the unit stage consisting of two hydrophilic layers separated by a hydrophobic microporous membrane. Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (b) Photovoltaic panel attached with a multi-stage thermal distiller for electricity and water co-production. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the confinement capillarity enabled by a photothermal thin coating for enhancing solar vapor generation. PU sponge is covered with a thin coating comprising black/hydrophilic nanoparticles (BHNPs). Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Two-dimensional axisymmetric heat and mass transfer model of a solar evaporator based on a rigid biosourced foam on the water surface. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Circuit-inspired salt capacitance model for antifouling solar desalination by highlighting the importance of interfacial water layer thickness. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Solar evaporators with self-cleaning function: (a) self-rotating solar evaporator for continuous desalination in hypersaline brine. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Fish-school inspired self-assembled particles system with self-rotation function, achieving solar-driven water–solute separation. Reproduced with permission.255 Copyright 2021, The Authors.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Conventional wick structure-based solar evaporator with good thermal insulation but poor salt-rejecting ability. (b) Contactless evaporation enabled by the separation of the light absorber and bulk water. Heat loss is large due to a lack of water confinement. (c) As-proposed wick-free structure with water confinement for good thermal insulation and excellent salt-rejecting. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2022, The Authors. (d) Left: Schematic diagram of the 3D salt-rejecting solar evaporator consisting of a solar absorber, vertically aligned mass transfer bridges, and a supporting frame; right: mass and heat transport scheme in the vertical bridge indicating that excessive salt can reflow back to bulk water via advection and diffusion from upper parts and heat is confined in the upper position for efficient vapor generation. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2022, The Authors.	 

 	Fig. 13  Solar evaporators with localized salt crystallization function: (a) cone-shaped 3D hydrogel solar evaporator with localized salt crystallization function. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (b) Cup-shaped solar crystallizer with zero liquid discharge. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2021, The Authors.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Electrospun Janus membrane consisting of a top hydrophobic layer and a bottom hydrophilic layer for effective salt rejection and (b) the long-term evaporation performance of two absorbers (Janus absorber and non-Janus absorber). Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Condensation setups for ISVG systems: (a) single-stage inverted structured solar water purifier consisting of a top light absorber and a honeycomb bottom water condenser based on hydrophobic nanostructured copper. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (b) Janus-interface ISVG system separating the water evaporation and the photothermal conversion on the two sides of the membrane generator; evaporated water vapor is condensed on a metal plate. Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) A flexible and fully passive multistage membrane system for seawater desalination. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2021, The Authors. (b) A PPy membrane with selective solution–diffusion for intercepting VOCs during solar water evaporation. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  Passive solar thermal device that can generate high-temperature and high-pressure vapor (128 °C and 250 kPa) for medical sterilization: (a) the thermal management design; (b) the whole setup for generating high-temperature and high-pressure vapor in Mumbai, India; (c) verification of effective sterilization. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Modular deformable vapor-electricity cogeneration based on a hydrogel/metal-oxide/polymer multilayer film. Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Piezo-photo-thermal solar evaporator for simultaneous vapor and electricity generation based on a hybrid PVDF/graphene membrane. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
