A robust and active hybrid catalyst for facile oxygen reduction in solid oxide fuel cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE03656B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE03656B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 964-971A robust and active hybrid catalyst for facile oxygen reduction in solid oxide fuel cells†

        
          
            Yu 
            Chen‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Chen‡
bc, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Ding‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Ding
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            YongMan 
            Choi
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seonyoung 
            Yoo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dongchang 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ben 
            deGlee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiyang 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bote 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gulin 
            Vardar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiayue 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hendrik 
            Bluhm
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Ethan J. 
            Crumlin
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Chenghao 
            Yang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Liu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Bilge 
            Yildiz
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Meilin 
            Liu
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0245, USA. E-mail: meilin.liu@mse.gatech.edu
bLaboratory for Electrochemical Interfaces, Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering and Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: byildiz@mit.edu
cGuangzhou Key Laboratory for Surface Chemistry of Energy Materials, New Energy Research Institute, School of Environment and Energy South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
dSABIC Technology Center, Riyadh 11551, Saudi Arabia
eAdvanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
Received 
      17th December 2016
    , Accepted 13th March 2017First published on 14th March 2017AbstractThe sluggish oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) greatly reduces the energy efficiency of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). Here we report our findings in dramatically enhancing the ORR kinetics and durability of the state-of-the-art La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 (LSCF) cathode using a hybrid catalyst coating composed of a conformal PrNi0.5Mn0.5O3 (PNM) thin film with exsoluted PrOx nanoparticles. At 750 °C, the hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF cathode shows a polarization resistance of ∼0.022 Ω cm2, about 1/6 of that for a bare LSCF cathode (∼0.134 Ω cm2). Further, anode-supported cells with the hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF cathode demonstrate remarkable peak power densities (∼1.21 W cm−2) while maintaining excellent durability (0.7 V for ∼500 h). Near Ambient X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Near Edge X-Ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS) analyses, together with density functional theory (DFT) calculations, indicate that the oxygen-vacancy-rich surfaces of the PrOx nanoparticles greatly accelerate the rate of electron transfer in the ORR whereas the thin PNM film facilitates rapid oxide-ion transport while drastically enhancing the surface stability of the LSCF electrode.

Broader context
Intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cells (IT-SOFCs) have the potential to be the cleanest and most efficient options for cost-effective utilization of a wide variety of fuels, from hydrogen to hydrocarbons, coal gas, and renewable fuels. They are ideally suited for distributed generation (which may be integrated with smart grids) and for mobile applications (e.g., electric vehicles). To make IT-SOFCs economically competitive and commercially viable, however, several material challenges must be overcome. One of them is the creation of durable, low-cost cathode materials and nanostructures of high electro-catalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at intermediate temperatures. Here we report an effective strategy for the fabrication of high-performance hybrid catalyst coated electrodes with dramatically enhanced ORR activity and durability for fuel cells. The concept of surface modification of electrodes through solution-infiltration of a catalyst and the unique hybrid electrode structure (exsoluted nanoparticles on a conformal coating) are readily applicable to other energy storage and conversion systems, including metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, electrolyzers, dye-sensitized solar cells, and photo-catalysis.

Introduction
The demand for clean, secure, and economically competitive energy has stimulated great interest in fuel cells for efficient energy conversion.1–4 Among all types of fuel cells, solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are the cleanest, most efficient chemical-to-electrical energy conversion systems with excellent fuel flexibility.5–8 However, broad commercialization of SOFC technology is still hampered by high cost and limited system lifetimes.9 The resistance from the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) contributes the most to energy loss in the existing SOFCs, more so at lower temperatures.10–12 Therefore, a key technical opportunity is to dramatically enhance the ORR kinetics and durability of the cathode at low temperatures.
As one of the most promising cathode candidates for intermediate-temperature SOFCs, La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3 (LSCF) has been extensively investigated because of its high electronic and ionic conductivities and good catalytic activity for the ORR. However, LSCF displays a higher degradation rate than La1−xSrxMnO3 (LSM) cathodes, attributed to Sr segregation near surfaces or interfaces,13,14 caused by electrostatic attraction of the negatively charged A-site dopants near the positively charged oxygen vacancies enriched at the surface.15 The Sr-enriched phases (such as SrO islands on the surface) are detrimental to the surface activity, and also promote the formation and growth of other detrimental secondary phases (e.g., SrCO3, Sr(OH)2, SrCrO4, etc.), leading to time-dependent degradation in performance.16 One possible solution is to develop new cathode materials or architectures which are resistant against Sr-segregation. For example, Sr-free cathode materials have been extensively studied. Perovskite or Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite-like materials, such as La(Ni,Fe)O3−δ, Nd2NiO4 and Pr2NiO4, were thus proposed and studied as candidate SOFC cathode materials.17,18 To date, unfortunately, none of the new cathode materials have all the desired properties: high ORR activity, suitable compatibility with other cell components (e.g., electrolyte and interconnects), and sufficient durability under realistic operating conditions.
Surface modifications with catalytically-active nanoparticles have been widely used in chemical and electro-catalytic catalysis19,20 and SOFCs.21 However, discrete particles may have limited effect on suppressing Sr segregation.22 Recently, conformal perovskite coatings (e.g. La0.85Sr0.15MnO3) have been deposited on LSCF surfaces to enhance performance and stability.10,23 When the crystal structure of the catalyst is similar to that of LSCF, the catalyst coating can be conformal and dense to effectively suppress Sr segregation and enhance the durability of the cathode.24 For a catalyst-coated LSCF electrode, the porous LSCF backbone serves as a “highway” for facile transport of both oxygen ions and electrons (or electron holes) while the thin catalyst coating offers enhanced ORR activity and durability.25 The desired catalyst layer should be conformal, highly active for ORR, and inert to contaminants encountered under realistic operating conditions.
Here, we report our findings in dramatically enhancing both the ORR kinetics and stability of the state-of-the-art LSCF cathode by applying a conformal coating of a hybrid catalyst derived from a one-step infiltration process.26 The hybrid catalyst is composed of a conformal film of the perovskite PrNi0.5Mn0.5O3 (PNM) and exsoluted PrOx nanoparticles. Analyses suggest that the PrOx nanoparticles dramatically enhance the ORR kinetics via a high concentration of oxygen vacancies while the thin PNM film effectively suppresses Sr segregation from the LSCF phase, thus significantly enhancing the stability of the cathode.
Results and discussion
RP-type layered perovskite, Pr2NiO4+δ (δ = 0.15–0.22), has been studied as a potential cathode for SOFCs because of its unique oxygen ion transport properties.17,18 When a Mn-doped Pr2NiO4+δ with an intended formula of Pr2Ni0.5Mn0.5O4+δ was used as a catalyst to coat the surface of a porous LSCF cathode, however, it was found that the catalyst layer is, in fact, composed of a PrOx phase (with a possible composition of Pr7O12) and a single perovskite phase PrNi0.5Mn0.5O3 (PNM) (ESI,† Fig. S1) under the conditions of our study (solution infiltration of catalysts into a porous LSCF cathode). The advantages of the nanoparticles derived from an exsolution process over those from other deposition techniques (such as solution infiltration of nanoparticles27,28) include better control over particle size, distribution, and morphological stability. To probe the surface chemistry and electronic structure of the hybrid catalyst in order to explain the mechanism of performance enhancement, we deposited a thin-film of the catalyst on a model cell with a flat, dense LSCF electrode using pulsed laser deposition (PLD) (ESI,† Fig. S2 and S3). The similarity in the crystal structure of PNM to that of LSCF facilitates facile epitaxial growth of a dense and conformal coating of PNM on each LSCF grain (ESI,† Fig. S4), allowing us to evaluate its effect on suppressing Sr segregation and, thus, on enhancing the stability and durability of the LSCF cathode.10
The unique architecture of the catalyst-coated electrode

Fig. 1a schematically shows the surface morphology of a hybrid catalyst coating on a porous LSCF electrode backbone (sintered large LSCF grains); the conformal coating is composed of a PNM film decorated with PrOx nanoparticles. Fig. 1b shows a TEM image of two PrOx particles on the PNM coating. The two insets in Fig. 1b are the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) patterns of the PrOx nanoparticles (fluorite structure) and the PNM coating (perovskite structure), respectively (see the ESI,† Fig. S4a and b). The FFT pattern of the nanoparticles (inset of Fig. 1b), together with the Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy (EELS) spectra shown in Fig. 1b acquired from two locations (1 and 2 in b) further indicated that these nanoparticles are mainly PrOx. The superlattice spots in the FFT pattern (location 1) are induced most likely by the formation of oxygen vacancies ordering within PrOx.29,30 Shown in Fig. 1c is a cross-sectional view (a high-angle annular dark field STEM image) of the hybrid catalyst coated LSCF. The EELS spectra (Fig. 1d) acquired along the red line marked on Fig. 1c clearly indicated that the exsoluted particles are PrOx while the thin PNM layer (∼10 nm thick) was conformally coated on the LSCF surface.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematics of an LSCF electrode backbone decorated with a conformal, dense PNM coating and exsoluted PrOx nanoparticles. (b) A high-resolution TEM image showing two PrOx particles on a conformal PNM coating deposited on an LSCF grain. The insets are the FFT patterns from the nanoparticles (point 1) and the conformal PNM coatings (point 2); and the EELS spectra from point 1 and 2, suggesting that the nanoparticles are mainly PrOx (point 1) while the conformal coating is PNM (point 2). (c) High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image of a cross-section of the hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF cathode. (d) EELS spectra acquired along the red line marked in (c), indicating that the exsoluted particles are PrOx whereas the thin, conformal coating is PNM on the top of the LSCF grain. 
Electrochemical performance
Shown in Fig. 2a are some typical electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), acquired in ambient air at 750 °C under open circuit voltage (OCV) conditions, of the symmetrical cells with bare LSCF, PNM-coated LSCF, PrOx-coated LSCF, and the hybrid catalyst (PNM and PrOx)-coated LSCF electrodes (ESI,† Fig. S5a and b). The Rp values at 750 °C of these electrodes are 0.134, 0.068, 0.030, and 0.022 Ω cm2 for bare LSCF, PNM-coated LSCF, PrOx-coated LSCF, and the hybrid-catalyst-coated LSCF, respectively. Clearly, the LSCF coated with a thin film of the hybrid catalyst (PNM and PrOx) displayed the lowest Rp among all cathodes studied, much better than the other two excellent cathodes reported earlier: La0.4875Ca0.0125Ce0.5O2−δ (LCC) coated-LSCF31 and PrSrCoMnO6−δ (PSCM) coated-LSCF23 (ESI,† Fig. S6). The results suggest that the hybrid catalyst (PNM and PrOx) has the highest ORR activity on LSCF. Further, the surface exchange kinetics of these cathodes was also determined from electrical conductivity relaxation (ECR) measurements (Fig. 2b and ESI,† Fig. S7). At 750 °C, the surface exchange coefficient (k) for the bare LSCF was ∼5.68 × 10−4 cm s−1, which is consistent with previous values reported for LSCF.32–34 The k for PrOx-, PNM- and hybrid catalyst coated LSCF electrodes increased to ∼1.77 × 10−2, 7.58 × 10−3, and 7.50 × 10−3 cm s−1. The highest k of the PrOx-LSCF electrode may suggest that PrOx is most active for oxygen exchange; however, the hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF electrode showed the lowest Rp in the symmetrical cell, suggesting that the overall rate of the cathode processes depends also on other factors such as the rate of ionic transport associated with the ORR. The conformal coating of PNM plays a vital role in facilitating rapid oxygen-ion transport into LSCF, as to be elaborated later.
 Fig. 2  (a) Typical electrochemical impedance spectra of cells with a bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx- and hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF electrode, measured in ambient air at 750 °C under OCV conditions; (b) temperature dependence of the surface exchange coefficient (k) of the bare LSCF and catalyst-coated LSCF cathodes; (c) typical I–V–P curves and (d) stability testing (at a constant cell voltage of 0.7 V) for Ni–YSZ anode supported cells with a bare LSCF or PNM-, PrOx- or hybrid PNM–PrOx catalyst-coated LSCF cathode at 750 °C using 3% humidified H2 as fuel and ambient air as the oxidant. 
Shown in Fig. 2c are typical I–V–P curves of anode-supported cells (ESI,† Fig. S5c) based on bare or catalyst-coated LSCF cathodes at 750 °C. A peak power density (Pmax) of 1.21 W cm−2 was achieved for the cell with a hybrid PNM–PrOx catalyst coated LSCF, much higher than 1.09 W cm−2 for PrOx-LSCF, 0.88 W cm−2 for PNM-LSCF, and 0.79 W cm−2 for bare LSCF. Shown in Fig. 2d are the power densities of the anode-supported cells with different cathodes operated at 750 °C under a constant cell voltage of 0.7 V for ∼500 h. Clearly, the cell having a hybrid catalyst coated LSCF electrode showed not only the highest power density but also the best durability. It is noted that the surface morphology/composition had slightly changed during the initial 110 h of testing; more PrOx particles were exsolved from the parent coating, leading to some improvement in performance during this period of time (ESI,† Fig. S8a and b). After ∼110 h of operation, however, the morphology became reasonably stable; the subsequent durability in performance is attributed to the observed stability in morphology, composition, and structure of the hybrid catalyst coated LSCF electrodes (ESI,† Fig. S8c, d and S9–S11).
The origin of performance and stability enhancement
It is most likely that the two phases of the hybrid catalyst, PrOx and PNM, contributed synergetically to the ORR activity and the durability of the cathodes. Oxygen can be readily incorporated through highly active PrOx particles. The cells with PNM coating showed an initially lower performance (compared with the PrOx coating and hybrid catalyst coating) but a significant activation behavior over time. The hybrid catalyst coated-LSCF shows the lowest Rp, highest power output, and best stability among the cathode combinations studied, suggesting that the PrOx nanoparticles dramatically facilitate the ORR kinetics, while the conformal thin PNM film enhances the stability. In order to test this hypothesis, we probed the surface electronic structure and composition of the bare LSCF (∼100 nm), and PNM-, PrOx- and hybrid catalyst (∼10 nm)-coated LSCF (∼100 nm) thin-film model electrode systems using Near Ambient Pressure XPS and NEXAFS.

Fast ORR kinetics: surface oxygen vacancies and charge transfer ability on PrOx. 
The electron transfer from the cathode surface to the oxygen molecule is an important step for the ORR. The density of states (DOS) near the Fermi level (EF) is a simple descriptor used for characterizing the easiness of electron transfer.35,36 The X-ray photo electron spectra of the valence band (VB) provide information about the filled states (Fig. 3a). The VB structures near the Fermi level for bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx-, and hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF are shown in Fig. 3b. Since the area of the VB spectra of all the samples was normalized to one, the intensity of the spectra represents the DOS in the VB. The DOS at EF for PrOx-LSCF and hybrid-LSCF was higher than those for either bare LSCF or PNM-LSCF (Fig. 3b), indicating easier charge transfer from the PrOx-LSCF and hybrid-LSCF surface to absorbed oxygen molecules.35,36
 Fig. 3  Surface electronic structure of bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx-, and hybrid catalyst (PNM–PrOx)-coated-LSCF model thin films characterized using near ambient XPS and NEXAFS at 300 °C (black line) and 500 °C (red line) in a 200 mTorr O2 environment. (a) XPS valence band structure of different films. The area of all the valence spectra was normalized to unity. (b) Zoomed in valence band spectra near the Fermi level region. The black and red dotted lines are the linear fittings of the valence band edge, and the black dash lines mark the zero intensity and binding energy position. (c) The O K-edge absorption spectra of bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx-, and hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF. Three features in the LSCF O K-edge spectra are attributed to the unoccupied state of hybrid transition metal TM(Co,Fe) d–O 2p band (feature i); La 5d/Sr 4d–O 2p states (feature ii) and Co and Fe sp–O 2p hybridized bands (feature iii).41,42,45,46 The insets in (c) are zoomed-in views of the pre-edge region. (d) Mn L-edge and (e) Ni L-edge absorption spectra of the hybrid catalyst (PNM–PrOx). 
For SOFC cathodes, the concentration of oxygen vacancies is also a decisive factor for fast oxygen exchanges.37–40 The change in the X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) and the intensity near the EF in the VB spectra as a function of temperature indicated that oxygen vacancies are readily formed in PrOx at elevated temperature, suggesting that PrOx nanoparticles are likely the active phase for ORR in the hybrid catalyst-coated-LSCF cathodes.
The NEXAFS probes the unfilled electronic states. For bare LSCF, the feature i in the O K-edge XAS (Fig. 3c) is attributed to the unoccupied states of the O 2p-transition metal (TM) 3d hybridization band. With increasing temperature, more oxygen vacancies form at the LSCF surface, leading to the population of electronic states near the Fermi level, and so the eg absorption feature (red arrow) intensity decreases.41,42 The t2g absorption feature (black arrow) slightly increases, which is attributed to a change in the degree of covalency.41,42 From the transition metal (TM) L-edge XAS, a slight reduction in the Co valence state was observed, while the Fe valence state remained the same (ESI,† Fig. S12). For PrOx-LSCF, the O K-edge XAS (Fig. 3c) is similar to that of the cubic PrOx,43,44 consistent with the cubic structure of PrOx quantified by XRD (ESI,† Fig. S3 and S4). Similar to LSCF, the intensity of the feature i in the O K-edge XAS of the PrOx-LSCF, corresponding to the Pr 4f–O 2p hybridization band, decreased significantly with temperature. Such a decrease is likely due to the formation of oxygen vacancies, which leave excess electrons filling into the unoccupied Pr 4f–O 2p band. The change in the O K-edge XAS of the hybrid PNM–PrOx catalyst coated-LSCF followed the same trend as that on the PrOx-coated LSCF. The PNM-LSCF, on the other hand, did not show any detectable change in the O K edge XAS.
Consistent with the change in the O K edge XAS above, with increasing temperature the intensity near the Fermi level in the VB spectra of the PrOx-LSCF increases and the top of the VB shifts up towards the Fermi level (Fig. 3b). Such a change is likely due to the formation of oxygen vacancies in the PrOx-LSCF at high temperature, leading to creation of states near the Fermi level. The VB of the hybrid PNM–PrOx coated LSCF followed the behavior of the VB of the PrOx-LSCF, while the shift in the VB top is less on PNM-LSCF (Fig. 3b). Furthermore, both the Ni and Mn L edge spectra for the hybrid catalyst (Fig. 3d and e) did not show any noticeable variation with temperature, indicating no change in the Ni and Mn valence states. All these results indicate that the temperature-dependent changes of the VB structure and the O K-edge XAS of the hybrid PNM–PrOx catalyst with temperature arises from the formation of oxygen vacancies in PrOx. Based on oxygen vacancy availability as deduced from our XPS and XAS measurements, the PrOx is the active phase on the hybrid catalyst coated LSCF surface for a fast oxygen exchange process.


Enhanced durability: inherent chemical stability of the hybrid coating. 
To understand the mechanism for high stability of the hybrid PNM–PrOx catalyst-coated LSCF, we investigated the surface chemistry of LSCF, the hybrid catalyst, and the hybrid catalyst coated LSCF model thin films exposed to reactive gas (O2, H2O) at elevated temperatures. All samples were first cleaned from carbon in 200 mTorr O2 at 300 °C, and then heated to 500 °C in O2. Subsequently, 10% H2O was added to the O2 gas environment while the temperature was kept at 500 °C. Shown in Fig. 4 are the (La + Sr)/(Co + Fe) ratio for LSCF (quantified from La 3d, Sr 3d, Co 2p and Fe 2p peak area) and the Pr/(Ni + Mn) ratio for the hybrid catalyst (quantified from Pr 4d, Ni 3p and Mn 3p) as a function of measurement conditions. Clearly, the (La + Sr)/(Co + Fe) ratio of LSCF increased significantly as the temperature was increased from 300 to 500 °C in O2 or when 10% H2O was introduced at 500 °C. In contrast, the Pr/(Ni + Mn) ratio of the hybrid catalyst varied only slightly under similar conditions. Furthermore, the LSCF surface became much rougher by forming large precipitate particles accompanying the large increase in (La + Sr)/(Co + Fe) ratio of LSCF. In contrast, the surface morphology of the hybrid catalyst stayed nearly unchanged (ESI,† Fig. S13). All these results prove that the hybrid catalyst surface is more stable chemically than LSCF when exposed to the gases relevant to SOFC operation at high temperatures. The O 1s, Sr 3d and Pr 4d photoelectron spectra provide further evidence to support that the hybrid catalyst has better stability than LSCF (ESI,† Fig. S14 and S15).
 Fig. 4  Surface composition of LSCF and the hybrid catalyst (PNM–PrOx) measured under different conditions: 200 mTorr of O2 at 300 °C, 200 mTorr of O2 at 500 °C, and 200 mTorr of a gas mixture (90% O2 + 10% H2O) at 500 °C. For comparison, the (La + Sr)/(Co + Fe) and Pr/(Ni + Mn) were normalized by the values obtained in 200 mTorr of O2 at 300 °C. 

Mechanism of ORR acceleration probed by computation
Periodic density functional theory (DFT) simulations were performed to gain more insight into the mechanism of the enhanced ORR and stability on the hybrid catalyst coating, by examining oxygen adsorption, vacancy formation and oxygen transport processes. As will be seen below, the strong oxygen adsorption and easier vacancy formation predicted by DFT calculations here are consistent with the results obtained from XPS and XAS above. Furthermore, fast oxygen transport due to exsoluted PrOx particles and a more stable surface due to the conformal PNM coating can be expected based on these calculations, the latter also being consistent with the XPS results above.
We calculated the oxygen adsorption energy on PrO2 and oxygen vacancy formation energy in PrO2 using PBE + U,47 and we took CeO2 as an excellent model catalyst reference for comparison. Shown in ESI,† Table S1 are the calculated oxygen vacancy formation energies (EVO) for bulk PrO2 and CeO2 (1.04 eV and 4.69 eV, respectively) and the adsorption energy of O2 on the PrO2(111) and CeO2(111) surfaces (−1.19 and ∼0.00 eV, respectively) with an end-on configuration. These quantities are characteristic of how fast the surface oxygen exchange and bulk oxygen diffusion kinetics are.48 In comparison to CeO2, the stronger O2 adsorption and much lower oxygen vacancy formation energy (EVO) of PrO2 support the ease of oxygen uptake and the exceptional ORR kinetics on the PrO2 surface under the cathodic conditions. The strong adsorption of oxygen molecule (presumably as chemisorption) on PrOx is consistent with the easier charge transfer found on PrOx by XAS and XPS above. The calculated EVO for PrOx (1.04 eV) is much smaller than that of PNM (3.63 eV) and LSCF (2.38 eV) (ESI,† Table S2). This is also consistent with the larger amount of oxygen vacancies found in PrOx from the XPS and XAS measurements above.
Furthermore, a localized oxygen vacancy transport channel could be formed in the thin-film PNM phase during the PrOx exsolution process, allowing for fast oxygen transport through the PrOx/PNM-LSCF electrode system. Localized growth of PrOx nanoparticles (Fig. 2) may inevitably result in local Pr deficiency in the parent PNM coating. Migration barriers for oxygen diffusion were calculated to understand the effect of Pr deficiency in the PNM bulk phase, similar to a previous study.48 The stoichiometric bulk PNM structure has a migration barrier (Em) of 1.26 eV, while the structure with Pr deficiency has a much lower barrier of 0.45 eV (ESI,† Table S3). More interestingly, the non-stoichiometric structure shows a smoothly curved vacancy trajectory, while the stoichiometric structure has a strong interaction between the vacancy and the neighboring ions (Fig. 5a and b). The bulk diffusion barrier Ea is the summation of the migration barrier (Em) and oxygen vacancy formation energy (EVO), as compiled in ESI,† Table S3. In effect, in this system the bulk diffusion barrier was lowered from 4.89 eV to 1.62 eV due to Pr deficiency (ESI,† Fig. S16). The 67% lowering of the bulk diffusion barrier in Pr-deficient PNM supports the possibility of fast oxygen transport through the thin PNM layer. In addition, we examined the migration energy of oxygen from the PrOx surface into the Pr-deficient PNM subsurface. To simplify the problem, we assessed the PrOx-terminated surface of PNM to represent the oxygen transfer from PrOx particles into PNM. The surface energy calculations show that PrO-terminated surfaces are more stable than Ni and Mn-terminated ones. As shown in ESI,† Fig. S17, for the configuration without Pr deficiency in PNM, a 0.21 eV barrier is required to diffuse into the sub-surface, followed by overcoming a migration barrier of 0.93 eV to reach the oxygen vacancy. However, for the case with Pr deficiency in the PNM, oxygen is instantaneously incorporated into the sub-surface without a barrier, and then it hops by overcoming a 0.82 eV barrier. The 12% reduction in the migration barrier and the non-existence of the incorporation barrier clearly manifests that Pr deficiency in PNM could be a critical factor in enhancing the oxygen transport into and through the bulk layers. Overall, on the basis of the surface and bulk calculations, the enhanced ORR and fast bulk diffusion of the hybrid catalyst coated LSCF cathode is illustrated in Fig. 5c. Gas-phase oxygen adsorbs either preferentially on PrOx nanoparticles or on the PrOx-terminated surfaces of PNM, followed by dissociation. Subsequently, monoatomic oxygen diffuses through the PrOx surface or the PrOx bulk, migrating down into PNM and to the cathode/electrolyte interface.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a trajectory of oxygen vacancies (a) without and (b) with Pr deficiency (VPr). The solid arrow represents the oxygen migration trajectory. (c) Schematic representation of the lowest energy pathway for the O2 reduction on the hybrid catalyst (PrOx/PNM) coated LSCF cathode and the enhanced bulk diffusion of oxygen vacancies in PNM by introducing Pr deficiency. 
Finally, the lattice mismatch between PNM and LSCF is only 0.4%, allowing the formation of a conformal PNM coating on LSCF (as shown in Fig. 1c), and the PNM layer protects the surface against chemical degradation. The segregation and phase precipitation of the A-site elements (e.g., Sr) are well accepted in the literature to be detrimental to the performance of LSCF and perovskite-related materials.49,50 Indeed, the continuous degradation in LSCF performance (Fig. 2d) is attributed to Sr segregation on LSCF as shown in Fig. 4. One driving force for Sr segregation is the net positive charge at the surface due to the preferential formation of oxygen vacancies.15 The coverage by a conformal hybrid catalyst layer with high oxygen vacancy formation energy (ESI,† Table S2) can suppress the oxygen vacancy concentration at the LSCF/PNM interface, and in turn decrease the driving force for Sr segregation.22 Consistent with this argument, the hybrid catalyst surface was found to be much more stable than the LSCF surface, both electrochemically (Fig. 2) and chemically (Fig. 4) when exposed to reactive gases at high temperatures.
Conclusions
In summary, both the ORR activity and the stability of the state-of-the-art LSCF cathode have been effectively enhanced through surface modification by an electrocatalytically active and robust hybrid catalyst coating composed of a conformal PNM film and exsoluted PrOx nanoparticles. The dispersed PrOx nanoparticles significantly accelerate the ORR kinetics because of the easier electron transfer and a larger concentration of oxygen vacancies at the surface. The inherently more stable PNM film greatly enhances the durability of the cathode by suppressing Sr segregation from LSCF. The combination of distinctive properties of the two separate phases, together with their unique morphology and architecture, provide a dramatic enhancement in electrocatalytic performance and long-term durability of a state-of-the-art electrode backbone. The process involves a simple, one-step surface modification. The demonstrated approach of surface enhancement is attractive not only for intermediate-temperature SOFCs, but also for other types of energy conversion and storage systems, including electrolysis cells for hydrogen production and membrane reactors for the synthesis of clean fuels.
Experimental
Methods and any associated references are available in the ESI.†
Author contributions
M. L. and B. Y. conceived, designed and supervised the project. Yu C., Yan C., and D. D. contributed equally to this work. Yu C. and D. D. carried out the fabrication of the samples and conducted data analysis of all electrochemical experiments. B. Z. and S. Y. performed the electrical conductivity relaxation measurement. D. C. performed the Raman analysis. Yan C., Q. L., H. B., E. C., G. V., and J. W. fabricated the PLD films and characterized the surface chemistry of the thin films. YongMan C. and L. Z. conducted the DFT calculation. Yu C., H. X, and Y. D. conducted TEM analysis. B. Z., C. Y., and J. L. collected the data of X-ray diffraction and SEM. Yu C. and B. D. performed the XPS analysis of the cathodes. Yu C., Yan C., YongMan C., M. L., and B. Y. contributed to writing the paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the US Department of Energy SECA Core Technology Program (DE-NT0006557), DOE ARPA-E REBELS Program (DE-AR0000502), and Guangdong Innovative and Entrepreneurial Research Team Program (No. 2014ZT05N200). B. Y. and Yan. C. acknowledge financial support for this research from the DoE Basic Energy Sciences (DE-SC0002633), and Yan. C. acknowledges fellowship financial support from the Schlumberger Foundation for Faculty of the Future Program. This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. This research also used the Advanced Light Source that is supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We thank Dr Sean Bishop and Dr Nikolai Tsvetkov for the assistance with XPS and NEXAFS experiments.
References
E. D. Wachsman and K. T. Lee, Science, 2011, 334, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhan and S. A. Barnett, Science, 2005, 308, 844–847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shao and S. M. Haile, Nature, 2004, 431, 170–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. Murray, T. Tsai and S. A. Barnett, Nature, 1999, 400, 649–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carrette, K. A. Friedrich and U. Stimming, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 5–39 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Wang, K. Blinn, M. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Cheng and M. Liu, Science, 2009, 326, 126–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Y. Choi, W. Qin, H. Chen, K. Blinn, M. Liu, P. Liu, J. Bai, T. A. Tyson and M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 357 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, D. Su, M. Han and F. Chen, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Lynch, L. Yang, W. Qin, J.-J. Choi, M. Liu, K. Blinn and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2249–2258 CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, D. Su, Z. Yang, M. Han and F. Chen, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 25–33 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Bu, Y. Zhang, R. Yan, D. Ding, B. Zhao, S. Yoo, D. Dang, R. Hu, C. Yang and M. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601890 .
S. P. Jiang and X. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 505–531 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Simner, M. D. Anderson, M. H. Engelhard and J. W. Stevenson, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A478–A481 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, J. W. Han, Y. Chen, Z. Cai and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7909–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Jiang, S. Zhang and Y. D. Zhen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A127–A134 CrossRef CAS .
T. Komatsu, H. Arai, R. Chiba, K. Nozawa, M. Arakawa and K. Sato, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A9–A12 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Zhou, J. W. Templeton, Z. Nie, H. Chen, J. W. Stevenson and L. R. Pederson, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 44–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nishihata, J. Mizuki, T. Akao, H. Tanaka, M. Uenishi, M. Kimura, T. Okamoto and N. Hamada, Nature, 2002, 418, 164–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Gorte and J. M. Vohs, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 14, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, C. Xia and F. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3595–3605 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsvetkov, Q. Lu, L. Sun, E. J. Crumlin and B. Yildiz, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1010–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, M. Liu, Z. Liu, X. Li, K. Blinn, X. Zhu and M. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1149–1154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, A. V. Virkar, M. Liu and F. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 489–496 RSC .
D. Ding, X. Li, S. Y. Lai, K. Gerdes and M. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 552–575 CAS .

          D. Ding and M. Liu, Electrocatalytic conformal coatings and method for making the same, US Pat., US 20150325860 A1,  2015 Search PubMed .
D. Neagu, G. Tsekouras, D. N. Miller, H. Ménard and J. T. S. Irvine, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 916–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Fowler, A. C. Messner, E. C. Miller, B. W. Slone, S. A. Barnett and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3683–3693 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Ou, T. Mori, F. Ye, T. Kobayashi, J. Zou, G. Auchterlonie and J. Drennan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 171911 CrossRef .
Y. Ding, Y. Chen, K. C. Pradel, M. Liu and Z. Lin Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 214302 CrossRef .
M. Liu, D. Ding, K. Blinn, X. Li, L. Nie and M. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8613–8620 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Cox-Galhotra and S. McIntosh, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1429–1436 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, J. Hyodo, K. Chen, N. Ai, S. Amarasinghe, T. Ishihara and S. P. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F682–F686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lane and J. Kilner, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 136, 997–1001 CrossRef .
Z. H. Cai, Y. Kuru, J. W. Han, Y. Chen and B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17696–17704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Feibelman and D. R. Hamann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavone, A. M. Ritzmann and E. A. Carter, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4933–4937 CAS .
Y.-L. Lee, D. Lee, X. R. Wang, H. N. Lee, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 244–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Lee, J. Kleis, J. Rossmeisl, Y. Shao-Horn and D. Morgan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3966–3970 CAS .
Z. A. Feng, F. El Gabaly, X. Ye, Z.-X. Shen and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4374 CAS .
Y. Orikasa, T. Ina, T. Nakao, A. Mineshige, K. Amezawa, M. Oishi, H. Arai, Z. Ogumi and Y. Uchimoto, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16637–16643 RSC .
D. N. Mueller, M. L. Machala, H. Bluhm and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Seifarth, J. Dabrowski, P. Zaumseil, S. Mueller, D. Schmeisser, H. J. Muessig and T. Schroeder, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2009, 27, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schaefer, V. Zielasek, T. Schmidt, A. Sandell, M. Schowalter, O. Seifarth, L. E. Walle, C. Schulz, J. Wollschlager, T. Schroeder, A. Rosenauer, J. Falta and M. Baumer, Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 045414 CrossRef .
M. Abbate, F. M. F. Degroot, J. C. Fuggle, A. Fujimori, O. Strebel, F. Lopez, M. Domke, G. Kaindl, G. A. Sawatzky, M. Takano, Y. Takeda, H. Eisaki and S. Uchida, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 46, 4511–4519 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizokawa, A. Fujimori, T. Arima, Y. Tokura, N. Mori and J. Akimitsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, 13865–13873 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Choi, M. C. Lin and M. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7214–7219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, M. C. Lin and M. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1441–1445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, W. C. Jung, Z. Cai, J. J. Kim, H. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7979–7988 CAS .
J. W. Han and B. Yildiz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8598–8607 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03656b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Intermediate-temperature solid oxide fuel cells (IT-SOFCs) have the potential to be the cleanest and most efficient options for cost-effective utilization of a wide variety of fuels, from hydrogen to hydrocarbons, coal gas, and renewable fuels. They are ideally suited for distributed generation (which may be integrated with smart grids) and for mobile applications (e.g., electric vehicles). To make IT-SOFCs economically competitive and commercially viable, however, several material challenges must be overcome. One of them is the creation of durable, low-cost cathode materials and nanostructures of high electro-catalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at intermediate temperatures. Here we report an effective strategy for the fabrication of high-performance hybrid catalyst coated electrodes with dramatically enhanced ORR activity and durability for fuel cells. The concept of surface modification of electrodes through solution-infiltration of a catalyst and the unique hybrid electrode structure (exsoluted nanoparticles on a conformal coating) are readily applicable to other energy storage and conversion systems, including metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, electrolyzers, dye-sensitized solar cells, and photo-catalysis.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematics of an LSCF electrode backbone decorated with a conformal, dense PNM coating and exsoluted PrOx nanoparticles. (b) A high-resolution TEM image showing two PrOx particles on a conformal PNM coating deposited on an LSCF grain. The insets are the FFT patterns from the nanoparticles (point 1) and the conformal PNM coatings (point 2); and the EELS spectra from point 1 and 2, suggesting that the nanoparticles are mainly PrOx (point 1) while the conformal coating is PNM (point 2). (c) High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image of a cross-section of the hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF cathode. (d) EELS spectra acquired along the red line marked in (c), indicating that the exsoluted particles are PrOx whereas the thin, conformal coating is PNM on the top of the LSCF grain.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Typical electrochemical impedance spectra of cells with a bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx- and hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF electrode, measured in ambient air at 750 °C under OCV conditions; (b) temperature dependence of the surface exchange coefficient (k) of the bare LSCF and catalyst-coated LSCF cathodes; (c) typical I–V–P curves and (d) stability testing (at a constant cell voltage of 0.7 V) for Ni–YSZ anode supported cells with a bare LSCF or PNM-, PrOx- or hybrid PNM–PrOx catalyst-coated LSCF cathode at 750 °C using 3% humidified H2 as fuel and ambient air as the oxidant.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface electronic structure of bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx-, and hybrid catalyst (PNM–PrOx)-coated-LSCF model thin films characterized using near ambient XPS and NEXAFS at 300 °C (black line) and 500 °C (red line) in a 200 mTorr O2 environment. (a) XPS valence band structure of different films. The area of all the valence spectra was normalized to unity. (b) Zoomed in valence band spectra near the Fermi level region. The black and red dotted lines are the linear fittings of the valence band edge, and the black dash lines mark the zero intensity and binding energy position. (c) The O K-edge absorption spectra of bare LSCF, and PNM-, PrOx-, and hybrid catalyst-coated LSCF. Three features in the LSCF O K-edge spectra are attributed to the unoccupied state of hybrid transition metal TM(Co,Fe) d–O 2p band (feature i); La 5d/Sr 4d–O 2p states (feature ii) and Co and Fe sp–O 2p hybridized bands (feature iii).41,42,45,46 The insets in (c) are zoomed-in views of the pre-edge region. (d) Mn L-edge and (e) Ni L-edge absorption spectra of the hybrid catalyst (PNM–PrOx).	 

 	Fig. 4  Surface composition of LSCF and the hybrid catalyst (PNM–PrOx) measured under different conditions: 200 mTorr of O2 at 300 °C, 200 mTorr of O2 at 500 °C, and 200 mTorr of a gas mixture (90% O2 + 10% H2O) at 500 °C. For comparison, the (La + Sr)/(Co + Fe) and Pr/(Ni + Mn) were normalized by the values obtained in 200 mTorr of O2 at 300 °C.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of a trajectory of oxygen vacancies (a) without and (b) with Pr deficiency (VPr). The solid arrow represents the oxygen migration trajectory. (c) Schematic representation of the lowest energy pathway for the O2 reduction on the hybrid catalyst (PrOx/PNM) coated LSCF cathode and the enhanced bulk diffusion of oxygen vacancies in PNM by introducing Pr deficiency.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee03656b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
