Developing environmentally benign routes for semiconductor synthesis: improved approaches to the solution deposition of cadmium sulfide for solar cell ...  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/A909257I View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/A909257I
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2000, 2, 79-86Developing environmentally benign routes for 
semiconductor synthesis: improved approaches to the solution deposition of 
cadmium sulfide for solar cell applicationsAlexander Bayera, David S. Boyle†a, Markus R. Heinricha, Paul O’Brien*b, David J. Otwaya and Odile RobbeaaDepartment of Chemistry, Imperial College of Science Technology and Medicine, South Kensington, London, UK SW7 2AYbThe Manchester Materials Science Centre and, The Chemistry Department, The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK M13 9PL. E-mail: paul.obrien@man.ac.ukReceived 23rd November 1999First published on UnassignedUnassigned31st March 2000Green ContextWhile the conversion of sunlight into electricity using semiconductors 
is fundamentally an environmentally benign process the manufacture of the 
solar cells can involve environmentally damaging chemistry. The deposition 
of thin films of cadmium sulfide using chemical bath deposition is 
currently very inefficient and leads to considerable quantities of cadmium 
waste. The use and disposal of cadmium compounds is highly regulated and it 
seems unlikely that processes of this type will be acceptable in the 
future. Here a new process is described which uses much lower 
concentrations of cadmium in the preparation of the film, is highly 
efficient in cadmium use, and also offers the potential to eliminate 
volatile ammonia from the process.JHCSummaryChemical Bath Deposition (CBD) is a useful method for the deposition of 
thin films of semiconductors such as CdS, which are important components of 
polycrystalline solar cells. Such devices potentially offer low cost solar 
energy conversion which are interesting sustainable energy sources. We are 
attempting to reduce the environmental impact on the fabrication of such 
devices by developing routes in which cadmium is used efficiently in the 
deposition of films. At present the fabrication of CdS window layers by CBD 
generates considerable quantities of cadmium-containing waste and the 
incorporation of cadmium into the films accounts for only a small fraction 
of the total used in the process. The use and disposal of 
cadmium-containing compounds is highly regulated in the EU and elsewhere. 
In CBD, the extent of the heterogeneous film formation process is limited 
by two major factors: homogeneous reaction in solution (precipitation) and 
the deposition of material on to the reactor walls. In this paper we 
describe the development of a novel high-efficiency CdS CBD system, using 
concentrations of cadmium orders of magnitude lower than in previously 
reported methods. The modelling of chemical equilibria have enabled us to 
develop this method which also offers the potential to eliminate ammonia 
(which is volatile and undesirable for large-scale CBD operations). Films 
have been characterized as good quality CdS by spectroscopic methods 
(UV–VIS, PL and XPS), microscopy (SEM and TEM) and powder XRD.IntroductionThe conversion of sunlight into electricity, by exploiting the 
photovoltaic properties of a semiconductor material, is both an 
environmentally benign and technologically interesting process. Although 
the photovoltaic effect was discovered by Becquerel in 1839 the forerunner 
to contemporary silicon solar cell technology, the diffused silicon 
p–n homojunction, was only developed in 1954.1 The invention of the CdS∶CuS heterojunction 
solar cell,2 the antecedent of 
CdS∶CdTe based devices, led to intense research on thin film solar 
cell devices.Semiconductor materials can absorb light (photons of energy greater or 
equal to the bandgap of the material) and generate electron–hole 
pairs. Normally these charged species would recombine with each other after 
some finite period, however if they can be separated and collected at two 
externally connected contacts a photocurrent can be produced. Efficient 
photovoltaic energy conversion requires a high probability of photon 
absorption, efficient separation and effective transport of the charge 
carriers. The most widely employed device principle for solar energy 
conversion is the p–n semiconductor junction. The configuration 
provides an intrinsic electric field that facilitates the separation of 
photogenerated charge carriers. The principles of solar energy conversion 
and the material aspects of photovoltaic technology have been reviewed in 
many papers and books.3In 1990, a review of photovoltaic technology by the then UK Department 
of Energy was undertaken by ETSU. The main conclusion of the exercise was 
an acknowledgement that PV systems, integrated into the fabric of UK 
buildings, could provide an environmentally benign power source at a cost 
competitive with conventional sources.4 
Although there have been both academic advances and market growth in 
photovoltaic technology in recent years, there remains a need for increased 
efficiency of the cells, lower cost processing and increased process 
yields. Photovoltaic energy generation is currently dominated by bulk 
crystalline silicon cell technology. The widespread utilisation of the 
product is problematic due to the high production cost of these cells. Thin 
film polycrystalline solar cells, such as the BP Solar ‘Apollo’ 
CdS∶CdTe heterojunction device,5 offer 
the potential for lower cost solar energy conversion. The large-scale 
exploitation of these devices is partly dependent on a reduction of the 
potential environmental impact of the technology. There is considerable 
potential for the development of cheaper and safer processes for their 
manufacture. Cadmium-containing compounds and wastes are highly regulated 
in the EU and elsewhere and the associated environmental legislation is 
subject to continuous review; trends for regulatory limits are increasing 
downwards.6Although the electrodeposition of CdTe on CdS layers (on tin oxide 
glass) has been developed to contain Cd in a safe manner, the fabrication 
of CdS window layers by Chemical Bath Deposition (CBD) generates 
considerable Cd-containing waste. We have and others recently reviewed some 
of the chemistry underlying CBD processes.7 
Typical CBD processes for sulfides employ an aqueous alkaline solution 
(ca. 60–90 °C) containing the chalcogenide source, the 
metal ion and added base. A chelating agent is used to limit the hydrolysis 
of the metal ion and impart some stability to the bath, which would 
otherwise undergo rapid hydrolysis and precipitation. The technique under 
these conditions relies on the slow release of S2− ions, 
via thermal decomposition of an organic precursor, into an 
alkaline solution in which the free metal ion is buffered at a low 
concentration. The deposition of cadmium sulfide by CBD is particularly 
straightforward and well-studied with notable contributions from the Lincot 
group.7 However, minimising the 
environmental impact of the process presents a considerable challenge.A major limitation of current CBD methods is the inefficiency of batch 
processing techniques, in terms of the utilisation of starting materials 
and their conversion to thin films. Typically 2% of the cadmium source in 
CdS CBD is deposited in the thin film. Significant volumes of 
Cd-contaminated water and precipitates are generated. In addition the 
process employs high concentrations of ammonia which is volatile and 
detrimental to the environment. An efficient system for recovering and 
recycling cadmium and other chemicals would place a much lower burden on 
the environment. It would also ensure that the process will be able to 
comply more easily with regulatory requirements on emission. The quantity 
of chemicals to be disposed of in landfill sites will be reduced as will 
the quantities of cadmium compounds that have to be stored in a production 
facility (which will reduce the environmental risk of accidental 
release).The extent of the heterogeneous reaction on the substrate surface is 
limited by two major factors; the competing homogeneous reaction in 
solution (which is autocatalytic and results in massive precipitation in 
solution) and deposition of material on the CBD reactor walls. There are 
analogies here with the problems encountered in Chemical Vapor Deposition 
(CVD), where the use of ‘cold wall’ (in preference to 
‘hot wall’) configurations can suppress the undesirable reactor 
wall reactions. The lower thermal energy input of the system also increases 
the relative importance of surface reactions on the heated 
substrate.8In general the controlling physiochemical factors for successful CBD are 
the supersaturation of the solution and the kinetics of the growth process 
(e.g. the catalytic activity of the deposition surface).7 Supersaturation is defined as the metastable 
condition whereby the concentration of a substance in solution exceeds the 
equilibrium concentration with respect to its solid phase. As cadmium ions 
are labile in aqueous media and equilibria are rapidly established in 
stirred solutions, thermodynamic equilibria models are useful in assessing 
the initial stages of these chemically reactive baths. Studies of the 
speciation of cadmium in chemical baths (i.e. calculation of 
distributions and concentrations of metal and metal-ligand species) allow 
us to determine the initial supersaturation of the system.Here we demonstrate the application of equilibrium and speciation 
calculations for CBD systems. The results of these studies have provided a 
rational framework for the development of high-efficiency CdS CBD systems 
that use cadmium and ethylenediamine at low concentrations. It is desirable 
to eliminate ammonia from the process (which is commonly employed in CdS 
CBD) as it is volatile and undesirable in larger scale CBD operations. We 
have successfully performed CBD in optically clear solutions under 
conditions of low temperature with direct heating of the target 
substrate.ExperimentalDeposition of thin filmsCdS thin films were grown on glass microscope slides or tin oxide (TO) 
coated glass (Tec 10, LOF) from solutions containing cadmium chloride 
(0.01–0.001 mol dm−3), an amine ligand (ammonia or 
ethylenediamine; 5–0.001 mol dm−3), thiourea (0.01 
mol dm−3) and sodium hydroxide (0.01 mol 
dm−3) to obtain a solution of final pH 12.5 (adjusted by 
dropwise addition of 5 mol dm−3 HCl or NaOH or the use of 
a PC-controlled automatic titrator). Deposition baths containing ammonia 
were prepared according to a formulation described elsewhere.5 An EIL 7000 pH meter with temperature compensation 
and Russell glass electrode (calibrated against standard pH 4.00 and 10.00 
buffers) were used to record solution pH. Substrates were degreased and 
cleaned thoroughly by ultrasonication using a standard procedure, before 
immersion in the chemical bath. The essential features of the modified CBD 
process (Fig. 1) are the incorporation of a 
filtration unit (to remove homogeneously generated precipitates) and the 
potential for continuous reaction by replenishment, treatment and 
purification of reagents within a recirculating closed-loop CBD reactor. We 
have used direct heating of the CBD substrate, the configuration limits the 
undesirable homogeneous reaction. Precipitation and deposition of CdS on 
the walls of the reactor vessel limit the effectiveness of in situ 
strategies for cadmium recovery. The CBD solution was maintained at 
moderate temperature (ca. 300 K) for deposition. Films were 
deposited on resistively heated substrates (ca. 350 K) and removed 
from the bath after the desired period of time (ca. 45 min), 
washed with de-ionised water and any adherent particulate matter removed by 
ultrasonic agitation. Film thicknesses (ca. 40–60 nm) were 
determined by Quartz Crystal Microbalance (QCM) measurements. Throughout 
the deposition process the chemical bath remained optically clear and no 
deposition on the CBD reactor was observed to occur. The substrates were 
allowed to dry under ambient conditions (ca. 0.5 h) before film 
characterisation or a further annealing step in air. Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a high-efficiency CdS CBD system. Potential 
for continuous operation is achieved via alternate use of filters 
1 and 2 (polypropylene 200 nm mesh) to facilitate recovery of particulate 
cadmium compounds. Organic by-products of the CdS CBD process are also 
removed during water treatment. Characterisation of thin filmsElectronic absorption spectra were recorded with a Philips PU 8710 
spectrophotometer. Photoluminescence (PL) measurements were obtained at 10 
K using the 457.9 nm line of an Ar-laser and excitation density of 3.0 mW 
mm−2 (spectral resolution of 2 nm), with a 495 nm long 
wavelength pass filter in front of the monochromator. X-Ray diffraction 
studies were performed using secondary graphite monochromated Cu-Kα 
radiation (40 kV) on a Philips X’Pert Materials Research 
Diffractometer (MRD). Measurements were taken using a glancing angle 
incidence detector at an angle of 3°, for 2θ values over 
20–60° in steps of 0.04° with a count time of 1 s. Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) and EDAX were carried out on a JEOL J535CM 
instrument with a LINK QX2000 unit. Samples were carbon coated before 
analysis. A JEOL-JEM 2010 transmission electron microscope operating at 200 
kV was used for TEM studies and to obtain electron diffraction patterns. 
Wide scan XPS measurements were performed in the ultra-high vacuum chamber 
(base pressure 10−8 Pa) of a VG ESCALAB-Mk II (VG 
Scientific) using Al-Kα excitation (analyser pass energy of 50 eV). 
The energy scale was calibrated using trace carbon (C1s 284.8 
eV) as a reference.Modelling and speciationAll calculations were carried out using microcomputers either in EXCEL 
or using the program SPECIES.9Results and discussionMinimizing cadmium concentration in solution: modelling 
and speciation studiesA number of reports in the literature suggest that good quality, 
specular and adherent films of CdS are only obtained, from alkaline 
solutions, when the solution used for deposition is formally supersaturated 
with respect to the precipitation of hydroxy-cadmium species. We have 
sought to generalize this condition and have now defined the concept of an 
equivalent solution. The idea can be simply stated as follows; if an 
alkaline bath successfully deposits a thin film of CdS it can be 
characterized in terms of a free cadmium ion concentration and its pH. It 
is a simple matter to define solutions that provide this same level of 
supersaturation either for the same or a different ligand.The calculations for CBD solutions are quite straightforward, for in 
general we are working with a substantial excess of the ligand and at 
elevated values of pH, such that [L] »[M] and 
therefore we can write: MT 
= MF
{1 + 
β1[L]T + 
β2[L]T2 + 
β3[L]T3 
+............}
        (1)
      where MT and LT are the 
total metal and ligand concentrations respectively, MF 
is the free metal ion concentration and βn the 
nth overall thermodynamic formation constant. For CdS 
CBD from basic solutions we employ amine ligands and the free ligand 
concentrations are dependent upon pH (a minor correction for conditions of 
pH > pKa + 1) MF = MT
{1 
+ 
β1(KA[L]T/[H+
] + KA)+ 
β2(KA[L]T/[H+
] + KA)2 
+.......}−1
        (2)
      where KA is the relevant acid dissociation 
constant.We can hence establish conditions for which pM (the negative logarithm 
of free metal ion concentration MF) and hence the 
concentration of hydroxy-cadmium species is the same for different 
solutions at a fixed solution pH.Calculations were carried out using either equations of type (1) or (2) in EXCEL 
spreadsheets or by modelling with the program SPECIES. The latter program 
uses a precise algorithm to calculate pM and pL, from input data defining 
total concentrations for the metal and ligand.The input parameters for 
SPECIES are the stability constants for the homogeneous and heterogeneous 
equilibria being modelled and their stoichiometric coefficients. The 
calculated speciation curves are displayed as a function of pH. Identical 
results were obtained by either method of calculation, which served to 
confirm the approximations detailed above.The results of these calculations can best be presented in terms of 
contour lines defining a constant pM (determined for the onset of 
supersaturation i.e. [Cd]F = 
Ksp/[OH]2), on a plot of total metal 
MT against total ligand LT, for 
different conditions for a single metal–ligand combination or 
alternatively, on a different line for a new metal–ligand 
combination. The approach provides a more precise definition of the concept 
of a critical metal–ligand ratio for CBD as outlined by Hodes et 
al.10 In this study we have modelled 
ethylenediamine, 1,2-diaminopropane, ammonia, ethanolamine, triethanolamine 
and hydrazine as representative ligands for the cadmium system. Equivalence 
plots are shown in Fig. 2 for which all the 
contour lines correspond to −log[Cd]F = pM = 10.61, 
conditions for which good films of CdS are deposited from a commercial CBD 
system defined in ref. 11. The contours reflect the tendency of metal 
complexes to dissociate on dilution. The positions of the contour lines 
provide an indication of the thermodynamic stability of the complexes 
formed, for example, ethylenediamine (en) is a stronger ligand than ammonia 
and is hence needed at lower concentrations. Fig. 2  The concept of chemical equivalence for different CdS CBD systems. 
Ligands represented in this study are (a) ethylenediamine; 
(b) 1,2-diaminopropane; (c) ammonia; (d) 
ethanolamine; (e) triethanolamine and (f) hydrazine. 
Contour lines represent conditions of [Cd2+]F = 2.44 
× 10−11 mol dm−3 at pH = 12.5. In terms of developing new regimes for deposition, the concept of 
chemical equivalence is very useful. The calculations suggest that CBD 
solutions (Bath B) of solution pH = 12.5, containing lower concentrations 
of cadmium (0.001 mol dm−3) and en (0.012 mol 
dm−3), are equivalent in terms of cadmium supersaturation 
to the much stronger solutions of cadmium and ammonia (Bath A) typically 
used for the growth of solar cell window layers.11 Speciation profiles of both systems are shown in 
Fig. 3. Fig. 3  Speciation diagrams of high cadmium/high ammonia (Bath A; solution pH = 
13) and low cadmium/low ethylenediamine (Bath B; solution pH = 12.5) CBD 
solutions used to deposit CdS thin films. The baths are defined in terms of 
cadmium supersaturation. Precipitation points for hydroxy-cadmium species 
are indicated by the vertical dashed lines. Good quality CdS films are 
deposited from baths of solution pH values greater or equal to those 
corresponding to the precipitation points: A = Cd2+, B = 
NH3 or en, C = OH− Deposition of CdS from conventional bathsThin films of CBD CdS have been deposited from 3 different CdS CBD 
solutions which provide similar levels of supersaturation (Table 1). The films were characterized by 
spectroscopic methods (UV–VIS, PL and XPS) and XRD. The as-deposited 
films were optically transparent, specular and ranged in colour from yellow 
(Baths A and C films) to orange–red (Bath B films). The colour of 
films changed to pale yellow (Bath B) or brick-red (Bath A and C films) 
after annealing in air at air (673 K for 15–30 min). Bandgaps of the 
films were determined from UV–VIS spectroscopic measurements before 
and after annealing. The linear dependence of α2 with 
hν indicated a direct bandgap. Extrapolation of the linear 
region of the absorption profile from plots of α2vs. eV provided data on the change in bandgap energy upon 
annealing in air. Representative spectra are shown in Fig. 4 and data are presented in Table 2. Preliminary PL measurements on films 
indicated that there were notable differences in emission spectra of films, 
obtained from baths containing either ammonia or ethylenediamine. It was 
interesting therefore to compare the PL emission spectra of films obtained 
from Baths A and C (that contained lower concentrations of cadmium and 
ammonia) which were identical in terms of hydroxy-cadmium supersaturation 
(i.e. chemically equivalent in our model). No significant 
differences were observed. PL spectra of films obtained from Baths A 
(ammonia bath) and B (ethylenediamine bath) are presented in Fig. 5. In all cases these spectra consisted of a 
broad, complex low energy band. No convincing evidence for (near) bandgap 
emission was obtained. The observation was ascribed to the polycrystalline 
nature of the films which would be expected to contain many defects (both 
structural and impurity based), leading to sub-bandgap emission(s) at lower 
energies. PL spectra of as-deposited films from Baths A and C were 
identical in all major features, these consisted of a broad low energy 
emission which could be deconvoluted into three components with peak maxima 
at 1.47, 1.58 and 1.68 eV; PL bands of films from Bath B (cf. Bath 
A and C) were similar in their features but broader and displaced to higher 
energy by ca. 0.05 eV. Annealing in air has a marked effect on the 
PL emission spectra of films. PL spectra obtained for all annealed films 
presented a change in relative intensities of the three components of the 
broad emission band. No change in band positions were recorded for the 
films from Baths A and C, films derived from Bath B displayed a 
hypsochromic shift of the band at 1.595–1.600 eV. For all films the 
highest energy band (Emax = ca. 1.68–1.7 
eV) diminished in intensity and for films from Baths A and C, the lowest 
energy band (Emax = 1.47 eV) greatly increased in 
intensity and extended the entire broad emission band into the lower energy 
region. Two tentative conclusions can be made from these observations. 
Films deposited from CBD solutions of identical formulation chemistry (more 
simply, the same ligand) and cadmium speciation have been shown to yield 
CdS films of very similar optical and electronic properties. Minor 
differences are observed for films derived from baths containing a 
different ligand to ammonia (i.e. ethylenediamine) but similar 
cadmium supersaturation, although the differences are only in detail.
Table 1 CdS CBD solutions of similar hydroxy-cadmium supersaturation used to 
deposit thin films. All concentrations in mol dm−3. 
Solution pH values adjusted by dropwise addition of 5 mol 
dm−3 NaOH(aq)

CBD solution[Cd2+][Ammonia][Ethylenediamine][Thiourea]pHBath A0.015.0280.0113Bath B0.0010.0120.0112.5Bath C0.0012.80.0112.5 Fig. 4  Determination of bandgaps of CdS CBD films from UV–VIS 
measurements. Data recorded for films before and after annealing in 
air. 
Table 2 Bandgap measurements as determined from UV–VIS measurements on CdS 
CBD films before and after annealing in air. Data reported in eV

CBD solutionAir-annealedAs depositedBath A2.212.36Bath B2.312.36Bach C2.352.37 Fig. 5  Low temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of as-deposited 
(a and c) and annealed (b and d) CdS 
CBD films. Films deposited from high cadmium/high ammonia (Bath A, films 
a and b) and low cadmium/ethylenediamine (Bath B, films 
c and d) exhibit similar characteristics in PL spectra. 
The absence of band edge emission and the broad nature and low energy of 
the PL response are typical for small grained CBD CdS films. Glancing angle XRD measurements were recorded [Fig. 6(a) and (b)] and the 
diffraction patterns compared with standards in the JCPDS data files. 
As-deposited films were composed of a mixture of cubic and hexagonal phases 
of CdS, annealing in air for 30 min at 673 K improved crystallinity and 
effected conversion to the hexagonal modification.12 The effect was more pronounced for films 
deposited from baths containing ethylenediamine, in general these films 
exhibited superior crystallinity to those deposited from ammoniacal 
solutions, which are polytypical and often ill-defined.11 Wide-scan XPS measurements of films were 
performed, photoelectron binding energies of 405.6 eV (Cd 
3d5/2), 411.2 eV (Cd 3d3/2) and 162.4 eV (S 2p) were 
recorded for the major XPS peaks of the CBD CdS films (Fig. 7). Similar values have been reported for good 
quality CBD CdS films deposited from acidic solutions containing no added 
ligand.13 No significant differences 
between films were observed for films deposited using different baths. Fig. 6  X-Ray diffraction spectra of air-annealed CdS thin films on TO-glass 
deposited from different chemical bath solutions. Films grown from 
(a) high cadmium-high ammonia baths ([Cd2+] = 0.01 mol 
dm−3, [ammonia] = 5.02 mol dm−3, pH = 
13); (b) low cadmium-low ethylenediamine baths ([Cd2+] 
= 0.001 mol dm−3, [en] = 0.012 mol dm−3, 
pH = 12.5); (c) film deposited on heated TO-glass substrate from 
recirculating CBD solution as used for (b). Films deposited from 
baths containing ammonia appear to have a preferred [002] orientation, 
ethylenediamine baths deposit films that are in general more crystalline 
with alignment in the [101] direction.  Fig. 7  Wide scan XPS spectrum of CdS CBD film on TO-glass deposited from low 
cadmium-low ethylenediamine solution (Bath B). Deposition of CdS on heated substrates in circulating 
systemsOne major problem in the CBD of films of CdS and related materials is 
that the efficiency of the process is low due to homogeneous precipitation 
and deposition on the reactor walls. We have now sought to combine the use 
of dilute solutions as described above with a novel approach to the heating 
of the substrate. Typical CBD experiments involve the heating of the whole 
deposition bath, we have modified the deposition system in such a way that 
the dilute deposition solution is continuously circulated over a TO-glass 
substrate, in contact to a resistively heated immersion apparatus. In some 
ways this approach is analogous to the difference between a hot walled and 
a cold walled CVD reactor. A schematic representation of our simple design 
is shown in Fig. 1.The deposition of good quality CdS films on heated glass substrates was 
carried out using the low cadmium–ethylenediamine CBD solution (Bath 
B). Throughout the deposition process the CBD solution remained optically 
clear and pale yellow in colour, there was an absence of CdS formation on 
reactor walls or as homogeneous precipitate over 10 h. Films were removed 
and replaced periodically with fresh TO-glass substrates. The films were 
characterized by spectroscopic methods (UV–VIS and XPS), microscopy 
(TEM) and XRD. The as-deposited films were optically transparent, specular 
and yellow–orange in colour. The colour changed to pale yellow after 
annealing in air at 673 K. The bandgaps of the films were determined before 
and after annealing. Annealing produced a shift in the bandgap from 2.38 to 
2.31 eV (Fig. 8). The values were comparable 
to those obtained for conventional CBD films. Glancing angle XRD 
measurements were recorded [Fig. 
6(c)] and the diffraction patterns compared with 
standards in the JCPDS data files. Similar to observations made for 
conventonal CBD films, the as-deposited films were composed of a mixture of 
cubic and hexagonal phases of CdS. Films were annealed in air for 30 min at 
673 K, the process improved crystallinity and effected conversion to the 
hexagonal modification. The effect of air-annealing was further 
investigated by TEM. The as-deposited films on heated substrates appeared 
to be composed of dense, asymmetric grains of diameter in the range 
80–120 nm, no compelling evidence for grain growth with annealing was 
obtained (Fig. 9). We have reported similar 
observations for conventional CBD of CdS from ethylenediamine-buffered 
solutions.14 An approximate elemental ratio 
of Cd∶S 1∶1 was determined from EDAX measurements. No 
significant differences in XPS data were recorded for films from heated 
substrates in comparison with those obtained by conventional CBD. 
Photoelectron binding energies of 405.9 eV (Cd 3d5/2), 411.5 eV 
(Cd 3d5/2) and 162.5 eV (S 2p) were recorded for the major XPS 
peaks of our CBD CdS films. An important conclusion was the impurities in 
the as-deposited films did not increase for films grown from replenished 
baths (Fig. 10). Minor concentrations of 
impurities assigned to carbon (C 1s 284.8 eV), nitrogen (N 1s 396.0 eV) and 
oxygen O 1s 532.1 eV) were present in all CBD films. These contaminants 
have been identified in CdS CBD films by other workers.15 Annealing of films in air reduced the 
nitrogenous contaminant to a concentration below the detection limit of the 
instrument. Fig. 8  The effect of annealing on the bandgap of CdS CBD films grown from a 
continuous flow reactor on heated TO-glass substrates.  Fig. 9  Transmission electron micrograph of an as-deposited CdS CBD film 
obtained from a high-efficiency reactor. Films grown on heated TO-glass 
substrates from low cadmium-low ethylenediamine solutions (Bath B). 
Deposition time of 45 min. Annealing of films in air (673 K for 30 min) 
does not result in significant grain growth.  Fig. 10  Wide scan XPS of CdS CBD films acquired from a high efficiency reactor. 
Films grown from (b) replenished baths after 6 h possess very 
similar photoelectron spectra to those obtained from fresh baths 
(a) (45 min). ConclusionsChemical modelling and speciation studies have enabled us to develop a 
novel high-efficiency CdS CBD process that utilises low cadmium 
concentrations and provides a viable alternative to the use of volatile 
solutions of ammonia. Films have been deposited by conventional CBD from 
heated solutions and also in a novel reactor with a heated substrate. The 
films obtained from the new reactor have been characterised as good quality 
CdS by spectroscopic methods (UV–VIS and XPS), microscopy (SEM and 
TEM) and powder XRD. No significant differences in the chemical or physical 
nature of films have been observed for films deposited from fresh and 
replenished baths. This suggests that continuous recycling may be possible. 
Our initial successful and reproducible attempts to lessen the 
environmental impact of CBD appear to be successful. These efforts have 
involved the design of deposition solutions by modelling and the 
development of a new geometry for deposition. The approach may offer a 
viable route towards the high efficiency production of CdS layers for solar 
cell applications. Further investigations to determine the long-term 
stability of these new systems are in progress.AcknowledgementsThis work has been conducted under the SOCRATES-ERASMUS programme. We 
are also grateful to the EPSRC for financial support. Paul O’Brien 
was the Sumitomo/STS Professor of Materials Chemistry. We thank Dr K. 
Senkiw (Dept. of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College) for XPS, R. 
Sweeney and N. Royall (Dept. of Materials, Imperial College) for XRD and 
TEM respectively, K. Pell (Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, Queen Mary and 
Westfield College) for SEM.ReferencesD. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676 CAS .D. C. Raynolds, G. Leies, L. L. Antes and R. E. Marburger, Phys. Rev., 1954, 96, 533 CrossRef .For some General reading see e.g.,  Solar Cells and their Applications, ed. L. D. Partain, 
New York, Wiley,  1995; 
 Search PubMed ; A. L. Farhenbruch and 
R. H. Bube, 
Fundamentals of Solar Cells, Photovoltaic Solar Energy 
Conversion, Academic Press, New 
York,  1983;  Search PubMed ; M. Iqbal, An 
Introduction to Solar Energy, Academic Press, 
New York,  1983;  Search PubMed ; M. A. Green, 
Solar Cells, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
Prentice Hall,  1982.  Search PubMed There are also many reviews in the literature of thin film PV see 
e.g.,  K. Durose, P. R. Edward and D. P. Halliday, J. Cryst. Growth, 1999, 197, 733 Search PubMed ; W. H. Bloss, 
F. Pfisterer, 
M. Schubert and 
T. Walter, 
Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, 
 1995, vol. 3, p. 3;  Search PubMed ; T. L. Cu and S. S. Chu, Solid State Electron., 1995, 38, 533 Search PubMed .E. H. Taylor, Review of Photovoltaic Power Technology, 
1990, ETSU-R-50..A. K. Turner, J. M. Woodcock, M. E. Özsan, D. W. Cunningham, D. R. Johnson, R. J. Marshall, N. B. Mason, S. Oktik, M. H. Patterson, S. J. Ransome, S. Roberts, M. Sadeghi, J. M. Sherborne, D. Sivapathasundaram and I. A. Wells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 35, 263 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Patterson, 
A. K. Turner, 
M. Sadeghi and 
R. J. Marshall, 
Proc. 12th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conf., 
 1994, 950. Search PubMed .P. O’Brien and J. McAleese, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2309 RSC ; D. Lincot, Actualite Chem., 1999, 5, 23 Search PubMed ; R. Ortega-Borges and D. Lincot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 3464 CAS .A. C. Jones and 
P. O’Brien, 
CVD of Compound Semiconductors; Precursor Synthesis, Development and 
Applications, VCH, Weinheim, 
 1997. Search PubMed .SPECIES, Academic Software, UK, 1997..S. Gorer and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5338 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Özsan, D. R. Johnson, M. Sadheghi, D. Sivapathasundarum, G. Goodlet, M. J. Furlong, L. M. Peter and A. A. Shingleton, J. Mater. Sci., Mater. in Electron., 1996, 7, 119 Search PubMed .JCPDS database, card no. 41–1049..D. S. Boyle, P. O’Brien, D. J. Otway and O. Robbe, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 725 RSC .P. O’Brien and T. Saeed, J. Cryst. Growth, 1996, 158, 497 CrossRef CAS .M. Stoev and K. Katerski, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 377 RSC .Footnote† Present address: Department of Physics, University of 
Durham, Science Laboratories, South Road, Durham, UK DH1 3LE.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:
Green ContextWhile the conversion of sunlight into electricity using semiconductors 
is fundamentally an environmentally benign process the manufacture of the 
solar cells can involve environmentally damaging chemistry. The deposition 
of thin films of cadmium sulfide using chemical bath deposition is 
currently very inefficient and leads to considerable quantities of cadmium 
waste. The use and disposal of cadmium compounds is highly regulated and it 
seems unlikely that processes of this type will be acceptable in the 
future. Here a new process is described which uses much lower 
concentrations of cadmium in the preparation of the film, is highly 
efficient in cadmium use, and also offers the potential to eliminate 
volatile ammonia from the process.JHC

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a high-efficiency CdS CBD system. Potential 
for continuous operation is achieved via alternate use of filters 
1 and 2 (polypropylene 200 nm mesh) to facilitate recovery of particulate 
cadmium compounds. Organic by-products of the CdS CBD process are also 
removed during water treatment.	 
MT 
= MF
{1 + 
β1[L]T + 
β2[L]T2 + 
β3[L]T3 
+............}	
        (1)
      
MF = MT
{1 
+ 
β1(KA[L]T/[H+
] + KA)+ 
β2(KA[L]T/[H+
] + KA)2 
+.......}−1	
        (2)
      

 	Fig. 2  The concept of chemical equivalence for different CdS CBD systems. 
Ligands represented in this study are (a) ethylenediamine; 
(b) 1,2-diaminopropane; (c) ammonia; (d) 
ethanolamine; (e) triethanolamine and (f) hydrazine. 
Contour lines represent conditions of [Cd2+]F = 2.44 
× 10−11 mol dm−3 at pH = 12.5.	 

 	Fig. 3  Speciation diagrams of high cadmium/high ammonia (Bath A; solution pH = 
13) and low cadmium/low ethylenediamine (Bath B; solution pH = 12.5) CBD 
solutions used to deposit CdS thin films. The baths are defined in terms of 
cadmium supersaturation. Precipitation points for hydroxy-cadmium species 
are indicated by the vertical dashed lines. Good quality CdS films are 
deposited from baths of solution pH values greater or equal to those 
corresponding to the precipitation points: A = Cd2+, B = 
NH3 or en, C = OH−	 

Bath A	0.01	5.028	0.01	13
Bath B	0.001	0.012	0.01	12.5
Bath C	0.001	2.8	0.01	12.5

 	Fig. 4  Determination of bandgaps of CdS CBD films from UV–VIS 
measurements. Data recorded for films before and after annealing in 
air.	 

Bath A	2.21	2.36
Bath B	2.31	2.36
Bach C	2.35	2.37

 	Fig. 5  Low temperature photoluminescence (PL) spectra of as-deposited 
(a and c) and annealed (b and d) CdS 
CBD films. Films deposited from high cadmium/high ammonia (Bath A, films 
a and b) and low cadmium/ethylenediamine (Bath B, films 
c and d) exhibit similar characteristics in PL spectra. 
The absence of band edge emission and the broad nature and low energy of 
the PL response are typical for small grained CBD CdS films.	 

 	Fig. 6  X-Ray diffraction spectra of air-annealed CdS thin films on TO-glass 
deposited from different chemical bath solutions. Films grown from 
(a) high cadmium-high ammonia baths ([Cd2+] = 0.01 mol 
dm−3, [ammonia] = 5.02 mol dm−3, pH = 
13); (b) low cadmium-low ethylenediamine baths ([Cd2+] 
= 0.001 mol dm−3, [en] = 0.012 mol dm−3, 
pH = 12.5); (c) film deposited on heated TO-glass substrate from 
recirculating CBD solution as used for (b). Films deposited from 
baths containing ammonia appear to have a preferred [002] orientation, 
ethylenediamine baths deposit films that are in general more crystalline 
with alignment in the [101] direction.	 

 	Fig. 7  Wide scan XPS spectrum of CdS CBD film on TO-glass deposited from low 
cadmium-low ethylenediamine solution (Bath B).	 

 	Fig. 8  The effect of annealing on the bandgap of CdS CBD films grown from a 
continuous flow reactor on heated TO-glass substrates.	 

 	Fig. 9  Transmission electron micrograph of an as-deposited CdS CBD film 
obtained from a high-efficiency reactor. Films grown on heated TO-glass 
substrates from low cadmium-low ethylenediamine solutions (Bath B). 
Deposition time of 45 min. Annealing of films in air (673 K for 30 min) 
does not result in significant grain growth.	 

 	Fig. 10  Wide scan XPS of CdS CBD films acquired from a high efficiency reactor. 
Films grown from (b) replenished baths after 6 h possess very 
similar photoelectron spectra to those obtained from fresh baths 
(a) (45 min).	 
Footnote
† Present address: Department of Physics, University of 
Durham, Science Laboratories, South Road, Durham, UK DH1 3LE.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
