2D non-carbide MXenes: an emerging material class for energy storage and conversion  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA05392F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05392F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 20174-201892D non-carbide MXenes: an emerging material class for energy storage and conversion

        
          
            Sandhya 
            Venkateshalu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammed 
            Shariq
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nitin K. 
            Chaudhari
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Kwangyeol 
            Lee
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Andrews Nirmala 
            Grace
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry and Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kylee1@korea.ac.kr
bCentre for Nanotechnology Research, Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Vellore 632014, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: anirmalagrace@vit.ac.in
cDepartment of Chemistry, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Gandhinagar 382426, Gujarat, India. E-mail: nitin.chaudhari@sot.pdpu.ac.in
Received 
      7th July 2022
    , Accepted 30th August 2022First published on 2nd September 2022AbstractSince the first discovery of MXenes in 2011, various compositions of MXenes have been developed based on the combinations of different transition metals. Their exceptional and intriguing properties, such as excellent electronic conductivity, hydrophilic nature, and ease of large-scale synthesis, enabled them to be candidates for diverse applications, including energy storage, EMI shielding, biomedical, transparent conductive films, electrocatalysis, etc. However, most efforts have been focused on carbide MXenes and not much on non-carbide (carbonitride and nitride) MXenes. With electronegative nitrogen in non-carbide MXenes, an additional negative charge is induced in the conductive network, enhancing their properties such as wettability, conductivity, and pseudocapacitance. The difficulty in their synthesis has been a significant stopgap in the research progress of non-carbide MXenes. In this review, we have provided a comprehensive overview of the synthesis, properties, and applications of non-carbide MXenes, emphasizing the difference between carbide and non-carbide MXenes for better understanding. The challenges and limitations of non-carbide MXenes and the ways to circumvent them are briefly discussed. The future research directions and the opportunities are also discussed to encourage researchers to investigate non-carbide MXenes further.Sandhya VenkateshaluDr Sandhya Venkateshalu received her Master's degree in Nanotechnology from Visvesvaraya Technological University, India, in 2015. Afterward, she worked as an Assistant Professor for a year at Dr T. Thimmaiah Institute of Technology, India. She received her PhD in Nanotechnology from Vellore Institute of Technology, India, in 2021. She is currently a Research Professor at Korea University, Republic of Korea. Her research interest includes the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials, 2D nanomaterials, MXenes, and energy storage and conversion devices.Mohammed ShariqDr Mohammed Shariq is an Institute Post-Doctoral Fellow at Vellore Institute of Technology, India. Prior to joining VIT in 2021, he was Sandwich Erasmus Doctoral Scholar (2015–2020) from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM) Dhanbad, India in collaboration with IME Institute of Metal Processing and Recycling, RWTH Aachen Germany and University of Maribor, Slovenia. He received his M. Tech in Mechanical Engineering from IIT(ISM) Dhanbad in 2015. His research focuses on the formulation and characterization of novel metal and carbon nanomaterial-based inks, including MXenes, for different 3D printing techniques.Nitin K. ChaudhariDr Nitin Chaudhari is an Associate Professor at Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Gandhinagar, India. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Korea University, South Korea in 2013. He subsequently worked as a Research Professor at Myongji University and Korea University, South Korea from 2013 to 2019. Later, he joined Nexcoms Ltd Co., South Korea as Deputy Director before moving to India. His research interest includes the design and development of active electrode materials such as porous carbons, nanocomposites, oxides, sulphides, hydroxides, 2D MXenes, and nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion devices.Kwangyeol LeeProfessor Kwangyeol Lee obtained his PhD degree (1997) in Chemistry from the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. After fulfilling his military obligation, he joined Korea University in 2003 as a chemistry faculty member, before being appointed as a professor. He is the recipient of the Wiley-KCS Young Scholar Award (2009, Korean Chemical Society) and the Excellent Research Award (2019, KCS Inorganic Chemistry Division). His current interests include the development of synthetic methodologies for nanoscale materials and the development of nanotechnologies to support the environment by creating sustainable energy.Andrews Nirmala GraceProfessor Andrews Nirmala Grace is the Director at the Centre for Nanotechnology Research, Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Vellore, India. She received her PhD degree from the University of Madras, India, and worked as a Postdoctoral/Senior Research Fellow at the Korea Institute of Energy Research, South Korea on renewable energy. She is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and a Fellow of the Academy of Sciences, Chennai (FASCh). Her current research interests include 2D energy materials, design and fabrication of electrodes for solar cells, and supercapacitors.
1. Introduction
Graphene has been the major focus of research since its discovery in 2004, owing to its superior physicochemical properties. The discovery of graphene initiated the exploration of other 2D materials, leading to an exponential expansion in the realm of 2D materials, making them one of the major research focuses. In 2011, a new family of 2D materials consisting of transition metal carbides and nitrides, known as MXenes, was introduced. MXenes possess advantages such as high metallic conductivity, ease of processing, hydrophilicity, and large flake sizes with high yields compared to other 2D materials.1,2 MXenes are synthesized mainly from their parent MAX phases through chemical exfoliation. The MAX phase has a general formula Mn+1AXn (n = 1–3), where M represents the transition metal, A belongs to groups 13 and 14 elements, and X represents carbon and/or nitrogen (Fig. 1a). The selective removal of A layers from the MAX phase results in MXenes represented as Mn+1XnTx, where Tx indicates the attached surface terminations during selective etching. MXenes can be categorized as carbide MXenes (Mn+1CnTx), nitride MXenes (Mn+1NnTx) and carbonitride MXenes (Mn+1CNnTx).3
 Fig. 1  Elements from the periodic table constituting the MAX phase (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 23 copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd. Experimentally synthesized and theoretically predicted non-carbide MXenes (b). 
Since the discovery of MXenes, researchers have intensively studied the mechanical properties, electrical conductivity, surface functionalization, hydrophilicity, etc., which has led to diverse applications in electronics, optoelectronics, communication, sensing, environment, catalysis, energy, etc.3–11 About 155 MAX phases are reported theoretically, but only a few MXenes have been synthesized using these MAX phases.12 Among them, carbide MXenes are widely reported, and merely a handful of reports exist for the non-carbide (nitride and carbonitride) MXenes. According to the latest report, there are currently 28 nitride MAX phases and 17 nitride MXenes which are thermodynamically stable.13 However, most do not exist physically and are only theoretically proved. The major holdback in the progress of non-carbide MXenes is the difficulty in synthesizing their parent MAX phases and etching them to obtain non-carbide MXenes. The theoretically predicted and practically synthesized non-carbide MXenes are shown in Fig. 1b. The lone electron pairs in the nitrogen will induce additional negative charges in the conductive network and supply redox-active sites, beneficial for electrochemical applications. Compared to their carbide counterparts, non-carbide MXenes exhibit improved wettability, conductivity, and pseudocapacitance.14 Furthermore, DFT calculations predicted that non-carbide MXenes have higher Young's modulus, active surface area, magnetic moments, and stability in the aqueous medium than carbide MXenes with the same stoichiometry.15–17 Most of the reviews reported on MXenes are limited only to the general synthesis, properties, and applications of carbide MXenes.3,4,6,18–21 Although Johnson and his group recently published a review on the underlying energy storage mechanisms of nitride MXenes, there is no detailed review focusing on the synthesis and properties of non-carbide MXenes.13
Thus, the current review aims to provide a comprehensive critical overview of the theoretical and experimental advances, mainly in carbonitride and nitride MXenes. Firstly, the structural features and challenges in synthesizing non-carbide MXenes are discussed. Then, an in-depth summary of the latest synthesis techniques, properties, and exciting applications of non-carbide MXenes is provided. The properties and performances of carbide and non-carbide MXenes are also compared for better understanding. Finally, future research prospects are provided, encouraging the researchers to explore non-carbide MXenes further.
2. Non-carbide MXenes
2.1 Structural features
The crystal lattice structure in MAX phases is hexagonal closed packed (hcp) with a P63/mmc symmetry space group, wherein the A atoms are sandwiched between two layers of MX. The 2D MXene layers obtained after removing the A atoms are hexagonal structures like their parent MAX phases.2 In the case of carbonitride MXenes, C and N atoms are present randomly at the octahedral sites independent of the carbonitride stoichiometry. The information regarding the arrangement of C and N atoms in carbonitride MXenes is seldom provided, thus requiring further structural characterization.22 There are three types of MAX phases, viz. 211, 312, and 413 depending on the value of n, and thus the number of M layers usually varies between 2 and 4 in MXenes. It is deduced that different compositions and structures of MXenes are possible when two or more randomly distributed transition metals are present at the M sites. If the MXene structure has two metals (M′ and M′′) at the M sites forming a solid solution, then they are represented as (M′M′′)n+1XnTx. On the other hand, if these two metals are arranged in an in-plane order forming alternating chains in the same metal, they are called in-plane ordered double transition metal MXenes (i-MXenes) with the general formula (M′4/3M′′2/3)XTx. An ordered vacancy is formed when the M′′ metal atoms are selectively etched in i-MXenes, resulting in MXenes with the formula M′4/3XTx. When the two metals M′ and M′′ are arranged in separate planes (M′′ and M′ atoms in the inner layer and outer layers, respectively), they are known as out-of-plane ordered double transition metal MXenes (o-MXenes) with the general formula (M′2M′′)X2Tx or (M′2M′′2)X3Tx.2,19,22,23 Since the introduction of double transition metal MXenes, many theoretical and experimental studies have been reported only on carbide-based double transition metal MXenes. However, very few reports on non-carbide double transition metal MXenes were reported only recently. A theoretical study based on density functional theory (DFT) calculation was reported by Zeng et al., wherein ordered M′2M′′CNO2 MXenes (M′ = Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta; M′′ = Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta) were investigated for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).24Fig. 2 depicts the geometric structure of bare and O-terminated ordered double transition metal carbonitride M′2M′′CNO2. From Fig. 2a, it can be seen that the metal layers M′ and M′′ are present in the outermost and the middle layers of the MXene, while the C and N layers are present on either side of M′′. The bare MXenes are thermodynamically prone to be functionalized with oxygen groups that occupy the hollow positions of the outermost layers (Fig. 2b). With the presence of two hollow sites, fcc and hcp, in the basal planes of bare MXenes, four configurations such as fcc–fcc, fcc–hcp, hcp–fcc, and hcp–hcp are present for M′2M′′CNO2 MXenes (Fig. 2c). Djire and colleagues reported the synthesis of the first mixed metal nitride MXene, M–Ti4N3Tx (M = V, Cr, Mo, or Mn).25 Detailed studies revealed that the catalytic performance of M–Ti4N3Tx depends mainly on the basal planes due to the large availability of metallic sites for the adsorption of protons. Subsequent studies to investigate the role of the mixed metals in M–Ti4N3Tx in the mechanisms of HER catalysis proposed that the oxygen vacancies created in the basal planes served as active sites for HER catalysis.26 Various computational and experimental studies demonstrate that the functional groups such as –O, –OH, –Cl, and –F adhering to the surface of the metals in the carbonitride and the nitride MXene significantly influence their properties, thus making them useful for numerous applications.27–30 Non-carbide MXenes and MXenes with –OH and –O terminations show higher stability than –F terminated MXene structures.30
 Fig. 2  Crystal structure of bare and O-terminated ordered double transition metal carbonitride ((a and b), respectively). Different configurations of M′2M′′CNO2 MXenes (c).24 
2.2 Challenges in synthesis
Compared to carbide MXenes, the number of reports on non-carbide MXenes is less mainly due to the limited number of MAX phases containing nitrogen atoms. Even though many new non-carbide MXenes such as Mo2(CN)Tx, Cr2N, MVN (M = Ti, V, Cr), Ni2N, Ti3N2F2, Zr3N2F2, Mn2NTx, Cr2NO2, Zr2N, etc. are predicted to exist theoretically, they have not been experimentally synthesized.16,31–36 Recently, non-carbide MXenes such as Ti3CNTx, Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx, M-Ti4N3Tx (M = V, Cr, Mo, or Mn), Ti2NTx, Ti4N3, and V2N have been experimentally proved (Fig. 1b).17,25,37–40 The difficulty in synthesizing non-carbide MXenes could be attributed to two significant factors. Firstly, Tin+1Nn has less cohesive energy than Tin+1Cn; thus, the nitride MXene structures have lower stability and dissolve easily in the hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution, the etchant widely used to produce carbide MXenes from their MAX phases. Secondly, the A atoms in the nitride MAX phases are strongly bonded, requiring more energy for their extraction. Thus, the formation energy of nitride MXenes is relatively higher than that of carbide MXenes. However, the carbide MAX phases could simply be treated with HF solutions to etch away the A atoms, producing carbide MXenes.1,39,41
On the other hand, in non-carbide MAX phases, the M–A bond energy is higher than or the same as the M–X bond energy; thus, with strong etchants, the M–A bonds might break to etch A while simultaneously breaking the M–X bonds.42 Since nitride MXenes tend to dissolve in strong etchants like HF, researchers focused on developing alternative etchants such as acid with fluoride salt (in situ HF) and a eutectic mixture of molten salts to produce nitride MXenes.38–40 However, MXenes obtained through these etchants exhibit higher surface defects when compared to their HF-etched counterparts. Furthermore, the synthetic procedures are highly complicated with the requirements of an inert atmosphere, high temperatures, and complex fluoride salts.42 Although a few reports on synthesizing carbonitride MXenes from their MAX phases using HF etching have been reported, the stability of the synthesized structures has not been adequately studied.37,43 DFT computations predict that non-carbide MXenes exhibit properties superior to carbide MXenes, thus exhibiting the potential to be used in various fields.44–46 A comprehensive overview of the synthesis methods adopted so far in producing non-carbide MXenes and their properties will be discussed in the subsequent sections of this review.
3. Carbonitride MXenes
3.1 Synthesis

3.1.1 HF etching method. 
The first evidence for the exfoliation of Ti3AlCN to form Ti3CN MXene was reported in 2012 by Naguib et al.47 The MAX phase Ti3AlCN was treated with 30% HF for 18 h to obtain Ti3CN MXene. An increase in the c-lattice constant from 1.841 nm to 2.228 nm was calculated before and after etching using HF. Subsequently, researchers studied various HF concentrations and time durations for etching the Ti3AlCN MAX phase, such as 40% (18 h),48 48% (18 h),37 48–51% (24 h).49 The synthesized Ti3CN MXene through the HF etching method can be further delaminated using tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH) or tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH).43,50,51 Although the HF etching method used to produce carbonitride MXenes seems simple, finding alternatives to this method is recommended as HF is toxic and needs special care in handling. Furthermore, with the HF etching method, the MXenes are predominantly terminated with –F functional groups, making them unsuitable for various applications.


3.1.2 LiF–HCl etching method. 
Ti3CNTx MXenes are mainly produced via the in situ HF (solution containing a mixture of LiF and HCl) etching route milder than the HF etching method and is environmentally benign. Huang and Mochalin reported the synthesis of Ti3CN MXene from the MAX phase Ti3AlCN by the in situ HF approach.52 In another studyk, free-standing films from well-dispersed solutions of Ti3CN obtained through in situ HF etching using LiF–HCl were produced by vacuum filtration.53 A particular volume of MXene dispersed solution was filtered through a Celgard membrane, and the thickness of the film was controlled by optimizing the amount of dispersion. The d-spacing in the Ti3CN MXene films was decreased with increasing annealing temperatures, whereas the pore size and volume increased. The decrease in the d-spacing was attributed to the removal of –OH surface terminations and intercalated water at high temperatures. Furthermore, Chen and colleagues proposed that the in situ HF formed during LiF–HCl etching acts as an acid molecular scissor that can tailor the titanium atoms on the Ti3CN MXene to create defective redox-active sites and defective nanosheets.14 They also proved that the tailored Ti3CN MXene exhibits an improved pseudocapacitive nature and specific capacitance. The defects formed on the surface of the metal atoms due to excessive immersion in LiF–HCl are crucial for energy-related applications. For the first time, a new high entropy carbonitride MXene (HE CN-MXene) was reported by Du et al., which was synthesized from HE MAX phase (Ti1/3V1/6Zr1/6Nb1/6Ta1/6)2AlCxN1−x by in situ HF etching using LiF–HCl.54 The HE MAX phase was formed through the metallurgical treatment of MAX phases such as Ti4AlN3 and V2AlC with a medium entropy MAX phase (Zr1/3Nb1/3Ta1/3)2AlC. It was proposed that this medium entropy MAX phase solves the issue of phase separation in HE MAX phases during synthesis, owing to their low entropy difference. The HE CN-MXene was formed by subjecting the HE MAX phase to LiF–HCl etching.
Hantanasirisakul and co-workers studied the effect of LiF–HCl and HF etching (with delaminating agents) on the properties of Ti3CN MXene.55 The carbonitride MXene synthesized through the LiF–HCl route had a compact structure with intercalations of Li+ and H2O compared to the carbonitride MXene obtained via the HF route. The study also provided the insight that at a higher molar ratio of LiF to the MAX precursor, the Ti3CN MXene structures can be delaminated without the need for sonication. Furthermore, the intercalation of Li+ ions into the layers of carbonitride MXene delaminates them without needing a separate complex delaminating agent. With the use of intercalating agents such as TBAOH and TMAOH, there was an increase in the interlayer spacing, which dramatically suppresses the inter-flake electron transport (Fig. 3). On the other hand, few impurities in Ti3CN MXene structures were observed while delaminating using organic bases. Carbonitride MXenes prepared through this method have been used in sensing, energy storage, and biomedical applications.56–59
 Fig. 3  Schematic representing the structures of Ti3CN MXene (right) produced through the LiF–HCl and HF + TBAOH/TMAOH etching routes (left). Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


3.1.3 KF-HCl etching method. 
Liang and co-workers reported the synthesis of Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene from its MAX phase Ti2AlC0.5N0.5 using the KF-HCl (in situ HF) etching approach similar to that of the LiF–HCl mild etching method.17 Until now, Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx and Ti3CNTx are the only synthesized carbonitride MXenes. An absence in the MXene peaks and increased weight loss in the material indicated that HF etching is not the optimum method to synthesize Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene. The MAX phase Ti2AlC0.5N0.5Tx with particle sizes ranging between 20 and 44 μm was etched with a mixture containing KF and HCl. The multi-layered MXene obtained after etching was treated with TMAOH to get mono/few-layer Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene. They reported that with water-soluble KF, fluoride salt impurities observed in the multilayer MXene could be avoided, unlike those formed from the LiF route.

3.2 Properties
According to DFT computations, the electrical and magnetic properties of non-carbide and carbide MXenes are different mainly due to the changes in the density of states.1 Replacing 50% of carbon atoms in Ti3C2 with nitrogen atoms leads to the formation of Ti3CN MXene, which exhibits drastically different properties. The carbonitride MXene Ti3CN shows remarkable EMI shielding effectiveness (SE), superb charge storage capacity, high negative charge in solution, excellent stability, and good optical and transport properties.58,60 The exact role of nitrogen atoms and their influence on the properties of the carbonitride MXene are yet to be explored and understood. However, a few reports have elucidated the origin of properties of carbonitride MXenes through experimental and theoretical studies.55,58,60

3.2.1 Electronic and electric properties. 
Hantanasirisakul et al. investigated the optoelectronic and transport properties of Ti3CNTx MXene.55 The study showed that the carbonitride MXene exhibits lower electronic conductivity and blue shift in the UV-Visible spectrum than the carbide MXene Ti3C2Tx. The electrons in the nitrogen are localized in the lower energy band far from the Fermi level, and thus they are not active in electronic transport. Also, the randomly distributed N atoms and the atomic defects could act as scattering centers, thereby reducing the conductivity. Further, the intercalation of TBAOH/TMAOH increases the interflake distance leading to a decrease in the electronic conductivity and an increase in resistivity with decreasing temperature. The electronic transport properties are dependent on the electron hopping between the flakes rather than the electron transport within the same flake. With the removal of the intercalants either through vacuum annealing or ion exchange, they exhibited metallic behavior with a tremendous increase in conductivity. The Hall and electronic transport measurements showed that the electrons are the major charge carriers with a density of 8 × 1021 cm−3. The results also indicated that Ti3CNTx MXene is metallic within the flake. The optoelectronic and transport properties of Ti3CNTx MXene are depicted in Fig. 4. Jindata et al. reported a systematic investigation of the electronic structure of Ti3CNTx using ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS).58 The study revealed that upon increasing the electron density, the Ti 3p core-level of Ti3CNTx shifts to a lower binding energy of up to ∼250 m eV in contrast to Ti3C2Tx MXene with negative electronic compressibility (NEC). The DFT study further suggested that the NEC could be due to the hybridization of Ti–N bonds in Ti3CNTx, which helps to promote the Ti 3d available states to receive more electrons above the Fermi level. This NEC property observed in Ti3CNTx could be applied to energy and charge storage applications. These findings differentiate the electronic structure and properties of carbonitride MXenes Ti3CNTx from their carbide counterpart Ti3C2Tx.
 Fig. 4  (a) Optical image of Ti3CNTx and Ti3C2Tx solutions and DLS spectrum of Ti3CNTx solution. (b) UV-Visible spectra of Ti3CNTx. (c) Temperature-dependent resistivity of the Ti3CNTx films. (d) Hall mobility and carrier concentration of the Ti3CNTx film at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.2 Thermal and mechanical properties. 
Iqbal et al. showed that the electrical conductivity of the Ti3CNTx MXene increases from 1125 to 2520 S cm−1 when annealed at 350 °C.60 The increase in conductivity is attributed to the loss of intercalated molecules leading to the reduction in the interlayer spacing. The heat-treated 40 mm Ti3CNTx MXene film exhibited better EMI shielding properties with an efficiency of 116 dB than the highly conductive Ti3C2Tx (shielding efficiency of 93 dB). The annealed Ti3CNTx finds applications in flexible and portable electronics with good dimensional stability and flexibility. The Ti3CN MXene with a Young's modulus of 15 GPa has the highest mechanical properties, measured through nanoindentation.51 Neat epoxy has a Young's modulus of 4.5 GPa, while the Ti3CN-epoxy composites exhibited an improved modulus of 12.8 GPa when the MXene content increased to 90 wt%.


3.2.3 Chemical properties. 
The chemical properties and reactivity of the carbonitride MXene are influenced by various factors such as flake size, degree of exfoliation, surface functional groups, synthesis approach, and vacancies in M and X. During chemical transformations of MXenes in water, Ti3CN reacts faster than Ti3C2, producing more CH4 due to the random substitution of N atoms in their structure.52 The random substitution serves as a defect and helps to improve the chemical reactivity. The electrochemical properties of the Ti3CNTx MXene stem from their electronic conductivity and facile ion diffusion pathways. It was shown by freeze-drying the colloidal solutions of Ti3CNTx MXene that the restacking of the sheets could be avoided with the formation of interstitial voids, as shown in Fig. 5a.56 On the other hand, compactly packed Ti3CNTx paper was obtained when the colloidal solution of MXene was vacuum filtered (Fig. 5b). The restacked sheets in the Ti3CNTx paper help create paths for fast electron transport, thus improving the conductivity of freeze-dried Ti3CNTx, which contains resistance-increasing air (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  SEM images of freeze-dried Ti3CNTx (a) and Ti3CNTx paper (c). Electrical conductivity of the freeze-dried Ti3CNTx and Ti3CNTx paper (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. 

4. Nitride MXenes
4.1 Synthesis
As discussed earlier, the developments in MXenes in the last few decades are more focused on carbide-based MAX phases and their respective MXenes. The synthesis of nitride MXenes remains challenging because of their complex chemistry, unstable behavior with etchants, and long reaction times.1,39 This section highlights the synthesis protocols available for titanium, vanadium, and molybdenum nitride-based MXenes.

4.1.1 Titanium nitride MXenes. 
Recently, titanium nitride MXene quantum dots (QDs) have been developed as a phototheranostic platform for cancer diagnosis and treatments.61 Shao et al. synthesized Ti2N QDs from the Ti2AlN MAX phase using the KF-HCl etching method, followed by exfoliation using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) (Fig. 6a). The Ti2AlN MAX phase had a sandwich-like morphology with a lattice parameter of 13.59 Å, while the Ti2N QDs exhibited 2D sheet-like morphology. Various analysis techniques suggested the complete removal of Al, and the resultant Ti2N QDs had an average lateral diameter of 4.83 ± 2.69 nm with a thickness of 1.81 ± 0.67 nm.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic view for the synthesis of biodegradable Ti2N QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Synthetic schematic for the formation of Ti4N3Tx from its MAX phase Ti4AlN3 using the molten salt etching method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Cemistry. 
In another study reported by Soundiraraju and George, the effects of different etchants such as HF, HF–HCl, KF, and KF-HCl were examined in the synthesis of Ti2N MXene from Ti2AlN under the same reaction conditions.38 It was shown that KF-HCl etching solution combined with heating and sonication yielded the best results for producing Ti2N MXenes with a shorter reaction time (1 h). The Ti2N MXene synthesized using the KF-HCl method had a c-lattice parameter of 17.33 Å. However, removing Al from the MAX phase using this method led to a significant drop in conductivity of the synthesized Ti2N MXene (4950 S cm−1) compared to its MAX phase (28570 S cm−1). Wang et al. also reported the synthesis of Ti2NTx using the KF-HCl etching method with an increased reaction time (6 h).62 The thickness of the ultra-thin layered structure of MXene was in the range of 5–8 nm. Urbankowski et al. first reported the successful synthesis of Ti4N3Tx MXene from its MAX phase Ti4AlN3 using a molten salt etching method.39 The MAX phase was mixed with a eutectic mixture of molten fluoride salts (LiF + NaF + KF) and heated in an Ar atmosphere (Fig. 6b). The molten-salt treated MAX phase was further treated with H2SO4 to remove Al-containing fluoride impurities. The multi-layered MXene was delaminated to a few layers using TBAOH solution. In the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern, the absence of peaks representing the Ti-fluoride compounds indicated the successful etching of Al from Ti4AlN3 using the molten salt etching method. However, the MXenes produced through the molten salt etching are not in their pure phase and suffer from low yields. In another case, the synthesis of the nanolayered Ti2NTx MXene was reported by using an O2-assisted molten salt reaction process.63 In this technique, the Al in the Ti2AlN MAX phase was etched with a molten fluoride salt mixture under the flow of O2 and Ar. The byproducts, such as aluminum oxyfluoride formed during the reaction were eliminated using HCl. With the O2-assisted molten salt synthesis technique, the problem of phase purity is not observed; however, it results in low yields. Molten salt etching is the most suitable method to obtain higher-order nitride MXenes.64


4.1.2 Vanadium nitride and molybdenum nitride MXenes. 
V2NTx MXenes are obtained from their parent MAX phase V2AlN through the selective etching of Al using LiF and HCl.40 The reduction in the intensity of the MAX phase peaks and a shift towards the left in the XRD pattern indicate the increase in the c-lattice parameter. Though there is a visible amount of exfoliation, there are small amounts of impurities in the resultant material, and thus the synthesis route needs further optimization. Urbankowski et al. reported the ammoniation method to produce 2D molybdenum and vanadium nitrides from their carbide MXenes.65 The 2D vanadium nitride was synthesized through the ammoniation of vanadium carbide MXene at high-temperature ranges. The vanadium carbide MXene (V2CTx) was heated in the presence of ammonia to transform carbides into nitrides. As the temperature increased gradually from 400 °C to 600 °C, the ratio of N to C significantly increased. The bonding of N onto the metal atom V was confirmed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Using the same ammoniation technique, Mo2CTx MXene was converted to 2D Mo2N. After conversion, it was detected that the 2D Mo2N retained the MXene structure, while the 2D vanadium nitride had mixed structures of trigonal V2N and cubic VN. The requirement to synthesize the carbide MXene and the use of hazardous NH3 gas severely limit this synthesis technique.

4.2 Properties
The nitride MXenes exhibit superior properties to their carbide counterparts due to their higher conductivities, better plasmonic properties, elastic structural properties, and improved pseudocapacitive performance when employed in energy storage devices.15,27,28,45,63

4.2.1 Mechanical and electronic properties. 
The nitride-based MXenes have higher Young's moduli than their carbide counterparts. Also, they have lower energies, better structural stability, and stronger atomic bonds. However, surface oxidation significantly degrades the mechanical properties of nitride MXenes.28 In contrast, DFT calculations revealed that the surface oxidation of Ti3N2 increases the structural stability by almost 30% compared to bare MXenes, which could be attributed to the reduction in the cohesive energy of the structure.27 Also, the calculated adsorption energy of −11.41 eV depicted the strong adherence of O to the Ti atoms on the surface of the bare Ti3N2. A decrease in the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level from 14.84 to 6.74 with surface oxidation of Ti3N2 MXene has a negative impact on the electrical conductivity of the nitride MXene. However, the surface oxidation enhances the absorption capability with reflectivity at higher photon energies compared to the bare MXene. These surface treatments are also significant in further improving their optoelectronic properties.


4.2.2 Magnetic and optical properties. 
The magnetic properties of M2NT2 (M = Ti, V, Cr, Mn) with different surface terminations such as O, OH, and F were determined using the crystal field theory model and first-principles simulations.16 With a magnetic moment value of up to 9 μB per unit cell and Curie temperature in the range of 1877 to 566 K, nitride MXenes are promising candidates for spintronic applications. The study also provided the insight that 2D nitride MXenes have robust ferromagnetism and intrinsic half-metallic transport behavior for conduction of electrons. Ti2N MXenes in the form of QDs exhibited an intense and wider absorption spectrum of 808 and 1064 nm in NIR-I and NIR-II regions, respectively, which is highly beneficial in increasing their efficiency in cancer phototherapy.61 A lower concentration of Ti2N QDs (20 ppm) can reach temperatures of about 60 °C when exposed to a laser having a wavelength of 1064 nm, demonstrating the competence in converting NIR laser energy into heat. The photothermal efficiency of these Ti2N QDs is much better than those of other materials such as GO, Au nanorods, and MoS2 nanoflakes. Djire and co-workers investigated the optoelectronic and electrocatalytic properties of Ti4N3Tx MXene.64 The study showed that it has a wider range of visible light absorption at an energy greater than ∼2.9 eV.

5. Applications
Compared to carbide MXenes, non-carbide MXenes are highly conductive due to the electronegative nitrogen, which induces more charges in the network. In addition, the strong bonds between M and N enable enhanced structural stability, making them more attractive than their carbide counterparts.48,54 Non-carbide MXenes have shown great promise in energy storage and conversion, electrocatalysis, EMI shielding, environmental remediation, electronics, and biomedical applications. The subsections below summarize their advanced applications in these fields.
5.1 Batteries
Intrigued by the exceptional performance exhibited by carbide MXenes as battery electrodes, researchers started to explore the storage properties of non-carbide MXenes as well. Not surprisingly, non-carbide MXenes also exhibited excellent storage properties like their carbide counterparts. In a study reported by Naguib et al., the multilayer Ti3CNTx as a K-battery anode showed a charge capacity of 90 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1.37 Ti3CNTx demonstrated good rate capability with minimal losses at high current densities. Further, the electrochemical performance of Ti3CNTx MXene in storing potassium ions was better than Ti3C2 and Nb2C MXenes due to the presence of nitrogen. In addition, Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx powder showed good performance as a Na-ion battery electrode with a specific capacity of 182 mA h g−1 at 20 mAg−1.17 This is the highest value obtained of all the MXenes reported to date as Na-ion battery electrodes, which is likely due to the partial replacement of C by N. The electrical conductivity of the free-standing Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx paper (∼435 ± 25 S cm−1) prepared using the KF-HCl method was higher than that of Ti2CTx (∼354 ± 50 S cm−1). Furthermore, the Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene exhibited an enhanced electroactive surface area of 7.1 m2 g−1 than Ti2CTx MXene (3.2 m2 g−1). Fig. 7 depicts the electrochemical performance of Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx as a Na-ion battery electrode. The cyclic voltammetry curves have broad peaks (Fig. 7A), and the galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) curves indicate the reversibility of sodiation and de-sodiation (Fig. 7B and C). The Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene exhibits 1.6–1.9 times higher specific capacity than Ti2CTx (Fig. 7D) with excellent cycling performance (Fig. 7E).
 Fig. 7  (A) CV curves at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (B) GCD curves at a current density of 20 mA g−1. (C) GCD curves for various other current densities. (D) The rate capability of Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene and Ti2CTx. (E) Long-term cycling performance at 200 mA g−1.17 
Similarly, Zhu and co-workers reported that the outstanding performance of Ti3CN-based Na-ion batteries could be attributed to the increased electron density due to the incorporation of electronegative nitrogen atoms in the Ti3C2 lattice.48 This further facilitates the adsorption of Na ions and enhances the interaction between Ti3CN and Na ions. When the freeze-dried Ti3CN was used as an electrode in a Li-ion battery, a discharge capacity of 300 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 was observed. Such electrodes have loosely arranged, and less restacked nanosheets, facilitating the electrochemical activation process. With repeated cycling, there was a gradual exposure of new active sites to the electrolyte for accumulating the Li+ ions. Thus, the capacities of the freeze-dried Ti3CN were gradually increased with cycling.56 The mechanical strain and the presence of five types of metal–N bonds in HE CN-MXene enable them to exhibit a high rate capability of 702 mA h g−1 at 4C and long cycling stability when used as an electrode in lithium–sulfur batteries.54 Lin et al. investigated the feasibility of titanium nitride MXenes as host materials for lithium–sulfur batteries by using first-principles calculations through the framework of density functional theory (DFT).29 The results showed that these nitride MXenes exhibit reasonable adsorption energies towards Li2Sx species with minimal structural deformation. The charge transfer analysis demonstrated a small amount of charge transfer from Li2Sx species to Ti2N MXenes, enabling them as potential candidates for Li–S batteries. Furthermore, they reported that the O- and F-functionalized Ti2N MXenes were the most stable configurations of Ti2N with significantly different anchoring mechanisms. The charge transfer analysis, charge density difference, and the van der Waals interaction ratio showed that the charge transfer interactions between Li2Sx and Ti2NO2 were dominated by chemical interaction. In contrast, the van der Waals interaction contributed to the adsorption energies between Li2Sx and Ti2NF2. Similarly, the DFT calculations revealed the effect of different surface terminations such as S, O, and F on the Ti3CN MXene towards the absorption of Na in a Na ion battery.66 The bare Ti3CN had better adsorption ability on the N side than on the C side, while the Ti3CNTx (T = O, S, and F) had an opposite trend in adsorption. In addition, Ti3CNO2 and bare Ti3CN had low diffusion barriers (0.037 eV and 0.045 eV, respectively) while Ti3CNO2 and Ti3CNS2 exhibited high adsorption towards Na (Ead = −1.702 eV and −1.626 eV, respectively). These analyses predicted that the bare Ti3CN and O, S terminated Ti3CNT2 could be promising anode materials for Na ion batteries.
5.2 Supercapacitors
Non-carbide MXenes are suitable for supercapacitor application due to their unique geometry, good electrical conductivity, and laudable charge storage properties.14,40,63 In the work reported by Chen et al., Ti3CN MXene tailored using an acid molecular scissor strategy had defective surfaces which acted as ideal platforms for proton incorporation.14 The defects induced on the surface of the Ti3CN MXene had a unique electronic structure and exhibited higher redox activity. The tailored carbonitride MXene showed a specific capacitance of 376 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1. The assembled micro supercapacitor with the tailored Ti3CN electrodes demonstrated a volumetric capacitance of 250 F cm−3 and an energy density of 12.46 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.43 W cm−3. This strategy of tuning the surface defects is crucial in controlling the surface properties of MXenes for energy, catalysis, sensing, and other applications. Djire et al. studied the nanolayered Ti2NTx MXene in various electrolytes such as aluminum sulfate, magnesium sulfate, potassium sulfate, potassium hydroxide, sodium sulfate, lithium sulfate, and sulfuric acid to evaluate the electrochemical behavior.63 The highest areal capacitance of 1350 μFcm−2 was obtained in MgSO4 aqueous electrolyte with wider reversible redox peaks, revealing its pseudocapacitive nature. The trend in capacitance as a function of cations was Mg2+ > Al3+ > H+ > Li+ > Na+ > K+, in both theoretical and experimental findings. The titanium nitride MXene Ti2NTx achieved a specific capacitance of 201 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 in 1 M MgSO4 with a potential window of 1 V. This value is significantly higher than that of the benchmark carbide MXene Ti3C2Tx, which exhibited a specific capacitance of 98 F g−1 with a potential window of 0.75 V under the same operating conditions. The 2 e− process and the multilayer adsorption feature of the Mg2+ cation increase the capacitance retention of Ti2NTx to about 160% after 1000 cycles (Fig. 8). The excellent supercapacitive performance was attributed to the presence of –O and/or –OH terminating groups which induced pseudocapacitive charge storage in Ti2NTx MXene when used in the MgSO4 electrolyte.
 Fig. 8  Electrochemical performance of Ti2NTx MXene as a supercapacitor electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
The supercapacitive nature of V2NTx MXene was determined by constructing an asymmetric cell with V2NTx MXene as the negative electrode and Mn3O4 nanowalls as the positive electrode.40 The asymmetric device exhibited a specific capacitance of 112.8 F g−1 at a current density of 1.85 mA cm−2 with an energy and power density of 15.66 W h kg−1 and 3748.4 W kg−1, respectively. The cell exhibited a capacitance retention of 96% after 10000 cycles with a cell voltage of 1.8 V. Zhang et al. reported the influence of surface terminations on the properties of carbonitride MXenes.44 Ti3CN MXene with –F and –OH terminations exhibits electrochemical double-layer behavior, while the –O terminated Ti3CN MXene exhibits pseudocapacitive behavior in an aqueous electrolyte. Moreover, the surface dipole moments and the number of unoccupied states in the Ti atoms above the Fermi level are influenced by the terminations, which in turn modifies the pseudocapacitance of Ti3CN MXene.
5.3 Electrocatalysis
With chemically stable structures in acidic solutions, carbonitride MXenes exhibit catalytic properties. Liang and co-workers reported the electrocatalytic activity of Ti3CNTx nanosheets, suggesting that the number of active sites and the electrical conductivity are the required characteristics for a good electrocatalyst.43 Delaminating multilayer MXenes to single/few-layer increases their specific surface area, providing more active sites and higher interfacial contact area with the electrolyte, facilitating good diffusion and fast charge transfer. The delaminated titanium carbonitride (d-Ti3CNTx) MXene exhibited higher catalytic activity with an onset overpotential and Tafel slope of 53 mV and 86 mV dec−1, respectively (Fig. 9). The values obtained were lower than those of Ti3C2Tx, and all other MXene catalysts reported so far. Further, the double-layer capacitance depicting the electrochemically active surface area of the delaminated Ti3CNTx MXene was 11.08 mF cm−2, which was greater than that of the delaminated Ti3C2Tx (0.597 mF cm−2). DFT calculations indicated the presence of a more significant number of active occupied states for Ti3CNO2. Further, they revealed that the free energy for the adsorption of atomic hydrogen was closer to zero than that of Ti3C2O2.
 Fig. 9  LSV curves (a) and Tafel slope (b) for the HER of d-Ti3CNTx, multilayer Ti3CNTx, Pt/C, and the GC substrate.43 
DFT computations predicted that Mo-based carbonitride Mo2(CN)Tx has good thermodynamic stability and HER catalytic activity.31 It was further predicted that the Mo-based carbonitride MXenes with O/OH terminations were more stable under ambient conditions, with O atoms serving as the active catalytic sites for the HER with an appropriate interaction between H and the surface of MXene. Huang et al. predicted that among various carbonitrides, only Ti3CNO2 and Nb3CNO2 have the potential to be effective HER catalysts with their low ΔGH values.30 When mixed terminations of –O and –OH were applied to the surface of Ti3CNO2 to tune the HER activity systematically, the C-side of Ti3CNO2 demonstrated excellent HER activity at coverages of 1/9 (ΔGH = −0.165 eV) and 2/9 (ΔGH = −0.102 eV). Further, with the help of DFT calculations, various double metal M′2M′′CNO2 MXenes (M′ = Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta; M′′ = Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, Ta) were investigated for HER activity.24 The computations showed that 11 double metal carbonitride MXenes are suitable for the HER, whose activity is predicted to be greater than Pt. Also, Ti2NbCNO2, Ti2VCNO2, and Mo2TiCNO2 have negative formation energies and are thermodynamically stable. Hence these three double metal carbonitride MXenes can be synthesized experimentally. Moreover, Ti2NbCNO2 MXene has better stability, abundant catalytic sites on the C-side, and very small Gibbs free energy (ΔGH) of 0.02 eV, making it an ideal catalyst for the HER. Djire et al. investigated the use of delaminated Ti4N3Tx MXene as an effective HER electrocatalyst.64 The Ti4N3Tx MXene exhibits an anodic photocurrent response in the presence of an ascorbic acid hole scavenger. The incident photon to current efficiency showed the semi-conductor behavior of the MXene at temperatures below ∼90 K. Also, the increase in the cathodic current response in the linear sweep voltammetry was attributed to the hydrogen adsorption on the surface of Ti4N3Tx MXene. The Ti4N3Tx MXene exhibited an overpotential of ∼300 mV vs. RHE at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of ∼190 mV dec−1. In the study reported by Zheng et al., it was predicted that S-functionalized Scn+1Nn MXene would have higher performance than the bare MXenes.67 With S terminations, the value of ΔGH* was increased to a more positive value representing weak interaction between MXene and H*, which can promote high exchange currents favorable for the HER.
5.4 Other applications
Apart from the above-discussed applications, non-carbide MXenes, like their carbide counterparts, have been explored in other fields such as biomedical, environmental remediation, EMI shielding, etc. Shahzad et al. demonstrated the extraordinary Hg ion removal ability of Ti3CNTx by large-scale reduction of Hg2+ to Hg+ to form Hg2Cl2.49 The adsorption process involving the removal of Hg2+ ions in an aqueous solution was called MXsorption. The carbonitride MXene exhibited a removal capacity of 4606.04 mg g−1 with a high distribution coefficient value of up to 6.78 × 109 mL g−1, suggesting carbonitride MXene as an ideal candidate for removing heavy metals and toxic Hg from water bodies. The removal kinetics and capacities of the carbonitride MXene are higher than those of the reported materials like hydrogen metal sulfide and metal–organic frameworks. With excellent recyclability, MXenes exhibit properties suitable for water purification.
The chemical and electronic properties of MXenes enable them to be used as a pristine substrate for surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS).59 Ti3C2 MXene exhibits an enhancement factor (EF) of 1.9 × 106, while the Ti3CN exhibits a low enhancement factor of 3.7 × 105. This reduction in the enhancement could be due to the disordered atoms in the X layer. The enhancement factor of carbonitride MXenes could be optimized by engineering the surface groups. Soundiraraju and George explored the SERS activity of Ti2N MXene for detecting the trace level of military-grade explosives such as PETN, HMX, and RDX.38 Ti2N was integrated into different substrates such as paper, glass, and silicon to determine its SERS activity. The paper substrate has shown the best sensitivity as compared to other substrates. An enormously high Raman enhancement factor of 1012 was obtained using Rhodamine 6G with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. Because of its high surface area, porosity, and fiber-like morphology, it efficiently concentrates the deposited analyte on the surface resulting in intense and sharp peaks of the Raman signal.
With electronegative nitrogen, which can inject an increased number of electrons, Ti3CN MXene exhibits properties suitable for a photothermal agent in photothermal therapy.57 Metallic Ti3CN exhibits strong NIR absorption with good photothermal stability, dispersibility, and biocompatibility, making it ideal for various biomedical applications. The biocompatibility studies of nitride MXenes form the essential and critical criteria for their possible use as a biomedical agent for treating cancerous cells. Shao et al. performed the cell viability assays of Ti2N QDs at varying concentrations with different cell cultures of 293 T human embryonic kidney cells, 4 T1 murine mammary carcinoma cells, and U87 human malignant glioma cells using the standard MTT cytotoxicity assay.61 The findings have shown good biocompatibility properties of QDs with a size of 5 nm and a concentration value of 80 ppm. These QDs were also evaluated as in vitro photothermal agents (PTT) in NIR laser irradiation. The cancer cells were eliminated using 40 and 80 ppm concentration values of Ti2N QDs for a shorter exposure time of 5 min. These results have shown the potential use of nitride MXenes as the PTT agents with higher efficiency for tumor ablation treatments.
In the last decade, metal and carbon-based materials have been used for EMI shielding, wherein a shielding effectiveness of 50 dB was considered sufficient for material thickness ranging between 50 and 100 μm.60 However, the difficulty in processing the metals into thin films limited their practical use in advanced mobile applications. With a metamaterial-like structure, thermally annealed 40 μm Ti3CN exhibits exceptional shielding performance with a shielding effectiveness of 116 dB. Gao et al. investigated the electrical properties of two MoNx MXene phases, namely Mo5N6 and δ-MoN.68 The study reported that the formation of ohmic contact between nitride MXenes and Cr/Au electrodes is beneficial for developing electronic devices. Mo5N6 and δ-MoN achieved high electrical conductivities of 229.6 and 3126 S cm−1, respectively, with a minor loss in conductivity after four weeks under normal room conditions. These results revealed the potential use of MoNx MXenes in solid-state nanoelectronic devices. The surface oxidized Ti3N2 (Ti3N2O2) had reduced absorption and reflectivity in the visible spectrum while displaying higher reflectivity and absorption than the bare Ti3N2 at higher photon energies, suitable for photoelectronic applications.27
Earlier, different amine-based solutions, ionic liquids, and solid adsorbents were used for CO2 sequestration, capture, and storage. However, due to their toxic effects on the environment, researchers started exploring other alternatives such as metals, graphene, and metal–organic frameworks for efficient conversion. With the low efficiencies exhibited by these materials toward CO2 adsorption, research is progressing in discovering alternative materials. Recently, Jurado et al. predicted the use of 2D structured MXenes for activating and converting CO2 using the DFT calculations through the PBE-D3 approach.69 Higher exothermic CO2 adsorption energies were reported from −1.03 (for Mo2N) to −3.13 eV (for Ti2N). They also claimed that the M2N and M4N3 families of nitride MXenes, have a lower affinity than their carbide counterparts, whereas the M3N2 exhibited higher values toward the CO2 adsorption.
Establishing a synthetic protocol for the controlled ratio of C/N in non-carbide MXenes would open wide avenues to various new materials and unseen applications. Table 1 summarizes the synthesis techniques and applications of non-carbide MXenes. As outlined in the table, it is evident that the in situ HF etching method is the widely used synthesis method for carbonitride MXenes, while the molten salt etching and in situ HF methods are the commonly used methods in the synthesis of nitride MXenes. Furthermore, the acid–salt etching method intercalates cations into the MXene structures and improves its volumetric capacitance.
Table 1 Summary of the synthesis of non-carbide MXenes and their applications




Non-carbide MXene
Synthesis method
Application
Performance
Ref.




Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx
KF-HCl etching
Na-ion battery
182 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1

17



Ti2N
KF-HCl etching
SERS
EF of 1012

38



Ti2NTx
O-assisted molten salt etching
Supercapacitor
201 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1

63



V2N
LiF–HCl etching
Supercapacitor
112.8 F g−1 at 1.85 mA cm−2

40



Ti3CNTx
LiF–HCl etching
Supercapacitor
376 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1

14



Ti3CN
HF etching
Na-ion battery
98.9 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1

48



Ti3CNTx
HF etching
K-ion battery
90 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1

37



Ti3CN
LiF–HCl etching
Li-ion battery
300 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1

56



HE CN MXene
LiF–HCl etching
Li–S battery
702 mA h g−1 at 4C

54



Ti3CNTx
HF etching
HER
148 mV at 10 mA cm−2

43



Ti3CN
LiF–HCl etching
SERS
EF of 3.7 × 105

59



Ti3CNTx
HF etching
Water purification
Hg ion removal capacity of 4606.04 mg g−1

49



Ti3CN Tx
LiF–HCl etching
EMI shielding
SE of 116 dB

60



Ti4N3Tx
O-assisted molten salt etching
HER
625 mV at 10 mA cm−2

25



V–Ti4N3Tx
O-assisted molten salt etching
HER
330 mV at 10 mA cm−2

25



Cr–Ti4N3Tx
O-assisted molten salt etching
HER
400 mV at 10 mA cm−2

25



Mo–Ti4N3Tx
O-assisted molten salt etching
HER
425 mV at 10 mA cm−2

25



Mn–Ti4N3Tx
O-assisted molten salt etching
HER
610 mV at 10 mA cm−2

25





6. Conclusion and perspectives
Although there has been immense research progress in carbide MXenes, the development of non-carbide MXenes has been limited due to the difficulty in their synthesis compared to their carbide analogues. This review summarizes the significant breakthroughs in synthesizing non-carbide MXenes to tackle their stability issues that limit the expansion of the MXene family. Synthesis techniques such as molten salt and acid-salt etching are widely used in synthesizing non-carbide MXenes. Understanding the electronic structure of carbonitride and nitride MXene is very important to fine-tune their electronic properties and gain insights into their formation mechanism. The presence of electronegative nitrogen atoms, more significant d-band center shift, and lower Gibb's free energy are the possible reasons for the improved performance of non-carbide MXenes. The substantive developments made in non-carbide MXenes and the newly discovered non-carbide MXenes are discussed in this review. Non-carbide MXenes exhibit good electronic, optical, mechanical, transport, catalytic, and energy storage properties, and are comparatively better than carbide MXenes. They are expected to outperform their carbide counterparts with remarkable electrochemical, chemical, thermal, and mechanical stabilities and find diverse applications. The current challenges and the future research directions in non-carbide MXenes are given as follows:
(1) With molten-salt and acid-salt etching methods, in situ HF is still produced; therefore, efficient and cost-effective etching and delamination techniques must be developed to synthesize non-carbide MXenes. Although surface terminations greatly influence the properties of non-carbide MXenes, the –F terminated MXenes are unsuitable for biomedical applications and pose less stability than those of –O terminated MXenes. Thus, synthesis routes should be developed to engineer the surface of non-carbide MXenes with more –O terminations and optimize the interlayer spacing. Even though ammoniation of carbide MXenes to produce nitride MXenes serves as an alternative synthesis method, improper conversion with several impurities limits this method, pointing to the need for further optimization. Moreover, in the ammoniation method, there is a need to synthesize the carbide MXene first and then expose them to hazardous NH3 to obtain the nitride MXene, which further complicates the synthesis procedure. In addition, apart from the Ti containing carbonitride and nitride MXenes, there is not much experimental research on MXenes with other transition metals, suggesting the necessity for future research with other metals.
(2) Non-carbide MXenes may also encounter the issue of oxidative degradation in aqueous media like their carbide counterparts. The defects created on the surface of MXenes during their synthesis are vulnerable to oxidative degradation in the presence of oxygen or water, deteriorating their intrinsic properties. This issue could be addressed by carefully controlling the quality of the parent MAX phase, choosing the right etchants and etching conditions, using non-aqueous electrolytes, storing them in a cryogenic freezer, and surface layer doping or forming composites.70 Non-carbide MXenes can be made composites with other 2D materials such as graphene, boron nitride, dichalcogenides, and layered double hydroxides to form 2D/2D MXene heterostructures. These configurations will help enhance the synergy of the structure, thereby improving the structural stability and preventing oxidative degradation. There is no report yet on such non-carbide MXene heterostructures; thus, research should progress in this direction to develop more stable structures. In the case of carbide MXenes, it can be observed that MXene composites show excellent HER performance compared to standalone MXenes. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that combining the catalytically active non-carbide MXenes with other known catalysts will result in promising composites for the HER. Surface layer doping is another method to improve the structural stability of MXenes. Further, with the success of the mixed metal nitrides for HER applications, research should be focused on developing various other mixed metal non-carbide MXenes.
(3) Since the discovery of MXenes, researchers have been continuously pondering the mass production of MXenes. The successful demonstration by Shuck et al. on the scalable synthesis of Ti3C2Tx MXene using a custom-designed reactor has shown that it is practically possible to scale up the chemical reactions by carefully considering various technological and safety issues.71 Looking forward, the development of efficient, low-cost reactors for the large-scale production of MXenes not only enables the potential expansion of MXenes in various fields but is also a significant step towards their commercialization.
(4) A better understanding of the X site in non-carbide MXenes has been obtained through DFT computations. Most of the properties predicted to be exhibited by non-carbide MXenes, viz., structural, elastic, electronic, insulating, metallic, ferromagnetic, transport, optical and mechanical, are all through DFT computations. However, there is no report for the experimental evaluation of most properties and applications of non-carbide MXenes. DFT predicts the existence of many carbonitride and nitride MXenes, and thus efforts should be taken in this direction to experimentally prove the new MAX phases and MXenes.
(5) Using in situ/operando characterization techniques, reliable synthesis routes can be identified. During the etching and exfoliation processes, XRD and other microscopy techniques can help monitor the extent of etching and optimize the synthesis procedure. Insitu XRD, Raman, TEM, and XAS could be integrated to obtain reliable features. However, these require complicated setups; thus, standardizing them will help understand the unique properties of MXenes beneficial for a plethora of applications.
Although there are increasing reports on synthesizing carbonitride and nitride MXenes, their practical applications have not been explored much. Thus, the researchers seem less motivated to synthesize new non-carbide MXenes. We believe this review will help researchers understand the stopgaps in the progress of non-carbide MXenes and encourage them to develop new non-carbide MAX phases and MXenes, leading to the expansion of the MXene family.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea, Grant No. NRF-2020K1A3A1A19088726, NRF-2019R1A6A1A11044070, and NRF-2021M3H4A1A02049916, and Department of Science and Technology (DST) under the joint India-Korea bilateral project (INT/Korea/P-52). This work was also supported by the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government (MOTIE), Grant No. 20203020030010, and by the Central Power Research Institute (CPRI), Bangalore (RSOP/21-26/GD/6) and Pandit Deendayal Energy University (PDEU) under the Start-up grant ORSP/R&D/PDPU/2021/NC00/R0069.
References
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103393 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hantanasirisakul and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804779 CrossRef .
S. De, S. Acharya, S. Sahoo and G. C. Nayak, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 7134–7169 RSC .
M. Soleymaniha, M.-A. Shahbazi, A. R. Rafieerad, A. Maleki and A. Amiri, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1801137 CrossRef .
B. C. Wyatt, A. Rosenkranz and B. Anasori, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007973 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mehdi Aghaei, A. Aasi and B. Panchapakesan, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 2450–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, S. Lian, F. Song, S. Chen, Z. Wu, X. Xie and N. Zhang, Small, 2021, 17, 2103626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song, J. Hu, G. Li, J. Wang, S. Chen, X. Xie, Z. Wu and N. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 14, 37 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, M. Orbay, S. Luo, S. Duluard, H. Shao, J. Harmel, P. Rozier, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 111–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, P. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Park, M. R. Lohe, Y. Wu, A. Shaygan Nia, S. Yang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8689–8693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sokol, V. Natu, S. Kota and M. W. Barsoum, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 210–223 CrossRef CAS .
D. Johnson, Z. Qiao, E. Uwadiunor and A. Djire, Small, 2022, 18, 2106129 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Chu, H. Zhang, W. Yang and J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 106007 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Hong, S. Yazdanparast and M. Asle Zaeem, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 045004 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kumar, N. C. Frey, L. Dong, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7648–7655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liang, A. Tabassum, A. Majed, C. Dun, F. Yang, J. Guo, K. Prenger, J. J. Urban and M. Naguib, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 1422–1430 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Kumar, P. Prakash, T. Krithiga, D. J. Amarnath, J. Premkumar, N. Rajamohan, Y. Vasseghian, P. Saravanan and M. Rajasimman, Chemosphere, 2022, 286, 131607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Verger, C. Xu, V. Natu, H.-M. Cheng, W. Ren and M. W. Barsoum, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2019, 23, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim, D. San Baek, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24564–24579 RSC .
G. Li, B. C. Wyatt, F. Song, C. Yu, Z. Wu, X. Xie, B. Anasori and N. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105043 CrossRef CAS .
A. VahidMohammadi, J. Rosen and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2021, 372, eabf1581 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ronchi, J. T. Arantes and S. F. Santos, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 18167–18188 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, X. Chen, K. Weng, Y. Wu, P. Zhang, J. Jiang and N. Li, npj Comput. Mater., 2021, 7, 80 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djire, X. Wang, C. Xiao, O. C. Nwamba, M. V. Mirkin and N. R. Neale, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djire, H. Zhang, B. J. Reinhart, O. C. Nwamba and N. R. Neale, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 3128–3136 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Aghaei, I. Torres, A. R. Baboukani, I. Khakpour and C. Wang, Comput. Condens. Matter, 2019, 20, e00382 CrossRef .
S. M. Hatam-Lee, A. Esfandiar and A. Rajabpour, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 566, 150633 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, D.-D. Yang, N. Lou, S.-G. Zhu and H.-Z. Li, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 1588–1594 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, N. Zhou, X. Chen, W.-J. Ong and N. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18479–18486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wei, Z. Fu, D. Legut, T. C. Germann, Q. Zhang, S. Du, H. Zhang, J. S. Francisco and R. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 4477–4488 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, J. Li, Y. Li, Z. Yang and R. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 119, 062404 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, A. Cui, B. Sun, G. Liu and B. Xu, Solid State Commun., 2021, 336, 114411 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang and Y. Liao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 426, 804–811 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai, S. Yunoki, Y. Kawazoe, H. Weng and Z. Fang, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 195414 CrossRef .
Y. Yue, B. Wang, N. Miao, C. Jiang, H. Lu, B. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Ren and M. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 2367–2373 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, R. A. Adams, Y. Zhao, D. Zemlyanov, A. Varma, J. Nanda and V. G. Pol, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6883–6886 RSC .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
S. Venkateshalu, J. Cherusseri, M. Karnan, K. S. Kumar, P. Kollu, M. Sathish, J. Thomas, S. K. Jeong and A. N. Grace, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 17983–17992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. R. Shein and A. L. Ivanovskii, Superlattices Microstruct., 2012, 52, 147–157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Front. Mater., 2019, 6, 312 CrossRef .
K. Liang, A. Tabassum, M. Kothakonda, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, B. Kenney, B. D. Koplitz, J. Sun and M. Naguib, Materials Reports: Energy, 2022, 2, 100075 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, C. Cheng, P. Fang, B. Tang, J. Zhang, G. Huang, X. Cong, B. Zhang, X. Ji and L. Miao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4376–4384 RSC .
N. C. Frey, H. Kumar, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6319–6325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fan, Y. Ying, X. Luo and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25391–25398 RSC .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, M. Wang, M. Lyu, Y. Jiao, A. Du, B. Luo, I. Gentle and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6854–6863 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shahzad, K. Rasool, J. Iqbal, J. Jang, Y. Lim, B. Kim, J.-M. Oh and D. S. Lee, Environ. Res., 2022, 205, 112532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, H.-W. Wang, L. Vlcek, J. Peng, A. B. Brady, N. C. Osti, E. Mamontov, M. Tyagi, J. Nanda, S. G. Greenbaum, P. R. C. Kent and M. Naguib, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1902207 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Hatter, J. Shah, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, Composites, Part B, 2020, 182, 107603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang and V. N. Mochalin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10251–10257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iqbal, F. Shahzad, K. Hantanasirisakul, M.-K. Kim, J. Kwon, J. Hong, H. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and C. M. Koo, Science, 2020, 369, 446–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, C. Wu, Y. Chen, Q. Zhu, Y. Cui, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Shang, B. Li, W. Chen, C. Liu and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103228 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hantanasirisakul, M. Alhabeb, A. Lipatov, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Salles, C. Ieosakulrat, P. Pakawatpanurut, A. Sinitskii, S. J. May and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2941–2951 CrossRef CAS .
F. Du, H. Tang, L. Pan, T. Zhang, H. Lu, J. Xiong, J. Yang and C. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 235, 690–699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Tang, Q. Liu, Y. Xia, X. Zhai, H. Zhang, D. Duan, H. Wang, W. Zhan, L. Wu, N. Zheng, W. Lv, Y. Wang and M. Zhou, Small, 2022, 2200646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jindata, K. Hantanasirisakul, T. Eknapakul, J. D. Denlinger, S. Sangphet, S. Chaiyachad, C. Jaisuk, A. Rasritat, T. Sawasdee, H. Nakajima, A. Rattanachata, I. Fongkaew, S. Limpijumnong, Y. Gogotsi and W. Meevasana, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 021401 CAS .
K. Shevchuk, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, MRS Bull., 2022, 47, 545–554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iqbal, F. Shahzad, K. Hantanasirisakul, M.-K. Kim, J. Kwon, J. Hong, H. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and M. Koo Chong, Science, 2020, 369, 446–450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Lin and P. Huang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 126009 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Song, J. Guo, W. Huang, Y. Ge, L. Hu, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 259–265 CrossRef .
A. Djire, A. Bos, J. Liu, H. Zhang, E. M. Miller and N. R. Neale, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2785–2795 CrossRef CAS .
A. Djire, H. Zhang, J. Liu, E. M. Miller and N. R. Neale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11812–11823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, K. Hantanasirisakul, L. Yang, L. Zhang, B. Haines, S. J. May, S. J. L. Billinge and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17722–17730 RSC .
W. Guo, Z. She, H. Xue and X. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 529, 147180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, X. Sun, C. Qiu, Y. Yan, Z. Yao, S. Deng, X. Zhong, G. Zhuang, Z. Wei and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 13695–13705 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, J. Cao, T. Li, W. Luo, M. Gray, N. Kumar, K. S. Burch and X. Ling, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 351–357 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jurado, K. Ibarra, Á. Morales-García, F. Viñes and F. Illas, ChemPhysChem, 2021, 22, 2456–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iqbal, J. Hong, T. Y. Ko and C. M. Koo, Nano Convergence, 2021, 8, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. Levitt, Y. Zhu, S. Uzun, V. Balitskiy, V. Zahorodna, O. Gogotsi and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1901241 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Sandhya Venkateshalu	Dr Sandhya Venkateshalu received her Master's degree in Nanotechnology from Visvesvaraya Technological University, India, in 2015. Afterward, she worked as an Assistant Professor for a year at Dr T. Thimmaiah Institute of Technology, India. She received her PhD in Nanotechnology from Vellore Institute of Technology, India, in 2021. She is currently a Research Professor at Korea University, Republic of Korea. Her research interest includes the synthesis and characterization of nanomaterials, 2D nanomaterials, MXenes, and energy storage and conversion devices.
Mohammed Shariq	Dr Mohammed Shariq is an Institute Post-Doctoral Fellow at Vellore Institute of Technology, India. Prior to joining VIT in 2021, he was Sandwich Erasmus Doctoral Scholar (2015–2020) from the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (ISM) Dhanbad, India in collaboration with IME Institute of Metal Processing and Recycling, RWTH Aachen Germany and University of Maribor, Slovenia. He received his M. Tech in Mechanical Engineering from IIT(ISM) Dhanbad in 2015. His research focuses on the formulation and characterization of novel metal and carbon nanomaterial-based inks, including MXenes, for different 3D printing techniques.
Nitin K. Chaudhari	Dr Nitin Chaudhari is an Associate Professor at Pandit Deendayal Energy University, Gandhinagar, India. He received his PhD degree in Materials Science from Korea University, South Korea in 2013. He subsequently worked as a Research Professor at Myongji University and Korea University, South Korea from 2013 to 2019. Later, he joined Nexcoms Ltd Co., South Korea as Deputy Director before moving to India. His research interest includes the design and development of active electrode materials such as porous carbons, nanocomposites, oxides, sulphides, hydroxides, 2D MXenes, and nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion devices.
Kwangyeol Lee	Professor Kwangyeol Lee obtained his PhD degree (1997) in Chemistry from the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign. After fulfilling his military obligation, he joined Korea University in 2003 as a chemistry faculty member, before being appointed as a professor. He is the recipient of the Wiley-KCS Young Scholar Award (2009, Korean Chemical Society) and the Excellent Research Award (2019, KCS Inorganic Chemistry Division). His current interests include the development of synthetic methodologies for nanoscale materials and the development of nanotechnologies to support the environment by creating sustainable energy.
Andrews Nirmala Grace	Professor Andrews Nirmala Grace is the Director at the Centre for Nanotechnology Research, Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Vellore, India. She received her PhD degree from the University of Madras, India, and worked as a Postdoctoral/Senior Research Fellow at the Korea Institute of Energy Research, South Korea on renewable energy. She is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and a Fellow of the Academy of Sciences, Chennai (FASCh). Her current research interests include 2D energy materials, design and fabrication of electrodes for solar cells, and supercapacitors.

 	Fig. 1  Elements from the periodic table constituting the MAX phase (a) reproduced with permission from ref. 23 copyright 2019 Elsevier Ltd. Experimentally synthesized and theoretically predicted non-carbide MXenes (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structure of bare and O-terminated ordered double transition metal carbonitride ((a and b), respectively). Different configurations of M′2M′′CNO2 MXenes (c).24	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representing the structures of Ti3CN MXene (right) produced through the LiF–HCl and HF + TBAOH/TMAOH etching routes (left). Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Optical image of Ti3CNTx and Ti3C2Tx solutions and DLS spectrum of Ti3CNTx solution. (b) UV-Visible spectra of Ti3CNTx. (c) Temperature-dependent resistivity of the Ti3CNTx films. (d) Hall mobility and carrier concentration of the Ti3CNTx film at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of freeze-dried Ti3CNTx (a) and Ti3CNTx paper (c). Electrical conductivity of the freeze-dried Ti3CNTx and Ti3CNTx paper (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 56 copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic view for the synthesis of biodegradable Ti2N QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61 copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Synthetic schematic for the formation of Ti4N3Tx from its MAX phase Ti4AlN3 using the molten salt etching method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 39 copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Cemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) CV curves at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (B) GCD curves at a current density of 20 mA g−1. (C) GCD curves for various other current densities. (D) The rate capability of Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx MXene and Ti2CTx. (E) Long-term cycling performance at 200 mA g−1.17	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrochemical performance of Ti2NTx MXene as a supercapacitor electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  LSV curves (a) and Tafel slope (b) for the HER of d-Ti3CNTx, multilayer Ti3CNTx, Pt/C, and the GC substrate.43	 

Ti2C0.5N0.5Tx	KF-HCl etching	Na-ion battery	182 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1	
17

Ti2N	KF-HCl etching	SERS	EF of 1012	
38

Ti2NTx	O-assisted molten salt etching	Supercapacitor	201 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	
63

V2N	LiF–HCl etching	Supercapacitor	112.8 F g−1 at 1.85 mA cm−2	
40

Ti3CNTx	LiF–HCl etching	Supercapacitor	376 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1	
14

Ti3CN	HF etching	Na-ion battery	98.9 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1	
48

Ti3CNTx	HF etching	K-ion battery	90 mA h g−1 at 10 mA g−1	
37

Ti3CN	LiF–HCl etching	Li-ion battery	300 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	
56

HE CN MXene	LiF–HCl etching	Li–S battery	702 mA h g−1 at 4C	
54

Ti3CNTx	HF etching	HER	148 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
43

Ti3CN	LiF–HCl etching	SERS	EF of 3.7 × 105	
59

Ti3CNTx	HF etching	Water purification	Hg ion removal capacity of 4606.04 mg g−1	
49

Ti3CN Tx	LiF–HCl etching	EMI shielding	SE of 116 dB	
60

Ti4N3Tx	O-assisted molten salt etching	HER	625 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
25

V–Ti4N3Tx	O-assisted molten salt etching	HER	330 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
25

Cr–Ti4N3Tx	O-assisted molten salt etching	HER	400 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
25

Mo–Ti4N3Tx	O-assisted molten salt etching	HER	425 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
25

Mn–Ti4N3Tx	O-assisted molten salt etching	HER	610 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
25


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
