Atomic spectrometry update. X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B915056K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B915056K
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24, 1289-1326Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAtomic spectrometry update. X-Ray fluorescence spectrometry

        
          
            Margaret 
            West
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew T. 
            Ellis
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Philip J. 
            Potts
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Christina 
            Streli
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christine 
            Vanhoof
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Dariusz 
            Wegrzynek
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Wobrauschek
          
        
      c
aWest X-ray Solutions Ltd, 405 Whirlowdale Road, Sheffield, S11 9NF, UK
bOxford Instruments Analytical Oy, PO Box 85 (Nihtisillankuja 5), FI-2631, Espoo, Finland
cTU Wien, Atominstitut der Österreichischen Universitäten, Stadionallee 2, A-1020, Vienna, Austria
dScience Deanery, The Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA, UK
eVITO, Environmental Analysis and Technology, Boeretang 200, B-2400, Mol, Belgium
fFaculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, AGH University of Science and Technology, Al. Mickiewicza 30, 30-059, Krakow, Poland
Received 
      23rd July 2009
    , Accepted 23rd July 2009First published on 20th August 2009Contents1 Introduction and reviews2 Instrumentation2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sources2.2 Detectors3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures3.1 Spectrum analysis3.2 Matrix correction and calibration procedures4 X-ray optics and microfluorescence5 Synchrotron radiation5.1 Instrumental developments and fundamental studies5.2 New applications6 TXRF6.1. Fundamental TXRF research and instrumentation6.2. Synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF)6.3. Surface analysis6.4. New applications7 Portable and mobile XRF8 On-line XRF9 Applications9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniques9.2 Geological and industrial minerals9.3 Environmental9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic9.5 Industrial9.6 Clinical and biological9.7 Thin films, coatings and nano-materials9.8 Chemical state and speciation10 AbbreviationsReferencesAbstract
This is the latest review covering atomic spectrometric activities using XRF techniques. It offers a comprehensive review of instrumentation and detectors, matrix correction and spectrum analysis procedures, X-ray optics and micro-fluorescence, SRXRF, TXRF plus handheld and portable XRF as assessed from the published literature. As techniques mature, the application sections have expanded to report developments in sample preparation, geological and industrial minerals, environmental, archaeological, forensic, biological, clinical, thin films, chemical state and speciation studies. They also reflect how the XRF technique is increasingly being used to provide analytical measurements that are then combined with results from more specialised techniques to report comprehensive material characterisation. The commercial availability of silicon drift detectors (SDD) has transformed the handheld EDXRF market this year by extending in situ analytical capabilities down to magnesium. Imaging techniques that provide either 2D or 3D mapping facilities continue to feature this year along with further developments in SR and TXRF systems. The writing team would welcome feedback from readers of this review and invite you to complete the Atomic Spectrometry Updates questionnaire at http://www.asureviews.org.

1 Introduction and reviews
This review continues the series of Atomic Spectrometry Updates in X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry1 and should be read in conjunction with other related reviews in the series.2–5 This update refers to papers published approximately between May 2008 and March 2009. The writing team has changed this year with the departure of Peter Kregsamer and the arrival of Dariusz Wegrzynek. Our thanks go to Peter for all his hard work over the years.
The commercial availability of silicon drift detectors (SDD) has transformed the handheld EDXRF market this year by extending in situ analytical capabilities down to magnesium. The advantages and capabilities for in situ analysis were explained by Potts and West6 in a book that brought together the knowledge and expertise of internationally recognised scientists with practical experience of commercial handheld and bespoke systems for the assessment of contaminated land, surfaces, coatings and paint, workplace monitoring, metal and alloy sorting, geochemical prospecting, archaeological investigations, museum samples and works of art and extraterrestrial analysis. The XRF technique is increasingly being used to provide major, minor and trace element determinations that are then combined with results from more specialised techniques. The development of synchrotron radiation-based techniques continues with 2D and 3D imaging configurations being recognised as important tools for clinical and biological investigations. Adams7 looked back over the period from 1975 to the present describing performance parameters such as detection limits and spatial analytical potential (lateral and depth resolution) from SRXRF and other techniques. Synchrotron-based X-ray absorption spectroscopy was described by Shi and Chance8 as a valuable method to provide a direct analysis of metal bound to proteins and proteomic metal distribution in biological matrices. In chapter 6 of this Review, the proceedings of the 12th conference on TXRF and related methods provide readers with a comprehensive survey of TXRF activities during the last year.
Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen discovered the existence of X-rays in 1895, for which he received the first Nobel Prize for Physics in 1901. Thomsen9 described his discovery as one of those that transforms the world. The writing team offer this review in the hope that its contents may shed some light on the activities of today's X-ray practitioners.
2 Instrumentation
2.1 General instrumentation and excitation sources
In the last few years the focus for instrument development has been directed towards improvements in detector technology, construction of highly compact X-ray tubes, design of fast, modular, multi-detector signal processing electronics, optimisation and the wider use of X-ray optics, as well as the integration of two or more analytical techniques into one instrument. Advances were made in the construction of specialised apparatus utilising synchrotron X-ray beams or beams of charged particles for specific applications. In parallel with the development of medium and large scale facilities, a number of groups have reported new designs or improvements in portable X-ray technology. These trends in technological advancement have continued and feature in the literature covered in this review. Two groups reported the integration of a compact, low-power X-ray tube and a polycapillary X-ray lens with a SEM. The system constructed by Langer et al.10 combined XRF and XRD techniques; the latter by using the Laue method and the Kossel micro-diffraction technique. The apparatus constructed by Procop and Hodoroaba11 integrated EPMA, utilising energy and wavelength dispersive modes, and micro-beam XRF into one instrument. The main advantages of the integrated EPMA/XRF instrument were improved detection limits of elements and the possibility to precisely correlate the XRF signal with the topography/mean atomic number of the analysed sample. Reed12 described the advantages of synthetic multilayers over Bragg crystals for the use in EPMA/WDXRF spectrometers for light element (Z = 4–9) analysis. Unlike “real” Bragg crystals, the synthetic multilayers can be optimised to enhance resolution and reduce the background emanating from specular reflection.
Development of a modular data acquisition system was reported by Alberti and colleagues.13 The integration of techniques and construction of advanced instruments utilising focused beams of charged particles and X-ray photons increased the requirements put on data acquisition systems. The acquisition system was compact, compatible with personal computer (PC) standards, and versatile to adapt to various application needs. The system was based on field programmable gate array (FPGA) technology that can handle up to four state-of-art silicon drift detectors and used a universal serial bus (USB) interface to communicate with the host PC. The system was designed for use in XRF and in particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) techniques. Fischer and colleagues14 described an ultra fast X-ray tomography scanner which was developed to operate with frame rates of 1 kHz and higher. The main field of application was for capturing flows with a velocity of a few metres per second in two-phase flow studies. The scanner used an electron beam to generate hard X-rays that impinged on a tungsten alloy target and a circular X-ray detector comprising 240 CdZnTe elements. Another scanning system for examining in depth sample structure was developed by Malglaive and Albert15 who improved their patented reverse-geometry X-ray system and converted it into a motionless laminography system (MLX®). In the MLX a scanning X-ray source is placed close to the object and the generated divergent X-ray beam, after passing the object, was collected simultaneously by an array of 64 detectors. The MLX was used by the NASA agency to detect flaws in the space shuttle fuel tank insulating foam and its heat-resistant tiles. In recent years, significant advances were made in the development of X-ray imaging devices. Vykydal and colleagues16 reported an ongoing project to develop a high-frame rate, large area, X-ray detector that could out-perform existing devices. The authors predicted its widespread use in biomedical applications such as mammography or small animal imaging. An advanced set up for single biomolecule imaging was proposed by Shintake.17 In a standard experiment, the number of photons scattered from a single biomolecule is not sufficient to generate a detectable diffraction pattern, however in this work, Shintake overcame this difficulty by using an intense reference wave superimposed onto the weak scattered beam, resulting in a detectable interference pattern recorded by a planar X-ray detector. Nano-sized gold particles were proposed as a reference wave source. The set up should then provide a 3D reconstruction of the molecule electron density. Advances and improvement in X-ray detection technology have been utilised in work by Ince-Cushman and co-workers.18 They developed a high spatial resolution X-ray crystal spectrometer for plasma diagnostics in the Alcator C-Mod tokamak. The instrument used a spherically bent crystal and a set of 2D X-ray detectors to measure H-like and He-like argon emission in the wavelength range 3.7 Å–4.0 Å with resolving power of 10000 at 200 frames per second. Dickinson and collaborators19 have constructed and tested a short working distance multicrystal X-ray spectrometer that used a millimetre-sized flat crystal placed at a distance of about 1 cm from the sample. The spectrometer's effective solid angle was comparable to that achieved by 17 spherically bent analysing crystals with a working distance of 1 m. This type of instrument is suitable for X-ray spot sizes of a few tens of micrometres or smaller. The authors foresee its future use for the collection of high resolution X-ray emission spectra induced by a single pulse of the LINAC Coherent Light Source.
The efforts to miniaturise X-ray equipment to make it more suitable for in situ applications have continued driven by both extraterrestrial and terrestrial applications. Two groups, one from Japan and the other from China, reported the development of two X-ray fluorescence spectrometers for the monitoring of extraterrestrial environments. Both projects were related to the ongoing (Japan) and already accomplished (China) Lunar missions that were conducted independently. Yamamoto and co-workers20 described the X-ray spectrometer onboard of the KAGUYA SELENE (Selenological and Engineering Explorer) spacecraft launched towards the Moon on 14 September 2007. The spectrometer was designed to determine the major elemental composition of the Lunar crust with high spatial resolution by using Solar X-ray induced XRF. The measurements were performed from Lunar orbit. The spectrometer consisted of three parts: XRF-A containing the main sensor to observe X-rays from the Lunar surface, SOL-B with a Si-PIN photodiode for monitoring Solar X-rays, and SOL-C with an X-ray sensor for collecting X-rays induced in a standard target attached to a base plate. The XRF-A and SOL-C components used X-ray sensitive CCD devices. The test results obtained by using the flight model components were presented. By the time this review is published, the KAGUYA SELENE mission should be accomplished and the achieved scientific goals announced on the mission Web page. Zhang and his colleagues21 presented the design and the results of ground verification tests of an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer for imaging spatial distribution of selected elements on the Lunar surface. The spectrometer was launched onboard China's Lunar orbiter Chang'E 1 on 24 October 2007. The Chang'E 1 mission was completed with a controlled impact of the spacecraft on the Moon surface on 1 March 2009. The general concept of the X-ray spectrometer was similar to that of KAGUYA SELENE mission; to use Solar and cosmic ray induced X-ray emission to detect the surface distribution and abundances of such elements as Al, Fe, Mg, Na, Ni, S and Ti from the Lunar orbit. The Chang'E 1 spectrometer consisted of two Si-PIN photodiode modules, each containing two low energy detectors with 25 mm2 active area, 500 μm effective thickness, energy range 1–10 keV, and energy resolution equal to about 5% at 9 keV. The authors used the direct demodulation technique combined with a fundamental parameter method to perform quantitative and qualitative analysis of the acquired data. Advances in portable X-ray spectrometry have also been driven by terrestrial projects. Hatakeyama and co-workers22 described the design of a portable instrument with a spatial resolution of 3.5 mm for imaging the distribution of elements in samples. The spectrometer used a battery powered X-ray source (pyroelectric crystal), Si-PIN detector, collimating slit, and stepper motors. Aiming at in situ analysis Yonehara and Tsuji23 developed a compact X-ray fluorescence probe employing coaxial irradiation and detection geometry by using a ring-shaped secondary target. They used the probe on steel reference materials, standard solutions and solid samples in a solution.
2.2 Detectors
In what was a sparse year for papers available for review, there was no significant progress reported in the area of cryogenic detectors and only limited activity in silicon-based X-ray detectors. That said, the past year has seen the incorporation of silicon drift detectors (SDD) into commercially available handheld EDXRF systems and the much wider commercial availability of large area SDD of up to 80 mm2 in area. In a similar vein, the use of large area SDD was reported24 for the SIDDHARTA experiment at LNF, Frascati, Italy. In this experiment, SDD of 100 mm2, cooled to −120 Celsius, will be used, specifically for their very fast response, excellent energy resolution and low background, when compared with the previously used Si(Li) and CCD X-ray detectors. These new SDD will have an energy resolution <150 eV and will enable kaonic deuterium X-ray peak shifts to be established with a precision of around 15 eV at 7 to 10 keV. A review of planar silicon, mostly Si-PIN, detectors by Burger and colleagues,25 concentrated on the advances in all aspects of the detector fabrication technologies for industrial applications including the use of detector arrays and some pixellated devices. The authors identified a re-emerging interest in detectors where the electronics are integrated in or onto the sensor chip itself. The material and processing details of a Si PIN X-ray detector were described in detail by Kim and co-workers,26 who needed such a detector for a photon counting experiment. The authors reported that a leakage current of 0.2 nA cm−2 could be achieved providing a guard ring was used; a practice that is commonplace for improving leakage in such devices.

X-ray detectors using CdTe or CdZnTe sensor crystals offer the possibility of working at room temperature with the ability to provide very high stopping power for higher energy X-rays. Such detectors are used in a variety of applications, but the use of an impressive CdZnTe detector array27 on the first Indian Moon mission, Chandrayaan-1 literally takes the technology to new heights. The on-board High Energy X-ray spectrometer (HEX) was designed to study low-energy (30–270 keV) natural gamma rays emitted from the lunar surface due to decay of uranium and thorium. The impressive detector consists of nine (3 × 3) CdZnTe detector arrays, each detector was of area 4 cm × 4 cm and 0.2 cm thick and composed of 256 (16 × 16) pixels (2.4 mm × 2.4 mm) providing a geometric area of 144 cm2. The operating temperatures for the CdZnTe detectors on HEX are designed to be below +10° Celsius and, due to the large sensitive area, active cooling of these detectors was not considered. Instead, a passive cooling configuration was implemented using a heat pipe and radiator, thus demonstrating the value of the relatively high operating temperature of CdZnTe detectors. The modules for the flight gave an energy resolution of 5–6% at 122 keV, which improved to 4% when cooled to 0° Celsius. Returning to Earth, Xu and colleagues28 described the characteristics of a straightforward single sensor CdZnTe X-ray detector that provided an energy resolution of 3.45% at 59 keV when operated at room temperature. Kim et al.29 were concerned with the passivation of semi-conducting polycrystalline CdZnTe films as they play an important role in the overall performance when used as an X-ray detector. XPS and noise power spectrum and pulse height spectra measurements showed that S passivation with (NH4)2S effectively removed the Te-oxide layers on the CdZnTe surface, reduced the surface leakage current and gave improved energy resolution by suppressing 1/f noise. Although destined for use in X-ray imaging applications, Baumer and co-workers30 at Philips reported the performance of a CdZnTe array comprising 3 mm thick crystals on a 1 mm pixel pitch. Using a custom readout, the countrate per pixel was an impressive 2 × 106 photons s−1, although the array was not used as an energy dispersive detector suitable for high energy EDXRF.
An announcement31 was made of the award of $2.1M for what may be the most expensive pixellated X-ray detector, which will be developed at Cornell University and be used in conjunction with the Energy Recovery LINAC that is claimed will be the World's most powerful X-ray source. While not intended for use in XRF studies at this stage, this impressive instrumentation would have potential for such studies in addition to the intended applications in which short X-ray image movies of processes changing on sub microsecond time scales will be made. The detector will have hundreds of thousands of active pixels and extensive custom electronic readout systems in order to achieve the high image speeds needed for studying changes to matter in the sub microsecond domain. In recent years, the so-called pnCCD pixellated X-ray detectors have been described and while few reports have yet been published of XRF studies, Leitenberger and co-workers32 described the use of such a device in X-ray scattering experiments at a SR beamline at BESSY II in Berlin. Making use of the combined X-ray energy resolution available from each pixel, the 2D spatial information and the very high detector frame rates (200 Hz) a complete data set of 105 frames was collected and used in the study of an interesting cadmium arachnidate multilayer. An example of the potential in EDXRF of using pixellated detectors from the medical and research field was presented by Tichy and colleagues,33 who investigated the capabilities of the Medipix2 and Timepix devices for imaging in X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysis. The authors recognized that the energy resolution available from each pixel was insufficient for direct EDXRF measurements, but developed a two-stage process to enable 2D EDXRF imaging. The rather contrived process involved the obvious but inefficient calibration process of first measuring pure element spectra from each pixel and storing the data. In the second stage, an unknown sample was measured and the resulting spectrum was decomposed using the calibration data to provide spectra of the individual elements present. The amount of a priori knowledge and calibration required, coupled with the limited quality of the output data make this system unattractive at this stage but, nonetheless, show some possibilities for future development of these interesting and readily available pixellated detectors. A very high speed hybrid pixel X-ray detector capable of >2 × 106 counts pixel−1 s−1 was reported,34 albeit for use in commercial XRD instruments, with active area per module of up to an impressive 84 × 34 mm2. A complete large area detector system with up to 80 of these modules was claimed to have a detector area of 431 × 448 mm2 and was proposed for use in demanding applications such as protein crystallography.
The use of a small amount (2 mol%) of xenon in an argon-filled gas proportional counter was reported35 to provide a useful reduction from 1500 to 800 V of the required detector bias, an improvement in energy resolution and, unsurprisingly, a more than two-fold improvement in efficiency for energies greater than the Xe K absorption edge. An impressive 64-channel, multiwire gas proportional counter (MWPC) filled with a gas mixture of 90% Kr/10% CH4 was described by Sushkov et al.,36,37 who used the detector for low energy X-ray measurements from a tokamak plasma source in order to help establish the plasma electron temperature with a spatial resolution of around 2 cm. Although an exotic application, it used the typical arrangement of a tandem detector often found in WDXRF systems, where a second detector is placed behind the first to detect the harder X-rays that first pass through the front detector. In this example a 32-channel variant of the MWPC was used to good effect as the second detector.
Johnson et al.38 designed and built a 2D detector system which can be operated up to kHz frame rate. The detector consisted of a 100 mm long scintillation crystal coupled to a Geiger-mode avalanche photodiode array for use in X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy.
3 Spectrum analysis, matrix correction and calibration procedures
3.1 Spectrum analysis
The review year saw a disappointing paucity of publications in this area although the paper by Luo and Zhan39 did bring to the notice of this reviewer the journal “Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis”, a Chinese language journal that may provide a future platform for publications in EDXRF spectrum processing from the increasingly important economic and technology powerhouse of China. The aforementioned paper recognized the rather obvious need for background subtraction and peak overlap correction in EDXRF spectra and applied the chemometric technique of a genetic algorithm for this purpose. The authors claimed that the genetic algorithm was better than non-linear least squares fitting using the Marquardt Levenberg algorithm and showed this by the successful deconvolution of spectra from a single and rather straightforward application of polarization EDXRF of a Fe, Si, and Sr containing permanent magnet sample.
3.2 Matrix correction and calibration procedures
As in previous years, efforts continue to develop an accurate and robust algorithm for data analysis and calibration procedures. In a fundamental work, Santra40 has adapted the non-relativistic quantum electrodynamics and the perturbation theory to derive and explain X-ray absorption, inner-shell binding energies, complex index of refraction, the non-relativistic theory of Compton scattering and the X-ray fluorescence and Auger decay of inner-shell excited systems. Delgado and Figueroa,41 revisited Sherman equations. Assuming selective, sequential excitation by monochromatic X-rays, they assembled a set of linear equations which they proved have a single, unique and physically feasible solution. They simulated the influence and propagation of measurement uncertainties and proved that the solution is well conditioned. Pereira and Bueno42 presented a partial least squares (PLS) method for a multivariate calibration in the XRF analysis of density of varnishes and viscosity of paints. They used XRF spectra, including the regions of coherently and incoherently scattered radiation excited by a Rh-target X-ray tube. Using PLS analysis of the data they were also able to determine the content of the sample inorganic matrix. Tuo and his colleagues43 used the neural network-based approach for correction of absorption and enhancement effects in EDXRF analysis.
In research related to the Japanese KAGUYA SELENE mission and to other planetary orbiter missions, Maruyama and co-workers44 investigated the influence of particle size effects on the XRF intensities. They observed the strong influence of particle size effects reaching up to 50% of the intensity emitted from a flat and homogenous sample. Gherase and Fleming45 adopted a fundamental parameter approach to the energy-broadening response of a Si(Li) detector through the ratio between K-alpha peak area to the sum of the coherently and incoherently scattered peak areas. By using a radioisotope excitation source they applied the method to the analysis of arsenic in polyester resin skin phantoms. Oskolok and Monogarova46 developed a method for the experimental determination and numerical refining of X-ray tube emission spectra. They used a special target sample to scatter the primary radiation emitted from an X-ray tube. Based on the measured scattered spectrum and applying a mathematical procedure, they calculated the distribution of photons in the tube primary spectrum. This method could be used to refine the spectrum of an ageing X-ray tube which may improve the accuracy of results obtained by using fundamental parameter methods. Shan and colleagues47 have proposed two instrumental approaches to correct for mineralogical effects in wavelength XRF analysis of pressed powder pellets relying on the control of the peak shift and the use of the peak area instead of peak intensity (height) in the calculations. The proposed methods were tested on a set of 27 certified reference materials. Filippov et al.48 implemented a method for quantitative analysis of “difficult” elements such as Er, Re, Yb and W using reference samples prepared from compounds of other alternative chemical elements contributing characteristic lines close in wavelength to those of the analytes of interest. The proposed approach could be useful in cases where the availability of reference materials containing the analysed elements is limited. Gurol et al.49 measured the dependence of the X-ray fluorescence production cross-sections of Co, Fe and Ni and their compounds on the external magnetic field with a magnitude equal to ± 0.4 T using a simple 241Am source-based set up. The measurements were carried out in EDXRF mode. In an attempt to improve methods for X-ray imaging, Xie and co-workers50 reported a derivation of a new reconstruction algorithm to correct for polarisation effects of the incident X-ray wave in X-ray fluorescence holography. They proved the validity of the new algorithm by numerical simulation followed by reconstruction of a model crystal structure composed of 27 iron atoms arranged in a cubic lattice.
A few reports were devoted to laboratory procedures such as quality control, quality assurance, method validation, improvement in the accuracy of the fundamental data, and the use of analytical terminology in X-ray spectrometry research. Bartley and co-workers51 addressed the problems related to the determination of uncertainty for in situ collected XRF data during Pb analysis. The uncertainty determination is a “hot topic” for all XRF analytical laboratories being accredited or applying for accreditation. The proper assessment of a method's uncertainty is compulsory for any analytical laboratory complying with quality control protocols or following good laboratory practice. Hyslop and White52 proposed an empirical approach based on duplicate XRF measurements to provide a better estimate of limits of detection for the analysis of PM 2.5 samples. Beckhoff53 reported new experimentally obtained results on mass absorption coefficients and fluorescence yields for aluminium and on transition rates of X-ray lines originating from Cu-LIII and Cu-LII subshells. The measurements were performed using tunable synchrotron radiation and a superconducting tunnel junction detector with energy resolution equal to about 10 eV in the soft X-ray range. The data obtained should improve the accuracy of standardless analysis when using fundamental parameter methods. Kantor54 produced a review and statistical evaluation of the articles published during the last 30 years in the journal Spectrochimica Acta Part B related to the use of the terms “calibration” and “external calibration” in the field of atomic spectrometry. Following the IUPAC guidelines he controversially proposed to avoid the use of the term “calibration” and instead express the procedure as “the degree of matrix matching of standards and samples”. Readers will note that this review has not followed this advice. A simple but solid work was reported by Mahrok and Shamoon55 from University of Mosul, Iraq who optimized the source-sample-detector distances in their XRF spectrometer by measuring radiation from 137Cs source scattered on carbon targets.
4 X-ray optics and microfluorescence
A number of new micro-beam systems have been successfully introduced. Lin and co-workers56 described a newly constructed confocal XRF set up utilising a full polycapillary lens in the excitation path and a half polycapillary lens in the detection path. An application of the spectrometer for the characterisation of layered structures was presented. Hampai et al.57 have continued the development of confocal, polycapillary based XRF spectrometry by constructing a system incorporating a couple of polycapillary lenses, silicon drift detector and X-ray sensitive CCD camera. The system enabled them to perform 3D mapping of elemental distributions in the sample as well as taking a radiographic picture of the same sample with a spatial resolution of 6 µm. In the next developmental step they plan to insert a compound refractive lens between the sample and the camera to improve the spatial resolution of the sample image. Sun et al.58 reported the first application of a newly constructed polycapillary based micro-beam XRF spectrometer with a laboratory X-ray source. The estimated detection limit for Fe was equal to 9 µg g−1. The spectrometer has been used to investigate individual air aerosol particles collected in Beijing, China during the test of odd-even car driving restrictions in preparation for the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games. Van Der Snickt et al.59 evaluated the analytical performance of the PRAXIS instrument combining µ-beam XRF and confocal µ-beam Raman spectroscopy (RM). The results obtained from an illuminated sheet of parchment were compared with those provided by a synchrotron-based µ-beam XRD.
Advancements in the development of high-resolution X-ray optics were reported in a work by Adams and Attenkofer.60 They constructed a tunable crystal analyzer characterised by large solid angle and electron-volt resolution in the energy range 6.5–12 keV. The analyser was based on active optics comprising a silicon strip with adjustable shape. The authors presented two applications for the newly developed optics, in atomic physics and in trace element analysis. They also foresee its application in X-ray imaging. Watanabe et al.61 produced a review of multilayer polarisation devices and their applications to polarimetric studies in the energy region up to 400 eV, including polarisation analysis of soft X-ray fluorescence with multilayer-coated gratings. Matsuda and his colleagues62 investigated X-ray energy distribution and the energy dependence of the output focal distance for a polycapillary X-ray lens attached to a sealed X-ray tube. They concluded that the difference in the output focal distance between Mo Kα and Mo Lα was 17 µm and that in conventional XRF measurement such difference could be negligible due to the fact that a 100 µm deviation in the distance from the optimum focal spot resulted in only a 3% increase of the focal spot size. Wegrzynek et al.63 published a similar report, where they evaluated the performance of different polycapillary and single capillary lenses in an X-ray tube based system. They measured a gain of about 2500 for a polycapillary lens and about 25 for a single glass capillary. In their work they also proposed a procedure for predicting the detection limits of elements as a function of the lens focal spot size and intensity gain.
A number of the reported applications of µ-beam X-ray techniques included combinations of two methods in one set up or use of complementary techniques followed by advanced methods of data analysis. The combined use of µ-beam XRF/XRD was also reported in a work by Jaroszewicz and co-workers.64 Their combination of techniques was used for phase characterisation of Ti–B–C ceramics. Due to a strong heterogeneity of the investigated samples the µ-beam XRF/XRD system discovered and visualised more phases when compared with conventional XRD. Molloy and Sieber65 demonstrated the use of metrological methods, such as principal component analysis (PCA) for evaluating the data from µ-beam XRF analysis to investigate elemental heterogeneity, so-called “nugget” effects, in standard reference materials. By using the proposed methods they could predict quantitatively the minimum recommended representative mass of solid samples. Bontempi et al.66 applied µ-beam XRF techniques to monitor air pollution by the determination of trace metals in lichens. They combined the µ-beam XRF analysis with AAS and SEM to validate the results and suggested that µ-beam XRF analyses could be performed directly in the field to monitor industrial locations. Moller et al.67 have used, for the first time, synchrotron-based X-ray fluorescence microscopy to investigate macrophages exposed to carbon nanotubes and reported an excess of calcium in the exposed cells.
5 Synchrotron radiation
5.1 Instrumental developments and fundamental studies
Only a few instrumental developments have been reported within the last review period. Details of experiments using the new microfocus spectroscopy beamline 118 at Diamond, Harwell, UK were reported by Mosselmans et al.68 who focused on the potential for environmental applications. The beamline offers µ-XRF, µ-XAS and µ-XRD configurations and underscores the trend of combining X-ray techniques at one beamline to characterize samples more comprehensively. Measurements with compound refractive lenses at the BAM-beamline were reported by Strub et al.,69 who claimed a beam with an impressive diameter below 1 µm and an intensity gain of 15000. The ability to switch excitation energies within only a few minutes was also an impressive feature. Pereira et al.70 describe an X-ray fluorescence and transmission microtomography imaging system installed at LNLS, Campinas, Brazil using a quasi-monochromatic beam produced by a multilayer monochromator. Ohigashi and coworkers71 performed time-lapse observation of XRF from Cu during an electrodeposition process. XRF imaging was carried out using full-field Wolter mirror microscope constructed at the Photon Factory, Japan. The very impressive detection limit achieved was equal to 0.60 pg per image per 80 s exposure time.

Fundamental studies of resonant Raman cross sections of pure elements and oxides were performed by Valentinuzzi et al.,72 who used theoretical models convoluted with instrument functions to establish that the Raman cross sections were similar for both elements and oxides. Beckhoff53 reported reference-free quantitation in X-ray spectrometry using SR. The author noted that values and estimated uncertainty of atomic fundamental parameters given in the literature could be improved by dedicated experiments and showed this by determining mass absorption coefficient and fluorescence yield of Al as well as transition probabilities of the Cu–L series. Only by such measures can reference-free determinations be performed to an acceptable level of trueness.
5.2 New applications
The combination of µ-XRF, µ-XRD and µ-XANES, highlighted in last year's review, has seen further development this year in particular for more comprehensive characterization of samples.
A large number of applications in the field of environmental studies and their toxicology were evident within the review period as shown by Endo et al.,73 who determined the chemical speciation of As-accumulating minerals in a sedimentary iron deposit using beamline BL37XU at SPring-8. The authors concluded that the specific correlation between the distribution of As and biominerals indicated that micro-organisms played an important role in the mineralization of strengite in combination with an As-accumulating process. Kodera et al.74 also used a beamline at SPring-8 to investigate the distribution of Pb in Pb-accumulating Pteridophye blechnum niponicum. Two-dimensional maps of Pb in various parts of the plant allowed the authors to propose the mechanism for transport and accumulation of Pb. Naftel et al.75 investigated metals at the soil/root interface and the distribution and oxidation state of Cu and Mn in soil within the rhizosphere of the roots of Populus tremuloides. The authors found a chemical reduction of both elements in the near-root environment, whereas Mn 2+ and Cu1+ were found within the roots.
The feature of SR µ-XRF to provide spatially-resolved in vivo metal abundance data on a sub-micrometer scale without the need of chemical fixation, coating, drying or even sectioning of plant samples was highlighted by Punshon et al.76 The ability to uncover mechanisms of plant metal homeostasis without influence from sample preparation was a particularly attractive feature highlighted by the authors. Synchrotron methods were used to assess the uptake of roadway-derived Zn by earthworms in an urban soil.77 The authors tested their hypothesis that earthworms will bio-accumulate Zn in a roadway-dust contaminated soil system thereby identifying a potential pathway for roadway contaminants to enter the terrestrial food web. The authors established by means of SR µ-XRF mapping that there is a change in the Zn storage pattern within the intestine, which could not be correlated without mapping. Similarly Lei et al.78 used SR µ-XRF to obtain the cellular distribution of Pb and As in the leaves of Viola principis H. de Boiss. The authors' findings showed that the plant had a special mechanism for detoxification of toxic metals within the mesophyll cells. The distribution was found to be different from the nutrient elements. The uptake of organomercury and accumulation in zebrafish larvae at the tissue and cellular level was investigated by Korbas et al.79 The greatest accumulation of methyl and ethyl mercury compounds was localized in the rapidly dividing lens epithelium, with lower levels being found in brain and various other organs. The authors pointed out that µ-XRF was found to be a powerful tool for directly investigating the molecular toxicology of heavy metals. Tissue specific trace level metal distribution in Daphnia magna was studied with SR and laboratory X-ray techniques by De Samber et al.80 Two-dimensional µ-XRF scanning and XRF µ-CT were used to investigate the accumulation of metals within specific organs using K-means clustering and PCA for data handling.
Several publications within the review period reported applications in the field of medicine and biology. Munro et al.81 investigated the intracellular metabolism of As for understanding As-induced toxicity by the ingestion of As-contaminated drinking water. Microprobe XRF and X-ray absorption analyses were performed on HepG2 cells following their exposure to high doses of arsenite (1 mM) and arsenate (20 mM). Microprobe XRF elemental mapping showed As accumulation in the euchromatin region of the cell nucleus, synonymous with As targeting of DNA or proteins involved in DNA transcription. XANES and EXAFS analysis of arsenite-treated cells, however, showed the predominance of an As tris-sulfur species, providing increased credence to arsenic's interaction with nuclear proteins as a key factor in As-induced toxicity. McCrea et al.82 compared rapid scanning XRF mapping with MRI imaging to establish the Fe distribution in the brain. The authors claim that this combination of investigative tools improved the mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. The elemental and absorption distribution of breast tissue samples was investigated by Pereira et al.83 who used X-ray fluorescence and transmission tomography facilities at LNLS, Campinas, Brazil. The behaviour of Cu, Fe and Zn in healthy tissue and tumour tissue was investigated. Farquharson et al.84 investigated the distribution of trace elements Ca, Cu, Fe and Zn as well as the oxidation state of Cu in breast tumour tissue by SR µ-XRF and µ-XANES. Two-dimensional maps with spatial resolution of 18 µm were compared with optical transmission images to identify the tumour regions. An increase in all elements was found in the tumour regions, except Fe, which showed a decrease. Tumour regions were found to have a higher fraction of Cu+ compared with normal samples. In this review period the contributions with regards to osteoporotic research were very sparse, although this subject remains of interest. Lima et al.,85,86 characterised osteoporotic bone structures of the femoral head and the cortical and trabecular regions by 2D SR µ-XRF images. The measurements were performed on the XRF beam line at the NSLS, Campinas, Brazil, using the standard white beam excitation geometry of 45° incidence and an X-ray beam optic of 20 µm diameter. The results showed that the concentration and the superficial distribution of the minerals varied significantly among the groups, mostly in relation to the element Ca, depending on the location and bone. A correlation between elemental distribution of minerals and structure was found by the same authors87 who concluded that 2D imaging on a micrometer scale was an important tool for the investigation of osteoporotic bones in combination with µ-CT. Gajda et al.88 investigated the distribution of selected elements in atherosclerotic plaques of mice. Numerous essential and trace elements were detected in cross sections of aortic roots. Two-dimensional maps of element distribution were compared with images of consecutive sections stained histologically, allowing precise location of the analyzed elements in morphologically defined areas of aortic lesion. Sulfur was detected in areas occupied by macrophages and smooth muscle cells. Iron was observed in high concentrations in cardiac and smooth muscle, blood clots and in adjacent coronary vessels. Lower concentrations of Fe were seen in the regions of plaques rich in macrophages and lipids. The authors also determined Ca, Cu, P and Zn and claimed that the presented results provided a substantial morphological and physicochemical background for further investigations aimed at evaluating pharmacological and dietary treatment of atherosclerosis.
A comparative metallomics of transgenic and non-transgenic soybeans was performed by Sussulini et al.89 Transgenic and non-transgenic soybeans proteins were found to display typical and random profiles for metal ions bindings. Twining et al.90 reported the exploration of ocean biogeochemistry by single-cell microprobe analysis of protist elemental compositions. These few cell tissue organisms were mapped by SR-XRF and sub-cellular maps indicated the importance of Fe to photosynthetic machinery and of Zn for nuclear organelles. The authors claimed that observed changes in diatom silicification and cytoplasm content following iron fertilization will modify the understanding of the relationship between iron availability and silicification.
Several papers dealing with the investigation of NASA stardust mission to Comet 81P/Wild2 were published during the review period, showing the power of SRXRF for the investigation of this kind of material. Brennan et al.91 of SSRL, Stanford, CA reported the investigation of stardust samples captured in aerogel. As the cometary material disaggregated during the deceleration in the aerogel, elemental mapping of the entire track was found to be necessary. The challenge was to discriminate between pixels having cometary and aerogel material and those of pure cometary material, which was claimed by the authors to be successfully achieved. Flynn et al.92 reported in situ characterization of ∼10 µm particles captured in aerogels from the same NASA mission. Chemical, mineralogical and size-frequency characterization was performed without any invasive extraction. Chemical composition, oxidation state and grain size were determined. Lanzirotti et al.93 used XRF methods at NSLS and APS to collect element maps for each track and the elemental abundances of 156 individual fragments within these tracks were determined. It was found that in general whole-track and terminal particle abundances were dissimilar.

Cultural heritage is a booming field of application, not only for SR-XRF but also for XRF in general because the techniques are non-destructive. It is pleasing to note that the number of publications increased during the review period. Constantinescu et al.94 used SR µ-XRF at the microbeamline at BESSY, Berlin, Germany for the identification of archaeological gold from Transylvania and of Dacian bracelets. The authors used the trace elements for provenancing, especially Hg, Pb, Sb, Sn and Te. A spectacular application was reported in which five Dacian gold bracelets where identified by their Sb and Sn traces. Guerra et al.95 used the BAM-line at BESSY, Berlin, Germany for the determination of trace elements in gold, especially Pt by its K-lines. Combined SRXRF/XANES studies of coloured palaeontological and archaeological bone material were reported by Reiche and Chalmin.96 Measurements were performed at ID 21 at the ESRF, Grenoble, France. The blue, grey or black stains were investigated and correlated with Mn5+, the blue stains were identified as alteration phenomenon initiated by heat processes. Use was made of SR µ-XRF in a study of the distribution of Br, Pb and Zn in tooth and bone samples from pre-Columbian archaeological sites in Peru. The authors found that Pb and Zn appeared in similar regions of the samples, while Br showed an enrichment close to the Haversian canals. Cotte et al.97 applied micro-imaging techniques to the chemical analysis of ancient painting. The two main concerns of restorers and conservators were illustrated: looking backwards to gain insight into ancient artistic practices and looking forward to preserve works of arts. The authors established the relevance of combining µ-XRF, µ-XAS, µ-XRD and µ-FTIR for the complete analysis of paintings. Echard et al.98 analysed the varnish on historical musical instruments with SR µ-XRF in combination with XRD and FTIR. The authors found new insights into the understanding of the varnishing process and similarities with some painting techniques.
Only one outstanding geological application was published within the review period, in which an overview was given by Frisia et al.99 of SR applications to past volcanism archived in speleothems (cave carbonate deposits). A direct causal relationship between volcanism and climate change was the aim and the authors proved that the detection of sulfur's variability in speleothems, which required high spatial resolution and low detection limits, proved to be an ideal application for SR µ-XRF. Short-lived pulses of increased sulfur concentration related to atmospheric loading due to volcanic eruptions and the methodology was found to expand the potential to correlate volcanic eruption events on a global scale.
6 TXRF
In this section of the review only special achievements are mentioned, whereas routine applications may be found in their respective application sections.
The proceedings of the “12th conference on TXRF and related methods”, June 2007 in Trento provided a comprehensive survey of TXRF activities during the last year and many of the papers presented are mentioned below. A review of the use of SR as an ideal excitation source for TXRF was presented by Streli et al.100 In particular the wide energy range was emphasised, which can be easily tuned by means of a multilayer monochromator leading to the lowest detection limits often in the fg range for medium Z elements. The authors stressed the inherent physical properties of SR, such as the natural collimation and the linear polarization as well as the high flux of photons making this source ideally suited for ultra trace element analysis. Changing to a Si (111) single crystal allowed X-ray absorption measurements in fluorescence mode (XAS). This configuration enabled the chemical speciation of trace elements to be made as a result of the high sensitivity while working in the TXRF mode. The performance of several beam lines were described for different synchrotrons worldwide in terms of detection and speciation when covering the range of measurable elements from B to U.
6.1. Fundamental TXRF research and instrumentation
In an article by Fernandez-Ruiz101 critical aspects regarding the uncertainty in multielement quantification by TXRF were discussed. Several empirical models were systematically compared with each other and with theoretical models. The author concluded that some uncertainties can be explained by the choice of model but some were caused by variations in Compton background or nonlinearity of the Si(Li) detector quantum efficiency. Furthermore the roughness and small geometrical variations of the sample depositions were important sources of uncertainty in experimental TXRF measurements. In a study by Wellenreuther et al.102 trace element quantification in protein samples was performed. A wide range of proteins having different salt content, buffer composition, additives and amino acid composition could be analysed. Several sample supports were used such as plexiglass, quartz glass and silicon. All samples were spiked with internal standard for quantification. A partial separation of protein and internal standard was only observed with untreated silicon, whereas siliconised quartz proved to be the least prone to heterogeneous drying of the sample and yielded most accurate results.
Turning to the instrumentation side, Kunimura and Kawai103 described a handy, portable waveguide TXRF spectrometer with nanogram sensitivity. With their novel compact configuration, nanogram levels of Sb and rare elements could be detected by K-line or L-line excitation in rain water samples. Wobrauschek et al.104 introduced a modernised version of a low cost TXRF module that had been updated to perform measurements in vacuum, thereby extending the range of detectable elements down to Na. The combination of an electrically cooled high resolution (140 eV at 5.9 keV) silicon drift detector with an 8 µm Be window, plus a high power (3 kW) Mo anode tube and a Mo/Si multilayer monochromator with high reflectivity yielded a detection limit of 2 pg for Rb (1000 s counting time) with an attractively high sensitivity of 70 cps ng−1 for this compact attachment unit.
6.2. Synchrotron radiation induced TXRF (SR-TXRF)
The detection of elements at ultra trace levels has become commonplace but there is now increasing interest in chemical speciation, which can be addressed by using SR and XAS techniques in TXRF mode (SR-TXRF-XANES). Fittschen et al.105 performed the speciation of Fe in atmospheric aerosols using SR-TXRF-XANES across the Fe K-edge at Hasylab, DESY, Hamburg, Germany. Atmospheric aerosols were collected in ten size fractions from 15 nm to 16 µm with a Berner impactor, directly on specially shaped silicon reflectors fitted into the impactor. No additional sample preparation was required. Due to the high sensitivity of the TXRF measurements a sample collection time of only 20 min gave sufficient sample mass on the reflectors. Based on the analytical results from different Fe salts in isopropanol suspension used as reference samples for the chemical states, it was found that Fe(III) was mainly present in all particle size fractions. SR-TXRF at Hasylab, was used by Groma et al.106 to study airport-related aerosols using a 7-stage May cascade impactor. The aim was to correlate elemental composition of fine particulate matter (PM 2.5) in different size fractions to airport-related sources. The method allowed quantitative determination of most elements at ultra-trace levels (pg m−3) from samples collected for less than 20 minutes. The comparison of the size distribution of the elemental concentrations for different locations allowed the authors to differentiate between end-of-pipe and other emission sources. The authors claimed the ability to determine typical elements coming from combustion processes (Pb, Zn), aircraft-related emissions (Cu), as well as road salting processes (Cl). They reported that elements connected to crustal erosion and resuspension (Ca, Fe, Ti) had their maximum concentrations in the larger micrometer size fractions (1–4 µm). They concluded the method had the potential to be used in industrial/traffic processes where the time scale of the event is similar to the typical sampling durations, even using laboratory scale equipments.
A study of parameters influencing self absorption phenomena in SR-TXRF XANES across the As K-edge was performed by Meirer et al.107 Calibration samples with various As(V) concentrations were prepared on flat substrates and measurements showed a correlation between the damping of the oscillations and the As mass deposited. A Monte Carlo simulation was developed using data focusing on the sample shape and geometry obtained from confocal white light microscopy. The study showed that the damping was correlated to the key parameters of the sample itself, namely shape and density. Both XANES and EXAFS were performed under grazing incidence and the results led to the conclusion that the damping of the oscillation in the EXAFS region renders the TXRF EXAFS not feasible for highly concentrated samples. The Polar ice sheet and continental glaciers are natural archives of paleoclimatic information. In particular, Aeolian dust archived in polar and mid-latitude ice cores are a valuable proxy for assessing environmental and climatic variations over different time scales. XAS experiments across the Fe K-edge were performed on these dust samples at SSRL Stanford, CA108 using TXRF geometry. They showed that inclusions of mineral fractions on insoluble dust in the 1–10 µg range was possible. Meirer et al.109 performed a study showing the ability of SR-TXRF-XANES to chemically characterize contamination on silicon wafers used in the semiconductor industry. It provided information on possible unwanted chemical processes taking place on the wafer surface and helped in determining the true source of the contamination. In particular the Fe XANES data showed that the method could be applied successfully for that task.
To determine the influence of anthropogenic sources on the contamination of river waters in the state of Sao Paolo Brazil samples were analysed by SR-TXRF.110 In the city of Limeira there are galvanization industries as well as precious and semi precious jewellery production. The dumping of industrial waste has led to the contamination of water samples by Al, Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni, Pb and Zn and of the sediments by Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn, which are even higher than the quality reference values defined by the Brazilian legislation. The detection limits for the elements in these water samples were in the range of 0.04 µg L−1 and in sediment 0.03 µg g−1.
A progress report was published by Tiwari et al.111 based on the activities from a laboratory TXRF instrument using the micro XRF beamline on the Indian synchrotron source Indus-2.
6.3. Surface analysis
The sensitivity of TXRF, in particular for impurities on a surface, is a well known feature that has been applied to improve front-end semiconductor processing. Budri112 published a summary of how in-line TXRF monitoring provided detailed information on Al, Mo and Ti contamination levels and possible improvements of several process steps to minimise product yield losses and optimise process geometry in the same fabrication platform. Sparks et al.113 investigated the capabilities of TXRF for both photovoltaic and advanced semiconductor processing industries. Single crystal silicon coupon samples showed variations in the effectiveness of a number of cleaning regimes used for removing trace metal contamination during photovoltaic processing. For the second type of materials used in photovoltaic, the multi-crystalline silicon was also analysed but it was found to be more difficult to quantify metallic contamination. Another interesting benefit was the ability of TXRF to characterize changes in the silicon dioxide content of hafnium silicate films used as high-k gate dielectrics. Similarly Takahara et al.114 published details of trace metal analysis by TXRF of hafnium silicate deposited on silicon wafers. The difficulties in measuring Hf Lα with the conventional W Lβ excitation, overlying scatter lines and high background from Hf itself were discussed. The use of an iridium target X-ray tube permitted TXRF measurements on hafnium silicate films with intentional contamination of Cr, Cu, Fe, Ni and Ti. X-ray resonance Raman scattering and the Si escape peak from the scattered Ir-radiation overlapped the Ni peak thus giving rise to additional difficulties in spectrum processing. Detection limits nevertheless were reported to be in the range of 110 atoms cm−2 for the transition metals. Hönicke et al.115 from the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Germany's national metrology institute, developed an alignment strategy to perform element depth profiling in vertical sidewall layers on structured wafers. Three-dimensional test structures were fabricated consisting of silicon bars with width/spacings either in the µm or in the nm range. The alignment procedure developed, allowed for distinct excitation of multiple sidewalls of one kind. In addition information about depth-dependent sidewall contamination, layer thickness and composition could be obtained by this new approach. The authors assumed that chemical speciation should be possible by using grazing incidence XRF (GIXRF) in combination with near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) to provide yet more valuable information in this important and challenging area of technology. Danel et al.116 reported the capability of thin film characterization by TXRF, dealing with films thinner than a few nm. Sweeping TXRF, in which the silicon wafer is moved continuously during measurement, was optimized by Borde et al.117 for the monitoring of metallic contamination in integrated circuit manufacturing processes. Sekowski et al.118 applied TXRF to investigate sputtering processes and determined the angular distribution of sputtered germanium atoms in comparison to a Monte Carlo simulation. Molecular organisation of a protein–lipid film on a water surface was studied by Zheludeva et al.119 The X-ray standing wave method was applied to determine the composition of the protein–lipid film and to locate the position of Ni ions in the direction normal to the film surface. Numerical analysis of the X-ray standing wave fluorescence data revealed that, after injection under the phospholipid monolayer, the protein–lipid mixture separated in a self-assembled manner to a layered structure.
6.4. New applications
Within the topic of environmental investigations a comparison study was made by Woelfl et al.120 of intestinal broad flatworms within their fish host. The authors found that the mass fraction of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, and Pb decreased significantly with the body size of the endoparasite, but Zn did not. Compared to fish organs, small parasites were shown to accumulate up to 307 times more Mn, up to 255 times more Fe, up to 220 times more Ni, up to 175 times more Cu and up to 12 times more Zn than the host fish. Lead was only found in the endoparasite, but not in the fish organs. Mages et al.121 determined Cd and Zn accumulation in single zebrafish embryos. In contact with contaminated sediment, fish eggs and embryos might be exposed to metals via the water phase as well as through direct contact with contaminated particles. The authors indicated this might result in body burdens that were difficult to predict normally and might vary according to individual micro-scale exposure conditions. TXRF was employed to analyse individual embryos for internal contaminant concentrations, which helped to develop a better understanding of dose–response relationships. The use of vermicompost as a bioadsorbent substrate for Cr, Ni, Pb and V from waste water remediation was evaluated by Urdaneta et al.122 This enabled the authors to optimize parameters such as pore size absorbency conditions which resulted in the mean removal percentage of around 95% for example Pb. Wagner et al.123 investigated the mass distribution of trace elements in aerosol samples collected in the urban area of Göteborg, Sweden with special focus on the impact of different air masses and anthropogenic activities. Polished quartz carriers were chosen as collection substrates for the subsequent direct analysis by TXRF. Unimodal mass distributions were found in the study area for the elements Ca, Cl, Fe and Zn, whereas the distributions for Br, Cu, Cr, K, Ni and S were bimodal, indicating high temperature processes as the primary source of the submicron particle components. The sample collection period included the New Year firework displays which showed both an extensive increase in concentrations as well as a shift to the submicron particle range for K and Sr; elements that are typically found in fireworks.
Only a few biomedical applications were reported in this review period. Magalhaes et al.124 studied concentrations of Br, Cu, Fe and Zn in healthy and cancerous breast tissue. Several contiguous thin sections (up to 10 µm thickness) of each tissue were analyzed by TXRF in order to study the homogeneity in the elemental concentration along each tissue. The main goal of this study was to demonstrate the presence of Br, which was assumed to play an important role in breast carcinoma development. A similar pattern for almost all the analyzed tissues was obtained: levels of Br, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, P, S and Zn increased in carcinoma tissues when compared with the corresponding healthy samples. In contrast to the findings of this study, those of earlier studies showed decreased Br levels for different carcinoma tissues, unlike the levels of the other elements studied. Szoboszlai et al.125 determined the elemental content of Cu, Fe and Zn in two human adenocarcinoma cell lines. Cancer cells were sedimented directly to the quartz plates using a modified cytospin slide holder arrangement. Special glass stands and caps were also constructed to hold the quartz plates with the cell samples during the vapour-phase microwave assisted digestion. Dry mass of the centrifuged cells was determined and the elemental analysis data reported for the two cell lines were referred either to sample cell numbers, to the total protein content or to the dry mass. Sanchez et al.126 analysed oral fluids from women affected by osteoporosis and osteopenia in an attempt to prove an association between periodontal disease and osteoporosis and/or osteopenia. The concentration of some elements in saliva showed different behaviour as compared to gingival crevice fluid. The authors reported that Ca and Zn levels in bone showed very distinguishable behaviour and they recommended TXRF for such investigations. However, they suggested improvements in the statistics in order to establish this as a routine method able to correlate periodontal disease and the element concentrations determined.
TXRF is suitable as a micro-analytical technique where only a small amount of sample is required and for this reason has been successfully applied to cultural heritage investigations. Vazques et al.127 showed that examples from Argentinian cultural heritage sites could be related by means of pigments in paintings on canvas and in rock sites as well as in underwater archaeology research. In a second paper128 TXRF with FTIR and GC-MS was combined to obtain information for identification of inorganic and organic components in black pigments of rock art from Argentina. Martinez et al.129 analysed water in the cave under the Sun Pyramid in the ancient Teotihuacan City and water samples from wells around the site. Metal concentration in all of the water samples from inside and outside the cave matched the characteristics of the sampling site, well's depth, soil and minerals, indicating that these water sources were hydrologically connected.
TXRF was applied to various other interesting fields. Martinez et al.130 determined trace elements in tobacco confirming that TXRF provided precise (reproducible) and accurate (trueness) data for 15 elements in this sample type. The possibility of S determination in a uranium matrix was studied by Dhara et al.131 The precision and accuracy of the method were assessed and found to be better than 8% (1σ RSD) and 15% respectively at a concentration level of 1 µg mL−1 for S measured in solutions whereas for Rb2U(SO4)3, these values were found to be better than 4 and 13%, respectively. A first application of TXRF to the compositional study of magnetic ferro-fluids was reported by Fernandez-Ruiz et al.132 with the twin aims of validating the best analytical conditions and evaluating the limitations of TXRF in the analysis of these materials. An empirical method, based on the use of angle-dependent TXRF measurements was tested for three kinds of ferromagnetic nano-particles, with different morphologies. The techniques of ICP-MS and ICP-OES were used to validate the TXRF results. In contrast with the ICP techniques, the developed TXRF procedure did not require previous chemical acid digestion. Additionally, two procedures of magnetic nanoparticle synthesis, i.e. co-precipitation and laser-pyrolysis, were checked for the contaminant trace metals Cr, Mn and Zn. The authors recommended the method of laser-pyrolysis for the production of the produced higher purity nanoparticles.
7 Portable and mobile XRF
Arguably, the characterisation of art, and cultural and archaeolgical artefacts is one of the most popular applications of this technique, and is on the increase. Thus, Vazquez-Calvo et al.133 undertook an evaluation of this approach in the characterisation of patinas (5 to 500 µm thick) on stone building materials. Some of these patinas originated from past treatments applied for aesthetic or protective reasons, and the investigation demonstrated elevated levels of Fe, K, Mn, P, Si and Ti in the patina surface. Desnica et al.134 used PXRF to analyse the pigments in the painted wooden inventory of the pilgrimage church of Saint Mary of Jerusalem in Trski Vrh—one of the most beautiful late-baroque sacral ensembles in Croatia. The results were used to inform proposals for conservation; supplementary laboratory analysis by µ-PIXE and µ-Raman being required to confirm pigment type.
PXRF continues to be important in space applications, not least in planetary XRF mapping from an orbiter using the Sun as the excitation source. As a contribution to these experiments, Ogawa et al.135 used an improved simulation model to undertake a numerical estimation of the expected resolution of a single orbital track of the Japanese SELENE orbiter for various elements under varying solar conditions. Resolution for the elements Al, Mg and Si was estimated to be <90 km under normal Sun conditions and 20 km under active conditions. The elements Ca, Fe and Ti would also be detectable with a spatial resolution of 20 km during the periods of active solar flares. Further details of the X-ray spectrometer used on this mission were offered by Shirai et al.136 describing the use of a CCD detector technology with a 200 eV resolution (5.9 keV) with 16 of these devices giving a total collection area of 100 cm2. In preparation for applications in the analysis of planetary surfaces, Naranen et al.137 simulated in the laboratory the XRF analysis of regolith at different viewing angles in order to assess the affect on spectra of varying physical properties such as particle size distribution and packing density. A semi-empirical function was developed to fit fluorescence line intensities as a function of viewing geometry to account for the observed variations in elemental line ratios and the implications for future planetary missions were discussed.

In situ scanning XRF, often in ship born laboratories, has regularly been applied to drill core samples. A further example of such an application was described by Hodell et al.138 as part of the Integrated Drilling Programme in the eastern North Atlantic. Scanning XRF data was complemented by delta 18O measurements to record the style of sedimentary deposition in the older glacial periods of the Pleistocene. Elemental X-ray scanner data was complemented by sediment granulometry in a study by Diekmann et al.139 of ocean floor core samples drilled during Leg 195 of the Ocean Drilling Programme in the southern Okinawa Trough in the Northwest Pacific Ocean. These samples provided a detailed record of environmental change over the last 28 ka. The calibration of XRF core scanners was discussed by Weltje and Tjallingii140 with particular reference to uncertainties associated with the poorly constrained measurement geometry, irregularity in the split core surface, and spatial variations in the thickness of a pore water film (if present) which forms directly below a protective foil covering the core surface. To overcome these difficulties, the author proposed a log ratio calibration model, based on theory, the principles of compositional data analysis and empirical evidence, which was capable of achieving a precision in measurements of about 2%. Other applications of this to paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic studies are covered in the geological and industrial minerals section of this review.
Continuing their interest in instrument development, Kawai's group22 described a portable device for 2D X-ray imaging based on a pyroelectric crystal, a Si-PIN detector, a slit and pulse motors, all driven by a 9 V battery. The 0.8 mm pinhole used on this device offered a spatial resolution of 3.5 mm. Hocquet et al.141 designed and built a mobile XRF detector system for in situ analysis in archaeometry applications in which the X-ray tube and SDD detector were mounted in a detector head on a mobile platform that allowed independent vertical and horizontal movement. The instrument was applied to the analysis of the pigment compositions of wall paintings. Uhlir et al.142 addressed one of the limitations of PXRF instrument design, namely detectability of low atomic number elements. A new attempt to solve this problem in art and archaeological applications was evaluated by incorporating both the X-ray optics and detector snout in a vacuum chamber housing.
There is significant contemporary interest in combined portable XRF and XRD instruments and the design and preliminary performance of such a device was described by Gianoncelli et al.143 This instrument comprised a 30 kV Cu anode X-ray tube, polycapillary semi-lens to provide a parallel X-ray beam, and no moving parts and was designed especially for material identification in cultural heritage applications where artefacts are non-moveable, and/or exhibit irregular surfaces and shapes. Analysis times to measure the main crystalline phases in test samples were between 30 minutes and 1–2 hours.
One popular application of PXRF is the analysis of soil. However, XRF had a different role to play in the report of Fakih et al.,144 who were interested in the monitoring of Fe(III) in soils and the tracking of changes in iron oxide mineralogy. Analytes were monitored using small (2 × 2 × 0.2 cm) striated polymer plates coated with synthetic pure ferrihydrite or As-doped ferrihydrite, which were inserted within two different horizons (organo-mineral and albic) located in a wet-land soil with alternating redox conditions. Before and after measurements of these coated plates were undertaken by laboratory XRF and showed that the ferrihydrite disappeared over a period of months as a measure of redox rates. Complementary SEM studies indicated that the plates became colonised by bacteria and biofilms suggesting a biological-mediated process with iron sulfide and other micro-precipitates forming in the albic-horizon samples with other micro-precipitates after a 7 month incubation period.

Other contributions were made by Cesareo and Brunetti145 who described the novel use of portable EDXRF equipment to determine the thickness of gold on gilded artefacts. The instrument was optimised for the determination of Ag, Au and Cu and the thickness of gold was determined by measuring differential attenuation of line ratios with a particular interest in characterising gilded objects from the Royal tomb of Sipan and from the Museum of Sican in the north of Peru. Another innovative contribution was described by Melquiades et al.146 in the determination by PXRF of titanium dioxide in sun cream with the aim of estimating the sun protection factor and identify metals present in samples. The elements Br, K, Sr and Zn were detected and the sun protection factor measured in three commercial products provided a value that was 10% smaller than the nominal one. Guilherme et al.147 compared the performance of a portable and non-portable XRF spectrometers for archaeometric applications.
8 On-line XRF
We are delighted to welcome a significant increase in the number of on-line contributions this year, although believing that this still under-represents the role of XRF in this area of application. Thus, Tillman and Duong148 were interested in managing slagging at the Monroe Power Plant in Southeastern Michigan, USA. They described the use of an on-line XRF instrument to blend two sources of coal, one bituminous and the other sub-bituminous to achieve a dramatic reduction in costly slagging incidents at the plant. On line monitoring in a different context was described by Ellis et al.149 whose interest lay in the use of optical and X-ray spectroscopies with crystallography for determining the functional states of metals in metalloprotein crystals. Based on a beamline at the Daresbury synchrotron, X-ray absorption measurements were made on crystals in situ from which diffraction data was obtained as well as microspectrophotometry data, thereby allowing the simultaneous monitoring of optically active and optically silent metal centres in crystals of nitrite reductase from Alcaligenes xylosoxidans containing active Cu centres.
9 Applications
9.1 Sample preparation and preconcentration techniques
In recent years, this Review has commented on advanced techniques that have enabled individual single particles to be analysed. Ma and Kim150 described three different particle collection devices that are available for such work; a two stage filter pack, a low pressure Andersen impactor and a micro-orifice uniform deposit impactor. The samplers were assessed for their ability to collect particles of varying size and deal with cluster formation that often impedes single particle analysis. As expected, the time taken to collect particles was shown to be a critical parameter required to avoid filter overload. Stage rotation was seen as an effective way to separate clusters although this restricted analysis to those particles dispersed to the edge of a cluster. As with all analytical techniques, results only apply to the sample actually examined rather than the “bulk” sample submitted. Finkelshtein and Gunicheva151 described a mathematical model for the dependence of intensity of X-ray fluorescence radiation on the particle size of powder and pulp samples. Whilst their expression was shown to deal with homogeneous binary mixtures, it was also applicable for more realistic multi-component powder samples. Merkle et al.152 revisited the notoriously difficult problem facing analysts dealing with chromite-rich samples. The low solubility of chromium in lithium borate fluxes encourages the faint hearted to restrict their analytical methods to the use of pressed powder pellets. The authors implied that reasonable results could be obtained by avoiding fusion, but a critical awareness of the shortcomings of this approach was given. Zhang et al.153 offered a technique for the mixing of mineral samples with agaron gel after decomposition with aqua regia. The sample/gel solution was heated to boiling to form a quasi-solid gel. This approach may also be of interest to those seeking to avoid damaging platinum ware when faced with high-content ore samples. Osman et al.154 reported methods for the hydrolysis of RuO2–TiO2 mixed oxides to form gels and powders. Basic or neutral conditions were found to lead to powders consisting of 2–10 nm diameter crystalline RuO2 embedded in a matrix of crystalline anatase and amorphous TiO2 whilst acid hydrolysis gave gels containing smaller (1–3 nm) amorphous RuO2. Both gels and powders suffered from the formation of clusters of aggregates up to 0.5 µm wide. The Ru:Ti ratios measured on the powders by XPS were lower compared to those from the bulk XRF technique. The XRF data also contained more low-valent Ru, thought to be due to incomplete hydrolysis of the precursors. Paul et al.155 presented a method for synthesizing un-doped and doped ceramic (Ba,Sr)TiO3 powders based on a sol-drying process utilising freeze-granulation and freeze-drying of freshly prepared sols. The method was reported to be flexible, catering for different stoichiometry of the powders and the chemistry of doping agents as well as the incorporation of fluoride ions that can be easily de-agglomerated.

Other sample preparation methods published during this Review year included sol–gel methods156 for Ca2PbO4 using the Pechini complex route and solid state reaction. The sol–gel samples retained more Pb and were shown by SEM to have a smaller distribution interval with a median value of 1 µm. Crozet and Guigue157 separated actinides from fission products by extraction chromatography prior to XRF analysis. The samples were prepared for a PUREX test (Pt, U refining by extraction) where analytical control is monitored by measuring Np, Pu and U concentrations in the main extraction raffinate. A gravimetric approach to the univariate standard addition method was presented by Kelly et al.158 for both liquids and solids. Gravimetry rather than volumetry was shown to reduce the preparation time, increase design flexibility and improve accuracy in the reported result. The standard addition method is often used for analytes in aqueous solutions that are aspirated into flames or plasmas and determined by absorption, emission or mass spectrometric techniques. This formulation offered a method that could also be applied to complex matrices, such as distillate and residual fuel oils, analysed by XRF or combustion combined with atomic fluorescence or absorption where matrix-induced interferences are encountered.
9.2 Geological and industrial minerals
XRF continues to be one of the workhorses of geochemical applications, often being used to provide basic major and trace element determinations that are then combined with results from more specialised techniques. During the present review period, the XRF technique contributed to a study of the provenance and diagenetic history of Alpine Tethyde mudrocks from Sicily,159 the analysis of Quaternary tephra layers from Northwestern Argentina in a study designed to understand the factors that triggered rock avalanches,160 and the characterisation of sandstone samples from the Ajali formation, Anambra Basin (Nigeria) to evaluate hydraulic conductivity and hence ground water quality.161 Hydrologic changes in southern Africa over the last 200 ka was investigated by Kristen et al.162 using high resolution XRF scanning and other geochemical measurements to characterise sediments from Lake Tswaing. El-Hasan163 used XRF to contribute to a study of the geochemistry of redox-sensitive trace elements in the Upper Cretaceous oil shales of Central Jordan, proposing an authigenic or non-detrital source for organic matter. In contrast, ophiolite-related amphibolites were studied by Moazzen and Berhansli164 in samples collected from the Khoy area of NW Iran proposing an origin as a seamount. XRF was one of the techniques used by Cornelius et al.165 to map geochemically the deeply weathered laterites from western Yilgarn Craton of Western Australia, demonstrating geochemical trends, major lithologies and dispersion halos around significant bedrock mineralisation. Hajaji et al.166 characterised the general geology of peraluminous rocks from the Bou-Azzer region of the Central Anti-Atlas area of Morocco, with a particular interest in the phase transitions observed on heating samples beyond 1100 °C. It should be re-emphasised that in all these studies referred to above, XRF was usually used to provide routine elemental data as part of a multi-technique approach.
XRF was also used to contribute routine data to a number of paleoceanographic and paleoclimatic studies, research that is usually aimed at elucidating climatic conditions over geological time periods often to contribute to an understanding of modern climate change issues. McHugh et al.167 undertook one such study designed to understand the last reconnection of the Marmara Sea (Turkey) to the World Ocean, after this sea had been transformed into a brackish lake when global sea levels fell below the sill level in the Dardanelles Strait. The aim of the study by Panizzo et al.168 was to reconstruct early Holocene environments (10685 to 7260 a BP) at a small lake near Holebudalen, Southern Norway. In addition to the expected early Holocene warming, climatic perturbations were detected. The interest of Luckge et al.169 was in paleoenvironmental conditions off southern Sumatra during the past 300000 years, caused by monsoon or ocean circulation controls on the basis of analysing off-shore sediment cores. Three influences on the variability of sea surface temperature were proposed: variations in the intensity of upwelling, elevated fresh water input and long-term changes in the intensity of frequency of low-latitude climatic phenomena, such as the El-Niño-Southern Oscillation. Sea floor sediment cores from the McMurdo/Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica were the object of analysis of Damiani and Giorgetti170 using fused glass XRF, SEM and optical microscopy to show that various layers originated from either the McMurdo Volcanic Group or the Transantarctic Mountains and deposited over the last 25000 years. Romero et al.171 studied changes in diatom production over the last 25 ka based on sediment samples collected off the coast of Mauritius and linked this phenomenon to enhanced upwelling of silica-rich waters and variability in the nutrient content of the thermocline. Onal and co-workers172 studied playa lake evaporites from the middle Miocene in the Gurun basin, Central Anatolia, Turkey to elucidate the water mixing regime during periodic desiccations of the shore-lake plain. The V/Ni ratio was of interest to Galarraga et al.173 as a parameter to characterise the palaeoenvironmental controls on non-mature crude oils from several Latin American basins with the aim of determining the type of environment in which organic matter was deposited prior to any crude oil formation. This work was designed to establish this approach as a geochemical exploration tool to reduce significantly the costs and time of oil prospecting. Scanning XRF was used by Agnihotri et al.174 to characterise paleoceanography over the last 2300 years from sediment cores from the Peru margin; surface productivity and subsurface denitrification were the phenomena measured by this study. The popularity of scanning XRF was further exemplified by the work of Unkel et al.175 related to deglacial environmetal changes on Isla de los Estados (Southeastern Tierra del Fuego), and Rohling et al.176 whose interest lay in the eolian dust content of Red Sea sediments and the timing of sea level fluctuations during the early to middle marine isotope stage 3 and the link to climate variations. As in work described in the previous paragraph, XRF was often used in all these applications as a technique to support more specialised measurements, often of organic carbon and alkernones and sometimes of isotope ratios.
A number of studies have employed XRF, usually in combination with other techniques in more contemporary environmental geochemistry applications. Thus, Tarvainen et al.177 investigated geochemical baselines for the elements As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Hg, Ni, Pb, Sb, V and Zn in two regions of Finland (Ita-Uusimaa and Pirkanmaa). As part of this study, the authors undertook a comparison of the determination of total concentrations by XRF and concentrations determined after an aqua regia extraction or concentrated nitric acid leach. Comparison of these data indicated that Cr and Pb showed the lowest extractability using aqua regia and Cu the highest using acid leach. The levels of trace elements determined after aqua regia extraction or acid leach were controlled by the abundance of micas, goethite, and hydrous aluminium silicates, whereas in topsoil, organic carbon correlated with Cd, Hg and Pb concentrations. Ranasinghe et al.178 were interested in stream sediment geochemical mapping as a tool for mineral exploration, applying this approach to the Upper Mahaweli River Basin in Sri Lanka. They observed (i) identical geochemical behaviour between Ba, K, Rb and Sr, (ii) a lack of correlation between Ca and Mg and the presence of metacarbonates, probably due to the dissolution of Ca-Mg bearing minerals, (iii) high Al contents associated with silt and clay released by the erosion of agricultural soil, (iv) Anthropgenic Pb enrichment adjacent to cities and (v) an association between Mn, Na, Nb, Ti, Y, Zn and Zr and underlying lithologies. Clay rich tailings from a closed phosphate mine in Bartow Florida, USA was the object of interest to Krekeler et al.179 because the options for reclamation and restoration of these tailings is very limited. Their study was based on eight continuous push borings and XRF demonstrated a strong correlation between P and Ca indicating that apatite was the major control on phosphate and other element relationships were associated with relevant mineral phases providing guidance on restoration and reclamation programmes. Zaccone et al.180 used an EDXRF miniprobe instrument to undertake the previously unproven association between Br and humic acid as the sink for this element in the ombrotrophic bog at the Etang de la Gruere (Switzerland). Results from a careful analysis of two peat cores provided evidence for this possible role of humic acid as a geochemical sink for Br derived from atmospheric deposition. In contrast, Angulo et al.181 used XRF in combination with XRD, TGA and HCl acid selective dissolution to characterise construction and demolition waste recycling aggregates, presenting results for three representative samples from the Sao Paulo region of Brazil. Components of interest included the amount of cement paste (and associated hydrated and carbonate phases), clay, micas and soluble salts, all valuable for evaluating the potential use of these materials as raw materials in the cement industry. Saikia et al.182 used XRF to contribute along with FTIR to a study of the properties of naturally occurring glasses formed by shock metamorphism, which originated from the eruption of large amounts of colloidal solution, accompanied by fire and smoke at Garuamukh, Assam, India during April 2005. This colloidal solution was rapidly transformed into fulgurites, a natural glassy material, the characterisation of which was the objective of this contribution.
It is well known that selected clays are industrial minerals of some importance, as illustrated by a multi technique approach incorporating XRF used by Trindade183 to study the mineralogical transformations observed when firing two extremely calcareous clays in the temperature range 300–1100 °C under oxidising conditions. Significant differences were observed in the mineral transformations when the calcite-rich clay was compared with the dolomite rich one. Mahto and Sharma184 used XRF and XRD to characterise the chemical and physical properties of bentonite clay samples from India for use as water-based drilling fluids. Bentonite beds in the Two Medicine Formation, Campanian, NW Montana were studied by Foreman et al.,185 who used XRF to provide data that led to the identification of the 7 elements that provided 100% geochemical discrimination of these samples being in decreasing order of influence: Cr, Ga, Sc, Th, U, V and Zr. This study was complemented by an 40Ar/39Ar age determination and an inferred origin of the beds from identified volcanic sources.
XRF also has a role to play in the characterisation of ore deposits, one specialised application being illustrated by the work of Kolpakova et al.186 for the XRF determination of Re on gold-containing ores, based on the separation and adsorption of perrhenate ions on activated charcoal. Sitko et al.187 used WDXRF to determine the chemical composition of siderite for the elements Ca, Fe, Mg and Mn in concretions using a selective acetic acid dissolution to separate out calcite, which was soluble in 0.25 mol l−1 acid solution, followed by dissolution in hydrochloric acid (to dissolve siderite from insoluble quartz), the elemental composition being determined from a solution pipetted onto a membrane filter. XRF was used by Al-Malabeh188 to demonstrate the very high purity of goethite that was used as an iron ore deposit in the historic Warda mine (Ajloun district, northern Jordan) which was worked at the time of the Crusades. Ghavami-Riabi et al.189 used ICP-MS and XRF to analyse the Kantienpan Cu–Zn volcanic-hosted massive sulfide deposit located in the eastern part of the Namaqua Metamorphic Province, South Africa. Mobile metal ions (Cu, Mn, Pb and Zn) from the finest fraction of eolian sand samples that covered the deposit were measured by these techniques to demonstrate a geochemical anomaly that could be used to located the concealed ore deposits. A study of the natural occurrence of uranium that could be used as an analogue for the migration and immobilisation of uranium in the post operational phase of a radioactive waste repository was undertaken by Noseck et al.190 The immobile uranium phase and trace element distributions were measured by a combination of techniques in argillaceous samples from the Ruprechtov site, Czech Republic with confocal µ-XRF providing data on the correlation between U and As(V) located on arsenic rich layers on pyrite surfaces that confirmed results by sequential extraction. XRF also contributed to the study by Keegan et al.191 on the provenance of uranium ore concentrates from the three operating uranium mines in Australia.
The weathering of rock is an important, but often ignored topic in geochemical studies, despite the weathered surface being the most accessible indicator of geology in many field studies. Therefore, the study of Lee et al.192 is to be welcomed in evaluating the chemical weathering of granite in a high elevation environment near Seoul, South Korea under conditions of acid rainfall. XRF was one of a range of techniques applied and results showed that although a few trace elements were relatively immobile, many major and trace elements (particularly Ca and Na) were mobile from the beginning of granite weathering, effects that were associated with the breakdown of plagioclase and dissolution of biotite. A related form of degradation that leads to rock erosion is the effect of lichens, fungi, molds and bacteria on rock surfaces, a phenomenon that was studied by Tazaki et al.193 at the UNESCO World Heritage Site of Saint John Baptist Church, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. XRF was again one of the techniques (the others were TEM and STEM) used to study samples from a collapsed wall in the ancient church and showed that the pistolitic laterite surface was inhabited by lichens and fungi that effectively formed a bio-clay-mineralised surface dominated by the minerals goethite and kaolinite. XRF also made a contribution to an SEM, EPMA and ion probe study by Mordberg et al.194 to establish a weathering profile of Devonian rocks comprising Riphean dolostone containing carbonate-fluorapatite and intensively pyritised shales. The mineralogical consequences of weathering were reported based on the dissolution of apatite and pyrite, which provided an acidic environment allowing, for example, the migration of titanium (sometimes regarded as an immobile element) to form anatase in weathered apatite grains.
The analysis of coal- and oil-related materials is regularly featured in this section, this year being no exception. However, a different spin on this topic was made by Chassapis and Roulia195 who used EDXRF in conjunction with AAS to evaluate low-rank coals as raw materials for calcium and iron organomineral fertiliser based on lignite deposits from Greece. Continuing in a non-conventional way for this topic area, Estrada et al.196 used XRF, XRD and EPMA to demonstrate evidence for fossil coal-seam fires in coal seams incorporated in Lower Palaeogene clastic sediments on southern Ellesmere Island, Queen Elizabeth Islands in the Canadian High Arctic. The study focused on identifying two types of paralava (melted rock) distinguished by their mineralogy. Kang et al.197 investigated the effect of ultrasonic treatment on the surface composition and floatation performance of high-sulfur coal using XRF, XRD and SEM techniques. The results showed that ultrasonic conditioning could enhance the effectiveness of the floatation technique in the desulfurisation of high-sulfur coal, mainly because of improved pyrite separation. Xia et al.198 used XRF in combination with ICP-AES and optical emission spectrometry to characterise coal-bearing strata from the eastern Yunnan Province, China especially with respect to Pd and Pt and a range of other heavy metals. XRF played an important role in an investigation by Erginal et al.199 of a landslide near Dundar Village in Northwestern Turkey associated with the Bursa-Orhaneli lignite field where a gently inclined slope had been undermined to extract a coal seam. In addition to the presence of a fault and the recent occurrence of heavy precipitation, XRF data showed that the failure occurred on a clayey silt layer whose main constituent was smectite, a product of the chemical weathering of tuff. The interest of Al-Ayed and Matouq200 was oil shale samples from the Ellajjun area south of Jordan, using XRF to determine the effect on S of different pyrolising conditions and environments. Baraka-Lokmane et al.201 demonstrated the importance of complementary methods (including X-ray computer tomography, MRI, particle size analysis, SEM, XRD and XRF) to provide a more complete picture of the hydrocarbon reservoir capacity of sandstones. One of their conclusions was that rock heterogeneity on a sub-centimetre scale may have a significant effect on hydrocarbon recovery.
As a contribution to the development of analytical methods, Nakayama and Nakamura202 described issues concerning the selection of calibrator samples for the XRF analysis of geochemical samples, especially taking account of uncertainties in certified or reference values. When analysing samples using the glass bead XRF technique, the advantages of synthesizing calibration samples in demonstrating traceability were discussed by these authors. Another aspect, that of automated quality control systems in the XRF analysis of complex ores, was discussed by Zaitsev et al.203 who described a new algorithm developed and tested for the automated analytical control system for the XRF analysis of copper–nickel and other complex ore samples.
9.3 Environmental

9.3.1 Environmental forensics. 

Dendrochemistry combines the application of analytical techniques with an understanding of tree biology. EDXRF was the technique of choice of Smith et al.204 in an application of environmental forensics intended to determine responsibility for contamination from leaks or spills of petroleum or other toxic products. Elements commonly determined were S and Cl (fossil fuels), Cl (solvents), Pb (leaded gasoline), with other metal elements also used as indicators of mining and smelting activity as the presence of an element not normally found in wood served to demonstrate exposure of the tree to an unusual event or process. However, dating environmental exposure from tree-ring records may be complicated by internal changes in tree chemistry due to wood infection and tree maturation. Gauthier et al.205 were concerned by radial mobility of elements in sapwood during their study of nine mature sugar maple tree species common to eastern North America that have suffered decline in past decades. Samples were collected in three Quebec watersheds along a soil acidity gradient to assist in the understanding of the problem. Cadmium and Mn were identified as elements responsive to soil acidity. Peura et al.206 reported the relationship between elemental composition, the micro-fibril angle (MFA) distribution and the shape of the cell cross-section in Norway spruce xylem from Flakaliden, Sweden. XRF data showed that Cl, K and S were better indicators for irrigation and fertilisation treatment than Mn. Cell cross-section and the MFA distribution was used to show changes as a function of cambial age.
With sensitivity, discrimination and a spatial resolution of <100 nm, Thieme et al.207 showed that µ-XRF and spectro-microscopy were powerful tools for both the determination of elemental composition and chemical speciation. Samples from soils and groundwater aquifers were examined to show 3D images of clay dispersions, micro-habitats and morphological effects of biologically-induced redox changes of humic substances. Jimenez and colleagues208 examined leaves of the Prunus rootstock (GF 677 peach-almond hybrid) grown in hydroponics to study plant growth and development. Two dimensional mapping showed more Fe in the midrib and veins leading to a better understanding of the so-called Fe chlorosis paradox, where leaves of fruit trees grown in the field usually have high concentrations of Fe but are still Fe-deficient. Broadhurst et al.209 studied SRXRF maps of Mn and Ni in leaves of Alyssum murale and Alyssum corsicum. Their work on plants grown in soils with non-phytotoxic factorial additions of Mn and Ni salts indicated that maximum Ni phyto-extraction by Alyssum may be reduced in soils with higher phyto-available Mn. Fresh pine wood blocks were submerged in sulfate and iron-containing media, innoculated with bacterial consortia isolated from seawater to simulate the seabed conditions of the Vasa shipwreck of 1628.210 Sulfur K-edge X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy and XRF mapping showed organic sulfur had accumulated in the lignin-rich middle lamella in the eroded parts of the wood. The S content in the wood increased more than 10 times in 2 years. A series of innoculums from marine archaeological wood showed that after 4 years of anaerobic treatment, considerable amounts of inorganic iron sulfides were present. A sediment sample from the Vasa's seabed was also found to be rich in FeS2. XRF mapping of P and S distributions indicated that scavenging sulfate-reducing bacterial penetration produced hydrogen sulfide in situ. Insects were also shown by Andrahennadi and Pickering211 to be important in bioaccumulation and dispersal of environmental contaminants. The toxic effects and biotransformation of As were examined in larvae, pupae and adults of bertha armyworm moth. A synthetic diet containing arsenate caused reduced larval survival and increased pupal stage duration but had no effect on pupal weight or larval stage duration. XAS showed larvae biotransformed dietary arsenate to yield predominantly trivalent arsenic coordinated with three aliphatic sulfurs, modelled as As(111)-tris-glutathione. Imaging with µ-XRF also showed Cu and Zn in the gut. Zinc distribution and speciation within the root, petiole and leaf of rocket plants (Eruca vesicaria L Cavalieri) were determined using SRXRF techniques (µ-XRF tomography and µ-XANES). Terzano et al.212 examined plants grown in polluted soil with and without compost amendment. Plants grown with compost were found to partly block Zn immediately outside the root endodermis as zinc phytate, while a smaller Zn fraction was found to xylem transport as zinc citrate. In the leaves, Zn was largely excluded from leaf cells. This work gave an insight into the ability of this common edible plant and the role of compost in influencing the molecular strategies involved in Zn uptake and detoxification.
Shibata et al.213 developed a reference material for soil containing hazardous metals. The soil CRM was prepared by adding aqueous standard solutions of As, Cd, Cr, Hg, Pb and Se to a base brown forest soil from Fukuoka, Japan. The soil was dried and homogenised then prepared as 23 mm diameter pressed pellets and irradiated by a 4 kW X-ray tube. Fluorescence intensities for As, Cd, Cr, Pb and Se were reported to be constant values for 240 minutes of radiation. The Hg Lα intensity was almost constant after 60 minutes radiation in air. Calibration curves showed good linearity under 3000 mg kg−1 for As, Cd, Cr, Pb and Se and 300 mg kg−1 for Hg. Lower limits of detection were reported to be 0.84 to 2.7 mg kg−1. In India there is growing concern over the potential accumulation of heavy metals in soils from rapid industrial and urban development, further exacerbated by the increasing reliance on agrochemicals in recent decades. Dantu214 monitored As, Ba, Co, Cr, Cu, Mo, Ni, Rb, Sr, V, Y, Zn and Zr infiltration through soil into groundwater in the south-eastern district of Ranga Reddy. The contamination was measured by WDXRF and assessed on the basis of enrichment factor, geoaccumulation index, contamination factor and degree of contamination. The concentration of Ba, Rb, Sr, V, Y and Zr were interpreted to be mainly from parent granite rocks whereas As, Co, Cr, Cu, Mo, Ni, Pb and Zn concentrations showed contribution from geogenic and anthropogenic sources. A similar exercise was undertaken on street dusts collected in Baoji, NW China215 to confirm that Cu, Pb and Zn presented serious pollution. Yalcin and Unal216 adopted a multivariate statistical approach to identify heavy metal sources in urban roadside soils of Manisa, a city in western Turkey. Samples were analysed by a bench top EDXRF system showing that Ag, Al, As, Cd, Cl, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mo, Pb, Sb, Sn, W and Zn concentrations were higher than those of the earth's crust and North European soil. The heavy metal pollution was attributed to highways, industrial and household wastes. The authors suggested that traffic on busy highways alongside schools, hospitals and children's playgrounds be diverted in the short term and such institutions should be built away from highways and industrial areas in the long term. Jacquat et al.217 studied the speciation of Zn in carbonate rich surface soils (pH 6.2–7.5) influenced by the run-off (1322–30090 mg kg−1 Zn) from galvanised power line towers. Using data collected from 12 bulk and 23 µ-focused EXAFS spectra; the number, type and proportion of Zn species were derived using principal component analysis, target testing and linear combination fitting. Nearly pure Zn-rich phyllosilicate and Zn-layered double hydroxide type precipitates were identified at different locations within a single soil horizon, suggesting that local Al and Si controlled the formation process. Hydrozincite was identified on the surface of limestone particles that were not in direct contact with the clay soil matrix. Hopp et al.218 combined selective extractions and XRF to examine the fate of As and Cr in a podsolic soil contaminated by chromated copper arsenate (CCA). Iron was enriched in the upper 30 cm due to a previous single treatment of the soil with Fe(II). In the surface layers, Cr(III) was partitioned between a mixed Fe(III)/Cr(III) solid phase that formed upon the Fe(II) application and a recalcitrant phase thought to be organic material such as CCA-treated wood. Deeper in the profile, Cr was reported to be in the form of extractable hydroxides. Throughout the soil, As was present as As(V). Jacobi et al.219 evaluated commercial landscaping mulch for possible contamination from CCA treated wood. The maximum As concentration measured in the mulch samples collected throughout the State of Florida, USA was 230 mg kg−1, compared unfavourably with the Florida residual direct exposure regulatory guideline of 2.1 mg kg−1. Clark et al.220 studied 140 urban gardens in Roxbury and Dorchester, MA, USA to show that 81% of the gardens had Pb levels above the US EPA action limit of 400 µg g−1. Raised beds were reported to show Pb concentrations increased from an initial 150 ± 40 µg g−1 to an average of 336 µg g−1 over 4 years, supporting the conclusion that wind transported particles were the mechanism for recontamination. This study indicated that urban Pb remediation required constant maintenance and should be on a neighbourhood-wide scale rather than be confined to individual back-yards. Schroth et al.221 also assessed Pb mobility in controlled and natural organic soil horizons to quantify Pb sequestration in forests. Conifer forests were found to have at least a 2-fold higher Pb burden in the forest floor relative to deciduous forests due to more efficient atmospheric scavenging and slower organic matter turnover. Adebiyi and Asubiojo222 used EDXRF to measure 13 elements in vegetation from a bitumen deposit in S.W. Nigeria to assist in the understanding of the ecosystem and the transport of elements from bitumen to soil to vegetation. Kuligowski et al.223 characterised and compared Danish pig manure treated by combustion and thermal gasification in terms of nutrients K and P and heavy metals Cd, Cr, Cu, Ni and Zn. Elemental contents were measured by EDXRF and the acid and water extractable concentrations determined by AAS and colourmetric spectrometry. Their results indicated that ash from gasified manure contained more water extractable K in comparison with combusted manure whereas the opposite was the case for P. Heavy metals Cd, Cr and Ni were present in higher concentrations in the fine particle size fraction (<30 µm particle diameter), whereas Cu, K, P and Zn exhibited higher concentrations in the coarser size fractions (>30 µm).
A number of different multivariate statistical techniques were used by Giralt et al.224 to disentangle the effects of various environmental issues in sediments accumulated in Lago Chungara, Chile. Data collected by XRF, XRD, total organic carbon, total inorganic carbon and total biogenic silica were evaluated to assist in the understanding of the lake morphology, catchment size and ecosystem responses to abrupt arid events. Multivariate analysis was also used by Yalcin et al.225 to assess heavy metal pollution in sediments from Gumusler Creek, Nigde, Turkey. Abandoned quarries were thought to be the source of pollutants Fe, Hg, Sb and W. Two pairs of salt-marsh sites were studied by Koretsky et al.226 to understand the influence of sediment chemistry on the vegetation. One pair, adjacent to a large tidal creek was densely vegetated by tall Spartina alterniflora whereas the other sites, located higher in the marsh, were abundant in Juncus roemarianus and the short-form Spartina alterniflora. Analytes in suboxic sediments were Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Ni and Zn associated with Fe and Mn oxyhydroxides whereas other sediments were sulfidic and supported different species. Espinoza-Quinones et al.227 presented SRXRF data on chromium ion phyto-accumulation by three floating aquatic macrophytes. Okay and colleagues228 analysed surface sediments by WDXRF to evaluate metal pollution from 17 stations in the Instanbul Strait and Marmara Sea, Turkey. Sediment quality guidelines (SQG), enrichment factors (EF) and geoaccumulation indices (Igeo) were used to indicate that Ni and Pb were the most likely contaminants to cause adverse biological effects. Records from floodplain deposits in the Dnieper River basin, Belarus were studied by Kalicki et al.229 to reconstruct the phases of natural and anthropgenic environmental changes in the region. The transport and bioavailability of Se in Blackfoot River sediments in Idaho, USA were studied by Oram et al.230 using SR µ-XRF. Oxidation state maps of Se in the sediments showed three species, Se(-II,O), Se(IV) and Se(VI) allowing the authors to predict the biogeochemical cycling and bioavailability of the analyte in the streambed. Toner et al.231 examined Fe speciation within Fe-encrusted biofilms formed at mid-ocean ridge vents using µ-EXAFS, µ-XRD and a high resolution TEM. Their observations provided a starting point from which progressively older and more extensively weathered seafloor sulfide minerals may be examined. It is hoped that their work will improve the interpretation of ancient microbial processes and associated biological signatures.

XRF core scanning technology is increasingly used to quantify sediment composition. Ziegler et al.232 used this approach to establish a correlation between Br and sediment total organic carbon measured in cores from the Arabian Sea and a Mediterranean basin. Lowemark et al.233 used a commercially available XRF core scanner to correlate the Mn content with colour cycles in sediment from the central Arctic Ocean. As the prominent Mn cycles showed no correspondence to any of the other measured elements, the authors suggested that the Mn cycles were caused by variations in water column ventilation and riverine input, rather than variations in sediment source or diagenesis. This approach was offered as an alternative to traditional isotope stratigraphy where it was difficult or impossible to sample calcareous microfossils. De Vleeschouwer et al.234 combined XRF core scanning and SEM analysis to measure tephras and cryptotephras in freeze dried and resin impregnated Holocene peat columns. Their work confirmed the value of the non-destructive core scanner to provide data on the original sample thus confirming the ability of a preservation technique to offer a continuous archive of tephras in the peat.
XRF and IR spectrometry of camel bone charcoal235 confirmed that the spongy like structure was able to adsorb Hg(II) ions from wastewater. The material was found to be remarkably efficient when compared with other natural and synthetic adsorbents. EDXRF data in conjunction with FTIR and XRD236 confirmed the ability of a marine cyanobacterium, Synechococcus elongatus strain BDU/75042 to sequester U from aqueous systems at pH 7.8. This organism was thought to show potential for harvesting U from natural aquatic environments.
Readers partial to seafood may be interested in a study by Barrento and colleagues237 who measured essential elements and contaminants in edible tissue of European and American lobsters. EDXRF and FAAS data showed that both lobster species were rich sources of the essential elements Cl, Cu, Na, Se and Zn but sadly this review must report that Cd values were well above the maximum allowed level set by the European Commission. Similarly, a biomonitoring study by Desideri and co-workers238 used EDXRF to report “unsavoury” levels of Cd, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Ni, Sn, Pb and Zn in mussels from the Mediterranean and other Italian seas. Alpha-spectrometry also condemned the crustaceans by detecting the presence of 210Po. However the authors did state that the data depended upon the site and period of the sampling. A SRXRF study by Li et al.239 detected As, Hg and Se in fish from a polluted area of Guizhou Province, China. A German study240 used EDXRF to measure heavy metal concentrations (Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb and Zn) in water, mud and different organs of fish from three Croatian fish farms.
Gunes et al.241 were concerned with the ability of plants to withstand drought conditions. They studied the genotypic response of 12 sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) cultivars to drought by measuring nutrient and non-essential elements in response to applied Si. Polarised EDXRF data showed that the application of Si significantly improved the uptake of Al, Ba, Cl, Cr, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, Rb, S, Sr, Ti and V whereas Br, Mo, Ni and Zn uptake was not affected. Ustunda242 also exploited the sensitivity of polarised EDXRF to assess elemental concentrations in peppermint (Mentha piperita), thyme (Thymus vulgaris) and sumac (Rhus glabra), all plants commonly used in the preparation of Turkish foods. Barua et al.243 used XRF for elemental analysis of the seeds of chilli (Capsicum annum L.), popular as a spice and also used in homoeopathic treatments. Fourier transform Raman and FTIR spectra showed the presence of specific functional groups but ascorbic acid, a vitamin found in chilli peppers was conspicuous by its absence in the seeds.


9.3.2 Aerosols and particulates. 
Progress in reducing the adverse impact of ambient particulate material (PM) on human health was reported by Lippmann244 following an evaluation of data collected since 2000 by the US EPA's Speciation Trends Network. This initiative has generated 24 h average PM component concentrations for sulfate and nitrate ions, elemental and organic carbon (EC/OC) and inorganic elemental data on an every third or sixth day basis at sites in most large US cities. The results show the potential to guide future research and control activities on those PM sources that have the greatest relevance to public health. Such data collection programmes are expensive and therefore the frequency of testing was too sparse to study short-term health effects where semi-continuous data collection, or at least 4 h concentration data are needed. The report expressed the hope that funding may be found to support continuous monitoring and thereby accumulate cost-effective information on PM component exposure-response relationships that would provide a sound basis for targeted air quality standards and pollution control measures. Hirshon et al.245 measured Zn in ambient PM 2.5 to show an association between Zn levels and hospitalisation for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. The metal composition of PM 2.5 was shown to influence allergic and/or inflammatory reactions with ambient Zn found to contribute to adverse pulmonary function in susceptible adults. The study was then extended to include children through the evaluation of hospital admissions and discharge data for asthma in 0–17 year olds in Baltimore, Maryland, USA from June to November 2002. Previous-day XRF measurements of airborne Zn (8.63–20.76 ng m−3) were found to be associated with paediatric asthma admissions that were 1.23 times higher than those with previous-day levels of Zn <8.63 ng m−3. Neghab et al.246 assessed pulmonary reactions associated with exposure to raw materials used in the production of ceramics. They compared 33 male workers at risk to exposure with 20 healthy male unexposed workers. All the men were interviewed, given respiratory symptom questionnaires, chest X-rays and lung function tests. The men were also fitted with personal dust monitors to collect airborne inhalable and respirable dust for the determination of chemical composition by XRF and crystalline phase(s) by XRD. The dust monitors showed high levels of inhalable and respirable particulates and the presence of crystalline silica. The data provided further evidence of the extent of the association between the exposure to silica dust and impaired respiratory function. In Colombo, Brazil, Godoi et al.247 used EDXRF and electron probe micro-analysis (EPMA) to characterise the chemical composition of particulates emitted from lime manufacturing sites and the deposition rate of inhaled dolomitic lime aerosols. The majority of the respirable particulates were identified as aluminosilicates, Ca-Mg oxides, carbon rich particles, Ca-Mg carbonates, soot and biogenic particles. The authors hoped that the data will allow policy makers to focus their mitigation strategies in an effective way as well as enabling the lime producers to design and implement improved emission controls. A similar study by Avigo et al.248 characterised particulate matter indoor and outdoors of classrooms at two schools in Curitiba, Brazil to show that, on average, 42% of coarse particles could be deposited at the extrathoracic level, whereas 24% relate to the pulmonary region. The fine fraction showed a deposition rate of approximately 18% for both deposition levels.
Characterisation of particulate matter in air is often used for source apportionment. Mazzei et al.249 collected PM 1, PM 2.5 and PM 10 daily samples at several sites in the urban area of Genoa, Italy. Positive matrix factorization (PMF) was used to assess the EDXRF data to relate Cu, Pb and Zn to traffic, and Ni and V to heavy oil combustion. Anthropogenic sources such as the sea and dust from soil were also found. Ochsenkuhn et al.250 used a Gent stacked filter unit to collect 84 samples of PM 2.5 and PM 10 air particulates in a coastal industrial area in Attica, Greece throughout the period from June 2005 to May 2006. The PM 10 fraction was found to exceed the annual limit of 40 µg m−3 by 1.6 times. The samples were analysed for Ca2+, Cl−, K+, Mg2+, Na +, NH4+, NO3 and SO42− by ion chromatography as well as ICP-AES, AAS and EDXRF. Factor analysis was applied to obtain correlations between cations and anions leading to matrix compounds in both the size fractions. The data enabled the authors to identify local air pollution sources. Raman et al.251 collected PM 2.5 samples from November 2002 to August 2005 at two rural locations in New York State. The samples were collected on multiple filters at both sites, every third day for a 24 h interval with a speciation network sampler. Teflon® filters were analysed for PM 2.5 mass by gravimetry and by XRF for elemental composition. Nylasorb ® and Teflon filters were leached with water and analysed for anions and cations by ion chromatography. The study showed lognormal frequency distribution fits to the measured mass concentrations at both sites on a seasonal basis and an annual cycle with pronounced summer and winter peaks from the XRF data. Pozza et al.252 studied the effects of biomass burning in Brazil. They measured PM emission profiles of burning sugar cane and other vegetation. The samples were analysed by XRF and the analytical profiles compared with reference vegetative burn profiles taken from the US EPA databank SPECIATE. The Cl and K content were confirmed as markers for the burning of sugar cane foliage.

Other studies of aerosols and particulates included micro-physical and chemical aerosol measurements collected during DYCOMS-II research flights in marine stratocumulus clouds near San Diego, USA in 2001.253 Samples were evaluated for 18 organic and elemental components between droplet residuals and un-activated particles. XRF and FTIR data showed that sea salt, ammonium, sulfate and organic compounds were dominant. Concentrations of 42 elements in PM 2.5 collected in Zabrze, Poland were reported by Rogula-Kozlowska et al.254 The EDXRF data on ambient dust sampled in 2003 enabled the authors to begin a series of assessments of the quality of Polish urban atmospheric fine particulates.


9.3.3 Consequences of industrial activity. 
European legislation has caused the reprocessing of polymer-rich shredding residues to switch from landfill to thermal treatment. However, when shredding residues are from waste of electric and electronic equipment (WEEE), thermal treatment gives rise to halogens, polybrominated dioxins and furans (PBD/F) and brominated flame retardants (BFR). Therefore, high temperatures with sufficient residence times are needed for effective incineration. Post-combustion synthesis of polyhalogenated dioxins and furans (PXD/F) is dominant in the temperature range 250–450 °C and rapid gas cooling from 450–250 °C is required to ensure effective raw gas treatment. Schlummer et al.255 developed a pebble heater device as an alternative to conventional quench cooling for this purpose. A pilot plant was built and the emitted halogens analysed by XRF, HPLC techniques were used to measure BFR and gas chromatography monitored PXD/F, to confirm that the pebble heater technology was effective in suppressing post-combustion synthesis of PCD/F and PBD/F without further gas treatment. Miskolczi and Bartha256 also reported work on the treatment and monitoring of different hydrocarbon fractions following thermal treatment of high-density polyethylene waste.
The characterisation of waste material from industrial processes continues to feature in the literature. When the waste is radioactive, a treatment process must be developed using a substitute analyte for the active component. Nicu et al.257 used La to replace Eu, which partially simulates the chemical behaviour of Am. Their study of a radioactive waste cemented matrix reported XRF data for Co, Cs and Sr, the chemical carriers for radionuclides as well as La. Cements were assessed with and without bentonite mineral additives to report diffusion depth and concentration profiles for each analyte of interest. Denecke et al.258 used µ-XRF and µ-XRD to investigate uranium immobilisation. Earlier work using XANES had revealed the presence of arsenopyrite in sediment as thin coatings on the surface of Fe nodules. However µ-XRD only found pyrite and siderite phases, an indication that the pH of the sediment environment during diagenesis must have been neutral. Petrescu and Bilal259 used ICP and XRF to evaluate metals in soils from mining dumps of the Crucea-Botusana uranium deposit in Romania. Sequential extraction emphasized that U was associated with all the mineral fractions in the soils, particularly in the carbonate, oxide and organic fractions. As carbonates are known to release U when the pH changes the authors suggested that U could be recovered from stream waters. Al-Saleh and Al-Harshan260 were concerned with naturally occurring radioactive materials in wastes from petroleum products. The chemical composition of the waste was determined by XRF and high resolution gamma-ray spectrometry. Natural radionuclides were reported to be higher in the waste than the petroleum products with age of scale samples being between 2.39 and 3.66 years.
Arsenic emissions generated during the combustion of high arsenic coals from SW Guizhou, China were measured by Zhao et al.261 using XRF. A low pressure impactor was used to collect PM size-segregated samples as part of a programme to reduce emissions. In Germany262 micro-scale grain size analysis by SEM was compared with XRF data from bulk coal-fired power plant fly ash to serve as reference data for a variety of environmental studies. Gitari et al.263 were concerned with the leaching characteristic of selected South African fly ashes produced by power stations. Their work assessed the leachability of species of disposed fly ashes on groundwater. XRF measured As, Cd, Cr, Pb and Se leached out of the fly ashes when in contact with de-mineralised water to show that the levels were below the Target Water Quality Range (TWQR) of South Africa. However, with lower pH waters, values were reported to be above the TWQR limits. Pengthamkeerati et al.264 investigated the chemical modification of coal fly ash treated with HCl and NaOH. XRF, XRD and SEM results suggested that treating fly ash with alkaline solution was a promising way to enhance phosphate immobilisation. Marcello et al.265 studied inorganic pigments made from the recycled coal mine drainage sludge of Brazilian coal that are known to contain pyrite (iron sulfide), making the mine drainage acidic. XRF, XRD and TGA techniques were used to characterise the pigments, showing that the brown colours could be used in the ceramics industry.
The characterisation of other waste products continues with work by Kante et al.266 on new materials from galvanising processes prepared by pyrolysis of metal sludge saturated with spent mineral oil. FTIR, XRD, XRF, ICP, SEM and thermal analysis were all used to test catalytic activity and surface porosity to indicate that a new, stable carbon phase could be produced. Alvarez and Bohe267 proposed a chlorination process for recovery of Ni from waste material. A laboratory scale simulation increased the Ni recovery factor from 85% to 96%. Heat treatment was monitored thermo-gravimetically and all species produced were characterised by XRF, XRD and SEM. Gonzalez-Fernandez et al.268 evaluated the environmental risk from automotive shredder residues processed from the 8 to 9 million vehicles taken off the road every year in the European Union. The total metal content of shredded car wastes was measured by XRF and the mobility of hazardous metals determined by two standardised leaching procedures, DIN 38414-S4 and one devised by the US EPA. The lead and Zn content in the leachate was found to correlate with grain size of the shedder residues whilst other metals were not reported to be grain size dependent. In South Korea, Park et al.269 used XRF and XRD to examine the potential use of powdered waste, generated during sanding and sawing processes in a local chemical company, as an absorbent to remove As from mine drainage. Seredych et al.270 studied the effective ratios of sewage sludge and fly ash for use as an absorbent to remove H2S from biogas. The optimum balance of the two components in the absorbent was measured by XRF, XRD and thermal techniques to assist in the development of a waste management programme. Allen and co-workers271 linked exposure from polybrominated diphenyl ethers, a class of fire retardants used in domestic products, to house dust. A portable XRF analyser was used to quantify Br concentrations in consumer goods and dust in different rooms in a property. Saravababhavan et al.272 used XRF data to develop a new approach to the processing of leather that significantly reduced the use of water, chemicals, time, power and therefore costs for the manufacture of gloves. The sequence of the pre-tanning, tanning, post-tanning and finishing stages was changed to pre-tanning, post-tanning, tanning and finishing to show that the reversed processed leathers met the required military specification for Cr content, strength and bulk properties.

9.4 Archaeological, cultural heritage and forensic
Applications of XRF to many aspects of archaeology and cultural heritage retain a significant popularity that is likely to continue in future years. In the investigation of paper and manuscripts, the use of XRF is normally used to characterise pigments or inks. Within this area, it is interesting to see that the reach of XRF has even extended to philately, with an interesting contribution from Cesareo and Brunetti273 in the analysis of Latin-American stamps of the 1850–1900 period based on a portable instrument fitted with a capillary collimator to ensure adequate spatial resolution. The aim of this work was to identify the inorganic components of pigments used to print these stamps and their evolution with time. A more specific philatelic investigation was undertaken by Castro et al.274 who pursued a µ-Raman and µ-XRF study of the Spanish 15 cents King Alfonso XIII stamp (1889–1901) which was the subject of a colour error. About 4000 of the 1300 million stamps were printed in a chestnut-brown orange or yellow shade, rather than the official chestnut-brown violet colour. This study showed that differences were attributable to the use of different kinds of ink and this contribution described the nature of these inks and the way this error may have happened. In a more conventional application, Aceto et al.275 used portable Raman and XRF to examine an ancient religious manuscript, the Codex Eusebii Evangeliorum or Vercelli Gospels dating from the 4th Century A.D (thought to be the oldest existent copy of the Gospels written in Latin). Results allowed discrimination of the pigments used in the red (minium and cinnabar) and black (carbon black and metal gallate) inks and proved the hypothesis that a few pages had been written at a later time. Van Der Snickt et al.59 re-emphasised the advantages of combined µ-XRF and µ-Raman spectrometry techniques (‘PRAXIS’) for pigment identification in illuminated manuscripts, with comparisons made with µ-SRXRD. Bruni et al.276 added FTIR and visible reflectance spectrometry to this ideal combination of techniques for the non-invasive characterisation of small and precious artefacts and provided an example of an application to a late 15th/early 16th century painted and drawn parchment attributed to Andrea Mantegna. A combination of techniques was used by other workers in characterising 16th to 18th century Islamic manuscripts,277 a Dutch coloured map from the 18th century278 and a Blaeu coloured map from the 17th century.279 Silver point drawings by Albert Durer from the Renaissance period were of interest to Milota et al.,280 who used spatially resolved SRXRF and PIXE to obtain adequate sensitivity to determine the very feint silver marks that comprise these drawings. In addition to compositional information, Bonizzoni et al.281 were interested in reconstructing the thickness of up to 50 multilayers of famous paintings by Andrea Mantegna and Giovanni Bellini using visible Raman Spectrometry and portable XRF. Bicchieri et al.'s282 interest was in identifying the specific ink (e.g., iron-gall, logwood) to inform the restoration of manuscripts. As part of this project, the authors used ancient recipes to replicate logwood inks, adding various metallic salts containing Cr, Cu and Fe or amorphous carbon. Their ultimate conclusion was that iron salts were periodically added to the original logwood ink, perhaps due to shortages when the manuscript was originally written. To bring us completely up to date, Hatzistavros and Kallithrakas-Kontos283 addressed the question of the authentication of signatures when replication by personal computer technology is so easy to achieve. They used EDXRF to discriminate between modern inks that had been spiked within metallic and organometallic compounds to demonstrate the unique pattern revealed by the relevant elemental intensity ratios.
Contributions in the field of paintings covered by this year's review extend from caves to fine art. In the former area, Chalmin et al.284 were interested in contributing to a conservation strategy for cave paintings in karst caves at Arcy-sur-Cure, France and investigated the phenomenon whereby paintings are obstructed by an overgrowth of opaque calcite that is influenced by geochemical, geophysical parameters and by biotic processes. The authors synthesised various representative samples, which were analysed by µ-XRF and XANES to better understand formation mechanisms to contribute to a conservation strategy. Vazquez et al.128 used TXRF, FTIR and GC-MS to identify the inorganic and organic components in the black pigments of rock art at Alero Hornillos 2, an archaeological site in Jujuy Province, Argentina. Results from TXRF demonstrated iron and manganese oxides as the black pigments with GC-MS detecting the presence of saturated fatty acids associated with degraded animal fat and linked to a ruminant animal source. Some interesting conclusions were drawn by Sotiropoulou et al.285 following a mobile laboratory investigation of the degradation of Byzantine wall paintings in the Cathedral of Thessalonika (using XRF, FTIR and reflectance spectroscopy), which was followed up by a laboratory study of selected samples (by µ-FTIR, ED-SEM and µ-Raman). The authors proposed that the accidental effect of fire had caused (i) the thermal degradation of yellow ochre causing a reddish appearance to flesh tones and haloes, (ii) thermal degradation of azurite to tenorite causing a darkening effect on purple garments, (iii) degradation of red lead causing a lightening effect on red garments, and (iv) the widespread presence of oxalate in the paint surface. Civici et al.286 used TXRF as one of the techniques to characterise the pigments employed to Byzantine wall painting iconography in two churches in Albania. Ramos et al.287 investigated the use of discriminant analysis based on µ-Raman and XRF data for the classification of ochre pigments. The use of micro-based SR techniques (XRF, XAS, XRD) with µ-FTIR were explored by Cotte et al.97 with a view to the restoration and conservation of ancient paintings with a particular emphasis on understanding ancient artistic practices (as in the use of pigments and binders in Bamiyan Buddhist mural paintings) and the preservation of works of art (as in the blackening of cinnabar in medieval Spanish paintings). Identification of the pigment palette used in Etruscan painting using Raman and EDXRF was of interest to Sodo et al.,288 and pigment identification, usually using a combination of techniques including XRF was the subject of a number of other studies of Gothic paintings,289 Medieval sculpture,290 18th century frescos,291 19th and 20th century paintings and the Armorer's Shop paintings in North Carolina Museum of Art.292 About one third of Van Gogh's paintings are thought to re-use a canvas of an abandoned Van Gogh painting and Dik et al.293 used SRXRF mapping to reveal for the first time the woman's head that is hidden under the work ‘Patch of Grass’. This reconstruction of the image was based on decimeter-scale XRF intensity maps that reflected the distribution of elements (Hg and Sb were particularly useful) and hence pigments that allowed visualisation of the hidden face in unprecedented detail. This technique clearly has high potential.
The analysis of glass is another classic XRF application and one innovative application is illustrated by the work of Kanngiesser et al.294 whose interest was in the use of 3D µ-XRF in the analysis of corrosion layers in reverse-glass painting. Depth profiles of mobile elements confirmed that certain binding media initiate corrosion processes initiated at the glass/binding material interface. A suite of very rare and highly decorated Etruscan coloured glass vessels and beads from the 7th to 4th century BC (i.e., Iron Age) were analysed by Arletti et al.295 using µ-XRF, µ-XANES and µ-XRD. Their results indicated the presence of Pb and Sb (yellow decoration), Sb (white and turquoise), Mn (purple) and Fe (black) with supplementary measurements giving some compound specific and oxidation state data. Overall, it was concluded that these glass artefacts were produced in at least two distinct stages under different furnace conditions. Other archaeological glass studies involving some form of XRF included Roman Imperial age glass from Canton Ticino,296 archaeological volcanic glass from Rocchicella, Sicily297 and coloured glass from the Roman ship, Iulia Felix which sank off the coast of Northern Italy in the 3rd century containing cullets of recycled glass. In this investigation by Silvestri,298 XRF and EPMA were used to show that the coloured samples were all soda–lime–silica in composition with natron (hydrated soda ash) as flux. Discriminant analysis was used to classify many compositional groups which led the authors to propose that the compositional variability in both coloured and colourless glass indicated a dispersed production model for Roman glassware and a recycling practice in Roman Imperial times, especially for low status vessels.
Much work continues in the analysis of pottery, glazes and other ceramic materials by XRF, often in combination with other techniques. Thus, Carrano et al.299 used XRF to distinguish Nubian-style ceramics (mixtures of sand silt and clay sediment) from Egyptian-style pottery (generally coarser grained and higher in quartz) with implications for the Egyptian colonial encounter in Nubia. Cypriot bichrome wheel-made ware was of interest to Tschegg et al.300 in particular to distinguish reproductions made in the Late Bronze Age in the Eastern Nile Delta of Egypt, for which a less refined fabrication process was evident from the results. Veiga and Figueiredo301 used XAFS to study ceramic tiles used to manufacture artistic panels during the 16th to 18th centuries and decorated with high lead soda lime glazes with a particular interest in elucidating the role of calcium as a matrix modifier. Interpretation of results showed that Ca was present in a non-regular high coordination environment within the silica matrix. In a second contribution from these authors,302 the structural role of zinc in ancient, lead-rich, blue-and-white tile glazes of Portuguese origin (16th to 17th century) was presented, again based on XANES; in this case a low coordination environment (probably tetrahedral) was postulated. Zindovic et al.303 investigated medieval ceramics from the archaeological site of Ras, Serbia with results contributing to a national database of compositions of bodies, glazes and pigments. Other work on ancient pottery compositions and manufacturing techniques were reported from Ainos, Turkey,304 Cuma, Campi Flegrei, Naples, Italy,305 Solunto, Sicily,306 Novo Brdo, Serbia307 and South-West Iran.308 In these applications, XRF was usually complemented by other techniques.
XRF continues to play an important role in the study of ceramics from China. One example is ancient celadon ware from four archaeological kiln sites in Zhejiang Province by Zhou et al.309 Cluster analysis (based on SOM neural networks) was used to discriminate between sites and this approach was argued to have wider benefit in the analysis of data for ancient ceramics. Micro-XRF was used by Cheng et al.310 to provide elemental maps of the glaze and bodies of ancient Jun and Ru Chinese porcelain and results resolved the way the middle layer of glaze was turned into a glassy state and underwent a complex physico-chemical reaction with the body. Other studies were undertaken on ancient porcelain from the Longquan Kiln, Zhejiang Province,311 potteries of the Liangzhu Culture,312 blue and white porcelain from Dehua, Zhangzhou and Jingdezhen kiln sites from the Yuan and Ming dynasties,313 black-glazed bowl sherds from the Jian kiln site, Fujian Province,314 and porcelain from the Dangyangyu kiln (Song dynasty).315 Finally, Beckhoff et al.316 reported a SRXRF study of ancient Chinese ceramics that contributed to the validation of a fundamental parameter-based quantitative analysis procedure that avoided the need for reference samples. The performance of this approach was evaluated and found to be in line with target values obtained from an IAEA organised proficiency test.
The analysis of lithic artefacts has not received much attention over the current review period. However, Braun et al., in two related publications,317,318 used EDXRF to examine lithic resources used by Oldowan hominins from the Kanjera South formation in Kenya and the Koobi formation. This work demonstrated that in the earliest evidence of the use of stone tools, hominins used a wide variety of raw material and selected this material at some distance from the evential discard locations, and may indicate that Oldowan hominin technology was more complex and indicated a greater understanding of the source distribution of raw materials than has been usually associated with the beginnings of hominin tool use. Moving now to Roman times, Powers et al.319 used XRF and X-ray imaging to examine an inscription tablet from Teanum Sidinicum and after evaluating the analytical evidence proposed that the inscription was unlikely to have been made of marble and, as there was little or no correlation between variations in trace element concentrations across the tablet surface and the presence of characters, concluded that the inscription was a copy. Obsidian artefacts used by the Inka army from fortified and non-fortified sites in Northern Ecuador (Pambamarca region) were analysed by XRF in a study by Ogburn et al.320 The results showed that the Inkas acquired material from several different sources, an observation consistent with the provision by subject peoples in partial fulfilment of labour obligations.
Amongst a range of contributions on the characterisation of buildings and building materials, Nodarou et al.'s321 interest was in mud bricks of the Bronze Age used as earthen construction materials for domestic architecture in East Crete. XRF was one of the mineralogical and chemical compositional techniques used to show that there was a degree of standardisation employed in the manufacturing process but that the selection of raw materials depended on availability. Budak et al.322 investigated the use of Cretan clays for the design of restoration mortars, using XRD, FTIR and XRF to examine representative samples fired at temperatures ranging from 200 to 1200 °C. One of the clays selected for study contained low calcium and considerable kaolinite, exhibited the best pozzolanic activity when fired at 600 °C and was therefore considered an appropriate material for restoration purposes. One aspect of the decay of historic building materials was studied by Maguregui et al.,323 namely the impact of nitrate salts in mortars and bricks, on the basis of µ-Raman and µ-XRF. These results were complemented by the extraction of soluble salts which were determined by ion chromatography and ICP-MS. Correlations between the various analytical results and thermodynamic modelling were all used to diagnose the impact of nitrates. A further investigation of degradation phenomena was undertaken by Figueiredo et al.324 using XRD and SRXRF on two contrasting objects. The first was a dolmen from Zambujeiro, Portugal where accelerated weathering appears to be associated with biological attack of granite minerals by lichen. The second object was the Aqueduct of Carthage where construction techniques and local construction materials and methods of repair over the centuries was of interest. Castro et al.325 studied several English polychromed alabaster sculptures, pointing to microbiological degradation of the original materials used as pigments, a conclusion also relevant to other objects of cultural heritage326 where the decay of malachite to the rare mineral moolooite (copper oxalate) was associated with the excretion of oxalic acid by micro-organisms associated with biological attack. This work was supported by computer simulations based on Raman and XRF measurements. Another type of building degradation was studied by Sanchez et al.,327 in this case coatings on a granite monument, the Casas de Paredes, Coruna, Spain. A combination of techniques (SEM, XRD, XRF and DTA-TGA) facilitated the identification of six types of coating. Three gypsum coatings (original plaster and solutions from the lime mortar) suffered blackening from air pollution and the deposition of fuel combustion particles and airborne soil particles. Another coating comprised a dust crust (containing iron, lead and other metals) that originated from atmospheric pollution deposited directly on ashlar (rather than gypsum) surfaces, and a further comprised a silica rich detritic coating resulting from surface alteration of the granitic rock. The final deposition was bird excrement and associated alteration. These results have value in defining the appropriate cleaning regime for this heritage building.
The degradation of historic building interiors also occurs following the deposition of particulate material, one concern being the way atmospheric pollution deposited onto objects of art can induce and intensify surface damage. This may result from their potential to absorb moisture and hence atmospheric gases, as outlined by Godoi et al.328 who undertook a comprehensive characterisation of particulate matter at the Rubens House Museum, Antwerp, Belgium. The usual range of techniques were used to provide compositional and compound-specific data (EPMA, EDXRF and µ-Raman) and results which were interpreted to identify compounds that could contribute to chemical reactions on the surface of artefacts. Kontozova-Deutsch et al.329 used XRF and EPMA to assess the deterioration of objects of art in European churches and museums by particulate pollutants. Increasing tourism is known to generate microclimate perturbations and elevate indoor pollution by the transport of fine particulate matter. The same group330 also evaluated the influence of a protective double glazing system for ancient stained glass windows in the Basilica Saint Urbain, Troyes, France. Samples were collected from protected and unprotected windows indoors, in the interspace and outdoors for a period of one year. The EPMA data showed that the composition of single particles was more aggressive inside the church than outside. XRF measurements showed that soil dust was present in the fine fraction. The results showed that the installation of protective glazing was advantageous. A seasonal study of atmospheric conditions influenced by the tourist flow in the Royal Museum of Wawel Castle in Cracow, Poland was reported by Worobiec et al.331 Samples of suspended particulates were collected inside and outside the museum during both winter and summer 2006. The concentration of total suspended particulates was found to be higher, 130 µg m−3 in winter and 49 µg m−3 in summer, than those days without tourists, 73 µg m−3 and 22 µg m−3 respectively. Elements associated with soil dust (Al, Ca, K, Si and Ti) were considerably higher in summer while Cl levels were higher in winter due to the use of de-icing salts on the roads and pavements.
This year, metallurgical applications of XRF are illustrated by the work of Eliyahu-Behar et al.332 whose interest lay in the importance of the iron industry to the Neo-Assyrian Empire, based on secondary pit deposits at Tel Dor on Israel's Carmel Coast, dating from the 7th century BC. This site appears to have had a varied history, serving intermittently as a waste disposal site for an iron smithy, and for pottery presumably involved in maritime trading, and for animal penning. This study provided a rare insight into an Iron Age iron smithy in the southern Levant. Humphris et al.333 investigated the archaeological iron smelting processes by exploring the often overlooked influence of variability in slag composition within a single smelt, or between individual smelts at the same production site. They studied samples from two sites in Buganda Kingdom, Uganda dating from the 18th and 19th centuries and used a multi-sample analytical approach to measure compositional variation in slag blocks to differentiate two technological traditions that appeared very similar at the macroscopic level. Bronze artefacts from the Iron Age site in the Judean Hills were investigated by Friedman et al.334 to provide insights into the phase composition and manufacturing process and to establish provenance. Both XRD and XRF techniques were applied and the bangles turned out to be leaded tin bronze. The authors drew the conclusion that the metal objects were manufactured in the neighbouring region of Edom, thereby showing a strong economic relationship between Edom and Judah. A combination of techniques (EDXRF, ICP-AES, XRD and FTIR) was used by Ion et al.335 to characterise the bronze of a Roman mirror with a particular interest in the bronze corrosion products present in the patina, which can provide information on both the environment in which the patina was formed and the micro-chemical structure of the alloy. Results from this artefact provided reliable and reproducible quantitative elemental composition depth profiles for the outermost corroded layers. Bronze patinas were also of interest to Bonizzoni et al.,336 in this case 30 small bronzes and plaquettes from the Italian Renaissance and now found in the Civic collections of Vicenza (Italy). In the identification of archaeological gold, specifically Carpathian (Transylvanian) gold and Dacian bracelets, Constantinescu et al.94 used µ-SRXRF and µ-PIXE to demonstrate that the most promising elements to discriminate between samples were Hg, Pb, PGE, Sb, Sn and Te. An overview of techniques relevant for elucidating the ancient goldsmith's skill in manufacturing gold products (especially coins, cast products and intricate jewellery) was published by Guerra337 with a particular emphasis on manufacturing techniques, authentication, and provenancing to identify the source of gold. The specific techniques considered were XRF, ED-SEM, PIXE and SRXRF. Gold quarter lira coins were of interest to Cakir et al.338 in the development of a technique using seven gold–copper calibrator samples to cover the concentration range from 18 to 24 carat capable of the XRF analysis of samples to uncertainties of about 1.18%. Beck et al.339 were concerned about the reliability of surface analysis techniques such as PIXE and XRF that are affected by silver surface enrichment in ancient silver–copper coins. Cleaning procedures used after excavation or in museums employ chemical products that preferentially dissolve copper phases; the authors recommend the simultaneous use of RBS and PIXE to check silver surface enrichment and select the reliable measurements representative of the bulk composition. Peralta et al.340 asked the rhetorical question, ‘what are 50 cent Euro coins made of?’ mainly as an undergraduate exercise to demonstrate how to obtain reliable XRF analyses with the help of Monte Carlo simulation. The complexity of restoration processes was illustrated by the work of Crabbe et al.341 who investigated the silver blackening on a statuette from the 13th century Notre-Dame shrine of Huy (Belgium) in which XRF was used to detect the presence of Fe at the surface. The colour of the surface following application of ‘Cellini's recipe’ was influenced by the Fe and O content of the surface, placing significant restrictions on techniques for removing the black coating on the statuette's surface.
In other contributions, Echard and Lavedrine342 focused their attention on the varnishes used on ancient stringed musical instruments of the violin family dating from the 17th and 18th centuries. The comprehensive array of non-destructive or micro destructive techniques reviewed in this work included GC-MS, IR, ED-SEM, EDXRF and SR methods, applied to a large and representative number of ancient varnished musical instruments in a project based at the Musee de la Musique, Paris.
The forensic analysis of adhesive cloth tapes is an important source of evidence in the investigation of crimes and Goto et al.343 used high energy EDXRF with 3D polarisation optics to measure 14 elements (Ba, Ca, Cr, Fe, Mn, Mo, Nb, Ni, Pb, Sb, Sr Ti, Zn and Zr) for use in discriminating between samples. The authors reported that yarn density, in combination with XRF intensity data for these elements of interest was successful in discriminating between samples.
9.5 Industrial
The XRF technique, always in combination with other analytical methods, is routinely used for the characterisation of catalysts, corrosion products and cements and therefore readers interested in these application fields should refer to our companion ASU review on Industrial analysis: metals, chemicals and advanced materials.344 Nevertheless, several industrial applications are noteworthy and are covered in this year's review.
The Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) in electro-technical and electronic equipment remained of interest to analysts. Gore et al.345 emphasized the paucity of guidance regarding appropriate sample preparation and analysis for compliance testing, especially in respect of printed circuit boards (PCB). To address this concern, a comparative study was conducted using four EDXRF instrument types (microspot, hand-held, benchtop and laboratory polarising XRF) on depopulated PCB pieces. Samples were prepared by various forms of shredding and milling to assess data quality as a function of the sample preparation method, and the results were compared with those from ICP and INAA on the same samples. Due to the heterogeneity of the PCBs, analysis of unprepared samples using the afore mentioned XRF spectrometers resulted in unacceptable analytical precision, nevertheless with direct measurements hot spots could be rapidly located. Shredding samples to less than 0.5 mm improved the analytical precision sufficiently for RoHS compliance screening for both acid dissolution and for direct XRF measurements. Further reduction to below a particle size of 90 µm to improve the analytical precision was avoided as sample losses would be expected during milling. With judicious sample preparation, high quality data could be attained using XRF spectrometry. Perhaps the most significant analytical challenge in this field is the availability of matrix-matched certified reference materials. In an attempt to address this issue, the Japanese Society for Analytical Chemistry has embarked on a development of appropriate CRMs and during this review period has concentrated its efforts on Br in polyester disks for XRF analysis. In addition, the organisation focused on proficiency tests for the determination of hazardous substances (Br, Cd, Cr, Hg and Pb) in polyester disks or chips. In their first (Japanese language) contribution346 the certification of 5 candidate reference materials (JSAC 0651–0655) was described. Disk samples were prepared by filling cylindrical aluminium molds with a liquid raw material of polyester mixed with a hardener and bromine compounds. After curing, both surfaces were polished. The certified values, between 100 and 1000 mg kg−1, were derived from the median values of the results from participating laboratories. In a second Japanese language contribution347 the results of the 1st to the 4th round of proficiency testing (PT) for the determination of hazardous elements in plastic were presented. A significant number of laboratories, between 104 and 140 laboratories—which reflects the importance of these type of analyses—participated in the programme. The techniques used included wet chemistry and XRF analysis. In the 1st PT, the low concentration level for Hg was about 1 mg kg−1 and for the other elements between 5 and 10 mg kg−1, whilst other analyte concentration levels were ten times higher. For the 2nd to 4th PT, the low levels varied for all elements between 20 and 30 mg kg−1, whilst the second concentration level was a factor of 2 to 3 higher. More than 80% of the laboratories were within acceptable statistical evaluation limits; a satisfactory result. Generally, the uncertainties for XRF were larger compared with the chemical analysis, except in the case of Br where the opposite was observed. The authors assumed that the latter observation would have been caused by incomplete chemical decomposition of the samples, whilst the XRF measurements could be improved by selecting appropriate reference materials for calibration or optimising the matrix correction of the sample.
The XRF technique has been frequently shown to be an effective tool for quality control. In this context Brazilian researchers146,348 developed an XRF method to estimate the TiO2concentration in sun-protection cosmetics without any sample preparation. A portable EDXRF system, equipped with a Ag target miniature X-ray tube and a Si-PIN detector, was calibrated using reference materials with a concentration of TiO2 between 1 and 30% m/m. Samples were placed in a liquid cup covered with a Mylar film and analysed for 500 s. The TiO2 concentration was determined in 15 commercial samples and when combined with data from UV-VIS measurements, the researchers were able to estimate the total sun protection factor (SPF). The total SPF factor values determined by UV-VIS (chemical barrier) and by portable EDXRF (physical barrier) for 3 commercial sunscreen samples showed that the measured value was 10% lower than the value reported by the manufacturer.
The ability of the XRF technique to perform rapid, routine analysis of uranium samples for bulk and impurities without the need for dissolution is a particular advantage. In a first contribution349 the Th and U content of Th–U mixed oxides was determined using EDXRF. Pellets of 1 cm diameter were prepared from a 1:1 mixture of Th–U mixed oxide reference samples and cellulose. The reproducibility of the method was calculated to be better than 3 and 4% for the Lα and Lβ peaks of U, respectively. The measured values of the U concentration in synthetic samples, in the concentration range of 2 to 80% m/m, were in good agreement with the calculated gravimetric values. In a second contribution350 the capability of EDXRF for the determination of metallic impurities in U3O8 was examined. Synthetic U3O8 calibrants were prepared containing impurities (Ca, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, V, W and Zn) in the concentration range from 100 to 1000 µg g−1. The performance of the analytical method was verified by an inter-laboratory exercise using 2 synthetic samples and 5 reference samples. The measured values were in good agreement with the reference samples and the method was reported to have a good precision for the analytes determined.
The determination of S in petroleum diesel using WDXRF, as described in ISO 14596, is typically performed by comparing the response of the unknown to a linear calibration curve composed of a series of matrix-matched standards. Barker et al.351 proposed a method to determine S in biodiesel using the conventional mineral petroleum diesel calibrants even though biodiesel contains about 11% m/m O and mineral diesel is oxygen-free. The determination of S in biodiesel using petroleum diesel calibrants was predicted to be biased ∼16% due to attenuation by O of the S K X-ray intensities. A gravimetric standard addition method was hypothesized to overcome this bias because it should be matrix-independent. Samples of both petroleum diesel (SRM 2723a and European Reference Material EF674a) and biodiesel (candidate SRM 2773, NREL 52537, and NREL 52533) were analysed, comparing the traditional calibration curve method with the gravimetric standard addition approach. As expected, no significant difference was found between the two methods when measuring S in petroleum diesel. Sulfur determinations in biodiesel with petroleum diesel calibrants were, as predicted, lower by 19% compared with the gravimetric standard addition method at the 3, 7 and 12 µg g−1 levels. The results indicated that XRF using gravimetric standard addition yielded accurate unbiased S measurements in biodiesel samples. In addition, this approach is insensitive to differences in the C/H ratio, but more complexity is introduced.
Brugger et al.352 used the µ-XANES technique to measure in situ, at near µm resolution, the oxidation state of Eu in hydrothermal scheelite from the Giant Archean gold deposits in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia. By combining these measurements with µ-XRF imaging, inhomogeneities in Eu2+/Eu3+ ratios could be distinguished. Thermodynamic analysis revealed the influence of pH on these Eu2+/Eu3+ ratios and therefore, the authors stated that the primary heterogeneity of the scheelite most likely resulted from pH oscillating between fluid- and rock-buffered conditions.
Finally, in a Chinese language contribution, the determination of major elements in a phosphate fertilizer, was performed using XRF. Rui et al.353 developed an XRF method to determine the major elements (Al2O3, CaO, Fe2O3, K2O, MnO, Na2O, P2O5 and SiO2) in superphosphate fertilizer. The precision of the method ranged from 0.005% to 0.2% m/m for these elements. The results showed that the detected content of P2O5 was 18.1% which was in accordance with the labelled level, and that the necessary trace elements to supply to the plants were present. Moreover, the measured Al2O3 content of 3.2% gave the authors a warning that attention should be paid to Al poisoning when superphosphate was used.
9.6 Clinical and biological
Research in the field of in vivo XRF analysis for bone Pb and Sr measurements is a recurrent theme in this section, reflected by Zamburlini et al.354 who studied the feasibility of Raleigh scatter normalisation for 125I-radioisotope excited source XRF measurements of finger bone Sr by assessing theoretical considerations and Monte Carlo simulations. Raleigh scatter normalisation alone with either 22.1 keV or 35.5 keV photons was reported to be unsuccessful in correcting for the overlying soft tissue attenuation. However, the coherent peak at 35.5 keV was able to effectively correct for variability in the finger bone size between people. Thus, the authors suggested that, if the overlying soft tissue thickness could be obtained by means of an independent measurement, the 35.5 keV scatter peak could be used to correct for the bone size, with an overall accuracy of better than 10%. As mentioned in last year's review, the calibration of 109Cd K-X ray fluorescence systems (KXRF) for in vivo bone Pb measurements is a challenging task and remains an active area of research. De Brito et al.355 took into account the role of the assumptions for least-squares regression method, used to probe the Pb contamination of plaster of Paris phantoms in the calibration of a 109Cd KXRF system. The iteratively reweighted least-squares (IRLS) approach was considered preferable to the ordinary least-squares (OLS) for the case of non-uniform residual variance. The results showed that IRLS estimates of the intercept were significantly smaller and more precise than OLS estimates, while a less marked increase in the calibration slope was observed when IRLS was used. Moreover, OLS under-estimated bone Pb concentrations at low levels of Pb exposure and overestimated those concentrations at higher levels. For the newly developed “cloverleaf” systems, comprising a 4 × 500 mm2 LEGe detector, the suggested differences of bone Pb concentrations below 17 µg g−1 were comparable to the minimum detection limit, but were larger than the measurement uncertainty for bone Pb concentrations above 60 µg g−1. A contribution by Lodwick and Spitz356 evaluated the influence of the shape of the calibration phantom on the accuracy of the KXRF calibration. Firstly, an anthropometric surrogate (phantom) of the human leg was defined in a Monte Carlo code to simulate KXRF spectrometry measurements of Pb in bone. Subsequently, a cylindrical leg phantom was simulated, revealing that the phantom shape was a significant factor in predicting the KXRF response. The results suggested that an anthropometric phantom provided a more accurate calibration standard compared to the conventional cylindrical shape, and that the cylindrical shape introduced a 4% positive bias in measured Pb values. Both contributions reflected that the optimisation of the calibration of KXRF systems will remain of importance in this research field, especially because this technique is frequently adopted in Pb dose biomarker studies. Theppeang et al. performed two studies of a cohort of African-Americans to gain an insight into the influence of gender and race/ethnicity differences on Pb toxicokinetics. Additionally, the relationship between bone mineral density (BMD) and Pb in blood, tibia and patella was reported showing how BMD modified these Pb biomarkers in older women. Their first contribution,357 using KXRF for Pb in bone measurements and ASV for Pb in blood, revealed that African-Americans showed a prominent disparity in Pb dose accumulated over the lifetime. Women seemed to be at higher risk of release of Pb from bone with consequent health effects due to increased bone demineralisation with aging. The second contribution358 measured lumbar spine BMD, blood and bone Pb by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry, ASV and 109Cd-induced K-shell XRF, respectively. The authors believed that BMD represented the capacity of bone to store Pb and thus, the findings might have relevance for estimates of the effective size in people with higher BMD. The results had implications for changes in kinetics with aging, and the estimation of related risk of health effects associated with substantial pre- and midlife Pb exposure in older persons. Gherase and Fleming359 recognised the fact that the inhomogeneous distribution of an element could occur as a function of depth within the sample e.g. arsenic in skin. The authors developed an XRF signal equation based on the fundamental parameter method, which explicitly took into account the depth dependence of the elemental concentration. The formalism was verified using two disc resin stacks with different As concentrations.
The TXRF technique combined with co-precipitation by ammonium pyrolidine dithiocarbamate was applied to determine the elements Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn in human scalp hair from 281 individuals working in 10 Syrian industrial plants.360 The results from workers in a battery plant showed higher Pb concentrations compared with a control group, while some abnormal concentrations were obtained for Cu, Ni and Zn in individuals working in the cable, battery and printing industries, respectively. On the other hand, workers in olive oil, power stations, textile and iron industrial plants, were considered occupationally unexposed to these elements.
A research study by Wittmers et al.361 reported that problems were encountered in the determination of skeletal Pb burden in archaeological samples. Skeletal tissue samples from an early nineteenth century Philadelphia cemetery were studied for Pb content by ETV-AAS and XRF. High bone Pb levels were detected especially in children, even exceeding those of the buried adult population, that resulted in an investigation of diagenetic effects by several approaches. The ante-mortem age-related increase in bone Pb, reported in other studies, was not evident in this population. Also, the Pb was evenly deposited in areas of taphonomic bone destruction. Studies using SRXRF revealed no consistent pattern of Pb microdistribution within the bone. The authors reported that the postmortem diagenesis of Pb seemed to be penetrating these archaeological bones to a degree that made their original bone Pb content irretrievable by any known method. Increased bone porosity was most likely responsible for the very high levels of Pb found in bones of children.
Public health agencies are facing some new challenges in relation to human poisoning by As, Hg and Pb introduced from medicines or contaminated drinking water. Woolf et al.362 reported infantile Pb poisoning from an Asian tongue powder. A 12 month old infant of Thai parents was found to have a venous blood Pb concentration of 61 µg dL−1. This chronic Pb poisoning was attributed to the use of a Thai tongue powder by the parents for the first seven months of the infant's life. This powder was an ethnic remedy to absorb toxins, reduce white patches that developed following milk feeding and was thought to preserve the infant's health. XRF measurements of the powder revealed an incredible Pb content of 109000 mg kg−1, that was hardly likely to promote infant wellbeing! A further health inquiry with the Thai Food and Drug Administration resulted in six additional contaminated tongue powders (of 10 tested), some of which had Pb levels of 9000 mg kg−1. These results clearly indicate that there is an important task for the public health agencies to continue product surveillance. Moreover, Saper et al.363 investigated US- and Indian-manufactured Ayurvedic medicines sold via the Internet. They looked for As, Hg and Pb that might be present in such medicines due to the practice of rasa shastra (combining herbs with metals, minerals and gems). XRF measurements were performed on 193 medicine samples to determine the toxic metal content. The prevalence of metal-containing products was 20.7% (95% confidence interval), of which rasta shastra compared with non-rasa shastra medicines had a greater prevalence of metals (40.6% versus 17.1%) and a higher median concentration of Hg (20800 µg g−1versus 34.5 µg g−1) and Pb (11.5 µg g−1versus 7.0 µg g−1). All metal-containing products exceeded 1 or more standards for acceptable daily intake of toxic metals. Finally, Rubio et al.364 also assessed the effects of chronic arsenic exposure in rat brains using SR µ-XRF scanning and conventional XRF. These results indicated the existence of a protection mechanism which limits the transport of inorganic arsenic to the brain.

Bioimaging of cells and tissues to provide chemical information in the form of a spatially resolved image is of great importance, since trace elements are involved in many biological functions of living organisms. A review paper of Petibois and Guidi365 highlighted the pros and cons of the most popular techniques that have been implemented on accelerator-based sources such as SR microprobe analysis and confocal fluorescence microscopy, to address analytical issues on biological specimens. Popescu et al.366 validated rapid-scanning X-ray fluorescence (RS-XRF), a SR technology, by mapping and quantifying Cu, Fe and Zn in Parkinson's and normal brain slices using standard formalin-fixed autopsy slices; a simple preparation method. Many Zn-rich brain regions were found to be low in Fe and vice versa. The location and amount of Fe in brain regions known to be affected by Parkinson's disease agreed with analyses using other methods. RS-XRF definitely shows potential for further research in this field. A Brazilian research group367 performed topographic trace-element determinations of Cu, Fe and Zn in coronal sections of female Wistar rats of different ages using X-ray microfluorescence with SR. The 2D scanning measurements were performed using the XRF beam line at the SLNL (Campinas, Brazil). The acquisition time for each pixel was 10 s step−1 and the step size was 300 µm in X and Y directions. The observed distribution of the elements showed that Fe was more conspicuous in the cortical area, thalamus and below the thalamus, while Zn was more pronounced in the hippocampus, reinforcing the idea that these elements play an important role in neurological diseases. The elements Cu, Fe and Zn were also determined in colorectal liver metastases and surrounding normal livers,368 using XRF on a total of 60 samples from 30 patients. For all three elements, the concentration was found to be lower in the cancer tissue than in the normal liver, by 79.3% for Cu, 82.8% for Fe and 96.6% for Zn. Multivariate analysis of the 60 samples revealed that Zn was the only trace element that decreased in the cancer tissue after adjusting for the other elements.

Heavy metal contamination in the environment is not only a relevant issue in industrial and urban areas, but also extends to the Antarctic regions. Chinese researchers369 performed SRXRF measurements to determine the metal content throughout the total length of 4 single barbs of a snow petrel's feathers (Pagodroma Nivea) collected in Antarctica. A non-uniform microscale distribution of the elements Ba, Ca, Cu, Hg, Fe, K, Mg, Ni, Pb, S, Se, Sr and Zn within and among the barbs was observed. Using multivariate statistical analysis the factors influencing the fluctuations of the levels of the elements were investigated, resulting in 5 factors which explain about 80% of the total variance. Results of the factor analysis suggested external contamination by Ba, Hg, Fe, Pb and Zn on the feathers of the snow petrel. Returning to urban areas, Hirshon et al.245 investigated the relationship between Zn levels in particulates from outdoor ambient air (PM 2.5) and from urgent health care issues for children living in urban area. Data of hospitalisation for asthma by children, 0 to 17 years of age, for Greater Baltimore in the period of June 2002 through November 2002 were correlated with XRF results of ambient air PM 2.5 samples. The results suggested that high ambient PM 2.5 Zn levels (8.63 up to 20.76 ng m−3) were associated with an increase in emergency department visits or hospital admissions for asthma on the following day among children living in the urban area.
Finally, a µ-EDXRF method was developed in combination with partial least-squares regression to determine major, minor and some trace elements in vertebrate fossil bones and sediments.370 A calibration model was built by combining four different geological reference materials with similar matrix components. The collected spectra were pre-processed following different treatments and the best regression models were obtained using the first derivative or with the squared root transformation. Comparative analyses with the traditional ICP-OES and ICP-MS techniques were made for a large range of concentrations (10 µg g−1 to 100 mg g−1). Although high quality results were obtained on reference materials and homogeneous samples, in the case of fossils, which were not pretreated, the results showed significantly higher uncertainties.
Although a broad range of clinical and biological applications were considered in the above section, additional material on these topics can be consulted in our companion ASU review on Clinical and Biological materials, Foods and Beverages.371
9.7 Thin films, coatings and nano-materials
The intensity of XRF radiation from an analyte in a thin film is a complex function of instrumental factors, matrix composition and film thickness. Sitko372 offered readers two algorithms based on previously published work for intermediate-thickness samples. In the first algorithm, theoretical influence coefficients were treated as constants whereas, in the second approach, the coefficients were linear functions of sample thickness and concentration of all matrix elements. The capability of the algorithms was demonstrated with hypothetical Fe–Cr–Ni ternary systems and binaries Fe–Cr, Fe–Ni and Cr–Ni of mass thickness from 0.01 to 2 mg cm−2. The results indicated the validity of the two approaches and the author provided useful information on calibration procedure and interpretation of data. Meskauskas373 offered an efficient and accurate method using grazing angle incidence XRF to characterise the physical thickness of ultra-thin iron films grown directly on n-Si(111) substrates. Ochi et al.374 analysed Pb in tin coating using the theoretical intensity of scattered X-rays. The fundamental parameter method was adapted by using bulk solders as a reference sample. The scattered X-ray monitor method was additionally used to obtain the measured intensity ratio of fluorescence and scattered X-rays to correct the results. This was necessary because the electronic components analysed did not have a large and smooth surface suitable for quantitative analysis. An analytical result of 6 µm film thickness and 1430 µg g−1 Pb concentration was obtained for a 5.4 µm thick and 1388 µg g−1 Pb sample using the scattered X-ray monitor method.
Much of the literature considered in this section, published during the current review period, reports on properties of thin films. Musil et al.375 studied the effect of the addition of Ti into Al2O3 films and reported findings on the structure, mechanical properties and oxidation resistance. Three different compositions were relatively sputtered from an Al/Ti target with characterisation by XRD, XRF, micro-hardness testing and TGA. Stanca and Ilies376 assessed a Mn-doped AlN film deposited on a Si(100) substrate by pulsed laser deposition. The film was characterised by IR reflectance microscopy, XRD, XRF, SEM and cathode luminescence. Bacaksiz et al.377 reported work on the diffusion of Ag in ZnS thin films by spray pyrolysis with XRF used to determine the Ag diffusion profile. Doping with Ag was shown to convert the n-type ZnS thin films to p-type. In addition, the band gap of the p-type film was found to decrease. Dakhel and Ali-Mohamed378 used a sol–gel method to obtain La doped CdO films on amorphous glass and single crystal Si(100) substrates. The spin coated films were annealed at 400 °C before analysis by EDXRF, XRD, UV-VIS and IR absorption spectroscopy. Fister et al.379 used in situ SR-TXRF to show evidence of Sr surface segregation in (010)-oriented La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 thin films over a wide range of temperatures (25–900 °C) and oxygen partial pressures (0.15–150 Torr). In situ EXAFS measurements were reported by Ganjoo et al.380 in a study of the changes in local structure of As2S3 (around As and S K-edges) and GeSe2 (around Ge and Se K-edges) thin films. Their results confirmed photo-expansion in As2S3 films and photo-contraction in GeSe2 at an atomic level. Chemical bath deposited ZnS thin films from NH3/SC(NH2)2/SO4 solutions were prepared and characterised by Qi et al.381with XRF analysis confirming that the volume of oxygen in the as-deposited film was high. Martinez-Criado et al.382 used a combination of X-ray absorption and XRF to study the structure of GaGdN films grown by molecular beam epitaxy. The Gd atoms were found to be in a trivalent state with tetrahedral coordination, thus substituting Ga in the wurtzite GaN structure. The structure and properties of SnS thin films, prepared by electro-deposition in the presence of EDTA were reported by Cheng et al.383 The deposition potential (E) was explored by cyclic voltammetry. XRF analysis of the as-deposited films indicated that stoichiometric SnS films could be obtained under the condition of E = −0.95 to −1.00 V. The polycrystalline nature of the films was shown by XRD to be a SnS compound with orthorhombic structure. The direct band gap of the films was estimated to be 1.10–1.43 eV with an absorption coefficient near the fundamental absorption edge larger than 4 × 104 cm−1. Song et al.384 investigated a wet chemical cleaning process for ready-to-use InP substrates in order to remove both particulate and metallic contaminants. TXRF confirmed that the H2SO4 treatment used was successful. Steen et al.385 studied segregation and pile-up of Sb atoms at the Si/SiO2 interface at 1000 °C with a combination of GIXRF measurements, electrical measurements and etching on the nm scale. Long annealing times were reported to be necessary to ensure that the segregated atoms were in steady state with Sb atoms in the bulk. A similar exercise concerning the distribution and segregation of As was also reported by Steen and a larger group of international collaborators.386
Validation of K spectra XRF cross-sections of Ba, Cu and Y in YBa2Cu3O7-delta superconductors was published by Baltas and Cevik.387 Samples were excited by gamma-rays at 59.5 keV from an 241Am radioactive isotope and a Si(Li) detector was used to measure the X-ray intensities in different solid-state conditions. Gold diffusion in superconducting Bi1.8Pb0.35Sr1.9Ca2.1Cu3Oy was measured by Terzioglu388 using EDXRF. The Au diffusion coefficient was reported to decrease as the diffusion-annealing temperature decreased over the range 500–800 °C. Diffusion doping with Au caused a significant increase of the lattice parameter c by about 0.19%. Similarly, improvements in dc electrical resistivity and transport critical current density increased when compared with undoped samples. Ozturk et al.389 investigated the effect of Yb diffusion on structural evolution and superconducting properties of YBa2Cu3O7−xdevices prepared in bulk polycrystalline form. Diffusion in this Y123 ceramic was studied by EDXRF over the temperature range 800–900 °C and the structural quality was found to improve with Yb content. Oyanagi390 focused on XAS data from (La,Sr)2CuO4 thin film single crystal samples to show lattice effects in high temperature superconducting cuprates and discussed the role of electron–phonon coupling.
Three interesting papers published during this review period demonstrated the ability of XRF techniques to give chemical information on multilayered structures. Doomes and McGuire391 reported their work on ion beam sputtered multilayer SiO2/Ta2O5 coatings on fused SiO2 substrates. XAS gave chemical and structural features of the dielectric multilayered NO2/Ta2O5 mirror coatings. Rajput et al.392 studied the depth resolved structural information of heavy ion induced phase formation in Si/Fe/Si trilayers. XRF measurements gave the Fe depth distribution, whilst Mossbauer spectroscopy and XAFS provided information about changes in local structure. Synthesis and characterisation of a new four-layer Aurivillius phase Bi2SrNa2Nb4O15 was reported by Liang et al.393 Following a solid state reaction of Bi2SrNa2Nb4O9 and NaNbO3 at 1100 °C, XRD was used to show the resultant crystalline structure and XRF and thermogravimetry used for the measurement of composition the multilayers formed.
Work continues to improve the conversion efficiency of thin film solar cells. Zhang et al.394 published their work on the effect of composition on the structure and electrical properties of polycrystalline CuGaSe2 thin films on Mo-coated soda-lime glass substrates. XRF and XRD confirmed a two-phase region composed of CuGaSe2 and Cu2−xSe phases for Cu-rich films and CuGaSe2 and CuGa3Se5 phases for Ga-rich films. The results from Hall effect measurements for typical samples indicated that CuGaSe2 films are always p-type semiconductors from Cu-rich to Ga-rich systems. The best conversion efficiency of 6.02% was achieved under air mass 1.5 spectrum for 100 mW cm2 at room temperature using an aperture area of 0.24 cm2. The open circuit voltage of the CuGaSe2 solar cells was close to 770 mV. Eicke et al.395 replaced the thin CdS buffer layer between absorber and transparent front contact with In2S3 to form Cu(In,Ga)Se2 thin film solar cells. The buffer layer was formed by thermal evaporation at 720 °C to generate different cell performances. The composition of the initial powder used for the buffer layer and the deposition steps were monitored by XRF. The buffer/absorber interface region was analysed by SIMS and sputtered neutral mass spectrometry gave the depth profile. The best solar cell performance with efficiencies of about 13% were achieved with S-rich buffer layers. Camus et al.396 used a modified spray ion gas reaction originally designed for buffer layer deposition to deposit absorber layers for thin film solar cells with thickness in the µm range. The CuInS2 films were characterised by XRD, XRF, XPS and elastic recoil detector analysis to compare the composition of these new films with those prepared by rapid thermal processing.

Coating processes were investigated by Gruzdys et al.397 who were interested in thermal effects in WC–Co, Cr2C3–NiCr and WC–Co/NiCrBSi coatings formed using high velocity oxygen fuel and flame spraying. Coatings were heated using electric arc discharge in a hydrogen–argon atmosphere. Changes in structure and elemental composition before and after heating were measured by XRD and XRF to show that more crystalline coatings could be produced. Huang and Li398 continued their investigations into corrosion protection for tinplate. This year they reported the structural characterisation and properties of TiO2 film as a possible replacement for chromate. Tests on the corrosion behaviour of these tinplates showed that the TiO2 film was more effective in improving sulfide-stain resistance and corrosion protection when compared with the chromate-passivation film. The morphology, composition and thickness of the TiO2 film were studied by SEM, XPS and XRF respectively and confirmed that the film was homogeneous and crack-free. Demadis et al.399 were also interested in the corrosion protection of metal surfaces with studies of corrugated, sheet-like architecture in layered alkaline-earth metal R,S-hydroxyphosphonoacetatis acid (HPAA) frameworks. Crystal structures of Sr2+ and Ba2+ salts used in the coatings were determined by XRD and XRF and FTIR used to measure composition. Corrosion experiments were carried out at pH 2.0 and 7.3 to study the effect of combinations of externally added Sr2+ or Ba2+ and HPAA on corrosion rates of carbon steel. Cho et al.400 reported work on the influence of Re on the thermal stability of electrodeposited Ni–P films. Ni–P and Ni–Re–P films were deposited on Cu plates in a sulfamate bath. The concentration of P and Re in the films, measured by WDXRF, was 6% m/m and 10%m/m respectively. Differential Scanning Calorimetry and XRD showed that the crystallisation temperature of Ni–Re–P films was 76 °C higher than that of Ni–P films. The study indicated that the thermal stability of Ni–Re–P films was superior to that of Ni–P films. Allocca et al.401 used pulsed laser deposition to form SmCo thin films on polycarbonate, steel, silicon and amorphous substrates for low cost electronic applications such as radio frequency identification antennae and electromechanical devices for fuel feeding control in automotive engines. The films produced on these permanent magnetic materials were analysed by XRF. The effect of intense plasma pulse pre-treatment on the wettability in ceramic-copper materials was studied by Barlak et al.402 The first process was to apply a nm thin layer of Ti into the substrate, followed by a thicker, µm scale, layer of Ti deposited by physical vapour deposition. The third version was a sequential combination of the above processes. Samples were characterised by SEM, XRF, XRD and tessile drop tests. The best results were achieved for the third process. Daza et al.403 synthesized Ni/Mg/Al/Ce mixed oxides by thermal decomposition of layered double hydroxide-type compounds which were obtained by the coprecipitation method at constant pH. They studied the effect of the Ni2+ and Ce3+ incorporation methods in the hydrotalcite-type structure by XRF, XRD, thermogravimetric analysis and SEM. The results demonstrated the formation of solids with mixed crystalline phases of NiO–MgO (periclase) and CeO2 (fluorite) as well as other types of reducible species. Cerium was reported to promote catalytic activity in these types of solids with the best obtained by a coprecipitation of Ni2+, Mg2+, Al3+ and Ce3+. Electroless plating of ferrite and copper onto photopolymerised resin used for micro-molding of 3D structures was reported by Mukai et al.404 Evaluation by XRF and XRD confirmed that the materials were successfully plated onto the resin mould by controlling the temperature and pH of the source solution. Liu et al.405 joined β-alumina ceramic and Pyrex® glass to Al matrix composites by anodic bonding. The microstructure of the bonded interface and the joining mechanisms were analysed by SEM and EDXRF. They observed that the bonding region across the interface consisted of the metal layer, oxide transitional layer and the ceramic layer, with the transitional layer composed of a surface region and a sub-surface region. A pile-up of ions and their drift in the interface area were thought to be the main reasons for anode oxidation and joining at the interface. The temperature, voltage and drift ions in the ceramic or glass during the bonding process were essential conditions for solid state fusing and oxide bonding at the interface. Okamoto et al.406 studied close-spaced sublimation growth and characterised poly-crystalline Cd1−xZnxTe thick films for flat-panel X-ray detectors. The effects of substrate temperature on the properties of the layer were investigated and it was reported that the surface morphology and preferred crystallographic orientation depended on substrate temperature.
Literature during this review period reflects an increase in studies of nano-materials using XRF being one of a number of analytical techniques employed to characterise and assist in the development of this rapidly growing area of interest. Zhou et al.407,408 published their work on nano-alumina hybrid polyimide films prepared by the sol–gel process of aluminium isopropoxide in a N,N′-dimethylacetamide solution of polyimide acid. The films were characterised by XRF, FTIR, TGA and atomic force microscopy. The authors found that XRF was an effective way to detect the inorganic phase of the composite films and measure the nano-alumina content. Gupta et al.409 showed that X-ray reflectivity and XRF under standing wave conditions were able to show atomic diffusion with an accuracy of a fraction of a nanometer. Both the techniques were isotope selective by making use of nuclear resonance scattering from a Mossbauer active isotope. The authors studied self-diffusion of Fe through grain boundaries in amorphous and highly disordered nano-crystalline alloys of FeZr and FeN. Work by Dakhel regularly features in this Review and this year interests turned to charge trapping and AC-electrical conduction in nano-crystalline ErMnO3 film on Si substrate.410 XRF and XRD investigations showed that the structure of the films pre-annealed at 400 °C was amorphous but crystallised above 800 °C to form the ErMnO3 compound. A second paper411 reported the preparation and optical study of Au nano-grains in amorphous lanthanum oxide films. Films embedded with 4.5 nm Au grains exhibited insulating properties whereas 15 nm embedded grains made the film conducting. Dun and colleagues412 studied the effect of As doping on the photoluminescence of nano-crystalline 74Ge embedded in a SiO2 matrix. The samples were irradiated by neutron flux in a nuclear reactor so that the 74Ge with As impurities transmuted the 74Ge into 75As. The films were characterised by TEM, XRF, XPS and laser Raman scattering with photoluminescence showing that as the As concentration increased, the photoluminescence first increased but then significantly decreased. The authors offered an explanation of this non-monotonic behaviour. The early stages of nucleation and growth of atomic layer deposition (ALD) of Pt on SrTiO3 (001) were studied by Christensen et al.413 SEM revealed that the ALD Pt deposited as discrete nano-particles that grew and coalesced with increasing ALD cycles, ultimately resulted in a continuous film after 40 cycles. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) showed the films to be fine-grained and highly conformal such that the 0.4 nm atomic steps of the underlying SrTiO3 (001) surface remained visible even after 80 Pt ALD cycles. Grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering demonstrated that the early stages of the process yielded cylindrical particles. XRF measurements of the Pt coverage revealed growth dynamics in which the Pt was initially deposited faster than the steady-state growth rate that emerged after 40–70 ALD cycles. The films were presented as potentially useful substrates for catalysis and micro-electronic devices. Barman et al.414 used a chemical growth technique to prepare CdS nano-particles that were characterised by XRD and TEM. Surface morphology and composition were observed by SEM, AFM and XRF. These 6 nm particles have potential in semiconductor devices. Martinez-Huerta et al.415 prepared carbon supported PtRu–MoOx nano-particles with significant CO tolerance by a new two-step procedure. Firstly, molybdenum oxide was deposited on a carbon substrate (MoOx/C) by impregnation then Pt and Ru were incorporated following a colloidal method with NaHSO3. The composition, particle size and crystallinity of this catalyst material were determined by XRF, XPS, TXRF, TEM and TG. This work offered a method whereby the amount of precious metals, Pt and Ru could be reduced in parallel with a significant increase in CO tolerance when compared with commercial catalysts. The synthesis of carbon-supported unalloyed Au–Pt bimetallic nano-paticles was described by Kumar and Phani.416 Various compositions were characterised using TEM, XRF, XRD and cyclic voltammetry. The electro-catalytic activity of the Au–Pt/C nano-particles was studied by linear sweep polarisation measurements obtained using a rotating disc electrode. In the field of polymer clay nano-composites, naturally occurring smectite group clays are the most commonly used nano-fillers. Maiti and Bhowmick417 synthesized the smectite clay, hectorite in the laboratory to understand the structure and property relationship of polymer nano-composites. The synthesized clays were assessed by XRD, XRF and TEM were found to have a higher surface area than their natural counterparts. Also, synthetic clay filled samples exhibited a 75% increase in tensile strength and a 24% improvement in 100% modulus. Yamamoto et al.418 modified the surface of carbon nano-fibres with Pt nano-particles using a new RF sputtering system known as polygonal barrel-sputtering. Small and Johnston419 prepared novel hybrid materials of magnetic nano-particles and cellulose fibres. After successive washings and sonication, the particles remained bonded to the surface of the fibre and the fibres could be formed into a paper sheet. This work offers a new concept in paper-making and packaging with the ability to store information and offer enhanced security.
9.8 Chemical state and speciation
X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) information is conventionally measured in transmission through energy dependent absorption of X-rays or by observing X-ray fluorescence. However, secondary fluorescence processes, such as the emission of electrons and optical photons may also be used as a carrier of the X-ray absorption (XAS) signatures, thereby offering complementary information such as that from a surface. Where the near-visible photons have a shorter range in a material, the data collected will be more surface specific. Dowsett and colleagues420 described a first test of optically detected X-ray absorption spectroscopy (ODXAS) for the monitoring of electro-chemical treatments on copper based alloys. Artificially made corrosion products were deposited on a copper substrate and analysed in air and in a 1% m/v sodium sesquicarbonate solution to simulate typical conservation methods for copper-based objects recovered from marine environments. The measurements were made on sections 7.1 and 9.2 MF at SRS Daresbury, UK using the mobile luminescence end station, supplemented by XAS measurements taken on the Dutch-Belgium beamline DUBBLE (BM26 A) at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France. However, EXAFS and XANES from the broad optical measurements were superimposed on a high background due to other optical emission modes. This produced statistical fluctuations up to twice that expected by the authors from normal counting statistics because the data retained the absolute statistical fluctuation in the original raw count, whilst losing up to 70% of the original magnitude after background subtraction. The authors thought that the problem may be solved in future through optical filtering to isolate the information-containing band, combined with the use of higher input X-ray fluxes available in a third-generation light source. We await their next report with interest. Mazuritskiy and Makhno421 reported anomalous X-ray scattering and channelling inside hollow micro-capillary structures. XANES L−2,L−3 spectra and the reflection spectra of Si were obtained using grazing incidence of radiation onto channel walls of micro-channel plates. Channelling of secondary long wavelength X-ray radiation was observed due to the anomalous scattering in the vicinity of L edges of Si absorption. Strub et al.422 studied the chromium content in different oxidation states in chromium treated wood using XANES measurements at the Cr K absorption edge. They found that pine and beech samples treated with CrVI still contained a measurable CrVI content after four weeks conditioning. However, heat treating the wood for 2 h at 135 °C prior to conditioning reduced all the chromium to CrIII. Veiga and Figueiredo302 published a XANES study on the structural role of Zn in 16th to 17th century Portuguese tile glazes. The speciation and coordination of Zn, commonly used with Pb in ancient glazes to give rich white and blue effects, were assessed using ZnO and ZnCO3 as model compounds. Comparison between calculated and actual spectra collected from the glazes showed differences that were related to oxygen-anion linkages within the silica-rich glassy matrix. The results showed that Zn was most probably tetrahedral in the glazes examined. Pinakidou et al.423 used XRF mapping and Fe K XAFS spectra to determine the elemental distribution and local coordination of Fe in vitro-ceramic compounds containing Fe2O3, Na2O, PbO and SiO2. The XRF maps revealed that Fe rich inclusions were embedded in the vitreous matrix whilst the XAFS data showed that both hematite and magnetite were present. Spatially resolved XRF maps were presented by Andreasson et al.424 to show the introduction and evolution of oxygen vacancies in chromium-doped strontium titanate during an electric-field-driven insulator to metal transition. The vacancies were seen to be introduced at the anode and diffused through the crystal towards the cathode. The spatial distribution of the vacancies was explained by a model describing the electrical breakdown as a percolation process. Strong differences in the vacancy distribution were reported when the transition took place in air and in a hydrogen-enriched atmosphere. The vacancies disappeared from the surface in air, whereas they remained on the surface in the reduced hydrogen atmosphere. Pollakowski et al.425 used grazing incidence XRF combined with near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure (GIXRF-NEXAFS) to access deeply buried TiOx nano-layers to ascertain both the chemical speciation and the layer composition. By varying the angle of incidence, the penetration depth could be tuned from a few to several hundred nanometers. Initial measurements were performed on 30 nm thick titanium layers oxidised to different extents and buried below 5 nm carbon layers produced by ion beam sputtering. The plane grating monochromator beamline for undulatory radiation at BESSY II was used to provide tuneable radiation of both conventional flux and that of high spectral purity for the GIXRF-NEXAFS studies showing that this technique can contribute to the speciation of deeply buried nano-layers. Wang et al.426 reported real-time studies of Ga adsorption and desorption kinetics on c-plane sapphire by grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering as a function of substrate temperature (680–740 °C) and Ga flux. Nano-droplets of liquid Ga were seen to form on the sapphire surface and then grow in size during continuous deposition to a point where the droplet distance scale coarsened. The desorption rate at different substrate temperatures gave the activation energy of Ga desorption as 2.7 eV, comparable to measured activation energies for Ga droplets on other substrates and to the Ga heat of vaporisation. Hua et al.427 applied high-resolution X-ray emission spectroscopy and spin-polarized X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy at the Mn K-edge in the La1−xSrxMnO3 system to investigate its local electronic and atomic structures.
A systematic study of X-ray intensity ratios of K-series lines was made on compounds of Ni and Co by Porikli and Kurucu428 in order to examine the influence of chemical state and 0.6 and 1.2 T external magnetic fields. Samples were excited by 22.68 keV X-rays emitted from a 109Cd radioisotope source and the characteristic K-spectra were measured with a Si(Li) detector. The results demonstrated the ability of the EDXRF system to measure Kβ/Kα intensity ratios related to the chemical state of an analyte. Oz and colleagues429 used a WDXRF spectrometer to measure chemical shifts in K spectra from compounds containing various oxidation states of Co, Cr, Cu, Fe and Ti confirming that the Kβ spectra were more sensitive than the Kα for this purpose. Ceppi et al.430 measured Kβ emission spectra in several clusters of PO43− and P2O74− in different chemical environments. The cation influence and the cation substitution with hydrogen on satellite Kβ′ line parameters were also reported. The authors found that this line enabled the light ligand atom to be identified and the number of H bonds with the PO43− cluster could be characterised. Kaya et al.431 determined K shell absorption jump factors and jump ratios at the upper and lower energy branch of the K absorption edge in elements from Tm to Os in the periodic table. Measurements were made of the total atomic absorption cross-sections, Kα production cross-sections, Kβ/Kα intensity ratios and K shell fluorescence yields in attenuation and direct excitation geometry. The K X-ray photons were excited using 123.6 keV gamma-rays from an intense 57Co source and detected with an low energy Ge solid-state detector. Their measured values were compared with those published by other workers. Another group, Apaydin et al.432 determined K shell intensity ratios (Kα2/Kα1, Kβ1/Kα1 and Kβ2/Kα1) for 21 elements between Tb and U in the periodic table using the same excitation energy and a Si(Li) detector configuration. All the X-ray intensity ratios were plotted against atomic number and compared with published theoretical values and other available experimental data. Han et al.433 reported angular variations of both K and L fluorescence cross sections for some lanthanides (Dy, Er, Eu, Gd, Ho, Sm and Tb) measured at 59.54 keV incident photon energy at 5 angles ranging from 120° to 160°. They used an 241Am radioisotope source and a Si(Li) detector. The Lα XRF cross section was found to decrease with increasing emission angle and showed anisotropic distribution of Lα X-rays. The Kα, Kβ and Lβ XRF cross sections were angle dependent and showed isotropic distribution of Kα, Kβ and Lβ X-rays. Borovoy434 studied the Mα and Mβ spectra of Bi atoms excitated by Cr and Cu Kα1,2 radiation. The short wavelength satellites were found to be from radiation transitions M5N and M4N satellites whereas the transitions M5O-N6,7O and M4O-N6O were overlapped with the profiles of Mα1,2 and Mβ lines and therefore not observed as individual structures. A model was proposed for calculation of emission cross sections of the M5N and M4N satellites as well as the Mα1,2 lines and the M5O, Mβ and M4O satellites, taking into account main channels of generation and migration of vacancies in M subshells connected with Coster-Kronig transitions. Comparison of experimental values of the relative intensity of the separated satellites with calculated results indicated that the model was valid.
10 Abbreviations

AASAtomic absorption spectrometry
ACAlternating current
AFMAtomic force microscopy
ALDAtomic layer deposition
APSAdvanced Photon Source
ASUAtomic Spectrometry Update
ASVAnodic stripping voltammetry
BCBefore Christ
BFRBrominated flame retardants
BMDBone mineral density
BPBefore present
CCAChromated copper arsenate
CCDCharge coupled device
CRMCertified reference material
CTComputerised tomography
2D/3D2 Dimensional/3 Dimensional
DINDeutches Institut für Normung
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
DTADifferential thermal analysis
ECElementary carbon
EDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EFEnrichment factors
EPMAElectron probe microanalysis
ESRFEuropean Synchrotron Radiation Facility
ETV-AASElectrothermal vaporisation atomic absorption spectrometry
EXAFSExtended X-ray absorption fine structure
FAASFlame Atomic absorption spectrometry
FPGAField programmable gate array
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GC-MSGas chromatographic-mass spectrometry
GIXRFGrazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
HEXHigh Energy X-ray
HPAAHydroxyphosphonoacetatic acid
HPLCHigh performance liquid chromatography
IAEAInternational Atomic Energy Agency
ICP-MSInductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ICP-AESInductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-OESInductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry
INAAInstrumental neutron activation analysis
IRInfrared
IRLSIteratively reweighted least-squares
IUPACInternational Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
JSACJapanese Society of Analytical Chemistry
KXRFK-line X-ray fluorescence
LINACLinear accelerator
LNFLaboratory Nazionali di Frascati
LNLSLaboratorio Nacional de Luz Sincroton
MFAMicro-fibril angle
MLXMotionless laminography system
MRIMagnetic resonance imaging
MWPCMultiwire gas proportional counter
NASANational Aeronautics and Space Administration
NEXAFSNear-edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NRELNational Renewable Energy Laboratory
NSLSNational Synchrotron Light Source
OCOrganic carbon
OLSOrdinary least-squares
ODXASOptically detected X-ray absorption spectroscopy
PBD/FPolybrominated dioxins and furans
PCAPrinciple component analysis
PCBPrinted circuit board
PGEPlatinum group elements
PIXEParticle-induced X-ray emission
PLSPartial least square
PMFPositive matrix factorization
PMParticulate matter
PTProficiency testing
PUREXPt, U refining by extraction
PXD/FPolyhalogenated dioxins and furans
PXRFPortable X-ray fluorescence
RBSRutherford backscattering
RS-XRFRapid scanning-X-ray fluorescence
RoHSRestriction of Hazardous Substances
SDDSilicon drift detectors
SEMScanning electron microscopy
Si(Li)Lithium-drifted silicon
SIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometry
Si-PINSilicon ‘PIN’ detector device
SLNLSynchrotron Light National Laboratory
SOMSelf organising maps
SPFSun protection factor
SRMStandard reference material
SRSSynchrotron radiation source
SR-TXRFSynchrotron radiation-total reflection X-ray fluorescence
SRXRDSynchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRFSynchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
STEMScanning transmission electron microscope
TEMTransmission electron microscope
TGThermo-gravimetry
TGAThermo-gravimetric analysis
TXRFTotal reflection X-ray fluorescence
TWQRTarget Water Quality Range
USBUniversal serial bus
US EPAUnited States Environmental Protection Agency
UV-VISUltraviolet-visible spectroscopy
WDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
WEEEWaste of electric and electronic equipment
XAFSX-ray absorption fine structure
XANESX-ray absorption near edge structure
XASX-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPSX-ray photon spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
XRFX-ray fluorescence

References
M. West, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, P. J. Potts, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(10), 1409–1437 RSC .
B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and S. Shore, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(12), 1636–1692 RSC .
O.T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. M. Davidson, C. F. Harrington and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24(2), 131–177 RSC .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(4), 595–646 RSC .
E. H. Evans, J. A. Day, C. D. Palmer, W. J. Price, C. M. M. Smith and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 889–918 RSC .
Eds. P. J. Potts and M. West,  2008, ISBN 978-970-85404-85552-85405.
F. Adams, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2008, 63(7), 738–745 CrossRef .
W. Shi and M. R. Chance, Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 2008, 65(19), 3040–3048 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thomsen, Spectroscopy, 2008, 23(7), 30 Search PubMed .
E. Langer, M. Haschke and S. Dabritz, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 161(3–4), 455–458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Procop and V. D. Hodoroaba, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 161(3–4), 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. B. Reed, Microchim. Acta, 2008, 161(3–4), 433–437 CrossRef CAS .
R. Alberti, C. Guazzoni and T. Klatka, Journal of Instrumentation, 2008, 3, PO3003 Search PubMed .
F. Fischer, D. Hoppe, E. Schleicher, G. Mattausch, H. Flaske, R. Bartel and U. Hampel, Measurement Science & Technology, 2008, 19(9), 094002 Search PubMed .

          F. Malglaive and R. D. Albert, Presented at Materials Testing 2008/NDT 2008 Conference, Cheshire, ENGLAND,  Sep 16–18, 2008 Search PubMed .
Z. Vykydal, J. Visschers, D. S. Tezcan, K. De Munck, T. Borgers, W. Ruythooren and P. De Moor, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2008, 591(1), 241–244 Search PubMed .
T. Shintake, Physical Review E, 2008, 78(4), 041906 Search PubMed .

          A. Ince-Cushman, J. E. Rice, M. Bitter, M. L. Reinke, K. W. Hill, M. F. Gu, E. Eikenberry, C. Broennimann, S. Scott, Y. Podpaly, S. G. Lee and E. S. Marmar, Presented at 17th Topical Conference on High-Temperature Plasma Diagnostics, Albuquerque, NM,  2008, 2008 Search PubMed .
B. Dickinson, G. T. Seidler, Z. W. Webb, J. A. Bradley, K. P. Nagle, S. M. Heald, R. A. Gordon and I. M. Chou, Review of Scientific Instruments, 2008, 79(12), 8 .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Okada, H. Shiraishi, K. Shirai, T. Arai, K. Ogawa, K. Hosono, M. Arakawa and M. Kato, Advances in Space Research, 2008, 42(2), 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zhang, H. Y. Wang, C. M. Zhang, X. H. Liang, J. W. Yang, J. Z. Wang, X. L. Cao, M. Gao, X. Z. Cui and W. X. Peng, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2008, 28(10), 2450–2454 Search PubMed .
S. Hatakeyama, S. Kunimura, N. Sasaki, T. Yamamoto and J. Kawai, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(7), 847–850 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yonehara and K. Tsuji, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(5), 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishiwatari, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2007, 581(1–2), 326–329 Search PubMed .
P. Burger, M. Keters, O. Evrard and L. Van Buul, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2008, 591(1), 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, J. H. Seo, H. W. Lim, C. H. Ban, K. C. Kim, J. G. Park, S. C. Jeon, B. H. Kim, S. O. Jin and Y. Hu, Ieice Transactions on Electronics, 2008, E91C(5), 703–707 CrossRef .
S. V. Vadawale, S. Purohit, M. Shanmugam, Y. B. Acharya, J. N. Goswami, M. Sudhakar and R. Sreekumar, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2009, 598(2), 485–495 Search PubMed .
H. C. Xu, C. Cheng, C. L. Zhao, J. Z. Zhang and S. J. Pu, Nuclear Science and Techniques, 2007, 18(6), 358–361 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kim, J. H. Won, S. H. Cho, J. H. Suh, P. K. Cho, J. Hong, S. U. Kim and Y. R. Han, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2008, 53(1), 317–321 Search PubMed .
C. Baumer, G. Martens, B. Menser, E. Roessl, J. P. Schlomka, R. Steadman and G. Zeitler, Ieee Transactions on Nuclear Science, 2008, 55(3), 1785–1790 Search PubMed .

American Ceramic Society Bulletin,  2008, 87(4), pp. 16–16 Search PubMed.
W. Leitenberger, R. Hartmann, U. Pietsch, R. Andritschke, I. Starke and L. Struder, J. Synchrot. Radiat., 2008, 15, 449–457 Search PubMed .
V. Tichy, T. Holy, J. Jakubek, V. Linhart, S. Pospisil and Z. Vykydal, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2008, 591(1), 67–70 Search PubMed .
T. Taguchi, C. Bronnimann and E. F. Eikenberry, Powder Diffraction, 2008, 23(2), 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Khokonov, M. B. Masaev, Z. A. Sunshev and L. A. Khamukova, Technical Physics Letters, 2008, 34(8), 682–684 Search PubMed .
A. V. Sushkov, V. F. Andreev and D. E. Kravtsov, Review of Scientific Instruments, 2008, 79(10) Search PubMed .

          A. V. Sushkov, V. F. Andreev and D. E. Kravtsov, Presented at 17th Topical Conference on High-Temperature Plasma Diagnostics, Albuquerque, NM,  2008 Search PubMed .
I. Johnson, Z. Sadygov, O. Bunk, A. Menzel, F. Pfeiffer and D. Renker, Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, 2009, 16, 105–109 CAS .
L. Q. Luo and X. C. Zhan, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2008, 28(3), 704–706 CAS .
R. Santra, Journal of Physics B-Atomic Molecular and Optical Physics, 2009, 42(2), 16 Search PubMed .
V. Delgado and R. Figueroa, Journal of Mathematical Chemistry, 2008, 43(4), 1403–1421 Search PubMed .
F. M. V. Pereira and M. Bueno, Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 2008, 92(2), 131–137 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Tuo, B. Cheng, K. L. Mu and Z. Li, Nuclear Science and Techniques, 2008, 19(5), 278–281 CAS .
Y. Maruyama, K. Ogawa, T. Okada and M. Kato, Earth Planets and Space, 2008, 60(4), 293–297 Search PubMed .
M. R. Gherase and D. E. B. Fleming, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(5), 482–489 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Oskolok and O. V. Monogarova, Journal of Analytical Chemistry, 2008, 63(12), 1176–1181 Search PubMed .
H. Z. Shan, S. J. Zhuo, R. X. Shen and C. Sheng, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(5), 612–616 Search PubMed .
M. N. Filippov, A. A. Mukhanova, T. A. Kupriyanova and O. I. Lyamina, J. Anal. Chem., 2008, 63(8), 756–761 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurol, A. Karabulut, M. Ertugrul and G. Budak, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(1), 171–178 CrossRef .
H. L. Xie, W. Hu, H. X. Luo, G. H. Du, B. Deng, R. C. Chen, Y. L. Xue, S. M. Shi and T. Q. Xiao, Acta Physica Sinica, 2008, 57(11), 7044–7051 Search PubMed .
D. L. Bartley, J. E. Slaven, M. C. Rose, M. E. Andrew and M. Harper, Journal of Occupational and Environmental Hygiene, 2008, 5(6), D72–D72 CAS .
N. P. Hyslop and W. H. White, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(14), 5235–5240 Search PubMed .
B. Beckhoff, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 845–853 RSC .
T. Kantor, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(4), 518–524 Search PubMed .
M. Mahrok and S. Shamoon, Journal of Applied Spectroscopy, 2008, 75(2), 295–299 Search PubMed .
X. Y. Lin, Z. H. Wang, T. X. Sun, Q. L. Pan and X. L. Ding, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(11), 2638–2642 Search PubMed .
D. Hampai, S. B. Dabagov, G. Cappuccio, A. Longoni, T. Frizzi, G. Cibin, V. Guglielmotti and M. Sala, Optics Letters, 2008, 33(23), 2743–2745 Search PubMed .
T. X. Sun, Z. G. Liu, G. H. Zhu, H. Liu, Q. Xu, Y. D. Li, G. P. Wang, H. B. Sun, P. Luo, Q. L. Pan and X. L. Ding, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2009, 267(1), 171–174 Search PubMed .
G. Van Der Snickt, W. De Nolf, B. Vekemans and K. Janssens, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 59–68 Search PubMed .
B. W. Adams and K. Attenkofer, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2007, 582(1), 152–155 Search PubMed .
M. Watanabe, T. Hatano, K. Saito, W. B. Hu, E. Takeo, T. Tsuru, M. Takahashi, H. Kimura, T. Hirono, Z. S. Wang, M. Q. Cui, M. Yamamoto and M. Yanagihara, Nuclear Science and Techniques, 2008, 19(4), 193–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. Matsuda, Y. Nodera, K. Nakano and K. Tsuji, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(7), 843–846 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wegrzynek, R. Mroczka, A. Markowicz, E. Chinea-Cano and S. Bamford, X-Ray Spectrometry, 2008, 37(6), 635–641 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaroszewicz, W. De Nolf, K. Janssens, A. Michalski and G. Falkenberg, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1129–1133 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Molloy and J. R. Sieber, Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 2008, 392(5), 995–1001 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bontempi, R. Bertuzzi, E. Ferretti, M. Zucca, P. Apostoli, S. Tenini and L. E. Depero, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 161(3–4), 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moller, S. Schmitz, M. Wilke, D. R. Nelson, W. Malzer, B. Kanngiesser, S. Schefer and R. Bousquet, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2008, 72(12), A643–A643 .
J. F. W. Mosselmans, P. D. Quinn, J. R. Rosell, K. D. Atkinson, A. J. Dent, S. I. Cavill, M. E. Hodson, C. A. Kirk and P. F. Schofield, Mineralogical Magazine, 2008, 72(1), 197–200 Search PubMed .
E. Strub, M. Radtke, U. Reinholz, H. Riesemeier and E. Remikova, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2165–2168 Search PubMed .
G. R. Pereira, H. S. Rocha, M. J. Anjos, P. Faria, C. A. Perez and R. T. Lopes, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2007, 581(1–2), 128–132 Search PubMed .
T. Ohigashi, T. Aota, N. Watanabe, H. Takano, H. Yokosuka and S. Aoki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47(6), 4742–4745 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Valentinuzzi, H. J. Sanchez, J. Abraham and C. Perez, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(5), 555–560 CrossRef CAS .
S. Endo, Y. Terada, Y. Kato and I. Nakai, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(19), 7152–7158 Search PubMed .
H. Kodera, H. Nishioka, Y. Muramatsu and Y. Terada, Analytical Sciences, 2008, 24(12), 1545–1549 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Naftel, R. R. Martin, S. M. Macfie, F. Courchesne and V. Seguin, Canadian Journal of Analytical Sciences and Spectroscopy, 2007, 52(1), 18–24 Search PubMed .
T. Punshon, M. L. Guerinot and A. Lanzirotti, Annals of Botany, 2009, 103(5), 665–672 Search PubMed .
S. M. Lev, E. R. Landa, K. Szlavecz, R. Casey and J. Snodgrass, Mineralogical Magazine, 2008, 72(1), 191–195 Search PubMed .
M. Lei, T. B. Chen, Z. C. Huang, Y. D. Wang and Y. Y. Huang, Chemosphere, 2008, 72(10), 1491–1496 CrossRef CAS .
M. Korbas, S. R. Blechinger, P. H. Krone, I. J. Pickering and G. N. George, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2008, 105(34), 12108–12112 CrossRef CAS .
B. De Samber, R. Evens, K. De Schamphelaere, G. Silversmit, B. Masschaele, T. Schoonjans, B. Vekemans, C. R. Janssen, L. Van Hoorebeke, I. Szaloki, F. Vanhaecke, G. Falkenberg and L. Vincze, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 829–839 RSC .
K. L. Munro, A. Mariana, A. I. Klavins, A. J. Foster, B. Lai, S. Vogo, Z. Cai, H. H. Harris and C. T. Dillon, Chemical Research in Toxicology, 2008, 21(9), 1760–1769 Search PubMed .

          R. P. E. McCrea, S. L. Harder, M. Martin, R. Buist and H. Nichol, Presented at Conference on Medical Applications of Synchrotron Radiation, Saskatoon, CANADA,  2008 Search PubMed .

          G. R. Pereira, H. S. Rocha, M. J. Anjos, P. Farias, C. A. Perez and R. T. Lopes, Presented at Conference on Medical Applications of Synchrotron Radiation, Saskatoon, CANADA,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. J. Farquharson, A. Al-Ebraheem, G. Falkenberg, R. Leek, A. L. Harris and D. A. Bradley, Physics in Medicine and Biology, 2008, 53(11), 3023–3037 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lima, M. J. Anjos, M. L. F. Fleiuss, D. Rosenthal and R. T. Lopes, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 249–254 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Lima, M. J. Anjosa, M. L. F. Farias, T. U. Pantaleao, V. M. C. da Costa and R. T. Lopes, Presented at Conference on Medical Applications of Synchrotron Radiation, Saskatoon, CANADA,  2008 Search PubMed .

          I. Lima, M. J. Anjos, M. L. F. Farias, N. Parcegoni, D. Rosenthal, M. E. L. Duarte and R. T. Lopes, Presented at Conference on Medical Applications of Synchrotron Radiation, Saskatoon, CANADA,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Gajda, K. Banas, A. Banas, J. Jawien, L. Mateuszuk, S. Chlopicki, W. M. Kwiatek, T. Cichockil and G. Falkenberg, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(5), 495–502 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sussulini, G. Souza, M. N. Eberlin and M. A. Z. Arruda, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1501–1506 RSC .
B. S. Twining, S. B. Baines, S. Vogt and M. D. de Jonge, Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology, 2008, 55(3), 151–162 Search PubMed .
S. Brennan, K. Luening, K. Ignatyev, P. Pianetta, H. A. Ishii and J. P. Bradley, Powder Diffraction, 2008, 23(2), 81–86 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Flynn, S. R. Sutton and A. Lanzirotti, Advances in Space Research, 2009, 43(2), 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lanzirotti, S. R. Sutton, G. J. Flynn, A. Newville and W. Rao, Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 2008, 43(1–2), 187–213 Search PubMed .
B. Constantinescu, R. Bugoi, V. Cojocam, M. Radtke, T. Calligaro, J. Salomon, L. Pichon, S. Rohrs, D. Ceccato and E. Oberlander-Tarnoveanu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2325–2328 Search PubMed .
M. F. Guerra, M. Radtke, I. Reiche, H. Riesemeier and E. Strub, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys.
Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2334–2338 Search PubMed .
I. Reiche and E. Chalmin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 799–806 RSC .
M. Cotte, J. Susini, V. A. Sole, Y. Taniguchi, J. Chillida, E. Checroun and P. Walter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 820–828 RSC .
J. P. Echard, M. Cotte, E. Dooryhee and L. Bertrand, Applied Physics A-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 77–81 Search PubMed .
S. Frisia, A. Borsato and J. Susini, Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research, 2008, 177(1), 96–100 Search PubMed .
C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, F. Meirer and G. Pepponi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 792–798 RSC .
R. Fernandez-Ruiz, Analytical Chemistry, 2008, 80(22), 8372–8381 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Wellenreuther, U. E. A. Fittschen, M. E. S. Achard, A. Faust, X. Kreplin and W. Meyer-Klaucke, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .
S. Kunimura and J. Kawai, Powder Diffraction, 2008, 23(2), 146–149 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Wobrauschek, C. Streli, P. Kregsamer, F. Meirer, C. Jokubonis, A. Markowicz, D. Wegrzynek and E. Chinea-Cano, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          U. E. A. Fittschen, F. Meirer, C. Streli, R. Wobrauschek, J. Thiele, G. Falkenberg and G. Pepponi, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .
V. Groma, J. Osan, S. Torok, F. Meirer, C. Streli, P. Wobrauscbek and G. Falkenberg, Idojaras, 2008, 112(2), 83–97 Search PubMed .

          F. Meirer, G. Pepponi, C. Streli, P. Wobrauschek, P. Kregsamer, N. Zoeger and G. Falkenberg, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          G. Cibin, A. Marcelli, V. Maggi, M. Sala, F. Marino, B. Delmonte, S. Albani and S. Pignotti, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .
F. Meirer, C. Streli, G. Pepponi, P. Wobrauschek, M. A. Zaitz, C. Horntrich and G. Falkenberg, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(12), 1571–1576 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Moreira and E. V. Fazza, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .
M. K. Tiwari, G. S. Lodha, K. J. S. Sawhney, B. Gowrisankar, A. K. Singh, G. M. Bhalerao, A. K. Sinha, A. Das, A. Verma and R. V. Nandedkar, Current Science, 2008, 95(5), 603–609 CAS .
T. Budri, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(15), 4768–4773 CrossRef CAS .

          C. M. Sparks, S. Lanee, M. Beebe and M. Page, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          H. Takahara, H. Murakami, T. Kinashi and C. Sparks, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          P. Honicke, B. Beckhoff, M. Kolbe, S. List, T. Conard and H. Struyff, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          A. Danel, E. Nolot, M. Veillerot, S. Olivier, T. Decorps, M. L. Calvo-Munoz, J. M. Hartmann, S. Lhostis, H. Kohno, M. Yamagami and C. Geoffroy, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          Y. Borde, A. Danel, A. Roche and M. Veillerot, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          M. Sekowski, C. Steen, A. Nutsch, E. Birnbaum, A. Burenkov and P. Pichler, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          S. Zheludeva, N. Novikova, N. Stepina, E. Yurieva and O. Konovalov, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          S. Woelfl, M. Mages and P. Torres, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          M. Mages, N. Bandow, E. Kuster, W. Brack and W. von Tumpling, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          C. Urdaneta, L. M. M. Parra, S. Matute, M. A. Garaboto, H. Barros and C. Vazquez, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          A. Wagner, J. Boman and M. J. Gatari, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          T. Magalhaes, M. Becker, M. L. Carvalho and A. von Bohlen, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          N. Szoboszlai, A. Reti, B. Budai, Z. Szabo, J. Kralovanszky and G. Zaray, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          H. J. Sanchez, M. C. Valentinuzzi, M. Grenon and J. Abraham, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          C. Vazquez, A. Albornoz, A. Hajduk, D. Elkin, G. Custo and A. Obrustky, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .
C. Vazquez, M. S. Maier, S. D. Parera, H. Yacobaccio and P. Sola, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1381–1387 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Martinez, G. Zarazua, P. Avila-Perez, F. Juarez, L. Cabrera and G. Martinez, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          T. Martinez, J. Lartigue, G. Zarazua, P. Avila-Perez, M. Navarrete and S. Tejeda, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          S. Dhara, N. L. Misra and S. K. Aggarwal, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .

          R. Fernandez-Ruiz, R. Costo, M. R. Morales, O. Bomati-Miguel and S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, Presented at 12th International Conference on Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis and Related Methods, Trento, ITALY,  Jun 18–22, 2007 Search PubMed .
C. Vazquez-Calvo, B. G. Tubio, M. A. de Buergo, I. O. Feliu, R. Fort and M. A. Respaldiza, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 399–409 CrossRef CAS .
V. Desnica, K. Skaric, D. Jembrih-Simbuerger, S. Fazinic, M. Jaksic, D. Mudronja, M. Pavilicic, I. Peranic and M. Schreiner, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 19–23 Search PubMed .
K. Ogawa, T. Okada, K. Shirai and M. Kato, Earth Planets and Space, 2008, 60(4), 283–292 Search PubMed .
K. Shirai, T. Okada, Y. Yamamoto, T. Arai, K. Ogawa, H. Shiraishi, M. Iwasaki, M. Arakawa, M. Grande and M. Kato, Earth Planets and Space, 2008, 60(4), 277–281 Search PubMed .
J. Naranen, H. Parviainen, K. Muinonen, J. Carpenter, K. Nygard and M. Peura, Icarus, 2008, 198(2), 408–419 CrossRef .
D. A. Hodell, J. E. T. Channell, J. H. Curtis, O. E. Romero and U. Rohl, Paleoceanography, 2008, 23(4), 16 .
B. Diekmann, J. Hofmann, R. I. Henrich, D. K. Futterer, U. Rohl and K. Y. Wei, Marine Geology, 2008, 255(1–2), 83–95 CrossRef .
G. J. Weltje and R. Tjallingii, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 2008, 274(3–4), 423–438 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Hocquet, H. P. Garnir, A. Marchal, M. Clar, C. Oger and D. Strivay, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 304–308 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uhlir, M. Griesser, G. Buzanich, P. Wobrauschek, C. Streli, D. Wegrzynek, A. Markowicz and E. Chinea-Cano, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 450–457 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gianoncelli, J. Castaing, L. Ortega, E. Dooryhee, J. Salomon, P. Walter, J. L. Hodeau and P. Bordet, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 418–423 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fakih, M. Davranche, A. Dia, B. Nowack, P. Petitjean, X. Chatellier and G. Gruau, Applied Geochemistry, 2008, 23(12), 3372–3383 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cesareo and A. Brunetti, Journal of X-Ray Science and Technology, 2008, 16(2), 119–130 Search PubMed .
F. L. Melquiades, D. D. Ferreira, C. R. Appoloni, F. Lopes, A. G. Lonni, F. M. Oliveira and J. C. Duarte, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 613(2), 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Guilherme, A. Cavaco, S. Pessanha, M. Costa and M. L. Carvalho, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 444–449 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tillman and D. Duong, Fuel Processing Technology, 2007, 88(11–12), 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Ellis, S. G. Buffey, M. A. Hough and S. S. Hasnain, J. Synchrot. Radiat., 2008, 15, 433–439 Search PubMed .
C. J. Ma and K. H. Kim, Atmospheric Environment, 2008, 42(29), 7022–7026 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Finkelshtein and T. N. Gunicheva, Inorganic Materials, 2008, 44(14), 1567–1571 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. W. Merkle, P. V. S. Raju and M. Loubser, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 273–279 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, T. Y. Li, Z. C. Meng, C. N. Wang, L. Ke and Y. H. Feng, Microchemical Journal, 2009, 91(1), 59–62 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Osman, J. A. Crayston, A. Pratt and D. T. Richens, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 2008, 110(2–3), 256–262 CrossRef CAS .
F. Paul, J. R. Binder, H. Gesswein, H. J. Ritzhaupt-Kleissl and J. Hausselt, Ceramics International, 2009, 35(1), 479–486 Search PubMed .
K. Rubesova and D. Sykorova, Journal of Sol-Gel Science and Technology, 2009, 49(2), 228–232 Search PubMed .
M. Crozet and A. Guigue, Radiochimica Acta, 2007, 95(11), 625–628 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Kelly, B. S. MacDonald and W. F. Guthrie, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(16), 6154–6158 CrossRef CAS .
G. Barbera, A. Lo Giudice, P. Mazzoleni and A. Pappalardo, Sedimentary Geology, 2009, 213(1–2), 27–40 CrossRef .
R. L. Hermanns and A. Schellenberger, Quaternary International, 2008, 178, 261–275 Search PubMed .
M. N. Tijani and M. E. Nton, Environmental Geology, 2009, 56(5), 935–951 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kristen, A. Fuhrmann, J. Thorpe, U. Rohl, H. Wilkes and H. Oberhansli, South African Journal of Geology, 2007, 110(2–3), 311–326 Search PubMed .
T. El-Hasan, Neues. Jahrb. Geol. Palaontol.-Abh., 2008, 249(3), 333–344 Search PubMed .
M. Moazzen and R. Berhansli, Neues Jahrbuch Fur Mineralogie-Abhandlungen, 2008, 185(1), 51–62 Search PubMed .
M. Cornelius, I. D. M. Robertson, A. J. Cornelius and P. A. Morris, Geochemistry-Exploration Environment Analysis, 2008, 8, 241–254 Search PubMed .
M. Hajaji, A. Belkabir and S. H. Berrada, Journal of African Earth Sciences, 2008, 52(3), 114–120 Search PubMed .
C. M. G. McHugh, D. Gurung, L. Giosan, W. B. F. Ryan, Y. Mart, U. Sancar, L. Burckle and M. N. Cagatay, Marine Geology, 2008, 255(1–2), 64–82 CrossRef .
V. N. Panizzo, V. J. Jones, H. J. B. Birks, J. F. Boyle, S. J. Brooks and M. J. Leng, Holocene, 2008, 18(5), 805–817 CrossRef .
A. Luckge, M. Mohtadi, C. Ruhlemann, G. Scheeder, A. Vink, L. Reinhardt and M. Wiedicke, Paleoceanography, 2009, 24, 14 .
D. Damiani and G. Giorgetti, Paleogeogr. Paleoclimatol. Paleoecol., 2008, 260(1–2), 262–283 CrossRef .
O. E. Romero, J. H. Kim and B. Donner, Paleoceanography, 2008, 23(3) Search PubMed .
M. Onal, C. Helvaci, E. Tekin and T. Ayyildiz, Carbonates and Evaporites, 2008, 23(1), 11–20 Search PubMed .
F. Galarraga, K. Reategui, A. Martinez, M. Martinez, J. F. Llamas and G. Marquez, Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering, 2008, 61(1), 9–14 Search PubMed .
R. Agnihotri, M. A. Altabet, T. D. Herbert and J. E. Tierney, Geochemistry Geophysics Geosystems, 2008, 9 Search PubMed .
I. Unkel, S. Bjorck and B. Wohlfarth, Quaternary Science Reviews, 2008, 27(15–16), 1541–1554 Search PubMed .
E. J. Rohling, K. Grant, C. Hemleben, M. Kucera, A. P. Roberts, I. Schmeltzer, H. Schulz, M. Siccha, M. Siddall and G. Trommer, Paleoceanography, 2008, 23(3), PA3219 CrossRef .
T. Tarvainen, J. Jarva and H. Kahelin, Geochemistry-Exploration Environment Analysis, 2009, 9, 81–92 Search PubMed .
P. N. Ranasinghe, G. Fernando, C. B. Dissanayake and M. S. Rupasinghe, Journal of Geochemical Exploration, 2008, 99(1–3), 1–28 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. S. Krekeler, J. Morton, J. Lepp, C. M. Tselepis, M. Samsonov and L. E. Kearns, Environmental Geology, 2008, 55(1), 123–147 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zaccone, C. Cocozza, W. Shotyk and T. M. Miano, Geoderma, 2008, 146(1–2), 26–31 CrossRef CAS .

          S. C. Angulo, C. Ulsen, V. M. John, H. Kahn and M. A. Cincotto, Presented at 5th Asian-Pacific Landfill Symposium, Sapporo, JAPAN,  Oct 22–24, 2008 Search PubMed .
B. J. Saikia, G. Parthasarathy, N. C. Sarmah and G. D. Baruah, Bulletin of Materials Science, 2008, 31(2), 155–158 Search PubMed .
M. J. Trindade, M. I. Dias, J. Coroado and F. Rocha, Applied Clay Science, 2009, 42(3–4), 345–355 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mahto and V. P. Sharma, Petroleum Science and Technology, 2008, 26(15), 1859–1868 Search PubMed .
B. Z. Foreman, R. R. Rogers, A. L. Deino, K. R. Wirth and J. T. Thole, Cretaceous Research, 2008, 29(3), 373–385 Search PubMed .
N. A. Kolpakova, A. S. Buinovskii and I. A. Mel'nikova, Journal of Analytical Chemistry, 2009, 64(2), 144–148 Search PubMed .
R. Sitko, B. Zawisza, T. Krzykawski and E. Malicka, Talanta, 2009, 77(3), 1105–1110 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Malabeh, S. Kempe, F. V. Henschel, H. Hofmann and H. J. Tobschall, Acta Carsologica, 2008, 37(2–3), 241–253 Search PubMed .
R. Ghavami-Riabi, H. F. J. Theart and C. De Jager, Journal of Geochemical Exploration, 2008, 97(2–3), 83–101 CrossRef CAS .
U. Noseck, T. Brasser, J. Suksi, V. Havlova, M. Hercik, M. A. Denecke and H. J. Forster, Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, 2008, 33(14–16), 969–977 Search PubMed .
E. Keegan, S. Richter, I. Kelly, H. Wong, P. Gadd, H. Kuehn and A. Alonso-Munoz, Applied Geochemistry, 2008, 23(4), 765–777 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, S. J. Kim and M. H. Baik, Environmental Geology, 2008, 55(4), 853–862 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tazaki, R. Asada, Z. G. Lindenmayer, T. Shirotori, J. M. Vargas, C. H. Nowatzki and O. W. Coelho, International Journal of Earth Sciences, 2009, 98(1), 227–238 Search PubMed .
L. E. Mordberg, C. J. Stanley and A. V. Antonov, Mineralogical Magazine, 2008, 72(1), 95–99 Search PubMed .
K. Chassapis and M. Roulia, International Journal of Coal Geology, 2008, 75(3), 185–188 CrossRef CAS .
S. Estrada, K. Piepjohn, M. J. Frey, L. Reinhardt, H. Andruleit and W. von Gosen, Neues Jahrbuch Fur Geologie Und Palaontologie-Abhandlungen, 2009, 251(1), 33–52 Search PubMed .
W. Z. Kang, H. X. Xun and J. Hu, Fuel Processing Technology, 2008, 89(12), 1337–1344 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Xia, P. D. Zhao, Q. M. Cheng, Y. Q. Chen and S. Y. Zhang, Journal of China University of Geosciences, 2008, 19(4), 354–362 Search PubMed .
A. E. Erginal, M. Turkes, T. A. Ertek, A. Baba and C. Bayrakdar, Geografiska Annaler Series a-Physical Geography, 2008, 90A(2), 109–123 Search PubMed .
O. S. Al-Ayed and M. Matouq, Journal of Energy Resources Technology-Transactions of the Asme, 2009, 131(1), 4 Search PubMed .
S. Baraka-Lokmane, I. G. Main, B. T. Ngwenya and S. C. Elphick, Marine and Petroleum Geology, 2009, 26(1), 39–56 Search PubMed .
K. Nakayama and T. Nakamura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Zaitsev, T. A. Makarova, A. V. Barkov, A. V. Bakhtiarov and L. N. Moskvin, Inorganic Materials, 2008, 44(14), 1559–1566 CrossRef CAS .

          K. T. Smith, J. C. Balouet and G. Oudijk, Presented at 7th International Conference on Dendrochronology, Beijing, PEOPLES R CHINA,  Jun 11–17, 2006 Search PubMed .
S. B. Gauthier, D. Houle, C. Gagnon, B. Cote and C. Messier, Journal of Environmental Quality, 2008, 37(3), 871–879 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peura, M. P. Saren, J. Laukkanen, K. Nygard, S. Andersson, P. Saranpaa, T. Paakkari, K. Hamalainen and R. Serimaa, Trees-Structure and Function, 2008, 22(4), 499–510 Search PubMed .
J. Thieme, S. C. Gleber, P. Guttmann, J. Prietzel, I. McNulty and J. Coates, Mineralogical Magazine, 2008, 72(1), 211–216 Search PubMed .
S. Jimenez, F. Morales, A. Abadia, J. Abadia, M. A. Moreno and Y. Gogorcena, Plant and Soil, 2009, 315(1–2), 93–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. Leigh Broadhurst, R. Tappero, T. Maugel, E. Erbe, D. Sparks and R. Chaney, Plant and Soil, 2009, 314(1–2), 35–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fors, T. Nilsson, E. D. Risberg, M. Sandstrom and P. Torssander, International
Biodeterioration & Biodegradation, 2008, 62(4), 336–347 Search PubMed .
R. Andrahennadi and I. J. Pickering, Environmental Chemistry, 2008, 5(6), 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
R. Terzano, Z. Al Chami, B. Vekemans, K. Janssens, T. Miano and P. Ruggiero, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56(9), 3222–3231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shibata, J. Suyama, A. Himamoto, N. Yoshihara, S. Tsuruta, K. Nakano and T. Nakamura, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(6), 477–483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dantu, Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 2009, 149(1–4), 213–222 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lu, L. J. Wang, K. Lei, J. Huang and Y. X. Zhai, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2009, 161(2–3), 1058–1062 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Yalcin and B. Unal, Asian Journal of Chemistry, 2008, 20(5), 3978–3990 CAS .
O. Jacquat, A. Voegelin, A. Villard, M. A. Marcus and R. Kretzschmar, Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 2008, 72(20), 5037–5054 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hopp, P. S. Nico, M. A. Marcus and S. Peiffer, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(17), 6481–6486 Search PubMed .
G. Jacobi, H. Solo-Gabriele, B. Dubey, T. Townsend and T. Shibata, Waste Management, 2007, 27(12), 1765–1773 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Clark, D. M. Hausladen and D. J. Brabander, Environmental Research, 2008, 107(3), 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Schroth, B. C. Bostick, J. M. Kaste and A. J. Friedland, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(10), 3627–3633 Search PubMed .
F. M. Adebiyi and O. I. Asubiojo, Chemistry and Ecology, 2008, 24(6), 423–435 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuligowski, P. Stoholm, N. Pind, J. Laursen and T. G. Poulsen, Waste Management & Research, 2008, 26(4), 347–354 Search PubMed .
S. Giralt, A. Moreno, R. Bao, A. Saez, R. Prego, B. L. Valero-Garces, J. J. Pueyo, P. Gonzalez-Samperiz and C. Taberner, J. Paleolimn., 2008, 40(1), 195–215 Search PubMed .
M. G. Yalcin, I. Narin and M. Soylak, Environmental Geology, 2008, 54(6), 1155–1163 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Koretsky, A. Cuellar, M. Haveman, L. Beuving, T. Shattuck and M. Wagner, Chemical Geology, 2008, 255(1–2), 100–113 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Espinoza-Quinones, E. A. da Silva, M. D. Rizzutto, S. M. Palacio, A. N. Modenes, N. Szymanski, N. Martin and A. D. Kroumov, World Journal of Microbiology & Biotechnology, 2008, 24(12), 3063–3070 Search PubMed .
O. S. Okay, H. Pekey, E. Morkoc, S. Basak and B. Baykal, Journal of Environmental Science and Health Part a-Toxic/Hazardous Substances & Environmental Engineering, 2008, 43(14), 1725–1734 Search PubMed .
T. Kalicki, S. Sauchyk, G. Calderoni and G. Simakova, Quaternary International, 2008, 189, 91–105 Search PubMed .
L. L. Oram, D. G. Strawn, M. A. Marcus, S. C. Fakra and G. Moller, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(18), 6830–6836 Search PubMed .
B. M. Toner, C. M. Santelli, M. A. Marcus, R. Wirth, C. S. Chan, T. McCollom, W. Bach and K. J. Edwards, Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 2009, 73(2), 388–403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ziegler, T. Jilbert, G. J. de Lange, L. J. Lourens and G. J. Reichart, Geochemistry Geophysics Geosystems, 2008, 9 Search PubMed .
L. Lowemark, M. Jakobsson, M. Morth and J. Backman, Polar Research, 2008, 27(2), 105–113 Search PubMed .
F. De Vleeschouwer, B. van Vliet-Lanoe, N. Fagel, T. Richter and X. Boes, Quaternary International, 2008, 178, 54–67 Search PubMed .
S. S. M. Hassan, N. S. Awwad and A. H. A. Aboterika, Journal of Hazardous Materials, 2008, 154(1–3), 992–997 CrossRef CAS .
C. Acharya, D. Joseph and S. K. Apte, Bioresource Technology, 2009, 100(7), 2176–2181 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barrento, A. Marques, B. Teixeira, P. Vaz-Pires, M. L. Carvalho and M. L. Nunes, Food Chemistry, 2008, 111(4), 862–867 CrossRef CAS .
D. Desideri, M. A. Meli, C. Roselli and L. Feduzi, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(2), 591–600 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, G. Wu, J. Sun, B. Li, Y. F. Li, C. Y. Chen, Z. F. Chai, A. S. Iida and Y. X. Gao, Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health-Part a-Current Issues, 2008, 71(18), 1266–1269 Search PubMed .
Z. Matasin, E. Gjurcevic, I. T. Gajger, V. Orescanin, L. Mikelic, Z. Petrinec, S. Lulic, L. Bedrica and M. Matasin, Tieraerztliche Umschau, 2008, 63(5), 276–280 Search PubMed .
A. Gunes, Y. K. Kadioglu, D. J. Pilbeam, A. Inal, S. Coban and A. Aksu, Communications in Soil Science and Plant Analysis, 2008, 39(13–14), 1904–1927 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ustunda, Spectroscopy Letters, 2009, 42(1), 7–11 CrossRef .
A. G. Barua, S. Hazarika, J. S. Pathak and C. Kalita, International Journal of Food Sciences and Nutrition, 2008, 59(7–8), 671–678 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lippmann, Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 2009, 19(3), 235–247 Search PubMed .
J. M. Hirshon, M. Shardell, S. Alles, J. L. Powell, K. Squibb, J. Ondov and C. J. Blaisdell, Environmental Health Perspectives, 2008, 116(6), 826–831 CAS .
M. Neghab, J. H. Zadeh and M. R. Fakoorziba, Industrial Health, 2009, 47(1), 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. M. Godoi, D. M. Braga, Y. Makarovska, B. Alfoldy, M. A. S. Carvalho, R. Van Grieken and A. F. L. Godoi, Atmospheric Environment, 2008, 42(30), 7027–7033 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avigo, A. F. L. Godoi, P. R. Janissek, Y. Makarovska, A. Krata, S. Potgieter-Vermaak, B. Alfoldy, R. Van Grieken and R. H. M. Godoi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1459–1468 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mazzei, A. D'Alessandro, F. Lucarelli, S. Nava, P. Prati, G. Valli and R. Vecchi, Sci. Total Environ., 2008, 401(1–3), 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Ochsenkuhn, T. Lyberopoulou, G. Koumarianou and M. Ochsenkuhn-Petropoulou, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 160(4), 485–492 CrossRef .
R. S. Raman, P. K. Hopke and T. M. Holsen, Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 2008, 144(1–3), 351–366 CrossRef .
S. A. Pozza, R. L. Bruno, M. G. Tazinassi, J. A. S. Goncalves, V. F. Do Nascimento, M. A. S. Barrozo and J. R. Coury, International Journal of Environment and Pollution, 2009, 36(1–3), 276–286 Search PubMed .
L. N. Hawkins, L. M. Russell, C. H. Twohy and J. R. Anderson, Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres, 2008, 113(D14) Search PubMed .
W. Rogula-Kozlowska, K. Klejnowski and S. Szopa, Environment Protection Engineering, 2008, 34(4), 5–15 Search PubMed .
M. Schlummer, A. Maurer, R. van Eldik, P. Quicker, W. Fischer and M. Faulstich, Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 2007, 14(6), 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miskolczi and L. Bartha, Journal of Biochemical and Biophysical Methods, 2008, 70(6), 1247–1253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nicu, L. Ionascu, F. Dragolici, C. Turcanu and G. Rotarescu, Romanian Journal of Physics, 2007, 52(3–4), 287–294 Search PubMed .
M. A. Denecke, W. De Nolf, K. Janssens, B. Brendebach, A. Rothkirch, G. Falkenberg and U. Noseck, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(4), 484–492 Search PubMed .
L. Petrescu and E. Bilal, Carpathian Journal of Earth and Environmental Sciences, 2007, 2(1), 39–50 Search PubMed .
F. S. Al-Saleh and G. A. Al-Harshan, J. Environ. Radioact., 2008, 99(7), 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhao, J. Y. Zhang, W. C. Huang, Z. H. Wang, Y. Li, D. Y. Song, F. H. Zhao and C. G. Zheng, Energy Conversion and Management, 2008, 49(4), 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
U. Blaha, B. Sapkota, E. Appel, H. Stanjek and W. Rosler, Atmospheric Environment, 2008, 42(36), 8359–8370 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Gitari, O. O. Fatoba, L. F. Petrik and V. R. K. Vadapalli, Journal of Environmental Science and Health Part a-Toxic/Hazardous Substances & Environmental Engineering, 2009, 44(2), 206–220 Search PubMed .
P. Pengthamkeerati, T. Satapanajaru and P. Chularuengoaksorn, Fuel, 2008, 87(12), 2469–2476 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Marcello, S. Galato, M. Peterson, H. G. Riella and A. M. Bernardin, Journal of Environmental Management, 2008, 88(4), 1280–1284 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kante, J. S. Qiu, Z. B. Zhao, Y. Cheng and J. J. Bandosz, Chemical Engineering Journal, 2008, 138(1–3), 155–165 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Alvarez and A. E. Bohe, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 2008, 47(21), 8184–8191 Search PubMed .
O. Gonzalez-Fernandez, M. Hidalgo, E. Margui, M. L. Carvalho and I. Queralt, Environmental
Pollution, 2008, 153(2), 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Park, J. K. Yang and S. I. Choi, Journal of Environmental Science and Health Part a-Toxic/Hazardous Substances & Environmental Engineering, 2008, 43(9), 1093–1099 Search PubMed .
M. Seredych, C. Strydom and T. J. Bandosz, Waste Management, 2008, 28(10), 1983–1992 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Allen, M. D. McClean, H. M. Stapleton and T. F. Webstert, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(11), 4222–4228 Search PubMed .
S. Saravababhavan, P. Thanikaivelan, J. R. Rao, B. Chandrasekarn, B. U. Nair, T. Ramasami and D. C. Shely, Journal of the American Leather Chemists Association, 2008, 103(9), 303–313 Search PubMed .
R. Cesareo and A. Brunetti, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 260–264 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, B. Abalos, I. Martinez-Arkarazo, N. Etxebarria and J. M. Madariaga, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2008, 9(2), 189–195 Search PubMed .
M. Aceto, A. Agostino, E. Boccaleri and A. C. Garlanda, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 286–292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bruni, S. Caglio, V. Guglielmi and G. Poldi, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 103–108 Search PubMed .
L. Burgio, R. J. H. Clark, V. S. F. Muralha and T. Stanley, Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, 2008, 39(10), 1482–1493 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, N. Proietti, E. Princi, S. Pessanha, M. L. Carvalho, S. Vicini, D. Capitani and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 623(2), 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, S. Pessanha, N. Proietti, E. Princi, D. Capitani, M. L. Carvalho and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(1), 433–441 CrossRef CAS .
P. Milota, I. Reiche, A. Duval, O. Forstner, H. Guicharnaud, W. Kutschera, S. Merchel, A. Priller, M. Schreiner, P. Steier, E. Thobois, A. Wallner, B. Wunschek and R. Golser, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2279–2285 Search PubMed .
L. Bonizzoni, S. Caglio, A. Galli and G. Poldi, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 203–210 Search PubMed .
M. Bicchieri, M. Monti, G. Piantanida and A. Sodo, Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, 2008, 39(8), 1074–1078 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Hatzistavros and N. G. Kallithrakas-Kontos, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2008, 277(2), 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chalmin, E. Sansot, G. Orial, F. Bousta and I. Reiche, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 424–434 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sotiropoulou, S. Daniilia, C. Miliani, F. Rosi, L. Cartechini and D. Papanikola-Bakirtzis, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 143–150 Search PubMed .
N. Civici, M. Anastasiou, T. Zorba, K. M. Paraskevopoulos, T. Dilo, F. Stamati and M. Arapi, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2008, 9(2), 207–213 Search PubMed .
P. M. Ramos, I. Ruisanchez and K. S. Andrikopoulos, Talanta, 2008, 75(4), 926–936 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sodo, D. Artioli, A. Botti, G. De Palma, A. Giovagnoli, M. Mariottini, A. Paradisi, C. Polidoro and M. A. Ricci, Journal of Raman Spectroscopy, 2008, 39(8), 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hradil, J. Hradilova, P. Bezdicka and S. Svarcova, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 376–382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kriznar, M. V. Munoz, F. de la Paz, M. A. Respaldiza and M. Vega, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gil, M. L. Carvalho, A. Seruya, I. Ribeiro, P. Alves, A. Guilherme, A. Cavaco, J. Mirao and A. Candeias, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 328–337 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Woll, J. Mass, C. Bisulca, M. Cushi-Nan, C. Griggs, T. Wanzy and N. Ocon, Studies in Conservation, 2008, 53(2), 93–109 Search PubMed .
J. Dik, K. Janssens, G. Van der Snickt, L. van der Loeff, K. Rickers and M. Cotte, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(16), 6436–6442 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kanngiesser, I. Mantouvalou, W. Malzer, T. Wolff and O. Hahn, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2008, 23(6), 814–819 RSC .
R. Arletti, G. Vezzalini, S. Quartieri, D. Ferrari, M. Merlini and M. Cotte, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 127–135 Search PubMed .
R. Arletti, G. Vezzalini, S. B. Simona and F. M. Scotti, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 606–626 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Iovino, L. Maniscalco, G. Pappalardo, L. Pappalardo, D. Puglisi, F. Rizzo and F. P. Romano, Archaeometry, 2008, 50, 474–494 CrossRef CAS .
A. Silvestri, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(6), 1489–1501 CrossRef .
J. L. Carrano, G. H. Girty and C. J. Carrano, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(3), 785–797 CrossRef .
C. Tschegg, I. Hein and T. Ntaflos, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(5), 1134–1147 CrossRef .
J. P. Veiga and M. O. Figueiredo, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 229–233 Search PubMed .
J. P. Veiga and M. O. Figueiredo, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 458–461 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Zindovic, L. S. Damjanovic, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunovic, U. B. Mioc and D. Bajuk-Bogdanovic, Hemijska Industrija, 2008, 62(3), 138–142 Search PubMed .
S. Akyuz, T. Akyuz, S. Basaran, C. Bolcal and A. Gulec, Vibrational Spectroscopy, 2008, 48(2), 276–280 CrossRef CAS .
C. Grifa, V. Morra, A. Langella and P. Munzi, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 75–94 CrossRef CAS .
G. Montana, I. Iliopoulos, V. Tardo and C. Greco, Geoarchaeology-an International Journal, 2009, 24(1), 86–110 Search PubMed .
S. S. Cugalj, L. S. Damjanovic, I. D. Holclajtner-Antunovic and U. B. Mioc, Hemijska Industrija, 2008, 62(3), 143–147 Search PubMed .
S. M. A. Emami, J. Volkmar and R. Trettin, Surface Engineering, 2008, 24(2), 129–137 Search PubMed .
S. H. Zhou, L. Fu and B. L. Liang, Science in China Series E-Technological Sciences, 2008, 51(7), 999–1007 Search PubMed .
L. Cheng, R. W. Li, Q. L. Pan, G. X. Li, W. J. Zhao and Z. G. Liu, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section B-Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 2009, 267(1), 117–120 Search PubMed .
S. L. Feng, X. Q. Feng, J. H. Zhu, G. X. Xie, L. T. Yan, L. Li, G. Li and Q. H. Shen, Chinese Physics C, 2008, 32, 284–288 Search PubMed .
N. S. Li, Q. L. Li, Z. Q. Yao and Z. W. Mao, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2009, 29(1), 231–235 Search PubMed .
W. Juan, P. L. Leung and L. Jiazhi, Studies in Conservation, 2007, 52(3), 188–198 Search PubMed .
W. D. Li, H. J. Luo, J. N. Li, J. Z. Li and J. K. Guo, Ceramics International, 2008, 34(6), 1473–1480 Search PubMed .
H. Y. Zhang, Z. W. Zhao, D. W. Yang, S. Wang and W. Y. Guo, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(1), 307–312 CrossRef CAS .
B. Beckhoff, M. Kolbe, O. Hahn, A. G. Karydas, C. Zarkadas, D. Sokaras and M. Mantler, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 462–465 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Braun, T. Plummer, P. Ditchfield, J. V. Ferraro, D. Maina, L. C. Bishop and R. Potts, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(8), 2329–2345 CrossRef .
D. R. Braun, J. W. K. Harris and D. N. Maina, Archaeometry, 2009, 51, 26–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. Powers, D. M. Smilgies, E. C. Geil, K. Clinton, N. Dimitrova, M. Peachin and R. E. Thorne, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(2), 343–350 CrossRef .
D. Ogburn, S. Connell and C. Gifford, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(3), 740–751 CrossRef .
E. Nodarou, C. Frederick and A. Hein, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(11), 2997–3015 CrossRef .
M. Budak, P. Maravelaki-Kalaitzaki and N. Kallithrakas-Kontos, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 162(3–4), 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maguregui, A. Sarmiento, I. Martinez-Arkarazo, M. Angulo, K. Castro, G. Arana, N. Etxebarria and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(4), 1361–1370 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Figueiredo, T. P. Silva and J. P. Veiga, Applied Physics a-Materials Science & Processing, 2008, 92(1), 151–154 Search PubMed .
K. Castro, A. Sarmiento, M. Maguregui, I. Martinez-Arkarazo, N. Etxebarria, M. Angulo, M. U. Barrutia, J. M. Gonzalez-Cembellin and J. M. Madariaga, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 392(4), 755–763 CrossRef CAS .
K. Castro, A. Sarmiento, I. Martinez-Arkarazo, J. M. Madariaga and L. A. Fernandez, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80(11), 4103–4110 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Sanchez, J. R. Romani, D. F. Mosquera and C. A. Alves, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 346–354 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. M. Godoi, S. Potgieter-Vermaak, A. F. L. Godoi, M. Stranger and R. Van Grieken, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 298–303 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kontozova-Deutsch, F. Deutsch, R. H. M. Godoi, Z. Spolnik, W. Wei and R. Van Grieken, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 161(3–4), 465–469 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kontozova-Deutsch, R. H. M. Godoi, A. Worobiec, Z. Spolnik, A. Krata, F. Deutsch and R. Van Grieken, Microchimica Acta, 2008, 162(3–4), 425–432 CrossRef CAS .
A. Worobiec, L. Samek, P. Karaszkiewicz, V. Kontozova-Deutsch, E. A. Stefaniak, K. Van Meel, A. Krata, L. Bencs and R. Van Grieken, Microchemical Journal, 2008, 90(2), 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eliyahu-Behar, S. Shilstein, N. Raban-Gerstel, Y. Goren, A. Gilboa, I. Sharon and S. Weiner, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(11), 2895–2908 CrossRef .
J. Humphris, M. Martinon-Torres, T. Rehren and A. Reid, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2009, 36(2), 359–369 CrossRef .
E. S. Friedman, A. J. Brody, M. L. Young, J. D. Almer, C. U. Segre and S. M. Mini, Journal of Archaeological Science, 2008, 35(7), 1951–1960 CrossRef .
R. M. Ion, D. Boros, M. L. Ion, I. Dumitriu, F. Radu-Claudiu, R. Constantin, G. Florea and C. Bercu, Metalurgia International, 2008, 13(5), 61–65 Search PubMed .
L. Bonizzoni, A. Galli and G. Poldi, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 388–394 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Guerra, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 317–327 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cakir, A. Gurol, L. Demir and Y. Sahin, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(1), 345–348 CrossRef CAS .
L. Beck, E. Alloin, C. Berthier, S. Reveillon and V. Costa, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2320–2324 Search PubMed .
L. Peralta, A. C. Farinha and F. Rego, European Journal of Physics, 2008, 29(5), 901–909 Search PubMed .
A. Crabbe, I. Vandendael, H. Wouters, G. Dewanckel, O. Steenhaut and H. Terryn, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(3–4), 469–473 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Echard and B. Lavedrine, Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2008, 9(4), 420–429 Search PubMed .
A. Goto, A. Hokura and I. Nakai, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(9), 699–706 CrossRef CAS .
B. Charlton, A. S. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. Lancaster and M. Salisbury, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2007, 22(12), 1517–1560 RSC .
D. B. Gore, E. S. Heiden and R. J. Field, Environmental Science & Technology, 2008, 42(11), 4088–4092 Search PubMed .
K. Nakano, T. Nakamura, I. Nakai, J. Noro, A. Kawase, M. Hasegawa, Y. Ishibashi, I. Inamoto, K. Sudou, M. Kozaki, S. Turuta, A. Bando, A. Ono, K. Kakita, K. Takimoto and M. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(6), 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ishibashi, M. Hasegawa, K. Sudo, K. Nakano, A. Bando, S. Tsuruta, A. Ono, K. Kakita and M. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2008, 57(11), 901–910 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lonni, J. C. Duarte, F. M. Oliveira, F. L. Melquiades, D. D. D. Ferreira and C. R. Appoloni, Latin American Journal of Pharmacy, 2008, 27(5), 661–667 Search PubMed .
V. Natarajan, M. J. Kulkarni, N. K. Porwal, B. A. Dhawale, N. S. Hon, S. V. Godbole and V. K. Manchanda, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(14), 3290–3294 Search PubMed .
V. Natarajan, B. A. Dhawale, B. Rajeswari, N. S. Hon, S. K. Thulasidas, N. K. Porwal, S. V. Godbole and V. K. Manchanda, Spectrochimica Acta Part B-Atomic Spectroscopy, 2008, 63(7), 817–819 Search PubMed .
L. R. Barker, W. R. Kelly and W. F. Guthrie, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22(4), 2488–2490 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brugger, B. Etschmann, M. Pownceby, W. H. Liu, P. Grundler and D. Brewe, Chemical Geology, 2008, 257(1–2), 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Rui, H. Li, J. B. Shen and F. S. Mang, Spectroscopy and Spectral Analysis, 2008, 28(11), 2703–2705 Search PubMed .
M. Zamburlini, A. Pejovic-Milic and D. R. Chettle, Physics in Medicine and Biology, 2008, 53(15), N307–N313 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. A. de Brito, M. L. de Carvalho and D. R. Chettle, Physics in Medicine and Biology, 2009, 54(4), 919–934 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Lodwick and H. B. Spitz, Health Physics, 2008, 95(6), 744–753 Search PubMed .
K. Theppeang, T. A. Glass, K. Bandeen-Roche, A. C. Todd, C. A. Rohde and B. S. Schwartz, American Journal of Public Health, 2008, 98(7), 1248–1255 Search PubMed .
K. Theppeang, T. A. Glass, K. Bandeen-Roche, A. C. Todd, C. A. Rohde, J. M. Links and B. S. Schwartz, Environmental Health Perspectives, 2008, 116(6), 784–790 CAS .
M. R. Gherase and D. E. B. Fleming, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 2009, 67(1), 50–54 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khuder, M. A. Bakir, R. Hasan and A. Mohammad, Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, 2008, 143(1–3), 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Wittmers, A. C. Aufderheide, J. G. Pounds, K. W. Jones and J. L. Angel, American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 2008, 136(4), 379–386 Search PubMed .
A. D. Woolf, J. Hussain, L. McCullough, M. Petranovic and C. Chomchai, Clinical Toxicology, 2008, 46(9), 841–844 Search PubMed .
R. B. Saper, R. S. Phillips, A. Sehgal, N. Khouri, R. B. Davis, J. Paquin, V. Thuppil and S. N. Kales, Jama-Journal of the American Medical Association, 2008, 300(8), 915–923 Search PubMed .
M. Rubio, R. D. Perez, C. A. Perez, A. H. Eynard and G. A. Bongiovanni, Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 2008, 77(1), 1–8 Search PubMed .
C. Petibois and M. C. Guidi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391(5), 1599–1608 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. G. Popescu, M. J. George, U. Bergmann, A. V. Garachtchenko, M. E. Kelly, R. P. E. McCrea, K. Luning, R. M. Devon, G. N. George, A. D. Hanson, S. M. Harder, L. D. Chapman, I. J. Pickering and H. Nichol, Physics in Medicine and Biology, 2009, 54(3), 651–663 CrossRef .
R. E. B. Serpa, E. F. O. de Jesus, M. J. Anjos, L. F. de Oliveira, L. A. Marins, M. G. T. do Carmo, J. D. C. Junior, M. S. Rocha, R. T. Lopes and A. M. B. Martinez, Anal. Sci., 2008, 24(7), 839–842 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Gurusamy, M. J. Farquharson, C. Craig and B. R. Davidson, Biometals, 2008, 21(3), 373–378 Search PubMed .
Z. Q. Xie, P. F. Zhang, L. G. Sun, S. Q. Xu, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, Marine Pollution Bulletin, 2008, 56(3), 516–524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Olivares, N. Etxebarria, G. Arana, K. Castro, X. Murelaga and A. Berreteaga, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(4), 293–297 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taylor, S. Branch, M. P. Day, M. Patriarca and M. White, Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry, 2009, 24(4), 535–579 RSC .
R. Sitko, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meskauskas, Materials Science-Medziagotyra, 2008, 14(1), 79–81 Search PubMed .
H. Ochi, S. Watanabe and H. Nakamura, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37(3), 245–248 CrossRef CAS .
J. Musil, V. Satava, R. Cerstvy, P. Zeman and T. Tolg, Surface & Coatings Technology, 2008, 202(24), 6064–6069 Search PubMed .
I. Stanca and T. Ilies, J. Optoelectron. Adv. Mater., 2008, 10(9), 2420–2424 Search PubMed .
E. Bacaksiz, O. Gorur, A. Tomakin, E. Yanmaz and A. Altunbas, Materials Letters, 2007, 61(30), 5239–5242 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel and A. Y. Ali-Mohamed, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 2009, 113(1), 356–360 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Fister, D. D. Fong, J. A. Eastman, P. M. Baldo, M. J. Highland, P. H. Fuoss, K. R. Balasubramaniam, J. C. Meador and P. A. Salvador, Applied Physics Letters, 2008, 93(15) Search PubMed .
A. Ganjoo, H. Jain and S. Khalid, Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, 2008, 354(19–25), 2673–2678 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qi, G. B. Mao and J. P. Ao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254(18), 5711–5714 CrossRef CAS .
G. Martinez-Criado, O. Sancho-Juan, N. Garro, J. A. Sans, A. Cantarero, J. Susini, M. Roever, D. D. Mai, A. Bedoya-Pinto, J. Malindretos and A. Rizzi, Applied Physics Letters, 2008, 93(2) Search PubMed .
S. Y. Cheng, Y. J. He and G. N. Chen, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 2008, 110(2–3), 449–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Song, Y. C. Choi, M. C. Ju, S. H. Seo, M. H. Oh, D. C. Oh, T. Yao and H. Y. Lee, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2009, 54(2), 744–748 Search PubMed .

          C. Steen, P. Pichler and H. Ryssel, Presented at Symposium on Front-End Junction and Contact Formation in Future Silicon/Germanium based Devices held at the 2008 E-MRS Spring Meeting, Strasbourg, FRANCE,  May 26–29, 2008 Search PubMed .
C. Steen, A. Martinez-Limia, P. Pichler, H. Ryssel, S. Paul, W. Lerch, L. Pei, G. Duscher, F. Severac, F. Cristiano and W. Windl, Journal of Applied Physics, 2008, 104(2) Search PubMed .
H. Baltas and U. Cevik, Solid State Communications, 2009, 149(5–6), 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
C. Terzioglu, Physica B-Condensed Matter, 2008, 403(18), 3320–3325 Search PubMed .
K. Ozturk, S. Celik, U. Cevik and E. Yanmaz, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2008, 456(1–2), 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Oyanagi, Journal of Superconductivity and Novel Magnetism, 2007, 20(7–8), 613–617 Search PubMed .
E. E. Doomes and S. C. McGuire, Nuclear Instruments & Methods in Physics Research Section a-Accelerators Spectrometers Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2007, 582(1), 245–247 Search PubMed .
P. Rajput, A. Gupta, C. Meneghini, D. Avasthi, N. Darowski, I. Zizak and A. Erko, Hyperfine Interactions, 2008, 185(1–3), 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Liang, K. B. Tang, S. Y. Zeng, D. Wang, T. W. Li and H. G. Zheng, Journal of Solid State Chemistry, 2008, 181(10), 2565–2571 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Q. He, C. M. Xu, Y. M. Xue, C. J. Li and Y. Sun, Chinese Physics B, 2008, 17(8), 3138–3142 Search PubMed .
A. Eicke, S. Spiering, A. Dresel and M. Powalla, Surface and Interface Analysis, 2008, 40(3–4), 830–833 CrossRef CAS .
C. Camus, N. A. Allsop, S. E. Gledhill, W. Bohne, J. Rohrich, I. Lauermann, M. C. Lux-Steiner and C. H. Fischer, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516(20), 7026–7030 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gruzdys, S. Meskinis, S. Tamulevicius and T. Grinys, Materials Science-Medziagotyra, 2008, 14(3), 234–237 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Huang and N. Li, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2008, 465(1–2), 317–323 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Demadis, M. Papadaki, R. G. Raptis and H. Zhao, Chemistry of Materials, 2008, 20(15), 4835–4846 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Cho, M. T. Kim and S. G. Kang, Journal of the Korean Institute of Metals and Materials, 2007, 45(5), 300–304 Search PubMed .
L. Allocca, C. Bonavolonta, A. Giardini, T. Lopizzo, A. Morone, M. Valentino, M. F. Verrastro and V. Viggiano, Physica Scripta, 2008, 78(5) Search PubMed .
M. Barlak, J. Piekoszewski, J. Stanislawski, Z. Werner, K. Borkowska, M. Chmielewski, B. Sartowska, M. Miskiewicz, W. Starosta, L. Walis and J. Jagielski, Fusion Engineering and Design, 2007, 82(15–24), 2524–2530 Search PubMed .
C. E. Daza, J. Gallego, J. A. Moreno, F. Mondragon, S. Moreno and R. Molina, Catal. Today, 2008, 133, 357–366 CrossRef .
K. Mukai, S. Kitayama, T. Yoshimura and S. Maruo, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47(4), 3232–3235 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Liu, Q. S. Meng, X. Y. Lu and L. F. Hu, Chinese Journal of Mechanical Engineering, 2008, 21(2), 42–44 Search PubMed .
T. Okamoto, M. Kono, T. Jibiki, K. Imai, H. Kishihara, M. Kaino, S. Tokuda and T. Sato, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47(4), 2079–2082 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Zhou, X. G. Liu, D. M. Zhao, F. Lin and Y. Fan, Pigment & Resin Technology, 2008, 37(3), 161–166 Search PubMed .
H. R. Zhou, D. M. Zhao, X. G. Liu, F. Lin and Y. Fan, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2008, 28(3), 707–710 CAS .
A. Gupta, S. Chakravarty, P. Rajput, M. Gupta and R. Ruffer, Hyperfine Interactions, 2008, 182(1–3), 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2008, 458(1–2), 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Dakhel, Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 2009, 332(1), 9–12 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Dun, T. C. Lu, Y. W. Hu, Q. Hu, L. Q. Yu, Z. Li, N. K. Huang, S. B. Zhang, B. Tang, J. L. Dai, L. Resnick and I. Shlimak, Journal of Luminescence, 2008, 128(8), 1363–1368 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Christensen, J. W. Elam, B. Lee, Z. Feng, M. J. Bedzyk and M. C. Hersam, Chemistry of Materials, 2009, 21(3), 516–521 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barman, J. P. Borah and K. C. Sarma, Optoelectronics and Advanced Materials-Rapid Communications, 2008, 2(12), 770–774 Search PubMed .
M. V. Martinez-Huerta, J. L. Rodriguez, N. Tsiouvaras, M. A. Pena, J. L. G. Fierro and E. Pastor, Chemistry of Materials, 2008, 20(13), 4249–4259 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kumar and K. L. N. Phani, Journal of Power Sources, 2009, 187(1), 19–24 Search PubMed .
M. Maiti and A. K. Bhowmick, Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 2009, 111(2), 1094–1104 CAS .
H. Yamamoto, K. Hirakawa and T. Abe, Materials Letters, 2008, 62(14), 2122–2125 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Small and J. H. Johnston, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 2009, 331(1), 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Dowsett, A. Adriaens, G. K. C. Jones, N. Poolton, S. Fiddy and S. Nikitenko, Analytical Chemistry, 2008, 80(22), 8717–8724 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Mazuritskiy and P. V. Makhno, Jetp Letters, 2008, 88(6), 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
E. Strub, R. Plarre, M. Radtke, U. ReinholZa, H. Riesemeier, U. Schoknecht, K. Urban and P. Jungel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(10), 2405–2407 Search PubMed .
F. Pinakidou, M. Katsikini and E. C. Paloura, Journal of Non-Crystalline Solids, 2008, 354(45–46), 5053–5059 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Andreasson, M. Janousch, U. Staub and G. I. Meijer, Applied Physics Letters, 2009, 94(1), 3 .
B. Pollakowski, B. Beckhoff, F. Reinhardt, S. Braun and P. Gawlitza, Physical Review B, 2008, 77(23) Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Wang, A. S. Ozcan, K. F. Ludwig and A. Bhattacharyya, Journal of Applied Physics, 2008, 103(10) Search PubMed .
W. Hua, K. J. Zhou, Y. Y. Huang, Q. Qian, W. He, S. X. Ma, W. S. Chu, T. D. Hu and Z. Y. Wu, Spectroc. Acta Pt. A-Molec. Biomolec. Spectr., 2008, 70(2), 462–465 Search PubMed .
S. Porikli and Y. Kurucu, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 2008, 66(10), 1381–1386 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oz, E. Baydas and Y. Sahin, Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry, 2009, 279(2), 529–537 CrossRef .
S. Ceppi, G. Tirao, G. Stutz and J. A. Riveros, Chemical Physics, 2008, 354(1–3), 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kaya, E. Tirasoglu and G. Apaydin, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. Sect. B-Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2008, 266(7), 1043–1048 Search PubMed .
G. Apaydin, V. Aylikci, E. Cengiz, N. Kaya, Y. Kobya and E. Tirasoglu, Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 2008, 77(8), 923–927 Search PubMed .
I. Han, M. Sahin and L. Demir, Canadian Journal of Physics, 2008, 86(2), 361–367 Search PubMed .
N. A. Borovoy, Optics and Spectroscopy, 2008, 104(5), 702–708 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AC	Alternating current
AFM	Atomic force microscopy
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
APS	Advanced Photon Source
ASU	Atomic Spectrometry Update
ASV	Anodic stripping voltammetry
BC	Before Christ
BFR	Brominated flame retardants
BMD	Bone mineral density
BP	Before present
CCA	Chromated copper arsenate
CCD	Charge coupled device
CRM	Certified reference material
CT	Computerised tomography
2D/3D	2 Dimensional/3 Dimensional
DIN	Deutches Institut für Normung
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
DTA	Differential thermal analysis
EC	Elementary carbon
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EF	Enrichment factors
EPMA	Electron probe microanalysis
ESRF	European Synchrotron Radiation Facility
ETV-AAS	Electrothermal vaporisation atomic absorption spectrometry
EXAFS	Extended X-ray absorption fine structure
FAAS	Flame Atomic absorption spectrometry
FPGA	Field programmable gate array
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
GC-MS	Gas chromatographic-mass spectrometry
GIXRF	Grazing incidence X-ray fluorescence
HEX	High Energy X-ray
HPAA	Hydroxyphosphonoacetatic acid
HPLC	High performance liquid chromatography
IAEA	International Atomic Energy Agency
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-OES	Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
IR	Infrared
IRLS	Iteratively reweighted least-squares
IUPAC	International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
JSAC	Japanese Society of Analytical Chemistry
KXRF	K-line X-ray fluorescence
LINAC	Linear accelerator
LNF	Laboratory Nazionali di Frascati
LNLS	Laboratorio Nacional de Luz Sincroton
MFA	Micro-fibril angle
MLX	Motionless laminography system
MRI	Magnetic resonance imaging
MWPC	Multiwire gas proportional counter
NASA	National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NEXAFS	Near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure
NREL	National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NSLS	National Synchrotron Light Source
OC	Organic carbon
OLS	Ordinary least-squares
ODXAS	Optically detected X-ray absorption spectroscopy
PBD/F	Polybrominated dioxins and furans
PCA	Principle component analysis
PCB	Printed circuit board
PGE	Platinum group elements
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
PLS	Partial least square
PMF	Positive matrix factorization
PM	Particulate matter
PT	Proficiency testing
PUREX	Pt, U refining by extraction
PXD/F	Polyhalogenated dioxins and furans
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
RBS	Rutherford backscattering
RS-XRF	Rapid scanning-X-ray fluorescence
RoHS	Restriction of Hazardous Substances
SDD	Silicon drift detectors
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
Si(Li)	Lithium-drifted silicon
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
Si-PIN	Silicon ‘PIN’ detector device
SLNL	Synchrotron Light National Laboratory
SOM	Self organising maps
SPF	Sun protection factor
SRM	Standard reference material
SRS	Synchrotron radiation source
SR-TXRF	Synchrotron radiation-total reflection X-ray fluorescence
SRXRD	Synchrotron radiation X-ray diffraction
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscope
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
TG	Thermo-gravimetry
TGA	Thermo-gravimetric analysis
TXRF	Total reflection X-ray fluorescence
TWQR	Target Water Quality Range
USB	Universal serial bus
US EPA	United States Environmental Protection Agency
UV-VIS	Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
WEEE	Waste of electric and electronic equipment
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure
XANES	X-ray absorption near edge structure
XAS	X-ray absorption spectroscopy
XPS	X-ray photon spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
