 In situ generation of electron acceptor to amplify the photoelectrochemical signal from poly(dopamine)-sensitized TiO 2 signal crystal for immunoassa ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TB02525G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TB02525G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 2591-2597
In situ generation of electron acceptor to amplify the photoelectrochemical signal from poly(dopamine)-sensitized TiO2 signal crystal for immunoassay†

        
          
            Yilin 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Dai
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Qingrong 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shupei 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sihong 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhensheng 
            Hong
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yanyu 
            Lin
          
        
      a
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, China. E-mail: dhong@fjnu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-591-22866135
bFujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Manipulation and New Energy Materials, College of Physics and Energy, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou 350108, P. R. China. E-mail: winter0514@163.com
Received 
      1st December 2015
    , Accepted 26th February 2016First published on 26th February 2016AbstractA versatile photoelectrochemical immunoassay protocol was designed for quantitative monitoring of tumor markers by utilizing the poly(dopamine)-sensitized titanium dioxide (TiO2) signal crystal with an ordered mesoporous carbon support. Poly(dopamine) was introduced to alter the optical properties of the TiO2 signal crystal, thereby improving the visible light absorption and photoelectrical responses. More importantly, a new enzyme-like biomimetic catalyst was exploited as the signal amplifier to catalyze the reaction of hydroquinone. The generated product was deposited on the electrode surface and served as an efficient sacrificial electron acceptor, which could receive the photo-generated electrons of the excited semiconductor to assist the cathode photocurrent enhancement. Herein, a competitive-type immunosensor was achieved through the biomimetic catalyst labeled prostate specific antigen competing with the target antigen of different concentrations to react with the specific antibody anchored on the poly(dopamine)-sensitized TiO2 signal crystal. Under optimal conditions, the photocurrent decreased with increasing target concentration in a dynamic working range from 1 × 10−6 ng mL−1 to 50 ng mL−1, which provided a new photoelectrochemical method for tumor markers analysis.
1. Introduction
Immunoassays have stimulated substantial attention with the flourishing development of proteomics and genomics research for applications in food safety, medical diagnosis and clinical surveillance.1 Prostate cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed malignancies, and prostate specific antigen (PSA) has been recognized as the principal tumor marker for initial monitoring of prostate cancer and for detecting recurrence of the disease after treatment. A host of analytical protocols have been reported for monitoring PSA, including enzyme linked immunosorbent assay,2 fluorescence,3 electrochemical,4 surface plasmon resonance (SPR),5 isotope labeling mass spectrometry,6 chromatography,7etc. Nevertheless, a simple, accurate, and cost-effective detection technology for earlier and sensitive profiling of cancer biomarkers is still highly desirable. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) immunoassay has received substantial interest due to its attractive performance for future protein assays.8 This technique possesses higher sensitivity than the electrochemical strategies because of the reduced background signals originating from the different energy forms of the illumination source and determination signal.9,10 Presently, most of the signal changes for PEC immunoassays could be categorized into two types: “signal-on” and “signal-off”. A multitude of immunoassays belong to the latter type owing to the similar designs with quenching function to photo-generated carriers and steric hindrance effect induced by immunized interactions between antigen and antibody. With the aim to enhance the sensitivity of PEC immunoassays, enzyme-mediated methodologies are frequently employed for signal amplification, however, the introduction of natural enzymes as labels still faces severe limitations in these “signal-off” PEC platforms. Initially, the sensor preparation cost, storage and testing process are expensive, time-consuming and complicated. From another point of view, the stability of natural enzymes is inferior, which reduces the reproducibility and accuracy of the designed immuno-sensing platform. Most importantly, in the “signal-off” detection procedure, some potential unfavourable factors such as latent inhibitors and bias acid–base conditions could deactivate natural enzymes, which causes the unclear outcome for the “signal-off” source and inconsistent signal response. One promising approach is to exploit a feasible mimetic enzyme system label to bypass these drawbacks. Compared to natural enzymes, artificial enzymes possess several advantages, such as it is relatively easy to label, less expensive to produce, and more resistant to heat treatment and hydrolysis.11 Until now, limited PEC detection systems based on mimetic enzymes have been reported; thus, the realization of an innovative PEC immunoassay by labeling with mimetic enzymes for signal amplification would be highly desirable. Inspired by the research achievement of Wang's group, a new type of mimicking enzyme was obtained from chitosan (CS) functioned silver halide nanoparticles, which possesses intrinsic peroxidase-like activity that could be utilized as a biomimetic catalyst (BMC) to oxidize typical substrates.12 Hence, the development of this BMC-labeled PEC immunoassay might be a valuable route for signal enhancement. Moreover, if this novel BMC were integrated into the mimetic enzyme-labeled PEC strategies, a more widespread perspective for PEC transducer construction would be designed.
Enzymatic biocatalytic precipitation (BCP) is one of the strategies in PEC immunoassays,13,14 which involves the in situ formation of insoluble products on the electrode surface via catalysis by natural or artificial enzymes,15,16 thereby altering the photo-generated interfacial electron transfer. Up to now, infrequent application of the BCP strategy has been reported, let alone the exploitation of enzyme mimetic-induced BCP for PEC immunoassay construction. A new BCP alternative method has now been designed to mediate the photo-response. Hydroquinone (HQ), different from the commonly used 4-chloro-1-naphthol, was utilized as the substrate of BMC. During the catalysis process, a water-insoluble p-benzoquinone (PBQ) film was formed and deposited on the electrode surface in the presence of H2O2. Noticeably, the in situ generated PBQ could be utilized as an electron acceptor, receiving the electrons from the conduction band (CB) of the photoactive material and improving the cathode photocurrent.
In PEC detection, photoactive materials intimately affect the photoconversion efficiency. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) single crystals (TSC) have emerged as an attractive class of photoactive material which has been extensively applied in various optoelectronic fields owing to its particular characteristics: high crystallinity, oriented subunit alignment, light corrosion resistance and versatility towards surface modification.17 While TSC has found applications in photocatalysis,18,19 solar cells,20 and gas sensing,21 more studies on their use in PEC sensors still need to be carried out. In addition, owing to the large band gap (3.2 eV for anatase), only ∼4% of the incoming solar energy could be utilized by TSC, which restricts its application in PEC bioanalysis. Hence, in this work, highly biocompatible poly(dopamine) (PDA) was chose as the organic sensitizer to promote the absorption of visible light. PDA could also effectively immobilize large amounts of antibodies.22 Messersmith's group have tested surface-active PDA adhered to various different surfaces, including noble metals (Au, Ag), semiconductors (GaAs), and oxides (TiO2, SiO2) to form robust dopamine-derived films. The resulting films could support a large amount of secondary reactions.23 Qingji Xie's group applied biocomposites with PDA as matrix to support antibodies for high-performance sandwich-type immunosensors.24 In view of the above-mentioned facts, the self-polymerization of dopamine with charged side chains provides a facile one-step functionalization with simple starting materials and mild reaction conditions.25
In order to further improve the sensitivity of TSC, incorporation of carbonaceous substances with high electrical conductivity has been discovered as a way to enhance the photoconversion efficiency of wide band gap semiconductors. In particular, ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) exhibits an efficient electron transfer rate and larger current response due to the numerous edge-plane-like defect sites and excellent electrical conduction.26,27 Therefore, OMC could act as a scaffold in splitting and transferring photo-induced charge carriers, inhibiting the recombination of electron–hole (e−–h+) pairs of TSC.
Herein, the TSC semiconductor combined with PDA and OMC was used as an excellent photoactive material and sensitizer to promote the photocurrent response. The PEC experimental results revealed that the composites offered remarkable advantages in strengthening light absorption and fast charge separation, which improved the photocurrent intensity. In view of the specific recognition between antibody and antigen, an excellent biosensing platform was developed by stepwise modification of OMC, PDA-sensitized TSC, PSA-antibody (Ab) and the mixed solution containing target PSA and PSA-conjugated BMC (PSA@BMC). Its detection mechanism for PSA is illustrated in Scheme 1. Under a negative applied potential, the response of TSC presented a cathodic photocurrent signal. The PDA formed via self-polymerization could accept photo-induced electrons from the CB of TSC, further enhancing the cathodic photocurrent signal. Additionally, the in situ generated water-insoluble PBQ film with abundant electron accepting groups could receive the photo-induced electrons from illuminated TSC/PDA, efficiently improving charge separation and enhancing the cathodic photocurrent. Hence, BMC labeling as a catalytic amplifier greatly improved the sensitivity of this method and the design was totally different from previous BCP research that only used it as an inhibitor. It is anticipated that this improved BCP-dependent BMC will offer a promising tool for typical bioassays.
 Scheme 1  Fabrication procedure and photocurrent generation mechanism of the PEC immunosensor. 
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials and reagents
PSA and Ab were purchased from Shanghai Linc-Bio Science Co. Ltd. Dopamine hydrochloride (98%), glutaraldehyde (GLD, 5.0% aqueous solution), CS, and bovine serum albumin (BSA, 96–99%) were obtained from Aladdin Industrial Corporation (Shanghai, China), Jinshan Tingxin Chemical Plant (Shanghai, China), Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA), and Biss Inc. (Beijing, China), respectively. The phosphate buffer solution (0.1 M PBS, pH 7.4 and 7.0) was prepared by mixing a stock solution of 0.1 M NaH2PO4 and Na2HPO4 to adjust the pH value. Deionized (DI) water was prepared using a water purification system (China). OMC was prepared according to the literature by utilizing solid core/mesoporous shell silica spheres SBA-15 as template.27
2.2 Synthesis of BMC for BCP scheme and the preparation of PSA@BMC conjugates
BMC was prepared according to the previously published protocols.12 Briefly, 3.0 mL of 0.1 M AgNO3 aqueous solution was added to 1.5 mL of 1.0% (m/v) CS solution and stirred for 0.5 h. Subsequently, 3.0 mL of 0.15 M KI aqueous solution was added into the above solution and stirred for 2 h. Finally, a dispersion containing BMC nanoparticles was generated.
Conjugation of PSA with BMC was achieved by using the classic GLD coupling reaction between amine (–NH2) groups on the surface of BMC and PSA. Firstly, 30 μL of 5.0% GLD was added to 30 μL BMC solution, diluted with PBS (pH 7.4), stirred for 20 min, and held for 4 h at 4 °C. Following that, 35 μL 50 mg mL−1 PSA was added to the resultant solution and further incubated for 6 h at 4 °C with gentle shaking. Afterwards, the mixture solution was centrifuged at 8000 rpm to remove excess PSA and the obtained bioconjugate was dispersed in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 5 μL BSA (1%), which was stored at 4 °C for 1 h. Finally, the resulting solution was centrifuged at 8000 rpm to remove excess BSA and redispersed in PBS (pH 7.4) for further use.
2.3 Construction of the competitive PEC immunosensor for PSA

Scheme 1 shows the schematic illustration of PEC immunoassay for target PSA by coupling with OMC and PDA co-sensitive TSC as well as BMC-induced electron acceptor for application. PDA is an efficient multifunctional polymer matrix to support PSA antibodies. The existence of functional groups (i.e., catechol and amine) on the surface of PDA makes it suitable for further conjugation or modification. Before incubation with Ab (5 μL, 60 ng mL−1), the GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA electrode was immersed in 60 μL of GLD solution for 1.5 h to link the –OH groups in PDA and then washed with PBS. The aldehyde group (–CHO) of glutaraldehyde (GLD) could react with the –OH group in PDA via the aldol condensation reaction. After that, the electrode was immersed in Ab solution for 1 h, the Ab could be immobilized on the electrode surface through the GLD crosslinking method in which the other –CHO could couple with the –NH2 groups in Ab. Then this modified electrode was rinsed with PBS (pH 7.4) to remove physically absorbed Ab before blocking with 5 μL of 1.0% BSA for 1 h at 4 °C. Subsequently, the obtained electrode with the structure GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab was immersed into a mixture (60 μL) containing PSA@BMC (30 μL) and PSA standards with different concentrations for incubation of 1 h at 4 °C followed by rinsing with PBS (pH 7.4). Finally, the GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC was incubated at 30 °C for 15 min in a solution consisting of 1.0 mmol L−1 of HQ and 0.15 mmol L−1 of H2O2. After that, the electrode was rinsed with PBS (pH 7.4) and dried for PEC measurements.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Morphology and composition characterization
The morphology of OMC was characterized by SEM and TEM. As shown in Fig. 1A, the ordered mesopore channels of SBA-15 possessed a uniform size, suggesting the template was well synthesized.28 The OMC was composed of small grains, which possessed a submicrometer-scale particle size with lengths of ca. 0.6–0.8 μm and ca. 10 nm in diameter. To further explore the structure of OMC, TEM was utilized to investigate the construction (the inset in Fig. 1A): bright stripe-like structures with rough surfaces were clearly seen in the TEM image, representing the pore-wall images and implying that OMC possessed a large surface area. The above results demonstrated that OMC could be applied as the photocatalyst support due to its high porosity and large surface area. The morphology of the TSC sample was observed by SEM (Fig. 1B), and it consisted of some rhombus-like plates. The TSC/PDA displayed a blurry appearance and the morphology of the TSC was irregular (Fig. S3, ESI†). To further confirm the crystal structure of the prepared TSC, Raman spectra were recorded to identify the structure (the inset in Fig. 1B): the peak at 144 cm−1 was the O–Ti–O bending mode, and this fundamental vibrational feature indicated that pure anatase TiO2 was formed in the products. The other four distinct peaks located at 197, 396, 514 and 637 cm−1 corresponded to the Eg, B1g, A1g + B1g and Eg modes, respectively,29–31 further verifying the anatase phase of the synthesized TSC. Additionally, BMC nanoproducts were observed by typical TEM images, indicating that they were nanoparticles with diameters of 40–70 nm. Moreover, the HRTEM image (the inset in Fig. 1C) was recorded to identify the BMC crystal structure. The lattice fringes had an interplanar spacing of 0.353 nm which was very close to the (101) lattice plane of the hexagonal β-AgI phase (0.351 nm).32 One possibility was that combining with CS may have slightly influenced the interplanar spacing of the (101) planes.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of OMC (A) and TSC (B); TEM image of BMC (C). The insets in (A–C) are the TEM image of OMC, Raman spectuma of TSC and the HRTEM image of BMC respectively. 
3.2 Excellent PEC performance of TSC/PDA
Recently, an intriguing strategy was proposed to change the band gap of TiO2 by attaching oxygen-containing substituents to bind to the TiO2 nanostructure surface.33 These biomolecules could alter the coordination environment and endow the nanostructures with new hybrid optical properties originating from the ligand-to-metal charge transfer interaction between the metal surface atoms and the ligand.34 The pioneering works of Dimitrijevic's and Rajh's groups have proved that modification of enediol ligands on TiO2 nanomaterials could harvest visible light and improve the efficient spatial separation of charges.22,35 Therefore, PDA was introduced here to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency. A series of PEC measurements were employed to confirm this supposition. As depicted in Fig. 2A, TSC/PDA exhibited a larger photocurrent density in comparison with TSC under the applied potentials from −0.15 to −0.65 V, indicating that TSC/PDA possessed better PEC performance and PDA could enhance the light absorption and trigger the photoelectron transfer from the CB of TSC directly into the chelating PDA.
 Fig. 2  (A) Applied potential bias-dependent photocurrent densities, (B) IPCE spectra, (C) Voc time profile and (D) electron lifetime measurements (determined from the Voc decay in the dark) of (a) TSC and (b) TSC/PDA in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.0). 
IPCE spectroscopy is a fundamental tool to elucidate the photoelectric behavior of photoactive materials by measuring the IPCE values at various wavelengths. Fig. 2B illustrates the corresponding outcomes according to eqn (1)36 with no bias voltage: (1)where λ is the wavelength (nm), j is the short circuit photocurrent density (mA cm−2), and P is the incident light power (mW cm−2). Notably, the TSC/PDA complex presented an improved photoresponse and higher IPCE value not only in the ultraviolet region but also in the visible light region, which originated from the energy shift of the valence band in this complex.22 Additionally, it was interesting to note that the maximum IPCE obtained with TSC/PDA associated with the wavelength was red-shifted, further expanding the utilization of the entire optical wavelength range.
Subsequently, the typical open-circuit voltage (Voc) changes of TSC and TSC/PDA films under visible light illumination were employed to evaluate their photoelectric performance (as shown in Fig. 2C). The Voc represented the difference in Fermi levels between the photoactive material and the counter electrode. In the dark, both TSC and TSC/PDA exhibited an initial Voc of −0.025 V, which suggested an accumulation of electrons on the film electrode.37 When the light was on, most of the excited photoelectrons were collected, causing the shift of the Fermi level to a more negative potential. Accompanied with the competition between electron accumulation and charge recombination, the Voc arrived at a stable state (maximum value) with the increase of photo-induced electrons under light irradiation. Once the light was switched off, the Voc decayed as the collected electrons were relaxed owing to scavenging by electron acceptor species in the electrolyte and recombination with photo-induced holes.38 As expected, TSC/PDA presented a higher photovoltage and slower decay when light was switched on and off, which was due to the efficient utilization of the light and the low recombination rate of the excited e−–h+ pair. The electron lifetimes (τ) of TSC and TSC/PDA were calculated from the Voc decay in the dark according to eqn (2):39 (2)where τ is the potential dependent lifetime, e is charge of a single electron, kBT is the thermal energy in which T is the temperature in K and kB is Boltzmann's constant. The quantity dVoc/dt is the derivative of the open-circuit voltage transient. The relationship between the electron lifetime and Voc in TSC and TSC/PDA is presented in Fig. 2D. Obviously, TSC/PDA exhibited a longer decay lifetime of the accumulated electrons in comparison with TSC.
The aforementioned results affirmed that the TSC/PDA complex exhibited higher photoelectric performance compared with TSC due to their synergistic effect. These findings convincingly demonstrated that the PDA self-assembled by self-polymerization on TSC presented a good sensitizing effect, which dramatically improved the PEC performance of the TSC and provided a prominent photocatalytic candidate for PEC biosensing.
3.3 PEC biosensor characterization and detection strategy feasibility assay
The stepwise fabrication process of the immunosensor was monitored by PEC experiments and is shown in Fig. 3A. Compared to bare GCE (a), the TSC modified electrode (b) presented an obvious cathode photocurrent signal under the applied potential of −0.3 V, revealing that TSC, as a new typical photoactive material, possessed tremendous potential for PEC biosensing applications. The generation of cathode photocurrent avoided the destructive effects of photo-generated holes towards biomolecules. With the OMC coated on the GCE and then modified with TSC (curve c), the photocurrent intensity of the GCE/OMC/TSC increased significantly, which demonstrated that the OMC could trigger the rapid electron transport by virtue of its excellent conductivity. When PDA was self-polymerized on the TSC films (curve d), the photocurrent intensity increased to 2.5 times higher than that of TSC/GCE on account of the fast photoelectron movement from the CB of TSC into the chelating PDA as well as the light absorption enhancement. Later on, the photocurrent intensity decreased gradually after Ab anchoring and PSA@BMC specific binding (curves e and f). This could be attributed to the fact that the immobilization of these proteins resulted in weak charge-transfer abilities, suppressing the electron transfer between the electrode and electrolyte. When GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC was immersed into the solution containing HQ and H2O2, the photoresponse was enhanced enormously in that the BMC-initiated BCP reaction produced a strong oxidant (PBQ) by catalyzing reaction of the HQ. This in situ generated electron acceptor could receive photoelectrons from the LUMO of TSC/PDA, which further boosted the cathode photocurrent. Therefore, this PEC experiment preliminarily proved the successful fabrication of the immunosensor and the feasibility for targeting tumor marker.
 Fig. 3  (A) PEC response and (B) EIS spectra of different modified electrodes: (a) GCE; (c) GCE/OMC/TSC; (d) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA; (e) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab; (f) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC; (g) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC/PBQ. Traces (b) are the PEC response of GCE/TSC in A, and the EIS spectrum of GCE/OMC in B. The PEC tests were performed in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4) under the applied potential of −0.3 V. The EIS spectra were obtained in 5.0 mmol L−1 [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− solution containing 0.1 mol L−1 KCl. 
Another important tool for characterizing the interface properties of electrodes was employed to investigate the assembly process of this PEC sensing platform. Fig. 3B shows the EIS impedance spectra of modified electrodes formed in progressive construction steps using [Fe(CN)6]3/4− as the redox probe. Compared to naked GCE (curve a), the OMC modified electrode (curve b) exhibited a much smaller charge-transfer resistance (Rct) owing to the good conductivity of OMC, which could be applied for enhancing the photoelectron separation and transfer. With the TSC modified on the GCE/OMC surface (curve c), the value of Rct increased clearly due to the low conductivity of TSC, implying that the TSC was successfully deposited. However, after the self-polymerization with PDA, the Rct was reduced significantly (curve d), which could be elucidated as positively charged PDA with amino grousp supporting the transfer of negatively charged [Fe(CN)6]3−/4−. As expected, the semicircle was enlarged after the GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA matrix was soaked in Ab (e) and PSA@BMC (f) solutions, which resulted from the nonconductive properties of Ab and the PSA. After the GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC electrode was immersed into the HQ solution in the presence of H2O2, the measured Rct was further increased due to the in situ generated PBQ film which repelled the transfer of the negatively charged probe [Fe(CN)6]3/4−. Thus, the EIS characterization demonstrated that the proposed PSA biosensor was successfully fabricated.
3.4 Tentative mechanism for PSA detection
In this work, an excellent competitive-type PEC biosensor was fabricated by combining the classical TSC photoactive materials co-sensitized with OMC and PDA with the BMC-initiated BCP reaction for improving the sensitivity of this designed platform. Under the applied potential of −0.3 V, the photoresponse of TSC presented a cathodic photocurrent. After the modification of OMC, the photocurrent density was higher than TSC, which was due to that the excellent electrical conduction of OMC which promote the fast electron transfer from the external circuit to the valence band of the TSC, inhibiting e−–h+ pair recombination on TSC. When PDA was self-polymerized on the GCE/OMC/TSC films, the cathode photocurrent was further increased due to the increased visible light harvesting and photo-generated charge carrier separation. The formed TSC/PDA film possessed a narrower band gap (∼2.03 eV)40 and a more negative CB (−1.29 eV), which promoted the light absorption rate and the complex possessed stronger reducing capacity. Subsequently, anti-PSA was anchored on the OMC/TSC/PDA modified electrode using GLD as crosslinking agent. Then the GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab electrode was immersed into the mixed solution containing the PSA@BMC and PSA standards with different concentrations to facilitate the competition process. BMC, as a highly efficient peroxidase mimetic system, could catalyze the reaction of HQ to produce the PBQ precipitate, which could react with the photo-generated electrons from the CB of TSC. The photocurrent density decreased with the increase of PSA concentration because fewer PSA@BMC species were anchored onto the modified electrode surface, thus realizing the ultrasensitive detection of PSA.
3.5 Characteristics of the peroxidase-like activity of BMC
To further investigate the superiority of the proposed BMC inorganic nanocatalyst, the stability comparison between BMC and HRP in some special conditions was studied. As shown in Fig. 4A, both BMC and HRP exhibited a maximal photoresponse at the temperature of 30 °C; however, over the whole studied temperature range, BMC showed a stronger catalytic performance than HRP. Additionally, BMC was significantly found to retain relatively stable catalytic activity even after treatment at 90 °C for 2 h in comparison with HRP. Interestingly, HRP inhibitors including ascorbate (AA), H2O2, sodium azide (NaN3), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), and hydrochloric acid (HCl) had no obvious effect on the catalytic activity of BMC, whereas they almost completely inhibited the activity of HRP completely (Fig. 4B). These outcomes indicated that BMC possessed higher stability towards high temperatures and HRP inhibitors, and therefore it will be suitable for developing ultrasensitive PEC immunoassays.
 Fig. 4  Catalytic activity of (a) BMC and (b) HRP: (A) after treatment for 2 h at different temperatures; (B) in the absence or presence of ascorbic acid (AA), H2O2, NaN3, NaOH and HCl (the concentration of HRP inhibitors was 5 mM). Error bar represents the standard deviation (n = 3). 
3.6 Optimization of the PEC biosensing platform and experimental conditions
To achieve an optimal analytical performance for this design and enhance the competitive ability of the target PSA and BMC@PSA, the conditions of the biosensing platform construction including the amounts of OMC, TSC, and PDA were optimized. The optimal quanitites of OMC and TSC were 3 mg mL−1 (Fig. S1A and B, ESI†). For PDA, the self-polymerization time of the GCE/OMC/TSC was 30 min (Fig. S1C, ESI†). In addition, some experimental conditions, such as incubation time for the immune reaction, catalysis time for HQ reaction by the enzyme mimetic, pH value and applied potential, were investigated (Fig. S2, ESI†). Incubation times for Ab and PSA@BMC were both 1 h and the detection measurements were performed in PBS of pH 7.4 and at an applied potential of −0.3 V. The detailed explanation is given in the SI.†
3.7 Analytical performance of the biosensor
PSA, one of the main clinical biomarkers for prostate cancer, served as the model protein.41 To evaluate the detection ability of the PEC immunoassay, PSA standards with different concentrations were tested on the basis of multifunctional PDA induced cathodic photocurrent increase and BMC-initiated BCP reaction for altering the signal change. Under optimal conditions, the assay was carried out by utilizing the amperometric i–t curve in PBS solution (pH 7.4). As shown in Fig. 5A, the photocurrent density decreased with increasing PSA concentration. Fig. 5B demonstrates that the variation of photocurrent density increases linearly with the decreasing logarithm of target PSA concentration from 1 × 10−6 to 50 ng mL−1 with a detection limit (LOD) of 3.3 ng mL−1. The regression equation could be fitted to j (μA cm−2) = (−0.366 ± 0.009)logC (ng mL−1) + (2.671 ± 0.03) with R2 = 0.9952. The detection range of this design was wider and the LOD was lower in comparison with previous reports (Table S1, ESI†). Additionally, the feasibility of the strategy was investigated on a real sample of human serum with a recovery rate of 99.14–106.8% (Table S2, ESI†).
 Fig. 5  (A) The photocurrent densities of different PSA concentrations: (a–i) 10−6, 10−5, 10−4, 10−3, 10−2, 0.1, 1.0, 10, and 50 ng mL−1. (B) The corresponding calibration curve. (C) The photocurrent densities of the prepared PSA sensor with interfering agents, including 50 ng mL−1 AFP, CEA and IL-6, 0.1 ng mL−1 PSA and the corresponding mixed solutions. (D) The reproducibility by detecting different PSA concentrations: (a) 0.001 ng mL−1, (b) 1.0 ng mL−1, (c) dark current response without light irradiation. 
Furthermore, the specificity of the PEC immunoassay toward the target PSA was examined by replacing PSA with some possible interfering materials in human serum samples, including α-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and human interleukin-6 (IL-6) with a hundred-fold excess concentration of PSA. However, the detection signals of these interferents were lower than that of PSA (shown in Fig. 5C). Besides, the mixtures of these interferents with PSA all had no evident effect on PSA detection, revealing the high specificity of this multiple amplifying biosensor.
The reproducibility was another evaluation index for a newly developed analytical method. In this work, the relative standard deviation (RSD) was estimated by determining two different concentrations of PSA. Seven parallel replicate measurements of 0.001 ng mL−1 and 1.0 ng mL−1 were detected and the RSDs were 1.98% and 2.16%, respectively. Additionally, the long-term stability was measured and there was no obvious photocurrent deterioration (maintaining 92.6% of the initial result) after ten days storage at 4 °C. The above outcome suggested that the constructed biosensor could be used in clinical and biological applications for ultrasensitive PSA determination.
4. Conclusions
In summary, a new PEC biosensing platform based on OMC and PDA co-sensitized TSC as well as the signal amplification effect of BMC labeling was developed. The classical photoactive material of TSC with good photoelectric efficiency was first applied for PEC immunoassay. With the OMC support, the cathode photocurrent originating from TSC increased significantly under the bias voltage of −0.3 V. The introduction of PDA on the TSC film not only strengthened the visible light absorption and enhanced the cathode photocurrent conversion efficiency, but also was employed as an appropriate matrix for immobilizing Ab. In the competitive progress, BMC labeled PSA competed with the target PSA for specific binding of the Ab, and the photoresponse was reinforced once again, mainly resulting from the in situ generated electron accepter induced by the BMC-initiated BCP reaction. These characteristics endowed the PEC immunosensor with high sensitivity, representing a ubiquitous strategy with great potential in the fields of clinical diagnostics and prognosis.
Acknowledgements
This project was financially supported by the NSFC (21205016, 21575024), National Science Foundation of Fujian Province (2011J05020, 2016J06003), and Education Department of Fujian Province (JA14071, JB14036, JA13068).
Notes and references
W. W. Zhao, Z. Y. Ma, P. P. Yu, X. Y. Dong, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 917–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Acevedo, Y. Perera, M. Ruiz, G. Rojas, J. Benítez, M. Ayala and J. Gavilondo, Clin. Chim. Acta, 2002, 317, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, M. Xu, M. Lu, G. Chen and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 70, 194–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jolly, V. Tamboli, R. L. Harniman, P. Estrela, C. J. Allender and J. L. Bowen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 75, 188–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ertürk, H. Özen, M. A. Tümer, B. Mattiasson and A. Denizli, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 224, 823–832 CrossRef .
Y. T. Chen, L. P. Tuan, H. W. Chen, I. A. Wei, M.-Y. Chou, H.-M. Chen, Y. C. Tyan and S. F. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 545–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Simon, S. Passeron, J. Lemoine and A. Salvador, J. Chromatogr. A, 2014, 1354, 75–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, Z. Y. Ma, D. Y. Yan, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10518–10521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 729–741 RSC .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7421–7441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Wang, K. L. Liu, J. X. Shu, T. T. Gu, X. M. Wu, Y. M. Dong and Z. J. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 69, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Wang, X. F. Xu, L. Qiu, Y. M. Dong, Z. J. Li and C. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6434–6442 CAS .
W. W. Zhao, X. Y. Dong, J. Wang, F. Y. Kong, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5253–5255 RSC .
W. W. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. C. Zhu, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 9520–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, P. P. Yu, J.-J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 495–497 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Wang, J. X. Shu, Y. M. Dong, X. M. Wu and Z. J. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 66, 283–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang, W. Huang, F.-w. Huo and D. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 8490–8495 RSC .
E. Tsuji, K. i. Fukui and A. Imanishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5406–5413 CAS .
W. Jiao, L. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1854–1859 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shuang, Y. Hou, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 52, 4098–4102 CAS .
D. H. Kim, W. S. Kim, S. B. Lee and S. H. Hong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 147, 653–659 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rajh, L. X. Chen, K. Lukas, T. Liu, M. C. Thurnauer and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10543–10552 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. D. Haeshin Lee, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, P. Li, T. Wang, L. Bu, Q. Xie, X. Xu, L. Lei, C. Zou, J. Chen and S. Yao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1699–1704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, R. Li, M. Tian, L. Liu, H. Zou, X. Zhao and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2062–2069 CAS .
R. Li, J. Gao, P. Gao, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Du and Q. Wei, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 731–738 RSC .
J. S. Yu, S. Kang, S. B. Yoon and G. Chai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9382–9383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, D. Huang, T. Odoom-Wubah, D. Fu, J. Huang and Q. Qin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 430, 272–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Chen, K. Y. Chen, Y. S. Huang, D. S. Tsai, K. K. Tiong and F. Z. Chien, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeng, K. K. Li, H. G. Yang and Y. H. Zhang, Vib. Spectrosc., 2013, 68, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, P. Reunchan, S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, T. Kako and J. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Han, X. Zhao, Q. Zhao and S. J. Kim, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8351–8357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, J. Li, P. Da, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 11288–11299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yotsumoto Neto, R. d. C. S. Luz and F. S. Damos, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 62, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, E. Rozhkova and T. Rajh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2893–2899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Song, J. M. Wu, M. Z. Tang, B. Qi and M. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19484–19492 CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Xin, X. Cheng and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 264, 476–484 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Meekins and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3437–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Nam, B. Kim, M. J. Ko, M. Jin, J. M. Kim and D. Y. Jung, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14000–14007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Deng, H. Y. Chen and J. J. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 59, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tb02525gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Fabrication procedure and photocurrent generation mechanism of the PEC immunosensor.	 

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of OMC (A) and TSC (B); TEM image of BMC (C). The insets in (A–C) are the TEM image of OMC, Raman spectuma of TSC and the HRTEM image of BMC respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Applied potential bias-dependent photocurrent densities, (B) IPCE spectra, (C) Voc time profile and (D) electron lifetime measurements (determined from the Voc decay in the dark) of (a) TSC and (b) TSC/PDA in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.0).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (A) PEC response and (B) EIS spectra of different modified electrodes: (a) GCE; (c) GCE/OMC/TSC; (d) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA; (e) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab; (f) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC; (g) GCE/OMC/TSC/PDA/Ab/PSA@BMC/PBQ. Traces (b) are the PEC response of GCE/TSC in A, and the EIS spectrum of GCE/OMC in B. The PEC tests were performed in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4) under the applied potential of −0.3 V. The EIS spectra were obtained in 5.0 mmol L−1 [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− solution containing 0.1 mol L−1 KCl.	 

 	Fig. 4  Catalytic activity of (a) BMC and (b) HRP: (A) after treatment for 2 h at different temperatures; (B) in the absence or presence of ascorbic acid (AA), H2O2, NaN3, NaOH and HCl (the concentration of HRP inhibitors was 5 mM). Error bar represents the standard deviation (n = 3).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) The photocurrent densities of different PSA concentrations: (a–i) 10−6, 10−5, 10−4, 10−3, 10−2, 0.1, 1.0, 10, and 50 ng mL−1. (B) The corresponding calibration curve. (C) The photocurrent densities of the prepared PSA sensor with interfering agents, including 50 ng mL−1 AFP, CEA and IL-6, 0.1 ng mL−1 PSA and the corresponding mixed solutions. (D) The reproducibility by detecting different PSA concentrations: (a) 0.001 ng mL−1, (b) 1.0 ng mL−1, (c) dark current response without light irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5tb02525g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
