The unconventional role of surface ligands in dictating the light harvesting properties of quantum dots  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA12623C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA12623C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7422-7457The unconventional role of surface ligands in dictating the light harvesting properties of quantum dots

        
          
            Indra Narayan 
            Chakraborty†
, 
      
        
          
            Pradyut 
            Roy†
, 
      
        
          
            Anish 
            Rao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gayathri 
            Devatha
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Soumendu 
            Roy
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Pramod P. 
            Pillai
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Centre for Energy Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pune, India – 411 008. E-mail: pramod.pillai@iiserpune.ac.in
Received 
      31st December 2020
    , Accepted 15th February 2021First published on 15th February 2021AbstractThe diligent utilisation of sunlight by green plants has essentially paved the way for the existence of life on earth. Our understanding of natural photosynthetic machinery reveals that the assembly of and precise interaction between different light-harvesting components is of prime importance for carrying out any meaningful processes. This has motivated the development of artificial light-harvesting materials, such as quantum dots (QDs), for mimicking the backbone of natural photosynthetic systems, in particular photoinduced electron- and energy-transfer processes. In conventional QD-based light-harvesting systems, surface ligands are considered as mere capping agents that provide colloidal stability to particles. Interestingly, the rational design of surface ligands can bring various forces into play, thereby controlling the interactions between the light-harvesting components and ultimately dictating the photophysical properties of the QDs. This review will primarily focus on the importance of finely tuned interparticle interactions, emanating from the thoughtful design of surface ligands, on light-induced energy- and electron-transfer processes in QD nanohybrids. We will also discuss the various applications of these QD-based light-harvesting systems that primarily originate from such ligand-driven favourable interactions (such as sensing, photopatterning, and photocatalysis). The review will conclude with our perspective on the potential role of surface ligands in bringing fundamental and applied advances in the area of QD-based light harvesting.Indra Narayan ChakrabortyIndra Narayan Chakraborty completed his Bachelor of Science degree with honours in chemistry at Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College, Rahara, West Bengal, in 2016. Then he joined the Integrated PhD programme at the Department of Chemistry, IISER Pune, where he is currently continuing as a senior research fellow (SRF) under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai. His research interests centre around the surface modification and photocatalytic properties of environmentally friendly quantum dots.Pradyut RoyPradyut Roy received his BSc degree in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University in 2017. He was first rank holder and received the best academic award, as a prestigious gold medallist, from Vidyasagar University. In 2017, he joined as an integrated PhD student at IISER Pune. He is currently pursuing his PhD at IISER Pune, under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai. His current research interest is focussed on controlling interparticle forces at the nanoscale to realize improved photophysical processes with existing nanomaterials, especially with quantum dots (QDs).Anish RaoAnish Rao completed his B.Sc. with honours in chemistry in 2013 at Ramjas College in Delhi University (India). He then obtained his MS + PhD from IISER Pune (India), in 2020, working under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai on regulating interparticle interactions and studying their impact on nanoparticle self-assembly. Currently, he is working on developing ways of regulating multicomponent nanoparticle self-assemblies with Prof. Luis M. Liz-Marzán at CIC biomaGUNE, Spain.Gayathri DevathaGayathri Devatha obtained her M.Sc. degree in chemistry from Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, India. She received her PhD under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai at Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Pune, India, in 2020. Her research interests include the surface engineering of quantum dots (QDs) and the study of ligand-directed photophysics and photopatterning in green quantum dots.Soumendu RoySoumendu Roy received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in chemistry from Vidyasagar University (West Bengal, India), in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He pursued a PhD under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune (India), and successfully defended his thesis in June 2020. His research interests lie in the areas of nanoparticle synthesis, surface chemistry, catalysis, and photophysics. He is currently working on understanding the potent role of surface ligands in dictating the fundamental properties of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles.Pramod P. PillaiPramod Pillai is an Associate Professor and a physical chemist in the Department of Chemistry at Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Pune, India. Dr Pillai obtained his PhD in chemistry in 2008 under the supervision of Prof. K. George Thomas at National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology (NIIST) Trivandrum, India. Prior to joining IISER Pune in June 2014, Dr Pillai was a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Prof. Bartosz A. Grzybowski at Northwestern University, Evanston, USA (2011–2014), and an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral Fellow at Technische Universität in Dortmund, Germany, with Prof. Christof M. Niemeyer (2008–2010). Currently Dr Pillai's research at IISER Pune is focused on controlling the interplay of forces to improve performance and develop new properties at the nanoscale. Some of the properties of interest include light harvesting, catalysis, and the self-assembly of hybrid nanomaterials.
1 Introduction
The conversion of sunlight into different forms of energy using artificial materials has emerged as a promising and affordable solution to energy crises.1–9 The supply of energy from the sun to the Earth is surplus: 3 × 1024 Joules a year, or about 10000 times more than the global energy consumption.10 In other words, covering 0.1% of the Earth's surface with solar cells with a moderate efficiency of ∼10% would satisfy our needs.10 Thus, in the last few decades, the focus has once again shifted to the sun and how to harvest sunlight in an efficient, scalable, and affordable way. This has led to the emergence of modern energy research that spans all the way from gaining fundamental understanding to commercializing light-harvesting devices. Technically, the energy from the sun can be used to drive three main processes in materials: (i) changes in temperature,11 (ii) the funnelling of energy,12 and (iii) the movement of electrons.13 Even though temperature changes in materials are often ungovernable, recent advances have led to the regulation of temperatures using plasmonic materials.11,14,15 On the other hand, extensive research in the last 2–3 decades has led to the precise control of the movement of energy and electrons through materials, and this area forms the basis of the present review.
As in any other area of science, energy research has been inspired by natural phenomena, like photosynthesis, vision, bioluminescence, etc.16–18 For instance, the efficient movement of energy and electrons in natural photosynthetic reaction centres still remains the benchmark for energy researchers to follow.19–27 The mimicking of natural processes, like photoinduced energy and electron transfer during photosynthesis, is a logical strategy adopted by researchers to achieve efficient light-harvesting using artificial materials.28,29 Dedicated efforts in this direction have helped us to gain deeper understanding into the various mechanisms involved in photoinduced energy and electron transfer processes (Fig. 1).30 Among the many mechanisms, Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) is a well-understood example, and it has been explored in many artificial materials to funnel photonic energy across long distances (10–100 Å).30,31 A FRET process involves the non-radiative transfer of energy from an excited donor through a dipole–dipole interaction, triggering coupled transitions in an acceptor (Fig. 1a).27,30,31 Some of the important factors that govern the FRET process include the spectral overlap integral, donor–acceptor distance, and orientation factor. Generally, FRET results in the formation of a fluorescent complex. On the other hand, the photoinduced electron transfer (PET) process involves the transfer of an electron from a donor to an acceptor, and this is mainly governed by the energetics of the donor–acceptor pair. The transfer of electrons from a donor to an acceptor should be thermodynamically feasible for an efficient PET to happen.30,32–37 A PET process can occur either through the photoexcitation of the donor (photooxidation) or the acceptor (photoreduction), as shown in Fig. 1b. In most cases, a PET process results in the formation of a non-luminescent charge-separated complex. Both these governable light-induced energy and electron transfer processes form an integral part of photosynthesis.27,30 As per our understanding of photosynthetic machinery, there is no single champion component that is solely responsible for the efficient transport of energy and electrons during photosynthesis.27,38 Rather, nature has assembled a series of champion components in a precise fashion, which work in tandem to maximise the efficiency of the respective photophysical process.36,38,39 During photosynthesis, long-range energy transfer occurs from light-absorbing pigments to the reaction centre, followed by a long-range electron-transfer process.27–38 Such long-range processes demand effective communication between individual light-harvesting components. Nature has built a self-assembled masterpiece (the photosynthetic reaction centre) to allow control over long-range energy and electron transfer processes through the precise control of various interparticle interactions.40,41
 Fig. 1  General schemes of (a) Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and (b) photoinduced electron transfer (PET) processes are shown in terms of potential energy diagrams (note: only the lower portions of the potential energy surfaces are shown). A PET process can occur either through the photoexcitation of the donor (photooxidation, labelled ‘1’) or the acceptor (photoreduction, labelled ‘2’). The photooxidation process involves the transfer of electrons from an excited donor (D*) to a ground state acceptor (A). On the other hand, the photoreduction process involves the transfer of electrons from a ground state donor (D) to an excited state acceptor (A*). 
How to mimic photosynthesis in achieving a precise assembly of different artificial light-harvesting components is of prime importance, to carry out any meaningful related processes. Moreover, connecting individual champion materials in a desired fashion can allow us to integrate various complex photophysical processes during artificial light-harvesting as well.41–44 One of the modular ways to assemble more than one system is via non-covalent interactions; these are often utilised by nature to devise its self-assembled machinery.45–47 The proper tuning of non-covalent interactions can bring the light-harvesting components close to each other in a precise orientation, which in turn can allow various photophysical processes or chemical transformations.48–50 Thus, it is essential to select suitable artificial light-harvesting materials that can both exhibit reliable photophysical properties and provide flexibility for tuning interparticle interactions.
An ideal light-harvesting material should exhibit properties such as a high molar extinction coefficient, excellent photo/thermal stability, easily tuneable absorption/emission profiles, high electron–hole mobility, and long-lived charge-separated states.51–54 Aimed at this, many artificial materials have been developed in the last few decades, including organic, inorganic, polymeric, and biomolecular materials, and metallic/semiconductor nanomaterials.51–72 Along with having the above-mentioned ideal characteristics, the easy tunability and flexibility of the surface chemistry of quantum dots (QDs) have earned them special importance in the area of light-harvesting studies.73–91 QDs are luminescent semiconductor nanomaterials that have sizes comparable to their Bohr-exciton radius, which results in the quantum confinement of energy levels.92–96 As a result, QDs are well-known to exhibit unique size-, shape-, and composition-dependent optoelectronic properties. Their broad absorbance in the visible region, high tuneability, and narrow emission make QDs ideal candidates for many light-harvesting studies. A photoexcited QD can follow different decay pathways, as summarised in Fig. 2; the efficiencies of these will ultimately decide their role in light-harvesting studies. One of the common pathways is the radiative recombination of excitons, called photoluminescence (PL; marked ‘1’ in Fig. 2), which finds use in sensing,97 imaging,98–100 and display applications.101,102 The photoexcited charge pairs can also participate in energy and electron transfer processes in the presence of appropriate acceptor moieties (marked ‘2’ and ‘5’ in Fig. 2, respectively).103–111 Likewise, the excitons in QDs can also be extracted from the core for (i) photovoltaic applications112–116 and (ii) driving various photo-redox transformations (marked ‘3’ and ‘4’ in Fig. 2, respectively).117–124
 Fig. 2  A summary of the main relaxation pathways in a photoexcited QD (QD*), which forms the basis of various energy-related applications. 
Most of the photophysical processes in QDs emerge from their cores, and extensive studies have been performed to maximise the light-harvesting properties via tuning their size, shape, composition, and crystallinitie.125–135 As mentioned earlier, the assembling and integration of champion materials is equally as important as (or even more important than) developing new champion materials. This is where the ligands on the surfaces of QDs can play a crucial role. In the initial era of QD research, surface ligands were considered as mere capping agents that provided colloidal stability to particles. However, recent studies have shown that surface ligands can be transformed to play a major role in controlling the photophysical properties of QDs as well. For instance, the surfaces of QDs can be appropriately decorated to regulate the interplay of forces and interactions, thereby achieving the desired light-harvesting properties from QDs. Thus, the primary focus of this review is to summarise the importance of surface ligands in channelling the extraction of energy and electrons from photoexcited QDs, via bringing various non-covalent interactions into play.
The review starts with a brief summary of the anatomy of surface ligands and the diversity of non-covalent interactions emanating from them. This will be followed by an elaborate discussion of surface-ligand-directed photoinduced electron and energy transfer processes in QDs. Next, we will discuss the significant role of non-covalent interactions in realising the application of QDs in areas such as sensing, photopatterning, and photocatalysis. The review will conclude with our perspective on the judicious control of ligand chemistry and interparticle interactions for bringing fundamental and technological advances in the area of QD-based light harvesting.
2 Surface ligands and interparticle interactions
The individual engineering of both components of QDs – the core and ligands – is essential for maximising the light-harvesting efficiencies of QDs. Most of the photophysical properties of QDs are dependent on their core parameters (such as size, shape, composition, crystallinity, etc.), which have been extensively studied and well-documented in many reviews.125–135 On the contrary, the surface ligands have been primarily viewed from the perspective of being stabilising or capping agents. It was believed that surface ligands were important mainly for providing stability to a nanoparticle system in a particular medium. However, recent studies have revealed that the rational design of surface ligands can turn out to have a critical impact on various optoelectronic properties at the nanoscale, including light harvesting.73,75,121,136,137 In general, a surface ligand has three sub-parts: a binding (or head) group; a spacer; and a terminal group (Fig. 3).138 Dedicated research has been carried out to tune these individual components of surface ligands so as to achieve properties of interest in nanomaterials.
 Fig. 3  A schematic representation showing the general structure of a QD, emphasising various processes emanating from the core and from surface ligands. 
Specifically, the terminal groups of ligands have been transformed to carry out an unconventional role via bringing various covalent and non-covalent interactions into play, thereby dictating the fate of photophysical processes in QDs and nanoparticles in general.139–152 This section will briefly discuss the importance of the three components of surface ligands on the light-harvesting properties of QDs, emphasising various non-covalent interactions emanating from the terminal groups.
2.1 Binding groups
The primary job of the binding group is to anchor the ligand onto the surface of the QD. Often, binding groups coordinate with unpassivated atomic orbitals (or “dangling orbitals”) on the surfaces of QDs, which are formed from low coordinating surface atoms.136,153,154 As a result, the anchoring of the binding group reduces the surface-centred excitonic trap states. Along with surface passivation, the nature of the binding group can influence the photophysical properties of QDs as well.153–156 For instance, Wuister and co-workers observed that ligand exchange with thiol molecules resulted in the PL quenching of CdSe QDs, whereas the PL of CdTe QDs was enhanced after place exchange with thiolated ligands.157 This striking discrepancy in PL behaviour was explained based on the trapping of photogenerated holes by the thiol groups, as the HOMO energy level of thiols lie above the valence band maximum of CdSe QDs (Fig. 4a). Likewise, the concentration of surface ligands can influence the PL properties of QDs. Whitten, McLendon, and co-workers observed a PL enhancement in CdS QDs in the presence of low concentrations of trimethylamine, which was attributed to the usual surface passivation of trap states by the amine groups.158 On the contrary, the excess use of amine ligands can suppress radiative emission from CdS QDs via electron transfer from amines to QDs.159 El Sayed and co-workers studied the effects of n-butylamine on the band-edge emission and picosecond bleach recovery of CdSe QDs.160 Multisite binding model studies suggest the selective binding of n-butylamine to the hole sites in CdSe QDs, resulting in the suppression of QD PL. Furthermore, Kamat and co-workers explored the anchor-group-dependent excited state dynamics and interfacial electron transfer (ET) in QD-TiO2 heterostructures (Fig. 4b).161 The use of amines as the binding group to link QDs and TiO2 enhanced the rate of electron transfer (ket) due to the confinement of the electron wave function via the passivation of intrinsic trap states.161–163 On the other hand, electron trap states were created when thiol was used as the binding group of the linker, which suppressed the rate of interfacial electron transfer (Fig. 4c).161,163–166 In another elegant work, Thomas and co-workers demonstrated the role of binding groups in regulating energy-level equilibration in CdSe–Au heterostructures (Fig. 4d).167 The ability of thiols to scavenge photoexcited holes from CdSe QDs was explored to achieve better Fermi level equilibration, which enhances the charge transport properties of CdSe–Au heterostructures. Interestingly, the use of amines as the binding group promoted the Au-mediated recombination of excitons in CdSe–Au heterostructures, thereby suppressing their charge transport properties.
 Fig. 4  (a) The band-edge positions of CdSe and CdTe QDs shown against vacuum and standard hydrogen electrode. Thiols can quench the PL of CdSe QDs via scavenging holes from the valence band of CdSe QDs, but cannot quench the PL of CdTe QDs (solid line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright: 2004, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic representation of the delocalisation and confinement of the electronic wave function in the core of a QD, by thiolated and amine ligands, respectively. (c) Variations in the rate of electron transfer as a function of the surface ligand used to adsorb CdS onto TiO2. MPA and Ala contain thiol and amine as binding groups, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagrams of the energy levels of different components in CdSe QD-Au NP heterostructures, along with the HOMO energy levels of surface ligands (dodecylamine and dodecylthiol). The hole scavenging abilities of thiols were explored to achieve better Fermi level equilibration, thereby enhancing the charge transport properties of CdSe–Au heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright: 2020, American Institute of Physics. (e) A schematic representation of energy transfer from a CdS QD to molecular acceptors that were functionalised with acid and amine binding groups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from influencing the efficiency, binding groups can control the nature of photophysical processes as well. Tang and co-workers studied the effects of binding groups in controlling the nature of energy transfer between CdS QD donors and boron dipyrromethane dye acceptors (Fig. 4e).168 The carboxylic-acid-functionalised acceptor dyes could attach themselves to multiple identical binding sites on the surfaces of the QDs, resulting in FRET being the sole quenching process. In contrast, both FRET and static quenching processes were observed when amine-functionalised dyes were used as acceptors. This was explained based on the existence of two available sites for the attachment of amine-functionalised dyes on QDs. The bright sites participated in a FRET process, whereas the dark sites were involved in charge transfer from the QDs through static interactions.
2.2 Spacers
A spacer acts as a bridge between the binding and terminal groups of a ligand, and it essentially controls the distance between the QD core and its surroundings. Commonly, long alkyl chains are used as spacers to prevent any undesirable loss of excitons via spatially separating the QDs from other interfering species. Both FRET and PET processes are highly dependent on the distance between the donor and the acceptor. Thus, varying the spacer length of the ligand is a convenient way to regulate these photophysical processes in QDs as required.30,169–171 In one example, Sugimura and co-workers studied the dependence of PL on the interparticle distance between two sizes of CdSe QDs.171 The QD–QD system showed two types of energy-transfer processes as a function of different inter-QD distances. Förster-type coupling was responsible for PL quenching at shorter inter-QD distances (below 10 nm), and the efficiency was dependent on the inverse of the sixth power of the distance.30,169–171 However, weak dipole–dipole interactions, known as retarded light-field coupling, were observed at longer inter-QD distances, with the quenching efficiency dependent on the inverse of the square of the distance.171–174 Similar to FRET, the charge transfer efficiency also has an exponential dependence on the donor–acceptor distance. A decrease in the spacer length led to strong electronic coupling between the donor and acceptor moieties, allowing for the efficient flow of electrons with negligible resistance.175,176 A series of examples in this regard has been reported in QD-metal-oxide nanocomposites.177–179 In one example, Kamat and co-workers demonstrated a tunnelling model for the electron transfer process from CdSe QD to TiO2 with bifunctional aliphatic ligands (Fig. 5a).177 Detailed spectroscopic studies revealed that the rate of PET, ket, decreased with an increase in the spacer length, which was in good agreement with the predicted results (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) A schematic representation of PET from a CdSe QD to a TiO2 QD through an aliphatic mercaptoalkanoic acid spacer. (b) A plot comparing the variations in the experimentally and theoretically calculated rates of PET, ket, as a function of the spacer length. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of PET from a QD to an oxide through a rigid aromatic spacer (bridge). (d) The variation in the rates of PET, ket, as a function of spacer length for n-methylene-based aliphatic bridges (HS–[CH2]n–COOH, black dots) and n-phenylene-based aromatic bridges (HS–[C6H4]n–COOH, red squares). Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright: 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Along with the length, the nature of the spacer plays a crucial role in deciding the fate of a photophysical process. Watson and co-workers have compared the kinetics and efficiencies of excited-state interfacial electron transfer in CdS QD donor-TiO2 NP acceptor systems connected through aromatic and aliphatic bifunctional spacers.178 Injection of electrons from the CdS QD to the TiO2 NP occurred on multiple time scales. The fast component (<10−8 s) was attributed to the tunnelling of electrons through excitonic states, which was more efficient during the use of an aromatic linker due to the presence of better electronic coupling in comparison with the aliphatic linker. However, the slow component (10−7 to 10−6 s) was due to trap-state-mediated electron injection, which had negligible dependence on the nature of the linker molecule. The distance dependence of electron-transfer processes was observed in the case of aromatic linkers as well.178 Likewise, Cánovas and co-workers used molecular bridges to control the electron transfer rates in a covalently connected PbS QD-TiO2 NP nanocomposite system (Fig. 5c).179 At a given donor–acceptor distance, stronger electronic coupling via the conductive aromatic phenyl bridge facilitates a faster electron transfer process than the use of a methylene spacer (Fig. 5d).
2.3 Terminal groups
Our understanding of natural photosynthetic reaction centres has revealed that establishing precise control over the interactions between different champion materials is crucial for maximising the efficiency of photophysical processes.36,38–41 However, how to achieve such finely tuned interactions in QDs still remains an open question. Here, the terminal groups of ligands have the potential to control the assembly of QDs with other light-harvesting materials via bringing various covalent and non-covalent interactions into play.180–183 Specifically, a terminal group can be conveniently modified to achieve a particular interparticle interaction in a QD-based nanohybrid system, as per the demand. In comparison with covalent interactions, non-covalent interactions can offer additional advantages in terms of flexibility and ease of reversibility when it comes to fine-tuning the interparticle interactions. Some key non-covalent forces include electrostatics, H-bonding, bridging/coordination, and π–π stacking (Fig. 6).184–187 The following discussion will review thoughtful uses of these non-covalent forces in the regulation of interparticle interactions, and their impact on the outcome of FRET and PET processes in QD-based nanohybrid systems.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagrams of four commonly used non-covalent interactions, which can arise through the judicious choice of surface ligands, for assembling QD-based donor–acceptor pairs. 
3 Light-harvesting through QD surface manipulation
Close proximity and systematic co-ordination between various champion components make the process of photosynthesis unique and efficient. The mimicking of such machinery in artificial systems will require materials that interact in predefined ways with each other. Specifically, the regulation of interactions between donors and acceptors can ultimately dictate the outcome of light-induced electron or energy transfer processes. Both of these processes can be conveniently controlled via bringing various non-covalent interactions into play through the appropriate surface functionalisation of QDs. In this section, we summarise the impact of such finely tuned non-covalent interactions on the dynamics and efficiencies of electron/energy transfer processes in QD-based light-harvesting systems.
3.1 Electrostatically driven photoinduced energy and electron transfer processes
The regulation of electrostatic forces stands out as one of the most attractive ways to control the complexation and distance between donor and acceptor components in a light-harvesting system. To achieve this control, the surfaces of QDs can be functionalised with appropriately charged ligands to impart attractive or repulsive interactions between QD-based donor–acceptor systems.188,189 Thus, the donor–acceptor distance can be regulated via varying the surface chemistry of QDs.
In an early report, Nabiev and co-workers investigated an energy-transfer process between oppositely charged CdSe/ZnS QDs of different sizes in an aqueous medium (Fig. 7a).190 Cysteamine and a mixture of mercaptosuccinic/mercaptosulphonic acid ligands were functionalised on the surfaces of differently sized CdSe/ZnS QDs to prepare positively and negatively charged QDs, respectively (Fig. 7a). Strong electrostatic attraction between the two oppositely charged QDs resulted in efficient resonance energy transfer from green-to red-emitting QDs (∼100%). Following this work, a series of other studies was performed involving electrostatically bound QD–QD and QD-NP assemblies.191,192 For instance, Rogach and co-workers extended the idea of electrostatic interaction to obtain a compact layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly of oppositely charged CdTe QDs deposited on a polymer-coated glass substrate.193 Thioglycolic acid (TGA) and 2-mercaptoethylamine (MEA) were used as ligands to impart negative and positive charges, respectively, on the surfaces of QDs. Profound electrostatic interactions between the QD layers facilitated the energy transfer process, with an efficiency of ∼80% in the LBL system. This work further paved the way for using electrostatic interactions as a tool to develop solid-state assemblies of various QDs, with fine control over their photophysical processes.193–196
 Fig. 7  (a) A schematic representation of a FRET process in an electrostatically assembled QD–QD donor–acceptor pair. The positive and negative charges on the green- and red-emitting CdSe QDs arise from surface-bound cysteamine and mercaptosuccinic/mercaptosulfonic acid ligands, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright: 2004, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagrams of the preparation and working principle of a dual-colour CdSe QD-based ratiometric fluorescent probe for Zn2+ detection. The pendant group (TSPP) electrostatically binds on the surface of the QDs and acts as the FRET acceptor for 512 nm-emitting QDs (FRET-1). A bathochromic shift occurs in the absorption of TSPP upon binding with Zn2+ ions, making TSPP a better FRET acceptor for 572 nm QDs (FRET-2). Accordingly, there are variations in the relative PL intensities of the QDs, which act as the readout for Zn2+ sensing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Electrostatic interactions have also played a crucial role in the development of QD-based organic–inorganic hybrid light-harvesting systems. For instance, Stefani and co-workers designed an electrostatically assembled organic copolymer-inorganic QD-based nanohybrid system and performed a detailed investigation into its photophysical properties.196 The water-soluble conducting copolymer poly[9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene-alt-1,4-phenylene]dibromide (PDFD) was conjugated with CdTe QDs through strong electrostatic attraction between the positively charged sidechain of the copolymer and the negatively charged thioglycolic acid on the surfaces of the QDs. The system exhibited the type-II alignment of the HOMO and LUMO levels, allowing for both charge-separation and energy-transfer processes. The finite intrinsic size and surface ligands imposed a minimum distance between the donor polymer molecules and acceptor QD core (∼1.5 nm), favouring long-range energy transfer processes (∼70%) over charge separation.
In another work, Sun and co-workers designed a dual QD-based ratiometric fluorescent probe for the detection of Zn2+ ions in solution as well as in living cells.197 The probe comprised two differently sized QDs (λem = 512 nm and 572 nm) as the fluorophores, which were electrostatically tethered via a meso-tetra(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphine dihydrochloride (TSPP) receptor (Fig. 7b). In the absence of Zn2+, 512QD exhibited efficient FRET (∼40%) with TSPP, leading to quenched emission at 512 nm and enhanced emission at 572 nm. Upon chelation with Zn2+, there was a red shift in the absorption of TSPP, making 572QD-TSPP a better FRET pair than 512QD-TSPP. Accordingly, there was a recovery in 512QD emission along with quenching of the emission of 572QD, which served as the readout for the quantitative detection of Zn2+ ions (Fig. 7b).
Electrostatically driven energy transfer has also been extended to QD-organic-dye-based donor–acceptor systems, which are another class of extensively studied nanohybrids used in QD light harvesting. In one representative example, Pradhan and co-workers used electrostatic forces to develop efficient FRET pairs based on doped QDs and organic dye molecules (Fig. 8a and b).198 Cysteamine hydrochloride was used as the ligand to impart positive charge while mercaptopropionic acid and dimercaptosuccinic acid were used to impart negative charges on the surfaces of Mn-doped QDs. Strong electrostatic attraction between the oppositely charged QD-dye pairs led to the efficient transfer of energy from doped-QDs to organic dyes (∼86% for [+] Mn:ZnS:::[−] Texas red; ∼76% for [−] Cu:ZnSe:::[+] rhodamine B; and ∼90% for [–] Mn:ZnS QD:::[+] cresyl violet). In another study, Sarkar and co-workers used positively charged Oxazine 170 perchlorate dye as an acceptor in an efficient energy transfer process with negatively charged CdS QDs of different sizes (3.5 nm, 4.0 nm, and 4.4 nm QDs, with corresponding energy transfer efficiencies of ∼46%, ∼59%, and ∼72%, respectively).199 At high concentrations, electrostatic attraction led to the strong aggregation of dye molecules on the surfaces of the QDs, resulting in efficient homo-FRET (the phenomenon of FRET between identical fluorophores).199
 Fig. 8  (a) A schematic diagram of resonance energy transfer in an electrostatically assembled doped QD-organic dye nanohybrid system. (b) Steady-state PL spectra of positively charged Mn-doped ZnS QDs in the presence of varying amounts of negatively charged Texas red acceptor. A steady decrease in the PL of the QDs along with a concomitant increase in the dye PL was observed, indicating a FRET process from the QD to the dye. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic representation of dye encapsulation inside a positively charged ionic-liquid-functionalised polymer nanoparticle, followed by its electrostatic assembly with negatively charged CdTe QDs. The process of FRET was observed from the QDs to Nile red dye encapsulated in the polymer nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright: 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Further, Patra and co-workers used electrostatic interactions to anchor negatively charged CdTe QDs on the surfaces of dye-encapsulated positively charged polymer nanoparticles (Fig. 8c).200 The photoexcited QDs here act as antennae and transfer excitons to the Nile red dye trapped inside the polymer nanoparticles. A positively charged ionic liquid was used to prepare dye-encapsulated poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) polymer nanoparticles. In contrast, the QDs were capped with negatively charged thioglycolic acid. Detailed steady-state and time-resolved experiments revealed ∼73% efficiency in transferring energy from the CdTe QDs to the dye-encapsulated polymer nanoparticles.
The real-world use of QDs for various light-harvesting applications has demanded the development of QDs based on less-toxic metal ions (like Cd-, Te-, Se-, and Pb-free QDs). In this direction, environmentally friendly QDs, such as InP, CuInS2, AgInS2, etc., have emerged as promising alternatives in various light-harvesting studies.201–203 In this direction, Thomas and co-workers designed an environmentally benign QD-based FRET system, comprising InP/ZnS QDs as donors and Lissamine rhodamine B ethylenediamine (LiRh) or Texas red cadaverine C5 (TxRed) as acceptors (Fig. 9a and b).204 Favourable electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged InP/ZnS QDs and positively charged dye molecules led to strong ground-state complexation between the QDs and the dyes. Consequently, moderately efficient resonance energy transfer was observed in [−] InP/ZnS QD – [+] LiRh dye (∼40%) and [+] InP/ZnS QD – [−] TxRed dye (∼50%) donor–acceptor systems (Fig. 9c and d). Remarkably, this study has opened up a new area of photophysical exploration involving InP/ZnS QDs, which can find applications in both medical and energy research.
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic representation of a FRET system consisting of InP/ZnS QDs as the donor and organic dye as the acceptor. (b) A 3D PL plot depicting the time-dependent evolution of FRET in the InP/ZnS QD-dye system. Spectral changes in the PL of InP/ZnS QDs in the presence of increasing amounts of (c) LiRh dye and (d) TxRed dye. Strong electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged QDs and dyes resulted in stable ground-state complexation, which further led to an efficient FRET process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright: 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Besides these initial developments, the generic use of environmentally friendly QDs has been limited due to challenges associated with synthetic procedures and suitable surface engineering processes. One of the longstanding challenges in the area of QDs, especially environmentally friendly QDs, is their functionalisation with non-ionisable ligands, imparting permanent positive charge on their surfaces. Via the optimisation of ligand exchange protocols, our group have addressed this challenge, modifying the surfaces of InP/ZnS QDs with positively charged N,N,N-trimethyl(11-mercaptoundecyl) ammonium chloride (TMA) ligands in an aqueous medium, with the retention of ∼80% of the QD PL (Fig. 10a).182 PL experiments proved the extraordinary stability of the TMA-capped QDs ([+] InP/ZnS) over a wide range of pH values and ionic strengths, without any significant loss of emission properties. The potency of the [+] InP/ZnS QDs for participating in efficient FRET was tested using steady-state and time-resolved experiments, with anionic merocyanine 540 dye ([−] MC 540) acting as the acceptor. The strong electrostatic attraction between the oppositely charged [+] InP/ZnS QD donor and [−] MC 540 acceptor led to the formation of a stable ground-state complex, finally leading to an efficient resonance energy transfer process in water (∼60%, Fig. 10b and c).
 Fig. 10  (a) A schematic diagram of the ligand exchange protocol between a myristic acid (MA) capped InP/ZnS QD and TMA ligand for the synthesis of cationic InP/ZnS QDs with permanent positive charge. (b) A schematic diagram of electrostatically driven FRET between oppositely charged [+] InP/ZnS QD and [−] MC dye. (c) Spectral changes in the PL of InP/ZnS QDs upon the addition of varying concentrations of [−] MC dye. The time-resolved PL decay profiles of a [+] InP/ZnS:::[−] MC complex collected at the emission maxima of the donor QDs (525 nm) and the acceptor MC dye (585 nm) are shown in the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) A schematic representation of electrostatically driven FRET between a pair of environmentally friendly QDs, comprising a [−] InP/ZnS QD as the donor and a [+] CuInS2/ZnS QD as the acceptor. (e) The dependence of the FRET efficiency on the donor–acceptor distance, studied via the temporal evolution of the FRET process as a function of solvent drying in the solid state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Continuing in this direction, a recent study from our group demonstrated electrostatically driven FRET in an all-QD-based donor–acceptor system, comprising environmentally friendly InP/ZnS and CuInS2/ZnS QDs.205 Here again, complimentary charges on the surfaces of the QDs played a critical role in achieving efficient resonance energy transfer from the [−] InP/ZnS QD to the [+] CuInS2/ZnS QD (Fig. 10d). The nonlinear Stern–Volmer plot confirmed the presence of both static and dynamic components in the PL quenching of [−] InP/ZnS QDs by [+] CuInS2/ZnS QDs. The temporal evolution of the resonance energy transfer process was realised in the solid state as well, which proves the potency of using electrostatic forces for future device-level studies (Fig. 10e).
Like in energy-transfer studies, electrostatic interactions emanating from surface ligands can dictate the outcome of photoinduced electron-transfer processes as well, which is discussed next. Weiss and co-workers systematically studied the effects of the donor–acceptor distance on the rate of PET from CdSe QDs to poly(viologen) in the thin-film state using transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy (Fig. 11a and b).206 The modification of the QD surfaces with negatively charged mercaptocarboxylic acids of different chain lengths (HS-(CH2)n-COOH, where n = 1, 2, 5, 7, 10, and 15) allowed the formation of stable complexes with cationic poly(viologen). A gradual decrease in the rate of PET from the CdSe QDs to viologen was observed as the donor–acceptor distance increased from n = 1 to 7 (even though the decrease in magnitude was not as expected for the all-trans configuration of mercaptocarboxylic acids) (Fig. 11c). Interestingly, there was a drastic difference between the observed and expected magnitudes of the decrease in the PET rates (based on the results from n = 1–7) for the nanohybrids with n = 10 and 15. The unexpectedly slow PET rates were attributed to the extended bundling of surface ligands within the thin films. This study highlights the possibility of conformational changes within the ligand shells and their unexpected effects on the rates of PET processes in the solid state.
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic representation of a thin film composed of electrostatically attached thioglycolic-acid-capped CdSe QDs and poly(viologen). (b) Transient absorption spectra of CdSe QD-poly(viologen) films at different pump-probe delay times. (c) A logarithmic plot of the intensity-averaged PET time constants for different CdSe QD-poly(viologen) films as a function of n (n is the number of methylene groups in the ligand). Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright: 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Later, electrostatically controlled PET was demonstrated by Waldeck and co-workers between oppositely charged [+] CdSe and [−] CdTe QDs.207 Also, the distance dependence of the PET rate was studied in the electrostatically assembled QD–QD system via systematically varying the lengths of the charged ligands. Surprisingly, no PET was observed between the QDs in the assemblies when the charges on the QDs were reversed. This proves the role of the static electric field in controlling the unidirectional electron flow, and this can be adopted as a strategy to slow down undesirable back electron transfer in QD-based light-harvesting devices.
In a different approach, Weiss and co-workers tuned the charge densities of the ligands on PbS QDs to control PET between QDs and 9,10-anthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid sodium salt (AQ), with similar charges (Fig. 12a).208 The perfect band alignment between the QDs and AQ molecules assured the elimination of other competitive photophysical processes (such as hole transfer and energy transfer; Fig. 12b). The negative charge density on the PbS QDs was reduced via diluting the ligand shell with neutral 6-mercaptohexanol (MHO) molecules, resulting in decreased repulsion between the PbS QDs and AQ molecules (Fig. 12c). Consequently, an efficient PET process was achieved between similarly charged QDs and AQ molecules, and this system was also used as a probe for measuring the permeability of the protective ligand shell. With the help of an electrostatic double-layer model, the dependence of the change in the Gibbs free energy (ΔGobs, due to changes in the surface charge density) on the diffusion of AQ was studied in detail (Fig. 12d).208 This work provides direct insight into the power of a surface modification approach for controlling the adsorption of analytes on QDs, which can be useful in the areas of sensing and photocatalysis.
 Fig. 12  (a) The binding of AQ molecules on the surface of a PbS QD via the penetration of the ligand shell (composed of mercaptohexanoic acid, MHA, and 6-mercaptohexanol). (b) The band positions of the PbS QD and AQ. (c) A plot showing the fraction of remaining QD PL as a function of the amount of MHA in the ligand shell at different concentrations of AQ molecules. Lowering the amount of MHA in the ligand shell led to a decrease in electrostatic repulsion between the QDs and AQ molecules. This triggered an efficient PET process from the QDs to AQ molecules. The lower the surface coverage of MHA ligands, the higher the efficiency of the PET process, and the higher the PL quenching. (d) A plot of the Gibbs free energy change as a function of the average number of bound MHA ligands per QD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In a continuation of their previous study, de la Cruz, Weiss, and co-workers explored the concept of charge screening to regulate the permeability of the QD ligand shell.209 This was achieved via adding positively charged tetraalkylammonium cations to the system, which in turn lowers the electrostatic repulsion between the PbS QD donor and anthraquinone-2-sulfonate (AQ) acceptor molecules, with similar charges (Fig. 13a). Increases in the concentration and bulkiness of the tetraalkylammonium cations ensured a steady decrease in the electrostatic potential of the PbS QDs, which directly translated to the penetration of AQ molecules through the ligand shell and increased PL quenching efficiencies (Fig. 13b and c). Free-energy scaling analysis along with molecular dynamics simulations revealed the formation of a diffuse layer with counterions at the slipping plane of the QDs, which is regulated by both the number of ions as well as the individual binding affinity of each ligand–counterion pair.210–212 Thus, this work used an electrostatically driven PET process to obtain an in-depth understanding of the dynamics of the nanoscale forces between the QD surface and the freely diffusing molecules. As a logical extension, Weiss and co-workers regulated the electrostatic potential at the QD-solvent interface via protonating the ligand shell of PbS QDs (histamine-derivatised dihydrolipoic acid, DHLA, ligands). Protonation resulted in the lowering of electrostatic repulsion between the QD donor and the AQ acceptor, thereby significantly increasing the permeability of the ligand shell towards negatively charged AQ (a ∼6.7-fold enhancement of the PL quenching was observed).213 The surface-charge-regulation strategies reported in the three above-mentioned examples can be useful in realising efficient PET in systems where the QD donor and dye acceptor have similar charges.
 Fig. 13  (a) The addition of quaternary ions (NR4+) can screen electrostatic repulsion between similarly charged QDs and AQ molecules, thereby enhancing the permeability of anionic AQ molecules. (b) Variations in the net charge of a nanohybrid system in the presence of NR4+ cations containing R groups of different sizes. (c) The effects of varying concentrations of different NR4+ cations on the PL quenching of QDs, by 1000 equivalents of AQ molecules. The penetration of AQ molecules increased with the bulkiness of the NR4+ cation, thereby enhancing the probability of PET processes from QDs to AQ molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic diagram of an electrostatically driven PET process from an environmentally benign [+] CIS/ZnS QD to [−] ICG dye. (e) Spectral variations in the PL of [+] CIS/ZnS QDs in the presence of increasing amounts of [−] ICG dye; the inset shows the corresponding quenching of the PL lifetime of the QDs. (f) Stern–Volmer plots for positively and negatively charged CIS/ZnS QDs in the presence of [+] methylene blue (MB) dye, confirming the role of electrostatics in the PL quenching of the QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In efforts to extend electrostatically driven electron transfer via environmentally friendly QDs, our group demonstrated a PET process from permanently positively charged CuInS2/ZnS ([+] CIS/ZnS) QDs to a negatively charged indocyanine green (ICG) dye in water (Fig. 13d and e).183 Temperature- and solvent-polarity-dependent PL quenching studies performed using steady-state and time-resolved techniques proved the existence of efficient PET from [+] CIS/ZnS QDs to [−] ICG dyes (∼80%). Control experiments with similarly and oppositely charged QD-dye systems proved the decisive role of electrostatic interactions in achieving efficient PET in [+] CIS/ZnS QD:::[−] ICG nanohybrids (Fig. 13f). Thus, electrostatically regulated PET between oppositely charged CIS/ZnS QDs and dye molecules can serve as a model system for future light-harvesting studies using eco-friendly QDs in aqueous media. Furthermore, both electron- and energy-transfer processes can occur simultaneously in QD-based donor–acceptor systems.196,214 In one such example, the contributions of photoinduced electron- and energy-transfer processes to exciton-quenching dynamics were studied by Lian and co-workers in an electrostatically assembled CdSe QD-rhodamine-B system.214 Steady-state, time-resolved PL, and transient absorption studies show the dominance of electron-transfer pathways (∼84%) over an energy-transfer mechanism (∼16%) in the quenching of donor photoluminescence.214
3.2 H-Bonding-assisted photoinduced energy and electron transfer
Another way of controlling the D–A distance is to introduce dipole- or partial-charge-based H-bonding interactions into light-harvesting systems.185,215,216 H-Bonding is a partial-polarisation-based three-centred two-electron bonding interaction between the lone pair of an electronegative atom and a H atom attached to another electronegative atom, such as F, N, O, etc.216 In general, the efficient H-bonding abilities of biomolecules are explored for introducing H-bonding interactions; this requires the surface functionalisation of QDs with small biomolecules. In this direction, the ability of streptavidin to undergo strong H-bonding with biotin molecules (|ΔG0| in bulk ensemble measurements ≈20 kcal mol−1) has been explored the most.217–220 For instance, Orden and co-workers successfully place-exchanged CdSe/ZnS QDs with biotinylated bovine serum albumin (bBSA) through the thiol groups in thiolated bBSA.221 Strong H-bonding between the biotin groups on CdSe/ZnS QDs and streptavidin in labelled tetramethylrhodamine dye (SAv-TMR) resulted in FRET from the QDs to the dye (11% FRET and 89% non-FRET).
Similarly, Kotov and co-workers achieved QD assemblies with radial organisation via exploring the H-bonding between streptavidin and biotin.222 Red-emitting nanowires (6.62 ± 1.55 nm in diameter and 512 ± 119 nm in length) and green-emitting CdTe QDs (3.2 ± 0.7 nm in diameter) were surface-modified with D-biotin, while orange-emitting CdTe QDs (4.1 ± 1.2 nm in diameter) were functionalised with streptavidin. The H-bonding-based layer-by-layer assembly of QDs and NWs led to the formation of a complex fuzzy superstructure with a high degree of axial symmetry. The nanowire photoluminescence was quadrupled due to the multistep-induced accumulation of photogenerated excitons at the cascade terminal. The addition of 3.2 nm green-emitting CdTe QDs to the orange-QDs/NW assembly resulted in a red–orange–green optical progression, with the band gaps of CdTe decreasing toward the axis of the superstructure. The appropriate organisation of the electronic energy levels of the QDs in the shells allows for multistep FRET from the external absorbing green QD layer to the core NWs (green to orange to red). In another report, Kotov and co-workers explored the use of dipole–dipole interactions to demonstrate efficient FRET in one-dimensional aggregates of CdTe QDs.223 Strong coupling between donor–acceptor excited states due to the close proximity of QDs in the aggregates led to the long-range migration of excitons within the 1D-nanochains.
In another set of studies, the H-bonding abilities of nucleic acids were extensively explored to prepare stable QD-based donor–acceptor systems. Niemeyer and co-workers reported a DNA-based self-assembled three-chromophore-based FRET (3Ch-FRET) system, which consists of luminescent CdSe/ZnS QDs, enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP), and Atto647-dye-modified oligonucleotides (Fig. 14a).224 The system was assembled via the immobilisation of the covalent EYFP-ssDNA conjugate on dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) capped QDs (via zinc-histidine coordination), followed by hybridisation with complementary oligonucleotides labelled with Atto647-dye. The 2Ch-FRET subsystem QD/EYFP containing 14 EYFPs showed the highest FRET efficiencies (up to ∼70%). The 2Ch-FRET QD/EYFP subsystem functions as a powerful donor in the 3Ch-FRET system. The appropriate choice of components in the 3Ch-FRET system assured a relay of FRET from the QDs to EYFP to Atto647 (∼17%), overruling direct FRET from the QDs to the Atto647 dye (∼0.8%, Fig. 14b). These results prove that supramolecular QD donors assembled through H-bonding interactions can participate in long-range FRET processes (9–13 nm).
 Fig. 14  (a) A schematic representation of FRET in a DNA-based 3Ch-FRET conjugate system, comprising DHLA-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs, enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP), and Atto647-dye-modified oligonucleotides (QD-EYFP-Atto647). (b) Photographs of PL in the 3Ch-FRET conjugate system. A relay of FRET processes was observed from the QDs to EYFP (FRET 1), and then from EYFP to the Atto647 dye in the hybridised oligonucleotides (FRET 2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright: 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, DNA-based H-bonding-driven FRET studies have been extended to other systems as well. For instance, Wu and co-workers used DNA-based H-bonding interactions to assemble QDs with gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), and the dependence of the energy transfer mechanism on the size of the metal NPs was demonstrated.225 Small-sized AuNPs (∼3 nm, with negligible localised surface plasmon resonance, LSPR) exhibited nanometal surface energy transfer (NSET) based PL quenching of the QDs, with a 1/d4 distance dependence.226,227 When larger AuNPs (∼15 and ∼80 nm with strong LSPR) were used as donors, the energy transfer mechanism followed the Förster theorem (with a 1/d6 distance dependence). The H-bonding interactions in carboxylic-carboxylate systems were explored by Tang and co-workers to realise efficient FRET from CdTe QDs to AuNPs.228 For this, thioglycolic acid and citric acid were functionalised on the surfaces of CdTe QDs and AuNPs, respectively. The FRET process was switched OFF via the addition of nucleophilic F− ions, which selectively cleaved H-bonding in the system.
H-Bonding interactions in QD-based nanohybrids have been extensively used in photoinduced electron-transfer studies as well.229–232 Willner and co-workers demonstrated PET in QD-based H-bonded molecular and biomolecular assemblies and used these as logic gates (Fig. 15).231 The CdS QDs were linked to the gold electrode surface through dsDNA, along with the appropriate incorporation of redox-active intercalators into the dsDNA.231 A fivefold increase in photocurrent was observed in a system that contained dsDNA with doxorubicin and methylene blue as intercalators (Fig. 15a and b). Furthermore, the potential-induced switching of photocurrent between the cathodic and anodic directions was also achieved via controlling the redox state of intercalated methylene blue, in the presence of triethanolamine (TEOA) as a sacrificial electron donor and molecular oxygen as a sacrificial electron acceptor.
 Fig. 15  The effects of intercalators on the direction of photocurrent in a CdS QD/dsDNA/intercalator system. The enhanced generation of photocurrent in the presence of (a) doxorubicin and (b) methylene-blue intercalators. The anodic current (from the QD to the Au surface) could be switched to a cathodic current (from the Au surface to the QD) when doxorubicin was replaced with methylene blue as the intercalating agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright: 2005,Wiley-VCH. 
In another study, Willner and co-workers modified CdSe/ZnS QDs with thiolated nucleic acid that includes a G-quadruplex sequence (Fig. 16).233 The binding of hemin to the G-quadruplex sequence resulted in efficient PET from the QD to the hemin complex, leading to the quenching of the QD PL. Furthermore, these G-quadruplex-hybridised CdSe/ZnS QDs were used as PET-based DNA aptasensors, regulating the binding of hemin complexes in the presence of different DNA analytes.
 Fig. 16  A schematic diagram of the PET process from a G-quadruplex-functionalised CdSe/ZnS QD to hemin protein. The selective intercalation of hemin into the G-quadruplex on CdSe/ZnS QDs led to efficient PET from the QD to hemin, which was further used as a tool to detect changes in the structures of oligonucleotides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Bridging- or coordination-driven photoinduced energy and electron transfer
Along with electrostatic and H-bonding, coordination-based chelation also helps in channelising the migration of energy or electrons in QD-based donor–acceptor nanohybrids. Bridging- or metal-coordination-based donor–acceptor assemblies cover a significant range of existing biological systems, where bridging can either help in controlling the distances in energy/electron transfer processes or the metal ion itself will act as an integral part of a redox process.186 Lesnyak and co-workers functionalised the surfaces of CdTe QDs with tetrazole ligands, which can coordinate with Zn2+ ions to initiate the aggregation/gelation of QDs.234 Two different sizes of CdTe QDs (green- and red-emitting) were used, and the process of gelation was monitored using FRET studies (Fig. 17a). A systematic decrease in the PL of green QDs was observed along with a concomitant increase in the PL of red QDs upon increasing the concentration of Zn(OAc)2 (Fig. 17b and c). The faster decay kinetics of the donor QDs in gel suggest efficient energy pumping from the green QDs to the red QDs, confirming the FRET process in the system. Finally, a white-light-emitting aerogel was fabricated via coordinating three differently coloured QDs (blue-emitting ZnSe QDs and yellow- and red-emitting CdTe QDs). This study revealed the potential of metal-ion-based coordination in assembling different QDs and their use in the area of light-emitting devices.
 Fig. 17  (a) A schematic diagram of zinc-ion-coordination-based gelation between different sizes of CdTe QDs, resulting in efficient FRET from smaller to bigger QDs. PL (b) spectra and (c) photographs of mixtures of green- and red-emitting CdTe QDs before and after the gelation process, with different green:red QD molar ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Likewise, Weiss and co-workers used bridging interactions to achieve efficient FRET in QD aggregates formed between two different sizes of NIR-emitting glutathione (GSH) capped PbS QDs (Fig. 18a and b).235 Binding studies confirmed that QD aggregates were formed due to preferential coordination between the Zn2+ ions and the glutamine residue of GSH (rather than the carboxylate residue). Upon increasing the concentration of Zn2+ ions, the continuous quenching of the PL of the donor QDs was observed, along with growth in the PL of the acceptor QDs. A FRET efficiency of as high as 97% with a rate of 14 ns−1 was estimated in these Zn2+-bridged QD assemblies. Also, coordination with Zn2+ ions helped to achieve the long-range diffusion of excitons in these NIR QD assemblies (∼11.2 nm at a DQD to AQD ratio of 3.5:1, corresponding to 2.3 hopping steps before emission). Coordination-based bridging was further extended to mercaptoalkanoic acid (MAA; −S-(CH2)(n−1)−COO−; n = 3–16) capped PbS QDs to study distance-dependent near-infrared energy transfer (EnT).236 The QD–QD separation (centre-to-centre) decreased from 5.8 ± 0.3 nm to 3.7 ± 0.3 nm as the number of methylene groups in the MAA was decreased from 16 to 3 (Fig. 18c and d). Consequently, a dramatic increase in the EnT rate from ∼150 ± 2 ns−1 to ∼2 ± 0.3 ns−1 was observed, with a maximum EnT efficiency of ∼70% (when n = 3) in these Zn2+-bridged NIR QD assemblies (Fig. 18c). Detailed analysis based on point dipole approximation (PDA) and transition density cube (TDC) methods was performed to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the distance-dependent energy-transfer process. At distances much greater than the physical size of the chromophore (>4 nm), EnT follows the prediction of the PDA model. However, at distances shorter than ∼4 nm (for samples with n = 3 and 4), the measured rates of EnT deviate strongly from those predicted by the PDA model (Fig. 18d). The prediction of the rates for these short-distance EnT processes was improved by ∼20% upon replacing the PDA model with a TDC model.
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic diagram of a GSH-capped donor and acceptor PbS QD complex coupled through zinc-ion coordination. (b) Spectral changes in the PL of the donor–acceptor mixture upon the addition of varying amounts of Zn2+ ions, followed by the recovery of the initial PL in the presence of EDTA molecules. An efficient FRET process was observed from the donor QD (DQD) to the acceptor QD (AQD) in the presence of Zn2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A schematic diagram of an MAA-capped donor and acceptor PbS QD complex coupled through Zn2+-ion coordination. (d) A plot of energy transfer rate vs. the centre-to-centre separation distance (red dots). The black and blue traces are the predictions of the energy transfer rates using the PDA and TDC methods, respectively. The inset shows PL spectra of a mixture of MAA-capped donor and acceptor QDs before (solid) and after (dashed) the addition of Zn2+ ions at pH 8.5. Individual donor and acceptor QD spectra were deconvoluted from the D:A mixture before (solid) and after (dashed) the addition of Zn2+ ions. The deconvoluted spectra show the higher PL intensity of AQD after the addition of Zn2+ ions. This confirms that an efficient FRET process operates from DQD to AQD in the presence of Zn2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Calcium and copper are other commonly used bridging agents for bringing donors and acceptors close to each other. For example, Rogach and co-workers reported efficient FRET (∼77%) in clusters of mercaptocarboxylic-acid-capped CdTe QDs formed upon complexing with Ca2+ ions.237 In another report, Yang and co-workers used Cu2+ ions to regulate the PET process in N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NALC) capped CdTe QDs.238 The strong coordination between the Cu2+ ions and the carboxylate groups of the NALC ligands ensured efficient PET from the QDs to the Cu2+ ions (Fig. 19a). Detailed Stern–Volmer analysis revealed that the quenching of the PL of the QDs in the presence of Cu2+ ions was predominately static in nature (Fig. 19b). Furthermore, the authors successfully used these Cu2+-complexed CdTe QDs as a sensor for the selective detection of thioacetic acid. The superior ability of thioacetic acid to complex with Cu2+ ions resulted in the removal of Cu2+ ions from the surfaces of the QDs, leading to the suppression of the PET process (and the recovery of the PL; Fig. 19c).
 Fig. 19  (a) A schematic diagram of the Cu2+-ion-modulated PET process in NALC-capped CdTe QDs for the development of a turn-on fluorescence biosensor for thioacetic acid. (b) The quenching of the PL of NALC-CdTe QDs upon the addition of increasing amounts of Cu2+ ions due to efficient PET from the QDs to the Cu2+ ions. (c) The recovery of QD PL upon the addition of thioacetic acid. The superior complexation of Cu2+ ions with thioacetic acid, over NALC-capped CdTe QDs, led to their decomplexation from the QD surfaces and the suppression of the PET process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright: 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.4 π–π-Stacking-driven energy and electron transfer
As discussed so far, strong ground-state complexation between the donor and the acceptor is key for realising efficient electron- and energy-transfer processes in QD-based light-harvesting systems. In this context, various intermolecular interactions can play decisive roles in the formation of such donor–acceptor complexes. Apart from the interactions discussed above, other strategies based on π–π-interaction-induced complex formation have been used in the literature to achieve efficient light-harvesting with QDs.
Weiss and co-workers achieved the faster extraction of NIR excitons from PbS QDs via forming π–π-assisted J-aggregates of cyanine dye (IR140-Cy+) on the surfaces of QDs (Fig. 20a).239 In an aqueous medium, Cy+ dye will form H-aggregates and precipitate out of solution in an hour. However, Cy+ dye forms stable J-aggregates on the surfaces of glutathione (GSH) capped PbS QDs. The pH and electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged QDs and Cy+ dye was the driving force for the formation of J-aggregates (head-to-tail or slip-stacked arrangements of aromatic moieties).240,241 An efficient FRET process was observed from the QDs to the adsorbed J-aggregates of Cy+ dye (ranging from 800 ps−1 to 20 ns−1). The fastest FRET process (τ = 90 ps) competes with the typical Auger recombination rate of PbS QDs.242,243 This suggests that the biexciton is spatially separated across the two chromophores, which emphasises the need for Cy+ dye in the form of J-aggregates (Fig. 20b). Controlling the surface coverage of GSH ligands and the pH of the medium led to the formation of two different kinds of J-aggregates: J1 and J2.244,245 Fine control over the π–π-stacking of the Cy+ dye, via tuning the pH, led to the better ordering of chromophores in the J2 aggregates compared with J1 aggregates. The spectral overlap integral between the emission of the QDs and the absorption of the Cy+ dye aggregates is more for J2 than J1. Consequently, the FRET process was more efficient in the QD/J2 system compared to the QD/J1 system. Later, J-aggregates of Cy+ dyes were used as molecular bridges for accelerating the long-distance migration of excitons in PbS-based NIR QD–QD assemblies (Fig. 20c).246 Steady-state and transient absorption studies showed that the transfer of energy from the donor QDs to J-aggregates is the rate-limiting step in the relay FRET mechanism (1.7 ns), while energy transfer from J-aggregates to acceptor QDs occurred within <10 ps in the donor QD:::J-agg:::acceptor QD system (Fig. 20d).
 Fig. 20  (a) A schematic representation of the π–π interactions between positively charged IR140-Cy+ dye molecules on the surface of a negatively charged GSH-capped PbS QD, leading to the formation of J1 and J2-aggregates of IR140-Cy+ dye (J-agg). The process of FRET from the QD to the J2 aggregate of the IR140-Cy+ dye was more efficient than to the J1 aggregate due to the larger spectral overlap integral with the former aggregate. (b) A Frontier orbital energy diagram of a PbS QD and IR140-Cy+ dye monomer and J-aggregates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright, 2016: American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of relay and direct FRET processes in a PbS-QD-based donor–acceptor complex formed via π–π interactions between IR140-Cy+ dyes. (d) PL spectra of donor QD-J-agg (DJ), J-agg-acceptor QD (JA), and donor-J-agg-acceptor QD (DJA) systems at the donor excitation wavelength. All the PL studies confirm the presence of both relay (DQD to J-agg to AQD) and direct (DQD to AQD) FRET processes in the hybrid system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. 
All the examples mentioned in this section establish the power of surface ligands for regulating the efficiency of light-induced energy- and electron-transfer processes in QDs via bringing various non-covalent interactions into play.
4 The impact of ligand chemistry on the applied properties of QDs
The exciting photophysical properties of QDs can be regulated in several ways to fit different application purposes. Here, again, the surface ligands play an important role in how efficiently energy and electrons can be extracted from a photoexcited QD. Specifically, the surface ligands can bring the various components close to each other via imparting favourable interactions, which mainly originate from the terminal groups of the ligands. The inverse relationship between the donor–acceptor distance and the efficiency of associated photophysical process has been used as a major tool for various applications, ranging from biology to the energy sector. In this section, we provide representative examples that highlight the important effects that surface ligands have on the sensing, photopatterning, and photocatalytic properties of QDs.
4.1 Surface-ligand-directed QD sensors
The variations in the photophysical properties of QDs in the presence of analytes are the primary readout for QD-based sensing applications. Introducing a specific interaction on the surfaces of QDs can lead to selectivity as well as sensitivity towards a particular analyte. In the following discussion we have tried to summarise the roles of different interactions, such as electrostatics, H-bonding, co-ordination, and bridging, in the sensing properties of QDs.

4.1.1 The role of electrostatics in surface-ligand-directed sensing. 
Rogach and co-workers explored electrostatically driven FRET in CdTe QDs for the ultrasensitive detection of DNA.247 Negatively charged TGA-capped CdTe QDs were electrostatically bound to a positively charged fluorescent conjugated polymer, poly[9,9-bis(3′-((N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammonium)propyl)-2,7-fluorene-alt-1,4-phenylene]dibromide (PDFD). PL quenching studies confirmed efficient FRET (∼72%) from the blue-emitting PDFD polymer to the red-emitting CdTe QDs (FRET 1; Fig. 21a and b). The net positive charge on the surface of the PDFD/QD nanohybrids paved the way for the electrostatic binding of negatively charged DNA strands that were labelled with NIR-emitting IRD700 dye. The relaying of resonance energy transfer from PDFD to the QD (FRET 1) and then from the QD to IRD700-dye-conjugated DNA (FRET 2) served as a tool for sensing studies. The efficiency and Förster distance of the FRET 2 process were estimated to be ∼42% and 5.1 nm, respectively. The difference in the strengths of electrostatic interactions was further explored to discriminate between single (ss) and double (ds) stranded DNA. The quenching of the QD PL by nucleic acids conjugated with IRD700 dye was 2.5 times higher for complementary ds-DNA than for ss-DNA, with a detection limit of ∼5 nM. Thus, the modification of the QD surfaces with positively charged PDFD polymers led to the design of a ‘DNA/polymer/QD/polymer/DNA’ complex, in which a multistep energy-transfer process was visualised for the ultrasensitive detection of DNA.
 Fig. 21  (a) A schematic representation of the electrostatic-interaction-driven relay of FRET processes from a PDFD polymer to a TGA-capped CdTe QD (FRET 1) and then from the CdTe QD to dye-labelled dsDNA (FRET 2). (b) Variations in the PL spectra of electrostatically bound PDFD-QD complexes in the presence of different concentrations of dye-labelled complementary ds-DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 247. Copyright: 2009, American Chemical Society. (c) The complexation of MIP@QDs with TNT molecules, forming an excited-state electron-transfer-induced Meisenheimer complex, followed by efficient resonance energy transfer from the QDs to the Meisenheimer complex. (d) A plot showing the preferential detection of TNT molecules over their structural analogues using molecularly imprinted (MIPs) and non-imprinted (NIPs) QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248. Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society. 
In another example, Chen and co-workers developed a CdTe-QD-based fluorescence-OFF sensor for the preferential detection of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT).248 A thin-layer silica shell was grown on the surfaces of QDs using a sol–gel-mediated seed-growth method to yield molecularly imprinted polymer coated CdTe QDs (MIP@QDs). The use of 3-aminopropyltriethoxy silane (APTES) in the synthesis generated an amino group on the surface of MIP@QDs. An excited state electron transfer complex (a Meisenheimer complex) was formed due to strong electrostatic attraction between the protonated amine and the electron-deficient aromatic ring of TNT (Fig. 21c). As a result, there was strong spectral overlap between the absorption of the Meisenheimer complex (350–650 nm) and the PL of MIP@QDs (450–580 nm), leading to an efficient transfer of excitation energy from the QD to the Meisenheimer complex. The extent of the PL quenching of the QDs, defined as (F0–F)/F0 (where F0 and F are the PL of the QD in the absence and presence of analyte, respectively), was used as the index to evaluate the performance of QD sensors (Fig. 21d). The linear range of detection was 0.8–30 μM, and the limit of detection (LOD) was 0.28 μM, with a correlation coefficient of 0.9956 for TNT. As a proof of concept for future real-world applications, the MIP@QD sensors were used for the detection of TNT in soil samples. Later, the MIP@QD-based donor–acceptor systems were used by Li and co-workers for the sensing of cytochrome c (LOD: 0.41 μM; linear range: 0.97 μM to 24 μM).249 Likewise, Lin and co-workers used a MIP@QD-based donor–acceptor system for the sensing of 4-nitrophenol (LOD: 76 nM; linear range: 0.1 μM to 40 μM).250


4.1.2 The role of H-bonding in surface-ligand-directed sensing. 
H-bonding is another key interaction that has been effectively used to achieve variations in the photophysical properties of QDs in the presence of different analytes. Melvin and co-workers regulated the H-bonding-driven energy-transfer process between metal and semiconductor NPs to develop a turn-on DNA sensor.251 For this, CdSe/ZnS QDs were conjugated with a 5′-TGC AGA TAG ATA GCA G-3′ oligonucleotide via the 5′ end. The AuNPs were conjugated with a complementary oligonucleotide (5′-CTG CTA TCT ATC TGC-3′) via the 3′ end. Hybridisation between the complementary DNA strands on the conjugated CdSe/ZnS QDs and AuNPs brought the QDs and NPs close to each other (Fig. 22a). This led to the quenching of the QD PL due to an efficient energy-transfer process (∼85%; Fig. 22b). The quenching of the QD PL intensity in contact with gold NPs has already been shown by Nabiev and co-workers, Bawendi and co-workers, and Kim and co-workers to follow the mechanism of fluorescence resonance energy transfer.190,252,253 The addition of 10 equivalents of unmodified complementary DNA strands (complementary with respect to the oligonucleotide on the QDs) resulted in the dissociation of H-bonding between the conjugated CdSe/ZnS QDs and AuNPs, which was accompanied by the revival of QD PL. Such QD-plasmonic NP assemblies can find significant use as DNA fluorogenic probes.
 Fig. 22  (a) A schematic diagram showing the hybridisation between CdSe/ZnS-QD- and AuNP-functionalised complementary oligonucleotides, which results in the quenching of the QD PL. The addition of excess target DNA complementary to the bioconjugated QDs forces the de-hybridisation of the AuNPs, thereby recovering the PL of the QDs. (b) PL spectra of bioconjugated QDs at different stages of hybridisation with complementary AuNPs and target DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright: 2005, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A conceptual schematic diagram of a single-QD-based DNA nanosensor. Target DNA triggers hybridisation between the capture and reporter DNA components, and this hybrid further complexes with QDs through biotin–streptavidin interactions. Finally, the FRET process from the QDs to the Cy5 dye on the reporter DNA was used as the readout for the sensing of target DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254. Copyright: 2005, Nature Publishing Group. 
Furthermore, Wang and co-workers reported a FRET-based nano-biosensor that was capable of detecting a low concentration of DNA in a separation-free format.254 The system comprised streptavidin-conjugated CdSe/ZnS QDs, biotin-attached capture probe DNA, and cyanine dye (Cy5) attached receptor DNA (Fig. 22c). The capture and receptor DNA components were selected in such a way that one half of the target DNA was complementary to the capture DNA and the other half was complementary to the receptor DNA. Here, QDs helped in signal amplification via providing a surface for hybridisation between several capture and target DNA components. PL studies in the presence of target DNA confirmed efficient energy transfer from the QDs to the Cy5 dye in the receptor DNA (the Förster radius was estimated to be ∼69.4 Å). Fluorescence burst experiments were performed in continuous flow mode to overrule the photobleaching of organic dyes and, also, to achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio. Accordingly, the binding of a few target DNA strands (∼50 copies or less) gave a noticeable FRET signal. The present system exhibited ∼100-fold higher sensitivity than the conventional molecular-beacon-based system.255 Thus, the use of QDs in capture-target-receptor-based detection could discriminate between specific and non-specific target DNA with ultrahigh sensitivity (fM to pM), and this has the potential to be extended to other biomolecules as well.


4.1.3 The role of intercalation in surface-ligand-directed sensing. 
QD-based DNA sensors have been developed via exploring the ability of analytes to intercalate with DNA, thereby creating variations in the photophysical properties of the QDs. Ye, Chen, and co-workers developed an efficient sensor for the detection of dsDNA based on the regulation of a photoinduced electron-transfer process between QDs and intercalating dyes, both in an aqueous medium and in living cells.256 The sensor comprised NIR-emitting N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) capped CdTe QDs (PET donor) and Al(III)-coordinated quinolone antibiotic gatifloxacin (Al-GFLX; PET acceptor; Fig. 23a). Electrostatic attraction between the oppositely charged NAC-capped CdTe QDs and Al-GFLX led to the formation of a strong ground-state complex. As a result, efficient PET was observed from NAC-capped CdTe QDs to Al-GFLX (9-fold quenching of the PL of QDs with respect to its initial value was observed; Fig. 23b). Detailed temperature-dependent Stern–Volmer analysis using both steady-state and time-resolved PL techniques revealed that the PL quenching is predominantly static in nature. Next, the ability of the Al-GFLX dye to intercalate with dsDNA was explored to regulate the PET process. Upon the addition of target dsDNA, the Al-GFLX dye detached from the surface of the QDs and intercalated into the major groove of dsDNA. This led to the disruption of the PET process between the QDs and Al-GFLX dye (a ∼7-fold enhancement in the QD PL was observed; Fig. 23c). The PET process was restored via adding fresh intercalating dye solution, and the system was ready for the next round of DNA detection. The QD:::Al-GFLX nanoprobe was able to detect ultralow concentrations of dsDNA in human serum (the LOD was estimated to be 6.83 ng mL−1). Furthermore, bioimaging studies proved the uptake of QD-Al-GFLX nanoprobes into live cells, making this an ideal probe for the real-time detection and imaging of dsDNA in live cells.
 Fig. 23  (a) A schematic diagram showing QD-based DNA sensing achieved via the regulation of the PET process in QDs using intercalating dyes. An efficient PET process from NAC-capped CdTe QDs to Al-GFLX was observed, which quenches the PL of the NIR-emitting QDs. The intercalation of Al-GFLX dyes with the target DNA results in the switching OFF of the PET process, thereby reviving the QD PL. (b) Spectral changes in the PL of NAC-CdTe QDs in the presence of increasing concentrations of Al-GFLX. (c) The time-dependent recovery of the PL of QDs after the addition of 36.0 g mL−1 dsDNA to the QD-Al-GFLX complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. 


4.1.4 The role of coordination/bridging in surface-ligand-directed sensing. 
Apart from the detection of biomolecules, interaction-driven photophysical properties of QDs have been utilised for the detection of toxic metal ions as well. Several approaches have been developed for detecting heavy metal ions via specific and non-specific interactions with QDs.257–260 Specific interactions mainly include the formation of stable reconfigurable complexes via bridging through nucleotide base pairs or coordination through the ligand shell. Santra and co-workers developed a turn-on sensor for the selective detection of cadmium ions (Cd2+) via regulating the electron-transfer process in surface-engineered QDs (Fig. 24).261 Here, the authors used the chelating or coordinating abilities of Cd2+ ions with 18-crown-6 ethers. Accordingly, the surfaces of Mn-doped CdS QDs were functionalized with 1,10-diaza-18-crown-6 ether (L1) ligands via carbodithioate (–CS2) based zero-length covalent coupling (QDL; Fig. 24a).261 The binding of L1 ligands onto the surfaces of QDs resulted in the quenching of QD PL via photoinduced electron transfer from the electron-rich secondary amine of L1 to the QDs. Upon adding Cd2+ ions, the secondary amine in L1 participated in complexation with the Cd2+ ions, thereby inhibiting the PET process (Fig. 24b). A linear variation in the recovery of the QD PL was observed with an increase in the concentration of Cd2+ ions (linear range: 0.97 μM to 24 μM).
 Fig. 24  (a) A schematic diagram of the preparation of QDL via functionalizing the surfaces of CdS QDs with diaza-crown-ether ligands via carbodithioate coupling. (b) Variations in the PL of QDL in the presence of increasing concentrations of Cd2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 261. Copyright: 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A schematic representation of the selective detection of heavy metal ions via the regulation of the FRET process in QD-based DNAzymes. An efficient FRET process was observed from CdSe QDs to Iowa black FQ dyes (Q), leading to the complete quenching of the QD PL. The addition of metal ions triggers the cleavage of DNA from the QDs, thereby suppressing the FRET process. The recovery of the QD PL in the presence of (d) Pb2+ and (e) Cu2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 262. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society. 
In another report, Fan and co-workers developed DNAzyme-functionalized QDs for the selective detection of heavy metal ions in the solution state (Fig. 24c–e).262 Ion-specific DNAzymes conjugated with quenchers (Iowa black FQ) were attached to the surfaces of CdSe/ZnS QDs via H-bonding with a complementary oligonucleotide base pair. An efficient FRET process was observed from the QDs to Iowa black FQ on the DNAzymes, leading to the quantitative quenching of the PL of the QDs (∼98% and ∼95%, respectively, for Pb2+- and Cu2+-ion-specific DNAzyme functionalized QDs). The addition of Pb2+ and Cu2+ ions ruptured the H-bonding interactions between complementary DNA strands and cleaved the DNAzymes from the surfaces of the respective QDs. Consequently, 50- and 70-fold increments in the PL intensities of the QDs were observed after the addition of Pb2+ (LOD: ∼0.2 nM) and Cu2+ (LOD: ∼0.5 nM) ions, respectively. Such sub-nanomolar turn-on sensors will have broad applications in monitoring waste treatment, industrial drain control, medical diagnostics, and homeland security.
Willner and co-workers reported the selective capturing of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions using oligo-T- and oligo-C-rich modified CdSe/ZnS QDs, respectively.263 1-QD560 (d = 3.8 nm; λem = 560 nm) was modified with thymine-rich nucleic acid and 2-QD620 (d = 5.8 nm; λem = 620 nm) was modified with cysteine-rich nucleic acid for the selective detection of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions, respectively (Fig. 25a). The T-rich and C-rich nucleic acids formed hairpin structures via metal ion-based coordination in the presence of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions. Consequently, an efficient PET process was observed from the QDs to the coordinated metal ions, leading to the quenching of the PL of the QDs. The quenching efficiencies were estimated to be ∼86% and ∼95% for Hg2+ and Ag+ ions, respectively, at their LOD values (2 ppb for Hg2+ and 200 ppb for Ag+). Furthermore, optical changes in the PL signals were used as readouts for the development of logic gates. A mixture of 1 QD560 and 2-QD620 was used for the creation of an “AND” logic gate (Fig. 25b). The presence of a single ion (either a Hg2+ or an Ag+ ion) can quench the PL of the respective oligo-functionalized QDs, without affecting the PL of the other oligo-functionalized QDs. This state was defined as a “False” output (“0”). The quenching of the PL of both types of oligo-functionalized QDs will only be observed in the presence of both ions, and this state was defined as a “True” output (“1”). Interestingly, an “OR” gate was designed via modifying the surfaces of both types of QDs with a mixture of T- and C-rich nucleic acids (Fig. 25c). For such a mixed ligand system, the PL of both QDs will be quenched in the presence of either one of the ions, giving rise to a “True” output state (“1”).
 Fig. 25  (a) A schematic diagram of the formation of a hairpin structure on the surface of a CdSe QD in the presence of Hg2+ or Ag+ ions, and the subsequent PET process from the QD to the toxic metal ion. Time-dependent spectral changes in the PL of CdSe QDs at different concentration ratios of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions, corresponding to (b) “AND” and (c) “OR” logic-gate systems. Here, “0” and “1” correspond to the absence (0 μM) and presence (30 μM) of metal ions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263. Copyright: 2009, Wiley-VCH. 

4.2 Surface-ligand-directed photopatterning
The ability to create well-ordered and high-contrast luminescent patterns is an essential step in the manufacturing of QD-based display devices. Various patterning strategies have been developed for the precise localisation of QDs.264–271 Among them, the idea of photopatterning has emerged as an attractive one due to its ease, versatility, and cost-effectiveness. The regulation of the fundamental photophysical properties of QDs via shining light through photomasks has led to the creation of high-contrast multicolour luminescent patterns.272–274 In photopatterning, the surface ligands can also play a crucial role in the precise localisation of QDs and in the regulation of their photophysical properties, and these aspects are summarized below.
In one of the first reports, Kotov, Liz-Marzán, and co-workers generated multicolour luminescent patterns via enhancing the PL quantum yield of QDs through the photoactivation of the QD surface (Fig. 26a).275 Upon the prolonged irradiation of citrate-stabilized CdSe/CdS core–shell QDs, the PL intensity of QDs was enhanced 50–500-fold in both liquid and solid states (quantum yield: 25–45%; Fig. 26b). This “dark state” to “bright state” transition was explained in terms of the smoothing of the CdSe QD surface, followed by the restructuring of the CdS shell via ionic diffusion at the interface.276 As a result, electron–hole pairs were confined within the core, leading to the enhancement of the PL efficiency.276–278 Thin films of CdSe/CdS QDs in the dark state were prepared in a poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) matrix, and these were irradiated for 72 h with a 60 W table-lamp. The use of a TEM copper grid as the photomask generated square-shaped luminescent patterns with black boundaries (negligible luminescence) corresponding to exposed and unexposed regions, respectively. It is worth mentioning that different coloured QDs (different sizes) were used to create multicolour photopatterns (Fig. 26c–e).
 Fig. 26  (a) Photooxidation removes the defect sites on the surfaces of citrate-capped CdSe/CdS QDs. (b) PL spectra of CdSe/CdS QDs as a function of irradiation: (1) before irradiation, and after irradiating for (2) 15 days and (3) 25 days. (c)–(e) Fluorescence microscopy images of multicoloured luminescent patterns created via the photooxidation of QDs using a 200-mesh TEM grid; the corresponding confocal images are shown in the insets; the scale bars are 100 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 275 and 276. Copyright: 2003 and 2004, American Chemical Society. 
In a ground-breaking discovery, Talapin and co-workers elegantly designed a generic strategy to “optically deposit” various nanomaterials (including QDs) via exploiting the chemical reactivity of surface ligands (Fig. 27).279 Photoactive ligands were functionalized on the surfaces of QDs, and these will regulate the solubility of QDs upon exposure to light. The general structure of the ligand consists of an ion pair, Cat+X−, where X− is an electron-rich nucleophile that will bind to electron-deficient (Lewis acidic) surface sites (Fig. 27a). In one example, photoacid generators (PAGs), like diphenyliodonium (Ph2I+) or triphenylsulfonium (Ph3S+) cations, were selected as Cat+, and surface-bound inorganic anions, such as Sn2S64−, CdCl42−, or MoO42−, were selected as X− (Fig. 27a). The protons released by the decomposition of PAG molecules reacted with the NP surface to alter the solubility of nanoparticles. In another example, surface-bound X− was used as a photoactive ion (like ammonium 1,2,3,4-thiatriazole-5-thiolate NH4CS2N3, or TTT), with NH4+ or K+ as the counter cation. Upon irradiation with UV light, the photoactive anions present on the surface of the QDs will decompose, making the QDs insoluble in most conventional solvents. In this way, the illumination of QD films through a photomask led to the direct deposition of QDs in the exposed regions, whereas QDs in the unexposed regions were washed off with common solvents. This created high-contrast positive luminescent patterns (Fig. 27b–e). Likewise, negative patterns were generated using lyophilic QDs capped with oleate or oleylamine in a mixture containing triflate-based PAG. Upon irradiation, the photodecomposition of lyophilic ligands occurred, and the triflate groups formed an ion pair with the surface of the QD. As a result, the solubility of QDs in the exposed regions increased in polar solvents, and they were washed off using N-methylformamide (NMF), whereas the lyophilic ligands were retained on the surfaces of the QDs in the unexposed regions and the QDs remained deposited on the surface. Remarkably, the resolutions of photopatterns created through this direct optical patterning approach were comparable to those generated via commercial photolithography techniques (Fig. 27f and g).280 This method was termed direct optical lithography of functional inorganic nanomaterials (DOLFIN), and it has been impressively extended to the LED level as well (Fig. 27h and i).281
 Fig. 27  (a) A schematic representation of the NP-ion-pair ligand system used in the DOLFIN process. (b) PL images of colloidal solutions of red (CdSe/ZnS), green (InP/ZnS), and blue emitting (ZnSe/ZnS) QDs. (c) Multicolour luminescent images created via the direct lithography of red, green, and blue emitting QDs on a SiO2 substrate. (d) Top row: positive luminescent photopatterns created via the direct lithography of NH4CS2N3-capped CdSe/ZnS (red) and InP/ZnS (green) QDs; bottom row: negative luminescent photopatterns created via the direct lithography of oleate-capped InP/ZnS (red) and CdSe/ZnS (green) QDs in the presence of (p-CH3S-C6H4) (C6H5)2S+OTf− PAG; the scale bars are 5 mm. (e) A true colour PL image created via the direct photopatterning of different sizes of CS2N3−-capped QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright: 2017, American Association for The Advancement of Science. SEM images of patterns prepared via the DOLFIN process using (f) CdSe QDs and (g) bare CeO2 nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) An electroluminescent image of a QLED patterned using a DOLFIN logo. (i) A patterned multicolour QLED with RGB pixels at high (left) and low (right) brightness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281. Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
The regulation of the photophysical properties of QDs has also been explored to create high-contrast luminescent photopatterns. In this direction, Weiss and co-workers photoregulated the PET process in QD-dye donor–acceptor systems to create diffraction-limited luminescent patterns.272 The system comprised CdSe@CdS@ZnS core@shell@shell QDs as the PET donor and polyviologen (PV) as the PET acceptor (Fig. 28a).
 Fig. 28  (a) A schematic diagram of photopatterning through the selective photodegradation of organic dyes. (b) The various steps involved in the photodegradation of polyviologen in the presence of oxygen. (c) The time-dependent recovery of the PL of CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs upon the irradiation of QD-polyviologen film with UV illumination (367 nm and 0.014 W cm−2 for 24 h). (d) A confocal microscopy image of a luminescent photopattern created via the photoregulation of the PET process in QD/PV film using a TEM grid as the photomask. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272. Copyright: 2012, Wiley-VCH. 
An ultrafast PET process (τPET = ∼26 ps) was observed from QDs to PV in both solution and solid states, which resulted in the formation of a non-luminescent complex. Next, luminescent photopatterns were created via exploiting the advantage of the superior photostability of QDs over organic dyes. The irradiation of QD–PV complex films with a 532 nm continuous-wave laser triggered the photodecomposition of the PV acceptors, thereby switching OFF the PET process. The photodecomposition of PV resulted in the formation of PET-disabled VO2 molecules through a series of radical intermediates, as summarized in Fig. 28b. Consequently, the PL of the donor QDs was recovered, thereby imparting luminescent colour to the exposed regions (Fig. 28c). High-contrast luminescent patterns with a resolution of 576 ± 6 nm were created, which was close to twice the diffraction-limit of the light source used (d = λ/2 = 244 nm) (Fig. 28d).
Our group have extended the idea of the selective photodegradation of organic dyes to create multicolour luminescent patterns on a single-QD nanohybrid film.273,274 Here, the QD patterning approach relied on the photoregulation of the FRET process in a QD-dye donor–acceptor film (Fig. 29a). The electrostatically assembled FRET system comprised cationic InP/ZnS QDs as the donor and anionic merocyanine 540 ([−] MC) dye as the acceptor, embedded in agarose thin film.273 Efficient FRET (∼85%) from the QDs to the MC dye gave the agarose film an orange luminescent colour (corresponding to the PL of the acceptor MC dye). The selective degradation of the MC dye regulated the composition of the donor–acceptor pair in the exposed regions of the agarose film. As a result, the FRET process in the agarose film was regulated from an ON state to a completely OFF state via a moderately efficient state (Fig. 28b). Consequently, multicolour patterns with three distinct luminescent colours were generated. The orange-coloured regions correspond to the FRET ON state (EFRET: ∼85%), the yellow-coloured regions correspond to a moderately FRET ON state (EFRET: ∼50%), and the green-coloured regions correspond to a FRET OFF state (EFRET: ∼0%) (Fig. 29c). Two-photon microscopy studies confirmed that the multicolour luminescent patterns were created through the regulation of the FRET process in the QD-dye nanohybrid film. The highlight of this work was the generation of multicolour luminescent patterns using a single-QD nanohybrid system, which has conventionally demanded differently coloured QDs. Here, again, electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged QDs and MC dye proved to be decisive for obtaining strong donor–acceptor complexation, as well as efficient FRET.
 Fig. 29  (a) A schematic diagram of the photoregulation of the FRET process in electrostatically bound InP/ZnS QD:::MC dye agarose film. (b) Variations in the PL spectra of QD:::dye agarose film upon continuous irradiation with a 10 W green LED for 5 h. (c) Fluorescence images of the multicolour luminescent patterns created via the photoregulation of the FRET process in single QD:::dye agarose film using appropriate masks; the orange, yellow, and green regions correspond to FRET-ON (∼85%), moderately FRET-ON (∼50%), and FRET-OFF (∼0%) states, respectively; the unmarked scale bars are 1 cm; all the multiple colours were generated from a single-QD:::dye nanohybrid film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 273. Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Later, our group enhanced the colour contrast of photopatterns via creating luminescent patterns on a non-emissive black background (Fig. 30a).274 This was achieved via incorporating both PET and FRET processes in a single QD nanohybrid film. The triad system comprised electrostatically bound [+] InP/ZnS QDs (PET and FRET donor), [−] MC dye (FRET acceptor), and [−] indocyanine green dye ([−] ICG, PET acceptor) embedded in agarose thin film. The acceptor dyes were selected in such a way that the PET process from the QDs to ICG dye will dominate over the FRET process from the QDs to MC dye (Fig. 30b and c). It is worth mentioning that electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged [−] MC and [−] ICG dyes prevented photophysical interactions between the two acceptors. Detailed steady-state and time-resolved PL studies confirmed that the rate of the PET process was ∼25 times higher than the rate of FRET in the [−] ICG:::[+] InP/ZnS:::[−] MC triad agarose film. The dominance of PET over FRET led to the creation of a non-luminescent black agarose film. The distinct difference in the absorption properties of the acceptor dyes allowed for the selective photodegradation of ICG dyes over MC dyes. As a result, the PET process in the [−] ICG:::[+] InP/ZnS:::[−] MC triad agarose film was switched OFF in the exposed regions. This triggered the FRET process from the QDs to MC dye, thereby giving the exposed regions of the agarose film an orange luminescent colour (corresponding to the PL of MC dye). Next, the FRET process was turned OFF via selectively photodegrading the MC dyes, which gave the exposed regions of the agarose film a green luminescent colour. Thus, the selective photoregulation of PET and FRET processes in [−] ICG:::[+] InP/ZnS:::[−] MC triad agarose film helped to enhance the contrast of multicolour luminescent patterns through the incorporation of non-emissive black regions (Fig. 30d).
 Fig. 30  (a) A schematic representation of the photoregulation of PET and FRET processes in ICG:::QD:::MC triad agarose film via the selective and sequential photodegradation of electron and energy acceptor dyes. (b) The steady-state PL spectra and (c) PL decay profiles of QD film (green), QD::MC dyad agarose film (red), and ICG:::QD:::MC triad agarose film (blue). (d) High-contrast multicolour luminescent images created via the photoregulation of PET and FRET processes in single-QD nanohybrid film; the black, orange, and green luminescent regions correspond to PET-ON, FRET-ON (PET-OFF), and FRET-OFF (PET-OFF) states, respectively; the scale bars are 1 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 274. Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Surface-ligand-directed photocatalysis
Flexibility in tuning the core and surface properties of QDs, along with their high photostability, has led to the emergence of QDs as an attractive catalyst for performing various light-driven oxidative and reductive chemical transformation processes.117–124,282–284 Achieving a high local concentration and the preferential binding of reactants on the catalyst surface is key for realising the efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons from QDs to reactant molecules. Both these factors can be enhanced via tuning the properties of surface ligands, like charge, length, density, and so on. In short, the surface ligands can lead to favourable interactions between the QD catalyst and the reactants, thereby positively influencing the process of photocatalysis. Thus, modifying the surfaces of QDs with appropriate ligands is also crucial in QD photocatalysis, and this is the subject of this section.
King and co-workers designed an electrostatic assembly of CdTe QDs with enzymatically active Clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase (H2ase) for the efficient photocatalytic evolution of hydrogen (Fig. 31a).285 The electrostatically driven QD-bio-nanohybrid assembly was inspired by the mechanism of the H2ase enzyme. In a natural system, negatively charged ferredoxin (Fd) is attached to the positively charged patch of the H2ase enzyme, assisting the transfer of electrons through a distal [4Fe–4S] cluster. In the reported study, the natural ferredoxin was replaced with negatively charged MPA-capped CdTe QDs to form an electrostatic assembly with the H2ase enzyme. Thus, ligand-directed electrostatic interactions played a crucial role in the formation of a controlled CdTe–H2ase assembly, which resulted in the transfer of photogenerated electrons from QDs to H2ase, promoting optimal solar H2 production. The presence of a hole scavenger (ascorbic acid) was found to be essential for the overall H2 production yield. An internal quantum efficiency of ∼9% was observed under optimum conditions, with a turnover frequency of 25 s−1. The QD:enzyme ratio had a strong influence on the photocatalytic performance of the nano-bio-hybrid, where the maximum evolution of H2 (∼250 nmol) was obtained at a 2:1 ratio of QD:enzyme (Fig. 31b).
 Fig. 31  (a) A schematic diagram of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in an electrostatically assembled CdTe QD-Clostridium acetobutylicum [Fe–Fe] hydrogenase hybrid system. (b) The effect of the QD:H2ase ratio on the amount of hydrogen produced by the electrostatically bound CdTe QD-H2ase photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 285. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic representation of an electrostatically bound hybrid photocatalytic system comprising a CdS nanorod and the hydrogenase enzyme; the relative energy levels of the QD and individual reactants are also shown in a consolidated diagram. (d) The light responsivity of the hybrid CdS nanorod-H2ase photocatalyst in the production of hydrogen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286. Copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Later, the photocatalytic performance of the QD-based nano-bio-hybrid was further improved via electrostatically coupling Clostridium acetobutylicum [FeFe]-hydrogenase (H2ase) with CdS nanorods instead of spherical QDs (Fig. 31c).286 The turnover frequency was boosted to 900 s−1 with a photon conversion efficiency of ∼20% when using ascorbic acid as the hole scavenger (Fig. 31d). The maximum photocatalytic efficiency was obtained at a CdS-nanorod:enzyme ratio of 1:1, and it decreases upon increasing the number of attached enzymes per nanorod.
In order to generalize the use of QD-based nano-bio-hybrids in photocatalysis, Brown and co-workers extended their studies via coupling CdSe QDs with ferredoxin-NAD+ reductase enzymes (FNR) to regenerate biologically important NADH (Fig. 32a).287 Here, again, electrostatic interactions assisted in complex formation between the negatively charged CdSe QDs and positively charged ferredoxin binding centre of the FNR protein. The substantial formation of NADH was achieved with a turnover frequency of 1440 h−1 upon irradiation with monochromatic light (405 nm). The formation of NADH was confirmed via a fluorescence assay (Fig. 32b). The photoregenerated NADH was further coupled to another enzymatic reaction cycle (the aldehyde reduction reaction) catalysed by Thermoanaerobium brockii alcohol dehydrogenase (tbADH). A TOF of ∼1488 h−1 was achieved for the enzymatically catalysed formation of isobutanol from isobutyraldehyde with a quantum yield of ∼4.8% (Fig. 32c).
 Fig. 32  (a) A schematic representation of an electrostatically attached QD-enzyme assembly for the efficient photocatalytic regeneration of NADPH and its subsequent use in the activation of oxidoreductase alcohol dehydrogenase. (b) Fluorescence assays for the quantitative estimation of the amount of NADH formed; the inset shows the variation in the NADPH concentration in solution during the course of irradiation. (c) Gas chromatograms of the reaction mixture before (black) and after 1 h of irradiation (red), confirming the formation of isobutanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 287. Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Apart from enzymes, QDs have also been complexed with synthetic organometallic complexes to drive various photocatalytic multielectron reactions. In one of the first examples, Eisenberg and co-workers used surface-engineered CdSe QDs as a sensitizer for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution studies in the presence of Fe–dithiolene complexes (Fig. 33a and b).288 The hydrogen evolution activity was dependent on the electronic properties of the Fe–dithiolene catalysts as well as the surface chemistry of the QD sensitizer. The Fe–dithiolene catalyst containing electron-donating dithionate ligands produced the maximum amount of H2 with the 3-mercapto-2,2-bis(mercaptomethyl)propanoic acid (S3) capped CdSe QD sensitizer (Fig. 33c). Moreover, an inverse relationship between the surface coverage of the QDs and the photocatalytic efficiency was observed, where the maximum hydrogen production was obtained with a coverage of 70 units of S3 ligands per QD (Fig. 33d). The concept was further extended to the QD-sensitized photocatalytic evolution of hydrogen using bis(chelate) complexes of Ni, Co, and Pt.289–291
 Fig. 33  (a) A schematic representation of the surface-engineered CdSe-QD-sensitized photocatalytic evolution of hydrogen using Fe–dithiolene complexes. (b) The general molecular structure of Fe–dithiolene complexes with different ligands and substituents. (c) Time dependent hydrogen production using four different Fe–dithiolene complexes in the presence of a CdSe–S3 QD sensitizer; the order of hydrogen production activity of the complexes is 2 > 1 > 3 > 4. (d) Time dependent hydrogen production by Fe–dithiolene complex-2 in the presence of CdSe QD sensitizers capped with different amounts of S3 ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In another example, Weiss and co-workers electrostatically coupled negatively charged CuInS2/ZnS QDs with a positively charged iron-tetraphenylporphyrin (FeTMA) complex.292 Ultrafast PET (with components of 3 ps (22%), 40 ps (22%), and 800 ps (56%)) was observed from the QDs to FeTMA in the electrostatically bound nanohybrid assembly, which further resulted in the reduction of CO2 to CO in an aqueous medium under visible light irradiation (Fig. 34a). High selectivity (∼99%) was achieved in the formation of CO, with a turnover number of 450 after 30 h of irradiation (per FeTMA complex). Fig. 34b shows the dynamics of ground state bleaching during transient absorption studies, where a sharper decay in the presence of the FeTMA complex confirms the ultrafast electron transfer process from QDs to FeTMA. The photocatalytic performances were superior for electrostatically bound QDs-FeTMA assemblies compared to a mixture of unmodified QDs and the FeTMA complex, proving the power of surface-ligand-directed non-covalent interactions (Fig. 34c).
 Fig. 34  (a) A schematic diagram of the PET process from QD to an Fe(III) complex in an electrostatically assembled CuInS2/ZnS QD-FeTMA complex, leading to the selective photoreduction of CO2 to CO. (b) Kinetic traces obtained from TA experiments involving CuInS2/ZnS QDs in the presence (red) and absence (black) of 0.5 equiv. of FeTMA probed at 480 nm (corresponding to QD ground state bleaching). (c) A plot of TON vs. cumulative absorbed energy vs. illumination time, proving that the photocatalytic performance of electrostatically bound QD-FeTMA assemblies (red circles) was superior compared to a mixture of unmodified QDs and FeTMA complexes (black squares). Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic diagram of photocatalytic H2 evolution using surface-modified CdSe QDs in the presence of polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters. (e) The structures of the three different ligands used in this study. (f) A plot showing the dependence of the surface ligand used on the evolution of H2via electrostatically bound QD-polyoxovanadate-alkoxide nanohybrid photocatalysts; the faded regions in the bar diagram show the enhancement in hydrogen evolution after the addition of 100 μM polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 293. Copyright: 2020, Royal Chemical Society. 
In another elegant work, Krauss, Bren, Matson, and co-workers showed that the electrostatic assembly between CdSe QDs and vanadium clusters (polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters, [V6O7(OC2H5)12]−), helped in enhancing the photocatalytic evolution of hydrogen.293 The photoexcited electrons in the conduction band of the QDs were used for reducing the protons to molecular hydrogen, and the holes in the valance band were scavenged by the vanadium cluster to regenerate the QD photocatalyst (Fig. 34d). The strong electrostatic assembly between the vanadium cluster and the charged QDs played a crucial role in the effective extraction of photogenerated holes, thereby achieving the efficient photocatalytic evolution of H2. The potent role of surface ligands was further validated via modifying the QD surface with three different ligands, namely, negatively charged MPA, zwitterionic glutathione (GSH), and zwitterionic cysteine (Cys). At an experimental pH of ∼4.5, the GSH- and Cys-modified QDs were able to form strong electrostatic complexes with negatively charged vanadium clusters. This led to the efficient scavenging of the holes, thereby resulting in the enhanced production of H2 by GSH- and Cys-modified QDs. Despite both GSH and Cys being positively charged under the experimental conditions, the proton reduction efficiency was found to be higher for GSH-modified QDs due to the loose packing of the GSH ligand shell (Fig. 34e and f). Interestingly, the addition of vanadium clusters failed to enhance the photocatalytic abilities of negatively charged MPA-capped QDs.
The ability of nature to assemble multiple light-harvesting materials in a precise fashion has led to the efficient coupling of energy- and electron-transfer processes in photosynthesis. Weiss and co-workers successfully mimicked this electronic coupling of energy- and electron-transfer processes in artificial light-harvesting materials.294 This was achieved via electrostatically binding two different sizes of oppositely charged CdSe/ZnS QDs with different ZnS shell thicknesses (Fig. 35a). The QDs with a thicker shell acted as the sensitizers (sQDs), whereas the thinner-shell QDs worked as the catalyst (cQDs). Similar to natural light-harvesting systems, the energy absorbed by the sensitizer QDs was efficiently funnelled (∼89%) to the catalyst QDs via a FRET process (Fig. 35b). This, in turn, improved the density of charge carriers in the catalyst QDs. As a result, several-fold enhancement (∼15-fold) of the internal quantum efficiency for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution was observed in the electrostatically assembled antenna-photocatalyst system in comparison with the individual QD components (Fig. 35c).
 Fig. 35  (a) A schematic diagram of the formation of an antenna complex via electrostatic assembly between sensitizer and catalyst QDs. (b) PL spectra of sQDs, cQDs, and their 4:1 mixture at pH 4.7. (c) A TON plot showing the photocatalytic production of hydrogen by sQDs, cQDs, and their 4:1 mixture. Reproduced with permission from ref. 294. Copyright: 2018, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
Along with Förster-type energy-transfer systems, other classes of photophysical phenomena, such as triplet sensitization via QDs, have made their way into the field of QD photocatalysis.295–297 In recent years, a series of examples has used triplet–triplet energy transfer from photoexcited QDs to surface-bound organic moieties, which generally occurs through a Dexter-type mechanism.297–313 A direct implication of this triplet energy-transfer process has been shown by Weiss and co-workers, carrying out [2 + 2] regioselective cycloaddition reactions using CdSe QDs as the photosensitizer (Fig. 36).295 The selective sensitization of one of the olefin reactants was achieved through precise control over the triplet energy levels of the QDs, leading to selective heterocoupling between the olefins (Fig. 36a and c). This resulted in high switchable regioselectivity (syn: ∼98%) and diastereoselectivity (∼98%) during product formation, which was difficult to achieve with conventional molecular complexes (Fig. 36b, d, and e).314,315 The binding of olefins on the surfaces of QDs through carboxylate moieties facilitated π–π interactions between the reactants, leading to the formation of kinetically disfavoured syn-products. Furthermore, the flexibility for tuning the QD triplet energy levels via particle size can help to expand the scope of cycloaddition reactions.
 Fig. 36  (a) A schematic representation of the triplet sensitization of olefin reactants through triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTEnT) from CdSe QDs. (b) The chemical structures of Ru(bpy)32+ and Ir(ppy)3 molecular photosensitizers. (c) The [2 + 2] photocycloaddition reaction scheme between (E)-4-(3-oxo-3-phenylprop-1-en-1-yl)benzoic acid (1) and 4-vinylbenzoic acid (3), with all possible combinations of homo- and hetero-products. (d) The PL profiles of the different photosensitizers used in the study; the triplet energies of substrates 1 and 3 are shown with dotted lines. (e) A product distribution chart summarizing the percentages of regio- and stereo-selective isomers formed during the cycloaddition reaction catalyzed by different photosensitizers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295. Copyright: 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
The spacer part of the ligand controls the distance between the QD core and the donor/acceptor species, which can also have a strong impact on QD-triggered photocatalytic reactions. The shorter the length of the surface ligand on the QDs, the higher the rate of electron transfer and, hence, the better the photocatalytic activity. In one of the seminal works in this area, Weiss and co-workers demonstrated the importance of ligand organisation to the photocatalytic properties of QDs in a C–C coupling reaction.316 CdS QDs capped with a long-chain oleic acid were used to photocatalyze the C–C coupling reaction between 1-phenyl pyrrolidine and phenyl trans styryl sulfone (Fig. 37a). The modification of the QD surface with shorter octylphosphonate ligands resulted in the remarkable enhancement of the photocatalytic activity of the CdS QDs, because of the disordering of the ligand shell. Specifically, the rate and energy efficiency of the C–C coupling reaction were enhanced by factors of ∼2.3 and ∼1.6, respectively (Fig. 37b). More importantly, appropriate surface functionalisation allowed for the use of QDs as a sole photocatalyst without the need for any sacrificial reagents or co-catalysts.
 Fig. 37  (a) A schematic diagram of the QD-based photocatalyzed C–C coupling reaction. (b) A plot showing the dependence of the yield of the product formed in the CdS-QD-based photocatalyzed C–C coupling reaction on the ligand shell composition; the higher the amount of OPA ligands, the greater the permeability and, hence, the higher the reaction yield. Reproduced with permission from ref. 316. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) A cartoon representation of the valorisation process of woodmeal to get aromatic compounds using CdS QD photocatalysis. (d) Variations in the yields of different aromatics with a change in the length of the surface ligands on CdS QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 317. Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In another example, the groups of Zhang, Wang, and Wang studied the effects of ligand length on the photocatalytic lignin valorisation reaction (Fig. 37c).317 For this, CdS QDs were functionalized with a series of marcaptoalkanoic acid ligands with varying chain lengths (C3, C6, and C11). Among them, 3-mercaptopropionic acid capped CdS QDs (CdS-C3) showed the maximum conversion yield of ∼27 wt% (Fig. 37d). Detailed studies comprehensively proved that electron transfer from the catalyst to the substrate was far superior in the case of shorter ligands (ket = 1.45 × 1010 in C3 vs. 7.51 × 107 in C11), which had a direct impact on the overall photocatalytic performance. Along with length, the head group of the ligands also had an influence on the photocatalytic activity. CdS QDs functionalized with a thiol group gave better yields than ones capped via carboxylic acids, which is due to the stronger electronic coupling of thiols with the QD cores.318,319
Ligand-length-dependent photocatalytic studies have also been demonstrated using environmentally friendly QDs. In one of the pioneering works, Wu, Zhou, Patzke and co-workers performed photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reactions with surface-engineered InP/ZnS QDs (Fig. 38a).320 The native oleylamine ligands on the InP/ZnS QDs were place exchanged with negatively charged ligands of varying lengths (such as sulphide ions, 3-mercaptopropionic acid, and 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid). Here, the shortest donor–acceptor distance was achieved in the sulphide-ion-capped QDs, followed by mercaptopropionic-acid- and 11-mercaptoundecanoic-acid-capped QDs. Consequently, the hydrogen production efficiency was found to be maximum with the sulphide-ion-capped QDs (Fig. 38b). Photocurrent and impedance spectroscopy studies confirmed that electron transfer from the QDs to the Ni2+ co-catalyst was superior in sulphide-ion-capped QDs over other mercaptoalkyl-capped QDs (Fig. 38c and d). This can be attributed to the inverse dependence of the PET process on the donor–acceptor distance. Later, our group investigated the ability of environmentally friendly InP QDs to photocatalyse two different classes of reactions, namely metal-centred redox and C–C coupling reactions.282 Our ability to precisely tune the surface chemistry of InP QDs led to the efficient catalysis of these two classes of reactions in aqueous and organic media.
 Fig. 38  (a) A schematic diagram of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution via PET from S2−-capped InP/ZnS QDs to a Ni2+ co-catalyst; ascorbic acid was used as the hole scavenger. (b) The influence of different organic ligands on the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activities of surface-engineered InP/ZnS QDs. (c) Transient photocurrent and (d) electrochemical impedance spectra of InP/ZnS QDs with varying ligands upon irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright: 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
In all of the examples mentioned up to now, the surface ligands were indirectly involved in improving the photocatalytic properties of QDs. Surface ligands achieved this via creating favourable environments for the fundamental photophysical properties of QDs to operate. Recently, efforts were dedicated to achieve the direct participation of surface ligands via including them as reactants in QD-photocatalysed reactions.321 In this direction, Wu and co-workers elegantly used ligands as reactants in QD-photocatalyzed disulphide coupling reactions (Fig. 39a).322 A series of thiolated ligands was incorporated onto the surfaces of CdSe QDs, which were then photochemically converted into the corresponding disulphides, with hydrogen as a by-product. The addition of small amounts of Ni2+ was found to enhance the yield of hydrogen production dramatically (from ∼86% in the absence of Ni2+ to ∼99% in the presence of Ni2+). The lack of the formation of any cross-coupled products confirms that disulphide coupling reactions occurred on the surfaces of the QDs and not in the bulk solvent. In this way, a wide range of thiolated ligands could be transformed quantitatively into the corresponding disulphides, along with hydrogen production, in the absence of any sacrificial reagents. Later, the idea of surface ligands as reagents was extended to the QD-photocatalysed oxidation of a series of benzyl alcohols (having abstractable C–H protons).323 In one example, MPA-capped CdSe QDs photocatalysed the quantitative oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde, along with the stoichiometric evolution of hydrogen (Fig. 39b).
 Fig. 39  The reaction scheme and mechanism of photocatalytic (a) disulfide formation and (b) alcohol oxidation, along with hydrogen evolution, in the presence of thiolate-capped CdSe QDs and Ni2+ catalysts (here, surface thiols act as hole scavengers). Reproduced with permission from ref. 322 and 323. Copyright: 2014 and 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
5 Summary and outlook
The importance of finely tuned interparticle interactions for achieving the desired use of the photophysical properties of QDs is summarized in this review, with an emphasis on interaction-driven photoinduced electron- and energy-transfer processes. The surfaces of QDs are a perfect platform for coding various covalent and non-covalent interactions into systems through appropriate ligand functionalisation. The representative examples given in this review show the impact of surface ligands on regulating fundamental photophysical processes, as well as on extracting desired applied properties from QD nanohybrids.
Before concluding this review, we want to give a perspective on the impact of ligand chemistry and surface engineering with respect to future QD light-harvesting applications.
5.1 Multi-functionality through a single ligand
In general, the thoughtful design of surface ligands can play a key role in bridging the gap between the fundamental and applied properties of QDs. Major technological applications demand the thorough processing of QD samples, where the interparticle interactions can turn out to be decisive. For instance, most medical applications heavily rely on perfect interactions between QDs and biological systems in order to achieve the desired targeting and functionality. Likewise, the energy sector requires perfect assemblies of various champion light-harvesting materials in a precise fashion (like layer-by-layer assemblies and tandem devices) in order to maximize output and durability. The appropriate choice of surface ligands and interparticle interactions can help to achieve the desired goals for both of these applications. There is a diverse pool of ligands available in the literature to meet the challenge of achieving perfect interparticle interactions.75,324–334 Most of these ligands are mono-functional with respect to the binding and terminal groups. However, the diversity and complexity associated with existing and future challenges demand multi-functionality in materials. The use of multiple ligands to achieve the multi-functionality in QDs is an attractive approach. However, the lack of control over reproducibility and precision in attaching the desired multiple ligands on QDs is limiting the progress of this approach. In this regard, the use of a single ligand with multi-functionality at both the binding and terminal groups can be a viable solution (Fig. 40). Multi-functionality at the binding part of a ligand will ensure the stronger attachment of ligands to the QD surface.288,313,335 Likewise, multi-functionality at the terminal part will bring multiple interparticle interactions into play.
 Fig. 40  The concept of multi-functional QDs using a single ligand with multiple functionalities at both the binding and the terminal groups. 
5.2 Cascades of photophysical processes
The coupling of different photophysical processes can be a promising strategy for maximizing the prospects of achieving the applied properties from QD-based light-harvesting systems.195,224,247,294 This has been briefly discussed in this review, where FRET and PET processes have been coupled to achieve desired photocatalysis and photopatterning performances from QD nanohybrids.274,290 Some other photophysical processes that can be coupled to maximize the chances of obtaining the desired outcome include triplet–triplet annihilation and two-photon absorption.297–313 Establishing a combination of different photophysical processes in QD-based systems will once again require the flexibility in regulating the surface chemistry of QDs.
5.3 Surface functionalisation in continuous flow process
At a pilot level, traditional place-exchange protocols can be used for functionalizing QDs with ligands of choice. However, technological applications demand the bulk supply of properly surface engineered QDs; for which, the serious optimisation of current place-exchange protocols will be required. A possible way out will be to establish ligand functionalisation under a continuous flow reactor set-up, which will ensure the steady supply of QDs with appropriate surface engineering.
5.4 “Green” and sustainable QDs
Finally, all these fine controls over surface engineering, interparticle interactions, and applied properties have to be established in QDs containing environmentally benign materials for the effective commercialisation of QD-based products. For instance, display devices based on Cd-containing QD light-emitting diodes (QD-LEDs) have been successfully introduced into the market.336,337 However, growing restrictions on the use of heavy-metal ions, like Cd, can hamper the mass production and commercialisation of such devices.338 At the same time, replicating efficient light-harvesting properties in “green” QDs is also challenging due to their inherent limitations, such as poor crystallinity and low PL quantum yields. Thus, dedicated research has to be conducted at multiple levels, covering “green” QD synthesis, ligand engineering, and the fabrication of devices, to achieve the final goal. Commendable progress in this direction was achieved by Jang and co-workers through the development of Cd-free QD-LEDs (based on InP/ZnSe/ZnS core/shell/shell QDs), where both the external quantum efficiency and the durability were comparable to Cd-based QD-LEDs.339 Here, again, the suitable surface engineering of Cd-free QDs helped to achieve an external quantum efficiency close to the theoretical limits.
As summarized above, the challenges in realizing the technological applications of QDs are interdisciplinary and multidimensional. In this context, suitable ligand chemistry and surface engineering hold the promise to achieve both basic and applied advances in QD light-harvesting, thereby bridging the gap between the fundamental and technological properties of QDs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from DST-SERB India, grant no. CRG/2019/003960, DST Nano Mission grant no. SR/NM/NS-1014/2017, and DST Nano Mission Thematic Unit Programme, India. I. N. C. and G. D. thank MHRD, P. R. thanks PMRF, A. R. thanks CSIR, and S. R. thanks UGC for fellowships.
Notes and references
R. J. Marcus, Science, 1956, 123, 399–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Arnon, Nature, 1959, 184, 10–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Giacoletto, Science, 1959, 130, 915–916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Caputo, Science, 1978, 200, 1222–1223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Maugh II, Science, 1983, 221, 1358–1361 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Lewerenz, H. Goslowsky, K.-D. Husemann and S. Fiechter, Nature, 1986, 321, 687–688 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12631–12632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jauffred, A. Samadi, H. Klingberg, P. M. Bendix and L. B. Oddershede, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8087–8130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. M. Clegg, in Reviews in Fluorescence 2006, ed. C. D. Geddes and J. R. Lakowicz, Springer, New York, 1st edn,  2006, ch. 1, pp. 1–45 Search PubMed .
P. Piotrowiak, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1999, 28, 143–150 RSC .
G. Baffou, R. Quidant and F. J. García de Abajo, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 709–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Baffou, F. Cichos and R. Quidant, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 946–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Romero, V. I. Novoderezhkin and R. van Grondelle, Nature, 2017, 543, 355–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Martino, D. Ghezzi, F. Benfenati, G. Lanzani and M. R. Antognazza, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3768–3780 RSC .
A. Samanta and I. L. Medintz, Sensors, 2020, 20, 2909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Huber, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1989, 28, 848–869 CrossRef .
J. Deisenhofer and H. Michel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1989, 28, 829–847 CrossRef .
N. Armaroli and V. Balzani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 52–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 1993, 26, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CrossRef CAS .
J. Otsuki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6710–6753 RSC .
S. K. Dutta, S. K. Mehetor and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 936–944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Colbow, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1973, 314, 320–327 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Leibl and P. Mathis, in Molecular to Global Photosynthesis, ed. M. D. Archer and J. Barber, Imperial College, London,  2004, ch. 3, pp. 117–188 Search PubMed .
N. Hildebrandt, C. M. Spillmann, W. R. Algar, T. Pons, M. H. Stewart, E. Oh, K. Susumu, S. A. Díaz, J. B. Delehanty and I. L. Medintz, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 536–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435–461 CrossRef CAS .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
T. Förster, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7–17 RSC .
D. M. Adams, L. Brus, C. E. D. Chidsey, S. Creager, C. Creutz, C. R. Kagan, P. V Kamat, M. Lieberman, S. Lindsay, R. A. Marcus, R. M. Metzger, M. E. Michel-Beyerle, J. R. Miller, M. D. Newton, D. R. Rolison, O. Sankey, K. S. Schanze, J. Yardley and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6668–6697 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Sapsford, L. Berti and I. L. Medintz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4562–4588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Closs and J. R. Miller, Science, 1988, 240, 440–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller, L. T. Calcaterra and G. L. Closs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 3047–3049 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ferrer, G. Rogez, A. Credi, R. Ballardini, M. T. Gandolfi, V. Balzani, Y. Liu, H.-R. Tseng and J. F. Stoddart, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 18411–18416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller, J. V. Beitz and R. K. Huddleston, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 5057–5068 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Supramolecular Devices,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Deisenhofer, O. Epp, K. Miki, R. Huber and H. Michel, Nature, 1985, 318, 618–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rybtchinski, L. E. Sinks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12268–12269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 34, 40–48 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Imahori, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6130–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuciauskas, P. A. Liddell, S. Lin, T. E. Johnson, S. J. Weghorn, J. S. Lindsey, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8604–8614 CrossRef CAS .

          W. A. Sidler, in The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria, ed. D. A. Bryant, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  1994, pp. 139–216 Search PubMed .
E. Soto, J. C. MacDonald, C. G. F. Cooper and W. G. McGimpsey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2838–2839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Cheung, S. C. Kapper, T. Zeng, M. E. Thompson and C. P. Kubiak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14961–14965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Li, H.-Y. Zhang, X.-Y. Dai, Z.-X. Liu and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5949–5952 RSC .
S. Guo, Y. Song, Y. He, X.-Y. Hu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3163–3167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Morales-Curiel and R. d. J. León-Montiel, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 74304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. E. Sapsford, B. Wildt, A. Mariani, A. B. Yeatts and I. Medintz, in FRET – Förster Resonance Energy Transfer, ed. I. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Germany, 1st edn,  2014, ch. 6, pp. 165–268 Search PubMed .
S. S. Park, Y. S. Won, Y. C. Choi and J. H. Kim, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3732–3736 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu and A. Patra, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 712–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1877–1884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Asbury, E. Hao, Y. Wang, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4545–4557 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Clifford, T. Gu, J.-F. Nierengarten and N. Armaroli, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2006, 5, 1165–1172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Praveen, C. Ranjith and N. Armaroli, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 365–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Iehl, M. Vartanian, M. Holler, J.-F. Nierengarten, B. Delavaux-Nicot, J.-M. Strub, A. V. Dorsselaer, Y. Wu, J. Mohanraj, K. Yoosaf and N. Armaroli, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1562–1573 RSC .
R. Sethy, J. Kumar, R. Métivier, M. Louis, K. Nakatani, N. M. T. Mecheri, A. Subhakumari, K. G. Thomas, T. Kawai and T. Nakashima, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15053–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Taniguchi, M. A. Bin Sazali, Y. Kobayashi, N. Arai, T. Kawai and T. Nakashima, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9312–9320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, Z. Tang, X. Liang and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1637–1641 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov, J. Dulka and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2323–2330 CrossRef CAS .
V. Biju, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 744–764 RSC .
K. V. Rao, K. K. R. Datta, M. Eswaramoorthy and S. J. George, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2184–2194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. A. Ballem, Z.-J. Hu, P. Bergman and K. Uvdal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5729–5733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, Y. Y. Li, J. Chen, G. Yang and Y. Li, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy and J. L. Coffer, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56, 16A–27A CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Frischmann, K. Mahata and F. Würthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847–1870 RSC .
M. Jebb, P. K. Sudeep, P. Pramod, K. G. Thomas and P. V Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6839–6844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pramod, K. G. Thomas and M. V George, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 806–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Weiss, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1005–1013 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan, P. Li, B. Sun, M. Chaker and D. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1573–1585 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Hines and P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3041–3057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V Kilina, P. K. Tamukong and D. S. Kilin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2127–2135 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. Hughes, J. L. Stein, M. R. Friedfeld, B. M. Cossairt and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14198–14207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Mundy, F. W. Eagle, K. E. Hughes, D. R. Gamelin and B. M. Cossairt, ACS Materials Lett., 2020, 2, 576–581 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Stein, E. A. Mader and B. M. Cossairt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1315–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Pillai, S. Reisewitz, H. Schroeder and C. M. Niemeyer, Small, 2010, 6, 2130–2134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Thomas, S. Ghimire, R. Kohara, A. N. Anil, K. Yuyama, Y. Takano, K. G. Thomas and V. Biju, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9060–9069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Shibu, M. Hamada, S. Nakanishi, S. Wakida and V. Biju, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263–264, 2–12 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hamada, S. Nakanishi, T. Itoh, M. Ishikawa and V. Biju, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4445–4454 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Subila, G. Kishore Kumar, S. M. Shivaprasad and K. G. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2774–2779 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Sekhar, A. De, S. S. Hossain and A. Samanta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 1536–1542 RSC .
C. K. De, S. Mandal, D. Roy, S. Ghosh, A. Konar and P. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 28502–28510 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. De, D. Roy, S. Mandal and P. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4330–4338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. De, T. Routh, D. Roy, S. Mandal and P. K. Mandal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 964–973 CrossRef CAS .
D. Roy, S. Mandal, C. K. De, K. Kumar and P. K. Mandal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 10332–10344 RSC .
Z. Hens and J. De Roo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15627–15637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yadav, A. Singh, L. Thulasidharan and S. Sapra, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 820–829 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4403–4409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nirmal and L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
R. Viswanatha, S. Sapra, B. Satpati, P. V Satyam, B. N. Dev and D. D. Sarma, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 661–668 RSC .
R. Viswanatha, S. Sapra, T. Saha-Dasgupta and D. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 45333 CrossRef .
Y. Lou, Y. Zhao, J. Chen and J.-J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 595–613 RSC .
V. Biju, T. Itoh and M. Ishikawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3031–3056 RSC .
M. Bruchez, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Yong, H. Ding, I. Roy, W.-C. Law, E. J. Bergey, A. Maitra and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 502–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Hou, X. Dai, Z. Yao, L. Lv, Y. Jin and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6448–6452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 17–45 RSC .
V. Biju, A. Anas, H. Akita, E. S. Shibu, T. Itoh, H. Harashima and M. Ishikawa, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3776–3788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thirunavukkuarasu, A. George, A. Thomas, A. Thomas, V. Vijayan and K. G. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14168–14176 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V Kamat, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vinayakan, T. Shanmugapriya, P. V Nair, P. Ramamurthy and K. G. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10146–10149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, K. Sandeep, S. M. Somasundaran and K. G. Thomas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2368–2375 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Sekhar, S. Paul, A. De and A. Samanta, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2675–2682 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Sekhar and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15661–15668 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pal, S. Srivastava, R. Gupta and S. Sapra, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15888 RSC .
P. V Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CrossRef .
M. Hamada, N. Takenokoshi, K. Matozaki, Q. Feng, N. Murase, S. Wakida, S. Nakanishi and V. Biju, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2178–2186 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Shibu, A. Sonoda, Z. Tao, Q. Feng, A. Furube, S. Masuo, L. Wang, N. Tamai, M. Ishikawa and V. Biju, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1601–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Halder and S. Bhattacharyya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13404–13412 CrossRef CAS .
G. Halder, D. Ghosh, M. Y. Ali, A. Sahasrabudhe and S. Bhattacharyya, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 10197–10216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pal, I. Ghosh, S. Sapra and B. König, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5225–5231 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Simlandy, B. Bhattacharyya, A. Pandey and S. Mukherjee, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5206–5211 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bhattacharyya, A. K. Simlandy, A. Chakraborty, G. P. Rajasekar, N. B. Aetukuri, S. Mukherjee and A. Pandey, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1508–1514 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Caputo, L. C. Frenette, N. Zhao, K. L. Sowers, T. D. Krauss and D. J. Weix, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4250–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kodaimati, K. P. McClelland, C. He, S. Lian, Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang and E. A. Weiss, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3659–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Wu, X.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900709 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 160–173 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Chandrashekar, A. Maji, G. Halder, S. Banerjee, S. Bhattacharyya and D. Maiti, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6201–6204 RSC .
T. Vossmeyer, L. Ketsikas, M. Giersig, I. G. Popovic, K. Diesner, A. Chemseddine, A. Eychmüller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7665–7673 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Midgett, J. M. Luther, J. T. Stewart, D. K. Smith, L. A. Padilha, V. I. Klimov, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3078–3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Karan, D. D. Sarma, R. M. Kadam and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2863–2866 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jana, B. B. Srivastava, S. Jana, R. Bose and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2535–2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, J. Zhao, P. Jing, W. Zhang, H. Li, L. Zhang, X. Zhong and Y. Masumoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11973–11979 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Alig and S. Bloom, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1975, 35, 1522–1525 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Kilmov and D. W. McBranch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4028–4031 CrossRef .
V. I. Kilmov, D. W. McBranch, C. H. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 60, 13740–13749 Search PubMed .
H. Chung, K.-S. Cho, W.-K. Koh, D. Kim and J. Kim, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14109–14116 RSC .
W. Wu, S. Ren, Q. Han, Y. Gao and D. Kong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 23556–23563 RSC .
O. Adegoke and E. Y. Park, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, D. So and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16035 CrossRef CAS .
J. De Roo, Z. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Deblock, A. J. Crosby, J. S. Owen and S. S. Nonnenmann, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8034–8039 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giansante, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1458–1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Min, M. Akbulut, K. Kristiansen, Y. Golan and J. Israelachvili, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 527–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. M. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. S. Batista, R. G. Larson and N. A. Kotov, Science, 2015, 350, 1242477 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces, Academic Press, London, 3rd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Roy, A. Rao, G. Devatha and P. P. Pillai, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7141–7145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, S. Roy, A. Rao, G. Devatha and P. P. Pillai, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8415–8419 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Boal and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 734–735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, V. Jain, R. K. Kashyap, A. Rao and P. P. Pillai, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5522–5528 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi, W. Liu, P. Misra, E. Tanaka, J. P Zimmer, B. I. Ipe, M. G. Bawendi and J. V Frangioni, Nat. Biotechnol., 2007, 25, 1165–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rao, S. Roy, M. Unnikrishnan, S. S. Bhosale, G. Devatha and P. P. Pillai, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2348–2355 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, G. S. Kumar, S. Roy, A. T. Rajesh, G. Devatha and P. P. Pillai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5625–5633 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shirin, S. Roy, A. Rao and P. P. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 19157–19165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, P. P. Pillai, J. V. I. Timonen, F. S. Emami, A. Vahid and B. A. Grzybowski, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 9886–9890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rao, S. Roy and P. P. Pillai, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 1843–1849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2021, 10, 765–771 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Giansante, I. Infante, E. Fabiano, R. Grisorio, G. P. Suranna and G. Gigli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1875–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. N. Goswami, D. Mandal and A. K. Rath, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1072–1080 RSC .
V. Arora, U. Soni, M. Mittal, S. Yadav and S. Sapra, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 491, 329–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Wuister, C. de Mello Donegá and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17393–17397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dannhauser, M. O'Neil, K. Johansson, D. Whitten and G. McLendon, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 6074–6076 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Cowdery-Corvan, D. G. Whitten and G. L. McLendon, Chem. Phys., 1993, 176, 377–386 CrossRef CAS .
C. Landes, C. Burda, M. Braun and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 2981–2986 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Hines and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem.
C, 2013, 117, 14418–14426 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Frederick, V. A. Amin, N. K. Swenson, A. Y. Ho and E. A. Weiss, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 287–292 CrossRef PubMed .
V. V. Chaban, V. V. Prezhdo and O. V. Prezhdo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
D. Pernik, K. Tvrdy, J. G. Radich and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13511–13519 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11272–11276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2299–2309 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sandeep, B. Manoj and K. G. Thomas, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 44710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. W. Slyker, V. M. Nichols, G. S. H. Pau, C. J. Bardeen and M. L. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1709–1713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Swathi and K. L. Sebastian, J. Chem. Sci., 2009, 121, 777–787 CrossRef CAS .
S. Melle, O. G. Calderoń, M. Laurenti, D. Mendez-Gonzalez, A. Egatz-Goḿez, E. Loṕez-Cabarcos, E. Cabrera-Granado, E. Díaz and J. Rubio-Retama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 18751–18758 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tai, E. Lü, I. Umezu and A. Sugimura, Appl. Phys. Express, 2010, 3, 035202 CrossRef .
P. Thomas, M. Möller, R. Eichmann, T. Meier, T. Stroucken and A. Knorr, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2002, 230, 25–29 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sen, S. Sadhu and A. Patra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 043104 CrossRef .
E. N. Bodunov, Y. A. Antonov and A. L. S. Gamboa, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 146, 114102 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Dibbell and D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3139–3149 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tansakul, E. Lilie, E. D. Walter, F. Rivera, A. Wolcott, J. Z. Zhang, G. L. Millhauser and R. Braslau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7793–7805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Hines, R. P. Forrest, S. A. Corcelli and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 7439–7446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Dibbell, D. G. Youker and D. F. Watson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18643–18651 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, E. R. McNellis, S. Kinge, M. Bonn and E. Cánovas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5311–5315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Stewart, A. L. Huston, A. M. Scott, A. L. Efros, J. S. Melinger, K. B. Gemmill, S. A. Trammell, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5330–5347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Algar, A. Khachatrian, J. S. Melinger, A. L. Huston, M. H. Stewart, K. Susumu, J. B. Blanco-Canosa, E. Oh, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 363–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Devatha, S. Roy, A. Rao, A. Mallick, S. Basu and P. P. Pillai, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3879–3884 RSC .
J. A. M. Xavier, G. Devatha, S. Roy, A. Rao and P. P. Pillai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22248–22255 RSC .
D. A. Walker, B. Kowalczyk, M. O. de la Cruz and B. A. Grzybowski, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1316–1344 RSC .
S. Scheiner, T. Kar and J. Pattanayak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 13257–13264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. Bertini, H. B. Gray, S. J. Lippard and J. S. Valentine, Bioinorganic Chemistry, University Science Book, California,  1994 Search PubMed .
N. J. Hestand and F. C. Spano, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7069–7163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mamedov, A. Belov, M. Giersig, N. N. Mamedova and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7738–7739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wargnier, A. V. Baranov, V. G. Maslov, V. Stsispura, M. Artemyev, M. Pluot, A. Sukhanova and I. Nabiev, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .
M. Achermann, S. Jeong, L. Balet, G. A. Montano and J. A. Hollingsworth, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1761–1768 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Tobias and M. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 1389–1397 CrossRef CAS .
T. Franzl, A. Shavel, A. L. Rogach, N. Gaponik, T. A. Klar, A. Eychmüller and J. Feldmann, Small, 2005, 1, 392–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Malikova, I. Pastoriza-Santos, M. Schierhorn, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3694–3697 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Feng, X. H. Zhong, M. Steinhart, A.-M. Caminade, J. P. Majoral and W. Knoll, Small, 2008, 4, 566–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Lutich, G. Jiang, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. D. Stefani and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2636–2640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Q.-S. Guo, Y.-Q. Liu and Q.-J. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5318–5323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, R. Bose, S. Jana, N. R. Jana and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 636–640 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, D. Majhi, K. Bhattachaaryya, N. Preeyanka, A. Datta and M. Sarkar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 9523–9535 RSC .
S. Kundu, S. Bhattacharyya and A. Patra, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 60–67 RSC .
O. I. Micic, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. R. Sprague and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4966–4969 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Santra, P. V. Nair, K. G. Thomas and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 722–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mao, C.-H. Chuang, J. Wang and C. Burda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8945–8954 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, P. V. Nair and K. G. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3838–3845 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, G. Devatha, S. Roy, A. Rao and P. P. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5354–5360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tagliazucchi, D. B. Tice, C. M. Sweeney, A. J. Morris-Cohen and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9907–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, P. Mukherjee, D. N. Lamont and D. H. Waldeck, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5751–5759 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, D. J. Weinberg, A. B. Nepomnyashchii, S. Lian and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8847–8854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. He, T. D. Nguyen, K. Edme, M. O. de la Cruz and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10126–10132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Weinberg, C. He and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2319–2326 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Knowles, M. Tagliazucchi, M. Malicki, N. K. Swenson and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15849–15857 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Knowles, M. Malicki and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12470–12473 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, Z. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Jiang and E. A. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4981–4987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Boulesbaa, Z. Huang, D. Wu and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 962–969 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Głowacki, M. Irimia-Vladu, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 3742–3753 RSC .

          G. A. Jeffrey and W. Saenger, Hydrogen Bonding in Biological Structures, Springer-Verlag, New York,  1991 Search PubMed .
E. A. Mondarte, T. Maekawa, T. Nyu, H. Tahara, G. Lkhamsurena and T. Hayashi, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 22705–22712 RSC .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov, J. Dulka and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2323–2330 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Mamedova, N. A. Kotov, A. L. Rogach and J. Studer, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, S. Tan and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 243–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Willard, L. L. Carillo, J. Jung and A. V. Orden, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 469–474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2063–2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, B. Ozturk, Y. Wang and N. A. Kotov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 6927–6931 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, O. Schöps, U. Woggon and C. M. Niemeyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4815–4827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. K. Cushing, Q. Wang, X. Shi, L. A. Hornak, Z. Hong and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2125–2129 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Jennings, M. P. Singh and G. F. Strouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5462–5467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Griffin, A. K. Singh, D. Senapati, P. Rhodes, K. Mitchell, B. Robinson, E. Yu and P. C. Ray, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 342–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xue, X. Wang, H. Wang, D. Chen and B. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4986–4988 RSC .
A. P. de Silva, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 15–16 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 49–59 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gill, F. Patolsky, E. Katz and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 4630–4633 CrossRef .
I. Willner and S. Rubin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 367–385 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sharon, R. Freeman and I. Willner, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 7073–7077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wolf, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2188–2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, M. S. Kodaimati, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1981–1984 RSC .
M. S. Kodaimati, C. Wang, C. Chapman, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5041–5050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mayilo, J. Hilhorst, A. S. Susha, C. Höhl, T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach and J. Feldmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14589–14594 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, Q. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Shen and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44173–44182 RSC .
C. Wang and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9557–9564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kasha, Radiat. Res., 1963, 20, 55–70 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Rowland, I. Fedin, H. Zhang, S. K. Gray, A. O. Govorov, D. V. Talapin and R. D. Schaller, Nat. Mat., 2015, 14, 484–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, R. Gresback, U. Kortshagen, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Kilmov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 177404 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Lenhard and B. R. Hein, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17287–17296 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Berlepsch and C. Böttcher, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 214, 16–21 CrossRef .
C. Wang and E. A. Weiss, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5666–5671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jiang, A. S. Susha, A. A. Lutich, F. D. Stefani, J. Feldmann and A. L. Rogach, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4127–4131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, H. Lu, J. Li, X. Song, A. Wang, L. Chen and S. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8146–8154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X.-W. He, Y. Chen, W.-Y. Li and Y.-K. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2553–2558 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Chen, Z. Lin and J.-M. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2010, 82, 7380–7386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dyadyusha, H. Yin, S. Jaiswal, T. Brown, J. J. Baumberg, F. P. Booy and T. Melvin, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3201–3203 RSC .
K. T. Shimizu, W. K. Woo, B. R. Fisher, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 117401 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oh, M.-Y. Hong, D. Lee, S.-H. Nam, H. C. Yoon and H.-S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3270–3271 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Zhang, H.-C. Yeh, M. T. Kuroki and T.-H. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 826–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tyagi and F. R. Kramer, Nat. Biotechnol., 1996, 14, 303–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, N. Zhang, Y. Sun, W.-W. Zhao, D. Ye, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25107–25113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.  H. Clever, C. Kaul and T. Carell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6226–6236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ono, S. Cao, H. Togashi, M. Tashiro, T. Fujimoto, T. Machinami, S. Oda, Y. Miyake, I. Okamoto and Y. Tanaka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4825–4827 RSC .
D. Li, A. Wieckowska and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3927–3931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.  S. Lee, M.  S. Han and C.  A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Banerjee, S. Kar and S. Santra, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3037–3039 RSC .
C.-S. Wu, M. K. K. Oo and X. Fan, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5897–5904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freeman, T. Finder and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., 2009, 121, 7958–7961 CrossRef .
M. K. Choi, J. Yang, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 10 CrossRef .
T.-H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, S. J. Lee, J. Chae, J. W. Kim, D. H. Kim, J.-Y. Kwon, G. Amaratunga, S. Y. Lee, B. L. Choi, Y. Kuk, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jun, E. Jang, J. Park and J. Kim, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2407–2410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lin, Q. Zeng, E. Lafalce, S. Yu, M. J. Smith, Y. J. Yoon, Y. Chang, Y. Jiang, Z. Lin, Z. V. Vardeny and V. V. L. Tsukruk, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800474 CrossRef .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, A. L. Rogach, D. V. Talapin, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9592–9593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Paik, H. Yun, B. Fleury, S.-H. Hong, P. S. Jo, Y. Wu, S.-J. Oh, M. Cargnello, H. Yang, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1387–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. P. García de Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Lan, F. Fan, G. Walters, A. R. Kirmani, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tagliazucchi, V. A. Amin, S. T. Schneebeli, J. F. Stoddart and E. A. Weiss, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3617–3621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Devatha, A. Rao, S. Roy and P. P. Pillai, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1710–1716 CrossRef CAS .
G. Devatha, P. Roy, A. Rao, S. Roy and P. P. Pillai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4099–4106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, M. A. Correa-Duarte, L. M. Liz-Marzán and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2830–2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, M. A. Correa-Duarte, I. Pastoriza-Santos, M. Giersig, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15461–15469 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patra and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23313–23321 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Malak, J. Jung, Y. J. Yoon, M. J. Smith, C. H. Lin, Z. Lin and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 608–619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, I. Fedin, H. Zhang and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2017, 357, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J.-A. Pan, H. Wu and D. V Talapin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13917–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, J.-A. Pan, H. Wu, X. Lan, I. Coropceanu, Y. Wang, W. Cho, E. A. Hill, J. S. Anderson and D. V Talapin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003805 CrossRef CAS .
I. N. Chakraborty, S. Roy, G. Devatha, A. Rao and P. P. Pillai, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2258–2262 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Perez, C. R. Rogers and E. A. Weiss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14091–14095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Dey, A. Nag and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8276–8279 RSC .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672–9680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, H. Hamby, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2201–2204 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lv, T. P. A. Ruberu, V. E. Fleischauer, W. W. Brennessel, M. L. Neidig and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11654–11663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, Z. Han, M. G. Haghighi and R. Eisenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2013, 110, 16716–16723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, Z. Han, W. W. Brennessel, P. L. Holland and R. Eisenberg, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1397–1406 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, M. F. Mark, H. Lv, D. W. McCamant and R. Eisenberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2575–2586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lian, M. S. Kodaimati and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 568–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Edwards, A. A. Fertig, K. P. McClelland, M. T. Meidenbauer, S. Chakraborty, T. D. Krauss, K. L. Bren and E. M. Matson, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8762 RSC .
M. S. Kodaimati, S. Lian, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8290–8295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, C. Wang, C. R. Rogers, M. S Kodaimati and E. A. Weiss, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 1034–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. R. Rogers and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 495–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15219–15229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang and M. Lee Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6198–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lai, Y. Sang, Y. Zhao and K. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19825–19829 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, P. Xia, N. Megerdich, D. A. Fishman, V. I. Vullev and M. L. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 3089–3096 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, X. Li, M. Mahboub, K. M. Hanson, V. M. Nichols, H. Le, M. L. Tang and C. J. Bardeen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5552–5557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, D. N. Congreve, M. W. B. Wilson, J. Jean, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. VanOrman, A. S. Bieber, S. Wieghold and L. Nienhaus, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4734–4742 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, Y. Han, Z. Chen, Y. Li, G. Liang, X. Liu, T. Ding, C. Nie, M. Wang, F. N. Castellano and K. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mongin, S. Garakyaraghi, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Zamkov and F. N. Castellano, Science, 2016, 351, 369–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Skourtis, C. Liu, P. Antoniou, A. M. Virshup and D. N. Beratan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8115–8120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, P. Zhang, P. Antoniou, S. S. Skourtis and D. N. Beratan, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 216, 301–318 RSC .
T. Jin, N. Uhlikova, Z. Xu, Y. Zhu, Y. Huang, E. Egap and T. Lian, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 214702 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cravcenco, C. Ye, J. Gräfenstein and K. Börjesson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 7219–7227 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Allardice, A. Thampi, S. Dowland, J. Xiao, V. Gray, Z. Zhang, P. Budden, A. J. Petty, N. J. L. K. Davis, N. C. Greenham, J. E. Anthony and A. Rao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12907–12915 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gray, J. R. Allardice, Z. Zhang, S. Dowland, J. Xiao, A. J. Petty, J. E. Anthony, N. C. Greenham and A. Rao, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4224–4234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sasikumar, A. T. John, J. Sunny and M. Hariharan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6122–6140 RSC .
J. De Roo, Z. Huang, N. J. Schuster, L. S. Hamachi, D. N. Congreve, Z. Xu, P. Xia, D. A. Fishman, T. Lian, J. S. Owen and M. L. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1461–1466 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lei, C. Zhou, M.-Y. Huang, L.-M. Zhao, B. Yang, C. Ye, H. Xiao, Q.-Y. Meng, V. Ramamurthy, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15407–15410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Pagire, A. Hossain, L. Traub, S. Kerres and O. Reiser, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12072–12075 RSC .
Z. Zhang, K. Edme, S. Lian and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4246–4249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, S. Xie, C. Liu, C. Zhou, J. Lin, J. Kang, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8443–8451 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Harris, S. B. Homan, M. Kodaimati, He Chen, A. B. Nepomnyashchii, N. K. Swenson, S. Lian, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12865–12919 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guyot-Sionnest, B. Wehrenberg and D. Yu, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 074709 CrossRef .
S. Yu, X.-B. Fan, X. Wang, J. Li, Q. Zhang, A. Xia, S. Wei, L.-Z. Wu, Y. Zhou and G. R. Patzke, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4009 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Huang, X.-B. Li, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 11530–11534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Li, Z.-J. Li, Y.-J. Gao, Q.-Y. Meng, S. Yu, R. G. Weiss, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2085–2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Zhao, Q. Y. Meng, X. B. Fan, C. Ye, X. B. Li, B. Chen, V. Ramamurthy, C. H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3020–3024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, I. Mekis, S. Haubold, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 202, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yeh, D. Patra, B. Yan, K. Saha, O. R. Miranda, C. K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3069–3071 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Tang and W. Tang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 360–376 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Algar, A. J. Tavares and U. J. Krull, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 673, 1–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. R. Algar and U. J. Krull and A. Merckoçi, Biosensing using Nanomaterials, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken,  2009 Search PubMed .
H. R. Chandan, J. D. Schiffman and R. G. Balakrishna, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 1191–1214 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gill, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7602–7625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, S. C. Warren, P. Fuller and B. A. Grzybowski, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 603–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Albanese, P. S. Tang and W. C. W. Chan, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2012, 14, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nag, M. V. Kovalenko, J. S. Lee, W. Liu, B. Spokoyny and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .

ZDNet, https://www.zdnet.com/article/quantum-dot-what-it-is-and-what-it-may-potentially-do/, accessed on 30th December, 2020 Search PubMed.
Official Journal of the European Union, Directive (EU), 2017/2102, 2017, L305, 8–11.
Y.-H. Won, O. Cho, T. Kim, D.-Y. Chung, T. Kim, H. Chung, H. Jang, J. Lee, D. Kim and E. Jang, Nature, 2019, 575, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Indra Narayan Chakraborty	Indra Narayan Chakraborty completed his Bachelor of Science degree with honours in chemistry at Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College, Rahara, West Bengal, in 2016. Then he joined the Integrated PhD programme at the Department of Chemistry, IISER Pune, where he is currently continuing as a senior research fellow (SRF) under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai. His research interests centre around the surface modification and photocatalytic properties of environmentally friendly quantum dots.
Pradyut Roy	Pradyut Roy received his BSc degree in Chemistry from Vidyasagar University in 2017. He was first rank holder and received the best academic award, as a prestigious gold medallist, from Vidyasagar University. In 2017, he joined as an integrated PhD student at IISER Pune. He is currently pursuing his PhD at IISER Pune, under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai. His current research interest is focussed on controlling interparticle forces at the nanoscale to realize improved photophysical processes with existing nanomaterials, especially with quantum dots (QDs).
Anish Rao	Anish Rao completed his B.Sc. with honours in chemistry in 2013 at Ramjas College in Delhi University (India). He then obtained his MS + PhD from IISER Pune (India), in 2020, working under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai on regulating interparticle interactions and studying their impact on nanoparticle self-assembly. Currently, he is working on developing ways of regulating multicomponent nanoparticle self-assemblies with Prof. Luis M. Liz-Marzán at CIC biomaGUNE, Spain.
Gayathri Devatha	Gayathri Devatha obtained her M.Sc. degree in chemistry from Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, India. She received her PhD under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai at Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Pune, India, in 2020. Her research interests include the surface engineering of quantum dots (QDs) and the study of ligand-directed photophysics and photopatterning in green quantum dots.
Soumendu Roy	Soumendu Roy received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in chemistry from Vidyasagar University (West Bengal, India), in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He pursued a PhD under the supervision of Dr Pramod P. Pillai at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER), Pune (India), and successfully defended his thesis in June 2020. His research interests lie in the areas of nanoparticle synthesis, surface chemistry, catalysis, and photophysics. He is currently working on understanding the potent role of surface ligands in dictating the fundamental properties of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles.
Pramod P. Pillai	Pramod Pillai is an Associate Professor and a physical chemist in the Department of Chemistry at Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Pune, India. Dr Pillai obtained his PhD in chemistry in 2008 under the supervision of Prof. K. George Thomas at National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology (NIIST) Trivandrum, India. Prior to joining IISER Pune in June 2014, Dr Pillai was a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Prof. Bartosz A. Grzybowski at Northwestern University, Evanston, USA (2011–2014), and an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral Fellow at Technische Universität in Dortmund, Germany, with Prof. Christof M. Niemeyer (2008–2010). Currently Dr Pillai's research at IISER Pune is focused on controlling the interplay of forces to improve performance and develop new properties at the nanoscale. Some of the properties of interest include light harvesting, catalysis, and the self-assembly of hybrid nanomaterials.

 	Fig. 1  General schemes of (a) Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and (b) photoinduced electron transfer (PET) processes are shown in terms of potential energy diagrams (note: only the lower portions of the potential energy surfaces are shown). A PET process can occur either through the photoexcitation of the donor (photooxidation, labelled ‘1’) or the acceptor (photoreduction, labelled ‘2’). The photooxidation process involves the transfer of electrons from an excited donor (D*) to a ground state acceptor (A). On the other hand, the photoreduction process involves the transfer of electrons from a ground state donor (D) to an excited state acceptor (A*).	 

 	Fig. 2  A summary of the main relaxation pathways in a photoexcited QD (QD*), which forms the basis of various energy-related applications.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic representation showing the general structure of a QD, emphasising various processes emanating from the core and from surface ligands.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The band-edge positions of CdSe and CdTe QDs shown against vacuum and standard hydrogen electrode. Thiols can quench the PL of CdSe QDs via scavenging holes from the valence band of CdSe QDs, but cannot quench the PL of CdTe QDs (solid line). Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright: 2004, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic representation of the delocalisation and confinement of the electronic wave function in the core of a QD, by thiolated and amine ligands, respectively. (c) Variations in the rate of electron transfer as a function of the surface ligand used to adsorb CdS onto TiO2. MPA and Ala contain thiol and amine as binding groups, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagrams of the energy levels of different components in CdSe QD-Au NP heterostructures, along with the HOMO energy levels of surface ligands (dodecylamine and dodecylthiol). The hole scavenging abilities of thiols were explored to achieve better Fermi level equilibration, thereby enhancing the charge transport properties of CdSe–Au heterostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright: 2020, American Institute of Physics. (e) A schematic representation of energy transfer from a CdS QD to molecular acceptors that were functionalised with acid and amine binding groups. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A schematic representation of PET from a CdSe QD to a TiO2 QD through an aliphatic mercaptoalkanoic acid spacer. (b) A plot comparing the variations in the experimentally and theoretically calculated rates of PET, ket, as a function of the spacer length. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of PET from a QD to an oxide through a rigid aromatic spacer (bridge). (d) The variation in the rates of PET, ket, as a function of spacer length for n-methylene-based aliphatic bridges (HS–[CH2]n–COOH, black dots) and n-phenylene-based aromatic bridges (HS–[C6H4]n–COOH, red squares). Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright: 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagrams of four commonly used non-covalent interactions, which can arise through the judicious choice of surface ligands, for assembling QD-based donor–acceptor pairs.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) A schematic representation of a FRET process in an electrostatically assembled QD–QD donor–acceptor pair. The positive and negative charges on the green- and red-emitting CdSe QDs arise from surface-bound cysteamine and mercaptosuccinic/mercaptosulfonic acid ligands, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright: 2004, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagrams of the preparation and working principle of a dual-colour CdSe QD-based ratiometric fluorescent probe for Zn2+ detection. The pendant group (TSPP) electrostatically binds on the surface of the QDs and acts as the FRET acceptor for 512 nm-emitting QDs (FRET-1). A bathochromic shift occurs in the absorption of TSPP upon binding with Zn2+ ions, making TSPP a better FRET acceptor for 572 nm QDs (FRET-2). Accordingly, there are variations in the relative PL intensities of the QDs, which act as the readout for Zn2+ sensing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 197. Copyright: 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A schematic diagram of resonance energy transfer in an electrostatically assembled doped QD-organic dye nanohybrid system. (b) Steady-state PL spectra of positively charged Mn-doped ZnS QDs in the presence of varying amounts of negatively charged Texas red acceptor. A steady decrease in the PL of the QDs along with a concomitant increase in the dye PL was observed, indicating a FRET process from the QD to the dye. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic representation of dye encapsulation inside a positively charged ionic-liquid-functionalised polymer nanoparticle, followed by its electrostatic assembly with negatively charged CdTe QDs. The process of FRET was observed from the QDs to Nile red dye encapsulated in the polymer nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright: 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic representation of a FRET system consisting of InP/ZnS QDs as the donor and organic dye as the acceptor. (b) A 3D PL plot depicting the time-dependent evolution of FRET in the InP/ZnS QD-dye system. Spectral changes in the PL of InP/ZnS QDs in the presence of increasing amounts of (c) LiRh dye and (d) TxRed dye. Strong electrostatic attraction between oppositely charged QDs and dyes resulted in stable ground-state complexation, which further led to an efficient FRET process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright: 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) A schematic diagram of the ligand exchange protocol between a myristic acid (MA) capped InP/ZnS QD and TMA ligand for the synthesis of cationic InP/ZnS QDs with permanent positive charge. (b) A schematic diagram of electrostatically driven FRET between oppositely charged [+] InP/ZnS QD and [−] MC dye. (c) Spectral changes in the PL of InP/ZnS QDs upon the addition of varying concentrations of [−] MC dye. The time-resolved PL decay profiles of a [+] InP/ZnS:::[−] MC complex collected at the emission maxima of the donor QDs (525 nm) and the acceptor MC dye (585 nm) are shown in the inset. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) A schematic representation of electrostatically driven FRET between a pair of environmentally friendly QDs, comprising a [−] InP/ZnS QD as the donor and a [+] CuInS2/ZnS QD as the acceptor. (e) The dependence of the FRET efficiency on the donor–acceptor distance, studied via the temporal evolution of the FRET process as a function of solvent drying in the solid state. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic representation of a thin film composed of electrostatically attached thioglycolic-acid-capped CdSe QDs and poly(viologen). (b) Transient absorption spectra of CdSe QD-poly(viologen) films at different pump-probe delay times. (c) A logarithmic plot of the intensity-averaged PET time constants for different CdSe QD-poly(viologen) films as a function of n (n is the number of methylene groups in the ligand). Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright: 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The binding of AQ molecules on the surface of a PbS QD via the penetration of the ligand shell (composed of mercaptohexanoic acid, MHA, and 6-mercaptohexanol). (b) The band positions of the PbS QD and AQ. (c) A plot showing the fraction of remaining QD PL as a function of the amount of MHA in the ligand shell at different concentrations of AQ molecules. Lowering the amount of MHA in the ligand shell led to a decrease in electrostatic repulsion between the QDs and AQ molecules. This triggered an efficient PET process from the QDs to AQ molecules. The lower the surface coverage of MHA ligands, the higher the efficiency of the PET process, and the higher the PL quenching. (d) A plot of the Gibbs free energy change as a function of the average number of bound MHA ligands per QD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) The addition of quaternary ions (NR4+) can screen electrostatic repulsion between similarly charged QDs and AQ molecules, thereby enhancing the permeability of anionic AQ molecules. (b) Variations in the net charge of a nanohybrid system in the presence of NR4+ cations containing R groups of different sizes. (c) The effects of varying concentrations of different NR4+ cations on the PL quenching of QDs, by 1000 equivalents of AQ molecules. The penetration of AQ molecules increased with the bulkiness of the NR4+ cation, thereby enhancing the probability of PET processes from QDs to AQ molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic diagram of an electrostatically driven PET process from an environmentally benign [+] CIS/ZnS QD to [−] ICG dye. (e) Spectral variations in the PL of [+] CIS/ZnS QDs in the presence of increasing amounts of [−] ICG dye; the inset shows the corresponding quenching of the PL lifetime of the QDs. (f) Stern–Volmer plots for positively and negatively charged CIS/ZnS QDs in the presence of [+] methylene blue (MB) dye, confirming the role of electrostatics in the PL quenching of the QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A schematic representation of FRET in a DNA-based 3Ch-FRET conjugate system, comprising DHLA-capped CdSe/ZnS QDs, enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP), and Atto647-dye-modified oligonucleotides (QD-EYFP-Atto647). (b) Photographs of PL in the 3Ch-FRET conjugate system. A relay of FRET processes was observed from the QDs to EYFP (FRET 1), and then from EYFP to the Atto647 dye in the hybridised oligonucleotides (FRET 2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright: 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  The effects of intercalators on the direction of photocurrent in a CdS QD/dsDNA/intercalator system. The enhanced generation of photocurrent in the presence of (a) doxorubicin and (b) methylene-blue intercalators. The anodic current (from the QD to the Au surface) could be switched to a cathodic current (from the Au surface to the QD) when doxorubicin was replaced with methylene blue as the intercalating agent. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. Copyright: 2005,Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  A schematic diagram of the PET process from a G-quadruplex-functionalised CdSe/ZnS QD to hemin protein. The selective intercalation of hemin into the G-quadruplex on CdSe/ZnS QDs led to efficient PET from the QD to hemin, which was further used as a tool to detect changes in the structures of oligonucleotides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 233. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) A schematic diagram of zinc-ion-coordination-based gelation between different sizes of CdTe QDs, resulting in efficient FRET from smaller to bigger QDs. PL (b) spectra and (c) photographs of mixtures of green- and red-emitting CdTe QDs before and after the gelation process, with different green:red QD molar ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic diagram of a GSH-capped donor and acceptor PbS QD complex coupled through zinc-ion coordination. (b) Spectral changes in the PL of the donor–acceptor mixture upon the addition of varying amounts of Zn2+ ions, followed by the recovery of the initial PL in the presence of EDTA molecules. An efficient FRET process was observed from the donor QD (DQD) to the acceptor QD (AQD) in the presence of Zn2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright: 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A schematic diagram of an MAA-capped donor and acceptor PbS QD complex coupled through Zn2+-ion coordination. (d) A plot of energy transfer rate vs. the centre-to-centre separation distance (red dots). The black and blue traces are the predictions of the energy transfer rates using the PDA and TDC methods, respectively. The inset shows PL spectra of a mixture of MAA-capped donor and acceptor QDs before (solid) and after (dashed) the addition of Zn2+ ions at pH 8.5. Individual donor and acceptor QD spectra were deconvoluted from the D:A mixture before (solid) and after (dashed) the addition of Zn2+ ions. The deconvoluted spectra show the higher PL intensity of AQD after the addition of Zn2+ ions. This confirms that an efficient FRET process operates from DQD to AQD in the presence of Zn2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) A schematic diagram of the Cu2+-ion-modulated PET process in NALC-capped CdTe QDs for the development of a turn-on fluorescence biosensor for thioacetic acid. (b) The quenching of the PL of NALC-CdTe QDs upon the addition of increasing amounts of Cu2+ ions due to efficient PET from the QDs to the Cu2+ ions. (c) The recovery of QD PL upon the addition of thioacetic acid. The superior complexation of Cu2+ ions with thioacetic acid, over NALC-capped CdTe QDs, led to their decomplexation from the QD surfaces and the suppression of the PET process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 238. Copyright: 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) A schematic representation of the π–π interactions between positively charged IR140-Cy+ dye molecules on the surface of a negatively charged GSH-capped PbS QD, leading to the formation of J1 and J2-aggregates of IR140-Cy+ dye (J-agg). The process of FRET from the QD to the J2 aggregate of the IR140-Cy+ dye was more efficient than to the J1 aggregate due to the larger spectral overlap integral with the former aggregate. (b) A Frontier orbital energy diagram of a PbS QD and IR140-Cy+ dye monomer and J-aggregates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 239. Copyright, 2016: American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic diagram of relay and direct FRET processes in a PbS-QD-based donor–acceptor complex formed via π–π interactions between IR140-Cy+ dyes. (d) PL spectra of donor QD-J-agg (DJ), J-agg-acceptor QD (JA), and donor-J-agg-acceptor QD (DJA) systems at the donor excitation wavelength. All the PL studies confirm the presence of both relay (DQD to J-agg to AQD) and direct (DQD to AQD) FRET processes in the hybrid system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 246. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) A schematic representation of the electrostatic-interaction-driven relay of FRET processes from a PDFD polymer to a TGA-capped CdTe QD (FRET 1) and then from the CdTe QD to dye-labelled dsDNA (FRET 2). (b) Variations in the PL spectra of electrostatically bound PDFD-QD complexes in the presence of different concentrations of dye-labelled complementary ds-DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 247. Copyright: 2009, American Chemical Society. (c) The complexation of MIP@QDs with TNT molecules, forming an excited-state electron-transfer-induced Meisenheimer complex, followed by efficient resonance energy transfer from the QDs to the Meisenheimer complex. (d) A plot showing the preferential detection of TNT molecules over their structural analogues using molecularly imprinted (MIPs) and non-imprinted (NIPs) QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 248. Copyright: 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) A schematic diagram showing the hybridisation between CdSe/ZnS-QD- and AuNP-functionalised complementary oligonucleotides, which results in the quenching of the QD PL. The addition of excess target DNA complementary to the bioconjugated QDs forces the de-hybridisation of the AuNPs, thereby recovering the PL of the QDs. (b) PL spectra of bioconjugated QDs at different stages of hybridisation with complementary AuNPs and target DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 251. Copyright: 2005, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A conceptual schematic diagram of a single-QD-based DNA nanosensor. Target DNA triggers hybridisation between the capture and reporter DNA components, and this hybrid further complexes with QDs through biotin–streptavidin interactions. Finally, the FRET process from the QDs to the Cy5 dye on the reporter DNA was used as the readout for the sensing of target DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254. Copyright: 2005, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) A schematic diagram showing QD-based DNA sensing achieved via the regulation of the PET process in QDs using intercalating dyes. An efficient PET process from NAC-capped CdTe QDs to Al-GFLX was observed, which quenches the PL of the NIR-emitting QDs. The intercalation of Al-GFLX dyes with the target DNA results in the switching OFF of the PET process, thereby reviving the QD PL. (b) Spectral changes in the PL of NAC-CdTe QDs in the presence of increasing concentrations of Al-GFLX. (c) The time-dependent recovery of the PL of QDs after the addition of 36.0 g mL−1 dsDNA to the QD-Al-GFLX complex. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) A schematic diagram of the preparation of QDL via functionalizing the surfaces of CdS QDs with diaza-crown-ether ligands via carbodithioate coupling. (b) Variations in the PL of QDL in the presence of increasing concentrations of Cd2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 261. Copyright: 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A schematic representation of the selective detection of heavy metal ions via the regulation of the FRET process in QD-based DNAzymes. An efficient FRET process was observed from CdSe QDs to Iowa black FQ dyes (Q), leading to the complete quenching of the QD PL. The addition of metal ions triggers the cleavage of DNA from the QDs, thereby suppressing the FRET process. The recovery of the QD PL in the presence of (d) Pb2+ and (e) Cu2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 262. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) A schematic diagram of the formation of a hairpin structure on the surface of a CdSe QD in the presence of Hg2+ or Ag+ ions, and the subsequent PET process from the QD to the toxic metal ion. Time-dependent spectral changes in the PL of CdSe QDs at different concentration ratios of Hg2+ and Ag+ ions, corresponding to (b) “AND” and (c) “OR” logic-gate systems. Here, “0” and “1” correspond to the absence (0 μM) and presence (30 μM) of metal ions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263. Copyright: 2009, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Photooxidation removes the defect sites on the surfaces of citrate-capped CdSe/CdS QDs. (b) PL spectra of CdSe/CdS QDs as a function of irradiation: (1) before irradiation, and after irradiating for (2) 15 days and (3) 25 days. (c)–(e) Fluorescence microscopy images of multicoloured luminescent patterns created via the photooxidation of QDs using a 200-mesh TEM grid; the corresponding confocal images are shown in the insets; the scale bars are 100 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 275 and 276. Copyright: 2003 and 2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) A schematic representation of the NP-ion-pair ligand system used in the DOLFIN process. (b) PL images of colloidal solutions of red (CdSe/ZnS), green (InP/ZnS), and blue emitting (ZnSe/ZnS) QDs. (c) Multicolour luminescent images created via the direct lithography of red, green, and blue emitting QDs on a SiO2 substrate. (d) Top row: positive luminescent photopatterns created via the direct lithography of NH4CS2N3-capped CdSe/ZnS (red) and InP/ZnS (green) QDs; bottom row: negative luminescent photopatterns created via the direct lithography of oleate-capped InP/ZnS (red) and CdSe/ZnS (green) QDs in the presence of (p-CH3S-C6H4) (C6H5)2S+OTf− PAG; the scale bars are 5 mm. (e) A true colour PL image created via the direct photopatterning of different sizes of CS2N3−-capped QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright: 2017, American Association for The Advancement of Science. SEM images of patterns prepared via the DOLFIN process using (f) CdSe QDs and (g) bare CeO2 nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 280. Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) An electroluminescent image of a QLED patterned using a DOLFIN logo. (i) A patterned multicolour QLED with RGB pixels at high (left) and low (right) brightness. Reproduced with permission from ref. 281. Copyright: 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) A schematic diagram of photopatterning through the selective photodegradation of organic dyes. (b) The various steps involved in the photodegradation of polyviologen in the presence of oxygen. (c) The time-dependent recovery of the PL of CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs upon the irradiation of QD-polyviologen film with UV illumination (367 nm and 0.014 W cm−2 for 24 h). (d) A confocal microscopy image of a luminescent photopattern created via the photoregulation of the PET process in QD/PV film using a TEM grid as the photomask. Reproduced with permission from ref. 272. Copyright: 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) A schematic diagram of the photoregulation of the FRET process in electrostatically bound InP/ZnS QD:::MC dye agarose film. (b) Variations in the PL spectra of QD:::dye agarose film upon continuous irradiation with a 10 W green LED for 5 h. (c) Fluorescence images of the multicolour luminescent patterns created via the photoregulation of the FRET process in single QD:::dye agarose film using appropriate masks; the orange, yellow, and green regions correspond to FRET-ON (∼85%), moderately FRET-ON (∼50%), and FRET-OFF (∼0%) states, respectively; the unmarked scale bars are 1 cm; all the multiple colours were generated from a single-QD:::dye nanohybrid film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 273. Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) A schematic representation of the photoregulation of PET and FRET processes in ICG:::QD:::MC triad agarose film via the selective and sequential photodegradation of electron and energy acceptor dyes. (b) The steady-state PL spectra and (c) PL decay profiles of QD film (green), QD::MC dyad agarose film (red), and ICG:::QD:::MC triad agarose film (blue). (d) High-contrast multicolour luminescent images created via the photoregulation of PET and FRET processes in single-QD nanohybrid film; the black, orange, and green luminescent regions correspond to PET-ON, FRET-ON (PET-OFF), and FRET-OFF (PET-OFF) states, respectively; the scale bars are 1 cm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 274. Copyright: 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) A schematic diagram of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in an electrostatically assembled CdTe QD-Clostridium acetobutylicum [Fe–Fe] hydrogenase hybrid system. (b) The effect of the QD:H2ase ratio on the amount of hydrogen produced by the electrostatically bound CdTe QD-H2ase photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 285. Copyright: 2010, American Chemical Society. (c) A schematic representation of an electrostatically bound hybrid photocatalytic system comprising a CdS nanorod and the hydrogenase enzyme; the relative energy levels of the QD and individual reactants are also shown in a consolidated diagram. (d) The light responsivity of the hybrid CdS nanorod-H2ase photocatalyst in the production of hydrogen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 286. Copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) A schematic representation of an electrostatically attached QD-enzyme assembly for the efficient photocatalytic regeneration of NADPH and its subsequent use in the activation of oxidoreductase alcohol dehydrogenase. (b) Fluorescence assays for the quantitative estimation of the amount of NADH formed; the inset shows the variation in the NADPH concentration in solution during the course of irradiation. (c) Gas chromatograms of the reaction mixture before (black) and after 1 h of irradiation (red), confirming the formation of isobutanol. Reproduced with permission from ref. 287. Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) A schematic representation of the surface-engineered CdSe-QD-sensitized photocatalytic evolution of hydrogen using Fe–dithiolene complexes. (b) The general molecular structure of Fe–dithiolene complexes with different ligands and substituents. (c) Time dependent hydrogen production using four different Fe–dithiolene complexes in the presence of a CdSe–S3 QD sensitizer; the order of hydrogen production activity of the complexes is 2 > 1 > 3 > 4. (d) Time dependent hydrogen production by Fe–dithiolene complex-2 in the presence of CdSe QD sensitizers capped with different amounts of S3 ligands. Reproduced with permission from ref. 288. Copyright: 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) A schematic diagram of the PET process from QD to an Fe(III) complex in an electrostatically assembled CuInS2/ZnS QD-FeTMA complex, leading to the selective photoreduction of CO2 to CO. (b) Kinetic traces obtained from TA experiments involving CuInS2/ZnS QDs in the presence (red) and absence (black) of 0.5 equiv. of FeTMA probed at 480 nm (corresponding to QD ground state bleaching). (c) A plot of TON vs. cumulative absorbed energy vs. illumination time, proving that the photocatalytic performance of electrostatically bound QD-FeTMA assemblies (red circles) was superior compared to a mixture of unmodified QDs and FeTMA complexes (black squares). Reproduced with permission from ref. 292. Copyright: 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic diagram of photocatalytic H2 evolution using surface-modified CdSe QDs in the presence of polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters. (e) The structures of the three different ligands used in this study. (f) A plot showing the dependence of the surface ligand used on the evolution of H2via electrostatically bound QD-polyoxovanadate-alkoxide nanohybrid photocatalysts; the faded regions in the bar diagram show the enhancement in hydrogen evolution after the addition of 100 μM polyoxovanadate-alkoxide clusters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 293. Copyright: 2020, Royal Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) A schematic diagram of the formation of an antenna complex via electrostatic assembly between sensitizer and catalyst QDs. (b) PL spectra of sQDs, cQDs, and their 4:1 mixture at pH 4.7. (c) A TON plot showing the photocatalytic production of hydrogen by sQDs, cQDs, and their 4:1 mixture. Reproduced with permission from ref. 294. Copyright: 2018, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) A schematic representation of the triplet sensitization of olefin reactants through triplet–triplet energy transfer (TTEnT) from CdSe QDs. (b) The chemical structures of Ru(bpy)32+ and Ir(ppy)3 molecular photosensitizers. (c) The [2 + 2] photocycloaddition reaction scheme between (E)-4-(3-oxo-3-phenylprop-1-en-1-yl)benzoic acid (1) and 4-vinylbenzoic acid (3), with all possible combinations of homo- and hetero-products. (d) The PL profiles of the different photosensitizers used in the study; the triplet energies of substrates 1 and 3 are shown with dotted lines. (e) A product distribution chart summarizing the percentages of regio- and stereo-selective isomers formed during the cycloaddition reaction catalyzed by different photosensitizers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 295. Copyright: 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) A schematic diagram of the QD-based photocatalyzed C–C coupling reaction. (b) A plot showing the dependence of the yield of the product formed in the CdS-QD-based photocatalyzed C–C coupling reaction on the ligand shell composition; the higher the amount of OPA ligands, the greater the permeability and, hence, the higher the reaction yield. Reproduced with permission from ref. 316. Copyright: 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) A cartoon representation of the valorisation process of woodmeal to get aromatic compounds using CdS QD photocatalysis. (d) Variations in the yields of different aromatics with a change in the length of the surface ligands on CdS QDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 317. Copyright: 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) A schematic diagram of photocatalytic hydrogen evolution via PET from S2−-capped InP/ZnS QDs to a Ni2+ co-catalyst; ascorbic acid was used as the hole scavenger. (b) The influence of different organic ligands on the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activities of surface-engineered InP/ZnS QDs. (c) Transient photocurrent and (d) electrochemical impedance spectra of InP/ZnS QDs with varying ligands upon irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 320. Copyright: 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 39  The reaction scheme and mechanism of photocatalytic (a) disulfide formation and (b) alcohol oxidation, along with hydrogen evolution, in the presence of thiolate-capped CdSe QDs and Ni2+ catalysts (here, surface thiols act as hole scavengers). Reproduced with permission from ref. 322 and 323. Copyright: 2014 and 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 40  The concept of multi-functional QDs using a single ligand with multiple functionalities at both the binding and the terminal groups.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
