4  Electrical properties of organic materials  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B208498H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B208498H
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2003, 99, 87-1254  Electrical properties of organic materialsJuliusz Sworakowski*a and Jacek UlańskibaInstitute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Wrocław University of Technology, Wyb. Wyspianskiego 27, 50-370 Wroclaw, PolandbDepartment of Molecular Physics, Technical University of Lodz, Zeromskiego 116, 90-924 Lodz, PolandFirst published on 5th June 2003AbstractRecent research into the electrical properties of low-molecular weight organic solids and polymers is reviewed. Conditions for an effective injection from electrodes into organic solids, and recent views on the photogeneration of charge carriers in photoactive polymers are briefly discussed. The transport of charge carriers in organic materials is reviewed, focusing on disordered (polycrystalline and amorphous) materials. Particular attention is paid to materials potentially applicable as elements of electronic devices: thin film field-effect transistors, and light-emitting and photovoltaic devices.1 IntroductionFor most of the 20th century, research into the electrical properties of organic solids has been a matter of merely academic interest: it was commonly believed that molecular materials could not compete with ‘conventional’ metals and semiconducting materials. The last decades, however, brought about significant progress, associated with the development of novel materials exhibiting interesting electrical and optical properties which could be applied in electronics and photonics.This is particularly true in the case of conjugated polymers. This class of materials has been the subject of intense research by physicists and chemists for 25 years, and although interest in these materials was fluctuating during this period, in recent years one has again witnessed a dramatic increase of interest in conjugated polymers, associated with their emerging large-scale applications in electro-optic devices such as light emitting diodes (LED), field effect transistors (FET) and and photovoltaic (PV) devices, and resulting in thousands of published papers, patents, and conference communications. At present, a few hundred groups are engaged in this type of research all over the world.This article will briefly review recent research into electrical properties of organic solids. For obvious reasons, several limitations will be imposed. With few exceptions, we shall review the literature published in the last few years; earlier research has been covered in several monographs (e.g., refs. 1–13) and in many review articles. The broad and rapidly developing area of so called synthetic metals (low-dimensional crystals of organic salts and charge transfer complexes) will not be discussed here. Furthermore, important aspects of the studies of organic materials, like their processability (which is a prerequisite for any practical application), new synthetic routes, applications of conjugated polymers as conducting plastics (in particular polyaniline, and its blends and composites) will be omitted, and we refer the reader to numerous review papers and books devoted to these problems.10,11,14–232 Materials2.1 MoleculesTable 1 presents chemical structures of some molecules and groups of molecules whose properties will be discussed in this article.
Table 1 Molecular structures, names and acronyms of common molecules described in this article; only the structures of a few prototypic materials have been shown

StructureName and acronym used in this paperPolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.Acenes:n
= 1: anthracene (Ac)n
= 2: tetracene (Tc)n
= 3: pentacene (Pc)n
→
∞: polyacene (PAc)PeryleneOligo- and poly-p-phenylenesn
= 2: p-quaterphenyl (4P)n
= 3: p-quinquephenyl (5P)n
= 4: p-sexiphenyl; p-hexaphenyl (6P)n
→
∞: poly-p-phenylene (PPP)Polyfluorene (PF)Ladder-type poly-p-phenylene (LPPP)Oligo- and poly-p-phenylenevinylenesn
= 1: p-distyrylbenzenen
→
∞: poly-p-phenylenevinylene (PPV)Poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexoxy)-p-phenylene vinylene)
(MEH-PPV)Oligo- and poly-α-thiophenesn
= 2: α-quaterthiophene (4T)n
= 3: α-quinquethiophene (5T)n
= 4: α-sexithiophene;α-hexathiophene (6T)n
= 6: α-octithiophene (8T)n
→
∞: polythiophene (PT)Polyisothianaphthene (PITN)Polysilanes (polysilylenes):Poly(methylphenylsilane)
(PMPSi)PSiKMetal phthalocyanine (MePc)Tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium (Alq3)Fullerenes:C601-(3-Methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1,1-phenyl-(6,6)C61
(PCBM)Amines:N,N′-diphenyl-bis(3-methylphenyl)(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (TPD);N,N′-diphenyl-bis(1-naphthyl)(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (NPB);N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(di(3-methylphenyl)aminobiphenyl)benzidine (TPTE)A characteristic feature of recent research is an increasing interest in oligomers of common conjugated polymers.8 The oligomers can serve as models of respective polymers, providing information about the effect of the conjugation length and chain packing on the electronic properties of the materials. On the other hand, the materials appeared interesting per se, easier to purify, characterize and fabricate as samples of a defined perfection. Essentially, there is not much difference in the electronic properties between sufficiently long oligomers and respective polymers. Thus one may state, somewhat simplifying the matter, that the main difference rests in the method of fabrication of samples: oligomers are usually vacuum-deposited whereas polymer films are prepared from solution. This trend is particularly well seen in the case of oligothiophenes, where a series of stable oligomers have been synthesized and characterized (for the reviews see, e.g., refs. 10,24,25). The energy gap in oligothiophenes (as well as in other series of oligomers –
vide infra) can be tuned to needs by a variation of the length of the molecule, as well as by use of suitable substituents.15 Present interest in this class of materials focuses mainly on p-sexithiophene (6T) and longer oligomers because of their use as active elements of FETs, OLEDs and PV devices.A similar situation can be observed in the case of oligophenyls (oligophenylenes). Early work on this class of materials focused on short oligomers: biphenyl, p-terphenyl and, occasionally, p-quaterphenyl. Recently, the interest of researchers has been focused mainly on p-sexiphenyl (6P)
– a material potentially applicable as a blue-light emitting material.26–29In the early stages of the systematic studies on organic semiconductors (in the fifties to seventies of the 20th century), short linear acenes were among the most extensively studied materials and anthracene (Ac) crystal became a model material (see, e.g. ref. 1). Recently, however, the interest moved to longer acenes (in particular, pentacene (Pc)), whose energy gap makes the material a more promising candidate for use in organic electronics. The energy gaps in crystalline acenes (the energy distance between the hole transport level and the electron transport level) decrease with increasing number of fused aromatic rings (cf. Table 2), well illustrating a general trend observed in all classes of organic low-molecular weight materials.
Table 2 Ionization energies, electron affinities and energies of HOMO and LUMO levels in a few organic solids. The values labelled Ic and Ac have been determined from photoemission experiments and reported values of band gaps, those labelled HOMO and LUMO are given as reported in the papers quoted without specifying the method or conditions of determination. Some values given in the table have been compiled from results reported in the quoted references. See the references for the original literature. Energies are given to within 0.1 eV

MoleculeIc/eVAc/eVHOMO/eVLUMO/eVRef.Naphthalene6.4   30 6.81.8  1Anthracene5.9   2,31  1.8    5.7   30 5.82.0  1Tetracene5.32.2  6 5.1   30 5.42.4  1Pentacene5.02.5  6 4.9   30 5.12.9  1Perylene5.2   30 5.42.5  16P5.8–6.02.7–2.9  32C606.93.4  33   6.44.534   6.24.535   6.13.736TPD5.9   37   5.52.338   5.82.639NPD6.4   37   5.42.438   5.72.639BCP  6.12.440CuPc5.0   41   5.33.642   5.23.535ZnPc5.2   41Alq36.3   43 5.73.05.73.042   5.83.138PPy  4.01.644PMeT  4.93.044PHT  5.23.244MEH-PPV  4.92.834   5.02.836PMPSi  5.31.845PVK  6.12.146Another group of low molecular weight molecules widely used in organic electronics are phthalocyanines. Electrical properties of phthalocyanines (MePc), considered to be one of the prototypic families of molecular semiconductors, have been studied since the middle of the 20th century. The interest in phthalocyanines is due to their unique properties: (i) a remarkable chemical and thermal stability, (ii) easy sublimation or crystallization, resulting in the possibility of obtaining high purity materials, (iii) the presence of the extended π-electron system of the molecule whose properties can be modified by the central ion and/or by side groups.The energy gap in crystalline phthalocyanines varies between ca. 2 eV and ca. 0.5 eV,47 hence matching the spectral region of the maximal solar activity was considered possible and there have been numerous attempts to use the materials as elements of the solar cells. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the conductivities of phthalocyanines can be dramatically modified upon exposition to active gases (in particular, to NOx), making conceivable a construction of gas sensors. Early research on phthalocyanines has been reviewed in refs. 41,48 and 49.The conductivity of phthalocyanines (which are usually p-type semiconductors) can be significantly increased upon doping with strong acceptors. Leo et al.50 studied films of vanadyl phthalocyanine (VOPc) doped in a controlled way with tetrafluorotetracyanodimethane (F4TCNQ). Doping with 2% of the acceptor resulted in an increase of the conductivity by two orders of magnitude, whereas the mobility increased by a factor of five. Such films, when used as hole transport layers in two-layer OLEDs, improve their performance reducing the electroluminescence onset voltage by about one order of magnitude.51Derivatives of triarylamine have been frequently used as hole-transporting materials due to favourable positions of their energy levels, easy fabrication and stability of films obtained. Typically, the architecture of this group of compounds may be represented by either a linear network of N(phenyl)3 building blocks or by their two-dimensional structure (‘starburst amines’). Structures of two amines often used in all-organic devices, TPD and NPB, are shown in Table 1.One of the disadvantages of short amines used as components of electronic and optoelectronic devices is their crystallization, deteriorating the performance of the devices and reducing their operational lifetime. The solution is to use larger amines; a clear dependence was found between the size of the molecule and its glass transition temperature.52 Replacing short amines with their longer oligomers improves the stability and performance of light-emitting devices, in particular at elevated temperatures.Organo-metal complexes are the family which has increasing importance. Their properties can be modified by both, modification of the complexing organic molecule and change of the central metal ion. Several compounds have been used in organic molecules, tris(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminum (Alq3) being one of the most important ones. Alq3 is an easily processed low-molecular weight material, forming good quality amorphous films, which has been widely used as the electron transporting medium. Moreover, Alq3 emits a bright green luminescence and can be used as a green emitting medium in electroluminescent devices (vide infra). Recently, the existence of a new phase of Alq3 was reported,53 with the luminescence spectrum blueshifted by ca. 50 nm.Several attempts have been reported aimed at finding other chelate complexes which could compete with Alq3: its analogues complexing Al with various substituted quinolines,54,55 or complexes with other bi- and trivalent central ions (Be, B, Mg, Ca, Sr, Sc, Y, Cu, Zn).56–59 Some of the materials have reportedly more favourable parameters than Alq3: higher electron mobility, blue-shifted fluorescence band, better morphology etc.Table 1 contains formulae of a few groups of prototypic electroactive polymers. These polymers and their derivatives are commonly used in experimental research, and are likely to emerge in commercial devices. When undoped, all of them are wide band-gap semiconductors. Thus the thermal generation of carriers is possible only upon doping; using the terminology borrowed from inorganic semiconductors, they are extrinsic semiconductors. For many applications it would be desirable to have an intrinsically conducting polymer, i.e., a conjugated polymer with a narrow energy gap. Various methods of manipulating the band gap in conjugated polymers have been thoroughly discussed in the recent review by van Mullekom et al.,15 we will therefore only briefly address here two approaches aimed at minimizing the band gap.The band gap can be reduced if the bond-length alternation is cancelled. The best known example of such a polymer is a polyisothianaphthene (PITN), which can be considered as a derivative of polythiophene (PT). In contrast to PT, in which the quinoidal form is energetically not favourable because of the loss of aromaticity, in PITN the loss of aromaticity in the heteroatomic ring is compensated by gaining aromaticity in the fused six-member ring. This reduces the energy gap from ca. 2 eV for PT to ca. 1 eV for PITN.60,61 Another class of polymers with reduced bond-length alternation are ladder polymers (see e.g., refs. 62,63). Polyacene is the simplest example of the ladder polymer which, according to theoretical considerations,64 should exhibit a metallic conductivity. Unfortunately, its synthesis is not simple at all.65 It should be mentioned here that in other ladder-type polymers, LPPP, widely used as electroluminescent materials, the bond-length alternation effect remains and some reduction in the gap width is only due to the rigid backbone with planar neighbouring rings.63,66Another strategy of decreasing the band gap consists in synthesising conjugated polymers with alternating strong electron-donor and strong electron-acceptor fragments.67 Hybridization of the high-lying HOMO level of the donor and the low-lying LUMO level of the acceptor in the donor–acceptor unit leads to a very small HOMO–LUMO distance. If the conjugated polymer made of such donor–acceptor monomers is long enough, the discrete energy level undergoes a further hybridisation forming bands separated only by a narrow gap.68 Several donor–acceptor polymers were synthesised using aryl units substituted with cyano- or nitro-groups as acceptors and pyrrole or thiophene groups as donors but the measured band gaps were in almost all cases higher than expected.15 Intensive studies of various donor–acceptor oligomers allowed one to design the desired structure of electron-withdrawing units. One of the most promising is benzobisthiadiazole; the polymer prepared electrochemically from co-trimer containing benzobisthiadiazole and two thiophene units shows an energy gap 0.5 eV.69 Further studies resulted in the elaboration of new synthetic routes of donor–acceptor monomers with benzobisthiadiazole, and when 3,4-ethylenedioxy-thiophene was used as donor unit, the acid-induced polycondensation yielded a polymer with a very low energy gap, ca. 0.3 eV.15 It is also worthy of mention that an interesting approach to obtain a low energy gap polymer with alternating donor–acceptor repeating units consisting of carbazole and squaraine derivatives; the obtained polymer was, however, insoluble.702.2 MorphologyIn principle, experiments which could be correlated with theoretical results should be performed on samples allowing for minimization of the possible influence of defects of any kind, i.e., on single crystals of high chemical purity and exceptional physical quality. Moreover, results obtained on well defined single-crystalline samples would constitute a natural reference for polycrystalline and amorphous samples, usually employed in real devices. As the growth of such crystals is quite difficult, measurements on single crystalline samples (ultra-pure or containing controlled amounts of dopants) are rather scarce. Reviews of early work on methods of purification, characterization and growth of organic crystals can be found in, e.g., refs. 71,72.Several reports on the growth of single crystals of oligothiophenes have been published in recent years, the interest being focused on long oligomers (4T and longer molecules). Thin crystalline flakes of unsubstituted thiophenes have been grown from the vapour phase (e.g., refs. 73–77), although melt-grown crystals have also been studied.78 The dense packing of the molecules results in most cases in their herringbone arrangement, the long axes of all molecules in the unit cell assuming a parallel (or nearly parallel) orientation. The growth conditions may play some role in the molecular packing, resulting in obtaining different crystal modifications, as has been found in 4T and 6T (so-called ‘low-temperature’ and ‘high temperature’ polymorphs).74,76–79 Substitution at the ends or at the sides of the molecules can modify the packing details and the overlap of molecular π orbital systems hence influencing the charge transport. The results have been reviewed in refs. 10 and 25.The growth of acene crystals (Ac, Pc), and of copper phthalocyanine from the vapour phase has been reported in ref. 74. Pc crystals have also been grown by the authors of ref. 80. It is worth noting that the authors report on the polymorphism of pentacene, potentially influencing its electrical properties.Experiments on low-molecular weight molecular solids, performed in recent years have in most cases been carried out on polycrystalline and amorphous samples. Significant progress has been made in recent years in obtaining samples of controlled thickness, purity and morphology. These samples are usually obtained as thin films, several nm to several μm thick. The morphology critically depends on the deposition conditions, in particular on the deposition rate, and nature of the substrate and its temperature. It is beyond the scope of this article to provide a detailed discussion of this topic, we shall, however, mention a general rule relating the morphology of samples with the substrate temperature. Within the limits imposed by other factors (thermal stability of the material, possible existence of several phases etc.), an increase of the substrate temperature results in an increase of the average size of crystallites. An extensive review on the growth of ultra-thin organic films by vacuum deposition was published by Forrest.813 Energy levels, contactsElectrical properties of molecular materials are determined, among other factors, by energies of levels (bands) allowed for electrons and holes in these materials. In perfect molecular crystals, the transport occurs in narrow energy bands; in disordered (polycrystalline or amorphous) materials, the bands split into a manifold of local states (see, e.g., ref. 1 for the review). If the vacuum level is taken as reference, then the energies of the electron and hole levels are, respectively, the electron affinity of molecules and their ionization energy in the solid state. The electrical energy gap is then the difference of the two latter parameters, being a measure of the energy difference between the energies of levels allowed for non-interacting electrons and holes.At this point, a terminology-related problem should be invoked. The energy gap is often identified with the optical (HOMO–LUMO) gap taken directly from spectroscopic measurements. Moreover, in some cases the energies of the HOMO and LUMO levels used to calculate the gap are taken from quantum-chemical calculations performed for isolated molecules. The former procedure neglects the electron–hole interactions and is likely to underestimate the gap by some 0.5 eV. The latter approach neglects the electrostatic interaction of a charge carrier with the polarizable environment introducing an important error, often exceeding 1 eV. Furthermore, approximate values of the HOMO and LUMO energies are often deduced from electrochemical measurements of the first oxidation and reduction potentials. This method requires a proper calibration.Typically, the solid-state ionization energies of various organic solids of interest range between 4 and 6 eV, their gaps – between 2 and 4 eV (cf. Table 2). Within groups of homologues, the ionization energies and the gaps usually decrease with increasing size of the molecule. This relation is illustrated in Table 2 with acenes. A similar relation is observed in other groups of compounds: for example, the electron–hole gap in oligothiophenes decreases from 3.6 eV in 4T to 3.0 eV in 6T82
(see similar correlations, e.g., in the reviews refs. 15, 24 and 83).The majority of typical non-substituted low-molecular weight materials (acenes, phenylenes, thiophenes, phthalocyanines, …) are p-type (hole-conducting) materials. A similar situation is encountered in π-conjugated polymers: most of them are p-type semiconductors built of electron-releasing macromolecules consisting of electron-rich subunits (like thiophene or pyrrole). Stable materials with electron accepting properties (n-type materials) are required in all important electronic and opto-electronic applications: (bipolar transistors, photovoltaic devices, LEDs and FETs, …). So far, however, only a few devices with such materials have been studied due to a shortage of suitable acceptor polymers (see e.g. ref. 84). In polymer LEDs, since p-type conjugated polymers are much better hole- than electron-transporting materials, the resulting charge imbalance limits EL efficiency. Additionally, polymers with high electron affinities would allow the use of aluminium as the cathode, which is much more stable than the often used at present low-work-function calcium electrode.85 In photovoltaic devices, preparation of composites of separated, but interpenetrating phases of acceptor- and donor-type conjugated polymer should allow one to use the ‘bulk heterojunction’ concept in producing PV cells. Some of such devices have already been produced, showing conversion efficiency similar to those obtained for polymer/fullerene systems.84,86,87 As in the heterojunction systems with fullerenes, MEH-PPV was used as a donor-type polymer, and the high electron affinity polymer was obtained by cyano substitution of MEH-PPV.85 All-polymer ‘bulk heterojunctions’ open new perspectives for PV devices. For example, it was shown that it is possible to create a bilayer junction with n- and p-type polymers interpenetrating each other.84 The use of organic materials in photovoltaic devices will be discussed below.An obvious choice for low-molecular weight n-type materials are molecules with high electron affinity which, in most cases, means the use of molecules such as derivatives of oligo- and polythiophenes,88,89 oligo- and polyfluorenes,90 naphthalenetetracarboxylic diimide (NTCDI),91 or phthalocyanines,92 cyano- or fluorine-substituted. One of the approaches for obtaining electron-transporting polymeric materials is to mix low molecular weight acceptors with inert polymer matrix. However, it is usually very difficult to obtain ‘solid solutions’ of acceptors molecularly dispersed in polymer matrix at concentrations sufficiently high to assure effective electron transport, since such systems are thermodynamically unstable and show a tendency to a phase separation. Especially at higher temperatures, inevitable during the fabrication procedure and also usually encountered by the working devices, the low molecular weight additives precipitate easily. This problem can be overcome, if electron-acceptor groups (like aryl units with nitro- or cyano-groups), capable of n-doping and electron transporting properties are incorporated as side groups or in the polymer main chain. Many low molecular weight acceptors were used as building units to produce electron transporting polymers, such as: pyridine, oxadiazole, quinoline, quinoxaline, triazine, bithiazole and then were tested in PLED devices. It was found that these heterocyclic units act also as fluorophores emitting in most cases blue light, however usually with a poor quantum efficiency (QE).93Interfaces between organic solids and electrodes play a key role in nearly all processes determining the action of organic electronic devices, in particular, in OLEDs and in PV cells. A detailed discussion of these processes is clearly beyond the scope of this article, it will nevertheless be necessary to provide a brief description of basic factors influencing the behaviour of contacts and heterojunctions. The basic factor is the energetics of the interfaces, and in particular relations between the energy of electrons in the contact and the energies of the electron and/or hole transport levels. According to a ‘textbook approach’, an effective injection of electrons into an organic solid takes place from an electrode whose work function is close to or lower than the electron affinity of the molecules forming the solid, whereas the hole injection occurs from an electrode whose work function is close to or higher than the solid-state ionization energy of the material. This simple picture is usually obscured by the presence of surface effects of various kind13,94,95 but nevertheless it can serve as a useful qualitative indication of injection ability of various electrodes.A comparison of the data of Table 2 with the work functions of typical electrode materials indicates that low work function metals (Na, ϕ
= 2.6 eV; Ca, ϕ
= 2.8 eV; Mg, ϕ
= 3.2 eV) should form efficient electron-injecting contacts to high electron affinity materials, whereas high work function materials (Au, ϕ
= 5.4 eV; Pt, ϕ
= 5.7 eV) should act as hole-injecting contacts to low ionization energy solids. It should be mentioned, however, that the choice of electrodes does not necessarily result from a direct comparison of the work functions. For example, Al (ϕ
= 3.9 eV) is often used as the low-work function (electron-injecting) electrode. Similarly, indium tin oxide (ITO, ϕ
= 4.7 eV) is a commonly used anode material, its disadvantages (mainly a relatively high interface barrier for hole injection into most organic materials) is largely compensated by its favourable optical properties. Several methods of improving the performance of ITO/organic solid interfaces have been described, protonation (e.g., refs. 96–99) or inserting an intermediate material replacing a high barrier with two lower ones (e.g., refs. 100–102) being often reported. Recently, Marks et al.103,104 reported on the use of binary and ternary conducting oxides of a general formula GaxInySnzZntO3
(x+y+z+t
= 2). Depending on composition, the work function of such electrodes (thin films on glass substrates) can be varied between 5.2 and 6.1 eV, providing convenient hole injecting contacts.4 Photogeneration of charge carriers in conjugated polymersThe mechanism of the most fundamental process involved in photoconductivity and photovoltaic phenomena in molecular crystals – photogeneration of charge carriers – is reasonably well understood (see, e.g., ref. 1 and references therein). In conjugated polymers, however, the carrier photogeneration has been controversial for a long time, in spite of an increasing number of experimental facts.9 The main point of the controversy is related to the strength of the photoexcited geminate electron–hole pair attraction as compared to the bandwidth, determining if the photoexcitations are strongly correlated Frenkel excitons or rather weakly bound excitons, allowing one to apply the band model with ultrafast charge photogeneration. In other words, the exciton binding energy determines whether conjugated polymers behave in this respect more like inorganic semiconductors or rather as other organic solids.105The model assuming the band to band transition or ultrafast electron transfer from primary generated intra-chain excitons is based on the observation of a very fast appearance of charge carriers, well documented by several experiments with very high time resolution. Transient excited-state absorption spectroscopy experiments performed in the range of the infrared active vibrational (IRAV) modes in conjugated polymers (PPV and MEH-PPV) and in their composites (MEH-PPV/C60) showed that charge carriers are photogenerated in a time span shorter than 100 fs, with the quantum efficiency as high as ca. 0.1.106 Since no correlation was found between the time evolution of the photoinduced IRAV signals and the exciton lifetime (ca. 300 ps), it was concluded that the charge carriers are photogenerated directly and not via the exciton annihilation. Pump–probe spectroscopy experiments for these polymers107 showed a weak spectral dependence of charge generation quantum efficiency in the range from the absorption edge up to 6.2 eV. This result yielded a further argument for a direct photogeneration of charged polarons at times shorter than 100 fs, contrary to the ‘exciton models’ assuming indirect charge generation. Furthermore, it was argued that the dramatic increase of photocurrent for excitation energies above the onset of absorption in PPV derivatives reported in the literature (which had been explained by a large exciton binding energy) arises in fact from the external current generated by electron photoemission.On the other hand, it was indicated that the appearance of charge carriers under illumination is a necessary but not sufficient condition for their contribution to conductivity, because the created charge carriers have to be able to move freely under an electric field.108 In organic solids, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs are bound together by the Coulomb force at a distance shorter than the Onsager radius (ca. 15 nm at room temperature) and most of them undergo a geminate recombination. Only few of them will avoid geminate recombination, escape from the Coulomb well and take part in the conductivity. The picosecond time-resolved technique, consisting of recording the average photocurrent resulting from a correlated action of periodically repeated pairs of femtosecond laser pulses, allowed one to distinguish components of the photoconductivity resulting from second-order processes between photogenerated intermediate species in a ladder type PPP (Me-LPPP). These experiments show that, although intra-chain excitons are indeed formed, most charge carriers are generated very quickly (< 1 ps). These charge carriers, however, are not free, forming polaron pairs which are precursors of free polarons. It was therefore concluded that several different intermediate states are involved in the mechanism of the formation of free charge carriers.108The mechanism of dissociation of neutral optical excitations (excitons) into free charge carriers was thoroughly discussed by Bässler and coworkers in several papers (e.g., refs. 105 and 109). Taking into account experiments on extrinsic and intrinsic generation of charge carriers and the effect of electric fields on prompt and delayed fluorescence in PPV derivatives and MeLPPP it was concluded that the generation of off-chain geminate pairs results from vibrationally relaxed singlet excitations. These geminate pairs may undergo an interchain dissociation. Higher energy excitations create ‘hot’ excitons capable of undergoing the on-chain dissociation.1055 Mobility5.1 Mobility measurementsMobility is one of the basic parameters characterising the transport of charges, hence numerous attempts have been reported aimed at determining this parameter, its dependence on temperature, electric field, and its relation to the morphology of samples. Although it is beyond the scope of this article to discuss details of the methods, it will be nevertheless useful to provide a brief description of the methods, commonly employed in determining the mobilities of charge carriers in organic solids. These are: (i) the time-of-flight (TOF) technique, (ii) the field-effect transistor (FET) method. Other methods are used less frequently or yield less reliable values.Conceptually, the TOF technique is the simplest method, based directly on the definition of the mobility. A thin sheet of charge carriers is created in the surface region of a plane-parallel sample provided with two electrodes (cf. Fig. 1). The measurement then consists in determining the time necessary for the carriers to reach the counter electrode (transit time, ttr
–
cf. Fig. 1b) under a given biasing voltage V. The drift mobility μ is calculated from the equation  (1)where L is the sample thickness. The technique can be used for materials exhibiting low dark conductivities. Moreover, the material under study should be either photoconducting or it should be provided with a suitable photoinjecting contact. The drift mobility so determined is an effective parameter which may be affected by traps (vide infra). In the limiting case, for a sample with deep traps whose trapping time is shorter than the transit time, the latter cannot be determined (cf. refs. 3 and 110). Fig. 1  TOF experiment. A scheme of the TOF apparatus (a), and a typical transient current as seen on the oscilloscope (b); ttr is the transit time. FET is a three-terminal device, schematically depicted in Fig. 2a. The experiment consists of measuring source-to-drain currents (Id) as a function of the source-to-drain potential difference (Ud) at various gate voltages (Ug). A family of schematic current–voltage characteristics is shown in Fig. 2b. The mobility can be determined from either the equation describing the slope of the dependence of the source-to-drain current on the gate voltage, measured in the linear portion of the plot  (2)or from the dependence of the saturation current on the gate voltage.  (3) Fig. 2  FE experiment. A schematic view of a thin film FET (a), and a family of current–voltage characteristics (b). The curves have been plotted for different gate voltages (Ug(1)<Ug(2)<Ug(3)). In the above equations, W and L are channel width and length, respectively, Ci is the capacitance of the insulating layer (per unit length), and Uo is the threshold voltage.111 Here, a possible effect of the contacts and of the spatial non-uniformity of samples should be carefully taken into account.112 All equations have been derived for spatially uniform samples and any non-uniformity may result in qualitatively incorrect results. Moreover, in trap-containing samples, the occupancy of traps will depend on the gate voltage. Hence one may expect the effective mobilities to depend on the gate voltage as has indeed been experimentally confirmed in numerous experiments (e.g., refs. 113–116). In the following, mobilities determined from field-effect measurements will be referred to as FE mobilities.5.2 Mobilities in organic single crystalsFor the discussion of the theories describing the transport of charge carriers in perfect molecular solids, the reader is referred to a rich literature existing on the subject (e.g., refs. 1 and 6 and references therein). For the purpose of the present discussion it is sufficient to mention that the theory predicts that the transport of charge carriers in perfect molecular solids occurs in narrow bands, the carriers being strongly coupled to lattice phonons. The experiments performed on single crystals, and in particular the temperature dependences of the mobilities, their anisotropies and relation to the crystal structure allow one to get an insight into microscopic phenomena controlling the transport of charge carriers and provide a reference for results obtained on less perfect samples. Experiments showed that the highest room-temperature mobilities measured in molecular single crystals are of the order of 10−1–101 cm2 V−1 s−1, and increase to 101–102 cm2 V−1 s−1 at temperatures of the order of 10 K.110,117 A good example of such a behaviour is the temperature dependence of the drift mobility of holes and electrons in single crystals of polycyclic hydrocarbons. Careful measurements performed on single crystals demonstrate that the ‘lattice’ drift mobilities (μo) follow a T−n dependence, with 0 ≤
n
≤ 3 but mostly ranging between 1 and 1.5. These experiments, however, can only be performed on samples of the highest chemical purity and controlled perfection, hence reliable results are scarce, and limited practically to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Early results obtained for single-crystalline samples have been listed by Karl;110,117 in most cases, they have been obtained by the time-of-flight method. The mobilities determined for single crystals at biasing fields typical of this type of experiment (up to ca. 103–104 V cm−1) are field-independent; at high fields (of the order of 104–105 V cm−1) the drift velocities of charge carriers tend to saturate thus resulting in a decrease of the apparent mobilities.Doping of molecular solids with a small amount (of the order of 10−7–10−4 mol mol−1) of suitably chosen guest molecules may give rise to a dramatic reduction of the effective drift mobilities due to trapping of charge carriers. In the case of shallow traps controlling the transport, the effective mobility (μeff) is described by the equation first derived by Hoesterrey and Letson.118 (4)where xg is the mole fraction of the guest molecule, and Et stands for the depth of the trap formed by the dopant (assumed monoenergetic). It follows from the equation that at low temperatures the mobility should be temperature-activated with a slope determined by the trap depth, whereas at sufficiently high temperatures it should attain its ‘lattice’ value (μo) equal to that in a pure crystal.The origin of traps in molecular materials has been studied and methods of their determination have been developed in the seventies and eighties of the 20th century, and discussed in numerous monographs and reviews (e.g., ref. 1, Ch. 2, refs. 3 and 6). In general, traps can be associated with either chemical impurities (‘chemical traps’) or with defects of crystal structure (‘structural traps’). Recently, the case of ‘dipolar traps’ has been considered.119–121 These centres are created in a molecular solid consisting of non-polar or weakly polar molecules, doped with polar guest species. The permanent dipole moment of the guest molecule locally modifies the polarization energy due to its contribution to the local field acting on a localized carrier, resulting in the appearance of local states in the vicinity of the dopant. The calculations119,120 showed that traps as deep as ca. 0.5 eV can be formed in the vicinity of strongly polar dopants.5.3 Disordered molecular materialsThe influence of local states becomes particularly important in samples containing high concentrations of structural defects or, in the limit, devoid of the long-range order. In disordered solids, carrier mobilities are expected to depend not only on factors related to the microscopic structure but also on meso- and macroscopic order: the size of crystalites, their orientation, inter-crystallite contacts etc. Hence one should expect the mobility to be lower than the respective value in a perfect crystal.2 Moreover, the mobility should be temperature activated, following, to a first approximation, the Hoesterrey–Letson equation (eqn. (4)). Qualitatively, such behaviour is often met (e.g., refs. 116,122–124); however, the simple Arrhenius-type dependence is not fulfilled.116,123–126 For example, a temperature dependence, interpreted as a superposition of two Arrhenius dependences was found in bis-1,2,5,-thiadiazolo)-p-quinobis(1,3-dithiole)
(BTQBT).116 In some polycrystalline samples a temperature-independent mobility has been found: in some pentacene thin films Nelson et al.122 report that the hole mobility amounts to 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, remaining practically constant between 7 K and 300 K. Non-Arrhenius dependences, interpreted within Bässler's model, will be discussed below.Typically, the mobilities reported for most electroactive polycrystalline and amorphous molecular solids (including polymers) are of the order of 10−4–10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, being quite often much lower. One should realize that low mobilities are one of the factors limiting the applicability of organic materials, thus several attempts to obtain materials exhibiting an improved mobility have been reported in the literature but these attempts only sporadically resulted in obtaining materials of an acceptable mobility (i.e., >10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1). In most cases the results were obtained using the techniques described above: time of flight and its modifications or field effect measurements. The FE mobility of holes has been determined in thin films of α-copper phthalocyanine (CuPc).127 The mobilities depend on the preparation conditions but upon optimizing the substrate and annealing temperatures and the film thickness, the value 3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved. The parameters of such an FE transistor change upon exposure to oxygen; the analysis of the results obtained shows that the transport of carriers is influenced by a trap ca. 0.4 eV deep.128 These results were obtained from experimental data using a technique referred to as the thermally modulated field effect, consisting of simultaneous measurements of current–voltage and activation energy–voltage dependences. Kuniyoshi, Kudo et al.129–131 used CuPc films in vertical OFETs (details of construction differ from those shown in Fig. 2). The FE mobilities determined from their measurements are much lower than those quoted above, amounting to ca. 4 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1. A review of early measurements of FE mobilities in phthalocyanines has been given in ref. 49.Much attention has been paid to studies of the transport properties of oligomer analogues of polymers commonly used in organic electronics. Horowitz et al.115 carried out a systematic study of FE mobility in oligothiophenes of various lengths (4T, 6T, 8T). A nearly linear dependence of the mobility on the gate voltage was found in thin films. It is interesting to compare results obtained on polycrystalline samples with those obtained on single crystals. In a polycrystalline 6T sample, Horowitz and Hajlaoui124 report the room-temperature FE mobility increasing linearly with the gate voltage and exceeding 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1, whereas the mobility in 6T single crystal was found equal to ca. 0.15 cm2 V−1 s−1, nearly independent of the gate voltage. A comparison of the mobilities taken at a constant voltage showed a clear dependence on the chain length: the mobility in 4T was of the order of 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, increasing to 0.03 cm2 V−1 s−1 in 6T and 0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1 in 8T. A similar trend was also observed by Botelho do Rego et al.132 Even higher mobilities, amounting to ca. (0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 1.2 cm2 V−1 s−1) at room temperature were reported in pentacene thin films.70,114,122,133,134 Note that these mobilities are comparable with those determined in good-quality single crystals by the time-of-flight method, and make organic thin films promising candidates for elements of commercial devices.In general, one should be careful when comparing carrier mobilities reported on the same material by various authors as they usually have been measured on samples of different morphologies and purities in different experimental conditions. In the case of vapour-deposited films, the effect of the deposition temperature has been explicitly determined (see above); on the other hand, several groups (e.g., refs. 112,124,134 and 135) found a clear relation between the size of crystallites and the FE mobility: in pentacene films the mobility increases by nearly two orders of magnitude when the crystallite size changes from 0.1 µm to ca. 5 µm,134 a similar effect was also found in oligothiophenes.124,136 Horowitz and Hajlaoui124,136 associate this dependence with the morphology of the polycrystalline samples, in which the mobility is controlled by the grain boundaries. This interpretation seems to find a confirmation in the results obtained on metal-free phthalocyanine films137 using the thermally modulated space-charge-limited current method.138 The data of in ref. 137 clearly point to a relation between the size of crystallites and the density of traps. The results quoted here corroborate earlier results reviewed, e.g., in refs. 139 and 140.Apart from the size of crystallites, their organization plays an important role. The role of alignment of crystallites is well illustrated with the results reported by Swiggers et al.141 who used rubbed pVA layers as the ‘commanding surfaces’ orienting pentacene: the measured hole mobilities amounted to 0.007 cm2 V−1 s−1 if the direction of current flow was parallel to the direction of rubbing, and was equal to 0.02 cm2 V−1 s−1 when these two directions were perpendicular. A similar effect was observed in a polymer FET. Amundson et al.142 report on an in-plane anisotropy of the FE mobility in PHT deposited onto a friction transferred PTFE. The anisotropy of the electrical properties was attributed to the surface ordering of the electroactive polymer.High mobility electron transporting materials have also been sought among molecules with high electron affinity such as suitably substituted oligo- and polythiophenes,88,89 oligofluorenes,90 NTCDI derivatives,91 or phthalocyanines92
(vide supra). The reported FE mobilities are slightly lower than those of holes, in some materials, however, reaching reasonably high values (e.g., over 0.1 cm2 V−1 s−1 in some NTCDI derivatives91). For a review of earlier research, see, e.g., ref. 140.An important class of disordered molecular solids are so-called “molecularly doped polymers”
(MDP) and glassy charge-transporting materials. MDP are amorphous solid solutions of molecules of electron- or hole-transporting materials (electron acceptors or electron donors, respectively) dissolved in a polymer hosts acting as a binder. Typically, the concentrations of charge-transporting materials in the “molecularly doped polymers” range between a few percent and several tens of percent (often significantly exceeding 50%), one should therefore realize that in this case the notion of “doping” differs from that employed in conventional solid state physics.In recent years, most of the rich experimental material related to the charge carrier transport in disordered molecular solids has been interpreted within the model due to Bässler (see refs. 125 and 126 and references therein). The model assumes that, due to disorder, energies of interaction of an excitation with the surrounding medium may be locally modified in a molecular solid. In the case of charge carrier transport, this translates into local (random) modifications of the polarization energy. As a result, narrow energy bands in which the transport of charge carriers occurs in molecular single crystals split into a manifold of local states, the transport between them occurring via hopping. Additionally, the spread of intersite distances must inevitably influence the respective transfer rates.The most important results have been obtained from computer simulations employing the Monte Carlo technique. The calculations were performed on a primitive cubic lattice consisting of non-polar isotropic molecules, with the lattice constant equal to 0.6 nm. The main results have been given in refs 125 and 126. The following heuristic equation, based on the results of the simulations and valid in the non-dispersive transport region, has been put forward  (5)where  (6)In the above equations, Ftr is a transition field between the low-field and high-field regimes (typically, Ftr is of the order of 105 V cm−1), C is a temperature- and field-independent constant being a function of the intersite distance and assuming the value of 2.9 × 10−4
(cm V−1)1/2 for the distance equal to 0.6 nm, and Σ is a temperature-independent parameter related to the off-diagonal disorder. A similar equation, valid for the dispersive transport, has also been derived, differing essentially in the σ-dependence of the mobility.143,144The above equations predict that (i) at high fields, the mobility should be field-dependent, following a Poole–Frenkel-type dependence, independently of the polarity of the molecules in the material, i.e., without directly assuming any Coulombic interaction between the local centres and the carriers; (ii) temperature dependences of the mobility should be non-Arrhenius; (iii) the zero-field mobilities are dependent on the diagonal disorder only, following a lnμo
∝
T−2 dependence. Thus, analyzing the field and temperature dependences of the drift mobility of holes in a disordered photoconducting material, one should be able to extract information concerning both diagonal and off-diagonal disorder. In its original form, the model neglects the influence of dynamic disorder (polaronic effects) on the transport of charge carriers.The model presented above provides a basis for interpreting the ample experimental material published so far. The mobilities were measured in hole-transporting materials (often derivatives of triphenylamine and phenylenediamine –
e.g., refs. 101,145–147) and electron-transporting materials (N-arylbenzimidazoles148), employing the TOF and FET techniques or, less often, the techniques such as transient electroluminescence. In the former materials, hole mobilities range between 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and exhibit field and temperature dependences as predicted by Bässler's model (Kovac et al.145 report on the hole mobility in NPB amounting to 3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and remaining voltage-independent up to 5 × 105 V cm−1). The mobilities reported in electron-transporting materials are lower by ca. one order of magnitude.145–148 A special mention should be devoted to Alq3, in which both electron and hole drift mobilities were measured.42,149,150 Alq3 is a widely used electron-transporting material in which the room-temperature electron mobility is (F1/2)-dependent, its zero-field value being of the order of 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1. The hole mobility exhibited a similar dependence, with a much lower zero field value, of the order of 10−10 cm2 V−1 s−1. Earlier experiments performed by several groups have been reviewed in numerous articles and monographs (e.g., refs. 5,151–154)As was mentioned above, the basic equations describing the charge transport in disordered solids were derived from computer simulations. Recently, analytical models were developed155–159 providing an analytical support to the results obtained earlier by the Monte Carlo simulations. The effective-medium model has been put forward by Fishchuk et al.158 It was demonstrated that, in the case of a weak disorder, the analytical model correctly describes experimental results obtained for weakly disordered organic materials provided the correct expression for the hopping rates is employed. An extension of the model to the case of a trap-containing disordered solid allowed Fishchuk et al.159 to derive equations describing concentration and temperature dependences of charge mobilities in a more correct way than the Hoesterrey–Letson equation (eqn. (4)) derived for a discrete trapping level.6 Emerging applications of organic materials6.1 ElectroluminescenceThe densities of thermally generated carriers in molecular materials considered in this article are negligibly small under normal conditions, hence the carriers are introduced by an external stimulus: by irradiation with quanta of an appropriate energy or by injection from suitable contacts (vide supra). Of interest to the matter of this section is the situation when carriers of both signs are injected into the samples. The charges should recombine in the sample bulk producing a neutral excited state which then radiatively decays emitting light. The phenomenon, referred to as electroluminescence (EL), was first observed in an organic material by Pope et al.160. Helfrich and Schneider161 were the first to use effective injecting contacts. The phenomenon itself has been reasonably well understood (see e.g., refs. 1,3 and 38 for the reviews of early literature) but it was only after the discovery of a bright luminescence in a multicomponent organic system162 and in polymers,163 when the interest increased tremendously. It is difficult to overestimate the importance of the discovery of EL in polymers and fabrication of the first polymer LED (PLED).163 The research on conjugated polymers, already slowly saturating at that time, received a new impetus and attracted a lot of researchers in academic and industrial laboratories, resulting nowadays in commercially available PLEDs and electroluminescent displays. Several hundreds of papers on various aspects of physics, chemistry and materials science of EL have been published each year. It is thus impossible to cover the rich literature existing on the subject; we shall therefore concentrate on a few topics referring the reader to several monographs and review articles – to mention but a few published in recent years.7,93,164–172Before discussing recent achievements it would be instructive to provide a simple picture explaining basic features of the energetics of electroluminescent structures. It should be kept in mind that the schemes presented below do not imply the applicability of the band model: as was mentioned earlier, the band model is, at best, applicable for single crystals, and it certainly cannot be used in disordered molecular solids. The levels drawn in the figure indicate schematically the energies of dominant electron and hole transport levels, equivalent to energies of the edges of the conduction and valence bands in the ‘conventional’ band picture.EL is a complex process, involving injection of electrons and holes, transport of the charges of both signs to the recombination zone, recombination and formation of neutral excitons and, finally, their radiative decay. Efficiency, kinetics and other characteristic features of each of these processes may depend on details of the structure arrangement. The simplest structure is a single-layer one, depicted schematically in Fig. 3 The electrons injected from a low-work function electrode and holes injected from a high-work function contact recombine in the sample in the recombination zone whose location is not easy to control.38 Presently, two- or three layer structures are usually employed (Fig. 3b, 3c) allowing for optimization of the injection and transport of charges and for the localization of the recombination zone. A complex structure, allowing for the controlled simultaneous emission of red, green and blue radiation was also described.173,174 Fig. 3  Schematic views of the geometries of one-, two- and three-layer OLEDs (upper part), and corresponding energy level diagrams (lower part). 1 – substrate; 2 – bottom (high work function) electrode; 3 – emitting layer; 4 – upper (low work function) electrode; 5 – hole transporting layer. ϕh and ϕl
– work functions of the electrodes, Ic
– ionization energy (energy of HOMO), Ac
– electron affinity (energy of LUMO). The positions of energy levels are those prior to attaining the thermal equilibrium. The following conclusions can be drawn from inspection of the above schemes.(i) The efficiency of the injection depends on the relation between the work function of the metal and either the energy of the hole transport level (ionization energy or HOMO) or electron transport levels (electron affinity or LUMO). In case of the incompatibility of the respective energy levels i.e., high surface barriers for carrier injection, the transport is likely to be injection limited, otherwise it will be space-charge limited.(ii) Electron transporting materials should be selected among materials with low-lying LUMO (high electron affinity). In the case of hole-transporting materials the HOMO energy is important. The tuning of the energy levels of organic materials to the needs may be achieved by a chemical tailoring of molecular structures (see refs. 15 and 169 for reviews).(iii) The wavelength of emitted radiation is related to the energy of the neutral exciton of the emitting layer, i.e., it depends on the HOMO–LUMO gap of the emitting species.Organic LEDs are able to emit all three principal colours: blue, green and red. Among those, green-emitting LEDs are the most developed; red-emitting LEDs with acceptable parameters can also be produced (though orange-emitting LEDs exhibit a much better performance). The missing elements required to produce full colour commercial displays are still blue-emitting LEDs, in spite of the fact that the first blue-emitting LEDs based on PF175 and on PPP176 were fabricated soon after the electroluminescence in organic structures was discovered. Their external QE was, however, very low, below 0.05 %, and although important progress was made in the subsequent years (see ref. 93 for review), the blue-emitting LEDs still do not fully meet industrial and commercial requirements.Since the structure of conjugated polymers can be modified in multitudinous ways, it is in principle possible to tune the emissive properties by changing the band gap. A very elegant illustration of such an approach was presented for a series of substituted polythiophenes with controlled conjugation length.177 The presence of aromatic rings adjacent to thiophene units extends the conjugated system causing a red-shift of PL. In contrast, large alkyl substituting groups (which act also as the solubilizing groups) disturb coplanarity of the thiophene rings causing a reduction of the conjugation, which in turn results in a blue shift of PL. One has to remember, however, that the reduction of the conjugation length leads also to a decrease of the charge carrier mobility, which is generally much lower in the conjugated polymers than in most inorganic semiconductors, thus a further decrease of the charge carrier mobility in the polymer layer may deteriorate the PLED performance.The importance of the blue-emitting materials for full colour displays arises also from the fact that the blue light, via a properly tuned energy transfer, can be efficiently transformed into energetically lower green or red light (see, e.g., ref. 178), hence with blue LEDs one can get all principal colours. Several low-molecular weight organic molecules have been reported to be promising blue-emitting EL materials. Oligophenylenes (mostly 6P and its derivatives26–29) have been frequently used. It seems, however, that the attention of researchers has been focused on blue-emitting polymers. We will describe the progress in this field, taking polyfluorenes (PF) as an example.Many homo- and copolymers containing phenyl, fluorene, thiophene, pyridine or furan groups (in the main chain, or as side groups) were found to emit a blue photoluminescence, what is a precondition to observe blue electroluminescence from a given material. And indeed, after proper chemical modification, consisting mainly of substitutions of various side groups, these polymers were used to fabricate blue emitting PLEDs. The chemical modifications were necessary in order to improve solubility, and also to disturb planarity of the polymer backbone and therefore to reduce a tendency to form excimers in the solid state. At present, polyfluorenes and polyalkoxyphenylenes are the most promising polymers for blue emitting LEDs. the former polymers have been particularly intensively investigated in recent years due to their high PL and EL efficiencies (e.g. refs. 179–182). Because PF are also thermotropic liquid crystals (LC), one can easily produce oriented layers183–186 which are particularly interesting as components of LEDs and displays since one can fabricate devices emitting a polarized electroluminescence. A successful alignment of LC PF was reported recently by Neher et al.186. The authors showed that by using photoaligned layers of photoaddressable polymers (PAPs) comprising mesogenic and non-mesogenic azobenzene side chains187 it was possible to get optically anisotropic layers with dichroic ratios exceeding 10. The aligned PAP layers with hole-transporting molecules were then used as components in LEDs showing photometric polarization ratios in EL emission of up to 14 at a brightness of up to 200 cd m−2 and an efficiency of 0.3 cd A−1.The blue emission in PF layers is often accompanied by a green emission. This ‘parasitic’ green emission causes a decrease of efficiency of the desired blue emission and results in spectral instability of emitted light. Research on the origin of this green emission, which has been the subject of controversy in recent years, will be covered here in more detail. Early explanations related it to the recombination on some green-emitting aggregates (excimer emission188,189) which were supposed to form primarily on the anode side. Recent experiments, however, provide strong evidence for the chemical origin of the emitting centres. It was demonstrated that fluorenone units (so called keto-defects) yield green emission due to radiative decay of excitons on these defected PF segments.182,190It is known that fluorenone may be formed as a product of the photo-oxidation of fluorene or of the annealing of fluorene in oxygen-containing atmosphere,188 and that the relative intensity of the green band increases with increasing concentration of fluorenone units.191 It was also shown that fluorenone defects may be created on a polyfluorene chain in a side reaction which already occurs in the course of polymerisation.192 Another argument against the morphological origin of the ‘green sites’ was deduced from PL experiments on diluted solutions of poly(9,9-di-n-hexylfluorene) endcapped with fluorenone groups. The PL spectra of these solutions were similar to the spectra of annealed solid layers of polyfluorene.193 The green emission of the keto-defects was also predicted by quantum-chemical simulation which assigned its origin to the CT π–π* transition of the fluorenone units.194 It has been commonly observed that the green emission band is always much more visible in EL spectra than in PL spectra.195,196 This feature may be rationalized assuming that in the EL experiments the emission occurs preferentially via recombination on defect (fluorenone) sites due to the charge trapping, whereas such a process cannot contribute to the photoluminescence.182,191,192,197Although the above papers clearly demonstrate that the keto-defects yield green emission, one cannot exclude a contribution from another mechanism, related to the morphology of samples. Several independent experiments have shown that annealing of polyfluorene films in an oxygen-free atmosphere leads to a relative increase of the intensity of the green emission,193,195,196,198,199 which can be assigned to excimer emission from aggregates. New evidence for the contribution of weakly-emitting aggregates in solid PF samples were recently reported,189,190,200. Based on STM experiments performed on LPPP it was shown that such aggregates might act as hole traps.201 On the other hand, one can also argue that morphological changes induced by the annealing may lead to a better packing of polymer chains, the improved order resulting in an increase of the diffusion length of excitons facilitating their transport towards keto-defects.A closer insight into the effect of charge carrier trapping in polyfluorene films on EL and PL spectra and, indirectly, on the nature of trapping sites, was obtained by means of thermoluminescence (TL).202,203 It was found that in samples with intentionally introduced extrinsic traps for holes (N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(di(3-methyl-phenyl)-amino-biphenyl)-benzidine, TPTE) the green component in EL is suppressed and simultaneously the EL efficiency increases.202,204 The effect was explained by a competition between the green-emitting sites and the added hole traps in capturing charge carriers. Such an explanation seems realistic because cyclovoltammetry measurements indicate a large HOMO offset (0.51 eV) of TPTE relative to PF.The suppression of the green emission by TPTE was also explained assuming that the additive molecules act as new hole transporting sites, and due to a more efficient hole transport the emissive zone is shifted away from the anode.205 It was further assumed that the green-emitting aggregates are formed mostly near the anode, hence the contribution of the recombination on these sites decreases with improved hole transport. Contrary to this explanation, however, it was found that the current through hole-only transporting devices decreases upon doping with TPTE while the EL efficiency is considerably improved, indicating a better balance between holes and electrons and at the same time suppressing the green emission.202,204Recently, it was also found that upon annealing the samples at temperatures close to the transition to the liquid-crystalline phase, the TL band broadens towards higher temperatures, indicating an increasing population of deeper traps. In such annealed samples the green bands in the PL and EL spectra are more pronounced.203 Since no changes were observed after annealing at lower temperatures, one can deduce that an enhanced mobility of the polymer main chain is required for their formation, i.e., they should be morphological defects, e.g. aggregates. Therefore one can conclude that some non-emitting or weakly-emitting aggregates are formed during the annealing, and these aggregates compete with the undisturbed chains with respect to exciton recombination. On the other hand, the photooxidation of the PF samples, albeit introducing keto-effects and resulting in a relative increase of the green emission in PL, has practically no effect on the TL spectra.203 This apparent discrepancy can be explained by considering the experimental conditions of TL experiments. TL consists in exciting the sample by illumination (and without any external electric field) at low temperatures (ca. 15 K) in order to photogenerate charge carriers and to fill the traps. Then the sample is heated at a constant heating rate to stimulate the charge carrier detrapping and a subsequent recombination (all the time without any external electric field). If the recombination is radiative, then the emitted light can be detected and analysed. Because PF is a donor-type material and holes are the dominating charge carriers, upon excitation at low temperature only holes can escape from the photogeneration sites and fill the traps. Thus it is difficult to fill and to detect any electron traps in conditions of a TL experiment. This means that on the basis of the TL experiments one cannot exclude that the keto-defects act as deep electron traps.To summarise the discussion relating to the origin of the green emission in PF we should say that it seems reasonable to assume that in an addition to green emission from keto-defects there are also ‘green sites’ of morphological origin. Therefore annealing at temperatures high enough under an oxygen-free atmosphere can both, facilitate the exciton diffusion thus increasing the probability that the excitons will be captured by keto-defect, as well as introduce green-emitting recombination sites such as aggregates. The above results show that in spite of extensive research of the mechanism of charge carrier transport in organic luminescent devices (for review see ref. 172), the role of charge carrier trapping is still not clear.6.1.1 Phosphorescent organic LEDs. Fluorescent OLEDs make use of radiative relaxations of luminescent molecules with conservation of spin symmetry, i.e., only singlet excited states are employed. This limits the efficiency of electroluminescence, since only 25% of excitons generated by injected and not correlated electrons and holes are singlets, while the rest are triplet excitons. Realisation of EL devices with higher (up to 100%) internal quantum efficiencies requires the introduction of phosphorescent guest molecules. Radiative relaxation of the triplet states, normally forbidden in organic molecules composed of light elements, is possible in molecules containing heavy elements (e.g., in metal complexes), because of the singlet–triplet mixing resulting from the spin–orbit coupling. Such dopants should be able not only to trap injected charges and to form excitons, but also to accept from the host both the triplet excitons (via Dexter transfer) and the singlet excitons (via Förster transfer). The transfer of a singlet exciton will be followed by the intersystem crossing to triplet states; this means that the host emission will be replaced by the phosphor emission, assuring a clear colour of emitted light. Additionally, the fast removal of triplet excitons from the EL material should increase the operating lifetimes of phosphorescent OLED devices as compared with fluorescent OLEDs, in which the long living reactive triplet excitons are accused of initiating chemical reactions. For these reasons, the elaboration of the first phosphorescent OLED devices in which red emission with nearly 6% of the external quantum efficiency was achieved, is certainly one of the most important developments in the field of OLED research in recent years.206,207 The emitting material was the organic red phosphor (platinum porphyrin – PtOEP) doped into an electron transporting host (Alq3 or CBP). At low currents, the external quantum efficiency was as high as 6%, decreasing considerably at higher currents due to the long decay time (ca 50 µs) of the PtOEP triplet states causing saturation of the emissive sites and triplet–triplet annihilation.208 Several red phosphors were then tested to find a material with a shorter triplet lifetime. One of the shortest lifetimes (ca. 4 µs) was reported for bis(2-(20-benzo[4,5-a]thienyl)pyridinato-N,C30) iridium(acetylactonate)
(Btp2Ir(acac)). An LED prepared with Btp2Ir(acac) as phosphor exhibits a red emission (λmax
= 616 nm) with an enhanced external quantum yield also at high current densities.209 Osmium complexes are also red phosphors with short lifetimes (below 2 µs) and when added to an emitting layer in polymer LED yield emission in the range 620–650 nm.210Green and blue phosphorescent LEDs were also constructed using appropriate phosphors with short triplet lifetimes. One of them is Ir(ppp)3
– a very good green phosphor. A high efficiency of green electrophosphorescence (λmax
= 510 nm) was obtained in the system consisting of Ir(ppp)3 added to a CBP host, due to a fast transfer of singlet and triplet excitons from CBP to Ir(ppp)3, efficient intersystem singlet–triplet crossing and a short lifetime of the triplet states of Ir(ppp)3.211,212 Further progress in green phosphorescent LEDs was achieved using 3-phenyl-4-(10-naphthyl)-5-phenyl-l,2,4-triazole (TAZ) as host doped with Ir(ppp)3, yielding maximum external efficiency exceeding 15% which corresponds to 80% internal efficiency.213In the case of blue phosphorescent OLEDs, the main difficulty is a shortage of hosts with the sufficiently high energies of triplet state required for an effective transfer of triplets to blue phosphor. The shortest wavelength of emitted light (λmax
= 475 nm) was found in a multi-layered OLED with a CBP host doped with 6% of an iridium complex (Firpic) as blue phosphor. The maximum external quantum efficiency was 5.7%.214 The availability of blue, yellow and red emitting electrophosphorescent materials allowed for the construction of a multi-layered phosphorescent OLED device emitting white light with a high external quantum efficiency, exceeding 5%.215A new concept of using phosphor chromophores to produce effective emitting materials for OLED devices consists in the synthesis of dendrimers with the phosphor as a core. Such structures should allow one to control the chromophore distribution, intermolecular interactions and transport of charges and energy. The first OLED devices with the CBP host doped with dendrimer containing green phosphor Ir(ppp)3 as a core show promising characteristic with maximum external quantum efficiency exceeding 8%.216Another approach aimed at using triplet as well as singlet excitons to generate luminescence consists of introducing both phosphorescent and fluorescent guests into the transporting host matrix in order to facilitate the exciton transfer from the matrix via the phosphor to the fluorescent dye. This was realised using CBP as the host and exciton donor, Ir(ppp)3 as the green phosphor acting as sensitizer and DCM as the red fluorescent dopant, yielding the peak efficiency 3% of the red emission.2086.2 Photovoltaic devicesThe photovoltaic effect is generally defined as the emergence of a voltage between electrodes attached to a solid or liquid system upon shining light onto this system.217 The charges are generated by a dissociation of excitons created by the absorbed light. The appearance of the photovoltaic effect in organics was reported many years ago (see, e.g., ref. 41 and references therein) but because of the low performance the effect did not attract much attention. The interest of researchers reappeared after Tang218 reported on a thin-film two-layer cell fabricated of copper phthalocyanine and a perylene tetracarboxylic derivative, having the power conversion efficiency of ca. 1% and the fill factor as high as 0.65.Despite the remarkable progress made in recent years, organic (low-molecular weight and polymer) photovoltaic devices cannot compete with silicon ones in terms of efficiency and stability. The problem of stability becomes crucial, since a long-term exposure to visible light results in a photodegradation drastically reducing lifetime of organic PV devices. Their attraction, however, is their low cost, facility of producing large-area structures, and chemical flexibility allowing for a relatively easy adaptation of the active material to the requirements of the devices. The low cost of producing all-organic PV devices, as compared with their inorganic counterparts, may reduce the requested operational lifetime, it is nevertheless clear that due to the very poor stability of non-protected organic PV devices (not exceeding a few hours) it is necessary to increase the stability of such devices by protecting them against oxygen, moisture and by introducing additives (e.g. chromophores) screening the conjugated polymer chain against light.In its simplest ‘classical’ configuration, a PV device is a photoconducting layer provided with two electrodes differing in their work functions. The open-circuit voltage in this case will not exceed the difference of the work functions of the electrodes, i.e., it will be of the order of a few tenths of a volt at best. Moreover, the performance of such devices is usually rather poor. A much better prospect can be envisaged for multi-component structures, heterojunctions similar to that described by Tang218 being the most obvious one. An appropriate choice of the components of the structure (i.e., a choice of the relative energies of the hole and electron transport levels) facilitates the exciton dissociation.Much effort has recently been devoted to developing novel PV materials and structures, and to improving their performance. The photovoltaic effect is a result of a multi-step process, involving exciton creation and diffusion, separation of charges, transport of carriers of both signs to electrodes and their transfer to the external circuit, efficiencies of all of these processes influencing the total efficiency of the power conversion.219 Rostalski and Meissner220 investigated ITO | Zn phthalocyanine | perylene derivative heterojunction cells. The power conversion efficiency varied between ca. 0.4% and 0.6% depending on the light intensity. The results reported in ref. 220 indicated that the carrier is produced only within a thin layer adjacent to the heterojunction contact which seems to be a general feature of molecular PV materials. Use of a very thin bilayer system allowed Peumans et al.221 to attain 2.4% power conversion efficiency. These results, however, indicate that the bilayer approach is not effective when applied to organics, because short exciton diffusion lengths impose the use of very thin polymer layers, which in turn only weakly absorb the light limiting PV efficiency.The efficiency can be improved by using materials with high absorption coefficients. The role of absorption was demonstrated by Videlot et al.222,223 who studied 8T-based Schottky and p/n junction cells. 8T films were deposited as oriented films, parallel or perpendicular to the substrate. The efficiencies of Schottky cells prepared in such a way were rather low (10−4–10−5%) but they differed by ca. one order of magnitude depending on the orientation of molecules – a difference attributed to different absorption coefficients of differently oriented films.A dramatic improvement of the efficiency can be achieved by introducing a factor facilitating the charge separation and by increasing the junction area. Indeed, the use of a three-layer system (the middle section being Zn phthalocyanine mixed with 30–50% of C60)224,225 resulted in a marked increase of the efficiency. Similar results were obtained if TiOPc was used instead of ZnPc.226 Due to its high electron affinity (cf. Table 2), C60 should be a very efficient electron acceptor. The efficient and fast photoinduced charge transfer made C60 and its derivatives promising components of PV cells. Fullerene-based PV devices will be discussed in the following sub-section.6.2.1 Conjugate polymer–fullerene composite PV devices. The realisation of all-polymer donor/acceptor heterojunction diodes is not easy, since almost all conjugated polymers are electron donors in the photoexcited state. In most of PV devices developed and investigated so far and based on this concept, fullerenes were used as molecular acceptors, following the discovery in the early nineties of the rectifying character of heterojunctions between p-conjugated polymers and fullerenes, and of a very fast electron transfer from photoexcited polymer to fullerene.227,228 An enhanced photoconductivity was also found in mixtures of C60 with the best known non-conjugated photoconducting polymer, PVK,229 and fullerene-doped σ-conjugated polymer, polymethylphenylsilane.230 Since then, several composites with C60 and its derivatives have been tested for their ability to photogenerate and separate electron–hole pairs. Effective photoinduced electron transfer onto fullerene was observed for several low molecular weight organic electron donors, like aromatic amines or porphyrins. Early work on composites with fullerenes as materials for PV devices are reviewed by Sariciftci;4 in this section we will briefly discuss selected results in this field published in last few years.The observation of an ultrafast photoinduced electron transfer between donor-type conjugated polymers (such as derivatives of PPV and PT) and acceptor-type fullerenes (C60 and its derivatives) opened new perspectives for the fabrication of low-cost PV devices based on organic molecules and conjugated polymers.227,228,231,232 A similar approach was earlier applied to polymer composites. It was found that the energy conversion efficiency of bilayer PV cells is limited, though bilayer diodes made of conjugated polymers and C60 show high rectification ratios (e.g. for thin MEH-PPV and fullerene layers it is of the order of 104).36,233 A significant increase in the junction area in organic PV devices was achieved by replacing conventional (flat-surface) systems by continuous interpenetrating donor–acceptor composites (‘bulk heterojunctions’).86,234 The concept of bulk heterojunctions allows one to overcome the problem of short exciton diffusion length in conjugated polymers, and additionally the fullerene acts as photostabilizing agent for the conjugated polymer ‘matrix’.36 The heterophase morphology of conjugated polymer/fullerene composites results in a very large donor/acceptor interface area and, consequently, in a reduced average distance between the photoexcitation sites and heterojunctions. In such ‘bulk heterojunction diodes’ the effectiveness of photo-induced electron transfer from polymer to fullerene increases by orders of magnitide compared to the bilayer configuration.36,84,233 For these reasons the photophysics of composites comprising electron donor and electron acceptor components has been the subject of intense studies in recent years.235The use of binary systems, together with some improvement in the contact structures resulted in PV devices with a power conversion efficiency reaching 2%
86 or even exceeding 2.5%.236 By controlling the morphology of the composites it was possible to obtain an interpenetrating network of both phases, what allows the charge carriers of both signs to percolate through the composite layer. Modified fullerene, 1-(3-methoxycarbonyl)-propyl-1-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61
(PCBM) mixed with MEH-PPV yields uniform films even for a 4:1 fullerene/polymer weight ratio.36,234,237 It was found that a properly chosen solvent used for film preparation allows for considerable improvement of the morphology of the composite,236 and it is clear that many other parameters of the composite fabrication should be optimised. The estimates given in ref. 236 indicate that further optimization of the cells built of MDMO-PPV and a C60 derivative may result in obtaining conversion power efficiencies exceeding 9%. The effort of several groups is at present directed towards optimizing both chemical structures and morphologies of PV devices (see refs. 36,41,235 and 238 for reviews). It seems that C60 and its derivatives, together with suitably chosen donor materials (oligomers or polymers) will be materials allowing one to fabricate PV cells whose power conversion efficiencies will attain commercially attractive limits. The Linz group produced relatively large-area solar cells, of the order of 102 cm2, on polyester (PET) substrate coated with ITO.36,132 In such flexible, real ‘plastic’ solar cells, the efficiency close to 2% was achieved, and the stability of the MDMO-PPV has considerably increased in the presence of fullerene. These figures are still not sufficient to consider the devices for industrial applications as power sources, where the power efficiency of a minimum of 5% is required, but some applications in individual electronic devices seem to be realistic in the nearest future.239There are two main processes determining the power efficiency of solar cells – the efficiency of photogeneration and separation of electron/hole pairs, and the transport of charge carriers towards electrodes. Due to the ultra-fast, sub-picosecond injection of electrons from conjugated polymer to fullerene232 and the formation of stable positive polarons on the conjugated polymer (as documented by sub-picosecond photo-induced absorption experiments240), the radiative relaxation of the polymer excited state is suppressed and the photogeneration efficiency in such a composite approaches 100%. Ultra-fast spectroscopic experiments performed using a femtosecond pump–probe technique for the MDMO-PPV/PCBM blends have shown that a forward transfer time of the electron is around 45 fs.241,242 Such a rapid charge transfer indicates a strong overlap of the orbitals of the excited polymer and fullerene. Efficient solar cells should absorb most of the solar spectrum, but the MDMO-PPV/PCBM layer absorbs the light practically only below 550 nm. To extend the absorption range towards longer wavelength, low-band gap polymers should be designed. Such polymers based on poly(isothianaphthene), with the band gap adjustable in the range 1.0–1.8 eV have already been synthesised.243Dyakonov investigated the charge carrier transport in polymer/fullerene solar cells measuring temperature- and illumination intensity-dependent current–voltage characteristics.239 He was studying one of the most advanced PV devices recently elaborated, ITO | PEDOT-PSS | MDMO-PPV:PCBM | Al, in which the desired morphology of the MDMO-PPV:PCBM composite layer (interpenetrating networks) was achieved by optimizing the preparation conditions.236 It was found that the short circuit current increases with increasing temperature in the range 100–300 K for all illumination intensities. This feature was explained by a decrease of series resistance with increasing temperature. Also the fill factor increases almost linearly with temperature, yielding the positive temperature coefficient of the power conversion efficiency. The open circuit voltage increases on lowering the temperature, in contrast to the observation that at the same time the HOMO–LUMO gap decreases, as was deduced from the red shift of the polymer absorption at low temperatures. Further performance of the system requires an optimization of the materials used: in order to achieve higher short circuit current density one should use materials with higher charge carrier mobility, and a further increase of the open circuit voltage requires new acceptors with lower electron affinities.Recently, donor–acceptor dyads have been synthesized consisting of chemically linked π-conjugated oligomer donors and C60-derivative acceptors.244,245 PV experiments indicate that in thin films these (single-component!) materials seem to form a bicontinuous donor–acceptor network making this type of molecule suitable candidates for efficient PV materials.Finally, the effect of contacts on the performance of bulk-heterojunction PV devices should be addressed. It has already been mentioned in this article that, within the simple picture, the open-circuit voltage of a PV cell should be equal to a difference of the work functions of electrodes used. In complex molecular systems this is clearly not the case. Brabec et al.246 report on a systematic study of PV structures: ITO | PEDOT-PSS | photoactive composite | upper electrode. The photoactive layer consisted of a composite of MDMO-PPV with C60 or a few of its derivatives with varying electron affinity, the upper electrode was Ca, Ag, Al or Au differing in their work function by 2.6 eV. The results showed that the open-circuit voltage is a linear function of the electron affinity of the acceptor, and only weakly depends on the metal work function, probably because of a pinning of the Fermi level due to the presence of surface states.7 Non-π-conjugated electroactive polymersNearly all electroactive polymers contain π-conjugated main chains. There are, however, two notable exceptions: poly(N-vinylcarbazole)
(PVK) and its derivatives, and polysilanes. In the former group, the main chain is electrically neutral, all activity depending on the side groups. In the latter polymers, optical and electrical properties result mainly from the σ-conjugation in the main chain.7.1 Non-conjugated polymers with carbazole chromophoresThe photoconductivity of PVK has been investigated for more than 30 years, and its charge-transfer complex with the trinitrofluorenone (TNF) acceptor is the best photoconducting material among non-π-conjugated polymers.247 PVK shows a relatively strong PL, with the emissive band centred at around 410 nm but the material is not efficient enough as an emitting layer.Various polymers and copolymers with carbazole units in the main chain were synthesised and tested as potential EL emitting materials. Poly(N-butyl-3,6-carbazolylene)
(PBK) shows a blue PL (maximum at 410 nm). Due to the presence of the butyl side group this polymer is solution processable and was used as an emitting layer in PLED, with PVK as a hole transporting layer, yielding a green electroluminescence (550 nm).248 Substitution of a trioxadecyl side group instead of butyl group resulted in a blue shift the EL emission to 420 nm.249 Copolymers of N-alkylcarbazole and σ-conjugated silane units emit a blue PL with the maximum at 420 nm, assigned to excimers formed by carbazole units.250 A fluorene-based copolymer with carbazolylenevinylene emits PL peaking at 460 nm, and when used as an emitting layer in the simplest LED configuration with ITO and Al electrodes, shows EL with the maximum at 480 nm; blending with PVK causes a blue shift of EL to 460 nm.251Only a few carbazole-based polymers used as EL emitting layers show promising efficiencies. One of such polymers is composed of carbazole and distyryleneoxadiazole units. LEDs made of this copolymer with ITO and Al electrodes exhibit a QE much higher than similar LEDs made of PPV.252Interesting results were obtained when PVK was used in PLEDs as an intermediate layer between the ITO electrode and a hole transporting/emitting layer to facilitate hole injection and to block electrons. Using such a configuration, blue-emitting LEDs made of PVK and monoalkoxy substituted PPPs laminates were fabricated, with a relatively high external QE reaching 3% in the ITO | PVK | poly[2-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene]
| Ca structure.253 A similar configuration was used to fabricate PLED with the bilayer made of PVK and a substituted fluorene/phenylene copolymer.2547.2 PolysilanesIt has been known for a long time that σ-electrons of the Si–Si and Ge–Ge bonds in polysilanes or polygermanes are delocalised, and these polymers have unusual electronic properties.255 Although many different germane homo- and copolymers have been synthesized, their electrical properties have not attracted great interest. By contrast, electrical and photo-electrical properties of polysilanes (PSi) have been intensively investigated for several years (for recent reviews see refs. 45,255–257).Polysilanes attract a lot of attention as potential photoconducting materials due to their high photogeneration efficiency and high hole mobility, exceeding 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Physical properties of PSi strongly depend on the structure of side groups attached to the silicon backbone.258 All PSi absorb in the UV range (300–400 nm), the absorption bands being related to the delocalisation of σ-electrons along the main chain, also the charge carrier photogeneration in undoped PSi is limited to the UV range. A physical doping with proper chromophores or a chemical attachment of the chromophores to the main chain as side groups (‘chemical doping’) can extend the photogeneration activity into the visible range. Additionally, the presence of such chromophores can improve, by a screening effect, the stability of the silicon backbone undergoing a relatively easy photodegradation.Poly(methylphenyl silylene)
(PMPSi) can be considered a model compound for which many investigations on the electronic structure, optical properties, charge carrier transport, photoconductivity and electroluminescence have been carried out in recent years. This polymer was also modified by physical or chemical doping, with various dopants: chromophores, electron donors or acceptors. The effect of doping PMPSi with low molecular weight acceptor chromophores depends, among other factors, on the dipole moment of the dopant. It was found that the acceptor dopants with zero dipole moment cause an increase of the charge carrier mobility,259 whereas the doping with polar acceptors results in lowering of the charge carrier mobility. The effect of dopants on the photogeneration efficiency is more complex: up to ca. 4 mol% the photogeneration efficiency is improving, declining for higher concentrations.258,260 The optimum concentration was found to be at ca. 2 mol%, since for this content of acceptor dopant the hole mobility is nearly unaffected, while the photogeneration efficiency increases almost ten times with respect to that in undoped PMPSi.The effect of decreasing the charge carrier mobility by introducing polar species in the side polysilane groups, with a simultaneous broadening of the distribution of the density of transport states and creation of new local states (‘dipole traps’) was used to put forward an idea of a molecular switch based on charge–dipole interactions.120,261 Such a molecular current modulator would consist of a polysilane with attached photochromic side groups; model calculations show that one could modify the dipole moment of the side groups and cross section of created dipolar traps via a photochromic reaction.Photoconductivity studies of N-carbazolyl-substituted silane homo- and copolymers (PSiK) and their charge-transfer complexes with 2,4,7-trinitrofluorenone (TNF) were carried out by means of the xerographic discharge method.262 The electric field dependence of the photogeneration quantum yield was analysed in terms of the Onsager model of geminate recombination.262 It was found that the substitution of polysilane with N-carbazolyl side groups considerably modifies the photoconducting properties of the polymer. In high electric fields, the photogeneration yield of PSiK(2:1) copolymer doped with TNF exceeds considerably the yield of the PMPSi + TNF system, being also much higher than that in fully substituted PSiK doped with TNF. In the PSiK(2:1)
+ TNF system, the high photoconductivity response extends over the whole visible range (as in the PVK+TNF system). Simultaneously, the dark decay of the surface potential becomes slower after the introduction of the N-carbazolyl side groups. From the TL studies of these materials carried out in 15–325 K temperature range it was found that the N-carbazolyl side groups form new photogeneration/recombination centres, acting also as trapping sites.263 Higher concentrations of N-carbazolyl groups result in increasing population of deep traps and recombination centres; this feature explains why in fully substituted PSiK the photogeneration yield is so poor. In these materials, the monomeric mechanism of luminescence dominates at low temperatures whereas the excimeric mechanism dominates at higher temperatures. The presence of N-carbazolyl side groups increases the stability of polysilanes by reducing their photodegradation and making these materials promising candidates for applications.It is also worthy of mention that polysilane derivatives were used to construct LEDs, showing EL spectra similar to PL spectra.264,265 A controlled photodegradation of PMPSi films with linearly polarized UV light leads to an angular-dependent emission, thus making possible construction of polarized LEDs.266Final remarksWe feel obliged to turn readers' attention to an important omission. Several papers have been published during last years reporting on fascinating novel phenomena in organic single crystals, polycrystalline low-molecular weight materials and in polymers. The credibility of some of these results, however, has recently been put in doubt.267 In view of the report267 and following retractions,268–271 they have not been included in the present review.Acronyms4Pp-Quaterphenyl 4Tα-Quaterthiophene6Pp-Sexiphenyl; p-hexaphenyl6Tα-Sexithiophene8Pp-Octiphenyl8Tα-OctithiopheneAcAnthraceneAlq3Tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminiumBtp2Ir(acac)Bis(2-(20-benzo[4,5-a]thienyl)pyridinato-N,C30) iridium(acetylactonate)CBP4,4'-N,N'-dicarbazolebiphenylCTCharge transferELElectroluminescenceFEField effectFETField effect transistorFirpicIridium(III)-bis(4,6-difluorophenylpyridinato-N,C2') picolinateFirppyFac-tris[2-(4,5′-difluorophenyl)pyridine-C2′,N]iridium(III)Ir(ppp)3Fac-tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridiumITOIndium tin oxideLCLiquid crystalLEDLight emitting diodeLPPPLadder-type poly-p-phenyleneMDMO-PPVPoly(2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyloctyoxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene)MEH-PPVPoly(2-methoxy-5-(2'-ethylhexoxy)-p-phenylenevinylene)Me-LPPPMethyl-substituted PPPMePcMetal phthalocyanineNPBN,N'-diphenyl-bis(1-naphthyl)-(1,1'-biphenyl)-4,4'-diamineNTCDINaphthalenetetracarboxylic diimideOLEDOrganic light emitting diodePAcPolyacene PBD2-(4-Biphenyl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazolePBKPoly(N-butyl-3,6-carbazolylene)PcPentacenePCBM1-(3-Methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61PETPolyethyleneterephtalatePFPolyfluorenePHTPoly(3-n-hexylthiophene)PITNPolyisothianaphthenePLPhotoluminescencePLEDPolymer light emitting diodePMeTPoly(3-methylthiophene)PMPSiPoly(methylphenylsilylene); poly(methylphenylsilane)PPPPoly-p-phenylenePPVPoly-p-phenylenvinylenePPyPolypyrrolePSiPolysilane; polysilylenePSiKN-Carbazolyl-substituted silane homo- and copolymersPTPolythiophenePtOEP2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-Octaethyl-21H,23H-porphine platinum(II)PTOXPoly(bis(3-decyl-2-thienyl)dithienol[3,2-b:2',3'-d]thiophene-4,4-dioxide)PVPhotovoltaicPVKPoly(N-vinylcarbazole) QEQuantum efficiencyTAZ3-Phenyl-4-(10-naphthyl)-5-phenyl-l,2,4-triazoleTCNQTetracyanoquinodimethaneTLThermoluminescenceTNFTrinitrofluorenoneTOFTime of flightTPDN,N'-Diphenyl-bis(3-methylphenyl)-(1,1'-biphenyl)-4,4'-diamineTPTEN,N'-Diphenyl-N,N'-bis(di(3-methylphenyl)aminobiphenyl)benzidineAcknowledgementsThis work was supported in part by the Wroclaw University of Technology and by the Technical University of Lodz. The authors thank Ewa Dobruchowska, Beata Luszczynska and Agnieszka Slazak for their technical assistance.ReferencesM. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals and Polymers, Oxford University Press, New York, 2nd edn.,  1999 Search PubMed .E. A. Silinsh, Organic Molecular Crystals. Their Electronic States, Springer, Berlin,  1980 Search PubMed .K. S. Kao and W. Hwang, Electrical Transport in Solids with Particular Reference to Organic Semiconductors, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1981 Search PubMed .N. S. Sariciftci, Prog. Quantum Electron., 1995, 19, 131 CrossRef CAS .P. M. Borsenberger and D. S. Weiss, Organic Photoreceptors for Imaging Systems, M. Dekker, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .E. A. Silinsh and V. Capek, Organic Molecular Crystals. Interaction, Localization and Transport, AIP Press, New York,  1994 Search PubMed .Organic Electroluminescent Materials and Devices, ed. S. Miyata and H. S. Nalwa, Gordon and Breach, London,  1997 Search PubMed .Electronic Materials: The Oligomeric Approach, ed. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1998 Search PubMed .Primary Photoexcitations in Conjugated Polymers: Molecular Exciton versus Semiconductor Band Model, ed. N. S. Sariciftci, World Scientific Publishing, Singapore,  1998 Search PubMed .Handbook of Oligo- and Polythiophenes, ed. D. Fichou, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .Semiconducting Polymers: Chemistry, Physics and Engineering, ed. P. F. Van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .Organic Electronic Materials. Conjugated Polymers and Low-Molecular Weight Organic Solids, ed. R. Farchioni and G. Grosso, Springer, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .Conjugated Polymer and Molecular Interfaces: Science and Technology for Photonic and Optoelectronic Applications, ed. W. R. Salaneck, K. Seki, A. Kahn and J.-J. Pireaux, M. Dekker, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .A. Pron and P. Rannou, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2002, 27, 135 CrossRef CAS .H. A. M. van Mullekom, J. A. J. M. Vekemans, E. E. Havinga and E. W. Meijer, Mater. Sci. Eng. Rep., 2001, 32, 1 Search PubMed .A. G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Metals, 2002, 125, 11 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Stenger-Smith, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 57 CrossRef CAS .E. T. Kang, K. G. Neoh and K. L. Tan, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 277 CrossRef CAS .J. Anand, S. Palaniappan and D. N. Sathyanarayana, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 993 CrossRef CAS .H. S. O. Chen and S. C. Ng, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1998, 23, 1167 CrossRef CAS .Advances in Synthetic Metals. Twenty Years of Progress in Science and Technology, ed. P. Bernier, S. Lefrant and G. Bidan, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1999 Search PubMed .Handbook of conducting polymers, ed. T. A., Skotheim, R. L. Elsenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2nd edn.,  1998 Search PubMed .Handbook of Organic Conductive Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa, vol. 1–3, Wiley, New York 1997 Search PubMed .P. Bäuerle, in Electronic Materials: The Oligomeric Approach, ed. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1998, ch. 2 Search PubMed .D. Fichou, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 571 RSC .S. Tasch, C. Brandstätter, F. Meghdadi, G. Leising, G. Froyer and L. Althouel, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 33 CrossRef CAS .H. Kajii, T. Tsukagawa, H. Okuno, T. Taneda, K. Yoshino and Y. Ohmori, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 393, 388 CrossRef CAS .B. Winkler, F. Meghdadi, S. Tasch, R. Müllner, R. Resel, R. Saf, G. Leising and F. Stelzer, Opt. Mater., 1998, 9, 159 CrossRef CAS .N. Johansson, J. Salbeck, J. Bauer, J. Weissörtel, P. Bröms, A. Andersson and W. R. Salaneck, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1136 CrossRef CAS .N. Sato, H. Inokuchi and N. Shirotani, Annu. Rev. Inst. Mol. Sci. Okazaki, 1980, 81 Search PubMed .E. A. Silinsh, M. Bouvet and J. Simon, Mol. Mater., 1995, 5, 1 Search PubMed .N. Koch, E. Zojer, A. Rajagopal, J. Ghijsen, R. L. Johnson, G. Leising and J.-J. Pireaux, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 51 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. C. Eklund, Science of Fullerenes and Carbon Nanotubes, Academic Press, New York,  1996 Search PubMed .N. S. Sariciftci, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1999, 4, 373 CrossRef CAS .P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 126 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .A. Rajagopal, C. I. Wu and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2649 CrossRef CAS .J. Kalinowski, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1999, 32, R179 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Baldo and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 62, 10958 Search PubMed .D. Troadec, G. Veriot and A. Moliton, Synth. Metals, 2002, 127, 165 CrossRef CAS .J. Simon and J.-J. André, Molecular Semiconductors. Photoelectrical Properties and Solar Cells, Springer, Berlin,  1985 Search PubMed .W. Brütting, S. Berleb and A. G. Mückl, Org. Electronics, 2001, 2, 1 Search PubMed .K. Sugiyama, D. Yoshimura, T. Miyamae, T. Miyazaki, H. Ishii, Y. Ouchi, Yukio and K. Seki, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 4928 CrossRef CAS .L. Micaroni, F. C. Nart and I. A. Hümmelgen, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2002, 7, 55 Search PubMed .S. Nešpurek, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2002, 299–302, 1033 CrossRef CAS .D. P. West, M. D. Rahn, C. Im and H. Bässler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 326, 407 CrossRef CAS .M. Bouvet, E. A. Silinsh and J. Simon, Mol. Mater., 1995, 5, 255 Search PubMed .Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, Weinheim,  1989, vol. 1; Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, Weinheim,  1992, vol. 2 Search PubMed ; Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, Weinheim,  1992, vol. 3 Search PubMed ; Phthalocyanines: Properties and Applications, ed. C. C. Leznoff and A. B. P. Lever, VCH, Weinheim,  1996, vol. 4 Search PubMed .G. Guillaud, J. Simon and J. P. Germain, Coordination Chem. Revs., 1998, 178–180, 1433 Search PubMed .M. Pfeiffer, A. Beyer, T. Fritz and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 73, 3202 CrossRef CAS .J. Blochwitz, M. Pfeiffer, T. Fritz and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 73, 729 CrossRef CAS .H. Fujikawa, M. Ishii, S. Tokito and Y. Taga, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 2000, 621, Q3.4.1 .M. Braun, J. Gmeiner, M. Tzolov, M. Coelle, F. D. Meyer, W. Milius, H. Hillebrecht, O. Wendland, J. U. von Schütz and W. Brütting, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 114, 9625 CrossRef CAS .S. Yin, Y. Hua, S. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Hou and X. Xu, Synth. Metals, 2000, 111, 109 CrossRef .H. Jang, L.-M. Do, Y. Kim, J. G. Kim, T. Zyung and Y. Do, Synth. Metals, 2001, 121, 1669 CrossRef CAS .N. Donzé, P. Péchy, M. Grätzel, M. Schaer and L. Zuppiroli, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 315, 405 CrossRef CAS .S. Anderson, M. S. Weaver and A. J. Hudson, Synth. Metals, 2000, 111, 459 CrossRef .Y. Liu, J. Guo, J. Feng, H. Zhang, Y. Li and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 2300 CrossRef CAS .T. Sano, Y. Nishio, Y. Hamada, H. Takahashi, T. Usuki and K. Shibata, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 157 RSC .J. L. Bredas, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Chem. Phys., 1986, 85, 4673 CrossRef CAS .H. Paulussen, B. Ottenbourgs, D. Vanderzande, P. Adriaensens and J. Gelan, Polymer, 1997, 38, 5221 CrossRef CAS .J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 173 CrossRef CAS .U. Scherf, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1853 RSC .M. Kertesz, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 1475 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Ruud, C. Wang and G. L. Baker, Synth. Metals, 1997, 84, 363 CrossRef CAS .U. Scherf and K. Müllen, Adv. Polym. Sci., 1995, 123, 1 CAS .E. E. Havinga, W. ten Hoeve and H. Wynberg, Synth. Metals, 1993, 55–57, 299 CrossRef CAS .G. Brocks and A. Tol, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1838 CrossRef CAS .C. Kitamura, S. Tanaka and Y. Yamashita, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 570 CrossRef .Y.-Y. Lin, J. Gundlach, S. Nelson and T. N. Jackson, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 1997, 18, 606 CrossRef CAS .N. Karl, in Crystals. Growth, Properties and Applications, ed. H. C. Freyhardt, Springer, Berlin, 1980, vol. 4 Search PubMed .N. Karl, in Organic Electronic Materials. Conjugated Polymers and Low-Molecular Weight Organic Solids, ed. R. Farchioni and G. Grosso, Springer, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .D. Fichou, B. Bachet, F. Demanze, I. Billy, G. Horowitz and F. Garnier, Adv. Mater., 1995, 6, 500 .R. A. Laudise, Ch. Kloc, P. G. Simpkins and T. Siegrist, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 187, 449 CrossRef CAS .Ch. Kloc and R. A. Laudise, J. Cryst. Growth, 1998, 193, 563 CrossRef CAS .L. Antolini, G. Horowitz, F. Kouki and F. Garnier, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 382 CrossRef CAS .T. Siegrist, Ch. Kloc, R. A. Laudise, H. E. Katz and R. C. Haddon, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 379 CrossRef CAS .T. Siegrist, R. M. Fleming, R. C. Haddon, R. A. Laudise, A. J. Lovinger, H. E. Katz, P. Bridenbaugh and D. D. Davis, J. Mater. Res., 1995, 10, 2170 CAS .G. Horowitz, B. Bachet, A. Yassar, P. Lang, F. Demanze, J. L. Fave and F. Garnier, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1337 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Mattheus, A. B. Dros, J. Baas, A. Meetsma, J. L. de Boer and T. T. M. Palstra, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C, 2001, C57, 939 CAS .S. R. Forrest, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1793 CrossRef CAS .P. Dannetun, M. Rei Vilar and M. Schott, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 286, 321 CrossRef CAS .J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and J. L. Bredas, in Electronic Materials: The Oligomeric Approach, ed. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1998, ch. 7.2 Search PubMed .M. Granstrom, K. Petritsch, A. C. Arias, A. Lux, M. R. Andersson and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1998, 395, 257 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Greenham, S. C. Moratti, D. D. C. Bradley, R. H. Friend and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1993, 365, 628 CrossRef .J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 4510 CrossRef CAS .A. Yassar, F. Demanze and D. Fichou, Optical. Mater., 1999, 12, 379 Search PubMed .A. Facchetti, Y. Deng, A. Wang, Y. Koide, H. Sirringhaus, T. J. Marks and R. H. Friend, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4547 CrossRef CAS .H. Meng, Z. Bao, A. J. Lovinger, B.-C. Wang and A. M. Mujsce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9214 CrossRef CAS .H. E. Katz, J. Johnson, A. J. Lovinger and W. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 7787 CrossRef CAS .Z. Bao, A. J. Lovinger and J. Brown, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 207 CrossRef CAS .D. Y. Kim, H. N. Cho and C. Y. Kim, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2000, 25, 1089 CrossRef CAS .H. Ishii, K. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605 CrossRef CAS .L. Yan and Y. Gao, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 417, 101 CrossRef CAS .F. Nüesch, K. Kamarás and L. Zuppiroli, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 283, 194 CrossRef CAS .F. Nüesch, L. J. Rothberg, E. W. Forsythe, Q. T. Le and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 84, 880 CrossRef .Q. T. Le, F. Nüesch, L. J. Rothberg, E. W. Forsythe and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1357 CrossRef CAS .Q.-T. Le, W. Forsythe, F. Nüesch, L. J. Rothberg, L. Yan and Y. Gao, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 363, 42 CrossRef CAS .I. G. Hill and A. Kahn, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 2116 CrossRef CAS .E. W. Forsythe, M. A. Abkowitz and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3948 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhou, M. Pfeiffer, J. Blochwitz, A. Werner, A. Nollau, T. Fritz and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 78, 410 CrossRef CAS .J. Cui, A. Wang, N. L. Edleman, J. Ni, P. Lee, N. R. Armstrong and T. J. Marks, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1476 CrossRef CAS .T. J. Marks, J. G. C. Veinot, J. Cui, H. Yan, A. Wang, N. L. Edleman, J. Ni, Q. Huang, P. Lee and N. L. Armstrong, Synth. Metals, 2002, 127, 29 CrossRef CAS .B. Schweitzer and H. Bässler, Synth. Metals, 2000, 109, 1 CrossRef CAS .D. Moses, A. Dogariu and A. J. Heeger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 316, 356 CrossRef CAS .P. B. Miranda, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Metals, 2001, 119, 619 CrossRef CAS .E. Frankevich, J. G. Müller and U. Lemmer, Chem. Phys., 2002, 285, 13 CrossRef CAS .H. Bässler, in The Nature of Photoexcitations in Conjugated Polymers, ed. N. S. Sariciftci, World Scientific Publishing, Singapore,  1997 Search PubMed .N. Karl, in Organic Electronic Materials. Conjugated Polymers and Low-Molecular Weight Organic Solids, ed. R. Farchioni and G. Grosso, Springer, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .S. M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .M. H. Choo, W. S. Hong and S. Im, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 420–421, 492 CrossRef CAS .M. C. J. M. Vissenberg and M. Matters, Phys. Rev. B, 1998, 12964, 1998 Search PubMed .C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, J. Kymissis, S. Prushothaman, D. A. Neumayer, P. R. Duncombe and R. A. Laibowitz, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1372 CrossRef CAS .G. Horowitz, R. Hajlaoui, D. Fichou and A. El Kassmi, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 3202 CrossRef CAS .J. Xue and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3714 CrossRef CAS .N. Karl, in Landoldt-Börnstein Numerical Data and Functional Relationships in Science and Technology, Group III, Vol. 17i, ed. O. Madelung, M. Schultz and H. Weiss, Springer Verlag, Berlin 1985 Search PubMed .D. C. Hoesterrey and G. M. Letson, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1963, 24, 1609 CrossRef .J. Sworakowski, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2000, 7, 531 CrossRef CAS .S. Nešpurek and J. Sworakowski, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 393, 168 CrossRef CAS .D. Tsiaouis and R. W. Munn, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 10860 CrossRef .S. F. Nelson, Y. Y. Lin, D. J. Gundlach and T. N. Jackson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 1854 CrossRef CAS .G. Horowitz, R. Hajlaoui, R. Bourguiga and M. Hajlaoui, Synth. Metals, 1999, 101, 401 CrossRef CAS .G. Horowitz and M. E. Hajlaoui, Synth. Metals, 2001, 122, 185 CrossRef CAS .H. Bässler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1981, 107, 9 .H. Bässler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15 CrossRef .F. Schauer, I. Zhivkov and S. Nešpurek, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2000, 266–269, 999 CrossRef CAS .I. Zhivkov, S. Nešpurek and F. Schauer, Adv. Mater. Opt. Electron., 1999, 9, 175 CrossRef CAS .S. Kuniyoshi, M. Iizuka, K. Kudo and K. Tanaka, IEICE Trans. Electron., 2000, E83-C, 1111 Search PubMed .K. Kudo, D. X. Wang, M. Iizuka, S. Kuniyoshi and K. Tanaka, Synth. Metals, 2000, 111–112, 11 CrossRef CAS .K. Kudo, M. Iizuka, S. Kuniyoshi and K. Tanaka, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 393, 362 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Botelho do Rego, O. Pellegrino, J. D. Lopes da Silva, G. Horowitz, F. Kouki, F. Garnier and M. Rei Vilar, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 1999, 101, 1999 Search PubMed .C. Dimitrakopoulos, S. Purushothaman, J. Kymissis, A. Callegari and J. M. Shaw, Science, 1999, 283, 822 CrossRef CAS .D. Knipp, R. A. Street, B. Krusor, R. Apte and J. Ho, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2002, 299–302, 1942 .M. Shtein, J. Mapel, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 268 CrossRef CAS .G. Horowitz, M. E. Hajlaoui and R. Hajlaoui, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 4456 CrossRef CAS .I. Zhivkov, S. Nešpurek and J. Sworakowski, Acta Phys. Pol. A, 2001, 100, 215 (Suppl.) Search PubMed .F. Schauer, S. Nešpurek and R. Novotny, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 1244 CrossRef CAS .F. Garnier, in Electronic Materials: The Oligomeric Approach, ed. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1998, ch. 11 Search PubMed .C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99 CrossRef CAS .M. L. Swiggers, G. Xia, J. D. Slinker, A. A. Gorodetsky, G. G. Malliaras, R. L. Headrick, B. T. Weslowski, R. N. Shashidhar and C. S. Dulcey, Appl. Phys. Lett, 2001, 79, 1300 CrossRef CAS .K. R. Amundson, B. J. Sapjeta, A. J. Lovinger and Z. Bao, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 414, 143 CrossRef CAS .P. M. Borsenberger, L. T. Pautmeier and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 46, 12145 CrossRef CAS .P. M. Borsenberger, L. T. Pautmeier and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 48, 3066 CrossRef CAS .J. Kovac, T. C. Wong, M. K. Fung, M. W. Liu, V. Kremnican, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2001, 85, 172 Search PubMed .H. H. Fong, K. C. Lun and S. K. So, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 353, 407 CrossRef CAS .V. Getautis, O. Paliulis, V. Gaidelis, V. Jankauskas and J. Sidaravicius, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 2002, 151, 39 CrossRef CAS .T. C. Wong, J. Kovac, C. S. Lee, L. S. Hung and S. T. Lee, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 334, 61 CrossRef CAS .R. G. Kepler, P. M. Beeson, S. J. Jacobs, R. A. Anderson, M. B. Sinclair, V. S. Valencia and P. A. Cahill, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 3618 CrossRef CAS .S. Naka, H. Okada, H. Onnagawa, J. Kido and T. Tsutsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L1252 CrossRef CAS .H. Bässler, in Disorder Effects on Relaxation Processes, ed. R. Richert and A. Blumen, Springer, Berlin,  1994, ch.
18 Search PubMed .P. M. Borsenberger, E. H. Magin, M. van der Auweraer and F. C. De Schryver, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1993, 140, 9 CAS .H. Bässler, in Semiconducting Polymers: Chemistry, Physics and Engineering, ed. P. F. Van Hutten andG. Hadziioannou, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .J. Sworakowski, Braz. J. Phys., 1999, 29, 318 Search PubMed .V. I. Arkhipov, U. Wolf and H. Bässler, Phys. Rev. B, 1999, 59, 7514 Search PubMed .S. D. Baranovskii, H. Cordes and F. Hensel, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 62, 7934 Search PubMed .V. I. Arkhipov, E. V. Emelianova, G. J. Adriaenssens and H. Bässler, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2002, 299–302, 1047 CrossRef CAS .I. I. Fishchuk, D. Hertel, H. Bässler and A. K. Kadashchuk, Phys. Rev. B, 2002, 65, 125201 Search PubMed .I. I. Fishchuk, A. K. Kadashchuk, H. Bässler and D. S. Weiss, Phys. Rev. B, 2002, 66, 205208 Search PubMed .M. Pope, H. Kallmann and P. Magnante, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 2402 CrossRef CAS .W. Helfrich and W. G. Schneider, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1965, 14, 229 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Tang and S. A. Van Slyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burn and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, in Handbook of conducting polymers, ed. T. A. Skotheim, R. L. Elsenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2nd edn.,  1998 Search PubMed .H. G. Harrison and R. H. Friend, in Electronic Materials: The Oligomeric Approach, ed. K. Müllen and G. Wegner, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1998 Search PubMed .A. Kraft, A. C. Grimsdale and A. B. Holmes, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 1998, 7, 403 .G. Leising, S. Tasch and W. Graupner, in Handbook of conducting polymers, ed. T. A. Skotheim, R. L. Elsenbaumer and J. R. Reynolds, Marcel Dekker, New York, 2nd edn., 1998 Search PubMed .R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. R. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. Dos Santos, J. L. Bredas, M. Logdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS .U. Mitschke and P. Bäuerle, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 1471 RSC .P. W. M. Blom and M. C. J. M. Vissenberg, Mater. Sci. Eng. Rep., 2000, 27, 53 Search PubMed .L. S. Hung and C. H. Chen, Mater. Sci. Eng. Rep., 2002, 39, 143 Search PubMed .A. B. Walker, A. Kambili and S. J. Martin, J. Phys. Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 9825 CrossRef CAS .Z. Shen, P. E. Burrows, V. Bulovic, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Science, 1997, 276, 2009 CrossRef CAS .P. E. Burrows, V. Bulovic, G. Gu, V. Kozlov, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 331, 101 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ohmori, M. Uchida, K. Muro and K. Yoshino, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 30, L1941 .G. Grem, G. Leditzky, B. Ullrich and G. Leising, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 36 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Andersson, O. Thomas, W. Mammo, M. Svensson, M. Theander and O. Inganas, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1933 RSC .T. Virgili, D. G. Lidzey and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 58 CrossRef CAS .M. T. Bernius, M. Inbasekaran, J. O'Brien and W. S. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1737 CrossRef CAS .M. Leclerc, J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Chem., 2001, 39, 2867 Search PubMed .D. Neher, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2001, 22, 1366 CrossRef CAS .U. Scherf and E. J. W. List, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 477 CrossRef CAS .M. Grell, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Inbasekaran and E. P. Woo, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 798 CrossRef CAS .M. Grell, M. Redecker, K. S. Whitehead, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo and W. Wu, Liq. Cryst., 1999, 26, 1403 CrossRef CAS .K. S. Whitehead, M. Grell, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Jandke and P. Strohriegl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2946 CrossRef CAS .D. Sainova, A. Zen, H.-G. Nothofer, U. Asawapirom, U. Scherf, R. Hagen, T. Bieringer, S. Kostromine and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 49 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Zilker, T. Bierringer, D. Haarer, R. S. Stein, J. W. van Egmond and S. Kostromine, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 855 CrossRef CAS .V. N. Bliznyuk, S. A. Carter, J. C. Scott, G. Klärner, R. D. Miller and D. C. Miller, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 361 CrossRef CAS .L. M. Herz and R. T. Phillips, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 13691 Search PubMed .J. M. Lupton, M. R. Craig and E. W. Meijer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4489 CrossRef CAS .P. S. de Freitas, U. Scherf, M. Collon and E. J. W. List, e-Polymers, 2002, 9, 1 Search PubMed .E. J. W. List, R. Guentner, P. S. de Freitas and U. Scherf, Adv. Mater., 2002, 15, 374 CrossRef CAS .J. I. Lee, G. Klärner and R. D. Miller, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1083 CrossRef CAS .E. Zojer, A. Pogantsch, E. Hennebicq, D. Beljonne, J. L. Bredas, P. S. de Freitas, U. Scherf and E. J. W. List, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 6794 CrossRef CAS .G. Klarner, M. H. Davey, W. D. Chen, J. C. Scott and R. D. Miller, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 993 CrossRef .K. H. Weinfurtner, H. Fujikawa, S. Tokito and Y. Taga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2502 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Lupton and J. Klein, Phys. Rev. B, 2002, 65, 193202 Search PubMed .M. Kreyenschmidt, G. Klaerner, T. Fuhrer, J. Ashenhurst, S. Karg, W. D. Chen, V. Y. Lee, J. C. Scott and R. D. Miller, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 1099 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Xia and R. C. Advincula, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5854 CrossRef CAS .J. Teetsov and M. A. Fox, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2117 RSC .S. F. Alvarado, S. Barth, H. Bässler, U. Scherf, J. W. van der Horst, P. A. Bobbert and M. A. J. Michels, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 117 CrossRef CAS .D. Sainova, T. Miteva, H. G. Nothofer, U. Scherf, I. Glowacki, J. Ulanski, H. Fujikawa and D. Neher, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1810 CrossRef CAS .D. Sainova, D. Neher, E. Dobruchowska, B. Luszczynska, I. Glowacki, J. Ulanski, H.-G. Nothofer and U. Scherf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 371, 15 CrossRef CAS .T. Miteva, A. Meisel, W. Knoll, H. G. Nothofer, U. Scherf, D. C. Müller, K. Meerholz, A. Yasuda and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 565 CrossRef .Y. K. Nakazawa, S. A. Carter, H. G. Nothofer, U. Scherf, V. Y. Lee, R. D. Miller and J. C. Scott, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3832 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef CAS .D. F. O'Brien, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 442 CrossRef .M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2000, 403, 750 CrossRef CAS .C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, S. R. Forrest, S. Lamansky, M. E. Thompson and R. C. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1622 CrossRef CAS .X. Jiang, A. K.-Y. Jen, B. Carlson and L. R. Dalton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 713 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Baldo, S. Lamansky, P. E. Burrows, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 4 CrossRef CAS .T. Tsutsui, M.-J. Yang, M. Yahiro, K. Nakamura, T. Watanabe, T. Tsuji, Y. Fukuda, T. Wakimoto and S. Miyaguchi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L1502 CrossRef CAS .C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 904 CrossRef CAS .C. Adachi, R. C. Kwon, P. Djurovich, V. Adamovich, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2082 CrossRef CAS .B. W. D'Andrade, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 147 CrossRef CAS .J. P. J. Markham, S.-C. Lo, S. W. Magennis, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2645 CrossRef CAS .A. Goetzberger, Ch. Hebling and H.-W. Schock, Mater. Sci. Eng. Rep., 2003, 40, 1 Search PubMed .C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .K. Yoshino, K. Tada, A. Fujii, E. M. Conwell and A. A. Zakhidov, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1997, 44, 1315 CrossRef CAS .J. Rostalski and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 37 CrossRef CAS .P. Peumans, V. Bulovic and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2650 CrossRef CAS .C. Videlot and D. Fichou, Synth. Metals, 1999, 102, 885 CrossRef CAS .C. Videlot, A. El Kassmi and D. Fichou, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 69 CrossRef CAS .J. Rostalski and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 87 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Lane, J. Rostalski, C. Giebeler, S. J. Martin, D. D. C. Bradley and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 63, 3 CrossRef CAS .T. Tsuzuki, Y. Shirota, J. Rostalski and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 1 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474 CAS .S. Morita, A. A. Zakhidov and K. Yoshino, Solid State Commun, 1992, 82, 249 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, Nature, 1992, 356, 585 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, R. West and C-H. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 3844 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, V. Dyakonov, N. S. Sariciftci, W. Graupner, G. Leising and J. C. Hummelen, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 1185 CrossRef CAS .N. S. Sariciftci and A. J. Heeger, in Handbook of Organic Conductive Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Wiley, New York,  1997, vol. 1, p. 413–455 Search PubMed .J. J. M. Halls and R. H. Friend, Synth. Metals, 1997, 85, 1307 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, Monatsh. Chem., 2001, 132, 421 Search PubMed .S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .J. J. M. Halls, A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, W. Wu, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater. Res., 2000, 12, 498 Search PubMed .C. J. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, in Semiconducting Polymers: Chemistry, Physics and Engineering, ed. P. F. Van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, Wiley-WCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .V. Dyakonov, Physica E, 2002, 14, 53 Search PubMed .B. Kraabel, J. C. Hummelen, D. Vacar, D. Moses, N. S. Sariciftci, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 4267 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, G. Zerza, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, S. Luzzi, J. C. Hummelen and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 340, 232 CrossRef CAS .G. Zerza, C. J. Brabec, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Metals, 2001, 119, 637 CrossRef CAS .D. Vageneugden, R. Kiebooms, P. Adriasens and D. Vanderzande, Acta Polym., 1998, 49, 687 CrossRef CAS .E. Peeters, P. A. van Hal, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10174 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, A. Swartz, R. Gomez, J. L. Segura, N. Martin, C. Brabec and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 1141 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, J. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Peason and M. Stolka, Poly(N-vinylcarbazole), Gordon and Breach, New York,  1981 Search PubMed .D. B. Romero, M. Schaer, M. Leclerc, D. Adès, A. Siove and L. Zuppiroli, Synth. Metals, 1996, 80, 271 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang and Q. B. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 1926 CrossRef CAS .H. K. Kim, M-K. Ryu, K-D. Kim, S-M. Lee, S-W. Cho and J-W. Park, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 1114 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Kim, S. I. Hong, H. N. Cho, D. Y. Kim and C. Y. Kim, Polym. Bull., 1997, 38, 169 CrossRef CAS .S-Y. Song, M. S. Jang, H-K. Shim, D-H. Hwang and T. Zyung, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 1482 CrossRef CAS .Y. Yang, Q. B. Pei and A. J. Heeger, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 934 CrossRef CAS .W.-L. Yu, Y. Cao, W. Huang and A. J. Heeger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 3270 CrossRef CAS .M. Ishikawa and J. Ohshita, in Handbook of Organic Conductive Molecules and Polymers, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Wiley, New York,  1997, vol. 1–4 Search PubMed .S. Nešpurek, Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 1999, 8–9, 319 Search PubMed .S. Nešpurek and A. Eckhardt, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2001, 12, 427 CrossRef CAS .S. Nešpurek, J. Pfleger, E. Brynda, I. Kminek, A. Kadashchuk, A. Vakhnin and J. Sworakowski, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2001, 355, 191 Search PubMed .S. Nešpurek, H. Valerian, A. Eckhardt, V. Herden and W. Schnabel, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2001, 12, 306 CrossRef CAS .S. Nešpurek, J. Sworakowski and A. Kadashchuk, IEEE Trans. Diel. Electr. Insul., 2001, 8, 432 Search PubMed .S. Nešpurek, P. Toman, J. Sworakowski and J. Lipinski, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2002, 2, 299 Search PubMed .I. Glowacki, J. Jung and J. Ulanski, Synth. Metals, 2000, 109, 143 CrossRef CAS .I. Glowacki, E. Dobruchowska and J. Ulanski, Synth. Metals, 2000, 109, 139 CrossRef CAS .S. Nešpurek, A. Kadashchuk, Y. Skryshevski, A. Fujii and K. Yoshino, J. Soc. Electr. Mater. Eng., 2000, 9, 39 Search PubMed .P. Toman, S. Nešpurek, A. Fujii and K. Yoshino, J. Soc. Electr. Mater. Eng., 2001, 10, 185 Search PubMed .G. Wang, S. Nešpurek, A. Fujii and K. Yoshino, J. Soc. Electr. Mater. Eng., 2001, 10, 189 Search PubMed .(http://www.lucent.com/news_events/pdf/researchreview.pdf)..See, Science, 2002, 298, 961 .See, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 289902(E) .See, Phys. Rev. B, 2002, 66, 249902(E)–249907(E) Search PubMed .See, Nature, 2003, 422, 92–93 CrossRef .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
Table Content:

	Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.Acenes:n
= 1: anthracene (Ac)n
= 2: tetracene (Tc)n
= 3: pentacene (Pc)n
→
∞: polyacene (PAc)
	Perylene
	Oligo- and poly-p-phenylenesn
= 2: p-quaterphenyl (4P)n
= 3: p-quinquephenyl (5P)n
= 4: p-sexiphenyl; p-hexaphenyl (6P)n
→
∞: poly-p-phenylene (PPP)
	Polyfluorene (PF)
	Ladder-type poly-p-phenylene (LPPP)
	Oligo- and poly-p-phenylenevinylenesn
= 1: p-distyrylbenzenen
→
∞: poly-p-phenylenevinylene (PPV)
	Poly(2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexoxy)-p-phenylene vinylene)
(MEH-PPV)
	Oligo- and poly-α-thiophenesn
= 2: α-quaterthiophene (4T)n
= 3: α-quinquethiophene (5T)n
= 4: α-sexithiophene;α-hexathiophene (6T)n
= 6: α-octithiophene (8T)n
→
∞: polythiophene (PT)
	Polyisothianaphthene (PITN)
	Polysilanes (polysilylenes):Poly(methylphenylsilane)
(PMPSi)
	PSiK
	Metal phthalocyanine (MePc)
	Tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium (Alq3)
	Fullerenes:C60
	1-(3-Methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1,1-phenyl-(6,6)C61
(PCBM)
	Amines:N,N′-diphenyl-bis(3-methylphenyl)(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (TPD);
	N,N′-diphenyl-bis(1-naphthyl)(1,1′-biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (NPB);
	N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(di(3-methylphenyl)aminobiphenyl)benzidine (TPTE)

Naphthalene	6.4	 	 	 	30
 	6.8	1.8	 	 	1
Anthracene	5.9	 	 	 	2,31
 	 	1.8	 	 	 
 	5.7	 	 	 	30
 	5.8	2.0	 	 	1
Tetracene	5.3	2.2	 	 	6
 	5.1	 	 	 	30
 	5.4	2.4	 	 	1
Pentacene	5.0	2.5	 	 	6
 	4.9	 	 	 	30
 	5.1	2.9	 	 	1
Perylene	5.2	 	 	 	30
 	5.4	2.5	 	 	1
6P	5.8–6.0	2.7–2.9	 	 	32
C60	6.9	3.4	 	 	33
 	 	 	6.4	4.5	34
 	 	 	6.2	4.5	35
 	 	 	6.1	3.7	36
TPD	5.9	 	 	 	37
 	 	 	5.5	2.3	38
 	 	 	5.8	2.6	39
NPD	6.4	 	 	 	37
 	 	 	5.4	2.4	38
 	 	 	5.7	2.6	39
BCP	 	 	6.1	2.4	40
CuPc	5.0	 	 	 	41
 	 	 	5.3	3.6	42
 	 	 	5.2	3.5	35
ZnPc	5.2	 	 	 	41
Alq3	6.3	 	 	 	43
 	5.7	3.0	5.7	3.0	42
 	 	 	5.8	3.1	38
PPy	 	 	4.0	1.6	44
PMeT	 	 	4.9	3.0	44
PHT	 	 	5.2	3.2	44
MEH-PPV	 	 	4.9	2.8	34
 	 	 	5.0	2.8	36
PMPSi	 	 	5.3	1.8	45
PVK	 	 	6.1	2.1	46
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  TOF experiment. A scheme of the TOF apparatus (a), and a typical transient current as seen on the oscilloscope (b); ttr is the transit time.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  FE experiment. A schematic view of a thin film FET (a), and a family of current–voltage characteristics (b). The curves have been plotted for different gate voltages (Ug(1)<Ug(2)<Ug(3)).	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic views of the geometries of one-, two- and three-layer OLEDs (upper part), and corresponding energy level diagrams (lower part). 1 – substrate; 2 – bottom (high work function) electrode; 3 – emitting layer; 4 – upper (low work function) electrode; 5 – hole transporting layer. ϕh and ϕl
– work functions of the electrodes, Ic
– ionization energy (energy of HOMO), Ac
– electron affinity (energy of LUMO). The positions of energy levels are those prior to attaining the thermal equilibrium.	 
4P	p-Quaterphenyl 
4T	α-Quaterthiophene
6P	p-Sexiphenyl; p-hexaphenyl
6T	α-Sexithiophene
8P	p-Octiphenyl
8T	α-Octithiophene
Ac	Anthracene
Alq3	Tris(8-hydroxyquinolinato)aluminium
Btp2Ir(acac)	Bis(2-(20-benzo[4,5-a]thienyl)pyridinato-N,C30) iridium(acetylactonate)
CBP	4,4'-N,N'-dicarbazolebiphenyl
CT	Charge transfer
EL	Electroluminescence
FE	Field effect
FET	Field effect transistor
Firpic	Iridium(III)-bis(4,6-difluorophenylpyridinato-N,C2') picolinate
Firppy	Fac-tris[2-(4,5′-difluorophenyl)pyridine-C2′,N]iridium(III)
Ir(ppp)3	Fac-tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridium
ITO	Indium tin oxide
LC	Liquid crystal
LED	Light emitting diode
LPPP	Ladder-type poly-p-phenylene
MDMO-PPV	Poly(2-methoxy-5-(3,7-dimethyloctyoxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene)
MEH-PPV	Poly(2-methoxy-5-(2'-ethylhexoxy)-p-phenylenevinylene)
Me-LPPP	Methyl-substituted PPP
MePc	Metal phthalocyanine
NPB	N,N'-diphenyl-bis(1-naphthyl)-(1,1'-biphenyl)-4,4'-diamine
NTCDI	Naphthalenetetracarboxylic diimide
OLED	Organic light emitting diode
PAc	Polyacene 
PBD	2-(4-Biphenyl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole
PBK	Poly(N-butyl-3,6-carbazolylene)
Pc	Pentacene
PCBM	1-(3-Methoxycarbonyl)propyl-1-1-phenyl-(6,6)C61
PET	Polyethyleneterephtalate
PF	Polyfluorene
PHT	Poly(3-n-hexylthiophene)
PITN	Polyisothianaphthene
PL	Photoluminescence
PLED	Polymer light emitting diode
PMeT	Poly(3-methylthiophene)
PMPSi	Poly(methylphenylsilylene); poly(methylphenylsilane)
PPP	Poly-p-phenylene
PPV	Poly-p-phenylenvinylene
PPy	Polypyrrole
PSi	Polysilane; polysilylene
PSiK	N-Carbazolyl-substituted silane homo- and copolymers
PT	Polythiophene
PtOEP	2,3,7,8,12,13,17,18-Octaethyl-21H,23H-porphine platinum(II)
PTOX	Poly(bis(3-decyl-2-thienyl)dithienol[3,2-b:2',3'-d]thiophene-4,4-dioxide)
PV	Photovoltaic
PVK	Poly(N-vinylcarbazole) 
QE	Quantum efficiency
TAZ	3-Phenyl-4-(10-naphthyl)-5-phenyl-l,2,4-triazole
TCNQ	Tetracyanoquinodimethane
TL	Thermoluminescence
TNF	Trinitrofluorenone
TOF	Time of flight
TPD	N,N'-Diphenyl-bis(3-methylphenyl)-(1,1'-biphenyl)-4,4'-diamine
TPTE	N,N'-Diphenyl-N,N'-bis(di(3-methylphenyl)aminobiphenyl)benzidine

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
