Inner transition metal-modulated metal organic frameworks (IT-MOFs) and their derived nanomaterials: a strategic approach towards stupendous photocata ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3NR00274H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3NR00274H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2023, 15, 7640-7675Inner transition metal-modulated metal organic frameworks (IT-MOFs) and their derived nanomaterials: a strategic approach towards stupendous photocatalysis

        
          
            Jayashree 
            Panda
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Suraj Prakash 
            Tripathy
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Srabani 
            Dash
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Asheli 
            Ray
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pragyandeepti 
            Behera
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Satyabrata 
            Subudhi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Kulamani 
            Parida
          
          
        
      *
      Centre for Nano Science and Nanotechnology, Siksha ‘O’ Anusnadhan (Deemed to be University), Bhubaneswar, Odisha 751030, India. E-mail: paridakulamani@yahoo.com; kulamaniparida@soauniversity.ac.in;  Fax: +91-674-2350642;   Tel: +91-674-2351777
Received 
      18th January 2023
    , Accepted 24th March 2023First published on 17th April 2023AbstractPhotocatalysis, as an amenable and effective process, can be adopted for pollution remediation and to alleviate the ongoing energy crisis. In this case, recently, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) have attracted increasing attention in the field of photocatalysis owning to their unique characteristics including large specific surface area, tuneable pore architecture, mouldable framework composition, tuneable band structure, and exceptional photon absorption tendency complimented with superior anti-recombination of excitons. Among the plethora of frameworks, inner transition metal based-MOFs (IT-MOFs) have started to garner significant traction as photocatalysts due to their distinct characteristics compared to conventional transition metal-based frameworks. Typically, IT-MOFs have the tendency to generate high nuclearity clusters and possess abundant Lewis acidic sites, together with mixed valency, which aids in easily converting redox couples, thereby making them a suitable candidate for various photocatalytic reactions. Therefore, in this contribution, we aim to summarise the excellent photocatalytic performance of IT-MOFs and their composites accompanied by a thorough discussion of their topological changes with a variation in the structure of the metal cluster, fabrication routes, morphological features, and physico-chemical properties together with a brief discussion of computational findings. Moreover, we attempt to explore the scientific understanding of the functionalities of IT-MOFs and their composites with detailed mechanistic pathways for in-depth clarity towards photocatalysis. Furthermore, we present a comprehensive analysis of IT-MOFs for various crucial photocatalytic applications such as H2/O2 evolution, organic pollutant degradation, organic transformation, and N2 and CO2 reduction. In addition, we discuss the measures employed to enhance their performance with some future directions to address the challenges with IT-MOF-based nanomaterials.Jayashree PandaJayashree Panda received her postgraduate degree in Applied Chemistry from Central University of Jharkhand, Ranchi, Jharkhand, in 2015. Since January 2022, she started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Her current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOFs and MOF-derived nanomaterials towards emerging photocatalytic applications.Suraj Prakash TripathySuraj Prakash Tripathy received his Master's in Science (M.Sc.) Degree in Chemistry from Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India in 2015. Then, he joined Advanced Materials Technology (AMT) Department CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in November 2017 at as a project fellow. Since July 2018, he started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. His current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOF-based nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.Srabani DashSrabani Dash received her postgraduate degree in Chemistry from Institute of Technical Education and Research (ITER), S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, in 2019. Since January 2022, she started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Her current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOF-based nanomaterials towards emerging photocatalytic applications.Asheli RayAsheli Ray received her Bachelor's Degree from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar in 2015 and M.Sc. Degree in Applied Chemistry from Centurion University, Jatni, Odisha, India in 2018. Since July 2018, she started working as a research scholar at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida. Her current research interests focus on the design of nickel phosphide-based nanomaterials for photocatalytic applications.Pragyandeepti BeheraPragyandeepti Behera received her postgraduate degree in Chemistry from Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, Burla, Odisha, in 2020. Since December 2020, she started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Her current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOF-derived nanomaterials towards emerging photocatalytic applications.Satyabrata SubudhiDr Satyabrata Subudhi received his postgraduate degree in Chemistry from Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India in 2014 and received his PhD in Chemistry from S ‘O’ A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India in 2020. Since November 2020, he started working as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. His current research interest is centred on the fabrication of MOF-based heterogeneous photocatalysts towards photocatalytic pollutant remediation, energy conversion and organic transformation reactions.Kulamani ParidaProf. Kulamani Parida is working as a Distinguished Professor in Chemistry and Director, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, Deemed to be University, he worked for 37 years in CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in different capacities and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry, Department. Dr Kulamani Parida has made significant contribution towards exploring the chemistry related to structural, morphological, optical, electronic and electrochemical properties of a number of wide band gap and narrow band gap semiconductors, doped metal oxides, metal carbides, metal sulphide, metal nitrides, MOF, MOF-derived nanomaterials, LDH, g-C3N4 and quantum dots for effective visible light absorption and charge separation required for efficient photocatalytic water splitting, degradation of pollutants and synthesis of fine chemicals. Thus far, he has published more than 500 research articles and review papers in high impact factor journals, 10 book chapters, filed 35 patents and supervised 50 PhD scholars. The importance and current relevance of his work are amply reflected in the large number of citations (26264) of his work and H index (87).
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of the field of photocatalysis, many researchers have devoted their efforts to the design and fabrication of novel nanomaterials. Semiconducting materials rich in active sites, desirable band structure, and superior exciton anti-recombination remain the perquisites for excellent photocatalytic outputs. However, the traditional inorganic catalysts cannot satisfy all the above-mentioned criteria. Thus, the introduction of hybrid organic–inorganic materials has revolutionized the field of photocatalysis. Typically, the realization of permanent porosity in these materials has further propelled their role as light active catalysts. Among them, metal organic frameworks have become very popular. Moreover, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are not restricted to a single application, rapidly demonstrating an astounding impact in various fields. MOFs can be described as hybrids porous frameworks containing metal ions/metal ion clusters coordinated through organic ligands. They are extremely porous because of the combination of an infinite number of potential building blocks to form hybrid crystalline materials with flexible1 structural geometries extended over 3D frameworks.1,2 Owing to the synergistic effect of both their metal nodes and organic linkers, MOFs and their derivatives are suitable candidates for a wide range of solar light-illuminated catalysis.3–5 In fact, in the last several years, the increase in reports on MOFs in the literature has provided diverse framework structures, which are fabricated using various metals as metal nodes and diverse categories of polytopic linkers such as cationic, anionic, and neutral linkers as another building block of the framework.6,7
Additionally, MOFs possess a designable pore structure, high surface area (∼7800 m2 g−1), free volume (∼90%), and low density (∼0.124 g cm−3), making them superior to related materials such as conventional nanomaterials, zeolites, and 1D-coordination polymers.8 Based on properties, MOFs can act as excellent photocatalysts for diverse applications, as reported by various research groups.9 Basically, a photocatalyst should have some suitable features, as follows: (i) high light absorption ability followed by electron–hole separation at their corresponding conduction band and valence band position, (ii) high exciton (electron–hole) life time and low recombination rate, (iii) high surface area to adsorb reactant molecules to enable redox reactions, (iv) suitable band edge potential and (v) thermal and chemical stability, to act as a potent material for various applications. In this context, besides achieving all the above-mentioned criteria, the remarkable surface area, ultrahigh porosity, easy chemical tunability, low synthesis cost, and environmentally friendly nature of MOFs make them robust candidates towards photocatalysis.1,10 Additionally, an efficient photocatalyst should possess a bandgap (Eg) energy of less than 3 eV, enabling light absorption to occur in the abundantly available visible range to maximize solar power utilization. Therefore, the structural engineering of MOFs can be realized through pre- or post-synthetic approaches, in which metals and/or ligands can be post-synthetically exchanged or additional molecules grafted to the backbone of the ligand to achieve the above-mentioned target.9 Further, recent research revealed the construction of an MOF with an even more complex structure, which consists of a variety of organic ligands as well as hetero-metallic ions having different functionalities but the same connectivity with the metal SBUs, which are referred to as multivariate MOFs, showing a noticeable performance enhancement compared to pristine MOFs.
In this context, the use of potential semiconductors as the metallic node in MOFs can be beneficial to diminish their charge carrier recombination probability and enhance their light absorption capacity. Among the various types of MOFs, inner transition metal-based MOFs are gaining significant attention as photocatalysts because of their variable valence states in metallic oxo-clusters, thereby promoting flexible bonding with a plethora of organic linkers and enabling the fabrication of rigid complex structures capable of performing specific applications. Therefore, combining or inserting a metal from the inner transition series in the framework structure can overcome many potential barriers observed for the pristine d-block metal organic frameworks. Additionally, one advantageous property of inner-transition metals is their luminescent nature, which combined with other transition metals, semiconductors, or MOF-derived templates can enhance the photocatalytic efficiency of composite materials. Diverse IT-metal-based MOFs (IT-MOFs) have been reported to date by various research groups and their historical development is outlined in Scheme 1. The basic advantages of IT-metals are their high electropositive character and diverse coordination numbers (6, 12, etc.), which make them good Lewis acids and feature high nuclearity clusters. This leads to varying complex framework geometries, which facilitate the creation of multiple structures that are not possible by conventional d-block metals.6
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the history of reported inner-transition MOFs (IT-MOFs). 
Moreover, the presence of oxygen vacancies in inner transition elements plays a crucial role in trapping the photoexcited electrons, which causes enhanced lifetime of photoexcitons and delays the recombination process. Additionally, the empty low lying 4f-orbitals of IT-MOFs are capable of trapping the photoexcited electrons at the catalyst surface or the between VB and CB position of IT-MOFs, which cannot be achieved in traditional d-block metal-based MOFs.11,12 These two important factors are the advantages of IT-MOFs to trap the photoexcited electrons and delay the recombination of excitons, resulting in superior photocatalytic activity.13–17 In this regard, Zhang et al. reported that the low-lying unoccupied 4f orbitals of Ce4+ in UiO-66(Ce) have longer-lived excited states and facile electron–hole separation, with attractive catalytic performance.18 Additionally, Qiu et al. explained the contribution of the low-lying empty 4f orbitals of Ce towards the extension of the light absorption range to the visible region, which leads to the efficient visible-light oxidation of benzyl alcohol.12 Because of these important properties, MOFs such as Ce-MOFs, Nd-MOFs, Eu-MOFs, Tb-MOFs, Ho-MOFs, Yb-MOFs, U-MOFs, Pr-MOFs, and Sm-MOFs have been formulated by several research groups.
Additionally, IT-metals are capable of forming labile coordination complexes. Subsequently, the ligand exchange phenomenon becomes facile, which promotes the effortless post-synthetic modification (PSM) of IT-MOFs. All lanthanoids (except La3+ and Lu3+) show luminescence nature with high specificity, sensitivity, transient time, feasibility, and repeatability.19–21 Moreover, in the actinide series, because of the relatively vast natural abundance, low specific activity, and intermediate chemical toxicity of uranium, U-MOFs have realized the most visible development. IT-metals have a broad range of coordination numbers and geometries, with minor energy variations between them, and their geometry is governed mostly by ligand steric hindrance, making them a lucrative option towards photocatalysis. Although this complicates the structural prediction of MOFs, it simultaneously offers the possibility of uncovering a large variety of novel structures with unique features such as high aqueous stability, high coordination number, presence of low-lying vacant f-orbitals, easily convertible redox couples, and potent Lewis acidic characteristics. Owing to these superiorities, there has been significant traction in the development of IT-MOFs over the past two decades, as depicted in the Web of Science publication database and illustrated in Scheme 2. It is noteworthy to depict that IT-MOF-based nanomaterial accounts for >3% of the total MOF-related publications thus far, which will increase over the coming years, as shown below.
 Scheme 2  Publication statistics of MOF and IT-MOFs for the period 2000–2022 (data collected from Web of Science Database from 2000 to August 2022). 
Additionally, the presence of chromophoric (π-conjugated systems) linkers, which have the ability to trap the photon of required wavelength, and linkers containing functional groups (auxochromes), modifying both the wavelength and intensity of absorption, have a significant impact on the IT-MOF band structure. They change the position of the corresponding highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the aromatic moiety and enhance the light-trapping ability of the framework. In addition, linkers with rigid structural backbones are generally preferred, given that the rigidity makes it easier to interpret the network geometry in advance of synthesis. Moreover, the rigidity also helps to withstand the open pore structure even after the removal of entrapped solvent.9 Given that MOFs are considered as molecules assembled to form a crystalline structure, their orbitals are denoted as HOMO and LUMO according to the frontier molecular orbital (FMO) theory instead of the VB and CB, respectively. The photocatalytic reaction takes place only when the energy of a photon equal to or greater than the HOMO–LUMO energy gap of the IT-MOF falls on the semiconductor material. Then, the electrons get excited to the LUMO via the charge transfer mechanism mostly through the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) process. Similar to semiconductor-based photocatalysis, the segregation and transportation of charge carriers to the active surface sites are crucial to carry out various redox reactions. The ELMCT of IT-MOFs plays a pivotal role in the anti-recombination of excitons and effective photocatalysis. Thus, the detailed study of IT-MOFs and related nanomaterials for photocatalysis has significant implications.
In this review, we mainly focus on inner-transition metal-based MOFs and their composites (pristine f-MOFs, d–f multi-variate MOFs, f-MOF-derived products, and their nano-composites) as photocatalysts. They are considered as a class of progressing MOF-based materials useful in the direction of photocatalytic performance, controllable hierarchy in improved surface characteristics, and multi functionalities. The importance of diverse types of IT-metal nodes and the corresponding linkers towards the morphological and physico-chemical variation is discussed thoroughly. In addition, the involvement of f-block metals in MOFs as a metal node enhances their catalytic and photocatalytic activity because of the metal–ligand synergistic effect and the details are discussed in the required section. Although many reviews have been published on inner transition MOFs, the importance of f-block metals and their junction with various other nanomaterials, derived products, and multivariate inner transition MOFs with d-elements has not been specifically discussed thus far with a focus on photocatalysis.6,22,23 Therefore, in this review, we present the prominence of IT-MOFs, their multitrack synthesis protocols, characterization, and potential applications relevant to photocatalytic energy and environmental usage. An overview of this review is outlined in Scheme 3.
 Scheme 3  Overall illustration highlighting inner transition MOFs (IT-MOFs). 
2. Structural features of IT-MOFs
The structural variations of MOFs are basically influenced by the choice and nature of their metal ions/clusters and linkers used in the framework design. Typically, the inner transition elements with variable coordination numbers generate multitudinous secondary building units (SBUs) with polydentate linkers, thereby generating numerous 3D frameworks. Moreover, to analyse the structural properties of IT-MOFs, a thorough examination of their fundamental building blocks is adopted. Accordingly, the detailed explanation is categorized into two categories, i.e., (i) influence of metal nodes and (ii) influence of linker.
2.1. Influence of metal nodes
Metal nodes are one of the integral parts of the MOF structure, which influence their morphological and physiochemical characteristics. Among the metallic elements, the d-block and f-block elements are widely accepted choices for the construction of the framework because of their high coordination numbers and diverse chemical properties. Typically, some of the d and f block elements employed in the fabrication of pristine and multivariate IT-MOF-based materials are listed in Scheme 4. Here, specifically, the underlying science of inner transition elements toward the formation of multinuclear MOF clusters is further elaborated. In this regard, the metal nodes are categorized into three sections, as follows: (i) metal ions, (ii) metal chains and (iii) metal clusters, which are subsequently discussed in detail with various reported examples.
 Scheme 4  Metals from d and f blocks used in IT-MOF-based nanomaterial fabrication. 

2.1.1. Metal ions as nodes. 
In these frameworks, f-block metal ions such as Yb(III), Tb(III), Sm(III), Eu(III), and Gd(III) have been used as metal nodes by various research groups to prove their influence on the fabrication of multifunctional IT-MOFs. Loeb et al. reported the preparation of Re-MOF by using trivalent rhenium ion as a metal node and rotaxane as a linker, which showed a very high surface area having ultra-high cage dimensions (i.e., 10000 Å3) and superior thermal stability. In addition, they found that MOFs containing Tb(III), Sm(III), Gd(III), Eu(III), and Yb(III) as the metal nodes exhibited almost similar thermal stability (up to 240 °C).6,24 Secondly, Chen et al. fabricated a UTSA-61 MOF having a large cage architecture using the Re(III) ion as the metal node, as shown in Fig. 1(i) and dendritic hexa-carboxylic acid as the linker.6,25 Furthermore, Qie et al. reported the preparation of different microporous MOFs using Y(III), Tb(III), Ho(III), etc., with the ABW topology, as shown in Fig. 1(iii), using benzene tricarboxylic acid as the linker source. The important consequence of these MOFs having metal ions is that they can easily be transformed from 3D MOFs to 2D MOFs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Construction of IT metal ion nodes (i–v). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 56© 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) Structure of IT metal chain nodes (vi–viii). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Building of dinuclear clusters (I–IV). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 31© 2018, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 32© 2012, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of trinuclear clusters (V–VII). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 33© 2005, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of tetranuclear clusters (VIII–XI). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from Ref. 57© 2000, Wiley.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 37© 2017, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 38© 2009, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of hexanuclear clusters (XII–XVII). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40© 2008, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41© 2009, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 42© 2009, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 46© 2018, Wiley.) Structure of heptanuclear clusters(XVIII). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49© 2012, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of nonanuclear clusters (XIX and XX). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 50© 2014, Nature Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51© 2017, the American Chemical Society.) (c) Isoreticular ditopic linker series. (d) Examples of anionic linkers. (e) Examples of cationic linkers. (f) Examples of neutral linkers. 


2.1.2. Metal chains as nodes. 
Dimeric and polymeric oxo/hydroxo concatenated nodes of inner transition elements, also known as rods, as shown in Fig. 1(vi–viii), are basically regarded as metal chains that are used with various linkers to form MOFs, as reported by multiple research groups.6,26 Yaghi et al. reported the preparation of a microporous Tb2(BDC)3 MOF in 1999, in which its framework consisted of Tb oxy-clusters and BDC linkers. In this IT-framework, each carboxylate ion is bridged through two Tb atoms, which is each coordinated by eight oxygen atoms from different sources (one each from four carboxylate groups of different BDC ligands, two from a nitrate anion, and one from each of two DMF molecules) in a bis-monodentate fashion to form a chain-like structure.6,27 In addition, Ferey et al. developed MIL-83, i.e., Eu2(O2C–C10H14–CO2)3, in 2004 employing Eu(III) concatenated nodes and HO2C–C10H14–COOH linkers having the framework surface area of 65 m2 g−1Table 1. In this structure, the face-sharing Eu-polyhedra are connected through 3 × μ3(O1) bridging groups, which are joined to create the connected chains.6,28 Similarly, Cahill et al. reported the preparation of GWMOF-6 in 2005 using adipic acid linkers and Pr(III) chain nodes, which was templated by 4,4′-bipyridine moieties.6,29 It can be observed that the metal chains tend to form relatively stable inner transition frameworks in comparison with MOFs containing simple metal ions as the metal node.
Table 1 Some examples of IT-MOFs with varying metal nodes




Types of metal nodes
Components of metal node
Molecular formula
Ref.




Abbreviations : BDC – benzene dicarboxylate, DMF – dimethyl formamide, ox – oxalate, ADB – 4,4′-azodibenzoate, CIP – carboxybenzylideneamino isophthalic acid, pydc – 2,5-pyridinedicarboxylic acid, OTf – triflate, DMA – N,N-dimethylacetamide, BTC – 1,3,5-benzenetricarbocylic acid, DMSO – dimethyl sulfoxide, Hhpzc – 3-hydroxy-pyrazine-2-carboxylic acid, CPEIP – 5-((4-carboxyphenyl)ethynyl)isophthalic acid, na – nicotinic acid, and pca – 2-pyrazinecarboxylic acid.




Metal ions
M = Gd, Sm, Eu, Tb
[M(H2O)(OTf2)3][Cl][OTf]7

6



M = Sm(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Yb(III), Eu(III)
[(Me2NH2)3[M3(L)2 (H2O)3]·48DMA

6



M = Tb, Ho, Er, Yb
M(BTC)(DMF)(DMSO)

6



M = Pr(III), Nd(III), Ce(III), Sm(III), Gd(III)
[M(BTC)(DMF)2]·H2O

6



Metal chain
IT-oxo/hydroxo chains
[Nd (H2O)]2[O2C(CH2)3CO2]3·4H2O

6



Tb(BDC)NO3(DMF)2

6



[Pr2(adipic acid)3(H2O)4]·adipicacid·4H2O

6



[Pr2(adipic acid)3(H2O)2]·H2O

6



[Eu2(CO3)(ox)2(H2O)2]·4H2O

6



Eu2(O2C–C10H14–CO2)3

6



Metal cluster
Dinuclear cluster
Tb2[(CH3)2SO]4(ADB)3·16[(CH3)2SO]

27



[Tm2(TBDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2]·4H2O

6



[Tb(CPEIP)(DMF)(H2O)]·2H2O

6



Er2(phen)2(BDC)3·3H2O

6



Er2(TBDC)3(phen)2·4DMF·2H2O

6



[Nd2(CIP)2(DMF)2.8](H2O)1.2

32



Trinuclear clusters
{[Pr3(HATPT)4(ATPT)2]·(NO3)·8H2O}n

33



[Eu3(HCOO)2(RCOO)8(DMF)2(H2O)]

34



{[Nd3(ATPT)3(HATPT)3]·9H2O}n

6



Dy2.5(BTB)3(OAc)0.5(H2O)3

6



{[(CH3)2NH2]3[Ln9-(μ3-O)2(μ3-OH)12(H2O)6] [Ln3(μ3-O)(H2O)3](HCO2)3-(BTB)6}·(solvent)x

35



Tetranuclear clusters
Dy4(μ3-OH)4(asp)3(H2O)8

6



Y2Cu2I2(OH)2(pca)2(na)

6



Sm4(μ3-OH)4(COO)62+

6



Yb(BPTb)(H2O)·(DMF)1.5(H2O)1.25

6



Hexanuclear clusters
[Dy2Cu(μ6-O)1/6(μ3-OH)2/3(μ3-OH)2(hpzc)2(H2O)2]·2H2O

6



[Ln2Cu(μ6-O)1/6(μ3-OH)2/3(μ3-OH)2(hpzc)2(H2O)2]·2H2O

6



[Er4(OH)4(pydc)4(H2O)3]·H2O

6



[Tb6O4(OH)4(COO)8]

6



[Y6(μ3-OH)8(O2C–)6(N4C–)6]

44



[PrIII2PrIV1.25O(OH)3(pydc)3

6



Heptanuclear clusters
Ag3Tb7[(μ3-OH)8(bpdc)6(NO3)3(H2O)6] (NO3)·2H2O

6



Gd7(COO)9(μ3-OH)8(H2O)6

6



Nonanuclear clusters
[Y9(μ3OH)12(OH)2(μ3O)2(H2O)7(O2C–)12]

51



[Er9(μ2-OH)3(μ3-OH)8(O2C–)18]

51







2.1.3. Metal clusters as nodes. 
The most prominent category of metal SBUs for the formation of frameworks is metal clusters. Typically, these clusters are oxo- and hydroxo-bonded polymetallic clusters. These SBUs of IT-MOFs as reported by various groups can be segregated into multiple categories as a dinuclear metal cluster, trinuclear metal cluster, tetranuclear metal cluster, hexanuclear metal cluster, heptanuclear metal cluster, and nonanuclear metal cluster depending on the structural complexity and nuclearity. The metal cluster is named according to the number of metal ions present in the cluster together with the oxo-hydroxo bonding involved. The metal cluster can be regarded as the most stable form of the metal node compared to the metal ion and metal chains because of their multiple bridging units, restorable sacrificial hydroxyl moieties, and bonding rigidity. Various research groups have reported diverse MOFs by using these metal clusters. Some of the predominant IT-MOF clusters formed are discussed as follows.
2.1.3.1. Dinuclear clusters. 
Dinuclear clusters are formed by the combination of two metal ions by M–M bonding having oxo and hydroxo linkages as auxiliary support. The dinuclear metal clusters of lanthanide and actinide series are widely used with ligand moieties to form diverse metal–organic hybrids. In this aspect, Yaghi et al. reported the preparation of MOF-9 having rectangular channels and pcu topology by using dinuclear Tb(III) as cluster nodes, as shown in Fig. 1(I) and azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid as the linker. The crystal structure of Tb2C6O12 SBUs represents that every Tb ion is connected to five ADB linkers, where four are coordinated as di-monodentate and one as bidentate linker bridging between the Tb ions. Two DMSO molecules are also bonded to each Tb atom with Tb-OS(CH3)2 = 2.40 (2) Å to give eight coordinated Tb centers, producing an octahedral topology of C6 units that are joined by long linkers to provide a 3D structure.6,27 Similarly, Gao et al., Stylianou et al., and Tasiopoulos et al. reported the preparation of diverse MOFs using trivalent inner transition ions such as Gd(III), Nd(III), and Eu(III) as dinuclear metal clusters taking various linkers such as S,S-dioxodibenzothiophen-3,7-dicarboxylic acid, tris(p-carboxylic acid) tridurylborane and 5-(4-carboxybenzylideneamino) isophthalic acid, respectively.30–32 Gao et al. reported that the crystal structure of the dinuclear cluster, as shown in Fig. 1(III), contains two Eu(III) ions, three DBTDC-O2 ligands, and four solvent (DMF) molecules with eight oxygen atoms coordinated to each Eu ion to produce a distorted square antiprismatic geometry. The above-mentioned Eu-cluster is assembled with the linker having a non-linear geometry to produce an MOF with sxb topology, which is different to the traditional pcu of similar MOFs. Alternatively, Stylianou et al. explained the structure of binuclear Eu(III)2 clusters, as shown in Fig. 1(IV), with two Eu(III) atoms joined by two μ2-bridging H2O molecules and two tctb3− ligands. The metal ions in the cluster are separated from each other with a distance of 3.9679(11) Å and the interconnection between the dinuclear cluster together with linker leads to the generation of a polymeric framework extending in 3-D having small, zig-zag-shaped channels in SION-105. Alternatively, Tasiopoulos et al. shown that the 6-coordinated nodes with the formula Nd2(COO)6(H2O)1.2(DMF)2.8, where each SBU consists of two, nine-coordinated Nd3+ ions and six carboxylate ions from six different CIP3− ligands linked through tri-coordinated linkers, give rise to a flu topology with the average cavity diameter of 3 to 4 Å and connected by smaller pores of around 2 Å.6,32
2.1.3.2. Trinuclear clusters. 
Because of the relatively higher stability of trinuclear clusters, it has been observed that their formation tendency is also very high. Therefore, they are formed under a wide variety of conditions and their triangular M3, skeleton remains intact in ligand exchange reactions, making them well-suited for post-synthetic modifications. Although these clusters are very common for d-block series, few examples exist using IT-elements because of the empty f orbitals and the higher coordination capacity of inner transition metals. In this case, Cheng et al. engineered an MOF with the formula IT3(ATPT)2(HATPT)4, in which each SBU was formed by the linking of two Ln3 nodes through two ATPT anions as a double bridge in a triangular form, which is then joined with non-coordinated ATPT ligand to create a pcu topology, as shown in Fig. 1(VI).6,33 An isostructural MOF series with Dy(III), Yb(III), and Eu(III) metal sources and BTC linker was fabricated by Zhao et al., which was reported to have 1D channels with a pore aperture in the range of 3.28–6.55 Å and calculated void occupancy of 39.6%. Herein, each SBU consisted of three building blocks, i.e., two separate Eu3+ ions and one Eu3-cluster. The Eu3 cluster has an eight-coordinated distorted square antiprism geometry, which is attained by six oxygen atoms from the carboxylic group of the linkers and two H2O molecules. Moreover, three distinct building blocks are joined by a BTB3− linker to form a 3D anionic framework.6,34 Additionally, Liu et al. prepared JXNU-3, which consisted of both nonanuclear and trinuclear IT(III)-cluster (IT = Er[III] Gd[III], and Tb[III]) using 2-fluorobenzoic acid as a modulator, where the trinuclear cluster [Ln3(O2C–)6-(HCO2)3(μ3-O)(H2O)3] exhibits six-fold symmetry, with six carboxylate ions from BTB ligands capping the cluster and a μ3-O in the center.35
2.1.3.3. Tetranuclear clusters. 
Although tetranuclear clusters are not as common as other clusters some IT-clusters with a square planar, rectangular, cubane tetranuclear geometry have been reported. In this regard, Gao et al. synthesized Gd(III) and Dy(III)-MOFs in 2000, which are made up of cubane-like tetranuclear IT(III) clusters, as shown in Fig. 1(VIII), i.e., IT4O4 nodes, with L-proline or L-aspartic acid linkers connecting them. The highly porous structure having formula Dy4(asp)3(μ3-OH)4(H2O)8 with an average pore aperture 12 Å in diameter was obtained even without removing the water and perchlorate solvent molecules from the framework.6 Furthermore, a mixed metal MOF was synthesized by Yang et al. using nicotinic acid and 2-pyrazinecarboxylic acid as the linkers with two different metal nodes of Cu(I) and Er(III), or Yb(III). The chair-like Cu(I) cluster node combined with cubane-like Er(III) cluster node produces a highly porous framework.36 Also, Petoud et al. and Rosi et al. explained a family of isostructural IT-MOFs with pcu topology formed by cubane-like tetranuclear Gd(III)-clusters, i.e., [Gd4 (COO)6(μ3-OH)4(H2O)8−x (μ1-OH)x](2−x)+, as shown in Fig. 1(IX), linked by the linear aminophenylene linkers to design the 3-D framework.37 The four cubane-like structures have the chemical formula Gd4(μ3-OH)4 with tetrahedral symmetry located at the vertices of the tetrahedron and bridged by four μ3-OH groups. Alternatively, Zhou et al. discovered PCN-17, a series of IT-MOFs made of unique square planar tetranuclear clusters of Er(III), Dy(III), or Yb(III) metal nodes, as shown in Fig. 1(X), and 4′,4′,4′′-striazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate linker having trigonal planar shape. Here, the Ln4 (μ4-H2O) SBU consists of four Ln atoms at the vertices of a square with μ4-H2O residing at the center. All the Ln atoms in the SBU are in the same plane and coordinated to seven oxygen atoms, i.e., four from carboxylate ions and four from different TATB ligands. The materials were activated despite their tiny pore diameters of around 3.5 Å under dynamic vacuum at 250 °C and their BET surface area was calculated to be 600–820 m2 g−1 by the CO2 adsorption process. Lastly, a rectangular tetranuclear IT-cluster (IT = Tb(III), Dy(III), Ho(III), Er(III) or Yb(III)) was reported for the preparation of IT-csq-MOF-1 using 2-fluorobenzoic acid acting as a modulator to prevent the formation of metal chains by Trikalitis et al. The IT-csq-MOF-1 features a csq topology, with large hexagonal channels nearly 16 Å in diameter, surrounded by six smaller triangular channels of approximately 6 Å.38
2.1.3.4. Hexanuclear clusters. 
Metal clusters containing six metal atoms have been known for their stability and diversity for many years. This is due to the framework flexibility, which is crucial to be realized due to the synergistic and cooperative effect between different types and strengths of interactions, including intra- and intermolecular forces of interaction, coordination bonds, and host–guest interactions.39 To date, many hexanuclear clusters containing IT-elements have been reported with octahedral, hexagonal prism, cuboctahedron, and triangular cupola building units. One of the potential IT-metal-based SBUs as a building block for the synthesis of MOFs was discovered by Yao et al. in 2008, which was formed by the repetition of an octahedral unit having the formula [Er6 (μ3-OH)8 (μ6-O)]8+ in a unidirectional manner. This resulted in the formation of a rod-shaped structure, which is a hybrid of an IT(III) chain and IT(III) cluster node, as shown in Fig. 1(XIII).40 Another interesting example by Almeida Paz, Rocha et al. involves the connection of a hexanuclear cluster, i.e., [Pr6(μ3-O)2(μ3-OH)6]8+, with another cluster through one Pr(III) ion to form a hybrid of metal chain-cluster node, as shown in Fig. 1(XIV).41 Moreover, in 2010, Monge et al. composed an octahedral IT(III)-hexanuclear cluster as nodes, as shown in Fig. 1(XII) with p-sulfonatocalix[4]arene as linkers to prepare an MOF, namely, RPF-9. Here, each ligand is coupled to four clusters, and the cluster with μ6-OH is located in the middle of an oh-face having six –OH group joined to eight sulfonate groups from the linkers, resulting in a framework with voids of 11.87 Å (height) between calixarene molecules and 8.32 Å (width) among clusters.42 The preparation of another MOF was reported by Lang et al. using an IT(III) hexanuclear cluster, i.e., [Eu6(μ3-OH)8(μ6-O)(H2O)14]8, linked by TPPS linkers, yielding an open framework having pores ranging from 4 to 5 Å. MOFs were generated in both examples by adjusting the pH of the reaction solution with triethylamine (TEA) or sodium hydroxide (NaOH), respectively.43 A series of Tb-sph-MOFs was reported to be comprised of Tb(III) hexanuclear cluster nodes having a cuboctahedron geometry with 12 coordinating sites bridged by a tridentate and hexadentate linker to form the sph topology. The Tb-sph-MOFs have two tetrahedral cages with the pore length of 6.5–22 Å and 2.5–9.5 Å, respectively, and BET surface areas ranging from 1020–2170 m2 g−1. Eddaoudi et al. and Li et al. showed different topologies, i.e., fcu and ftw, of IT-MOFs using 2-fluorobenzoic acid as a modulator to control the formation of a hexanuclear cluster, i.e., [IT6 (N4C–)6(μ3-OH)8 (O2C–)6]2, and bridging these through di and tetratopic linkers, respectively.44,45 Additionally, Zhou et al. prepared the [(CH3)2NH2]2[Eu6(μ3-OH)8(TCPP)1.5(DCDPS)3]·(solvent)x MOF using the mixed linker concept and concluded that it possessed the novel tam topology. For the synthesis of PCN-900(IT) (IT = Tb(III) Yb(III), Eu(III), and Dy(III)), they used a hexanuclear IT(III)-cluster, where each Eu6 cluster was connected with six TCPP linkers to form the scaffold structure, which is isostructural to PCN-224 having twelve coordinating sites together with square planar tetradentate and bent bidentate linkers. The bent 4,4′-dicarboxydiphenyl sulfone (DCDPS) linker in this MOF series can be substituted via a post-synthetic procedure with linear ditopic linkers such as BPDC to produce a broad class of MOFs with various chemical functions, as shown in Fig. 1(XVII). The surface areas of the PCN-900 (Eu) series vary in the range of 1730–2525 m2 g−1, which were made up of several ditopic linkers.46
2.1.3.5. Heptanuclear clusters. 
IT(III)-MOFs with heptanuclear nodes have only been reported in a few cases. In one example, Gao et al. used a dicubane IT(III) node, i.e., [Yb7 (μ3-OH)8]13+, in which the μ3-OH groups are also considered as vertices of the polyhedron, choosing Yb(III) and Ho(III) as the metal source linked through naphthalene-based dicarboxylic acid to prepare an MOF.47 In the second example, Zhang et al. prepared an MOF with the same heptanuclear IT(III)-cluster choosing Sm(III), Tb(III), or Eu(III) as the metal and a linear bidentate ligand having an hxl topology.48 Also, a trigonal prismatic heptanuclear IT(III)-node was used to prepare an MOF by Yang et al., as shown in Fig. 1(XVIII).49
2.1.3.6. Nonanuclear clusters. 
Using a nonanuclear IT(III)-cluster, i.e., [IT9(μ2-OH)3 (O2C–)18(μ3-OH)8] (IT = Y Tb, Er, and Eu), with 18 binding sites as a molecular building unit, Eddaoudi et al. in 2014 revealed two different topologies, i.e., gea and gez. gea-MOF-1 has a complicated architecture with three types of voids, constructed with triangular tritopic BTB linkers having a surface area of 1490 m2 g−1.50 It was reported by this group that the use of tritopic linkers, i.e., biphenyl-3,4,5-tricarboxylic acid and 5-(4-carboxybenzyloxy) isophthalic acid, led to the formation of nonanuclear clusters with 18 binding sites, as shown in Fig. 1(XIX). The topology of pek-MOF and aea-MOF differs due to the separation angle between the carboxylates, which is close to 120° for pek-MOF and 90° for aea-MOF, despite the fact that both molecules were generated from less symmetric tritopic linkers.51 Zhou et al. described several IT-MOFs with novel topologies composed of a nonanuclear IT(III)-cluster (IT = Eu(III), Dy(III), Yb(III) or Tb(III)) with twelve connected sites, as shown in Fig. 1(XX). For example, a 4-c node, PCN-905-SO2 or –CH2 using a tetradentate linker having –SO2 or –CH2 substituents with C2v symmetry and 12-C clusters resulted in the formation of [Eu9(μ3-O)2(μ3-OH)12 (O2C–)12], which was prepared using 2-FBA to act as a modulator, resulting in a novel dfs topology.52

2.2. Influence of linker towards the construction of MOFs
MOFs are constructed by the coordination of metal ions or metal clusters (SBUs) with organic struts, which are mostly carboxylic acid- or hetero atom (such as nitrogen)-containing ligands, as shown in Fig. 1(d–f).53,54 The rational design and development of new functionalized linkers are highly desirable for the successful formation of MOFs. Moreover, linkers and their functional groups further assist in pore aperture control, guest moiety selectivity and anchoring sites for PSM, thereby making them indispensable entities in modulating the framework functionality. Based on charge accumulation and ion formation, the organic linkers can be typically divided into three groups, as follows: (i) anionic linkers, (ii) cationic linkers, and (iii) neutral linkers, as shown in Fig. 1(d–f), respectively. Among these linkers, the anionic and neutral linkers are considered suitable for the formation of MOFs given that the metallic clusters are mostly electropositive in nature. Secondly, the favorable metal-linker binding can be determined in accordance with Pearson's HSAB (Hard–Soft Acid Base) principle. Particularly, the linkers found in the structures of IT-MOFs are diverse, ranging from bidentate to multitopic connectivity, including sulfonate, nitroso, pyridine-based, phosphate, and carboxylate functional groups. Because IT-metal-based clusters have a high coordination number, the complexity of IT-MOFs is regulated by utilizing lengthy, complex linkers (i.e., multitopic rather than ditopic ligands).55 Due to the adequate stability of the resulting frameworks, the isoreticular synthesis technique can be regarded as a desirable method for the amplification of pore volume from the microporous to mesoporous range (2–50 nm). By methodically lengthening the ligand structure, an isoreticular succession of IT-MOF structures can be produced, and similar to the dicarboxylate IT-MOF series, the structural diversity by multi-carboxylate linkers is quite difficult to form straightforward isoreticular expansion of frameworks given that slight modifications to the linker can have significant implications on the structure of the framework.8 The types of diverse linkers to form IT-MOFs and isoreticular IT-MOFs are shown in Fig. 1(c–f).
3. MOF fabrication routes
The vacant orbitals of metal ions indirectly define the coordination number of metals, which helps to determine the number of ligands that can bind to them, thereby modulating the desired features and functionalities of the resulting framework.57 The employment of diverse metal ions and ligands, as well as varied reaction conditions such as solvents, duration, temperature, and pressure always result in the formation of unique MOFs. The affinity between the metal ions and linkers is one of these variables that play a crucial role in the nucleation, construction, and final morphology of nanomaterials. Additionally, the temperature and solubility of the reactants in the solvent system have an impact on the formation of reaction sites during nucleation. Considering all these parameters, the fundamental principle behind the chemical interplay between metal ions and linkers in the construction of MOFs is the Pearson HSAB principle, which demonstrates that the greater chemical stability in the MOF framework is due to the polarizability and bonding characteristics developed between the strongly charged metal ions (hard acid) and carboxylate linkers (hard base) or vice versa.58 Similarly, the IT-MOFs synthesized with a controlled morphology, composition, structure, and size have a significant impact on their photocatalytic applications. Moreover, selectivity and band gap tuning can be achieved by choosing the appropriate combination of metal nodes and linkers. To date, numerous methods such as solvothermal/hydrothermal method, microwave-assisted method, reflux method, sonochemical method, ion exchange deposition method, and DBD plasma method have been reported by many research groups for the synthesis of IT-MOFs. Furthermore, post-synthetic changes can also be used to synthesize modified IT-MOFs as well as IT-MOF derived materials, which are particularly useful for improving their features by replacing, altering, or eliminating linkers or nodes from the framework. In this section, the possible methods for the synthesis of IT-MOF-based nanomaterials are discussed as follows, and moreover, these fabrication routes are illustrated in Scheme 5.
 Scheme 5  Diagrammatical layout of different strategies involved in the synthesis of IT-MOF-based nanomaterials. 
3.1. Hydrothermal/solvothermal method
The hydro/solvothermal synthesis method mainly takes place at elevated conditions of temperature and autogenous pressure above the boiling point of the solvent to cause chemical integration (by combination and/or decomposition of the precursor components), improving the solubility of salts, which is a conducive condition to shape the desired output directly from a solution. The term solvothermal refers to the involvement of a solvent during the synthesis of MOFs, where if water is used as the solvent, then the term hydrothermal is preferred. In this case, the reaction is carried out in a specific closed chemical container (stain-less steel autoclave or sealed apparatus having the capability to withstand high pressure). This method is very suitable to form stable MOF grids and produces high yielding products together with the added benefit that the reaction temperature, precursors, solvents, pH and reaction time can be flexibly adjusted to obtain the desired IT-MOF morphology. Various IT-MOFs such as Eu-MOF, Ce-UiO-66, Ce/Eu-HKUST-1, and Gd-MOF have been described by various research groups.59–63 Lina et al. synthesized isostructural IT-MOFs having La, Nd, Sm, Ho, and Er metal nodes with 9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′-dicarboxylic acid (H2sfdc) linker via the solvothermal route and heating at 200 °C for 72 h in water. The fabricated MOFs displayed stability up to 420 °C as well as ribbon-of-rings topology. The light gathering antennas and active sites for the catalytic performance of the above-mentioned materials are beneficial for the oxidative reaction of amine to imine using molecular oxygen from the air the oxidizing agent. In addition, Xia et al. reported the preparation of Ce, Tb and Dy coupled with an anthracene-derived dicarboxylate linker to form a broad band visible-active MOF by solvothermal treatment (85 °C for 3 days in DMF), which showed the calculated band gap energy (Eg) of 2.11, 2.20, and 2.15 eV, respectively.59 Similarly, Choi et al. used the hydrothermal technique to prepare an Eu-BTB MOF having a BET surface are 1001 m2 g−1, with an average pore volume of 0.50 cm3 g−1 and a pore dimension of 2 nm.60
3.2. Microwave-assisted method
Microwaves are a type of electromagnetic radiation (frequency/ν = 300–30000 MHz), which are exploited for synthesis, involving the rapid interaction of electrical components of microwave and mobile electric charges of the polar solvent and reactant molecules to obtain the product in a much shorter time compared to the conventional hydrothermal method. Solvents that are capable of transforming electromagnetic energy into heat by absorbing microwave energy through molecular vibrations and rotations are generally used and the selection of solvents was experimented by di-electric loss tangent as the effectiveness of solvent increases with greater dielectric loss. Moreover, they have greater energy conversion efficiency, fast crystallization, controlled morphology, good particle size distribution, and phase-selectivity. Various IT-MOFs such as Ce-TCPP, CeO2/N-doped carbon/Ce-TCPP, Tb-TCPP, and Eu-TCPP have been fabricated using this method by various research groups.64 Jiang et al. synthesized a 2D Tb-TCPP nano-sheet MOF via the microwave synthesis method and its bandgaps were found to be 1.65 eV, 1.68 eV, 1.70 eV, and 1.72 eV for Tb-TCPP (1–4), respectively, for various thicknesses.65 Lin et al. reported the preparation of Ce-MOF [Ce(BTC)(H2O)]·DMF via the microwave-assisted synthesis method and its BET surface area was found to be 62 m2 g−1.66 Zhao et al. used the microwave approach to prepare Ce-MOF in 2 h at 100 °C. Then, the pyrolysis of the Ce-TCPP sample was carried out for 2 h under an N2 flow at a temperature ranging from 300 °C to 550 °C to synthesize heterogeneous CeO2/N-doped C/Ce-TCPP catalysts. Ce-TCPP has a BET surface area of 36.4 m2 g−1, and its BJH pore size distribution verified its mesopore structure.67
3.3. Reflux method
The reflux method can be considered one of the facile synthesis techniques in which the framework fabrication process is carried out at a consistently elevated temperature for a given interval. However, although this method is one of the most useful methods towards the synthesis of IT-MOFs, the obtained products are relatively less stable, possess non-uniform particle size distribution, aggregated particles, and demonstrate indiscernible morphology compared to that from the hydrothermal synthesis method.68 These setbacks tend to make the framework susceptible to diminished crystallinity with relatively poor textural features. Although various MOFs such as Ce/Zr-UiO-66 and U-MOF have been reported thus far, Khandan et al. synthesized a spherical uranyl-curcumin MOF by the reflux method using ethanol-water as the solvent at 50 °C for 4 h with a low BET surface area of 42.62 m2 g−1, together with an average pore aperture of 2.74 nm.70
3.4. Sonochemical method
The sonochemical synthesis approach is considered one of the fastest, smoothest, and environmentally benign methods for the synthesis of nano MOFs using 20 kHz to 10 MHz ultrasound radiation. This reaction is milder and faster than the solvothermal approach, and it can happen in a short time period, making it lucrative for bulk production. Furthermore, acoustic cavitation in solvent happens when the resultant precursor mixture interacts with ultrasonic vibrations, resulting in the creation of a huge number of tiny bubbles with varying pressures. The moment the bubbles collide and collapse, they create a massive quantity of energy, which promotes the framework self-assembly reaction.66,67 Importantly, an increase in temperature and pressure hinders particle aggregation, which favors smaller framework nucleation with narrower particle size distributions. Additionally, the bond breakage in large polymer molecules becomes facile together with the expulsion of the solvation shells and adsorbates from the surface of the material, which is beneficial for the generation of new active sites. Owning to these synthetic benefits, IT-MOF composites such as the g-C3N4@Ce-MOF-based heterojunction have been fabricated. Karimia et al. reported the synthesis of Ce-UiO-66 by the ultrasonic method in 1 h. The produced Ce-UiO-66 had a polyhedron structure, with micro particles ranging in size from 0.1 to 2 μm, together with a high specific BET surface area of 1089.09 m2 g−1 (Ce-MOF).61
3.5. Ion exchange deposition method
Ion exchange is a stoichiometric and reversible procedure, where one ionic species replaces another on the exchanger. The ionic functional groups and metal ions from the cluster are exchanged through sites having the capability of creating an electrostatic connection with an oppositely charged ion. The movable counter ions are substituted by other ions with the same charge from the solution. This process needs to be repeated several times for better results but this leads to multiple disadvantages including a complicated synthesis route, long reaction time, and solvent-consuming process.68,70 The preparation of MOFs such as Ce-doped Fe-MIL-101-NH2 sensitized with Ag3PO4 has been reported using this post-synthetic modification technique. Zhao et al. reported the synthesis of an Fe-MIL-101-NH2 MOF doped with Ce through an in situ ion-exchange deposition approach, which was further sensitized by Ag3PO4. The SEM images revealed that the Ag3PO4 nanoparticles were unevenly distributed on the spherical Ce/Fe-MIL-101-NH2. The composite, Ce/Fe-MIL-101-NH2/Ag3PO4, showed greater light absorbance than the pristine Ag3PO4, which was examined by UV-Vis DRS spectra, and the Ce3+/4+ interconvertible redox couple promoted the migration of photo-induced excitons. Moreover, an increase in the content of Ce dopant in the framework enhanced the efficacy of electron–hole pair separation, thereby boosting the photocatalytic output.70
3.6. Dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) plasma method
The DBD method typically employs a high-voltage alternating current at frequencies ranging from lower radio frequency to the microwave region. Plasma is created in configurations with an insulating (dielectric) substance between the electrodes, which is responsible for the self-pulsing operation, popularly known as dielectric barrier discharge (DBD).71 This method is less suitable towards the formation of stable MOF in comparison with the hydrothermal method. IT-MOFs such as Ce-MOFs were prepared using this method, and further used as a template for the fabrication of MOF-derived CeO2. Tao et al. synthesized Ce-MOFs using the DBD plasma-assisted technique, where Ce-MOFs were produced by non-thermal plasma discharging with an applied voltage of 5.2 kV for 2 h. Initially for a short discharge time (up to 1 h), agglomerated large particles with poor dispersibility were formed, while on prolonging discharging period (2 h), uniform rod-like crystals were produced. Additionally, the synthesized MOF templates were further calcined at 200 °C and 250 °C to get morphologically unaltered CeO2 having abundant oxygen vacancies with a bandgap of 2.35 and 2.6 eV, respectively.63
3.7. Thermal treatment
Thermal treatment entails exposing the MOF template to extremely high temperatures and can be categorized into three types, as follows: (i) inert atmosphere (N2, Ar, etc.)-based thermal treatment, (ii) oxidizing environment (O2, air, etc.)-based thermal treatment and (iii) reducing atmosphere (H2S and NH3)-based thermal treatment.68 Using this method, MOF-derived porous products are obtained having a lower surface area in comparison to the pristine MOF. However, this technique is widely used to form stable metal oxides, sulfides, and other MOF-derived products, which have a significantly higher surface area, distinct topology, porosity, vacancies, and dopants than their traditional nanomaterial counterparts. The most important fact is C, N-based metal oxides and sulfides can be prepared using this technique without using any additional carbon and nitrogen doping sources and show comparatively good performances compared to the traditionally synthesized metal oxides, sulfides, and phosphides towards photocatalysis by reducing the bandgap energy and making the framework more light responsive. IT-MOF-derived products such as CeO2/NiO, CeO2 have been synthesized and described by various research groups. Pengfei Li et al. reported a one-pot synthesis method that involves hydrothermal mixed metal MOF synthesis followed by calcination for the preparation of an MOF-derived NiO/CeO2 photocatalyst. The spherical multi-variate Ni/Ce BTC MOF was transformed into an irregular porous spherical NiO/CeO2 heterojunction. It was observed that the BET surface area increased from 9.18 m2 g−1 to 43.49 m2 g−1 with an increase in the Ce content together with a decrease in the average pore size (from 25.3 nm to 11.0 nm) monotonically with an increase in the CeO2 content.69
It is noteworthy that not all these synthesis processes will yield the same physico-chemical product even if a similar reaction precursor is used for the synthesis. Among the various changes in the synthesized MOF, defects are one of the important types of characteristic features that may arise either because of stoichiometry or reaction condition variation. Basically, “spots where missing or displaced atoms or ions disturb the normal orderly arrangement of ions of the rigid crystalline framework”, are termed as defects. Defects are categorized into three types on a geometric scale, i.e., point, line, and planar defects. In the structure of MOFs, missing linker/cluster defects are the two most common types of point defects. After an organic linker is removed from a structure, it leaves coordination vacancies on two nearby metal clusters, whereas missing-cluster defects occur when a cluster and its whole set of organic linkers are removed, leaving one coordination vacancy on each of the neighbouring clusters. Many research groups have reported the development of defects in MOFs and their importance towards the enhancement of their characteristic physico-chemical features. Defective MOFs such as Ce-BTC, and Ce/Zr-UiO-66 have been reported by various research groups.14,61
4. Characterization of IT-MOF-based nanomaterials
The comprehensive characterization of IT-MOF-based nanomaterials is crucial to study and understand their physico-chemical properties as well as the relative variation between diverse semiconductors. Moreover, the role of f-orbitals, electronic transitions, redox couples, and bulk IT-cluster together with their interaction with functionalized linkers remains key in understanding their exceptional photocatalytic performance. Physico-chemical, textural, optical, electrochemical, and morphological aspects can be measured with the aid of several sophisticated instrumental techniques. Some of these crucial properties of reported IT-MOFs are explained with suitable examples.
4.1. Physico-chemical characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis represents the interpretation of the scattered X-ray intensity from the crystal planes. It provides preliminary information about the crystallinity, crystallite size (≈100 nm), and lattice strain of a material, which helps to calculate the crystallinity and structural defects in the material from the full width half-maximum values. In this regard, Tripathy et al. explained the lower angle peak shifting of a UNH (Ce/Zr) bimetallic MOF, as shown in Fig. 2(a and b) compared to pristine UNH (Zr) because of its expanded unit cell and the larger lattice parameter of Ce ion. Also, the decrease in peak intensity and broadening of the peak can be expected because of the insertion of the Ce ion, and eventually decrease in Zr oxy cluster content.14 Alternatively, More et al. explained the XRD pattern of CeO2 derived from Ce-MOF, as shown in Fig. 2(c), which depicts a slightly lower intensity of the diffraction peaks for the MOF-derived photocatalyst, suggesting the presence of some carbon residue from the BTC framework in the derived CeO2.72 With an increase in the calcination temperature, it was expected that the carbon residue of the Ce-MOF was removed, and thus the peak intensity increased.
 Fig. 2  (a and b) XRD and magnified XRD pattern of UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14© 2022, the American Chemical Society.) (c and d) XRD and BET–BJH isotherms of M-CeO2-573 and Ce-BTC MOF, respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 72© 2021, the American Chemical Society.) (e–i) XPS survey spectrum and XPS peaks of Ce 3d; Fe 2p; O 1s; and C 1s. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74© 2021, Elsevier.) (j) EPR spectra of Ce-MOFs and Fe/Ce-MOFs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74© 2021, Elsevier.) (k) TGA of UNH (Zr) and UNH (Ce/Zr). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14© 2022, the American Chemical Society.) (l and m) FTIR spectra of UNH (Ce), CeO2, and CeO2/UNH (Ce) (1:1, 1:2, and 2:1) and Raman spectra of CeO2 and (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce), respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 13© 2021, the American Chemical Society.) 
To predict the textural properties of a photocatalyst, the determination of its BET surface area and BJH pore volume is indispensable. Generally, the N2 gas adsorption–desorption measurement technique is very helpful to estimate these features of a photocatalyst. To obtain the isotherm, it is necessary to verify the volume of adsorbed N2 gas by the catalyst by observing the pressure difference in the system. The volume of the pore of a photocatalyst can be determined by the BJH model, according to which there are two separate zones present in the pores of the photocatalyst, as follows: (i) the pore walls containing an adsorbed layer and (ii) condensed amount in the residual pore channels. In this regard, More et al. synthesized a Ce-BTC MOF, which displayed a type-II isotherm, as shown in Fig. 2(d), accompanied by no notable hysteresis and the BJH pore-size distribution indicates the weak and broad class of pores with a size in the range of 0 to 50 nm.72 Alternatively, the BJH pore size distribution in the range of 2–35 nm of the derived CeO2 shows a type-IV isotherm with an H hysteresis loop, from which the broad mesoporous nature of the material was concluded. Also, Lammert et al. performed N2 sorption measurements for bimetallic Ce/Zr MOF at 77 K, resulting in type I(a) isotherms, which are typical for microporous materials. It was reported that the relatively high surface areas of around 1363 to 1443 m2 g−1 for the mixed-metal compounds compared to pristine Zr and Ce-UiO-66 results from the missing linker molecules in the framework, which was also confirmed in the TGA study.73 Moreover, Zhao et al. reported the BET surface area and pore nature measured by the BJH method of Ce-TCPP to be 36.4 m2 g−1 and its mesoporous nature, respectively. Interestingly, it was observed that the surface area decreased sharply with an increase in the calcining temperature for the composite in contrast to the average pore diameters, which exhibited an increasing pattern from 10.4–33.6 nm.59 Also, Karimia et al. showed the decrease in the BET specific surface area of Ce-UiO-66 with g-C3N4 composite to 331.35 m2 g−1 compared to the pristine sample, indicating the integration of constituents and occupation of a section of pores by g-C3N4 nanoparticles. Besides, the BJH calculation provided information about the reduction in pore volume for the composite with the reported values for g-C3N4, Ce-UiO-66, and CN@CeMOF-3 of 0.31, 0.48, and 0.29 cm3 g−1, respectively.61
However, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) can be used to measure the oxidation state, composition, and role crystal defects on the physico-chemical and photocatalytic performance of a fabricated catalyst. The elemental composition at the surface of a photocatalyst also can be examined by using the XPS technique, which confirms the presence of elements by using semi-quantitative databases of XPS or by comparing them with reference materials for quantitative information. Alternatively, electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy is very useful for locating active free radicals, color centers, cationic point defects, and other things. In this regard, Tang et al. confirmed the chemical compositions at the surface and oxidation states via XPS spectra of Ce-MOFs and FeCe-MOFs with different Fe:Ce molar ratios.74 The XPS spectrum demonstrated the presence of all the constituent ions in the respective materials such as C, O, and Ce in Ce-MOFs and C, O, Ce, and Fe in all Fe Ce-MOFs. As shown in Fig. 2(e–i), the 3d spectrum of Ce, which consists of both Ce3+ and Ce4+ ions having peaks labelled as v′, u′, and v, v′′, u, u′′ respectively, indicates the mixed valence state of the Ce ions in the samples. The redox couple reaction of Ce3+/4+ could produce oxygen vacancies to maintain the charge balance and this phenomenon directly governs the Ce3+/4+ ratio and oxygen defects in the material. For Fe Ce-MOFs, the peaks at around 712 eV for Fe2+ 2p3/2, 716 eV for Fe3+ 2p3/2, 724 eV for Fe2+ 2p1/2 and 727 eV for Fe3+ 2p1/2, indicating a bimetallic MOF comprised of Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions. While the EPR spectra, as shown in Fig. 2(j), were used to further validate the oxygen vacancies, where the g peaks index a value of around 2.00, corresponding to the oxygen defects in the samples. It was observed that the content of oxygen defects in Fe/Ce-MOFs increased drastically with an increase in Fe concentration and Fe/Ce-MOFs-2 had the most oxygen vacancy, which was consistent with XPS results. Hence, it can be inferred from the EPR and XPS results that the high ratio of Ce3+ to Ce4+ together with proper Fe/Ce molar ratios, can include more oxygen vacancies, leading to a superior photocatalytic outlook.
To check the thermal stability of a semiconductor photocatalyst, the thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) technique can be used, providing information about the weight loss with an increase in temperature. In this regard, Tripathy et al. explained the comparable thermal stability of bimetallic UNH Ce/Zr – 1:1 over its monometallic Zr-MOF-based counterparts. Both materials were subjected to TGA analysis, as shown in Fig. 2(k) at an elevated temperature up to 900 °C under an inert atmosphere and reported to have high stability to heat up to approximately 330 °C.14 Moreover, Karimia et al. measured the TG curve of CN@CeMOF-3 and explained the mass loss in three stages, as follows: (1) weight loss of around 5% may be due to the removal of H2O and other absorbed solvents by increasing the temperature up to ∼100 °C. (2) Weight loss of 12%, corresponding to the removal of –OH group and DMF trapped in the framework part at around 100–290 °C. (3) The CN@CeMOF-3 composite was observed to be stable up to 390 °C and 46% weight loss started from ∼550 °C because of the decomposition of both g-C3N4 and Ce-UiO-66 completely.61
A photocatalytic semiconductor material can be examined for the presence of M–O bonds and functional groups using the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) approach. Alternatively, Raman spectroscopy is a valuable method to determine the structural fingerprint and identify a molecule together with the ability to quantify the crystalline defects present in a semiconductor photocatalyst. Similar to FTIR, it has the capability to analyze the components of a chemical structure and provides quantitative data of a photocatalyst. In this regard, Mansingh et al. performed FTIR analysis of as-prepared samples and obtained vibrational transition bands for Ce-MOF, as shown in Fig. 2(l), at around 1645–1530 cm−1 for the asymmetric stretching and 1411–1341 cm−1 for the symmetric stretching of the –COOH group. Further, the peak at 584 cm−1 represents the Ce–O stretching vibration and the amine substituent in Ce-MOF was confirmed by the peaks located at 3344 and 3469 cm−1, which correspond to the symmetric and asymmetric stretching motions, respectively. Moreover, in the two-fold composite, all the notable vibrational bands of Ce-MOF appear to be more prominent with a remarkable variation in band intensity and position, confirming the high extent of coupling between the constituents. The characteristic Raman polarisation spectra, as shown in Fig. 2(m), of Ce-MOF@rod and CeO2/UNH(Ce) [1:1] were analyzed at room temperature, which showed all the fingerprint Raman bands of CeO2 with slight band shifting, broadening, and lower intensity due to the formation of the composite. Additionally, in the higher wavenumber region, the visualized Raman polarization bands show an out-of-plane ring C–H bending vibration at 812 cm−1, symmetric vibration of C–O2 at 1382 cm−1 and asymmetric bending motion of C–O2 at 1582 cm−1.13 Zhao et al. also found the characteristic band in the FTIR pattern of Ce-TCPP at 1585 cm−1 for symmetric stretching and 1402 cm−1 for asymmetric stretching of the carboxylate ion. Meanwhile, the bands observed at 1383 cm−1 and 1658 cm−1 correspond to the symmetric stretching of the –NO2 group and the stretching vibration of the non-coordinating carboxylic group, respectively.67
4.2. Surface topography and morphological insights
Physical characteristics, which include morphology and topography, can help determine the shape, size, and texture of materials on their surface together with the intricate interaction between individual components of a composite accompanied with quantitative dimensional measurement of the photocatalyst surface. The FESEM and HRTEM techniques are adopted to investigate these features. Using very energetic electron waves (0.2–4.0 keV), the FESEM investigation creates a picture of the surface topography of a photocatalyst. In this case, Zhao et al. prepared Ce-MOF via the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method and its composite via a facile calcination process. The SEM, TEM, and HR-TEM images showed the partial retention of the spindle shape of Ce-TCPP in the CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP-450 composite, while more debris was observed with an increase in temperature.67 Also, Campanelli et al. prepared Ce-MOFs possessing irregular octahedral shapes, which were verified by SEM.75 Danxia Zhao et al. prepared a Ce-based composite. The SEM analysis revealed that Ce/MIL-101-NH2(FC01) forms a roughly sphere-like shape on the surface of which, Ag3PO4 nanoparticles are unevenly deposited to form a heterojunction for effective electron–hole pair separation.62 Pengfei et al. prepared an NiO/CeO2 p–n heterojunction by annealing the precursor of nickel and cerium to form mixed-metal MOFs. SEM was used to analyze the morphological properties of pure NiO, pure CeO2, and NiO/CeO2 heterojunctions, which were regarded as rough and porous spherical particles, 0-D aggregated irregular spherical particles, and spherical particles with highly porous structures, respectively.69 Moreover, a CeO2/UNH (Ce) binary heterojunction was fabricated by Mansingh et al. and its morphology was studied by FESEM, which showed that CeO2 has a sheet-like structure with ripple and twisted patterns at its margins. In addition, the 1:1 composite possessed a rod-like structure, UNH (Ce), decorated on the surface of the CeO2 nanosheets, indicating improved coordination between the two pure materials.13 Xumei Tao et al. used the DBD plasma method for the first time to successfully prepare cerium dioxide from Ce-MOF and its SEM images were thoroughly studied to observe the microstructure of CeO2, revealing the presence of various irregular mesopores and 3D penetrating channels formed by the disordered accumulation of CeO2 nanocrystallites.63 Pengfei et al. performed the HRTEM analysis with a very energetic wave of electron flows throughout the sample, which led to the creation of a 2D image based on the transmitted electrons. The structure of NiO/CeO2-3 was predominantly microspheres of roughly 2 μm in diameter, as revealed by TEM and HRTEM analysis. Excluding some significantly brighter spots, there was a noticeable gap between the middle region of dark section and bright lines, showing a fuzzy and porous microsphere of NiO/CeO2-3, which is consistent with the SEM data. The HRTEM image revealed the well-ordered crystal lattices of NiO and CeO2, with interplanar fringes of 0.30 nm and 0.21 nm, indicating the CeO2 (111) and NiO (200) lattice spacings, respectively.69 Karimia et al. examined a composite material consisting of Ce-MOF and g-C3N4. The morphological study provided information about the CN@CeMOF-3 composite, in which a coating of g-C3N4 nanosheets around the MOFs with various shapes was found, which confirmed the intimacy of both materials on the surface of the MOF. The TEM image also confirmed that Ce-UiO-66 was successfully incorporated in the g-C3N4 structure.61 Tao et al. showed the morphology of as-prepared Ce-MOF through TEM at different reaction times and observed that the gradual agglomeration of the particles occurred and by 120 min, a rod-like shape, as shown in Fig. 3(i–iv), similar to the pristine MOF appeared. Also the TEM images of CeO2, an oxide derived from Ce-MOF at various calcining temperatures, are shown in Fig. 3(v–xiii).63 The TEM and HRTEM images shown in Fig. 3(xxxiv and xxxv) of (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce) show the same results as the SEM data. The HRTEM image shows a lattice fringe of 0.31 nm, which is analogous to the (111) crystal plane of the cubic fluorite phase, consistent with the observed XRD data.13 Maiti et al. reported the microstructure and morphology of Ce-MOF and its derived oxide by FESEM. The morphology of the parent MOF was maintained, whereas that of its oxide varied comes with a change in the ligand. It was also confirmed from the FESEM images, as shown in Fig. 3(xiv–xvii), that Ce-1,4-BDC MOF and Ce-1,2,4-BTC MOF produce spherical particles and Ce-1,3,5-BTC MOF shows a bar-shaped morphology, as shown in Fig. 3(xviii–xix), whereas Ce-1,2,4,5-BTEC MOF and its oxide are described to have a twisted bundle of thick plate-shaped particles with uneven edges, as shown in Fig. 3(xx and xxi).76 Tao et al. determined the elemental composition of their sample by characterization, i.e., EDS, which showed the presence of Ce, C, and O, indicating the complete removal of organic ligands during the calcination process, confirming the generation of CeO2.63 Zhao et al. reported the elemental mapping images, as Shown in Fig. 3(xxx–xxxiii), to show the even distribution of C, Ce, N, and O on the spindle-shape structure of their material, where a high concentration of Ce and O was observed on some particles, specifying the formation of CeO2 after calcination. These data provide proof of the partial oxidation of Ce-TCPP after thermal treatment under a nitrogen atmosphere.67
 Fig. 3  (i–iv) TEM images of Ce-MOFs at different formation periods (30 min, 60 min, 90 min, and 120 min). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63© 2019, Elsevier.) (v–xiii) TEM images of CeO2 derived from Ce-MOFs at different calcination temperatures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63© 2019, Elsevier.) (xiv–xxi) FESEM images of the benzene carboxylate MOFs and corresponding CeO2@C (Reproduced with permission from ref. 76© 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (xxii–xxix) AFM and TEM images of Tb-TCPP nanosheets (Reproduced with permission from ref. 55© 2019, Wiley.) (xxx–xxxiii) Elemental mapping images of CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP-450. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 67© 2021, Elsevier.) (xxxiv–xxxix) TEM image of UNH (Ce), TEM picture of (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce), SAED pattern of UNH (Ce) and (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce), and HRTEM image of (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 13© 2021, the American Chemical Society.) 
The atomic force microscope can be used to capture high-resolution images of the surface topography of photocatalysts and thickness of 2D-nanomaterials in their native environments. Jiang et al. synthesized 2D-IT-MOFs using a series of inner transition metals (such as Eu, Ce, Tb, Yb, and Sm) and an organic linker, i.e., tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin, with variable thickness in a domestic microwave oven. The AFM pictures of the 2D Tb-TCPP nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 3(xxii–xxv), revealed the variation in the thickness of the sheets, which could be easily controlled by adjusting the acetic acid dosage. Hence, it was concluded that there is a direct proportional relationship existing between the concentration of acetic acid and the thickness of the material, which fluctuated from 1.64–45.33 nm with an increase in the CH3COOH dosage. Also, in the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern, the intense spots were assigned to the (020), (021), and (041) planes of the 2D Tb-TCPP nanosheets, which were clearly apparent and validated the crystal structure previously reported in the XRD analysis.55
4.3. Optical-electrochemical insights
Using the fundamental optical and electrochemical techniques, the influence of two parameters, namely, bandgap and band edge potential, on the inherent features and functions of a photocatalyst is well understood. These parameters of a photocatalyst, as well as the flat band potential, are computed using two important analytical tools, i.e., UV–Vis DRS and Mott–Schottky. In the electrochemical analysis for evaluating many aspects of a photocatalyst such as nature of the material such as p-, n- or p–n type, flat band potential, and charge current density, they are obtained via Mott–Schottky studies. This is complementary with UV–Vis DRS given that both techniques evaluate the optical bandgap and band edge potential of a photocatalyst using eqn (1) and (2), respectively, as follows: Tauc equation: αhν = A(hν − Eg)n/2(1) Vfb[vs. SHE] = Vfb[vs. ref] + Vref[vs. SHE] + 0.0591 × pH(2)where Vref = reference electrode potential concerning SHE, Vfb = flat band electrode potential, pH = −log[H+], h = Planck's constant, α = proportionality constant, ν = incident light frequency, A = absorption coefficient and Eg = optical band gap. Furthermore, “n” represents the plausible electronic transitions for n = 1, 3, 4, and 6 related to the allowed direct transition, forbidden direct transition, allowed indirect transition and forbidden indirect transitions, respectively.
Additionally, the lifetime of the excitons is an important parameter of any photocatalyst for its practical utility. Characterisation techniques such as electrochemical study, PL analysis and TRPL analysis are very helpful to determine the comparative photo-generated exciton lifetime because of the migration of exciton towards the donor/acceptor main interface of photocatalysts.77,78 Basically, electrochemical analysis techniques such as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and transient photocurrent analysis are helpful to provide adequate ideas regarding the charge migration at the donor–acceptor interface.10,13 Mostly, composite nano-hybrid semiconductors show enhanced exciton lifetimes because of the charge migration at the donor–acceptor interface, as reported by various research groups based on various charge transfer mechanisms such as Z-scheme, S-scheme, double charge transfer, and co-catalyst loading.79–82 In both Z-scheme and S-scheme charge dynamics, the electrons of one semiconductor get fused with the holes of the coupled semiconductor to make their corresponding holes and electrons available, which practically cannot fuse further, thus enhancing their lifetime for optimum suitable redox reaction. Similarly, in the double-charge transfer mechanism, the electrons and holes of opposite semiconductors are transferred to their corresponding CB and VB, respectively, depending up their Fermi level position. Consequently, the density of electrons and holes increases in the CB and VB, respectively, of the opposite semiconducting material, thus increasing their comparative lifetime. Besides, employing the co-catalyst loading method, the electrons of the semiconductors are trapped by the co-catalyst, which hinders electron–hole recombination, and hence enhances their lifetime to show optimum productivity towards suitable photocatalytic reactions. In this regard, Yan et al. prepared a bimetallic IT-MOF using a metalloligand, i.e., Ru(phen)3-derived ligand, as the linker to achieve enhanced photocatalytic performance, which was verified by UV-Vis DRS spectra, as shown in Fig. 4(a).83 It was observed that the strong absorption band at 300–350 nm is due to the π–π* transition in the conjugated phen group and relatively weaker absorption peaks at 420–480 nm are due to the characteristic MLCT transition. Alternatively, the time-resolved PL collected in the timespan of <1 ns to 15 μs, as shown in Fig. 4(b), for the MOF showed much faster decay kinetics than the linker. These outcomes suggest plausible electron as well as energy transfer from the H3L to Eu2 oxo-clusters. Specifically, no characteristic Eu3+ f–f emissions were observed for Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF, indicating that the quenching and fast decay of Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF emission must be due to electron transfer instead of energy transfer from H3L to Eu f–f transitions. Additionally, Shiyin Zhao et al. prepared Ce-MOF via the microwave-assisted hydrothermal method and its composite by a simple calcination route. The pristine MOF showed excellent UV and visible light capture capacity with Eg of ∼2.25 eV. Compared with the UV-visible DRS spectra of CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP, they found the complete disappearance of the absorbance peak of Ce-TCPP, which indicates that the pristine MOFs were completely carbonized when annealed above 500 °C. Taking temperature as a crucial factor, the composites prepared between 300 °C and 450 °C have significantly better activity for decomposing RhB under visible radiation than Ce-TCPP and derived-CeO2 alone.67 Moreover, Campanelli et al. prepared Ce-MOFs using varying linkers or substituents of the same linker and observed the UV-visible absorption spectra of all the MOFs in the range of 300–324 nm.75 A representative bimetallic Ce/Zr MOF prepared by our group shows two strong bands at 265 and 365 nm in UV-DRS spectra, as shown in Fig. 4(g), because of the n–π* transition. The Eg was also calculated using the Tauc equation, which was found to be 2.54 eV and much lower than that of the pristine MOFs.14 The PL peaks depict a significant reduction in intensity, as shown in Fig. 4(d), strongly suggesting the enhanced lifetime of excitons in Ce/Zr MOF. The EIS, as shown in Fig. 4(f), and transient photocurrent spectra, as shown in Fig. 4(i), explain the effectual exciton segregation and transportation in a single-component bimetallic MOF.14 An IT-MOF, i.e., Ce/Eu-HKUST, was prepared by Mosleh et al. The comparison of the UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra HKUST-1 and Ce/Eu-HKUST-1 shows a red shift from 400–500 nm to 500–650 nm, which can be because of the charge transfer at the interface between the Eu/Ce redox pair and pristine MOF. The optical band gap obtained from the Tauc plot also is in agreement with the enhanced activity in the doped sample. The PL signal displayed a weaker intensity signal for pure HKUST-1 than the as-prepared sample because of the presence of surface defects in Ce/Eu-HKUST-1.84 Danxia Zhao et al. also prepared Ce/MIL-101-NH2(FC01), where on its surface, Ag3PO4 nanoparticles were irregularly deposited to form a heterojunction for the effective separation of electron–hole pairs. This was also justified by PL spectra, showing that the lifetime of the nanocomposite is 6.04 ns, which is slower than that of Ag3PO4 (4.20 ns) and MIL-101-NH2 (4.97 ns).62 To obtain enhanced photoredox ability, our group prepared a CeO2/UNH (Ce) binary heterojunction composite, which depicted a high-quality performance towards photocatalytic reactions, as proven by UV-Vis, EIS, PL, etc. Comparing the UV-Vis DRS spectra of the parent materials and composite, it was observed that the absorbance edge underwent a bathochromic (red) shift, demonstrating a synergic interaction between the constituents in the binary composite. The disorderliness and amorphous nature of the hybrid may explain the higher photon absorption, as indicated by the XPS, HRTEM, and SAED patterns. Furthermore, the presence of an electron-releasing group, such as amine (–NH2) group, resulted in a high negative ELMCT, which increased the light absorption. The 1:1 composite of CeO2 NS and UNH (Ce) was the best in terms of charge separation and oxygen vacancies generated between the Ce4+ (conduction band) and O2 (valence band) energy levels, as proven by the PL bands. To get more reliable information on the e−/h+ separation and transmission mechanism, the EIS spectra were examined in depth. The Nyquist plot of the composite, i.e., CeO2/UNH-Ce (1:1), revealed a smaller arc radius and a straighter conductive loop than the constituent materials. All these results showed that electrons in a two-fold heterojunction are more easily accelerated, signifying a reduced charge flow resistance.13 By fusing the precursor of Ni/Ce bimetallic MOFs, Pengfei et al. created an NiO/CeO2 p–n heterojunction. The negative and positive slope of the curve for the neat NiO and CeO2 in the Mott–Schottky plot represent p-type and n-type semiconductors, respectively. The absorption band of CeO2 in the pure state was discovered at ∼450 nm in the UV-Vis DRS spectra, which corresponded to the bandgap of about 2.8 eV. It was observed that the absorption edges of CeO2 upon NiO loading displayed a high wavelength shift in both the UV and visible bands. Moreover, oxygen vacancies, surface states, and self-trapping excitation corresponded to the PL peaks at 425 nm, 375 nm, and 540 nm, respectively. Also, when the concentration of CeO2 was increased with the molar ratio of Ni:Ce (1:0.3), the PL intensity diminished substantially, indicating greater separation and higher charge transportation efficacy of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. As the radius of the arc on the EIS spectra revealed a smaller arc radius, it signifies the higher effective charge transfer and better separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, as well as a faster interfacial charge-transfer process. Because of its lowest arc radius, the NiO/CeO2-3 heterojunction had the fastest interfacial charge transfer and the most efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs, which was in agreement with the results of the photocurrent measurements.69 Karimia et al. used UV-Vis DRS to study the well-explained high photoabsorption in the visible light region of a produced composite of Ce-UiO-66 and graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets (g-C3N4). The bandwidth of the metal organic framework dropped, but its visible light absorption increased, according to the report for the CN@CeMOF-3 composite. The Eg of semiconductors is lower than that of g-C3N4 and Ce-UiO-66, and the greatest styrene transformation was achieved by increasing the amount of g-C3N4 to 58%.61 Tao et al. synthesized CeO2 from Ce-MOFs at a calcination temperature of 200 °C, displaying the greatest range of UV-light absorption and strong adsorption ability in the UV-region, as verified by the UV-Vis DRS spectra shown in Fig. 4(c). C doping in the cerium oxide lattice during the pyrolyzing process, because of the decomposition of organic ligands, enabled O2p orbital hybridization to establish a new set of VB, decreasing the forbidden bandwidth of cerium oxide and improving its photocatalytic efficiency. The significant number of oxygen defects in CeO2 not only boosted the absorption of light but also adsorbed O2, which was favorable towards photocatalysis.63
 Fig. 4  (a and b) UV–vis of Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF and H3L in DMF, regularized luminescence degeneration debris of Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF and H3L. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83© 2018, Nature Communications.) (c) UV-Vis DRS of Ce-MOF-derived CeO2. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 © 2019, Elsevier.) (d and g) UV-Vis DRS, PL spectra of neat UNH (Zr) and UNH (Ce/Zr). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © 2022, the American Chemical Society.) (e and h, f, and i) Mott–Schottky analysis, EIS analysis plot, and fugitive photocurrent representation of UNH (Zr) and UNH (Ce/Zr), respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
4.4. Computational insights
Electronic structures correlating to the properties and reactivity of photocatalytic materials are readily predicted by using computational techniques based on quantum mechanics. Among the appropriate computational techniques, Kohn–Sham density functional theory (KS-DFT) has attracted attention due to its combined advantages towards economically friendly and excellent precision. For solids, the KS-DFT band gaps can be determined as the difference in energy of the orbitals in the ground state, in particular, as εLUCO − εHOCO, where ε signifies the orbital energy, LUCO represents the lowest unoccupied crystal orbital, and HOCO represents the highest occupied crystal orbital. The electronic exchange–correlation energy density at a location builds up on the local factors with local functionals such as the electronic kinetic energy densities, electronic spin densities, and their gradients. Due to the Hartree–Fock exchange present in hybrid functionals, the exchange–correlation energy of these systems is non-local and includes an integral over all space. In contrast, for the molecules and linkers of IT-MOFs, one generally uses time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT), in the linear response approximation. In addition to the very low energy because of the van der Waal interactions that exist among the molecules, DFT can also offer a plausible description of the geometry, dissociation energy, and kinetics of chemical reactions.2,4
The primitive cell of the UiO-66 framework, as shown in Fig. 5(a), was used to calculate DFT using the Vienna ab initio simulation package for the purpose of reducing the computational cost by Wu et al. Also, it was discussed how both metal alteration and linker modifications impact the framework characteristics, as shown in Fig. 5(b), which affects the photocatalytic applications in UiO-66-based series of IT-MOF using KS-DFT. Actually, a desirable photocatalyst must have an unoccupied metal orbital with lower energy than the orbital of donor species, which leads to negative ELMCT and facile ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT). Here, in this case, it was observed that UiO-66(Zr) was located at 2 eV above the LUCO of the ligand orbital, which is not a convenient case for effective LMCT. However, the replacement of Zr with IT-metal elements such as Th, U, Ce, Hf, and Ti in the UiO-66 series resulted in some variations with positive stimulus towards photocatalytic reactions. Due to the lower energy of 3d-orbitals of Ti4+, which encourages good mixing with the π*-orbital of the linkers, UiO-66(Ti) shows greater facile LMCT than that of other d0-metal ions. Also, recent research revealed that Ti+4-MOF has a longer exciton separation lifetime than that of isostructural Zr+4 and Hf+4 MOFs, as shown in Fig. 5(c). Moreover, in the case of UiO-66(Ce), TD-DFT was performed to determine the place where excitations mainly occur based on three major parameters, as follows (i) node-localized, (ii) ligand-to-metal, and (iii) linker-localized excitations. In the case of the first two types of excitations, 300 excited states are obtained, which are weak in nature because of their smaller oscillator strength with energy ranging from 3.00–3.47 eV. It was expected that the linker localised excitations were more likely to occur than the node-localised and LMCT excitation because of the strong π to π* transitions in the case of the linker, which is responsible for negative value of ELMCT, allowed LMCT, greater charge separation with long-lived excited states and enhanced photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 5  (a) UiO-66 framework structure with primitive cell illustrated by the blue background. Color pattern: metal – yellow, O – red, C – brown, and H – light pink. (b) Cluster model of UiO-66 (Ce) and UiO-66 (Ce)-X. Color pattern: Ce – yellow, O – red, C – brown, H – light pink, and X – blue. (c) Density of state of UiO-66(M) with unoccupied orbital highlighted in the yellow background. (d) Band alignment of UiO-66(Ce)-X (structure of BDC-X linker in the right lower box). The red and blue lines represent energy levels for water splitting and the green area represents the energy level of CO2 reduction. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 11© 2018, the American Chemical Society.) 
Also, ligand variation leads to the design of promising photocatalysts. For example, the UiO-66(Ce) MOF was prepared using 12 different types of linker by mono-substituting –NH2, –OH, –F, –Cl, –CF3, –Br, –I, –COOH, –NO2, –CH3, –SH, and –SO3H with –H on BDC. It was observed that linker functionalization introduces lower absorption energy (Eabs) as well as extends the absorption in the visible region of solar light, following a decreasing fashion of Eabs value with an increase in the electron-releasing ability of substituents. To understand the effect of substituents towards the electronic structure of UiO-66(Ce), total density of states (DOS) analysis was carried, out which displayed that newly filled states are formed in the original HOCO–LUCO gap of pristine UiO-66(Ce) after linker functionalization, and hence pushes the HOCO towards the LUCO, thereby lowering the HOCO to LUCO gap and Eabs, as shown in Fig. 5(d). Alternatively, it was observed that when an electron-withdrawing group (e.g., –NO2) substituted with BDC linker, the newly filled states were situated just above the original HOCO of pristine UiO-66(Ce), which are congruous with the previous studies on UiO-66(Zr) and MIL-125.11 For photocatalytic applications, the free energy change per electron for the reduction reaction can be calculated using eqn (3), as follows: ΔG = −e (ε° + εSHE) + α(ln10) (kBT) (pH)(3)where e is the charge on an electron, ε° is standard electrode potential, εSHR is absolute electrode potential of the standard hydrogen electrode, α is a parameter depending on the stoichiometry, kB is Boltzmann's constant, T is temperature and pH = −log [H+]. The value of ΔG calculated using the above-mentioned formula is a quantity that can be compared to the absolute band edge positions in relation to the energy of an ionized electron in a vacuum.11
Wu et al. also performed DFT analysis for understanding the probable photocatalytic mechanism together with the band structure of Gd-based MOFs. Here, the valence band and conduction band lying just below and above the Fermi level of Gd-MOF were primarily observed because of the ligand π–π* transition with the admixture of O and N centers. The photocatalytic dye degradation occurred through the formation of holes in the oxygen and aromatic centers, which correspond to its oxidation by oxidizing the dye and re-reducing back to its ground state again.85 Furthermore, Jiang et al. performed DFT with the single-crystal structure, which enabled the analysis of the 2D Tb-TCPP nano-sheets, exhibiting a typical semiconductor behaviour having the bandgap of 1.78 eV, same as the experimental value established from the Tauc plots.55
5. Photocatalytic mechanism insights
The photogeneration of exciton pairs and their proper transportation are a challenging task for the prediction of the mechanistic pathway of charge species for any photocatalytic reaction.55 The supremacy of IT-MOFs in contrast to other conventional transition metal-based MOFs towards photocatalysis can be explained through their extraordinary luminescence characteristics. It is the radiation emitted by an atom or a molecule following the absorption of photons and excitation into a higher energy triplet state. Because lanthanide metals except for La and Lu show excellent luminescence due to their f–f transition, their incorporation in the framework reduces the width of the bandgap energy level between the VB and CB, which permits the photocatalyst to be active under visible light. Additionally, in these types of materials, the adsorbed radiation is re-emitted at a slower intensity and can emit radiations in the absence of light for a small duration, enabling a longer lifetime of photo-generated excitons. In the case of doping using IT-metals such as Ce, Sm, and Eu, the energy levels of metals can be inserted into the band gap of the pristine material owing to the lower energy separation between the VB and CB, suppressing e−/h+ recombination and leading to the increment in their photocatalytic performance. The linker can also exhibit luminescence because of the extended π-conjugated system but sometimes ligand luminescence is not seen because of LMCT. To target the luminescence in MOFs with the least amount of energy transfer, it is crucial to choose suitable linkers with appropriate energy levels.
Besides, up-conversion luminescence is a distinctive process where high wavelength photons can be converted to low wavelength photons, which is contrary to the conventional luminescence. It was reported that lanthanides are capable of exhibiting upconversion luminescence because of the availability of many states in the IR and visible region with longer lifetimes. Upconversion agents are introduced in photocatalysis to overcome the theoretical efficiency by harvesting photons with energy lower than their Eg which has a great advantage over other transition metals. Jingsan Xu et al. reported that when g-C3N4 was doped with Er3+, Er3+ triggered upconversion either by excited-state absorption (ESA) or by energy transfer (ET). Combining both process, the emitted energy of Er3+ after being relaxed to the ground state transferred to the pristine material to produce electron–hole pairs. Hence, this effect can be adopted for the improvement of the photocatalytic process by doping lanthanide series metals.
Furthermore, Xu et al. and Tripathy et al. suggested that metals with mixed valency states and easily inter-convertible redox couples (e.g., Eu3+/2+ and Ce4+/3+) have an empty 4f-orbital and can be reduced to their lower oxidation state easily, which is also a thermodynamically feasible reaction that promotes superior photocatalytic performance in IT-MOF-based nanomaterials. Thus, the reductant on the surface of the catalyst can trap electrons, thereby inhibiting electron–hole recombination, and eventually the quantum efficiency increases.14,72
Together with the above-mentioned advantages, some popularly adopted pathways to justify the charge dynamics in IT-MOF-based nanomaterials are discussed as follows: (i) heterojunction type-II mechanism, (ii) Z-scheme mechanism, (iii) co-catalyst-based mechanism, and (iv) vacancy defect-mediated mechanism. An overall schematic representation of the photocatalytic mechanisms involved in IT-MOFs is shown in Scheme 6.
 Scheme 6  Illustration of heterojunction-based (a) type-II charge dynamics, (b) direct Z-scheme charge dynamics, (c) co-catalyst based charge dynamics, (d) vacancy-mediated charge dynamics, and (e) photosensitizer-based charge dynamics mechanisms. 
5.1. Heterojunction-based charge dynamics in IT-MOFs
Circumventing the shortcomings of a single component photocatalytic system, type-II heterojunction nanocomposites were introduced through the combinatorial impact of two semiconductors (I and II) with the view to upgrade the photocatalytic performance by increasing the lifespan of excitons, as shown in Scheme 6(a). In this case, the CB and VB levels of semiconductor-I are higher than the corresponding levels of semiconductor-II. Thus, the photogenerated holes will migrate to the semiconductor-I and electrons will migrate to the semiconductor-II under irradiation, resulting in efficient charge carrier separation and migration in comparison with the type-1 and type-III mechanisms.55 Zhao et al. explained the plausible mechanism through a heterojunction-mediated process for doped Ce-MIL-101-NH2/Ag3PO4 composites towards dye (TC and MB) degradation.62 Another case of a type-II heterojunction-based pathway involves photocatalytic pollutant degradation, as reported by Kuila et al.86 Pengfei et al. predicted the heterojunction-mediated mechanism for the NiO/CeO2 material used for photocatalytic pollutant degradation and hydrogen evolution.69 Baize et al. also explained the same mechanism for the MIL-101/UCNP heterostructure towards photocatalytic rhodamine-B degradation.87 Mansingh et al. followed the p–n heterojunction mechanism to explain the photocatalytic nitrogen reduction ability of the CeO2/Ce-MOF material.13
5.2. Z-Scheme-based charge dynamics in IT-MOFs
In this type of mechanism, both the semiconductors get excited by absorbing photons resembling our natural photosynthesis process as photosystem(I) and photosystem(II) with varying band gaps. The principle involves the combination of photo-excited electrons in the CB of one semiconductor with the holes in the VB of another semiconductor because of the transmission at the composite interface phase. For the solid- and liquid-phase Z-scheme process, a mediator and charge trapping solid conductor are required to connect the two photosystems indirectly. However, comparing them, the direct Z-scheme shown in Scheme 6(b) is more beneficial and we can understand the principle based on the metals present in the framework of IT-MOF for studying various photocatalytic oxidation and reduction reactions. Classifying, the semiconductors into three categories including metal node (M1) and intercalated metal cluster (M2) or metal of organometallic linker (M2), or another metal (M2) of the same metal cluster (or, maybe same as M1 with dissimilar oxidation state), it was explained that with UV-Vis light illumination followed by the generation of photoexcitons, the e−/h+ recombination occurs between the CB of M1 and VB of M2. The CB hole in M1 and CB electrons in M2 are available for redox reactions.88 In this regard, Zhao et al. explained the Z-scheme CeO2/N-doped C/Ce-TCPP system, which exhibited an excellent photocatalytic performance towards organic pollutant degradation.67 Karimia et al. also predicted the Z-scheme pathway for the g-C3N4@Ce-MOF composite, which is useful for aerobic oxidative Hantzsch pyridine synthesis of styrene.61
5.3. Co-catalyst-based charge dynamics in IT-MOFs
One more route is the use of a metal co-catalyst on the semiconductor surface, as shown in Scheme 6(c), to trap the electrons by promoting e−/h+ anti-recombination and enhancing the lifetime of excitons. In general, noble metals, transition metals, and their oxides, sulfides, and phosphides are used as co-catalysts to capture the photo-generated electrons from the active surface of the host catalyst to intensify the photocatalytic reactions. A co-catalyst can have multiple key roles such as lowering the activation energy, promoting separation and migration of electron–hole pairs, high selectivity towards a particular reaction, obstructing side, and back reactions, which are beneficial for the activity, selectivity, and stability of the semiconductor photocatalyst. In this case, the photo-excited electrons on the conduction band are transferred to the co-catalyst to cause reduction reactions.67
5.4. Vacancy defect-based charge dynamics in IT-MOFs
Framework defect engineering is the most popular and advanced method to enhance electron–hole pair separation, which is crucial for understanding the correlation between their structure and photocatalytic properties.74 The geometric electrical assembly and chemical characteristics of semiconductor photocatalysts are typically altered by defects at the surface/interface or in the bulk.8,9,74 In general, defects can be categorised in to three parts, as follows: (i) bulk defect, (ii) surface defect, and (iii) interface defect. In case of bulk defect, the atoms may be completely missing from their position or occupy an interstitial site to create vacancies. This is the most common type of defect exhibited by IT-MOF, which includes oxygen vacancies and metal ion vacancies responsible for narrowing the Eg and separating the photogenerated electron–hole pairs, as shown in Scheme 6(d). In this regard, Tripathy et al. describe the oxygen vacancy-mediated charge transfer process for enhanced photocatalytic reactions in a Ce/Zr bimetallic MOF.14 The surface of a nanomaterial possesses various unique features due to its high surface area and surface energy resulting from O, N, and S surface vacancy defects, which were reported in metal oxides, nitrides, and sulfides in the past. The formation of the most common oxide vacancy defect can modulate the coordination environment and electronic structure of adsorbates via surface bonds and localized electrons, which in turn help to narrow the Eg and trap the charge carriers, enhancing the photocatalytic activity.8,54,57–60,64,74,89–92 The interfacial defect is the most complex one, which is developed at the interface where both the surface and bulk coexist. In this case, the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs in various defects, transfer of excitons, their stabilization, and the effective coupling of different crystal faces, collectively decide the occurrence of a photocatalytic reaction. In addition, interface defects increase the electrical conductivity and reduce the energy barrier, which favor photocatalytic reactions.74,82,93–98
5.5. Photosensitizer-based charge dynamics in IT-MOFs
In addition to the above-mentioned charge dynamics mechanisms, another pathway has been explored by various research groups, i.e., photosensitizer-based charge dynamics. Photosensitizers are compelling materials because of their high visible spectrum photon trapping ability and utility. However, their stable functionality and activity can be well improved by suitable interaction with another robust photocatalytic material. Given that IT-MOFs have well-proven capabilities to provide variable vacancies, interconvertible redox couples, and high surface area towards photocatalysis, they tend to act as a suitable material for interaction with photosensitizers, which can further improve the light sensitivity feature of the framework and its photo-reactivity, as shown in Scheme 6(e). Basically, dyes such as thionine, Nile Blue A, methylene blue, eosin Y, and rhodamine B are used as photosensitizers, which contain light harvesting antennas in the form of extensive benzene rings and the presence of multiple functional groups (–OH, –COOH, etc.), enabling strong π–π stacking and H-bonding, respectively. Mechanistically, dye molecules in the ground state absorb photons and transformed them into their excited states (dye*). As long as the potential of dye* is more negative than the LUMO position of IT-MOFs, electron transformation from dye* to the LUMO of MOFs will occur. Finally, the electrons can be transported to different acceptors in the reaction medium (O2, H+, or CO2) to form ˙O2−, H2, or HCOO−, respectively. It is noteworthy that for a photocatalyst, its excitation wavelength can be extended to the visible light region with the aid of the desired photosensitizer. In this regard, Thakare and Ramteke studied the PSM of MOF-5 using 8-hydroxyquinoline (HOQ) dye, which was reported to have enhanced phenol degradation from 5% to around 90% in 80 min.
6. Photocatalytic performance of IT-MOF-based nanomaterials
Since the Dawn of water photolysis over TiO2 by Fujishima and Honda, researchers have meticulously developed various strategies for designing robust photocatalysts. In this case, the newly introduced class of porous coordination polymers comprised of inner transition SBUs are developing at a rapid pace. These IT-MOFs have been deliberately studied for a large variety of potential photocatalytic applications comprised mainly of organic transformations, carbon dioxide reduction, nitrogen fixation, water splitting, and pollutants degradation. Typically, the involvement of vacant f-orbitals, stronger LMCT, and variable oxidation states tends to promote superior photon harvesting tendency and suppressed exciton recombination, leading to the robust photocatalytic output of IT-MOF-based materials. Amongst the diverse photocatalytic applications by IT-MOFs, some of the noticeable cases are explored in detail and several other cases of emerging applications accompanied by their detailed photo-performances are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of photocatalytic outcomes using IT-MOF-based nano-materials




Sl. no.
Photocatalyst
Building blocks
Synthesis method
Morphology
Photocatalytic application and light source
Performance
Ref.


Bandgap
Metals
Linkers




Abbreviations: RPF: rare-earth polymeric framework, H2sfdc: 9,9′-spirobi[9H-fluorene]-2,2′-dicarboxylic acid, RE-MOFs: rare earth metal–organic frameworks, H2BPDC: 4,4′-biphenyldicarboxylic acid, H2BDC: 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid, MB: methylene blue, MO: methyl orange, RhB: Rhodamine B, TC: tetracycline hydrochloride, NSs: nanosheets, TCPP: mesotetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphine, bdc-NH2: 2-aminoterephthalic acid, phen: 1,10-phenanthrolin, 2-FBA: 2-fluorobenzoate, NDC: 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid, H2TCPP: tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin, H4TCPP: tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin, and H4TBAPy: 1,3,6,8-tetrakis (p-benzoic acid) pyrene.




1.
RPF-30-Er
Er
H2sfdc
Solvothermal
Rod shape
Organic transformation (oxidation of amines) (100 W visible radiation)
76% in 18 h

90



2.6 eV


2.


U
Curcumin
Reflux, sonochemical, hydrothermal
Spherical and rod shape
Dye degradation (UV radiation)
99.98% in 3 h

70



3.2 eV


3.
CeO2/N-doped carbon/Ce-TCPP
Ce
TCPP
Microwave
Spindle shape
Organic pollutants degradation (visible light radiation)
94.4% in 1 h

67



2.25 eV


4.
Ce-UiO-66-PDC
Ce
PDC
Mechano-chemical
Rod shape
Organic transformation (alcohol to aldehyde) (near UV radiation)
100% in 75 min

75



2.79 eV


5.
Ce/Eu-HKUST-1
Ce, Eu
H3TBC
Hydrothermal
Irregular shape
Organic pollutant degradation (visible light radiation)
99.99% in 25 min
84


2.60 eV


6.
Ce-doped MIL-101-NH2-sensitized Ag3PO4
Ce, Fe
BDC
Hydrothermal and in situ ion-exchange
Spherical shape
Organic pollutant degradation (MB) (visible light irradiation)
80% in 2 h

62



2.18 eV


7.
Ce-UiO-66
Ce
BDC
Solvothermal
Irregular shape
Dye degradation (RhB) (125 W UV radiation)
99% in 1 h

113



2.51 eV


8.
Ce MOF/BiVO4
Ce
NH2BDC
Hydrothermal
Irregular shape
Dye degradation (MB) (solar radiation)
88.8% after 3 h

86



2.26 eV


9.
MOF-derived NiO/CeO2
Ce, Ni
H3BTC
Hydrothermal and thermal treatment
Sphere shape
Hydrogen generation (300 W Xenon lamp)
28.6 μmol h−1 g−1

69



2.7 eV


10.
Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF
Eu, Ru
Ru(phen)3-derived tricarboxy-late acid
Solvothermal
Irregular shape
CO2 reduction (300 W xenon lamp)
321.9 μmol h−1

103



2.4 eV


11.
{[Gd(L)1.5(H2O)2]·2H2O}n
Gd

N,N′-Dioxide-3,3′-benzocinnoline dicarboxylic acid
Hydrothermal
Rod shape
Pollutant degradation (RhB) (UV light)
95% in 45 min

85



2.68 eV


12.
MIL-101/UCNPs
Gd, Yb, Er
H2BTC
Hydrothermal
Octahedral shape
Organic pollutants degradation (RhB) (UV light)
99% in 6 h

87



3.35 eV


13.
CeO2 derived from Ce-MOF
Ce
Trimesic acid
DBD plasma method
Rod shape
Organic pollutants degradation (MO) (500 W UV lamp)
98% in 36 min

63



2.35 eV


14.
La-NDC MOFs
La
2,6-H2NDC
Solvothermal
Rod shape
Organic pollutants degradation (RhB) (160 W lamps)
18.32% in 120 min

114



3.03 eV


15.
Ln-MOFs
Ce, Tb, Dy
Anthracene-based ligand
Solvothermal
Irregular shape
Organic pollutant degradation (RhB) (500 W Xe arc lamp)
95% in 25 min

59



Ce-2.11 eV, Tb-2.20 eV, Dy-2.15 eV


16.
Ln-MOFs
Eu, Tb
2,2′-Bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid
Solvothermal
Irregular shape
Pollutant degradation (RhB) (300 W Xe lamp)
96% for Tb-MOF in 6 h

115



Tb-3.46 eV, Eu-3.49 eV


17.
Porphyrin-based 2D lanthanide MOFs
Ce, Sm, Eu, Yb, Tb
H2TCPP
Microwave
Nanosheets
Organic transformation (oxidation of 1,5-DHN) (300 W Xe lamp)
77% in 10 min

55



1.73 eV


18.
g-C3N4@Ce-MOF
Ce
H2BDC
Sonochemical
Polyhedron structure
Organic transformation (hantzsch pyridine synthesis) (visible light)
70–95% in 6 h

61



2.7 eV


19.
Uranium-based porphyrin MOF
U
H4TCPP
Solvothermal
Irregular cubic shape
Cycloaddition
78–99% yield

111



1.55 eV
Reaction of CO2 (45 W, 6500 K compact fluorescent lamp)


20.
Ce/Zr MOF
Ce, Zr
BDC-NH2
Solvothermal
Cubic shape
a. Pollutant degradation (CIP)
a. 90.8% in 1 h

14



2.53 eV








b. Hydrogen evolution (300 W Xe arc lamp)
b. 468.30 μmol h−1




21.
CeO2/Ce-MOF
Ce
BDC-NH2
Hydrothermal
Nanorod shape
a. N2 fixation
a. 47.55 μmol L−1 h−1

13



2.8 eV
b. Water Oxidation (250 W Hg lamp)
b. 370.18 μmol h−1




22.
Tb-CU-10
Tb
H4TBAPy
Solvothermal
Hexagonal prismatic shape
Oxidation and detoxification of 2-CEES (UV light)
Conversion half-life 3.5 min (under O2)

116



2.5 eV


23.
GdCoO3 derived from Gd/Co-MOF
Gd, Co
Pyridine-2,3-dicarboxylic acid
Hydrothermal and thermal treatment
Rodlike shape
Organic pollutant degradation (phenol) (UV irradiation)
0.069 mg L−1 min−1

117



2.6 eV




6.1. Organic transformation reactions (OTRs)
Humans cannot survive without organic molecules such as drugs, reagents, polymers, agrochemicals, and cosmetics. In this case, the synthesis of natural products and their synthetic analogues, molecular libraries of biologically relevant entities, and industrially viable compounds are at the heart of the modern chemical industry. Consequently, the evolution of new synthetic methods and the modernisation of existing ones are at the forefront of current organic chemistry research trends.99 Arduous segregation of synthetic products through traditional homogenous organic catalysis and photocatalysis has led to the development of heterogeneous photocatalysis. The role of porous coordination polymers (PCPs) in high-yielding organic photo-transformation has been recently prioritized due to their abundant active sites, high surface area, functionalized guest or linker moieties, and coordinatively unsaturated metal sites. Moreover, the mouldable pore architecture in PCPs significantly favors exemplary product selectivity. Also, the light harvesting and transforming sites present in the framework promote photon-assisted OTRs, mitigating the need for complex organic procedures, high temperature, hazardous organic reagents and solvents, paving the path for a superior atom economy. Especially, the subclass of MOFs containing inner transition metal clusters is being extensively explored compared to their transition metal counterparts due to their high aqueous stability, high coordination number, empty f-orbitals and potent Lewis acidic characteristics, making them stable and reusable candidates towards OTRs. A few of these IT-MOF-based nanomaterials are explained in detail regarding some essential photocatalytic OTRs.
In this regard, Karimia et al. synthesized a composite of cerium-based MOFs (Ce-UiO-66) modified with graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets (g-C3N4). To attain the highest efficacy, a series of different composites with varying mass ratios of both pristine materials was prepared, and it was observed that CN@CeMOF-3 (composite g-C3N4@Ce-UiO-66 in 58/42 wt%) showed the maximum conversion efficiency. Indeed, the reaction began to yield more products abruptly as the temperature was increased from RT to 40 °C, but with an increase in temperature, even with an increase in catalyst loading, had the reverse effect on the conversion of styrene, which could be due to the partial solubility of O2 in the reaction medium.62 In the presence of various quenchers, TEMPO showed the maximum quenching ability, in which the conversion plummeted to around 5%, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The ESR spectrum in Fig. 6(b and c) confirmed the low concentration of OH˙ and significant detection of ˙O2−, respectively. Moreover, the cascade mechanism involving aerobic oxidation of styrene was propagated through Z-scheme-mediated ˙O2− radical generation, as shown in Fig. 6(d). Also, Campanelli et al. performed organic transformation reactions such as oxidation of 4-methoxybenzyl alcohol (MeOBA) by using Ce-UiO-66 as a photocatalyst. Additionally, they investigated the reaction-efficiency by altering the substituents of the BDC linker, such as Br, NO2, and F, and discovered that Ce-UiO-66-Br performed the best, reaching the extreme rate of product yield (94%) in 80 min. The reaction mechanism involves the absorption of light by the linker of the MOF to form photogenerated excitons through LMCT, and then reaction with alcohol to form the radical cation by the transfer of an electron from the aromatic nucleus to the photogenerated hole in the MOF. Subsequently, deprotonation of the radical intermediate occurs to form the 4-methoxy-α-hydroxy benzyl radical with the removal of O2 to form substituted benzaldehyde as the product.75 Moreover, Lina M. et al., also worked on organic transformations involving amine to imine as well as on cross-condensation reactions of amines and observed the excellent attainment of the inner transition polymeric frameworks, namely, RPF-30-Er, RPF-32-Ho, RPF-31-Nd, and RPF-31-Sm, towards the above-mentioned activity. The use of RPF materials as catalysts (10% mol) resulted in great selectivity and a good conversion range of up to 60–76% of the condensation of benzyl amine. In the oxidation of the benzylamine process, the RPF-30, RPF-31, and RPF-32 materials showed good activity (about 70%) and exceptional selectivity (>99%). They discovered that when using RPF-31-Nd as a photocatalyst in the presence of both air and molecular oxygen, the selectivity remained >99%, but the conversion declined significantly from 60% to barely 30% after 48 h.90 It is quite clearly seen that only a limited number of IT-MOFs has been used thus far in organic transformation reactions, and further research needs to be carried out on a variety of organic transformation reactions to get a thorough understanding of the underlying mechanism.
 Fig. 6  (a) Reaction efficacy in the presence of different quenchers. (b) ESR spectrum of catalyst samples with and without irradiation of visible light by utilizing DMPO. (c) Using TEMPO as the spin-trapping member. (d) Projected mechanism for photocatalyzed cascade aerobic oxidative functionalization of styrene. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62© 2019, Elsevier.) 
6.2. Carbon dioxide reduction
The burning of fossil fuels at an alarming rate, with large emissions of CO2, has sparked a catastrophic change in climate and global energy shortage. These challenges prompted researchers to look into sustainable techniques to reduce CO2 emissions or even capture CO2 from the atmosphere. Given that CO2 photo-reduction can be done under lower pressure and temperature conditions, it has the potential to be a more environmentally friendly alternative. The reduction of CO2 to minor quantities of HCOOH, HCHO, CH3OH, CO, and CH4, consuming different number of electrons and protons, has attracted significant attention for semiconductor-based photocatalytic CO2 reduction to chemical fuels.82 Photo-catalytic semiconductors such as MOFs are the utmost utilized materials for this concept, and their effectiveness is typically determined by their optimum bandgap (Eg), charge separation, and transfer. However, conventional d-block MOFs display relatively lower efficiency, selectivity, and poor stability. These drawbacks of traditional MOFs can be easily overcome by using IT-MOF-based nanomaterials. Strategically armed IT-MOFs tend to overcome the shortcomings with product selective CO2 reduction by promoting boosted charge separation/migration, electron availability to the surface adsorbed CO2, and tuning of the conduction band (CB) potential of semiconductor photocatalysts owing to the stupendous yield accompanied with definite product selectivity for CO2 photoreduction along and suppressed back reactions.100
In this regard, Yan et al. successfully fabricated an Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF using dinuclear Eu(III)2 clusters as nodes and Ru(phen)3-derivative as linkers to test its photocatalytic application towards CO2 reduction. The reaction was studied under visible-light irradiation (420–800 nm) utilizing Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF as a heterogeneous photocatalyst and triethanolamine as a sacrificial agent. In the liquid phase, the concentration of formate product (HCOO−) was determined using ion chromatography, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Electron injection into the Eu nodes is triggered by photo-excitation of the metalloligands, resulting in excited dinuclear Eu(II)2 active sites, which selectively decrease CO2 to formate in a two-electron process at a rate of 321.9 μmol h−1, as shown in the mechanism image in Fig. 7(e). The greater photocatalytic activity in this system can be explained by the presence of the effective light-harvesting Ru(phen)3 moiety, as well as the absence of side products, indicating strong selectivity for the reduction of CO2 to formate. Recycling tests of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 in MeCN/TEOA (v:v = 20:1) were carried out to assess the photocatalytic stability of the material, as shown in Fig. 7(c and d). The HCOO− level was around 47 μmol after 10 h of illumination, with no apparent deterioration after three reactions. Meanwhile, the PXRD patterns after photocatalytic reactions match that of the as-prepared sample, and the ICP-MS results showed 0.1% metal leaching to the solution after a 10 h photocatalytic reaction, indicating that the Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF was stable following photocatalytic usage.83 Basically, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, depends up the absorbed CO2 on the active surface area, surface defects and surface atomic construction of the photocatalyst and requires an intense reorganizational energy to convert linear CO2 to bent radical anion of CO2, followed by the formation of a variety of products such as HCOOH (∼−0.81 V), HCHO (∼−0.48 V), CH3OH (∼−0.38 V), CO (∼−0.53 V), and CH4 (∼−0.24 V) by consuming different numbers of electrons and protons.82,101 In this regard, product selectivity, which basically depends on factors such as photon energy, CB position, intensity of light, surface catalytic active sites, separation of photo-generated charge carriers, and adsorption/desorption of reactant/intermediates, is an important criteria to determine the target product. Many photocatalytic materials including IT-MOFs have been reported by various researchers to get the selective target product from CO2 photoreduction. In this regard, Payra et al. reported the selective formation of HCOOH (requires 2e−/2H+) as the reduction product using Ce-BDC, while CH3OH (requires 6e−/6H+) and HCOOH (requires 2e−/2H+) as reduction products using Ce-BDC-NH2.100 Similarly, Yan et al. reported the selective formation of HCOOH from CO2 reduction by using an IT MOF, i.e., Eu-MOF.83 Additionally, Stawowy et al. reported high selectivity for CH3OH as the CO2 photo-reduced product using Cu-doped (Ce/Zr)-MOF.102 All these reports represent the specific tendencies of IT-MOFs towards product-selective CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 7  (a) Time profile of produced HCOO− and catalyzed by Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF. (b) 13C NMR spectra of products in the liquid phase subsequently reacted with 13CO2 and 12CO2, respectively. (c) Quantity of produced HCOO− when reusing catalyst three times. (d) PXRD patterns for as-prepared Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF and after the photocatalytic reaction. (e) Suggested catalytic pathway of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOOH. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83© 2018, Nature Communication.) 
6.3. Photocatalytic water splitting
Overall photocatalytic water splitting and scavenger-prompted half-reactions to generate oxygen and hydrogen as solar-mediated fuels have attracted substantial attention as a potential source of renewable energy with no reliance on fossil fuels and display zero carbon footprints. Basically, this reaction with change in Gibbs free energy ΔG = +237.13 kJ mol−1 consists of two half-cell reactions, i.e., photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (PHER) and photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction (POER). For the purpose of water splitting, the band gap of a semiconductor photocatalyst should be greater than 1.23 eV and considering thermodynamics, its CB should be more negative than the reduction potential of H+/H2 (0 V vs. NHE at pH 0) and VB should be more negative than the oxidation potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V vs. NHE at pH 0). After the resourceful work of Fujishima and Honda in 1972, tremendous efforts have been contributed to fabricating more efficient photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution with multiple aspects such as photo-absorption proficiency, copacetic bandgap, proper band edge position, active surface sites, and exciton separation with transfer efficacy. TO date, various MOF-based photocatalysts have been reported with excellent performances for water splitting but IT-MOFs exhibit superiority compared to traditional MOFs with respect to their high nuclearity cluster making ability, Lewis acidic nature, aqueous stability, and redox couple forming tendency. However, two basic mechanistic ways have been explored to understand the mechanism of photocatalytic water splitting reactions involving IT-MOFs. The first is to use a single photocatalyst with sufficient band edge potential, a narrow Eg for harvesting visible photons, and significant photo-corrosion resistance. The second is the Z-scheme, a two-step strategy inspired by natural photosynthesis in green plants. Comparing both methods, the latter is found to be more advantageous because of the lower value of ΔG for each of the photocatalysts and the easy separation of the evolved H2 and O2.103
Tripathy et al. previously reported the photon-induced H2 evolution reaction, as shown in Fig. 8, to evaluate and correlate the efficiency of a bimetallic photocatalyst over its monometallic counterparts. It was reported that the neat UNH (Ce) and UNH (Zr) exhibited slow evolution of hydrogen due to the quick recombination of excitons and inadequate LMCT aspect, while the bimetallic MOF displayed a significantly enhanced evolution rate, i.e., 468.30 μmol h−1, which was around four-fold greater than that of the pristine Zr-MOF. This can be attributed to the slow recombination rate of charge particles, large active surface area, and appropriate bandgap. The photo-stability cycle test result exhibited minute changes in the photo evolution output, which in turn manifests the excellent stability of the UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1).14 In another case, Wu et al. performed the photocatalytic water splitting reaction of Ce-based MOFs with two important screening criteria of the prepared sample, as follows: (i) Eabs ≤ 3.0 eV and (ii) Eg ≥ 1.48 eV to screen visible-response photocatalysts for driving water splitting reaction. Under the optimal conditions such as temperature (298.15 K) and pH = 7, the PHER and POER band levels are positioned at −3.87 and −5.09 eV, respectively, when nine Ce-based MOFs were detected for visible light-responsive water splitting photocatalysts UiO-66(Ce6)-I, UiO-66(Ce2Zr4)-L, where L = 2,5-I, I, OH, 2,5-Br, and UiO-66(Ce2Ti4)-L, where L = I, 2,5-NO2, OH, 2,5-Br. Amongst the six promising photocatalytic bimetallic MOFs, UiO-66(Ce2Zr4)-2,5-I and UiO-66(Ce2Ti4)-I are the most favorable given that they have a low Eabs of 2.48 and 2.55 eV, respectively, and consequently have great ability to harvest light.104 Moreover, a monometallic IT-MOF-derived system (CeO2@N,S-C) was recognised for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution by Hao et al. In this case N,S-co-doped C-coated CeO2 with a 3D hinge-like structure assembled by 2D corrugated porous nanosheets based on MOF-808 (Ce) as a hard template was synthesised. The large proportion of surface active sites located on the hierarchical hinge-like structure, and the coating of N,S-doped C layer on CeO2 as the adsorber are two main driving features for improved photocatalytic H2 evolution reaction (HER). The synergetic effect of the N,S-doped C layer and hinge-like porous structure resulted in the superior photoactivity and cycle stability of the composite.105
 Fig. 8  (a) H2 production plot under irradiation of visible light for 1 h. (b) Recyclability study of UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1) towards photo-evolution of H2. (c) Schematic illustration of the possible mechanism of H2 generation by bimetallic UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14© 2022, the American Chemical Society.) 
Furthermore, Mansingh et al. reported the water oxidation process and found that the [CeO2/UNH (Ce)] composite had the highest activity, which they ascribed to its effectual charge separation and/or a longer photo-exciton lifetime, as evidenced by the PL, EIS, and Bode phase plots. Furthermore, using AgNO3 as a sacrificial agent, all the samples had lower O2 evolution activity than in FeCl3 medium because of the accumulation of Ag or AgO particles on the surface of the catalyst, which clogged the potential reactive sites and hindered the light absorption capacity of the material. Under the specified conditions, the CeO2/UNH (Ce) composite generated 370.18 μmol h−1 of O2 molecules in FeCl3 solution. They also reported that defect-oriented materials are particularly interesting for oxidation reactions of water, in which O-atom as an intermediate is produced by the cleavage of H2O molecules via breakdown of water into H and OH and dissociation of OH through low activation energy into O and H.13
6.4. Organic pollutant degradation
Pollution of the environment constituents (air, water, and soil) is a global concern that poses a major threat to the health of all species on Earth. Thus, efforts have been devoted to developing effective, ecologically friendly, and inexpensive technologies for eliminating organic dyes, antibiotics, microplastics, aromatic compounds, pesticides, and other persistent organic contaminants from water. The majority of all industrial wastewater impurities are organic dyes or persistent organic pollutants containing azo (–NN–) groups and benzene or naphthalene or heterocyclic rings.106 Photocatalysis using semiconductor catalysts, notably using IT-MOFs has shown to be effective in decomposing and mineralizing a number of bulk organic moieties in addition to inorganic NO3−, CO2, PO43−, H2O, and halide ions into biodegradable or less hazardous organic molecules.107
In this regard, Zhao et al. studied the photocatalytic activity of AFC-x and M-AFC01 composites under LED light for the degradation of MB dye. After 120 min, it was seen that AFC01 had a degradation rate of 86%, while that of M-AFC01 was 38% for MB removal, as shown in Fig. 9. Regarding the best photocatalytic performance, it was explained that because the generation of photons on the surface of the photo-stimulated material is not allowed with a high concentration of MB on the catalyst, a higher MB adsorption rate on the catalyst results in a slower rate of degradation. In addition, alkaline conditions are more encouraging for the production of free radicals (˙O2− and ˙OH) than acidic conditions, allowing for faster MB breakdown. In the composites, with an increase in the molar ratio of Ce/Fe, the oxygen vacancies also increased, which facilitated the formation of ˙O2− species, and then involved in the oxidation reaction. The MB degradation rate over AFC01 remained over 80% after three cycles, and no distinguishable peaks in its XRD or FTIR spectra following the photocatalytic reaction were observed, demonstrating that Ce-doped MIL-101-NH2 can increase the photostability of the Ag3PO4 photocatalyst.62 Similarly, Zhao et al. examined a few Ce-based IT-MOF catalysts towards RhB degradation and found that they have marginally higher activation activity when both Ce-TCPP and PMS were combined under visible light, with an efficiency of around 44% within 60 min. An experiment was also conducted to test all the composites pyrolyzed at different temperatures and observation revealed that the CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP-450 sample had the best activity, and when accelerated with visible light, the efficiency for RhB improved to >99% in 20 min. To provide evidence for their claims, the rate constant was calculated and it was found that the CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP-450 sample could breakdown 65% of organic carbon into carbon dioxide and water. To test the versatility of the synthesized CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP, the PMS-activated organic pollutant decomposition of several antibiotics and dyes was achieved using a visible light source, which showed superior decomposition rates of 84.5% for TCL, 98.6% for MB, 94.4% for MO and 97.8% for OTC within 60 min. A photocatalytic degradation reaction of RhB dye was carried out by Lv et al. under UV irradiation using MIL-101, UCNPs, and their composite as catalysts. Comparing the three, neat UCNPs had no degradation effect. However, RhB could be entirely broken down using the heterostructure composite in a short period. After the generation of electrons and holes at the respective positions by UV light illumination on MIL-101, it was observed that the CB of MIL-101 was 2.09 eV, which is greater than that of UCNPs. Hence, electrons can easily be transmitted to the UCNP component of the heterostructure, causing further excitement of UCNPs from the emission of MIL-101 and hole shift towards the surface of MIL-101. Then, the RhB dye is directly decolorized by holes given that both the absorption potential and redox potential similar, which is around 554 nm. Consequently, the MIL-101/UCNP heterostructure can prevent electron and hole recombination. Also, as another primary active component that degrades RhB, electrons react with O2 to form ˙O2− radicals, which effectively destroy the RhB molecules.67
 Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra of Ag3PO4, AFC10, and AFC01. (b) EIS Nyquist plots of Ag3PO4, AFC10, and AFC01. (c) Photocatalytic decadence curves of MB over AFC-x mixtures under LED illumination (Co = 20 mgL−1; pH = 7.0; mV−1 = 0.5 g L−1, T = 25 °C). (d) Schematic representation of the photodegradation and desirable reaction pathways for the MIL-101-NH2/Ag3PO4 system under irradiation of visible-light. (Reproduce with permission from ref. 62© 2019, Elsevier.) 
6.5. Artificial nitrogen fixation
Ammonia (NH3) is an indispensable component in the production of an ample range of chemicals, together with fertilizers and HNO3 in modern society. Moreover, ammonia also acts as a significant clean energy carrier and fuel by acting as an ideal hydrogen storage material with large hydrogen energy release efficiency. Currently, ammonia is produced by utilizing the well-known Haber–Bosch method, which uses H2 and N2 under excessively high pressure and temperatures, often over an iron-based catalyst for a faster chemical reaction. The wide use of the Haber–Bosch process results in massive amounts of energy consumption and CO2 emissions, putting immense pressure on global energy demand and promoting environmental deterioration.108 As a green alternative, the energy carrier ammonia can also be obtained from N2 by the photocatalytic reduction process. However, splitting the ultra-stable NN bond remains a challenge, accompanied by high bond dissociation energy (941 kJ mol−1), high ionization potential (15 eV), high electronegativity (−1.9 eV), large HOMO–LUMO energy gap along with zero dipole moment. These factors contribute to rigorous reaction conditions for ammonia formation. However, with the conscientious choice of photocatalyst, these setbacks can easily be overcome. Typically, the process of photocatalytic N2 reduction occurs by surface chemisorption, followed by association or dissociation of nitrogen molecules and reductive attachment of hydrogen atoms. In this regard, the functionalized high surface area MOFs and related nanomaterials are observed to show significantly superior photocatalytic nitrogen to ammonia conversion efficiency. Especially, the MOFs built with IT-metal nodes are an excellent choice for photocatalytic ammonia production.
For testing the ability of N2 reduction of all their synthesized samples, Mansingh et al. used UV-light irradiation. The (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce) composite exhibited the maximum NH3 generation from the provided N2 feed, i.e., 0.856 mgL−1 h−1–47.55 μmol L−1 h−1 (ACE = 0.33%), among the assessed photocatalysts, as shown in Fig. 10. Characterisations such as PL, EIS, Bode phase plots were reported along with a thorough description of effective charge carrier segregation and their transfer to make all the data acceptable throughout the reduction process. A maximum conversion rate (i.e., 1.57 mg L−1 h−1) was found taking 10 (vol%) CH3OH solution saturated with N2 in comparison to only N2 bubbled in deionized water because of the proper VB position to directly oxidize the hydroxyl ion (OH−) to ˙OH, which in turn reacts with methanol to form ˙CO2−. This promotes efficient N2 reduction in which the high reduction capacity of ˙CO2−, i.e., , assists the successful N2 reduction to NH3.13
 Fig. 10  (a) Production of NH3 in differently prepared samples. (b) Production of hydrazine over all synthesized catalysts. (c) Schematic presentation of the mechanism of NH3 production and evolution of oxygen over formed CeO2/UNH (Ce) p–n heterojunction (rod@sheet). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 13© 2021, the American Chemical Society.) 
7. Stability of IT-MOFs
The stability of any photocatalytic material is a significant property for its practical utility. In this regard, basically two types of stability can be considered, i.e., chemical stability and thermal stability.
For practical usage, the chemical stability of IT-MOFs is essential. Chemical stability can be defined as the resistance of IT-MOFs to chemical treatments (such as exposure to water, acid, alkali, and salt solutions) to maintain their framework integrity and permanent porosity. Various elements corresponding to the nature of coordination bonds, their surrounding environments, and other structural factors, affect the robustness of the metal–ligand bond upon chemical treatments. Alternatively, the effect of water molecules on building blocks of IT-MOF, i.e., the metal ions and organic linkers, determines the aqueous stability of the frameworks. Generally, in a humid environment, ligand exchange reaction or hydrolysis with metal ions plays a pivotal role in determining the degree of aqueous stability of IT-MOFs. Thus, as the thermodynamic basis of the stability of IT-MOFs, a strong coordination bond with high resistance to various entities results into the formation of highly stable IT-MOFs, which follows Pearson's Hard–Soft Acid–Base (HSAB) principle, as explained in section 3. Based on the above-mentioned guidelines, various IT-MOF-based materials have been reported with enhanced chemical stability according to the crucial choice of metals and linkers to form stable frameworks. In this regard, Zhang et al. reported some IT-MOFs (IT = Ce, Tb, Er, Nd, Dy, and Gd) showing excellent chemical, aqueous, thermal, and solvent stability for various cascade reactions.109 Moreover, Payra et al. also reported the high chemical stability of Ce-BDC-NH2, which is probably due to the stronger interactions between the metal and coordinated linkers and the aqueous stability also tested exposing the MOF in water for up to 6 days with same XRD pattern as the initially synthesised one.100 Additionally, Lia et al. prepared an Eu-based MOF (CTGU-19) and reported that it has remarkable water stability and can retain its crystalline integrity under ambient conditions. Also, further evaluation was carried out by immersing CTGU-19 crystals in solutions with different pH values (4–10) for 24 h at room temperature, and the unaltered PXRD pattern signifies the good crystallinity of the material.110
Secondly, multiple factors have been recognised to influence the thermal stability of IT-MOFs. In particular, the nature of coordinated solvent, hardness of the metal, nature and position of functional groups significantly affect the stability of the frameworks. With the help of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), the thermal stability of IT-MOFs can be determined, as explained in section 4.1. In this regard, various IT-MOFs were reported to have excellent thermal stability up to around 350–500 °C because of their flexible coordination sphere and coordinated unsaturated metal centres to promote more complex structures. Huang et al. reported a U-based MOF (IHEP-9) with framework stability of up to 400 °C, maintaining the intact crystalline state in the pH range of 2–11.111 Moreover,112 Li et al. reported the thermal behavior of an Eu-MOF (CTGU-19) by TGA experiment in air, which showed a gradual reduction in mass (12.5%) before 72.8 °C, corresponding to the loss of solvent molecules in its channels, and then the loss of coordination water, which accounts for 3.4%, between 72.8 °C and 193.1 °C, until the framework begins to collapse at 370 °C.112 However, the thermal stability of IT-MOFs can further be improved by preparing mixed-metal IT-MOFs, through ligand functionalization or using complex planar ligands to maintain the extended π–π conjugation, making framework rigid and more stable.
8. Summary and future perspective
Inner transition metal–organic frameworks (IT-MOFs) have become a competent candidate for photocatalysis, which are being utilized in ongoing research to develop, characterize, and implement robust nano-materials in many domains for environmentally friendly and cost-effective catalytic usage. In this review, we presented several aspects of IT-MOFs, starting from their fabrication routes, structures, characterization, and photocatalytic applications. Among the different inner transition MOFs, actinoid-based MOFs are the least explored because of their radioactive nature and low Earth abundance. Despite these setbacks, MOFs based on Th and U are popularly explored from the actinide series because of their tendency for high reactivity, variable oxidation state (+4, +5, +6, and +7), and complex framework-constructing nature. Unlike the widely studied d-block MOFs, these inner transition elements show irreplaceable nature towards coordination chemistry, where their empty f-orbitals, high coordination number of their inner transition metal clusters and ligand steric factors decide the coordination dynamics, geometries, and desired characteristics of the formed IT-MOFs. Moreover, their synthesis protocols have a remarkable influence on their photocatalytic activity through the optimization of crystallinity, physicochemical, and microstructural properties. Traditionally, solvothermal treatment was the most sought-after route towards IT-MOFs and multi-variate IT-MOF-based nanomaterial fabrication. However, recently, microwave-assisted solvothermal method and sono-chemical process have attracted more attention because they consume minimal duration and produce higher yields of crystalline frameworks. Moreover, the spatial orientation of the building blocks of IT-MOFs considerably influences the topologies of the generated frameworks, which is a function of the activities of the resultant MOFs. With the diversified nuclearity of metal clusters/nodes of the IT-elements, a large number of new topologies was reported, which can be incorporated to alter the position together with the orientation of the constituents present in MOFs to tune their photocatalytic active sites. In addition, designing the desired topology by the selection of appropriate starting materials favors the achievement of photocatalytic reactions involving an energetically suitable transition state through the concerted binding of reactants on the catalytic surface. Nevertheless, the photocatalytic performance of IT-MOFs can be further upgraded by mixed metal framework, nano-composite, metal nanoparticle composite, and MOF-derived products. These IT-MOF-based nanomaterials have been thoroughly studied considering their physio-chemical, morphological, and optical-electrochemical characterizations to contemplate the cooperative effect of textual and microstructural properties and charge carrier separation followed by migration and bathochromic shift in terms of absorption range for which the composite photocatalysts exhibit excellent performance towards diversified applications. Mostly, IT-MOF-based materials have been vividly explored for emerging photocatalytic applications involving organic transformations, water splitting, organic pollutant degradation, and CO2 and N2 reduction. Typically, for these applications, IT-MOF-based nanomaterials follow four mechanistic pathways, as follows: (i) heterojunction-based type-II charge transfer, (ii) Z-scheme-based charge transfer, (iii) co-catalyst-based charge transfer and (iv) photosensitizer-based charge transfer. Moreover, the photocatalytic performance may further be enhanced owning to their criteria such as small bandgap, suitable band-edge position, suppression of e−/h+ pair recombination, and lattice vacancies present in IT-MOFs.
IT-MOF-based nanomaterials have displayed promising potential to promote future research in the development of efficient photocatalysis. However, the research on IT-MOFs is in its infancy and yet to make a significant impact as photocatalysts. Commonly, some of the pivotal and pressing attributes for the development of these materials may be helpful to lead researchers in the right direction in the future. Typically, high throughput synthesis (HTS) remains amiss for IT-MOFs and can be game changing for developing diverse morphologically and physio-chemically distinct frameworks in a short time. Moreover, the composition range for inner transition metals and available linkers is vast. Therefore, IT-MOFs with desirable features can be scrutinized with aid of combinatorial HTS and machine learning (ML) platforms for thorough optimization of synthetic parameters. Among the various IT-MOFs, Ce, Eu, and Tb-based MOFs are the dominant ones, and hence more attention should be paid to other inner transition frameworks. Moreover, in photocatalytic application, IT-MOFs with their composites are mostly explored for organic transformations and organic pollutant degradation, whereas scarce studies are have been performed on carbon dioxide reduction, water splitting, and artificial nitrogen fixation. Additionally, assisted photocatalytic techniques such as sono-photocatalytic, photo-thermal catalytic, and piezo-photocatalytic effects of IT-MOFs should be explored significantly, given that there no such studies in the literature. Although IT-MOFs basically show superior photocatalytic efficiency in comparison to other group metal node-containing MOFs, their quantum efficiency needs further improvement to realize their practical and industrial utility. Generally, quantum efficiency (ϕ) is defined as the number of molecules reacted per quantum of absorbed light, as follows: (4)
Thus, to improve the quantum efficiency of IT-MOFs, their high active surface area is one of the important parameters that causes significant absorption of reactant molecules to improve the molecular reaction in a specific time. Secondly, the photo-absorption efficiency should be improved to facilitate the absorption of the target wavelength of photon energy. Though many studies have been published on IT-MOFs to date, advance research is still required to discover their full potential towards photocatalysis.118,119 Also, the trap states of photocatalysts such as vacancy defects (oxygen vacancy) and vacant orbitals (vacant 4f-orbitals) basically reside between the VB and CB of the material play an important role to trap the photoexcited electrons and cause delayed exciton recombination, ultimately improving the photocatalytic efficiency of the material. A wide range of research has been reported on the importance of “trap states” of various materials, and in this regard, IT-MOFs containing both oxygen vacancies and vacant 4f-orbitals can be considered as important materials to show delayed photo exciton recombination.12,13 With the rapid development of multi-discipline approaches, understanding emerging IT-MOFs will be immensely beneficial in the field of photocatalysis and can pave the way for the fabrication of novel IT-metal-based photocatalysts.
Abbreviations

MOFsMetal organic frameworks
IT-MOFsInner transition metal organic frameworks
SBUsSecondary building units
PSMPost synthetic modification
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
HOCOHighest occupied crystal orbital
LUCOLowest unoccupied crystal orbital
FMOFrontier molecular orbital
VBValence band
CBConduction band
LMCTLigand to metal charge transfer
MLCTMetal to ligand charge transfer
Re-MOFRare earth metal organic framework
HSABHard soft acid base
DBDDielectric barrier discharge
SAEDSelected-area electron diffraction
SHEStandard hydrogen electrode
KS-DFTKohn–Sham density functional theory
TD-DFTTime-dependent density functional theory
DOSTotal density of state
ESAExcited state absorption
ETEnergy transfer
OTRsOrganic transformation reactions
PCPsPorous coordination polymers
RTRoom temperature
PHERPhotocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction
POERPhotocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction
HTSHigh throughput synthesis
MLMachine learning
NIRNear infra-red
PLPhotoluminescence
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
UVUltra violate
UV-Vis DRSUV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
FTIRFourier transform infrared
XRDX-ray diffraction
PXRDPowder X-ray diffraction
ICP-MSInductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy
ESRElectron spin resonance
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
BETBrunauer–Emmett–Teller
BJHBarrett–Joyner–Halenda
PMSPer-oxymonosulfate
TEMPO2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy
DMPO5,5-Dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide
RPFRare-earth polymeric framework
RhBRhodamine B
MBMethylene blue
TCTetracycline hydrochloride
OTCOver the counter
MOMethyl orange
HOQ8-Hydroxyquinoline

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
S ‘O’ A Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha's management and staff are thankfully acknowledged for their constant support and encouragement in this work.
References
S. P. Tripathy, S. Subudhi and K. Parida, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 434, 213786 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ray, S. Sultana, L. Paramanik and K. M. Parida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19196–19245 RSC .
S. P. Tripathy, S. Subudhi, A. Ray, P. Behera and K. Parida, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 5352–5366 RSC .
S. Subudhi, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 392–415 RSC .
T. Guo, K. Wang, G. Zhang and X. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 331–339 CrossRef CAS .
F. Saraci, V. Quezada-Novoa, P. R. Donnarumma and A. J. Howarth, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7949–7977 RSC .
S. Subudhi, G. Swain, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 9824–9837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alzamly, M. Bakiro, S. Hussein Ahmed, M. A. Alnaqbi and H. L. Nguyen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 425, 213543 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Younis, E. E. Kwon, M. Qasim, K. H. Kim, T. Kim, D. Kukkar, X. Dou and I. Ali, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2020, 81, 100870 CrossRef .
S. Subudhi, S. Mansingh, S. P. Tripathy, A. Mohanty, P. Mohapatra, D. Rath and K. Parida, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 6585–6597 RSC .
X. P. Wu, L. Gagliardi and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7904–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qiu, Y. Zhu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. T. Menisa, C. Xia, S. Liu and Z. Tang, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4(8) DOI:10.1002/solr.201900449 .
S. Mansingh, S. Subudhi, S. Sultana, G. Swain and K. Parida, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 9635–9652 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Tripathy, S. Subudhi, A. Ray, P. Behera, A. Bhaumik and K. Parida, Langmuir, 2022, 38, 1766–1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, J. Meng, J. Feng, F. Yao, L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Zhang, ChemPhysChem, 2020, 21, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Curnoe and K. Kikoin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 15714–15725 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa, T. Soga, V. Dutta and H. C. Swart, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2613–2637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Pan, X. Zeng, X. Jiang, Z. Long and X. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13959–13962 RSC .
Z. Yu, F. Wang, X. Lin, C. Wang, Y. Fu, X. Wang, Y. Zhao and G. Li, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 232, 96–101 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Pal, N. Chatterjee and P. K. Bharadwaj, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1741–1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Zhang, D. Y. Du, J. S. Qin, S. J. Bao, S. L. Li, W. W. He, Y. Q. Lan, P. Shen and Z. M. Su, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 3589–3594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2789–2798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, K. Yuan and Y. Zhang, J. Rare Earths, 2020, 38, 801–818 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Hoffart and S. J. Loeb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 901–904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, H. Furukawa, C. Wu, M. O'Keeffe and B. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9328–9331 RSC .
A. Schoedel, M. Li, D. Li, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12466–12535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Reineke, M. Eddaoudi, D. Moler, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4843–4844 CrossRef CAS .
F. Millange, C. Serre, J. Marrot, N. Gardant, F. Pellé and G. Férey, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 642–645 RSC .
D. T. De Lill, N. S. Gunning, C. L. Cahill and T. George, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 44, 258–266 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yan, Q. Yue, Q. X. Jia, G. Lemercier and E. Q. Gao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2984–2987 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Ebrahim, T. N. Nguyen, S. Shyshkanov, A. Gladysiak, P. Favre, A. Zacharia, G. Itskos, P. J. Dyson and K. C. Stylianou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(7), 3052–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Manos, E. J. Kyprianidou, G. S. Papaefstathiou and A. J. Tasiopoulos, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6308–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chen, B. Zhao, W. Shi, J. Xia, P. Cheng, D. Z. Liao, S. P. Yan and Z. H. Jiang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2866–2874 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, M. Fang, C. S. Cao, W. Z. Qiao and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 4790–4794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Li, Y. L. Wang and Q. Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 2159–2164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Cheng, S. T. Zheng, W. Liu and G. Y. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 1047–1051 RSC .
T. Y. Luo, C. Liu, S. V. Eliseeva, P. F. Muldoon, S. Petoud and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9333–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, D. Yuan, X. Sen Wang and H. C. Zhou, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2072–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Angeli, E. Loukopoulos, K. Kouvidis, A. Bosveli, C. Tsangarakis, E. Tylianakis, G. Froudakis and P. N. Trikalitis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10250–10260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Q. Ren, Z. J. Li, Y. Y. Qin, P. X. Yin, J. K. Cheng and Y. G. Yao, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 1088–1092 RSC .
F. Shi, T. Trindade and F. A. A. Paz, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 1–12 Search PubMed .
F. Gándara, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla, M. Iglesias, N. Snejko and M. Angeles Monge, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 128–134 CrossRef .
J. Demel, P. Kubát, F. Millange, J. Marrot, I. Císařová and K. Lang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 2779–2786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. X. Xue, Y. Belmabkhout, O. Shekhah, H. Jiang, K. Adil, A. J. Cairns and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5034–5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hu, Z. Di, M. Wu, M. Hong and J. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2019, 19(11), 6381–6387 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Yuan, L. Feng, B. Guo, J. S. Qin, B. Xu, C. Lollar, D. Sun and H. C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5095–5099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zheng, L. P. Jin and S. Gao, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 1600–1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, L. Zhang, N. Muhammad, Y. Xu, Y. Zhou, F. Tang and S. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Fang, L. Cheng, L. Huang and G. Y. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 6–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Guillerm, Ł. J. Weseliński, Y. Belmabkhout, A. J. Cairns, V. D'Elia, Ł. Wojtas, K. Adil and M. Eddaoudi, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 673–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Abdulhalim, P. M. Bhatt, Y. Belmabkhout, A. Shkurenko, K. Adil, L. J. Barbour and M. Eddaoudi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10715–10722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, Y. Wang, K. Zhang, K. Y. Wang, W. Fan, X. Wang, J. A. Powell, B. Guo, F. Dai, L. Zhang, R. Wang, D. Sun and H. C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16682–16690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, J. Y. R. Seow, W. S. Skinner, Z. U. Wang and H. L. Jiang, Mater. Today, 2019, 27, 43–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Perry, J. A. Perman and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1400–1417 RSC .
Z. W. Jiang, Y. C. Zou, T. T. Zhao, S. J. Zhen, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 3326–3332 CrossRef .
C. R. Martin, G. A. Leith and N. B. Shustova, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 7214–7230 RSC .
U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt and J. Pastré, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 626–636 RSC .
Q. Li, C. Tian, H. Zhang, J. Qian and S. Du, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9208–9215 RSC .
Q. Xia, X. Yu, H. Zhao, S. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Guo and H. Xing, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, 17, 4189–4195 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Choi, T. Tachikawa, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10437–10443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karimia, S. Sadeghia, R. G. Gavinehroudi, H. Mohebali, A. Mahjoub and A. Heydari, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 6671–6681 RSC .
D. Zhao and C. Cai, Catal. Commun., 2020, 136, 105910 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tao, W. Cong, L. Huang and D. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 805, 1060–1070 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni and R. I. Masel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12394–12395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, Y. Xu, P. Shao, L. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, F. Cui and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124912 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lin, A. A. Ibrahim, P. Arab, H. M. El-Kaderi and M. S. El-Shall, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17961–17968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, S. Li, Y. Long, X. Shen, Z. Zhao, Q. Wei, S. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Chemosphere, 2021, 280, 130637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Behera, S. Subudhi, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 456, 214392 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, M. Zhang, X. Li, C. Wang, R. Wang, B. Wang and H. Yan, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 15930–15944 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Khandan, D. Afzali, G. Sargazi and M. Gordan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 18600–18613 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Son, J. Kim, J. Kim and W. S. Ahn, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6336–6338 RSC .
G. S. More and R. Srivastava, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 12492–12504 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lammert, C. Glißmann and N. Stock, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 2425–2429 RSC .
T. Tang, X. Jin, X. Tao, L. Huang and S. Shang, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 895, 162452 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campanelli, T. Del Giacco, F. De Angelis, E. Mosconi, M. Taddei, F. Marmottini, R. D'Amato and F. Costantino, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45031–45037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maiti, T. Dhawa, A. K. Mallik and S. Mahanty, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 288–298 RSC .
J. Li, X. Wu, W. Pan, G. Zhang and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, K. Wang, X. Wu, G. Zhang and S. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26898–26908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, Y. Li, X. Wu, J. Wang and G. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 42, 69–77 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Y. Li, J. Li and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263 DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2019.05.032 .
T. Jiang, K. Wang, T. Guo, X. Wu and G. Zhang, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–31 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Yan, M. H. Du, J. Liu, S. Jin, C. Wang, G. L. Zhuang, X. J. Kong, L. S. Long and L. S. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mosleh, K. Rezaei, K. Dashtian and Z. Salehi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 409, 124478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, W. Liu, X. Shen, H. Zhong, J. Xu, B. Li, J. Q. Liu, A. K. Singh, A. Singh and A. Kumar, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2018, 95, 104–106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuila, P. Saravanan, S. Routu, P. Gopinath, M. Jang and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 553, 149556 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lv, J. Jiao, Y. Liu, L. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Wang and J. Tang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22730–22733 RSC .
S. Subudhi, D. Rath and K. M. Parida, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 679–696 RSC .
M. Ding, X. Cai and H. L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 10209–10230 RSC .
L. M. Aguirre-Díaz, N. Snejko, M. Iglesias, F. Sánchez, E. Gutiérrez-Puebla and M. Á. Monge, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 6883–6892 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ghasempour, K. Y. Wang, J. A. Powell, F. ZareKarizi, X. L. Lv, A. Morsali and H. C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 426, 213542 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Baumann, D. A. Burns, B. Liu and V. S. Thoi, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 1–14 CrossRef .
J. Nowotny, M. A. Alim, T. Bak, M. A. Idris, M. Ionescu, K. Prince, M. Z. Sahdan, K. Sopian, M. A. Mat Teridi and W. Sigmund, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8424–8442 RSC .
G. Pacchioni, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 1041–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, X. Zheng, B. Yan, T. Xu and Q. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, X. Li, H. Ye, S. Chen, H. Ju, D. Liu, Y. Lin, W. Ye, C. Wang, Q. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Song, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8928–8935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao and Y. Ma, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 1155–1159 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Biroju, B. Choudhury and P. K. Giri, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7101–7112 RSC .
D. J. Newman and G. M. Cragg, J. Nat. Prod., 2020, 83, 770–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Payra and S. Roy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 8497–8507 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, T. Peppel, J. Strunk and Z. Sun, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4(8) DOI:10.1002/solr.201900546 .
M. Stawowy, R. Ciesielski, T. Maniecki, K. Matus, R. Łużny, J. Trawczynski, J. Silvestre-Albero and A. Łamacz, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 39 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, L. Gagliardi and D. G. Truhlar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(25), 7904–7912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Hao, W. Zhan, L. Sun, G. Zhuang, X. Wang and X. Han,  DOI:10.1021/acs.inorgchem.9b03204.
A. Wongrakpanich, I. A. Mudunkotuwa, S. M. Geary, A. S. Morris, K. A. Mapuskar, D. R. Spitz, V. H. Grassian and A. K. Salem, Environ. Sci. Nano, 2016, 3, 365–374 RSC .
C. C. Wang, J. R. Li, X. L. Lv, Y. Q. Zhang and G. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2831–2867 RSC .
J. John, D. K. Lee and U. Sim, Nano Converg., 2019, 6, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Geng, L. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Peng and Z. Bian, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129722 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, B. Zhai, C. S. Cao and B. Zhao, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 9671–9676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Huang, K. Q. Hu, L. Mei, C. Z. Wang, Y. M. Chen, W. S. Wu, Z. F. Chai and W. Q. Shi, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 651–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Y. Jiang, Y. Y. Sun, Y. J. Wang, M. Le Han, Y. P. Wu, L. F. Ma and D. S. Li, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 14854–14862 RSC .
D. Zhao and C. Cai, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 185, 108957 CrossRef CAS .
Nasruddin, A. Zulys, F. Yulia, A. Buhori, N. Muhadzib, M. Ghiyats and B. B. Saha, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2020, 9, 7409–7417 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Pu, X. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhao, J. Lumin., 2019, 206, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
V. Quezada-Novoa, H. M. Titi, A. A. Sarjeant and A. J. Howarth, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4163–4169 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mahata, T. Aarthi, G. Madras and S. Natarajan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1665–1674 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Yan, X. Wang, F. Wen, Z. Wang, D. Fan, J. Shi and C. Li, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, K. Zhang, G. Zhang and S. Yin, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 59–70 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Jayashree Panda	Jayashree Panda received her postgraduate degree in Applied Chemistry from Central University of Jharkhand, Ranchi, Jharkhand, in 2015. Since January 2022, she started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Her current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOFs and MOF-derived nanomaterials towards emerging photocatalytic applications.
Suraj Prakash Tripathy	Suraj Prakash Tripathy received his Master's in Science (M.Sc.) Degree in Chemistry from Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India in 2015. Then, he joined Advanced Materials Technology (AMT) Department CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in November 2017 at as a project fellow. Since July 2018, he started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. His current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOF-based nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.
Srabani Dash	Srabani Dash received her postgraduate degree in Chemistry from Institute of Technical Education and Research (ITER), S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, in 2019. Since January 2022, she started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Her current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOF-based nanomaterials towards emerging photocatalytic applications.
Asheli Ray	Asheli Ray received her Bachelor's Degree from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar in 2015 and M.Sc. Degree in Applied Chemistry from Centurion University, Jatni, Odisha, India in 2018. Since July 2018, she started working as a research scholar at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida. Her current research interests focus on the design of nickel phosphide-based nanomaterials for photocatalytic applications.
Pragyandeepti Behera	Pragyandeepti Behera received her postgraduate degree in Chemistry from Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, Burla, Odisha, in 2020. Since December 2020, she started working as a research scholar under the supervision of Prof. Kulamani Parida at Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Her current research interests are focused on the design of functionalized MOF-derived nanomaterials towards emerging photocatalytic applications.
Satyabrata Subudhi	Dr Satyabrata Subudhi received his postgraduate degree in Chemistry from Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha, India in 2014 and received his PhD in Chemistry from S ‘O’ A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India in 2020. Since November 2020, he started working as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, S‘O'A deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. His current research interest is centred on the fabrication of MOF-based heterogeneous photocatalysts towards photocatalytic pollutant remediation, energy conversion and organic transformation reactions.
Kulamani Parida	Prof. Kulamani Parida is working as a Distinguished Professor in Chemistry and Director, Centre for Nano Science and Nano Technology, Siksha O Anusandhan, Deemed to be University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. Before joining SOA, Deemed to be University, he worked for 37 years in CSIR-IMMT, Bhubaneswar in different capacities and retired from the position of Chief Scientist and Head of Colloids and Materials Chemistry, Department. Dr Kulamani Parida has made significant contribution towards exploring the chemistry related to structural, morphological, optical, electronic and electrochemical properties of a number of wide band gap and narrow band gap semiconductors, doped metal oxides, metal carbides, metal sulphide, metal nitrides, MOF, MOF-derived nanomaterials, LDH, g-C3N4 and quantum dots for effective visible light absorption and charge separation required for efficient photocatalytic water splitting, degradation of pollutants and synthesis of fine chemicals. Thus far, he has published more than 500 research articles and review papers in high impact factor journals, 10 book chapters, filed 35 patents and supervised 50 PhD scholars. The importance and current relevance of his work are amply reflected in the large number of citations (26264) of his work and H index (87).

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the history of reported inner-transition MOFs (IT-MOFs).	 

 	Scheme 2  Publication statistics of MOF and IT-MOFs for the period 2000–2022 (data collected from Web of Science Database from 2000 to August 2022).	 

 	Scheme 3  Overall illustration highlighting inner transition MOFs (IT-MOFs).	 

 	Scheme 4  Metals from d and f blocks used in IT-MOF-based nanomaterial fabrication.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Construction of IT metal ion nodes (i–v). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 56© 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) Structure of IT metal chain nodes (vi–viii). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (b) Building of dinuclear clusters (I–IV). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 31© 2018, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 32© 2012, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of trinuclear clusters (V–VII). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 33© 2005, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of tetranuclear clusters (VIII–XI). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from Ref. 57© 2000, Wiley.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 37© 2017, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 38© 2009, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of hexanuclear clusters (XII–XVII). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40© 2008, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 41© 2009, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 42© 2009, the American Chemical Society.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 46© 2018, Wiley.) Structure of heptanuclear clusters(XVIII). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 49© 2012, the American Chemical Society.) Structure of nonanuclear clusters (XIX and XX). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6© 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 50© 2014, Nature Chemistry.) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 51© 2017, the American Chemical Society.) (c) Isoreticular ditopic linker series. (d) Examples of anionic linkers. (e) Examples of cationic linkers. (f) Examples of neutral linkers.	 


Metal ions	M = Gd, Sm, Eu, Tb	[M(H2O)(OTf2)3][Cl][OTf]7	
6

M = Sm(III), Gd(III), Tb(III), Yb(III), Eu(III)	[(Me2NH2)3[M3(L)2 (H2O)3]·48DMA	
6

M = Tb, Ho, Er, Yb	M(BTC)(DMF)(DMSO)	
6

M = Pr(III), Nd(III), Ce(III), Sm(III), Gd(III)	[M(BTC)(DMF)2]·H2O	
6

Metal chain	IT-oxo/hydroxo chains	[Nd (H2O)]2[O2C(CH2)3CO2]3·4H2O	
6

Tb(BDC)NO3(DMF)2	
6

[Pr2(adipic acid)3(H2O)4]·adipicacid·4H2O	
6

[Pr2(adipic acid)3(H2O)2]·H2O	
6

[Eu2(CO3)(ox)2(H2O)2]·4H2O	
6

Eu2(O2C–C10H14–CO2)3	
6

Metal cluster	Dinuclear cluster	Tb2[(CH3)2SO]4(ADB)3·16[(CH3)2SO]	
27

[Tm2(TBDC)3(DMF)2(H2O)2]·4H2O	
6

[Tb(CPEIP)(DMF)(H2O)]·2H2O	
6

Er2(phen)2(BDC)3·3H2O	
6

Er2(TBDC)3(phen)2·4DMF·2H2O	
6

[Nd2(CIP)2(DMF)2.8](H2O)1.2	
32

Trinuclear clusters	{[Pr3(HATPT)4(ATPT)2]·(NO3)·8H2O}n	
33

[Eu3(HCOO)2(RCOO)8(DMF)2(H2O)]	
34

{[Nd3(ATPT)3(HATPT)3]·9H2O}n	
6

Dy2.5(BTB)3(OAc)0.5(H2O)3	
6

{[(CH3)2NH2]3[Ln9-(μ3-O)2(μ3-OH)12(H2O)6] [Ln3(μ3-O)(H2O)3](HCO2)3-(BTB)6}·(solvent)x	
35

Tetranuclear clusters	Dy4(μ3-OH)4(asp)3(H2O)8	
6

Y2Cu2I2(OH)2(pca)2(na)	
6

Sm4(μ3-OH)4(COO)62+	
6

Yb(BPTb)(H2O)·(DMF)1.5(H2O)1.25	
6

Hexanuclear clusters	[Dy2Cu(μ6-O)1/6(μ3-OH)2/3(μ3-OH)2(hpzc)2(H2O)2]·2H2O	
6

[Ln2Cu(μ6-O)1/6(μ3-OH)2/3(μ3-OH)2(hpzc)2(H2O)2]·2H2O	
6

[Er4(OH)4(pydc)4(H2O)3]·H2O	
6

[Tb6O4(OH)4(COO)8]	
6

[Y6(μ3-OH)8(O2C–)6(N4C–)6]	
44

[PrIII2PrIV1.25O(OH)3(pydc)3	
6

Heptanuclear clusters	Ag3Tb7[(μ3-OH)8(bpdc)6(NO3)3(H2O)6] (NO3)·2H2O	
6

Gd7(COO)9(μ3-OH)8(H2O)6	
6

Nonanuclear clusters	[Y9(μ3OH)12(OH)2(μ3O)2(H2O)7(O2C–)12]	
51

[Er9(μ2-OH)3(μ3-OH)8(O2C–)18]	
51


 	Scheme 5  Diagrammatical layout of different strategies involved in the synthesis of IT-MOF-based nanomaterials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) XRD and magnified XRD pattern of UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14© 2022, the American Chemical Society.) (c and d) XRD and BET–BJH isotherms of M-CeO2-573 and Ce-BTC MOF, respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 72© 2021, the American Chemical Society.) (e–i) XPS survey spectrum and XPS peaks of Ce 3d; Fe 2p; O 1s; and C 1s. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74© 2021, Elsevier.) (j) EPR spectra of Ce-MOFs and Fe/Ce-MOFs. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 74© 2021, Elsevier.) (k) TGA of UNH (Zr) and UNH (Ce/Zr). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14© 2022, the American Chemical Society.) (l and m) FTIR spectra of UNH (Ce), CeO2, and CeO2/UNH (Ce) (1:1, 1:2, and 2:1) and Raman spectra of CeO2 and (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce), respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 13© 2021, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (i–iv) TEM images of Ce-MOFs at different formation periods (30 min, 60 min, 90 min, and 120 min). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63© 2019, Elsevier.) (v–xiii) TEM images of CeO2 derived from Ce-MOFs at different calcination temperatures. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63© 2019, Elsevier.) (xiv–xxi) FESEM images of the benzene carboxylate MOFs and corresponding CeO2@C (Reproduced with permission from ref. 76© 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (xxii–xxix) AFM and TEM images of Tb-TCPP nanosheets (Reproduced with permission from ref. 55© 2019, Wiley.) (xxx–xxxiii) Elemental mapping images of CeO2/NC/Ce-TCPP-450. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 67© 2021, Elsevier.) (xxxiv–xxxix) TEM image of UNH (Ce), TEM picture of (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce), SAED pattern of UNH (Ce) and (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce), and HRTEM image of (1:1) CeO2/UNH (Ce). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 13© 2021, the American Chemical Society.)	 
Tauc equation: αhν = A(hν − Eg)n/2	(1)
Vfb[vs. SHE] = Vfb[vs. ref] + Vref[vs. SHE] + 0.0591 × pH	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) UV–vis of Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF and H3L in DMF, regularized luminescence degeneration debris of Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF and H3L. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83© 2018, Nature Communications.) (c) UV-Vis DRS of Ce-MOF-derived CeO2. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 63 © 2019, Elsevier.) (d and g) UV-Vis DRS, PL spectra of neat UNH (Zr) and UNH (Ce/Zr). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © 2022, the American Chemical Society.) (e and h, f, and i) Mott–Schottky analysis, EIS analysis plot, and fugitive photocurrent representation of UNH (Zr) and UNH (Ce/Zr), respectively. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14 © 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UiO-66 framework structure with primitive cell illustrated by the blue background. Color pattern: metal – yellow, O – red, C – brown, and H – light pink. (b) Cluster model of UiO-66 (Ce) and UiO-66 (Ce)-X. Color pattern: Ce – yellow, O – red, C – brown, H – light pink, and X – blue. (c) Density of state of UiO-66(M) with unoccupied orbital highlighted in the yellow background. (d) Band alignment of UiO-66(Ce)-X (structure of BDC-X linker in the right lower box). The red and blue lines represent energy levels for water splitting and the green area represents the energy level of CO2 reduction. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 11© 2018, the American Chemical Society.)	 
ΔG = −e (ε° + εSHE) + α(ln10) (kBT) (pH)	(3)

 	Scheme 6  Illustration of heterojunction-based (a) type-II charge dynamics, (b) direct Z-scheme charge dynamics, (c) co-catalyst based charge dynamics, (d) vacancy-mediated charge dynamics, and (e) photosensitizer-based charge dynamics mechanisms.	 



1.	RPF-30-Er	Er	H2sfdc	Solvothermal	Rod shape	Organic transformation (oxidation of amines) (100 W visible radiation)	76% in 18 h	
90

2.6 eV
2.	
	U	Curcumin	Reflux, sonochemical, hydrothermal	Spherical and rod shape	Dye degradation (UV radiation)	99.98% in 3 h	
70

3.2 eV
3.	CeO2/N-doped carbon/Ce-TCPP	Ce	TCPP	Microwave	Spindle shape	Organic pollutants degradation (visible light radiation)	94.4% in 1 h	
67

2.25 eV
4.	Ce-UiO-66-PDC	Ce	PDC	Mechano-chemical	Rod shape	Organic transformation (alcohol to aldehyde) (near UV radiation)	100% in 75 min	
75

2.79 eV
5.	Ce/Eu-HKUST-1	Ce, Eu	H3TBC	Hydrothermal	Irregular shape	Organic pollutant degradation (visible light radiation)	99.99% in 25 min	84
2.60 eV
6.	Ce-doped MIL-101-NH2-sensitized Ag3PO4	Ce, Fe	BDC	Hydrothermal and in situ ion-exchange	Spherical shape	Organic pollutant degradation (MB) (visible light irradiation)	80% in 2 h	
62

2.18 eV
7.	Ce-UiO-66	Ce	BDC	Solvothermal	Irregular shape	Dye degradation (RhB) (125 W UV radiation)	99% in 1 h	
113

2.51 eV
8.	Ce MOF/BiVO4	Ce	NH2BDC	Hydrothermal	Irregular shape	Dye degradation (MB) (solar radiation)	88.8% after 3 h	
86

2.26 eV
9.	MOF-derived NiO/CeO2	Ce, Ni	H3BTC	Hydrothermal and thermal treatment	Sphere shape	Hydrogen generation (300 W Xenon lamp)	28.6 μmol h−1 g−1	
69

2.7 eV
10.	Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF	Eu, Ru	Ru(phen)3-derived tricarboxy-late acid	Solvothermal	Irregular shape	CO2 reduction (300 W xenon lamp)	321.9 μmol h−1	
103

2.4 eV
11.	{[Gd(L)1.5(H2O)2]·2H2O}n	Gd	
N,N′-Dioxide-3,3′-benzocinnoline dicarboxylic acid	Hydrothermal	Rod shape	Pollutant degradation (RhB) (UV light)	95% in 45 min	
85

2.68 eV
12.	MIL-101/UCNPs	Gd, Yb, Er	H2BTC	Hydrothermal	Octahedral shape	Organic pollutants degradation (RhB) (UV light)	99% in 6 h	
87

3.35 eV
13.	CeO2 derived from Ce-MOF	Ce	Trimesic acid	DBD plasma method	Rod shape	Organic pollutants degradation (MO) (500 W UV lamp)	98% in 36 min	
63

2.35 eV
14.	La-NDC MOFs	La	2,6-H2NDC	Solvothermal	Rod shape	Organic pollutants degradation (RhB) (160 W lamps)	18.32% in 120 min	
114

3.03 eV
15.	Ln-MOFs	Ce, Tb, Dy	Anthracene-based ligand	Solvothermal	Irregular shape	Organic pollutant degradation (RhB) (500 W Xe arc lamp)	95% in 25 min	
59

Ce-2.11 eV, Tb-2.20 eV, Dy-2.15 eV
16.	Ln-MOFs	Eu, Tb	2,2′-Bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid	Solvothermal	Irregular shape	Pollutant degradation (RhB) (300 W Xe lamp)	96% for Tb-MOF in 6 h	
115

Tb-3.46 eV, Eu-3.49 eV
17.	Porphyrin-based 2D lanthanide MOFs	Ce, Sm, Eu, Yb, Tb	H2TCPP	Microwave	Nanosheets	Organic transformation (oxidation of 1,5-DHN) (300 W Xe lamp)	77% in 10 min	
55

1.73 eV
18.	g-C3N4@Ce-MOF	Ce	H2BDC	Sonochemical	Polyhedron structure	Organic transformation (hantzsch pyridine synthesis) (visible light)	70–95% in 6 h	
61

2.7 eV
19.	Uranium-based porphyrin MOF	U	H4TCPP	Solvothermal	Irregular cubic shape	Cycloaddition	78–99% yield	
111

1.55 eV	Reaction of CO2 (45 W, 6500 K compact fluorescent lamp)
20.	Ce/Zr MOF	Ce, Zr	BDC-NH2	Solvothermal	Cubic shape	a. Pollutant degradation (CIP)	a. 90.8% in 1 h	
14

2.53 eV	
	
	
	
	b. Hydrogen evolution (300 W Xe arc lamp)	b. 468.30 μmol h−1	

21.	CeO2/Ce-MOF	Ce	BDC-NH2	Hydrothermal	Nanorod shape	a. N2 fixation	a. 47.55 μmol L−1 h−1	
13

2.8 eV	b. Water Oxidation (250 W Hg lamp)	b. 370.18 μmol h−1	

22.	Tb-CU-10	Tb	H4TBAPy	Solvothermal	Hexagonal prismatic shape	Oxidation and detoxification of 2-CEES (UV light)	Conversion half-life 3.5 min (under O2)	
116

2.5 eV
23.	GdCoO3 derived from Gd/Co-MOF	Gd, Co	Pyridine-2,3-dicarboxylic acid	Hydrothermal and thermal treatment	Rodlike shape	Organic pollutant degradation (phenol) (UV irradiation)	0.069 mg L−1 min−1	
117

2.6 eV

 	Fig. 6  (a) Reaction efficacy in the presence of different quenchers. (b) ESR spectrum of catalyst samples with and without irradiation of visible light by utilizing DMPO. (c) Using TEMPO as the spin-trapping member. (d) Projected mechanism for photocatalyzed cascade aerobic oxidative functionalization of styrene. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 62© 2019, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Time profile of produced HCOO− and catalyzed by Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF. (b) 13C NMR spectra of products in the liquid phase subsequently reacted with 13CO2 and 12CO2, respectively. (c) Quantity of produced HCOO− when reusing catalyst three times. (d) PXRD patterns for as-prepared Eu-Ru(phen)3-MOF and after the photocatalytic reaction. (e) Suggested catalytic pathway of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to HCOOH. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 83© 2018, Nature Communication.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) H2 production plot under irradiation of visible light for 1 h. (b) Recyclability study of UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1) towards photo-evolution of H2. (c) Schematic illustration of the possible mechanism of H2 generation by bimetallic UNH (Ce/Zr 1:1). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 14© 2022, the American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) PL spectra of Ag3PO4, AFC10, and AFC01. (b) EIS Nyquist plots of Ag3PO4, AFC10, and AFC01. (c) Photocatalytic decadence curves of MB over AFC-x mixtures under LED illumination (Co = 20 mgL−1; pH = 7.0; mV−1 = 0.5 g L−1, T = 25 °C). (d) Schematic representation of the photodegradation and desirable reaction pathways for the MIL-101-NH2/Ag3PO4 system under irradiation of visible-light. (Reproduce with permission from ref. 62© 2019, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Production of NH3 in differently prepared samples. (b) Production of hydrazine over all synthesized catalysts. (c) Schematic presentation of the mechanism of NH3 production and evolution of oxygen over formed CeO2/UNH (Ce) p–n heterojunction (rod@sheet). (Reproduced with permission from ref. 13© 2021, the American Chemical Society.)	 
	(4)
MOFs	Metal organic frameworks
IT-MOFs	Inner transition metal organic frameworks
SBUs	Secondary building units
PSM	Post synthetic modification
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
HOCO	Highest occupied crystal orbital
LUCO	Lowest unoccupied crystal orbital
FMO	Frontier molecular orbital
VB	Valence band
CB	Conduction band
LMCT	Ligand to metal charge transfer
MLCT	Metal to ligand charge transfer
Re-MOF	Rare earth metal organic framework
HSAB	Hard soft acid base
DBD	Dielectric barrier discharge
SAED	Selected-area electron diffraction
SHE	Standard hydrogen electrode
KS-DFT	Kohn–Sham density functional theory
TD-DFT	Time-dependent density functional theory
DOS	Total density of state
ESA	Excited state absorption
ET	Energy transfer
OTRs	Organic transformation reactions
PCPs	Porous coordination polymers
RT	Room temperature
PHER	Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction
POER	Photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction
HTS	High throughput synthesis
ML	Machine learning
NIR	Near infra-red
PL	Photoluminescence
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
UV	Ultra violate
UV-Vis DRS	UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
XRD	X-ray diffraction
PXRD	Powder X-ray diffraction
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy
ESR	Electron spin resonance
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
BET	Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
BJH	Barrett–Joyner–Halenda
PMS	Per-oxymonosulfate
TEMPO	2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy
DMPO	5,5-Dimethyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide
RPF	Rare-earth polymeric framework
RhB	Rhodamine B
MB	Methylene blue
TC	Tetracycline hydrochloride
OTC	Over the counter
MO	Methyl orange
HOQ	8-Hydroxyquinoline

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
