Inorganic thin-film combinatorial studies for rapidly optimising functional properties  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15178A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15178A
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 738-781Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInorganic thin-film combinatorial studies for rapidly optimising functional properties

        
          
            Andreas 
            Kafizas
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ivan P. 
            Parkin
          
          
        
      *
      Materials Chemistry Research Centre, Department of Chemistry, University College London, 20 Gordon Street, London, UK WC1H 0AJ. E-mail: i.p.parkin@ucl.ac.uk
Received 
      1st July 2011
    First published on 21st September 2011AbstractCombinatorial chemistry is now commonplace in the pharmaceutical industry and applied rigorously in the discovery of drugs. Within materials science, combinatorial methods have been widely applied in investigating thin-films and since its re-introduction in the mid 90's more than 20 new families of materials have been discovered. Yet, given the high diversity of states that can be produced in a single deposition, such methods are now being used more prominently to optimise functional properties of existing materials; having been applied in a variety of fields. In this review we will cover the key developments in bandgap, ferro/di-electric, fuel cell anode/ cathode, H2storage, hardness, Li battery electrodes, luminescence, transparent ferro-magnetic, photocatalytic, photovoltaic, shape-memory, transparent conducting oxide and thermo-electric materials optimisation. The critical review focuses on how functional-property relationships have been derived from combinatorial studies (217 references).
Andreas Kafizas
Andreas Kafizas is a finishing PhD student in Professor Ivan Parkin's group. He obtained his MSci in Chemistry with honours from University College London in 2007. During his PhD he held a demonstratorship position. He won the Ramsay medal for best graduating doctor of Chemistry in 2011. His research interests focus on studying the photocatalysis of titania based thin-films from a combinatorial approach.
Ivan P. Parkin
Ivan Parkin is a Professor of Inorganic and Materials Chemistry and Head of Department at University College London. He obtained his BSc and PhD from the Imperial College London and was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Indiana. During his career he has published more than 330 research papers and has made 8 contributions to books. His laboratory focuses on the preparation of inorganic thin-films and nanomaterials by innovative routes.
1. Introduction
Combinatorial methods are now widely used in many areas of science for discovering new materials with unique functions or optimising existing materials through alloying and doping.1–4 The use of combinatorial methods has taken hold most prominently in the pharmaceutical industry, where attempts to optimise the medicinal activity of new drugs has led to more than 100000 new compounds being synthesised and screened each year.5 Combinatorial methods have also been applied quite extensively in inorganic chemistry, chiefly for thin-film depositions.
Combinatorial methods were first demonstrated through the pioneering work of Boettcher et al. in 1955.6 It was a unique approach to rapidly identify the vast number of ternary and quaternary metallic phases not studied by traditional methods. By vaporising metal sources through a rotating mask, a thin-film of a continuously graded Ag–Sn–Pb system was formed. A detailed ternary phase diagram was compiled from this lone sample; demonstrating the simplicity of this approach. By the early 1970's, the concept of thin-film combinatorial methods reached the wider research community through the studies of ceramic and metal oxide films by Hanak et al.7,8 For the first time the functional properties of combinatorial films were being mapped and related to their composition and phase. However, the progress of this methodology was hampered by the speed in which samples could be analysed.
It was not until the mid 90's that the concept re-emerged, when technological advances in the precision of physical vapour deposition (PVD) processes and screening techniques made combinatorial methods more attractive. This was demonstrated by Xiang, Schultz et al. in 1995 through their combinatorial investigations on the superconducting properties of Y, Ba, Ca and Sr cuprates9 and the giant magneto-resistance of Lax(Ba, Sr, Ca)yCoOδ compounds.10 This was followed by Danielson et al. in 1997 with the combinatorial investigation of luminescent materials and discovery of a new red phosphor Y0.845Al0.070La0.060Eu0.025VO4.11 The following year Van Dover et al. discovered a new high-specific capacitor material Zr0.2Sn0.2Ti0.6O2 with applications in dynamic random-access memory.12
Since their modern re-introduction, several groups have applied combinatorial methods in an attempt to optimise the functional properties of a range of materials. The development of more rapid analysis techniques, capable of screening the physical and functional properties of combinatorial films, has increased the breadth of investigation. Combinatorial methods have been applied in bandgap,13–16 ferro/di-electric,12,17–23fuel cell anode/cathode,24–30 H2storage,31–34 hardness,35–38Li battery electrode,39–41 luminescence,11,42–52 ferro-magnetic,10,53–57 photocatalytic,58–66 photovoltaic,67–70 shape-memory,71–74 transparent conducting oxide75–80 (TCO), thermoelectric81–85 and transistor optimisation;86–90 where several of these studies heralded the discovery of new materials.
Automated robotic synthesis methods have been applied primarily in the organic field; systematically combining reagents to form extensive pharmaceutical drug libraries.91 However, this discrete sampling method has not taken root in the inorganic field of thin-film research; where PVD synthesis dominates. Lately, combinatorial studies have focussed on optimising a given functional property; where the performance of miniaturised digital electronic devices has received the most attention. As the automated weighing and mixing of powder/liquid components on the micrometer scale for electronic applications is an arduous task, robotic methods are less desirable. Nevertheless, robotic methods have been applied in combinatorial thin-film polymer studies;92,93 but their primary use in the inorganic field has been in the investigations of ceramic dots94–96 and hydrothermal powders.97,98
The few reviews on the topic of combinatorial thin-film research have focussed on high-throughput screening methods and discovery of new materials.1–4 However, this review shows the use of combinatorial thin-film methods for optimising functional properties; encompassing most if not all fields in which it has been applied. Furthermore, this review introduces the emerging use of combinatorial chemical vapour deposition (CVD) methods. This alternative to PVD has been applied in optimising high κ di-electric materials20,21 photocatalytic materials58–65 and the discovery of pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N.66 The review is divided into fifteen sections, concentrating on functional-property relationships derived from combinatorial methods and how these relate to a specific application field. In turn, bandgap tuning, di-electric, ferro-electric, H2storage, fuel cell anode/cathode, hardness, Li battery electrode, luminescence, transparent ferro-magnetic, photocatalytic, photovoltaic, transparent conducting oxide, shape-memory and thermo-electric materials are covered. The combinatorial technique is exceptionally flexible, enabling rapid optimisation of parameters in all of these key technological areas as well as the discovery of new phases.
2. Bandgap tuning
The position and height of the bandgap strongly dictate the function of a semiconductor material. The number of fields in which tailoring this energy might provide functional benefit is extensive. One example is in photocatalysts, where the potential energies of the active semiconductor's conduction and valence bands dictate the plausibility and speed in which the respective reduction and oxidation processes can occur. The band structures of semiconductors can be altered through doping; where subsequent orbital overlap can shift band positions. Although the band structure of a material can be predicted computationally, modelling an entire library of dopant levels is often time consuming. By synthetically introducing dopants through a combinatorial process, a large variation of states can be produced simultaneously. Any alterations in the host bandgap can simply be related to composition (dopant level) across the series; thus indicating how the bandgap may be tuned.
2.1. 
          Mg doped ZnO
Matsumoto et al. demonstrated how molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) could be applied in a combinatorial fashion to tune the bandgap of ZnO thin-films doped with Mg.16 Using a KrF laser, 10 molar% Mg-doped ZnO and pure ZnO targets were ablated through a series of masks to produce 9 discrete samples on sapphire (0001) substrates. The process was carried out under high vacuum (O2, 10−4 Pa) at 900 K producing single crystalline wurtzite phased thin-films. From Rutherford back-scattering measurements, the level of Mg incorporated ranged from ≈2–18 molar%. A systematic shortening along the c axis of the host wurtzite unit cell occurred with increased Mg doping; decreasing from 5.204 Å at ≈2 molar% doping to 5.184 Å at ≈18 molar%. The reverse trend was observed for bandgap energy; where an increase in energy from 3.29 to 3.67 eV was seen from ≈2–18 molar% doping.
Previously, only 4 molar% Mg doping of ZnO had been achieved by traditional grinding-heating methods. Given the nature of the MBE deposition, kinetically stable phases could form that were not feasible at thermodynamic equilibrium; thus increasing the solubility limit of the ZnO host under the conditions imposed. This study demonstrated how combinatorial methods may be used to tune the emission energy for the potential fabrication of ZnO-based laser diodes.99
2.2. 
          Sn doped Nb0.06Ti0.94O2
Through a combinatorial pulsed laser deposition (PLD), Chan et al. produced a series of discreet Nb0.06SnxTi0.94−xO2 thin-film materials spanning 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.9.13 Through KrF laser excitation, Nb0.06Ti0.94O2 and SnO2 targets were ejected as a plasma plume onto lithium aluminium strontium tantalum oxide (100) substrates under an O2 partial pressure (10−3 Pa). In sliding a masked plate across the plume, a discrete combinatorial library of Sn doped states was produced.
The combinatorial films with low levels of Sn insertion adopted the anatase titania phase; with preferred orientation growth in the (004) crystal plane. From 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3, the lattice strain imposed a linear increase in the a and c axes of the unit cell in accordance with Vegard's law.100 When the Sn dopant level extended beyond x = 0.3, SnO2 was observed; indicating the solubility limit of Sn doping had been surpassed. The level of SnO2 formation and deviation from a solid solution increased with Sn insertion. When x ≥ 0.9, only the cassiterite SnO2 phase was observed; indicating the formation of a solid solution, albeit composed within a SnO2 matrix. The solubility limit reached at x = 0.3 was far greater than what had previously been reported for Sn doped anatase under thermodynamic conditions (x = 0.075).101
Through Tauc plot102 extrapolations, the bandgap energy increased linearly with Sn insertion into the host Nb0.06SnxTi0.94−xO2 matrix; ranging from 3.39 eV at x = 0 to 3.51 eV at x = 0.3. This band alteration was related to the mixing of Ti 3d orbitals with extended Sn 5s orbitals, shifting the conduction band to higher energies.103 It was also found that increased Sn doping did not introduce any additional charge carriers (ne) within the Nb5+ doped system yet decreased their mobility (μ). This was attributed to the decrease in film crystallinity and increased grain-boundary scattering processes with increased doping.
2.3. In–Ga–N
Utilising a combinatorial metal-organic CVD process, a thin-film of InxGa1−xN was synthesised with a compositional gradient spanning the full range of alloys (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) by Kuykendall et al.14 This was the first time in which In had been introduced into an InxGa1−xN system above x = 0.2 without phase segregation. The films were made by combining a triple source of precursors from different locations onto sapphire substrates within a tube furnace (550 °C). The InCl3 and GaCl3 metal precursors were introduced top-down to the substrate at opposite ends, inducing the gradient in metal concentration from 0 ≤ x ≤ 1, and the nitrogen source (NH3) was introduced at the centre. The process induced the growth of nano-wires from the substrate's surface 0.5–2.0 μm in length and 10–250 nm in diameter from the GaN to InN rich sections respectively. A series of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images demonstrating the change in nano-wire morphology across the substrate is shown in Fig. 1(a).
 Fig. 1  The combinatorial metal-organic CVD deposition of InxGa1−xN nano-wires with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 from InCl3, GaCl3 and NH3. (a) Top-down SEM image of the nano-wires formed from the GaN rich section at the top to the InN rich section at the bottom with transitional Ga/In gradients in-between (b) the corresponding photo-luminescence colours and (c) the compositional relationship of In component to the bandgap energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14, copyright Nature publishing group 2007. 
Compared with epitaxial InGaN thin-films, the nano-wire morphology enhanced strain relaxation and allowed a higher indium mole fraction to be incorporated with little pseudomorphic layering or phase segregation. It was also suggested that the high growth rate and low temperature synthesis promoted the formation of this meta-stable product.104 Upon comparing the In/Ga composition against the a and c unit cell parameters of this wurtzite crystal system, a near linear Vegard's law dependence was observed; with the a and c lattice constants varying from 3.189–3.535 Å and 5.188–5.709 Å from the pure GaN to pure InN sides respectively.
The optical properties were also assessed, first by pumping a continuous wave of 325 nm radiation to induce photo-luminescence. A near continuum of colours from within the intermediary compositions was observed, shown in Fig. 1(b). These photo-luminescence energies, as well as optical absorption and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) could be related to the direct bandgap of the alloys. A plot of these band energies were thus related to the corresponding In mole fraction (Fig. 1(c)). A slightly bowed dependence was observed, with bandgap energies ranging from ≈1.1 eV at the In pure end to ≈3.4 eV at the Ga end. It is well accepted that the bandgap energy of pure wurtzite phased GaN is 3.43 eV, where a good match was observed in this study. However, the band energy for pure InN fell between the disputed range of values, 0.7–1.9 eV,105,106 where such disparities are due to the material's high dependence on the free-electron concentration. Interestingly, the commonly observed drop-off in the photo-luminescence efficiency of InGaN alloys produced by MOCVD was not observed and attributed to the unique properties of the nano-wire structures formed. This study demonstrated, with all other synthetic parameters being equal, that a smooth dependence of the bandgap energy and composition of InxGa1−xN exists over 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.
3. Di-electric optimisation
The most practical use of the di-electric function has been within capacitors for digital electronics. SiO2 has been the key material in gate di-electrics for more than 40 years, being used in logic devices such as the ubiquitous field-effect transistor. However, the silicon-based microelectronics industry is rapidly approaching a point where device fabrication can no longer be scaled down. For instance, when SiO2 is 1-2 nm thick, the leakage current becomes unacceptably large for practical application. The need for higher permittivity di-electrics to replace this material has led to an extensive search for new candidates.107
Progress has been made, where SiO2 based random-access memory (RAM) devices have already been replaced by more effective materials in dynamic random-access memory devices (DRAM).108 Nevertheless, several properties should be considered when attempting to replace SiO2 such as; (i) the permittivity, bandgap and barrier height (ii) thermodynamic stability (iii) interface quality (iv) morphology and (v) gate compatibility and reliability. Combinatorial methods have been applied in the search and optimisation of candidate materials. Several screening methods have been developed in an attempt to rapidly assess such libraries. One such high-throughput method for scrutinising the material's capacitance is the “field of merit” test where: field of merit = εr × εo × Ebr = C × Vbr/A(1)where εr represents the di-electric constant, A is the capacitor area, Ebr and Vbr represent the break-down fields and voltages respectively and C represents the capacitance. By assuming the di-electric constant is independent of film thickness (accurate for amorphous thin-film oxide) a field of merit that corresponds directly to the maximum charge per unit area that can be stored on a capacitor can be derived within seconds of analysis. Alternatively, the di-electric constant can be directly found with knowledge of the sample thickness and capacitance: C = εr × εo × A/film thickness(2)where both methods have been applied in combinatorial studies of high di-electric candidate materials.
3.1. Zr–Sn–Ti oxides
Van Dover et al. demonstrated the first example in which combinatorial methods could be used to not only discover new materials with high di-electric constants (εr) and breakdown strengths (Ebr), but also to optimise functional properties.12 In their search for materials with the appropriate qualities for what were “new-age” dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) devices, they screened over 30 different elemental combinations over the span of 3 months. Although it may seem like an arduous task to find a new material with specific functionalities, several logical constrictions were made to narrow down their search. For instance, they focused exclusively on oxide systems as they had showed the greatest potential for DRAM purpose; with amorphous Ta2O5−δ and polycrystalline Ba/Sr titanate materials showing the best figures of merit in the literature at the time.109 Metal oxides are also the most readily compatible materials within existing fabrication processes. In addition, they recognised that most known materials with high εr typically incorporate one or more early transition metals; constricting their search to include at least two within all ternary systems investigated.
Van Dover et al. also felt that the deposition method used should be transferable to existing industrial processes; employing magnetron co-sputtering for this task. Square silicon wafers coated with a 60 nm thick TiN top-layer were used as substrates. Up to three metallic targets could be independently sputtered off-axis, each positioned at a central edge to the square. In order to identify which systems possessed the functional qualities for DRAM devices, a tool capable of rapidly assessing a large number of positions was developed. The tool consisted of a Hg filled thin-capillary that could be positioned in light contact with the material. This capillary could be translated across the surface to form a capacitor; with up to 4000 positions assessed per system over a 7 × 7 cm wafer. Contact to the base electrode was made by simply soldering a wire to the TiN under-layer. The capacitance was then measured after applying a voltage and measuring the leaking current after 1 s. Each sample took just a few seconds to assess. This allowed a “field of merit” for each position analysed to be derived (eqn (1)).
From the extensive search of over 30 elemental combinations, a Zr–Sn–Ti oxide system appeared to show the most promising properties; with moderately high specific capacitance and low leakage observed in the Zr0.2Sn0.2Ti0.6O2 region. An alloy target of this discovered composition was made and sputtered to form a uniform thin-film. The oxygen partial pressures and deposition temperature were varied for several runs in aid of finding the optimal processing conditions (0.4 Pa, 50:50 O2:Ar, 200 °C). This optimised uniform Zr0.2Sn0.2Ti0.6O2 film was subsequently tested against the leading industry materials over a high specific stored charge regime; being the only material to meet the basic requirements of high-specific capacitance, scalable deposition, high-breakdown field and low leakage for DRAM applications. This study shows how combinatorial methods can be used in aid of rapidly discovering and optimising new functional materials.
3.2. Zr–Hf–Sn and Ti–Hf–Sn oxides
In order to eliminate the high leakage current in highly thin (1–2 nm) amorphous silica field effect transistors and maintain an equivalent capacitance, a thicker di-electric material with a proportionally greater εr constant (a-SiO2 = 3.9) is required. Continuing with the theme laid out by Van Dover et al., combinatorial Zr–Hf–Sn and Ti–Hf–Sn oxide systems were investigated by Gladfelter et al. in aid of finding such a material.20,21,110 It was well established that ZrO2, HfO2 and TiO2 materials show high di-electric constants; however Gladfelter et al. suggested that adding Sn into the mix would minimise crystallisation and form smoother films with fewer grain boundaries.
A cold-walled, low pressure CVD reactor was utilised for depositing these ternary oxide systems in a combinatorial fashion. Zr(NO3)4, Sn(NO3)4, Hf(NO3)4 and Ti(NO3)4 single sourced precursors were used for depositing the two systems. This was achieved by placing the three separate metal nitrate outlets in an equilateral triangle arrangement at a set distance from the silicon substrate. An inert N2carrier gas pushed the source vapours through each outlet over the heated substrate (400–500 °C, 500 Pa, O2). Placing the outlets close to the surface encouraged the spread of each precursor and the formation of an intimately mixed metal oxide film.
The chemical composition of each system was mapped using both X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and Rutherford back-scattering. A wafer holding a grid of 100 capacitors was used to simultaneously measure the capacitance-voltage (εr–eqn (2)) and current-voltage (leakage current). An example is shown in Fig. 2 for the Ti–Hf–Sn oxide system, where the relative compositions from weighted XPS measurements are shown in (a–c) and the corresponding calculated di-electric constants in (d). The variation in composition was quantified and a trend in decreasing metal content was observed with distance from the outlet source.
 Fig. 2  The combinatorial low pressure CVD deposition of a Ti–Hf–Sn oxide system from singled source precursors Sn(NO3)4, Hf(NO3)4 and Ti(NO3)4 (400–500 °C, 500 Pa, O2). Figures (a–c) show the weighted content of each metal source determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and (d) calculated di-electric constants from high-throughput capacitance measurements. Reproduced with permission from reference 110, copyright ACS publications 2002. 
The composition giving the greatest εr (≈30) in the Ti–Hf–Sn system corresponded to Ti0.76Hf0.10Sn0.14O2. Through the extensive number of sputter-deposited systems covered by Van Dover et al. in their search for DRAM materials, the analogous ternary Ti–Hf–Sn oxide system was also covered.111 However, given their protocol for measuring the “figure of merit” over the true di-electric constant; a direct comparison was not applicable. Nevertheless, the most prominent material, Hf0.2Sn0.05Ti0.75O2, was similarly rich in Ti. In the Zr–Hf–Sn system also investigated by Gladfelter et al. the highest εr (20.2) was observed in the Zr rich section and corresponded to a composition of Zr0.81Hf0.12Sn0.07O2. When comparing the two systems, a slightly stronger capacitance was seen within the Ti rich areas of the Ti–Hf–Sn oxide. Leakage currents in both systems ranged similarly over 10−3–10−8 A/ cm2; however as more than one charge transport mechanism can operate, the dependence of leakage current on film thickness could not be expressed as a single relationship. However, a rough correlation between increasing leakage current and increasing Sn concentration was observed.
3.3. 
          Zr doped Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1−xO3
Using the combinatorial approach, Liu et al. investigated the effect of Zr doping Ba/Sr titanates;22 previously identified as candidates for DRAM and tuneable microwave devices.109 It was hypothesised that Zr doping would alleviate the current leakage in these materials when substituting Ti, given the greater chemical stability of Zr4+ over Ti4+. By varying the Ba/Sr ratio within these titanates the ferro/ para-electric Curie transition temperature could be tailored for increased room temperature di-electric permittivity. Ba0.6Sr0.4TiO3 was chosen as the host material in this combinatorial study as it showed a good balance between capacitance and loss.112 Recently, BaTi1−xZrxO3 solid solutions have attracted attention because of their higher dielectric tunability.113 However, the effect of Zr doping in the co-alkaline earth metal system had received less attention.
With a combinatorial PLD method, a SrTiO3 (001) substrate with an ≈60 nm thick top-layer of a SrRuO3 electrode was coated with a continuous compositional spread of Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1−xZrxO3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) in the x direction. This was achieved by ablating Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1O3 and Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti0.7Zr0.3O3 targets with a KrF laser through a computer guided translating mask (10 Pa, O2, 600 °C). By synchronizing the mask's movements in the x direction with laser pulses, the 400 nm thick film was deposited with excellent compositional control; as demonstrated by the Zr composition map in Fig. 3(a). X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis in the x direction showed how the combinatorial film was mono-phasic and cubic perovskite structured; with preferred orientation growth in the (001) plane. Progressively leftward shifting peaks to lower angles of 2θ were observed with increased Zr doping due to lattice strain within the perovskite. By comparing the ratio of the lattice parameters in the a and c directions, it was found that that the unit cell was least distorted over the 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.2 doping regime; where the distortions originated from epitaxial stress. As the combinatorial Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1−xZrxO3 layer was composed of larger units than the underlying SrTiO3 substrate, a compressive stress was exerted upon the film causing misfit dislocations and mosaicity. This caused a tapering of protruding grains with triangular shapes; however, increased Zr doping inhibited their formation. The di-electric constant, leakage (loss tangent) and tunability were assessed for 20 positions across the combinatorial film, as shown in Fig. 3(b).
 Fig. 3  The combinatorial PLD of Zn doped Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1−xZrxO3 from 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3 using Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1O3 and Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti0.7Zr0.3O3 targets through a computer guided mask. (a) The Zr to Ti ratio from EDX analysis and (b) the Zr concentration dependence on the di-electric constant (εr), tunability (nr), and loss tangent (D). Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, copyright AIP journals 2010. 
A directly proportional relationship between di-electric constant and leakage current was seen for all positions. However, a non-linear trend between these functional properties and doping level was observed. The initial enhancements in the di-electric constants and sample tunabilities were due to a stress-induced increase in the Curie temperature. Over the 0.10 ≤ x ≤ 0.17 doping regime, little stress was imposed upon the system and a local minimum was observed. Increased doping yielded a maximum capacitance at around 0.22 ≤ x ≤ 0.24, which fell sharply with further doping. It would seem as if an optimum Zr doping level was found; however, it is clear that internal stresses and strains are also playing a fundamental role in the electronic function. These observations were in stark contrast to what is seen in the bulk, where a systematic decrease in the capacitance occurs upon Zr doping. In this study, a concerted effort was made to not only simply correlate the dopant composition to the film's functional properties, but also to understand the underlying physical principles as to why such phenomena occurred. Although the problem of implementing these titanates within silicon-based electronic devices was not addressed, a broad overview of the physical properties that contribute to electronic capacitance was comprehensively covered.
4. Ferro-electric optimisation
Ferro-electric materials possess spontaneous electric polarisations that can be reversed by an external electric field. The spontaneous polarization induces a hysteresis effect that can be used as a memory function in electric devices; where ferroelectric capacitor materials such as Pb–Zr titanates are used in ferro-electric RAM.114 The di-electric constant (εr) of such ferroelectric materials is tuneable and high in absolute value, especially near the Curie phase transition temperature (Tc). By symmetry considerations, ferro-electric materials show piezo-electric and pyro-electric behaviour. These combined properties make ferro-electric capacitors very useful in sensing applications. Much research into the field of new ferro-electric discovery and existing material optimisation through solid-solution doping has been in aid of improving upon such functionalities; where the thin-film combinatorial approach has also been applied.
4.1. Pb–Zr titanates
Pb–Zr titanates encompass the most important applied ferro-electric materials to date. The varying ratios of the solid solutions that can be formed between ferro-electric PbTiO3 and anti-ferro-electric PbZrO3 show diverging properties. For instance, compositions more weighted in Ti show better characteristics for digital memory devices. Compositions more equally weighted in Ti and Zr, close to the morphotropic phase boundary, show excellent properties for piezoelectric applications in atomic force microscopy (AFM) scanners and other sensor devices.115
Various researchers have studied the patterning of functional thin-films by ink-jet printing.116 However, Okamura et al. was the first to apply such a method in a combinatorial fashion in their study of Pb–Zr titanates.18 Although the behaviour of a comprehensive range of Pb–Zr titanates had been previously investigated through individual synthetic methods,117 the combinatorial printing method demonstrated the ease at which discrete libraries could be formed. In this study, a discrete library of seven PbZrxTi1−xO3 materials was formed over 0 ≤ x ≤ 1. The Zr/Ti ratio was varied by printing differing ratios of [Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4] and [Zr(OC4H9)4] precursors with a fixed amount of [Pb(OCOCH3)2]. The inks were printed onto silicon wafers 3-inches in diameter with an under Pt electrode layer and upper Ti adhesion layer. Films were then calcined at 650 °C for 30 minutes. The printer was capable of depositing circular dots as small as 120 μm in diameter; however the dots suffered from “coffee-ring stain” type spreading118 where the centres were up to 70 nm thick and the peripheries approximately 10 times thicker. When larger areas were printed over 1 × 1 cm squares, smooth films approximately 100 nm thick were produced.
X-ray fluorescence (XRF) confirmed the pre-mixed ratios of Pb, Zr and Ti in each deposited film. The changing phase symmetry across the combinatorial library was assessed using XRD. Although all films adopted a basic perovskite arrangement; large variations in the unit cell lattice parameters a, b, and c were observed with changing Ti/Zr ratio. Starting from pure PbZrO3, the orthorhombic phase was observed, as seen in Fig. 4. However, as the Ti ratio was systematically increased, symmetry transitions from orthorhombic to rhombohedral to tetragonal progressively occurred; incurring a profound effect on the film's ferro-electric properties.
 Fig. 4  The XRD derived unit cell lattice parameters and phase symmetry behaviour of PbZrxTi1−xO3 with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1; assessed from a discrete combinatorial library formed through the ink-jet printing of [Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4], [Zr(OC4H9)4] and [Pb(OCOCH3)2] dissolved in 2-methoxy ethanol, calcined at 650 °C for 30 minutes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18, copyright Institute of Pure and Applied Physics 2002. 
Using a robotic sol–gel method, Rende et al. deposited a discrete combinatorial library containing 50 Pb–Zr based titanates.119 In 17 of the samples, the ratio of Zr/Ti precursors were systematically varied to form an array of PbZrxTi1−xO3 materials, similar to Okamura et al.18 The remaining 33 samples consisted of 6 molar% doped Pb1.1Zr0.58Ti0.42O3, with a range of various elements inserted. The piezo-electronic properties of the thin-film library were screened using a novel AFM technique. Topographical images revealed dark and bright areas corresponding to high and low local vibration amplitudes; where samples doped with Ba, Ce, Co, Cu, Li, Sr, Na, K, La, Pr, Rb, Ag, Te, V(III), and V(V) retained their piezo-electricity. However, little was done to optimise this dopant level or even quantify the magnitude of the piezo-electric effect.
Gang et al. approached this area and showed that the functional properties of a comprehensive range of PbZrxTi1−xO3 materials, synthesised from a combinatorial approach, could be assessed. Using analogous materials to Okamura's combinatorial ink-jet study,18 two sets of 9 discrete samples of PbZrxTi1−xO3 of 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.9 were made by depositing 2-methoxy ethanol solution mixtures of [Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4], [Zr(OC4H9)] and [Pb(OCOCH3)2] onto silica substrates by spin-coating and firing at either 575 or 675 °C (10 mins, pure O2). This process was repeated several times to create a library of films ≈500 nm thick. Pt electrodes were subsequently sputtered onto the back-side of the films to create an array of capacitors for functional testing. XRD analysis showed similar trends in phase transition behaviour of the Pb–Zr titanates to Okamura et al.18 However, disparities in the preferred orientation behaviour were observed; with a strong tendency for preferred orientation in the (111) plane near the morphotropic phase boundary, a random orientation in the Zr rich side and preferred growth in the (100) direction on the Ti rich side.120 It was clear that the preferred orientation growth of Pb–Zr titanates was not only substrate mediated but also highly dependent on the composition and calcination temperature.
In this study, a thorough attempt to assess the functional properties was made. Not only was the di-electric constant calculated for each sample, but in addition to this, the polarizations (saturated [Ps] and remnant [Pr]), dissipation factors, leakage currents and coercive field strengths were also investigated. Analogous to bulk studies,117 maxima in the di-electric permittivities (εr ≈ 920) and polarizations (Ps = 50, Pr = 25 μC cm−2) occurred at the composition PbZr0.6Ti0.4O3. Leakage currents also levelled at around 5.0 × 10−7 mA cm−2 within the 0.4 ≤ x ≤ 0.8 regime of PbZrxTi1−xO3; demonstrating the double benefits of this optimal composition for capacitor applications in ferro-electric RAM. This study not only succeeded in introducing a simple way of forming discrete combinatorial libraries from chemical solutions but also demonstrated the power of combinatorial synthesis in finding the optimum physical characteristics for maximum functionality.
4.2. 
          Ce doped Bi4−xTi3O12 and Bi3.75LaxTi3O12
Alternative ferro-electric materials for RAM applications have also been studied, including Bi/La titanates.121 Such Bi layer-structured ferro-electrics have attracted attention because of their fatigue-free properties, in contrast to existing Pb–Zr titanates that show fatal endurance issues due to the inter-diffusion of Pb and Pt electrodes. Kim et al. studied the effect of Ce and La doping in such titanates.19 A combinatorial film with changes in the Ce concentration was synthesised through a magnetron sputtering PVD method. Three separate Bi2O3, TiO2, and CeO2 targets were sputtered through an automated shutter that moved back and forth over the (111) Pt/TiO2/SiO2/Si substrate. The motion of the shutter was synchronised with the plasma generation such that a thickness-gradient “wedge” and a compositional spread from Bi4−xCexTi3O12 over the 0 ≤ x ≤ 4 range was achieved in the horizontal axis. The deposition was conducted at 300 °C to promote efficient inter-mixing and elemental diffusion (Ar:O2 = 3:1, 0.5 Pa) until an approximately uniform 250 nm thick coating was achieved. Post-deposition, the continuous combinatorial film was annealed at 700 °C for an hour in an oxygenated atmosphere to achieve full crystallisation.
The films were subsequently analysed by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) composition-mapping and XRD phase-mapping methods. The compositional gradient in Ce content varied from 0 ≤ x ≤ 4 across the horizontal. XRD mapping demonstrated the heavy phase segregation that extended Ce doping caused, as shown in Fig. 5(a). When x ≤ 0.8 the homogenous Bi4Ti3O12 (BCT) perovskite phase was observed. When Ce doping exceeded this limit, a Bi2Ti2O7 phase was adopted. When x ≥ 2, another insertion limit was surpassed and a separate CeO2 phase formed. From this study, it was clear that the solubility limit of Ce within the perovskite was limited to x ≤ 0.8. The remnant polarisation within the solid-solution region was assessed with a maximum 2Pr = 13 μC cm−2 at x = 0.15 (Bi3.85Ce0.15Ti3O12) was observed. Although this was slightly lower than the literature value, the trend held true; where excess Ce doping beyond x = 0.15 yielded a systematic polarization decrease. This trend also correlated with the intensity of Raman Ti–O stretching modes.
 Fig. 5  A stack of XRD patterns taken across a continuous Bi4−xCexTi3O12 thin-film with 0 ≤ x ≤ 4 synthesised by the magnetron sputtering of Bi2O3, TiO2, and CeO2 targets through a computer guided moving shutter (Ar:O2 = 3:1, 0.5 Pa, 300 °C) and crystallised at 700 °C for 1 hour (O2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, copyright AIP Journals 2008. 
Extending on this work, Kim et al. made mixed Bi–La titanates doped with Ce.17 Given the Ce doping level in Bi4−xCexTi3O12 for optimum remnant polarisability was found to lie at x = 0.15 and Bi/La = 3.75/0.25 for the non-doped (Bi,La)4Ti3O12 system,122 the Bi3.75LaxCe0.25−xTi3O12 range was investigated (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25). A combinatorial liquid source misted CVD approach was utilised for this task. Both Bi–La titanate and Bi–Ce titanate solid precursors were dissolved and then transported after nebulisation by an Ar flow over a Si wafer substrate. The full combinatorial range of Bi3.75LaxCe0.25−xTi3O12 states were formed in the x direction by manoeuvring an x–y shutter to create a concentration gradient. The continuous combinatorial library was then thermally treated at 700 °C for an hour in a pure O2 atmosphere to induce full crystallisation.
Regardless of La content, all samples shared the Bi4Ti3O12 perovskite structure. The intensities of (00n) peaks arising from crystal growth in the unit cellc-axis did not show preferred orientation effects with varying La content. However, a trend in the intensity of the (117) plane was observed, maximising at x = 0.21 within the Bi3.75LaxCe0.25−xTi3O12 system (Fig. 6(a)).
 Fig. 6  (a) Normalised preferred orientation in the (117) crystal plane and (b) polarisability (μC cm−2) for varying La content over the 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25 regime for the Bi3.75LaxCe0.25−xTi3O12 continuous combinatorial system; synthesised through a liquid source misted CVD deposition of Bi–La and Bi–Ce titanates form solution onto silicon wafers and annealed at 700 °C (1 hr, O2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 17, copyright National Academy of Sciences 2007. 
Further La doping from this point for x > 0.21 led to an abrupt decrease in the preferred orientation in this plane. The maximum remnant polarisability of 2Pr = 35 μC cm−2 coincided with the maximum preferred orientation in the (117) crystal plane. Extending from the idea introduced by Rende et al.,119 the piezoelectricity was measured using AFM microscopy. This study determined the optimum La doping level of x = 0.21 in the Bi3.75LaxCe0.25−xTi3O12 (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25) and also introduced a novel high-throughput characterisation method where the relative ranking of 2Pr could be estimated solely on the basis of the piezo-electric deformation.
5. H2storage materials

        Mg-based alloys are promising candidates for H2storage because of their high capacity, low density, availability and low cost. The major technical impediment is that the alloys require heating to near 300 °C to hydride and the reaction kinetics are slow. Although there have been efforts to improve the hydrogen sorption characteristics of Mg alloys, only incremental improvements have been achieved to date.
Recently, the combinatorial thin-film approach has been applied in aid of solving this problem; where graduating thin-films of Mg-based alloys were deposited through sputtering processes.31–34 Thin-films typically experience film strain upon hydrogenation, where the subsequent lattice expansions are constrained to a fixed substrate body. However, this can be beneficial, where in the case of MgH2 thin-films, the enthalpy of hydrogenation is 14 kJ mol−1 less negative than that of the bulk.123 Moreover, thin-films easily facilitate the study of surface structure and the investigation of the catalytic mechanisms involved in H2 sorption.
5.1. Mg–Ni–Fe ternary and binary alloys
Using a combinatorial magnetron sputtering PVD method, Olk et al. deposited an array of discrete Mg–Ni–Fe ternary and binary compounds.31,32 Separated Mg, Ni and Fe metal targets were sputtered through a computer guided mask onto sapphire substrates (Ar, 2 × 10−6 Pa, 350 °C). The plume distribution, target-substrate geometry and mask-slot positioning were adjusted to produce a combinatorial library of alloys with stoichiometric diversity from one discrete pad to another; forming 16 unique Mg–Ni–Fe ternary, 32 Mg–Ni and 32 Mg–Fe binary states. Film thicknesses ranged from 250–375 nm with a good compositional spread from 0–50% Ni and 0–25% Fe.
Within this combinatorial study, Olk et al. introduced a novel solution towards the simultaneous evaluation of the hydriding/de-hydriding properties of a combinatorial library.31,32 As the sorption of H2 in inter-metallic alloys leads to a modified density of states and a rise in the Fermi level; the metal hydrides that form will show lower metallic character and an increase in their electrical resistance.124 Given metals generally display considerably lower emissivities than insulators, dramatic changes in the optical properties of many metal-hydride systems occur upon sorption.125 Since the electronic structure directly influence the optical properties, a lowering of the density of states reduces the carrier concentration and increases the optical emissivity (where 0 ≤ ε ≤ 1). By assessing changes in material emissivity (through temperature changes) the comparative level of hydrogen sorption and desorption can be determined. By utilising a GaAs IR detector array, Olk et al. were able to rapidly measure such emissivity changes upon absorption and desorption of H2, where changes as large as Δε = 0.34 were observed.31,32
By maintaining a H2 pressure of 3.17 bar, the temperature of the samples were incrementally increased whilst monitoring the emissivity in situ. At certain temperatures, particular samples appeared brighter/darker on camera than others as their emissivities changed with H2 desorption/absorption respectively. The temperature at which hydrogen adsorption occurred in the ternary Mg–Ni–Fe range was plotted as a function of Ni concentration, as seen in Fig. 7. This trend suggested a minimum at a Ni concentration of ≈2.8 at%, which contained very small levels of Fe (0.33–0.43 at%). Since the Fe concentration was low in the ternary optimum, it was intuitive to compare the Mg/Ni composition ratio within the binary system. Areas within the ternary regime, with similar Mg/Ni ratios but higher Fe incorporation also displayed significantly higher absorption temperatures. It was therefore concluded that an optimum kinetic root to H2 absorption occurs for alloys with the approximate composition Mg96.8Ni2.8Fe0.38.
 Fig. 7  The H2 absorption temperature at 3.17 bar H2 pressure for a variety of discrete thin-film samples within a Mg–Ni–Fe library; synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of separated Mg, Ni and Fe sources onto sapphire substrates (Ar, 2 × 10−6 Pa, 350 °C).). Reproduced with permission from ref. 32, copyright IOP Publishing 2005. 
5.2. Mg–Ni–Ti ternary and binary alloys
Although MgH2 should be an attractive system for H2storage in principle, as it can contain as much as 7.6 wt% H2, its large negative enthalpy of formation ΔHf = −74 kJ (mol H2)−1 means unfavourably high temperatures are required to desorb hydrogen at ambient pressures. Even though hydrogenation of mechanically milled meta-stable Mg–Ti alloys do not produce ternary hydrides unless pressures in the GPa range are applied,126 room temperature MgyTi1−y alloys can do so when in the thin-film form.127 These Mg–Ti thin-film alloys display remarkable hydrogen-absorption properties where a superior reversible storage capacity is optimised in the Mg0.8Ti0.2 alloy. Gremaud et al. demonstrated the attractiveness of the combinatorial approach to such thin-film H2storage materials by first depositing Mg–Ni–Ti ternary and binary combinatorial alloys through a sputter PVD deposition and then rapidly assessing the enthalpy of hydrogenation of a large number of positions simultaneously using a novel procedure termed “hydrogenography”.33,34
The continuous combinatorial spreads were synthesised by sputtering quartz and sapphire substrates with Mg, Ti and Ni metal targets (Ar, 10−7 Pa, 25 °C). In forming the Mg–Ti and Mg–Ni combinatorial spreads, the Mg and Ti/Ni targets faced each other in guns tilted off-axis. The Mg–Ni–Ti spread was formed by positioning these guns at 120°. The composition of the films was determined by Rutherford backscattering, where MgyTi1−y ranged over 0.60 ≤ y ≤ 0.89, MgyNi1−y ranged over 0.55 ≤ y ≤ 0.95 and MgyNizTi1−y−z ranged over 0.60 ≤ y ≤ 0.92 and 0.02 ≤ z ≤ 0.40.
Extending upon the high-throughput approach introduced by Olk et al.,31,32 Gremaud et al. demonstrated an alternative method to hydrogenation detection based on the same principle of optical change.33,34 The new method was based on the Beer-Lambert law, where changes in transmission can be related to H2 absorption/desorption. By utilising a 3 channel charged-coupled device (CCD) camera, the level of transmitted light could be continuously monitored as a function of hydrogen pressure. The transmittance plateaus were related to the temperature dependence of the H2 pressure, allowing the enthalpy of hydride formation to be calculated from Van't Hoff plots. Most interestingly, the limiting factor of positions that could be analysed was the number of pixels produced per image in the camera, meaning thousands of positions were capable of being simultaneously assessed.
Such an example is shown in the MgyTi1−y binary system in Fig. 8(a), where the changes in the log10(transmission) at 90 °C was plotted as a function of H2 pressure and atomic fraction y (0.60 ≤ y ≤ 0.89). For all compositions the optical transmission increased with pressure. However, three different compositional regimes were observed, where:
 Fig. 8  (a) changes in log10(transmission) at 90 °C as a function of H2 pressure and atomic fraction y in the MgyTi1−y binary alloy system and (b) variation in hydride formation enthalpy in the MgyNizTi1−y−z system from the Van't Hoff plots for each pixel of colour data; synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of separated Mg, Ni and Ti sources (Ar, 10−7 Pa, 25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34, copyright John Wiley & Sons Inc 2007. 
(i) (0.60 ≤ y ≤ 0.82) below 700 Pa a gradual increase in transmission occurs and at higher pressures a plateau develops, which widens with increasing Mg content.
(ii) (0.82 ≤ y ≤ 0.86) the sharp transition in the colour map corresponds to a well-developed plateau in the isotherms and is the most prominent concentration regime for H2storage.
(iii) (0.86 ≤ y ≤ 0.89) two plateaus are present in the isotherms where the short plateau at low pressure is attributed to the formation of a segregated rutile MgH2 phase and breaking of the alloy.
From Van't Hoff plots of the colour data, the enthalpy of hydride formation for this binary system was found to range from −55 to −65 kJ (mol H2)−1 and was unfavourable for low temperature H2 release. For the Mg-Ni binary system the enthalpy of hydride formation ranged similarly from −45 to −65 kJ (mol H2)−1. Although Mg–Ti alloys showed high H2storage capacity, a lower kinetic route to H2 release was required for such materials to be applied in mobile H2storage devices. However, through investigating the ternary Mg–Ni–Ti system, Gremaud et al. discerned such favourable materials through their high-throughput method of “hydrogenography”.33,34 The ternary enthalpy diagram of this MgyNizTi1−y−z system, where 0.60 ≤ y ≤ 0.92 and 0.02 ≤ z ≤ 0.40, is shown in Fig. 8(b). Of particular interest is the dark-blue region where the enthalpy corresponds to hydride formations that are significantly less negative than MgH2 (−74 kJ (mol H2)−1). Remarkably, a relatively small addition of Ti to Mg–Ni did not result in an intermediate enthalpy value between that of the Mg–Ti and Mg–Ni systems. In fact, this region corresponded to the alloy composition of approximately MgyNi0.3T0.7−y (0.55 < y < 0.65) where enthalpies of hydration around ΔH = −40 kJ (mol H2)−1 were observed. This region represented a discrete range of materials that were close to the ideal value of −39.2 kJ (mol H2)−1 for applications in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, wholly identified through combinatorial methods.
6. Anode/cathode fuel cell optimisation
The polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) technology is considered a promising alternative energy conversion device for stationary, portable, and automotive applications. However, given the difficulty in portably storing H2fuel, it has been suggested that alternative anodic fuels such as methanol should serve to replace it. Nevertheless, such direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) require alternative anodic catalysts to PEMFC as the CO that is generated during the reaction that poisons and de-activates the Pt catalyst that is used.128
Recent studies have shown that alloying Pt with lower levels of Ru suppresses such a de-activation at the anode and is the most encouraging replacement material to date. Despite such progress, binary Pt–Ru alloys suffer from active surface blockage by preferential absorption of CO. Somewhat sluggish electrochemical kinetics are also seen at the cathode with significant voltage losses. Many binary alloys based on Pt have been investigated to find a more effective cathode catalyst, with Cr, Mn, Fe, Co and Ni alloys having been the most commonly studied.129,130 Several groups have tackled the issues affecting anode and cathode catalysts through a combinatorial approach and have rapidly identified cheaper, durable and more efficient candidates that merit more thorough testing in a true fuel cell environment.24–30
6.1. Anodic Pt–Ru–M (M = Co, Ni, W, WC) materials
Using a combinatorial PVD sputtering method, Strasser et al. deposited 64 discrete ternary and quaternary Pt–Ru–M (M = Co, Ni, W) combinatorial samples onto pre-wired Ti substrates.25 Composition control was achieved by guiding a lithographic mask across the surface. The deposition conditions were chosen such that good inter-atomic mixing to the thermodynamic equilibrium alloy occurred. XRD studies confirmed such uniform alloying and surface Auger spectroscopy showed that the surface compositions were close to the bulk.
The alloys were subsequently tested for their activity as anodes in a DMFC system in hope of deducing a more resistant material to CO surface poisoning than Pt–Ru binary alloys alone. The 64 samples were first electrochemically pre-treated by repeat voltammetry cycling between 0 and 0.7 V to a reference hydrogen electrode (RHE) in 0.5 M H2SO4. The pre-treatment was stopped as soon as a time-stable voltammogram was obtained; however, some alloy compositions continued to alter even after extended treatment due to corrosive degradation. The discrete array of catalysts was evaluated with respect to its methanol oxidation activity in a 1 M methanol in 0.5 M H2SO4 at ambient pressure and temperature. The Pt–Ru binary alloys demonstrated strong increases in catalytic activity compared with Pt alone; except at high Ru content (≥ 80%). Interestingly, the W containing alloys showed the lowest activities with some samples showing no activity at all. Given these W containing samples showed instability during pre-treatment it was suggested that strong surface corrosion occurred due to poor acid stability.
In the case of Co-rich ternary Pt–Ru–Co alloys however, very high activities were observed. This activity maximised at Pt0.2Ru0.2Co0.6 and decreased systematically with decreasing Co content to Pt0.5Ru0.5, as seen in Fig. 9. The activities were calculated by dividing the absolute activity of each catalyst by its exposed surface area (H2 absorption integral) and are on a logarithmic scale. Of particular note, the surface areas of the Co and/or Ni loaded alloys did not deviate much from a flat surface yet yielded the most significant activity increases to the oxidation of methanol. Within the Pt–Ru–Co–Ni compositional space, ternary Pt–Ru–Co catalysts outperformed the binary Pt–Ru standards. This was followed by ternary Pt–Ru–Ni and quaternary Pt–Ru–Co–Ni catalysts almost equally. The Co heavy optimal composition Pt0.2Ru0.2Co0.6 showed almost 8 times greater activity than any Pt–Ru binary catalyst and more than 35 times greater activity compared with pure Pt; demonstrating potential for DMFC anodic catalyst improvement at a significant cost reduction.
 Fig. 9  Summary of the anodic catalytic oxidation of 1 M CH3OH in 0.5 M H2SO4 activity trends for the most active samples in the combinatorial study normalised to the activity of pure Pt; where the discrete library of 64 samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ru, W, Co and Ni metal sources through a lithographic mask onto a pre-wired grid of Ti substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, copyright ACS Publications 2003. 
Cooper et al. analogously investigated the activity of Pt–Ru–W and Pt–Ru–Co ternary alloy systems as anode catalysts for DMFC through a combinatorial approach.24 Using a similar set-up to Strasser et al.,25 where a network of electrical traces were connected to contact pads (TiN coated Si), combinatorial PVD sputtering through shadow masks was employed to create 49 unique ternary and 14 unique binary compositions for both systems. The discrete libraries were annealed at 900 °C to induce atomic inter-diffusion at thermodynamic equilibrium (Ar, 10−4 Pa). Auger spectroscopy was used to determine the composition of each discrete sample and showed that no inter-diffusion took place at the contact pads. XRD diffraction mapping of samples showed single phase face-centred cubic (FCC) structures. Peaks relating to the alloy samples showed preferred orientation solely in the (111) direction, an example of which is shown in Fig. 10 for the binary Pt–Co and Ru–Co regimes. Ignoring the TiN substrate peaks, a systematic shifting of the (111) alloy diffraction peak was observed upon transition from pure Pt/Ru to pure Co (40.0°/41.7°–44.2°); obeying Vegard's law of alloying.100 The colour map in the figure amalgamates the 2θ values from the (111) peak for all alloys formed over the ternary Pt–Ru–Co regime.
 Fig. 10  
XRD stacks for the Pt/Ru–Co binary systems in addition to a 2θ° colour map for the shift in (111) peak with alloying; where the discrete library of 63 samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ru, and Co metal sources through a shadow mask onto a pre-wired grid of Ti–N coated Si substrates (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 900 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, copyright Elsevier 2006. 
Using a specially designed electro-chemical cell that could assess up to 100 discrete samples simultaneously, the catalytic activity to the oxidation of methanol (0.5 M) was rapidly evaluated. The samples were tested at room temperature, 40 °C and 60 °C after pre-treatment with H2SO4 (0.5 M). The potentials where the methanol oxidation reaction began and the current density at the peak were used to compare the activity of each composition. It should be noted however that these quantities were characteristic of short term behaviour and avoided complex fuel cell catalyst issues such as particle size, distribution, loading and exposed active surface area.
For the Pt–Ru binary alloys, an optimum composition of Pt90Ru10 was observed. Although initially large activities were seen within the W incorporated ternary Pt–Ru–W system, heavy surface corrosion took place at the higher test temperatures and activities fell sharply. Alloys that contained a greater fraction of W corroded more strongly, where some samples were completely stripped from their test pads. Nevertheless, the most active W alloy consisted of Pt25Ru0W75 and was 3 times more active than any binary Pt–Ru standard. It was not confirmed whether the partial corrosion of this compound had increased the surface roughness that led to the greater activity.25 Over the Pt–Ru–Co system, much larger increases in catalytic activity were observed, where a 20 times greater response than any binary Pt–Ru alloy was seen for the Pt12Ru50Co38 composition. Trends in the activities are shown diagrammatically using compositional-activity maps for the Pt–Ru–W and Pt–Ru–Co systems in Fig. 11. The activity-maps shown display the voltage potential (compared to a standard calomel electrode (SCE)) for the oxidation of methanol to occur; where some of the most active positions were up to 0.15 V lower than that of Pt. By assessing the compositional trends, the most active ternary catalysts were identified for the oxidation of methanol.
 Fig. 11  Compositional-activity maps for the (a) Pt–Ru–W and (b) Pt–Ru–Co systems for the electro-catalytic oxidation of methanol; where the discrete library of 63 samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ru, and W/Co metal sources through a shadow mask onto a pre-wired grid of Ti–N coated Si substrates (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 900 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, copyright Elsevier 2006. 
Using a novel combinatorial approach, Luet al. utilised scanning electrochemical spectroscopy to simultaneously assess the H2catalytic oxidation over a continuous combinatorial library.26 By PVD sputtering Pt, Ru and WC/Co targets from a single point through a shadow mask with varied distance to a Si substrate, a continuous film was formed. The matching of surface/bulk composition through Auger/ energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy respectively demonstrated good atomic mixing during deposition without surface segregation.
Using a Au microelectrode the feedback mode of the electrochemical microscope was set to the H2oxidation reaction. The electrolyte consisting of 0.01M H2SO4: 0.1 M Na2SO4 was then introduced into the test cell. The tip of the microscope was then position at a fixed distance to the sample surface and a bias voltage was applied. This induced the diffusion-limited reduction of protons to generate H2. If the sample surface was electrochemically active, the tip-generated H2 would diffuse to this surface and be re-oxidised. This cycle induced an additional tip current, where the magnitude was entirely dependent on the activity of the catalyst. In order to model a DMFC system, the surface was first loaded with a monolayer of CO and tested.
As expected, alloying Pt with Ru was shown to increase the reactivity to H2oxidation in both a CO surface “poisoned” and clear environment. Adding WC within a ternary Pt–Ru–WC regime showed regions of Pt–WC enhanced activities as well; however, a superior tolerance to pre-CO surface poisoning was seen at an optimum composition of Pt25±10Ru5±5(WC)70±5. Although alloying Pt or Pt–Ru binaries with WC was beneficial to the activity of the catalyst, its stability was a concern. Similar to the combinatorial studies of Strasser et al.25 and Cooper et al.,24 the electrolyte solution corroded the W containing alloys. Additionally, Luet al. investigated the Pt–Ru–Co ternary system,26 that had shown great beneficence in both previous combinatorial studies.24,25 An optimum composition with significantly enhanced H2oxidation activity and CO tolerance was observed at the position corresponding to Pt25±20Ru15±15Co60±15. However, adverse to the previous combinatorial studies of this system, a stability issue of the Co containing catalyst was highlighted. Nevertheless, the scanning electro-chemical approach demonstrated the potential to rapidly investigate a range of phase space, and seemed particularly useful for compositionally graded systems.
The Pt–Ru–M alloys investigated over these three individual combinatorial studies were not synthesised in the same way, making comparisons difficult. Although each study utilised magnetron sputtering to deposit their thin-film alloy samples, the combinatorial libraries were annealed at different temperatures and evaluated in different ways. For instance, Cooper et al. paid special attention to the phase and preferred growth behaviour of his tested alloys,24 whereas such focus was lacking in the other two studies.25,26 Additionally, in Strasser's study, the true available reactive catalyst surface area was evaluated and accounted for in their activity calculations,25 and elsewhere neglected. These differences aside, there was a consensus in that the prominent catalytic enhancement in alloying Pt–Ru with Co where the best compositions were observed at Pt25±20Ru15±15Co60±15,26 Pt0.2Ru0.2Co0.625 and Pt12Ru50Co38.24
6.2. Cathodic Pt–Co–M (M = Ti, Cu, Cr) materials
Using a similar approach to their combinatorial assessment of Pt–Ru–M (M = Co, W) anode catalysts, Cooper et al. investigated the Pt–Co–M (M = Ti, Cu, Cr) system for effectiveness as cathode catalysts in reducing O2.28 Pre-wired Si substrates were PVD sputter-coated through a mask to form a discrete combinatorial library of each system; with 49 ternary and 14 binary compositions. The samples were annealed at 900 °C inducing the formation of single-phased solid solutions with the FCC Pt structure. Each discrete library member was tested for its catalytic activity to the reduction of O2 using the same high-throughput combinatorial apparatus described earlier.24 Pure O2 was first introduced into the aqueous acidic system until saturated. When a stable current was achieved, the potential was swept from −0.3 to 1.1 V-SCE. The potential in which the O2reduction occurred ranged from ≈0.4 to 0.7 V-SCE, depending on the sample. The performance of each catalyst was ranked based on the potential defined by the onset of the reduction reaction. In order to facilitate a fair comparison, every library was tested against a Pt standard. Unique to other combinatorial investigations, Cooper et al. tried to assess the varying degrees of corrosion damage that can occur during catalytic testing using a quick and simple method.
By ranking the damage to each pad after catalysis testing from 0–5 (completely vanished–no change) using photographs before and after testing, the trends in stability were screened. For instance, through the Pt–Co–M (M = Ti, Cu, Cr) ternary system, samples more heavily laden with Co were completely corroded. However, within Pt–Co–Cr, the high Co content region was significantly stabilised relative to other systems.
The average onset potential for the O2reduction reaction of pure Pt was 0.568 ± 0.008 V-SCE and agreed well with the literature;131,132 validating the high-throughput test. When investigating the binary Pt–Ru system alone, renowned for its anodic activity for H2oxidation rather than O2reduction, a steady worsening in catalytic performance was observed with Ru content. This is shown in Fig. 12(a), where from Pt90Ru10 down to Pt40Ru60 the onset potential remained fairly consistent at 0.54 V-SCE but from Pt38Ru62 a sharp drop was observed until finally settling at 0.46 V-SCE for pure Ru.
 Fig. 12  The onset potential required for the catalytic reduction of O2 tested for a range of (a) binary Pt–Ru and (b) ternary Pt–Co–Cr discrete catalysts produced by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of metal targets (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 900 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, copyright Elsevier 2007. 
Pt–Co and Pt–Ti alloys have been recognised as better O2reduction catalysts than pure Pt alone;133,134 thus the Pt–Co–Ti ternary system was investigated by Cooper et al.28 It was observed that the addition of Ti to Pt had little effect on the catalytic enhancement over the binary regime, whereas the addition of Co showed notable improvements. The activity trend across the Pt–Co binary regime was “volcano-like,” peaking with near equivalent ratios of Pt43Co57 and an onset potential of 0.58 V-SCE. The majority of ternary Pt–Co–Ti compositions failed to show a strong response. The corrosion resistance of the majority of compositions was also very poor, with only binary Pt–Ti and Pt–Co compositions of high Pt content unaffected.
Some success had previously been seen through alloying Pt with Cu.135 This encouraged Cooper et al. to explore the Pt–Co–Cu ternary system with their rapid combinatorial approach.28 Initial catalytic activities were promising, with a band of low Pt compositions (Pt20Co20Cu60–Pt20Co60Cu20) showing onset potentials 80 mV higher than that of the pure Pt. Unfortunately this improved performance was not sustained, as samples with less than 50% Pt were either completely corroded or oxidised.
Lastly, Cooper et al. investigated the Pt–Co–Cr ternary system as Pt–Cr binary alloys also showed promising catalytic O2reduction activities.136 The strongest response was initially observed for the Pt20Co60Cr20 ternary catalyst showing an onset potential of 0.61 V-SCE, 1.1 V higher than Pt alone. This performance was not maintained, as the activity and others of similar composition were highly susceptible to corrosion. Although these samples deteriorated, other more robust compositions showed enhanced activity compared with Pt. In fact, the Pt28Co36Cr36 became more active over the test period, achieving the maximum onset potential of 0.67 V-SCE as displayed in Fig. 12(b). This strong performance was mirrored by nearby compositions of Pt:Co:Cr with approximately 1:1:1 ratios, which all outperformed the Pt standard. By rapidly screening candidate materials highlighted in the literature as active O2reduction catalysts, Cooper et al. were able to identify ternary Pt–Co–Cr materials that are potentially more active than the Pt standard currently used in fuel cell technologies.
6.3. Cathodic Pt–Ni–Zr ternary alloys
Pt–Ni alloys have been shown to outperform pure Pt for the catalytic oxidation of O2 in a variety of test environments.137 However, it is commonly found that the catalyst surface is leached almost entirely of its Ni after testing due to corrosion from the acidic electrolyte. Most groups have thus related the improved activity to the increased exposure of the active Pt surface. Nevertheless, marked improvements in the corrosion resistance are observed when combined in an alloy with Zr.138 Whitacre et al. proposed that adding Zr to a Pt–Ni alloy may result in a more corrosion stable alloy with enhanced catalytic properties.27 Using a combinatorial PVD magnetron sputtering method (Ar, 3 Pa, 23 °C) 18 discrete Pt–Ni–Zr samples were deposited on Au coated electrodes. Metallic Pt, Ni, Zr and Ni/Zr (70/30) alloys were chosen as sputter targets from which the discrete library was formed. The targets were angled so that a compositional gradient in the Pt, Ni and Zr could be achieved. The deposition time was limited so that films less than 10 nm in thickness were formed so that unfavourable segregation effects might not occur. Additionally, the procedure was conducted at room temperature to mitigate thermally motivated segregation effects; forming crystalline FCC solid solutions at kinetic equilibrium that obeyed Vegard's law.100 The unit cell lattice parameter a varied significantly through the compositional range from 3.67–3.87 Å and most strongly correlated with the Pt/Ni atomic ratio. Average grain size calculations from Scherrer peak broadening139 showed that the crystallites were consistently 50–55 nm wide and EDX studies showed the Pt content to range from 36–76 at%, the Ni content from 63–22 at% and the Zr content from 1.0–11 at%.
The catalytic performances of these 18 alloys were tested simultaneously in 1 M H2SO4 solutions saturated in O2 (23 °C) to produce Tafel curves (Fig. 13).140 It was generally observed that areas with greater than 10% mole fractions of Zr content had significantly lower Tafel currents and lower catalytic activities. The Pt59Ni39Zr2 and Pt52Ni47Zr2 samples offered the highest currents from the 18 samples tested. The increased potential from 0.6–0.8 V-SHE for most of the Pt–Ni–Zr alloys were substantially higher than pure Pt alone; yet the exposed catalyst surface areas were not determined and factored into these calculations.
Although the addition of Zr had little effect on the lattice, its presence reduced the functional ability of the alloy. It was purported by Whitacre et al. that the additional corrosion resistance that resulted from Zr doping was the primary cause of the decrease in activity and he related this to previous reports where it had been stipulated that the increased activity of Pt–Ni binary alloys was primarily due to a surface area increase due to Ni leaching in acidic media.137 This was further clarified through X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), where substantial decreases in Ni levels were observed after acidic treatment. Without the surface area of the catalysts characterised and accounted for in functional catalytic testing, it could not be concluded if Ni leaching alone or possibly some synergistic effect was the reason for the observed enhancements in Pt59Ni39Zr2 and Pt52Ni47Zr2.
6.4. Cathodic Fe–C–N ternary and binary alloys
Where research has focussed on binary/ternary systems involving Pt, alternative systems that seek to avoid using the costly noble metal entirely have been suggested. For instance, Fe–C–N based O2reduction catalysts have shown some promise. Although their cathodic rates of catalysis in H2/O2fuel cells are somewhat lower than the Pt standard material, they are less poisoned by CO species in direct methanol systems.141 Independent of how Fe–C–N alloys are produced, it has been duly noted that the observed catalytic activity is strongly correlated to the level of surface N incorporated into the material. However, the method of preparation influences the degree of N retention. Harsh methods, such as prolonged heat treatment under NH3 are commonly adopted to increase the N content and catalysis.142 Nevertheless, the synthesis of Fe–C–N is one area where magnetron sputtering has been shown to have a distinct advantage; where higher levels of N can be incorporated into the films by simply adjusting the N2/Ar plasma ratio.143
Utilising a combinatorial magnetron sputtering process, Fe–C–N libraries were produced and their O2catalytic reduction properties assessed by Easton et al.29 Not only was the ternary system investigated, but also the Fe1−xCx and C1−xNx binary systems as well. By sputtering C (graphite) and Fe targets through computer guided screens within an adjusted N2/Ar = 40/60 atmosphere (0.16 Pa, 23 °C) a discrete combinatorial library of the FexC1−x−yNy ternary (where 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.06 and 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5) and C1−xNx binary (where 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.15) systems were formed. A discrete library of the Fe1−xCx binary (where 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.14) was produced under the same conditions described above with the exception of the atmosphere being entirely composed of Ar. The alloys were deposited onto a variety of substrate media including Al, Si, C and SiO2 (quartz). The discrete libraries were then annealed over 800–1000 °C under Ar in order to assess the effect of calcination temperature on the physical and functional properties.
The catalytic activity to the reduction of O2 was tested in a 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte solution that was saturated with O2 gas. Upon stabilisation, the electrolyte was saturated and the catalytic activities measured. Initially the Fe1−xCx (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.14) binary samples were tested. As Easton et al. had predicted, the O2reduction activity was very low given the numerous reports pertaining to the requirement of N incorporation for catalytic activation.142 Much greater catalytic activities were observed upon testing the C1−xNx (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.15) binary samples, where the highest onset potential of 0.7 V-SHE was achieved for a C0.883N0.117 sample annealed at 1000 °C for 2 minutes. However, samples that were annealed for extended lengths of time with similar N composition had far lower rates of catalysis. This was related to the nature of N insertion into the C–N alloy framework and was investigated through XPS studies. Four types of N bonding environments were observed where increased annealing time induced: (i) a complete loss of nitrile-type bonding, (ii) more proportionate levels of pyrollic-type and pyridinic-type bonding and (iii) the formation of small levels of graphene-type bonding coupled by a loss of surface N–O groups. The increased activity of the C0.883N0.117 sample was related to its greater level of pyridinic-type N bonding. The catalytic O2reduction reaction for a whole range of FexC1−x−yNy (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.06 and 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5) ternary samples was investigated (Fig. 14). For samples annealed at 800 °C, the catalytic O2reduction activity increased with Fe content. However, such a trend was not observed for samples at 900 °C and the reverse trend was observed for samples annealed at 1000 °C. The most catalytically active samples were within the 800 °C series for samples Fe3.2C89.7N7.1 and Fe5.1C89.0N5.9 and were comparable to the most active Fe-based catalysts prepared by traditional methods in the literature to date.144 This was attributed to the higher N content that was lost upon annealing to 1000 °C. The chemical nature of the N within the Fe–C–N system was not as diverse as in the binary C–N system; where a proportionally equivalent ratio of pyridinic-type and pyrollic-type N bonding was seen across the board. A problematic production of H2O2 increased with Fe content and annealing temperature; however, the most active samples produced the lowest levels of peroxide. In order to quantify the corrosion stability of the ternary Fe–C–N alloys, libraries deposited on quartz were analysed by wavelength dispersive X-rays before and after a seven day immersion in 0.5 M H2SO4 (23 °C). The amount of Fe that corroded increased with annealing temperature and was attributed to the higher levels of segregated Fe3C. For the most active samples formed at 800 °C, up to 3 at% Fe could be retained and showed promising corrosion stable qualities in the most active Fe3.2C89.7N7.1 composition. A similar combinatorial study followed, where Garsuch et al. investigated the effect of B doping within the ternary Fe–C–N alloy system.30 Using a similar set-up to Easton et al.,29 combinatorial PVD sputtering was employed to form an array of discrete samples. Although B doping induced a much higher capacity for N incorporation, where higher levels of N doping have generally coincided with increased catalytic activity, it was found that increased co-doping with B was highly detrimental to catalysis.
 Fig. 13  Tafel curves showing the voltage onset region measured from the catalytic oxidation of a saturated O2 1 M H2SO4 solution, where the discrete library of 18 Pt–Ni–Zr samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ni, Zr and Ni/Zr targets onto pre-wired Au coated electrodes (Ar, 3 Pa, 23 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, copyright Elsevier 2008. 
 Fig. 14  Current densities (mA cm−2) for the catalytic reduction of O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature of several Fe–C–N samples annealed at either 800, 900 or1000 °C; formed by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Fe and C in a 40/60 N2/Ar environment (0.16 Pa, 23 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2008. 
7. Hardness optimisation
Competitiveness and innovation in surface engineering has created an increasing demand for the development of novel wear-resistant, tough and chemically stable multi-functional thin-film coatings; such as TiN coatings for added durability in tool-cutting devices.145 There are also a growing number of industrial applications for micro and nano electro-mechanical systems that require new, high-performance materials with an extended range of properties on the small scale.146 As such, there is a considerable research effort in finding materials able to withstand relatively high temperatures whilst maintaining exceptional mechanical properties. One such commercial product was developed by TDK for coating blu-ray discs; based upon a highly transparent polymer that can resist heavy scratching from sharp tools.147
Nominally, the hardness of a material is assessed by how much pressure it can take per unit area in a particular direction. In order to assess the hardness of a thin-film, simple bulk-scale methods such as the Vickers hardness148 have been adapted for the micro-scale. This method relies on a diamond shaped pyramid indenter that is pressed against the surface with a specified load. The area of indentation that remains after pressing can be measured and the material hardness derived in accordance to: (3)where d is the average length of the diagonal left by the indenter. However, the convention is to represent the hardness in HVx units (kg mm−2) where the x subscript term represents the mass of the load used in kg. The indentation area typically covers just a few μm2, so samples in the micrometer thickness range can be tested. Most importantly, this method can be applied across a compositionally graded thin-film system or over a discrete library of samples relatively quickly, making it compatible with combinatorial studies.
7.1. Ni–Fe–Cr
The Ni–Fe–Cr system encompasses a range of commercially exploited alloys such as stainless steels. Although this system had been investigated extensively in the bulk, the thin-film system was little studied. Given the possibility of non-equilibrium phase formation and the variety of mechanical properties that ensue, Rar et al. utilised two combinatorial PVD methods to investigate an array of compositionally graded Ni–Fe–Cr alloys.38 Through a combinatorial electron beam vapour deposition, Ni–Fe–Cr alloys that covered the entire binary and ternary phase space were formed over a single thin-film (air, 10−3 Pa). By using a sliding shutter and a sample rotation stage, layers of Cr, Fe and Ni were sequentially deposited on a sapphire substrate to create a continuous compositional gradient. At the end of the deposition, the layers were inter-diffused by annealing at 875 °C, forming an ≈1.7 μm evenly thick film at thermodynamic equilibrium.
Through high-throughput synchrotron XRD studies, a ternary phase diagram was constructed. The measured phase diagram was is in excellent agreement with the theoretical prediction, as shown in Fig. 15. In order to assess the material's elastic modulus and hardness, nano-indentation experiments were performed systematically across the continuous film. However, some problems arose due to (i) substrate influence and (ii) noise due to surface roughness. Nevertheless, some observed hardness trends matched previous bulk experiments. For instance, when moving from the σ-phase into the adjacent α-phase, the contact stiffness decreased from 2.5 × 105 to 1.6 × 105Nm−1. Given the changes in modulus were negligible, this corresponded to a 2.5 factor increase in hardness and agreed with bulk observations. Rar et al. also deposited compositionally graded Ni–Fe–Cr samples through a magnetron sputter deposition.38 By circularly angling Ni, Fe and Cr sources at 120° to each other, Si wafers were coated (0.1 Pa, 100 °C) and annealed at a range of temperatures; 200, 400, 600 and 800 °C (0.1 Pa, 2 hours). However, each continuously graded sample only contained compositional spreads pertaining to 30% of the possible ternary states. The phase diagram of each composition was mapped in accordance with its composition. This yielding a non-equilibrium phase in the Ni–Fe–Cr/ 1:1:1 region composed of the α-Mn structure at low temperatures (200–400 °C). On movement to 800 °C, the region examined demonstrated thermodynamically equilibrated phases; and was phase analogous to that of the electron beam deposited sample, displayed in Fig. 15(b).
 Fig. 15  (a) the calculated and (b) the measured ternary phase diagram for the Ni–Fe–Cr system from a single compositionally graded thin-film that covered all binary/ternary phase space achieved through an electron beam evaporation PVD deposition on sapphire (air, 10−3 Pa, annealed at 875 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, copyright IOP Publishing 2005. 
7.2. Cr–Al–N oxides
Cr–Al–N oxides were little explored until investigated through a combinatorial thin-film approach by Stuber et al.37 It was hypothesised that such materials might display the high hardness and superior performance of similar materials such as Ti–Al–N oxides used in tool-coatings and dry drilling operations.149 Using a magnetron sputtering PVD technique, Stuber et al. deposited 6 discrete combinatorial samples of various composition onto Si wafers at 200 °C.37 Two targets were used in the deposition; a CrN:AlN 70:30 pressed powder mixture and Al2O3. The deposition was conducted in either pure Ar or a 50:50 mix of Ar & N2 with a constant pressure of 0.6 Pa, creating two unique libraries.

EDX studies of samples deposited in pure Ar showed how the O content varied from 13.5–27.7 at% and the Cr:Al ratio varied from 1.85–0.95 from the samples located nearest the Cr and Al rich targets respectively. XRD analysis showed weak peaks corresponding to the (200) FCC CrN arrangement at ≈43° across the library; with crystallites too amorphous to be effectively analysed.139 By investigating the spacing and width of diffraction rings observed in transition electron microscopy (TEM), it was deduced the films were composed of an amorphous matrix supporting nano-crystalline grains ranging from between 10 and 50 nm in diameter (FCC, a = 4.09 Å). Although quite contrasting compositions were observed across the Cr–Al–N oxide regime, the Vickers micro-hardness values were relatively consistent; with little variation from 1211 HV0.05 at Cr43.6Al23.9N18.7O13.5 to 1067 HV0.05 at Cr28.7Al30.2N13.2O27.7 (Table 1).
Table 1 Culmination of Cr–Al–N oxide and Al–Cr oxide thin-film data from studies that attempt to optimise material hardness through a combinatorial approach adapted from refs. 37 and 38




 
Deposition conditions
Composition (at%)
Ratios
Vickers hardness



                    Al
                  

                    Cr
                  
O
N






HV0.05
N m−2 (/1010)




Stuber et al. (ref. 38)

PVD
                    magnetron sputtering of CrN:AlN 70:30 pressed powder and Al2O3 (Ar, 0.6 Pa, 200 °C)
23.9
43.6
13.5
18.7
1.82
2.10
1211
1.19


24.5
42.4
14.6
18.2
1.73
2.04
1129
1.11


25.1
41.3
15.8
17.6
1.65
1.9
1133
1.11


26.4
38.7
18.3
16.4
1.47
1.88
1123
1.10


28.0
33.9
22.9
14.5
1.21
1.66
1051
1.03


30.2
28.7
27.7
13.5
0.95
1.44
1067
1.05



PVD
                    magnetron sputtering of CrN:AlN 70:30 pressed powder and Al2O3 (Ar:N2 50:50, 0.6 Pa, 200 °C)
19.8
31.6
8.6
40.0
1.60
1.06
2531
2.48


20.1
32.3
9.3
38.3
1.61
1.10
2233
2.19


21.4
31.1
9.3
38.3
1.45
1.10
2326
2.28


23.6
28.4
11.8
36.2
1.20
1.08
2420
2.37


24.4
27.6
12.4
35.6
1.13
1.08
2485
2.44


26.2
24.0
16.8
32.9
0.92
1.01
2249
2.21


Diechle et al. (ref. 37)

PVD
                    magnetron sputtering of Cr2O3 and Al2O3 (Ar:O2 80:20, 0.4 Pa, 500 °C)
27.4
11.3
61.1
—
0.41
0.63
2370
2.32


25.0
14.2
60.6
—
0.57
0.65
2620
2.57


17.8
22.4
59.6
—
1.26
0.67
2430
2.38


13.5
26.9
59.4
—
1.99
0.68
2280
2.24


9.8
30.1
59.8
—
3.07
0.67
2150
2.11




Films deposited in a 50:50 Ar:N2 gas mixture, had lower O content varying from 8.6–16.8 at% at the Cr rich to Al rich ends respectively. Another contrasting difference was the overall ratio of metal to non-metal constituents in each of the 6 samples; hardly deviating from 1. The library was also far more crystalline; with crystallite sizes ranging from 50–15 nm (Cr rich to Al rich). TEM crystallography indicated the thin-films were composed of multi-crystalline FCC structures; with varying composition and lattice size. Most interestingly, these films displayed almost twice the level of Vickers micro-hardness compared with pure Ar depositions; with little variation in sample strength ranging from 2351 HV0.05 at Cr31.6Al19.8N40.0O8.6 to 2249 HV0.05 at Cr24.0Al26.2N32.9O16.8 (Table 1).
7.3. Corundum-type Al–Cr oxides
The hardness of Al2O3 thin-film coatings have been particularly exploited over the past 20 years for applications including tool coatings, gas turbine diffusion barrier layers and micro-electronics.150 Given the thermodynamic stability and hardness of the high temperature α-Al2O3 corundum phase, it is most often utilised in heavy-duty cutting tool coatings.151 Most processes currently utilise CVD to achieve crystalline α-Al2O3 coatings; however deposition temperatures in the vicinity of 1000 °C and post-heat treatments are typical. An alternative approach through low temperature PVD techniques has been suggested; with the most prominent success observed when combined with pulsed plasma technologies152 or growth directing templates.153
Using the template approach, Diechle et al. utilised magnetron sputtering PVD to form a discrete library of 5 compositionally variant Al–Cr oxide samples (Table 1).36 By first sputtering an ≈250 nm thick metallic Cr layer onto the Si wafer substrates, a growth directing medium for the low temperature formation of corundum type Al–Cr oxides was formed. Subsequent co-sputtering Al2O3 and Cr2O3, which can share similar symmetrical arrangements in the bulk, lead to the thin-film formation of meta-stable solid solutions at 500 °C (80:20 Ar:O2, 0.4 Pa). This was highly beneficial compared with Al–Cr oxides formed at thermodynamic equilibrium, as a thermal barrier of 1300 °C needs to be surpassed for perfect miscibility and the formation of the α-corundum phase over the binary range.
The oxygen content across the 6 sample coatings was almost invariant (59.8–61.1 at%). The maximum incorporation of Al was 27.4 at% and Cr was 30.1 at%. The total metal: oxygen ratio of the coatings little deviated from 0.66 and indicated full oxidation of the Al3+/Cr3+ containing compounds. Shifting XRD peaks indicated the formation of more compressed corundum structures with higher Cr content and was surprising given the larger average atomic radius of Cr3+. Through Scherrer analysis of XRD peak widths, crystallites increased in average size from 27 ± 6 nm to 44 ± 17 nm from the Al rich to Cr rich ends.
The Vickers micro-hardness test demonstrated the almost equivalent durability of samples, regardless of Al/Cr ratio; where 2150 HV0.05 was observed for Al9.8Cr30.1O59.8 at the Cr rich end and 2620 HV0.05 for Al25.0Cr14.2O60.6 near the Al rich end (Table 1). These micro-hardness values, as well as those of the N-rich library deposited by Stuber et al., were comparable to heavy duty tool-coating materials such as TiN (2300 HV0.05) and Al2O3-corundum (2085 HV0.05) and at least four times harder than shock resistant steel (474 HV0.05).154 The combinatorial studies by Diechle et al. and Struber et al. were not only strong examples of how PVD can be utilised to deposit functional meta-stable materials at lower temperatures than conventional routes but also how material hardness can be tailored by composition.
7.4. Ni–W alloys

          Ni metal is widely employed in the production of many micro-systems, yet the material's poor stability at intermediate and high temperatures is a limiting factor for devices.155 One possible solution to improve the performance of Ni at higher temperatures is to alloy it with other elements such as high-melting metals, where Ni–W alloys are promising candidates. Traditionally, Ni–W alloys are deposited by electro-deposition. However, Borgia et al. employed combinatorial magnetron sputtering in an attempt to optimise the functional performance of Ni–W alloys.35
Using Ni and W metal targets oriented at 35° from the normal, Si (100) wafer substrates with a 50 nm SiO2: 50 nm Si3N4 barrier layer were sputter coated to form continuous Ni1−xWx arrays varying in composition from 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.85 (Ar, 1.9 Pa, 25 °C). By varying the target voltage bias, this compositional range was covered over four depositions (with some overlap). The material hardness for a range of compositions was investigated both in the as-deposited state and after annealing at ≈525 °C (70 μPa) in an attempt to correlate microstructure to the ensuing mechanical properties. The Ni–W alloys could be grouped into four distinct regimes for both the as-sputtered and the annealed states. A diffraction pattern that typifies the characteristics of each group member is shown in Fig. 16(a) for the EDX confirmed Ni95W5, Ni75W25, Ni50W50 and Ni25W75 thin-film compositions. The four types could be grouped as follows: (i) 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25; highly crystalline Ni-type FCC solid solutions directed predominantly in the (111) and (200) plane with little change upon annealing, (ii) 0.25 ≤ x ≤ 0.50; highly crystalline Ni-type FCC solid solutions directed solely the (111) plane that phase segregated into Ni4W (211) and α–W (110) upon annealing, (iii) 0.50 ≤ x ≤ 0.75; amorphous material that crystallised into several NiW phased orientations as well as α–W (110) and (iv) 0.75 ≤ x ≤ 0.85; partially crystalline β–W orientated mainly in the (210) direction that changed phase upon annealing into an α–W material preferentially oriented in the (110) plane. The as-deposited films consisted of very small grains (≈5 nm) over the 0.25 ≤ x ≤ 0.85 regime, where more Ni rich as-deposited films were much larger (≈15 nm). After annealing the alloys the average crystallite size increased to ≈15–25 nm in diameter.
 Fig. 16  (a) Example XRD patterns typifying the characteristics of the four distinct film types over the Ni1−xWx alloy regime (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.85) and (b) the material hardness (GPa) versus the corresponding alloy composition for continuously graded thin-film alloys pre and post annealing at 525 °C; formed through the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Ni and W metal targets on Si based substrates (Ar, 1.9 Pa, 25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, copyright Elsevier 2005. 
The Vickers hardness was measured for a number of Ni–W alloys compositions. The hardness versus composition for the as-deposited and post-annealed samples are summarised in Fig. 16(b). A general trend for an increase in hardness with increasing W content in seen; however, three different zones were observed. The first region, called “Zone 1”, is composed only of Ni-type FCC structures where the hardening effect provided by the solid solution (W < 25 at%) was negligible compared with the Hall-Petch effect. Consequently, the reduction in grain size for increasing W content over this range largely accounted for the increased hardening in this region, for both as-deposited and annealed films. Within the second region, called “Zone 2”, the presence of substantial amorphous phased material explained the limited variability in hardness. However, at the Zone 1 to Zone 2 boundary, an inversion of the softening/hardening effect was seen (W ≈ 25 at%); where the softening produced by grain growth was balanced by the hardening caused by the crystallization of inter-metallic phases from both the supersaturated crystalline Ni-type FCC solid solution and the amorphous fraction. Within Zone 3, the most rapid increase in hardening was observed with increasing levels of β–W formation; where β–W is known to show typically higher levels of hardness than Ni-type FCC solid solutions of Ni and W. The fact that the average grain size of the annealed films in Zones 2 & 3 was an order of magnitude larger than that encountered in Zone 1 indicated that the increased hardness was due to the phase composition of the films rather than the Hall–Petch effect. Borgia et al. comprehensively demonstrated how the hardness of non-equilibrium phases and thermodynamic phase-segregated materials could be rapidly elucidated through combinatorial studies and is a promising tool for bulk alloy development.35
8. 
        Li battery electrode optimisation
Rechargeable Li-ion batteries are the power source of choice for a broad range of portable commercial electronic devices, displaying the best energy densities and the slowest loss of charge when not in use compared with any alternative. When introduced in the early 1990s, a standard 18650 cell (18 mm in diameter, 65 mm in height) stored 1100 mA.h of charge; however, advances in materials and fabrication techniques over the past 20 years have nearly quadrupled the storage capacity (3400–4000 mA.h).156 In the early 2000s, positive and negative electrodes in commercial cells were generally based on graphite and LiCoO2 respectively. However, since the release of the “Nexelion” series by Sony in 2005, a variety of new materials have been exploited in electrode development. For instance, the “Nexelion” series exploits the amorphous cyclic stability induced by Co alloying with Sn in an approximately 1:1 ratio (15 at%) inter-mixed with crystalline C (85 at%) for their negative electrode powders.157 The general school of thought for negative electrode development is based on combining high specific capacitance materials such as Si and Sn with transition metals; forming amorphous phased alloys that are more stable to repeat cycles of Li intercalation and discharge.158 Positive electrode development has mainly focused on inter-changing various combinations of transition metals in LiMO2 materials, where M is typically Co, Ni or Mn.
Originally graphite was used for the negative electrode; where 1 Li atom per 6 C atoms was intercalated and corresponded to a charge storage capacity of 372 mA h g−1. When either Si or Sn are used alone, a higher Li storage capacity in which ≈25 Li atoms are intercalated per 6 Si/Sn atoms and specific capacities as high as 3580 mA h g−1 and 994 mA h g−1 for Si and Sn are observed respectively. Nevertheless, these large storage capacities are associated with dramatic volume changes and poor long-term stability. New age materials counteract this effect by forcing Si/Sn based alloys into more cycle stable amorphous alloys through doping. Several studies have sought to optimise the subtle balance between increased amorphousness with capacity losses and battery life. Some have utilised combinatorial thin-film methods to simultaneously screen a vast number of systems and compositions in aid of rapidly achieving this goal, with Dahn et al. dominating the field of negative electrode development.39–41,159–162
8.1. Negative electrode Si1−xSnx

          Si and Sn negative electrode materials have created a great deal of interest because of their potential to deliver enormous gains in specific capacity compared with graphite, the industry standard. Si has a theoretical capacity that is over ten times that of graphite; however, their cyclic stabilities are incredibly low; where a 50% reduction in capacity is observed in just 5 charge-recharge cycles. The capacity loss occurs in crystalline metals/alloys for several reasons, the primary being the inhomogeneous volume expansions caused upon Li insertion that cause material cracking and loss of electrical contact. Using a combinatorial magnetron co-sputtering approach, Dahn et al. deposited amorphous Si1−xSnx (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.45) at kinetic equilibrium in aid of increasing the homogeneity of expansions upon Li insertion.39,161
By placing stationary masks with specially designed profiles in front of Si and Sn targets and rotating the substrates underneath, a gradient in the Si:Sn ratio was achieved (Ar, 0.2 Pa, 23 °C). A discrete library of 64 samples was deposited onto an array of pre-wired Cu pads that were arranged for rapid electrochemical testing. XRD diffraction mapping showed all samples were amorphous. By sandwiching a 50 μm porous Li+ separator, a 125 μm thick piece of Li metal and a top electrode over the 64 test samples and adding a 1:2 ethylene carbonate: diethyl carbonate with 1 M LiClO4 salt in-between, a standard coin-type test cell was formed with the capacity to simultaneously analyse all samples. A plot of the discharge capacity of these 64 batteries upon their 2nd cycle is shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  A plot of capacity (mA h g−1) for 64 discrete amorphous Si1−xSnx materials tested in a Li-ion battery cell formed from the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of Si and Sn targets through stationary masks onto rotating pre-wired Cu substrate pads (Ar, 0.2 Pa, 23 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 39, copyright IOP Publishing 2005. 
The theoretical capacity was calculated assuming 3580 and 994 mA h g−1 for pure Si and Sn, respectively, and matched the experimental data. For samples high in Si (x ≈ 0), capacities as high as 3500 mA h g−1 were observed. The capacitance losses were considerably smaller than that of crystalline Si–Sn alloy systems reported in the literature, with roughly a 1.5% loss in capacity per cycle.
While Dahn et al. concluded that the performance of these amorphous thin-film alloys might change when up-scaled in thickness for commercial applications it was suggested that Si0.6Sn0.4 alloys would be the most ideal candidates for thin-film batteries as they showed the greatest stability.161 However, amorphous Si–Sn alloys produced by magnetron sputtering would be impractical for industrial scale-up due to the high electricity costs in production alone.39 For this reason, research now favours doping Sn/Si based materials with transition metals to induce amorphous phase formation without the need of forced kinetic equilibrium through sputtering.
8.2. Negative electrode Si–Al–Mn
Since the discovery of melt-spun quasi-crystalline Al86Mn14163 many searches for amorphous and quasi-crystalline materials have ensued. A variety of melt-spun amorphous systems have been discovered since, including Si–Al–Mn alloys. With such a commercially scalable method of producing Si–Al–Mn alloys in mind, Dahn et al. produced an array of discrete samples through a combinatorial PVD sputtering process.39,160 It was their hypothesis that the Si–Al–Mn system might show good properties for negative electrodes in Li-ion batteries, where the Si is added for capacity, Al is added for conductivity and Mn is added to induce amorphousness. Using a similar series of masks to their synthesis of Si–Sn alloys,39,161Si, Al and Mn metal targets were sputter deposited in a combinatorial fashion onto an array of 64 pre-wired Cu pads (Ar, 0.2 Pa, 23 °C).39,160 The discrete samples showed a variety of compositions ranging from ≈30–90 at% Al, ≈10–90 at% Si and ≈0–30% at% Mn. Apart from some nano-crystalline Al segregation at high concentrations, predominantly amorphous Si–Al–Mn materials were formed over the compositional range. In fact, approximately 25 of the 64 compositions were within the range of Si–Al–Mn had previously been amorphously melt-spun.164 By sandwiching the array within their coin-type test cell arrangement, the charge-discharge capacity of these samples in a Li-ion battery environment were assessed. By focussing on samples that could be mass-produced, Dahn et al. realised that compositions around Si0.38Al0.52Mn0.10 showed excellent capacity retention up to the 18th cycle. The materials in this region showed capacities of 1000 mA h g−1, nearly three times that of graphite, the industry standard.
The performance of these amorphous ternary alloys was modelled as a 18650 commercial cell to see if such materials would duly improve the capacity and energy over a graphite based negative electrode. The cell calculations were based on an positive electrode of LiCoO2 that was 140 μm thick with a density of 4.8 gcm−3, porosity of 25%, capacity of 160 mA h g−1 and no irreversible capacity. A capacity-composition diagram for the extrapolated performances is shown in Fig. 18, where the shaded region represents combinations that can be melt-spun for industrial scale-up. Compositions on the low-Mn-content border of the shaded region showed significant capacity increases over the graphite based batteries, where a maximum reversible capacity of at least 3300 mA.h was observed for Si0.38Al0.52Mn0.10 and corresponded to a 40% increase in efficiency.
 Fig. 18  Extrapolated reversible charge-discharge capacity for an 18650 commercial Li-ion battery cell based on a LiCoO2 positive electrode and 64 various Si–Al–Mn negative electrodes; formed from the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of Si, Al and Mn targets through stationary masks onto rotating pre-wired Cu substrate pads (Ar, 0.2 Pa, 23 °C). The shaded region corresponds to the composition range of Si–Al–Mn that can be amorphously melt-spun. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2004. 
8.3. Negative electrode Sn1−xMx (M = Mo, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu)
Extending upon their combinatorial screening of candidates for negative electrodes, Dahn et al. studied the complete binary SnxMo1−x system (where 0 ≤ x ≤ 1).39,159 Thin-films of the alloy were deposited using a combinatorial magnetron sputtering PVD technique to form 64 discrete samples per deposition (Ar, 23 °C). At low deposition pressures (< 0.3 Pa) body-centred cubic (BCC) solid-solutions formed over the 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.35 range and β-tungsten-structured solid-solutions of SnMo3+x over the 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.30 range, adverse to their previous studies of Si–Sn and Si–Al–Mn systems which were primarily amorphous. However, BCC solid-solutions of Mo–Sn had not previously been prepared and Mo3Sn had only been prepared at high-pressure and temperature. For x ≥ 0.35, the diffraction peaks were broad indicating nano-crystalline phase formation. At this point the BCC phase co-exists with phase segregated Sn. When depositions were conducted at higher pressures (> 0.3 Pa), more porous films were formed. Upon examining the charge-discharge capacity of these alloys by sandwiching arrays within coin-cells,39 the specific capacity and cycling behaviour was shown to depend heavily on film structure and oxygen content. Fig. 19(a) shows the specific capacities of a number of compositions over the Sn1−xMox regime for their 2nd charge-discharge cycle. The capacities of the BCC structured films (x ≤ 0.35) were significantly lower than the nano-crystalline (x > 0.35) phase, equating to approximately 1 Li atom per Sn atom and significantly lower than the alloying limit of 4.2 Li atoms per Sn atom in pure Sn. XRD measurements taken during charge-discharge cycling revealed lattice expansions detrimental to electrical contact stability were occurring in this region (x ≤ 0.35). At x = 0.35, a turning point in the discharge capacity was observed with the appearance of nano-crystalline Sn formation. The rate of increase in capacity was sharper due to the higher alloy limit of Sn over Sn1−xMoxBCC structures. However, extended charge-discharge cycling caused the phase segregated Sn to aggregate with heavy losses in capacity.
 Fig. 19  The specific capacities of (a) SnxMo1−x and (b) Sn1−xMx (M = Mo, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu) thin-films in a Li-ion battery test cell for a range of discrete compositions formed by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of metal targets onto a pre-wired array of Cu pads. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright IOP Publishing 2005 and (b) from ref. 41, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2006. 
After thoroughly investigating the Sn–Mo binary system, Dahn et al. screened a large body of transition metals. Using an analogous combinatorial synthesis, with the exception of replacing the Mo target, Sn1−xM for M = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu were formed for (0.02 ≤ x ≤ 0.73).41 Within each binary system, 64 discrete samples were formed and the 512 compositions in total were rapidly characterised by XRD and charge-discharge capacitance studies. For the compositions that formed phase segregated crystalline Sn structures, several cycles of charge and discharge reduced their capacities, where this corresponded to x ≤ 0.35 in Sn1−xTix and x ≤ 0.30 in Sn1−xVx. Analogous to the Sn–Mo system, this was related to the aggregation of Sn into nano-crystalline regions. A plot of the 1st charge-discharge specific capacities for the 512 samples is shown in Fig. 19(b). The dashed line represents the theoretical capacity of the material if all of the Sn present would store 4.2 Li atoms per Sn atom.
Given the literature suggests that amorphous or nano-structured alloys yield the best capacity retention after extended cycling, alloys that could be prepared in the amorphous range of Sn1−xMx were examined. However, in each of these systems, the capacity decreased with increasing transition metal content. In the case of M = Co, the amorphous range could be reached with the lowest levels of M at x = 0.28, yet Sn was aggregating after just 25 cycles. In stark contrast, Sn1−xTix and Sn1−xVx libraries showed remarkable stabilities even after extended cycling. But as the capacity of Sn0.5V0.5 was larger than Sn0.5Ti0.5 it was suggested that M = V would be the best choice; ignoring considerations of cost and/or toxicity. However, alloying C with Sn–V compounds promoted to formation of vanadium carbides that were highly detrimental to the specific capacity. The next best possible candidates in Sn–Ti and Sn–Cr compounds also formed carbides upon alloying with C. In fact, the only system would not form stable carbides was Sn–Co and was hence why Sony had chosen this system. Dahn et al. went on to fully investigate the Sn–Co–C ternary system using combinatorial methods in order to fully understand the qualities of this commercially alloy.40 The [Sn0.55Co0.45]1−yCy system was investigated over the 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.5 range. They found that the addition of carbon to Sn–Co amorphous alloys could produce materials with extremely large reversible capacities of 700 mA.hg−1, almost double that of the graphite, the industry standard. An excellent resistance to the aggregation of Sn during cycling was also observed; where the most stable material after 25 charge-discharge cycles was amorphous [Sn0.55Co0.45]0.6C0.4. Although the exact specifications of the commercially applied Sn–Co–C system have not been released, recent independent investigations have established that Sn and Co are also in approximately a 1:1 ratio.157
8.4. Positive electrode LiMnxNi2−xO4

          LiMn2O4 has been shown to be an attractive alternative to the industrial standard positive electrode material LiCoO2 because of excellent charge-discharge cycle life and high temperature performance. However, the specific capacities are too low for commercial application. Several studies have looked into partially substituting Mn within LiMn2O4 with an extra transition metal to increase the capacity and stability of the material; where substitutions with Co, Mg, Sr, Ni, Fe, Al, Ti, and Zn have been investigated.165 Of these, the LiMn1.5Ni0.5O4 system showed the most promising features delivering up to 130 mA h g−1 at a relatively high voltage of 4.7 V and was stable to 1000 cycles.166
Preceding the numerous combinatorial studies undertaken by Dahn et al. on negative electrodes,39–41,159–161 Whitacre et al. attempted to further optimise the Li–Mn–Ni oxide system through a combinatorial approach.162 By sputtering separated LiMn2O4 and LiNiO2 targets onto an array of Pt pads with 50 nm thick Ti barrier layers, a discrete library of LiMnxNi2−xO4 states ranging from 0.15 ≤ x ≤ 1.8 were formed (Ar:O2 3:1, 1 Pa, 150 °C). The library was then annealed at 700 °C for 30 minutes in air to encourage full inter-diffusion and crystallisation. From XRD experiments performed in situ during annealing, the films were seen to be amorphous up to 600 °C where nucleation occurred. By 700 °C, the materials had fully crystallised into cubic spinel structures with preferred orientation growth in the (111) and (311) planes.
Interestingly, the unit cell lattice parameter a decreased exponentially rather than linearly from 8.43 Å at x = 0.8 to 8.15 Å at x = 1.7 and was attributed to intrinsic thin-film stress related factors. The charge-discharge capacities of these materials were tested in a different manner to Bahn et al.,39 where a LiPON solid electrolyte was evenly sputtered over samples and a Li anode evaporated on top. The measured capacities for a range of compositions are shown in Fig. 20. An optimum composition of LiMn1.4Ni0.6O4 is observed at x = 1.4 and corresponded to a maximum capacity of 115 mA h g−1 at a 4.7 V discharge plateau. A distinct trend was also observed, where the capacity increased from 0.3 ≤ x ≤ 1.4 and decreased from 1.4 ≤ x ≤ 1.7. By assessing the change in charge-voltage gradient, the most prominent discharge peaks over the 0.3 ≤ x ≤ 1.4 regime related to the Ni2+/Ni4+ couple. Conversely, the most prominent discharge peaks over the 1.4 ≤ x ≤ 1.7 regime was related to the Mn3+/Mn4+ couple. It is at x = 1.4 that the optimum balance between these two half-cell reactions occur and coincides with optimal charge-discharge capacity. In addition, the cycle life at this composition decreased nominally; with only a 10% loss of capacity after 8 cycles. Using combinatorial methods, Whitacre et al. not only confirmed the optimum composition found previously in bulk powder studies but also explained the underlying chemistries involved during charge and discharge.162
 Fig. 20  Charge-discharge capacity (μA h cm−2) for a range of discrete LiMnxNi2−xO4 materials as positive electrodes in Li-ion test cell environments; produced by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of LiMn2O4 and LiNiO2 targets onto an array of pre-wired Pt/Ti pads. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2003. 
9. Luminescence optimisation
A substance that exhibits the phenomenon of luminescence is described as a phosphor. There are two mechanisms in which a material can luminesce; phosphorescence and fluorescence. Fluorescing materials typically release their excited energies in 0.5–20 ns. However, as a forbidden transition must be overcome in phosphorescing materials, the energy release can be on the order of several ms to several hours. Fluorescent materials are commonly found in cathode-ray tube (CRT) and plasma video technologies, sensors, and white light emitting diodes (LEDs), whereas phosphorescent materials are most commonly used in radar screens and glow-in-the-dark toys.
Typical inorganic phosphors consist of a polycrystalline host doped with rare earth and/or transition metal ions that serve as the luminescent centre, also known as the activator. These sites are the source of the electronic relaxations involved in luminescence and the emission of light. Organic luminescent materials typically consist of some π-conjugated system that can be electronically excited from their highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in a pπ–pπ* transition. These excited states release a photon, typically in the visible region, upon electronic relaxation.
9.1. A novel optimised phosphor Y0.845La0.060Eu0.025VO4 [red]
One of the earliest and best examples of thin-film combinatorial optimisation was performed by Danielson et al. back in 1997.11 Using a combinatorial magnetron sputtering technique and an array of grid masks they were able to deposit over 25000 different materials on a single 3′′ diameter Si wafer and simultaneously screen their photo-luminescence properties. Within the review thus far, we have seen combinatorial magnetron sputtering applied to a maximum of 3 targets; however Danielson et al. applied this technique to 12. This not only created the compositional gradient that is warranted by combinatorial methods, but also formed a large variety of host compounds. They designed the phosphor library to include combinations of host lattice cations from groups IIA and IIIA, with a VO−nm counter ion (m = 3, 4; n = 1, 3) and from the group IIIB and IVB elements; with Eu, Tb, Tm and Ce activator ions. The positions of each of the 12 targets used are shown in Fig. 21(a). Four columns of SnO2, V, Al2O3:V (15:8 molar ratio) and Al2O3 were first deposited with constant thicknesses. Four rows with linearly varying thickness of La2O3, Y2O3, MgO and SrCO3 were then layered on the columns to divide the substrate into 16 sub-regions. Finally, within each sub-region, columns of rare earths Eu2O3, Tb4O7, Tm2O3 and CeO2 were deposited again with linearly varying thickness. The entire combinatorial array was then annealed at 850 °C for 5 hours to ensure complete inter-diffusion of the components to their equilibrium structures.
 Fig. 21  (a) layout of the various targets used in the combinatorial magnetron sputtering PVD of a series of phosphors and (b) an image of the ensuing photo-luminescence exhibited from these 2500+ samples when excited with UVC- 254 nm light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright Nature Publishing Group 1997. 
The level of photo-luminescence was rapidly screened using a simple photographic method. Whilst the entire film library was excited by a UVC source, a photograph of the ensuing luminescence was captured using a CCD camera. By pre-calibrating the camera to red (Y2O2S:Eu 9:1), green (ZnS:Cu, Al) and blue (ZnS:Ag, Cl) industrial standards, the chromaticity of each sample (> 2500) could be assessed from a single image, shown in Fig. 21(b). For a phosphor to have commercial application its emission should be as close to the centre of either the blue, green or red waveband detected by the human eye with a high quantum efficiency. With three such phosphors working in combination, any colour can be produced in a particular pixel. Danielson et al. observed that the most highly efficient luminescent materials with desirable chromaticity were red phosphors within the Eu3+ doped Y1−mAlmVO4 region. They subsequently optimised the luminescent properties of this system by depositing another combinatorial library focussed specifically on combinations of these elements and La. The comprehensive range of host compositions in their library enabled all Y0.95−m−nAlnLamEu0.05VO4 compounds to be assessed. From their high-throughput photographic assessment method, the combination with optimal luminescence intensity and chromaticity for commercial application corresponded to the compound Y0.82Al0.07La0.06Eu0.05VO4. This system was further optimised, this time designing a combinatorial deposition that linearly varied the Eu3+ concentration in Y0.87−mAl0.07La0.06EumVO4 (0 ≤ m ≤ 0.2). Screening this library identified a 2.5% Eu (m = 0.025) loading as the optimal composition (Φ = 0.83 ± 0.06, 620 nm). This phosphor showed improved red chromaticity and comparable efficiency to the more orange-red commercial standard Y1.95O3Eu0.05 (Φ = 0.86 ± 0.04). Their novel compound also contained half as much of the expensive rare-earth metal Eu. Further combinatorial investigations of phase space led Danielson et al. to the discovery of a new-type of blue-white (485 nm) luminescent material; Sr2CeO4.43
9.2. A novel optimised phosphor Gd3Ga5O12/SiO2 composite [blue]
Xiang, Schultz et al. also investigated a wide range of phosphor materials with a similar combinatorial approach, which lead to the discovery of a new material.51 Unlike their predecessors, a photo-resist template was laid down in a grid like pattern forming individual square (650 μm × 650 μm) cavities that were evenly spaced (100 μm) across the substrate. The magnetron sputtering deposition was then conducted through a series of quaternary masks. GaO2, Gd2O3, SiO2, ZnO2 and Y2O3 targets were used in high concentration to create the host structures; CeO2, EuF3, Tb4O7, Ag, TiO2 and Mn3O4 targets were used in low concentration to form dopants. Exactly 1024 unique combinations were formed within the cavities. The thin-film samples were then annealed with a strict regime; firstly at low temperatures (200–600 °C) to ensure uniform inter-diffusion whilst preventing evaporation and relieving mechanical stress and secondly at 1000 °C to ensure complete crystallisation. The photo-resist was removed by dissolution in acetone. An image of the complete combinatorial library is shown in Fig. 22(a).
 Fig. 22  Digital photographs of the as-deposited quaternary library under (a) ambient light (b) under UVC–254 nm light; synthesised through the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of GaO2, Gd2O3, SiO2, ZnO2 and Y2O3 main and CeO2, EuF3, Tb4O7, Ag, TiO2 and Mn3O4 dopant targets through a series of quaternary shadow masks on a Si wafer substrate (annealed 1000 °C, Ar). Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, copyright Nature Publishing Group 1998. 
Similar to Danielson et al.,11,43 the luminescent properties of the library was simultaneously assessed by digital photography. By exciting the samples with UVC light, the degree of brightness and colour of the ensuing photo-luminescence was quantified. The corresponding image is shown in Fig. 22(b). By adding a standard reference phosphor within the library (Zn2SiO4:Mn0.05) the quantum efficiencies could be estimated relative to the image brightness. It was observed that the most efficient site corresponded to the nominal composition Gd5.2Ga3.33Oz (Φ ≈ 0.50, 440–500 nm). However, bulk and thin-film samples of this material on LaAlO3 substrates (rather than Si wafers) showed no photo-luminescence. It was therefore suspected that the blue emission was related to some inter-diffusion of SiO2 from the original Si substrate. A new combinatorial library was then deposited on LaAlO3 substrates in an effort to deduce the true cause of blue luminescence. Using GaO2, Gd2O3 and SiO2 targets alone, a thin-film was sputtered through the series of grid masks to form a discrete library of GdxGa1−xOz/(SiO2)y; where 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and 0.003 ≤ y ≤ 0.100. The highest intensity phosphor corresponded to the composition Gd3Ga5O12/(SiO2)0.08. The blue coloured photo-luminescence was related to the charge transfer from porous Si directly to the defect states in SiO2.167 As the aim of the study was to find and optimise phosphors that were compatible with Si-based technologies, it was ironic that inter-diffusion of the Si substrate actually caused the intense blue photo-luminescence effect.
9.3. Random p-pyridine/m-pyridine polymers [blue]
Electro-luminescence from conductive polymer films was first reported in 1983168 and yielded the discovery of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDS) soon after.169 OLEDs are now commonplace, being used in television, computer and portable device screens. Two main families of OLEDs exist; those based upon small molecules and those employing conductive polymers. Devices based on conductive polymers have been favoured for their mechanical toughness and durability. Blue-luminescent OLEDs degrade significantly more rapidly than green and red; where research in this area has focussed primarily on forming more efficient blue OLEDs with longer lifetimes. Muramatsu et al. used the combinatorial thin-film approach to try and develop better blue light emitting OLEDs by randomly combining p/m-pyridine/phenylene units in π-conjugated polymers.46
After mixing several specified ratios of 1,4 and 1,3-dibromobenzene their polymerisation was initiated through a Grignard reaction in THF using Mg with a Ni catalyst (Ar, 75 °C), forming random m-phenylene/p-phenylene polymers [mPhex/pPhe1−x]ran (x = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1). Similarly random m-pyridine/p-pyridine polymers [mPyry/pPyr1−y]ran (y = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.8, 1) were formed by substituting the benzene reagents for 2,5-dibromopyridine and 3,5-dibromopyridine. After washing these polymers several times in HCl solution and air-drying, the terminal C–Br bonds were replaced with C–H bonds by LiAlH4 treatment. A library of discrete polymer films was made by evaporating the polymer combinations under vacuum through masks onto glass substrates. The [mPhex/pPhe1−x]ran and [mPyry/pPyr1−y]ranpolymers did not chemically react when combined and formed 14 unique mono-layer and 49 unique bi-layer thin-films.
In mono-layered [mPhex/pPhe1−x]ran films, the absorption maximum shifted systematically to shorter wavelengths from 311 nm (x = 1) to 250 nm (x = 0). A similar trend was also observed in mono-layered [mPyry/pPyr1−y]ran films with a gradual shift from 314 nm (y = 1) to 265 nm (y = 0). By exciting these mono-layered films it was found that the corresponding photo-luminescence followed an analogous pattern, where a shorter absorption maximum wavelength yielded a shorter emission wavelength. The maximum photo-luminescence in these mono-layer films was observed at x = 0.5 and y = 0.5 in [mPhex/pPhe1−x]ran and [mPyry/pPyr1−y]ran films respectively. An approximate 7.6 fold increase in luminescence was observed for these 50:50 randomised combinations over their pure counterparts. The [mPhe0.5/pPhe0.5]ranpolymer film demonstrated the strongest emission. When assessing the bi-layered combinations of [mPhex/pPhe1−x]ran and [mPyry/pPyr1−y]ran, photo-luminescence colours ranging from blue to green were observed. The maximum intensity was seen in the central sample and corresponded to the 50:50 mix of [mPhe0.5/pPhe0.5]ran and [mPyr0.5/pPyr0.5]ran. Intriguingly, the combination of these two polymers did not produce an average emission wavelength of the two individual polymers, even though a chemical reaction did not occur. In fact, the luminescence intensity was considerably higher than either of the polymers alone. This was explained through an antenna effect where the [mPyr0.5/pPyr0.5]ran acted as a light capture layer, feeding this energy to the [mPhe0.5/pPhe0.5]ran emission layer. The thicknesses of the capture layer and emission layer were subsequently optimised through an additional combinatorial vacuum evaporation synthesis; increasing the photo-luminescence intensity a further three-fold.
9.4. 
          Gd–Y2O3 [UV], Gd–Y3Al5O12 [UV] & Cr–Y3Al5O12 [red]
Miniaturised UV emitting solid-state sources are required components for future non-line-of-sight communication transceivers/ receivers and bio-particle detection units. Gd-doped yttria (Y2O3) powders exhibit intense UV emission centred at ≈315 nm and Fowlkes et al. applied combinatorial thin-film methods to try and derive the optimum dopant level for maximum luminescence.44,45 Using a combinatorial magnetron sputtering synthesis, Y2O3 powder and Gd metal targets were sputtered up onto a Si (001) substrate (O2/Ar = 0.074, 0.3 Pa, annealed 850 °C–12 hours). The separation distance of the two targets created an almost linear gradient in the Gd doping level from 2–23 at% and the formation of a continuous library of states. XRD studies confirmed the formation of the cubic bixbyite yttria structure in which Gd replaced Y centres. A preferential orientation in the (222) plane was also observed. At sites devoid of inversion symmetry (between face-centred oxygen vacancies) the “forbidden” 4f–4f transition is relaxed and Gd3+ activators can luminesce more freely.170 High energy luminescence arises because of the large separation in ground state (8S7/2) and excited state (6P7/2) energies (3.95 eV), resulting in a UV photon emission upon relaxation. By exciting along the continuous film using high energy electrons (constant voltage/current = 15 kV/35 pA), the cathodo-luminescence was measured as a function of Gd dopant level. An optimum dopant level was observed at 8.3 at% (Y1.56Gd0.44O3.25) where beyond this level a sharp drop in emission intensity occurs, as shown in Fig. 23. This concentration quenching occurs when the wave-functions of Gd3+ centres begin to overlap and excited charge carriers can hop between ions. Given both active and inactive Gd3+ centres are present in the material, the probability for excitation quenching at inactive sites (between body-diagonal oxygen vacancies) or non-radiative centres increase.
 Fig. 23  A plot of the normalised cathodo-luminescence intensity versus corresponding Gd/Cr dopant level (at%) from continuously graded Gd-doped Y2O3, Gd-doped Y3Al5O12 and Cr-doped Y3Al5O12 thin-films; synthesised by a combinatorial magnetron sputtering process onto Si (001) substrates. 
Gd-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Y3Al5O12) powders have also showed intense UV emission centred at ≈312 nm. Deng et al. applied combinatorial methods to find the optimum Gd dopant level in Y3Al5O12 for maximised luminescence using a combinatorial magnetron sputtering method. Continuous Gd-doped Y3Al5O12 films were deposited from Y2O3 and Al targets and Gd targets in a triangular layout and sputtered upwards onto Si substrates (O2/Ar = 0.08, 0.3 Pa, annealed 1000 °C–10 hours). XRD showed that the films were highly crystalline, adopting the cubic Y3Al5O12 structure with Gd3+ occupying the dodecahedral sites. A preferred growth in the (420) plane was also observed. From EDX measurements across the film, a transitional range of Gd doping levels from ≈1–12 at% were identified. The cathodo-luminescence was investigated in a similar manner to Fowlkes et al.44,45 by exciting each unique position in turn along the continuous sample and monitoring the emission intensity at 315 nm. Similar to Gd-doped Y2O3, the primary emission in Gd-doped Y3Al5O12 corresponds to the 8S7/2–6P7/2 transition. An optimum doping level was found at ≈5.5 at% Gd , shown in Fig. 23. From ≈6.0 at% a sharp drop in intensity was seen due to electron-hopping. This optimum compared well with Fowlkes et al.'s study of Gd-doped Y2O3.44,45 Although the host materials differed, they both shared cubic structures and would adopt similar Gd–Gd distances at a given dopant level. As 25% of sites in Gd-doped Y2O3 are inactive, ≈6 at% of Gd sites would be active in the luminescence optimised structure, comparing well with the 5.5 at% Gd optimum in Y3Al5O12.
Single crystals and powders of Y3Al5O12 doped with Cr3+ have been used as high-temperature sensors because of the systematic loss in fluorescence intensity with increases in temperature.171 However, as a thin-film, better thermal contacts form with greater substrate adhesion at lower synthetic temperature requirements. With this in mind, Deng et al. applied combinatorial methods in an effort to optimise the Cr3+ dopant level for maximum luminescence. Similar to his method described above, continuous Cr-doped Y3Al5O12 thin-films were formed on Si substrates by replacing the Gd metal target with Cr metal (O2/Ar = 0.056, 0.4 Pa, annealed 1000 °C). The Cr dopant level range from 0.34–4.84 at% and were highly crystalline with a preferred growth in the (420) plane. The photo-luminescence was assessed after exciting films with 480 nm light generated from a Xe lamp coupled with a grating. The characteristic 4A2–4E2 emission centred at ≈688 nm was observed across the samples. The maximum intensity was seen at a Cr doping level of 0.69 at% (Fig. 23), agreeing well with bulk powder investigations (0.65 at%).172 The temperature-luminescence relationship of the most luminescent sample from the combinatorial series was also assessed. A linear drop in intensity with increased temperature was observed over −261 °C to 25 °C with good correlation (r2 = 0.91), with the electron-phonon coupling energy barrier of 25.2 meV deduced from an Arrhenius plot.
9.5. 
          Tb–YCa4O(BO3)3 [green] & Eu–YCa4O(BO3)3 [red]
Using a combinatorial pulsed laser deposition synthesis, Sano et al. discovered and optimised green (Tb-doped) and red (Eu-doped) calcium oxyborate phosphors.42,52 The phosphors showed excellent thermal and chemical stabilities. Using a KrF excimer laser, separate TbCa4O(BO3)3, EuCa4O(BO3)3 and YCa4O(BO3)3 targets were deposited onto SiO2 substrates creating continuously graded thin-films (O2, 10−4 Pa, 500 °C). The complete range of compositions from pure Y to pure Tb/Eu containing positions was achieved where; 0 ≤ y ≤ 1 in Y1−yTbyCa4O(BO3)3 and 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 in Y1−xEuxCa4O(BO3)3. XRD studies showed that monoclinic acentric structures were adopted across both systems. By simultaneously exciting each combinatorial system (UVC–254 nm light), photographs of the ensuing luminescence were taken, as shown in Fig. 24. In order to find the optimum dopant level, a He-Cd laser (325 nm) was pulsed across the film and the luminescence measured. Several emission lines were detected in both systems. In the Eu doped system, peaks typical of Eu3+ activators were observed at 577, 590, 615, 655 and 705 nm, which were assigned to the 5D0–7Fj (j = 0,1, 2,3,4) transitions. Similarly, peaks typical of Tb3+ insertion were observed in the Tb doped system at 488, 542, 586 and 622 nm assigned to the 5D0–7Fj (j = 6, 5, 4, 3) transitions. The maximum luminescence intensities were found to be lie at x = 0.075 (Y0.925Eu0.075Ca4O(BO3)3) and y = 0.25 (Y0.75Tb0.25Ca4O(BO3)3). The decay rates of the photo-luminescence were investigated across both libraries, with the rate of decay increasing linearly with doping in both systems. The increased rate of decay was attributed to greater energy transfer amongst the activators. This increased non-radiative pathways and decreased the luminescence intensity.
 Fig. 24  Photographs of the photo-luminescence across continuously graded combinatorial thin-films of Y1−xEuxCa4O(BO3)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and Y1−yTbyCa4O(BO3)3 (0 ≤ y ≤ 1); synthesised by the combinatorial PLD of TbCa4O(BO3)3/EuCa4O(BO3)3 and YCa4O(BO3)3 targets on SiO2 substrates (O2, 10−4 Pa, 500 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, copyright Elsevier 2006. 
10. Transparent ferromagnetism
Magnetism has been studied from a combinatorial thin-film approach since Xiang, Schultz et al. discovered a new class of LaMxCoO6 (M = Ba, Sr, Ca) giant magneto-resistive compounds in 1995.9,10 This approach has also been applied by several groups in their search for transparent ferromagnets.53–57
Whereas traditional electronics are based on controlling the movement of charge carriers, practical ferromagnetic semiconductors also allow control of the electron spin state (up or down). The development of transparent ferromagnets will be essential in future spintronics applications for spin transistor devices and spacial light modulators. However, most of the ferromagnetic semiconductors investigated so far have low magnetic dopant solubilities and therefore low magnetic moments. Systems based on metal oxides (transparent semiconductors) that have high affinities for magnetic ion insertion are thus desirable candidates in forming stable transparent ferromagnets.
10.1. Ti1−xCoxO2
In 2001, Mn-doped GaAs was the most promising candidate for ferromagnetic semiconductor applications.173 In the same year, using a combinatorial approach, Koinuma et al. investigated the 1st row transition metal doping of an anatase TiO2 host.56,57 By assessing the magnetic properties of these materials a novel ferromagnetic semiconductor material Ti1−xCoxO2 was discovered. Using a combinatorial MBE deposition, pure TiO2 targets and co-doped transition metal-TiO2 targets (Sc, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn–TiO2) were ablated through a series of synchronised masks onto LaAlO3 (001) or SrTiO3 (001) single crystal substrates (Ar, 10−3 Pa, 670–720 °C). This yielded a combinatorial library of discrete and unique samples with varying dopant levels. XRD studies showed that materials within the solubility limit range, which varied considerably for each transition metal system,57 formed anatase crystal structures with preferred orientation in the (004) direction.56 The lattice constant increased proportionally within the solubility range, in accordance with Vegard's law.100 When the solubility limit was surpassed, phase segregation oxide mixtures were formed.
A scanning superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) microscope was used to create a magnetic map (−270 °C) of the combinatorial material. However, only Co-doped anatase samples showed any signs of ferromagnetic behaviour, where domains approximately 20 μm in diameter were observed (Fig. 25). At room temperature, these ferromagnetic properties were still observed. The Curie transition temperature (Tc) was thus established as 125 °C, which was 100 °C higher than any other ferromagnetic semiconductor reported at the time. Approaching the systems solubility limit, the greatest ferromagnetic effect was observed at x = 0.08 where increased doping yielded non-magnetic phase segregated samples. This optimal material showed a saturated magnetism of 0.32 μB/Co atom, a surface conductivity of 0.1 Ωcm and excellent transparency over the visible region. Though the origins of this effect were unclear at the time it was later established that oxygen defects and homogenous spreading of Co2+ dopant ions in interstitial sites were fundamental to the ferromagnetic effect.174,175
 Fig. 25  
            SQUID magnetism map (200 × 200 μm) of a Ti0.94Co0.06O2 thin-film sample on a LaAlO3 (001) substrate; formed from the combinatorial MBE deposition of TiO2 and Co0.5Ti0.5O2 targets (Ar, 10−3 Pa, 670–720 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 57, copyright Elsevier 2002. 
10.2. In1−xFexO3−δ
Xiang et al. investigated In2O3 as host material for transaperent ferromagnetism given its wide bandgap (2.9–3.7 eV) and large BCC unit cell (10.12 Å).55 They doped the material with Fe in anticipation of forming a Fe3+ doped system with higher solubilities due to charge matching. A thin-film of (In1−xFex)2O3 with transitional composition from 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4 was fabricated on an Al2O3 (0001) substrate using a combinatorial ion beam sputtering method (PLD). A KrF excimer laser ablated separated Fe2O3 and In2O3 targets under high vacuum (10−5 Pa) to form the slightly oxygen deficient thin-films. The high vacuum deposition induced the formation of Fe2+ as well as the Fe3+ dopants necessary for ferromagnetism and charge transport. XRD showed the change in lattice constant of the primary In2O3 phase (Ia) across the film from 10.08 Å (0 at% Fe doping) to 10.00 Å (20 at% Fe doping). The films also showed preferential orientation in the (111) crystallographic plane. Increased Fe doping above 20 at% induced the formation of phase segregated Fe3O4 and InFeO3.
The magnetic field dependence of the magnetic moment was measured by a SQUID magnetometer; where the most conductive films grown under high vacuum were found to be the most ferromagnetic. Within the 15 at% Fe doped sample, room temperature ferromagnetism was observed (Tc = 475 °C) and a saturated magnetisation of 1.45 μB/Fe atom, more than four times larger than in Co-doped TiO2. Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) studies showed this sample contained both Fe2+/Fe3+ ions situated in the In2O3 lattice which both contributed to the materials magnetic properties. Given the established use of In2O3 based TCO compounds, such Fe doped transparent ferromagnetic materials may quite attractive for future coherent spin transport devices.
10.3. CoxLi0.2Ni0.8−xO
The half metallic behaviour of oxygen deficient NiO was revealed by computational calculations.176 Since most transparent ferromagnetic semiconductors share this property,177 it was hypothesised that such a material could show similar functionality when used as a host for diluted metals. Given NiO is a p-type semiconductor, any ferromagnetism exhibited due to hole carrier movement should also be more prominent.178
With such factors in mind Koinuma et al. investigated the doping of NiO using a combinatorial approach in order to explore the possible magnetic effect and ordering.53 They decided to co-dope this system with Li and Co; where the Li would serve to increase the conductivity of the highly insulating host by inducing Ni3+ formation and the Co would serve to induce ferromagnetic behaviour.56,57
Using a combinatorial PLD synthesis, separate Li0.2Ni0.8O and Co0.1Li0.2Ni0.7O ceramic targets were ablated through motioned masks onto MgO (100) substrates coated with a 15 nm NiO buffer layer, forming a continuous thin-film with a linear gradient in the Co/Ni concentration (O2, 1 Pa, 550 °C). A compositional spread of CoxLi0.2Ni0.8−xO was formed ranging from 0.01 ≤ x ≤ 0.12. A FCC rock-salt phase was adopted unilaterally across the film, with little variation in the unit cell (≈4.20 Å). All positions along the substrate showed negative magneto-optical Kerr rotations; however, the energy of the maximum rotation shifted systematically from 2.1 eV at x = 0.02 to 3.1 eV at x = 0.08. With the majority of Co doping residing in the Co2+ state, these shifts were related to increasing d–d intra-valence charge transfers. SQUID analysis at −270 °C revealed the weak ferromagnetic behaviour of the materials, with little variation across the combinatorial library. Disappointingly, none of the compositions retained this functionality at room temperature. The ferromagnetism observed in dilute metal semiconductors can be severely hampered if the host material is too insulating. Koinuma et al. discovered that introducing Co within NiO provides both Co3+ and Co2+ insertion. It is these Co3+ ions that annihilated hole carriers and charge transport, hampering the ferromagnetic effect.
11. Semiconductor photocatalysis optimisation
As early as 1929 it was known that the pigment “titanium” (TiO2) was responsible for fading in paints and through subsequent studies it was identified that this was due to photocatalysis.179 Researchers realised that semiconductors such as TiO2 could be used to photocatalytically degrade organic pollutants and heralded the era of self-cleaning thin-film chemistry; where several companies have utilised this function in glass,180 tile181 and other products. Although many semiconductors have been studied, the anatase phase of TiO2 is the leading material for photocatalytic applications due to its biological and chemical inertness, mechanical robustness durability to multiple photocatalytic cycles, relatively low cost and high photo-activity.182 However, the bandgap of anatase (3.2 eV) falls into the UVA region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Substantial efforts to shift this into the visible region in aid of greater solar photocatalysis have been made. Most studies have aimed at modifying the band structure of TiO2 though doping or composite formation.183
11.1. N-doped TiO2 and the Ti3−δO4N pseudo-brookite phase
The inclusion of N dopants have been shown to theoretically and experimentally alter the band structure of TiO2, pushing the bandgap into the visible.182,184 As the N dopant can enter the TiO2 host by either direct substitution of an oxygen site (Ns) or by stationing itself interstitially (Ni) there is uncertainty in the literature as to which type of nitrogen insertion yields the more active photocatalyst.
Using a combinatorial atmospheric pressure chemical vapour deposition (APCVD) approach, Parkin et al. investigated the N-TiO2 system.60,63–66 Using TiCl4 and ethyl acetate precursors to form the TiO2 framework and either NH3 or t-butyl amine precursors to dope this matrix, a series of combinatorial thin-films with ranging dopant concentrations of various nature (Ns/Ni) were formed. The APCVD set-up consisted of a cylindrical cold-walled reactor with an underlying carbon heating block. Gas vapours from liquid precursors were transferred to the reactor by an inert N2carrier gas. The combinatorial aspect of their work was achieved by introducing the precursor flows through separate entry points on the same side of the reactor, inducing compositional gradients. Glass substrates (90 mm x 225 mm × 3.2 mm, horizontal × lateral × thickness) with an ≈25 nm SiO2 barrier layer were coated using a variety of conditions as described in Table 2; outlining the variety of materials achieved.
Table 2 List of deposition conditions used by Parkin et al. in exploring the N doping phase space of titania through combinatorial APCVD




Molar flow (10−3 mol min−1)
Deposition temperature (°C)
Range of materials deposited within a single continuously graded thin-film



                    TiCl4

Ethyl acetate


NH3

t-butyl amine





12
4.8–7.8
18
—
630
Pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N (0.06 ≤ δ ≤ 0.25).66


3.0
6.8
—
4.1
500
Pure pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N to pure Ni-doped anatase phase mixtures.63


2.0
6.8
0.86
—
500
Ns-doped anatase and rutile phase mixtures (0 ≤ Ns: Ti ≤ 11%, 0 ≤ anatase ≤ 100%, 0 ≤ rutile ≤ 41%).60


3.9
8.1
0.0086
—
500
Ns/Ni-doped to pure Ni-doped anatase (0 ≤ Ns: Ti ≤ 11%, 1.0 ≤ Ni: Ti ≤ 4.3%).65


3.0
6.8
—
—
600

                    Anatase and rutile phase mixtures (0 ≤ anatase ≤ 100%, 0 ≤ rutile ≤ 80%).64




It was found that using high molar flow rates of NH3 as a precursor for N insertion actually caused a phase transformation from the expected anatase arrangement of TiO2 to a new undiscovered phase, pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N where 0.06 ≤ δ ≤ 0.25.66 When the alternative N insertion agent t-butyl-amine was used, known for its preference in interstitial insertion into the lattice (Ni) rather than substituting for an oxygen site (Ns),185 a continuously graded range of materials was formed over the substrate from pure pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N to pure Ni-doped anatase phase mixtures.63 Over 42 unique positions were investigated using high-throughput analysis methods. Each Raman pattern was deconvoluted into its component pseudo-brookite and anatase phases and then compared with standards to yield its phase ratios; where 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 for the (Ti3−δO4N)x(Ni–TiO2)1−x phase composites. Locations that were closest to the reactor inlet that dispensed t-butyl amine during the deposition were more highly composed of pseudo-brookite. This showed how the reaction chemistry and phase formation inside the reactor was dependent on the mass transport limited dispersion of the N source, where formation of pseudo-brookite on the opposite end of the reactor was limited due to gas diffusion constraints. Using the Swanepoel method, the thicknesses of each position was determined using the relationship of the light interference patterns.186 Films ranged in thickness from 110–280 nm. XPS confirmed the nature of N dopant to be interstitial (399.7 eV–N0) in the pure anatase and substitutional (395.6 eV–N3−) in the pure pseudo-brookite phased sections. The photocatalytic activities of all 42 unique positions were simultaneously assessed by monitoring the colour change of an “intelligent ink” using digital photography. The “intelligent ink” was composed of a viscous polymer agent (hydroxyl ethyl cellulose), a sacrificial electron donor (glycerol) and a redox ink (dichloroindophenol-DCIP) and functioned via a unique photo-reduction cycle.187–189 Upon photo-irradiating the entire combinatorial thin-film with UVA light, photo-excitations in the underlying semiconductor layer produced electrons and holes that migrated to the surface. The glycerol (in excess) served to mop up these holes, inhibiting recombination and promoting the electron reduction of the DCIP redox indicator from blue to colourless. This colour change was assessed from changes in the red-green-blue components of digital photographs; where the red component plateaued when the DCIP was fully reduced. Upon plotting the plateau times against pseudo-brookite/anatase phase composition, a strikingly linear trend (r2 = 0.97) was observed, where test positions more highly composed of pseudo-brookite were significantly more active, as shown in Fig. 26. On a side note, a regression analysis of the underlying film thickness against plateau time showed little correlation (r2 = 0.28), verifying changes in film thickness were not the cause for the ranging photocatalysis observed.
 Fig. 26  Plot of phase composition versus the time taken to reach a plateau in the red component of digital colour in the photocatalytic reduction of DCIP “intelligent ink” over a phase compositionally graded thin-film formed by the combinatorial APCVD of TiCl4, ethyl acetate and t-butyl amine (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass. 
In another combinatorial study, Parkin et al. utilised NH3 as the N source but with a much lower mass flow than previously; forming Ns-doped anatase and rutile phase mixtures (0.86 × 10−3 mol min−1)60 instead of pure pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N phased materials (18 × 10−3 mol min−1).66 Over 247 positions were investigated across the continuous phase and composition graded thin-film revealing (anatase)1−x(rutile)y for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 and 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.41 and 0 ≤ Ns: Ti ≤ 11%. The phase compositions were derived through deconvoluting and comparing Raman spectra with standards. However, the level of nitrogen doping was determined through a new wavelength dispersive X-ray analysis deconvolution method where the overlapping N K lines and Ti L lines could be separated.60XPS studies confirmed that this doping was solely substitutional in nature. Film thicknesses ranged considerably from 200–750 nm with the thickest portion laying towards the centre of the glass where the underlying carbon heating block was hottest. This demonstrated how the deposition reaction of TiCl4 and ethyl acetate was surface reaction rate limited. The photocatalytic activity to UVA light was simultaneously assessed across all 247 points using an “intelligent ink”, this time containing resazurin (Rz) as the redox indicator rather than DCIP. This ink would change colour from royal blue to pink (resorufin–Rf) to colourless in a two-step kinetic photoreduction process. By monitoring the colour change of the ink layer through digital photography, the change in red-green-blue components in images could be related to the reaction kinetics.61 A minimum in the green component of digital colour showed the point where the intermediate Rf was at its maximum concentration and this was compared with phase composition and Ns levels, as shown in Fig. 27.
 Fig. 27  (a) Bar chart comparing the Ns: Ti% and time taken to reach a minimum in the green component of digital colour (Gmin) for 9 unique positions across the film that were closest to the reactor inlet and (b) a bar chart comparing the % rutile component as well as Ns: Ti % and Gmin for 9 unique positions across the middle section of the film; formed by the combinatorial APCVD of TiCl4, ethyl acetate and NH3 (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass. 

Fig. 27 showed a general trend where increased Ns-doping yielded a poorer photocatalyst given that the time taken to form the intermediate in the photo-reduction of a Rz-based “intelligent ink” typically increased. However, it is well known that the rate of photocatalysis is not based only on the impurity dopant level within a material. The rate of photocatalysis is also dependent upon: (i) the bandgap energy and exciting light source, (ii) material thickness, (iii) surface roughness and (iv) crystallinity. As the exciting light source (3.4 eV) was higher in energy than all observed bandgap energies, factor (i) could be negated. Given film thickness varied by ≈30% in both data sets, yet the time taken to reach Gmin varied by as much as 400%, the observed effects could not be attributed to factor (ii). All films were exceptionally smooth and below the measurement limit of the Brunauer-Emmet-Teller (BET) isotherm method. XRD studies showed that un-doped films were in fact less crystalline than Ns-doped films; negating factors (iii) and (iv). It was thus established that the photocatalytic rate was mainly dependent on the level of Ns-doping, where these sites acted as centres for the recombination of photo-generated electrons and holes;190 hampering UVA activated photocatalysis. Another trend was observed in Fig. 27(b), where an increased rutile phase component yielded a poorer photocatalyst. This was supported by a previous combinatorial study by Parkin et al. where a continuous range of anatase-rutile phase mixtures were deposited on a single substrate [(anatase)x(rutile)y (0 ≤ x ≤ 1, 0 ≤ y ≤ 0.8)] and lower photocatalytic activities to the photo-oxidation of a stearic acid overlayer was seen at more rutile composed positions.64
In their last combinatorial study of N-doped titania, Parkin et al. utilised an even lower level of NH3 as the N source (0.0086 × 10−3 mol min−1); forming continuous Ns and Ni-doped mixtures within a pure anatase framework over a single combinatorial thin-film where 0 ≤ Ns: Ti ≤ 11% and 1.0 ≤ Ni: Ti ≤ 4.3%.65 The photocatalytic activity of this film was assessed photographically once more to the photo-reduction of a Rz-based “intelligent ink”. However, the ink was cast using an aerosol-spray59 creating an even ink layer and allowing the photocatalytic activity to be mapped. The changing colours of the evenly cast ink layer are shown in Fig. 28 at various photo-excitation times. The bottom-right section of the film, that reacted most prominently, was found to be entirely composed of Ni-doped material. Elsewhere, some level of Ns-doping was found and comparatively hindered photocatalysis. In order to be thorough, representative sections of the film were tested to the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue dye in solution (UVA light) and the photocatalytic oxidation of stearic acid in air (visible light > 420 nm). Once again, the section that contained Ni-doping alone was most active. The activity could be entirely attributed to the dopant level as the bandgap/film-thickness, surface roughness and crystallinity were all accounted for.
 Fig. 28  A series of digital photographs taken during the photo-reduction reaction (UVA-365 nm) of a Rz-based “intelligent ink” layer evenly cast over an anatase semiconductor thin-film with varying levels of Ns and Ni dopant; formed by the combinatorial APCVD of TiCl4, ethyl acetate and NH3 (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass. 
Culminating Parkin et al.'s combinatorial thin-film research into N-doped titania,60,63–65 several general conclusions could be made:
(i) Pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N is a more active photocatalyst than Ni-doped anatase under UVA light.63
(ii) Un-doped anatase is more photocatalytically active than Ns-doped anatase under UVA light.60
(iii) Pure Ni-doped anatase is more photocatalytically active than Ns-doped anatase under UVA light and visible light (> 420 nm).65
(iv) Pure anatase is more photocatalytically active than anatase-rutile mixtures and pure rutile under both UVA and UVC light.60,64
11.2. Nb-doped TiO2
The photocatalytic properties of Nb-doped anatase TiO2 had previously been un-reported; however, several studies had investigated such a system for changes in conductivity.191,192 By replacing Ti4+ sites with Nb5+ ions, an additional electron per Nb ion can be injected into the materials conduction band, increasing the number of charge carriers for TCO applications. However, Parkin et al. postulated that the increased electron mobility might allow for more uninhibited transfer of photo-generated electrons and holes to the material surface where photocatalysis can take place. Using a combinatorial APCVD set-up, thin-films with continuously graded Nb5+ dopant levels were inserted within an anatase TiO2 framework. This was achieved through combining TiCl4, NbCl5 and ethyl acetate precursors on glass substrates within a cold-walled reactor set-up (N2carrier gas, 500 °C). The temperature of the NbCl5 source was altered in order to vary the precursor vapour pressure and reagent transfer. This allowed two compositionally graded thin-films to be synthesised where the Nb doping level ranged from 0.0004 ≤ x ≤ 0.0011 and 0.0017 ≤ x ≤ 0.0194 in NbxTi1−xO2 over each system respectively. The NbCl5 and TiCl4 precursors were introduced into the reactor from separate points creating a gradient in the Nb5+/Ti4+ ratio across each thin-film formed. XRD and Raman studies over 400 unique positions confirmed that both systems were composed entirely of the anatase titania phase and were of similar crystallinity (16.4–20.4 nm average crystallite size). By mapping the photocatalytic activity using a Rz-based “intelligent ink” method,59 sheet resistance using the Van der Pauw method193 and the material bandgap through Tauc plots a three dimensional functional property relationship was derived, as shown in Fig. 29. In the photocatalysis experiments, Parkin et al. measured the thickness of the even ink layer cast onto the semiconductor surface through spectroscopy and converted the time taken to reach a plateau in the red component of digital colour (point of full conversion of Rz indicator) into a photocatalytic rate (molecules reduced cm−2 s−1). As predicted by Parkin et al., the increased conductivity of the material was linked with an increase in the photocatalytic activity. However, the increased conductivity was not proportional to the level of Nb insertion into the anatase framework. The conductivity of a semiconductor is dependent on two fundamental properties; the number of charge carriers (n) and the mobility (μ) of these carriers through the host. Previous studies showed how oxygen vacancies within Nb-doped anatase were ideal for enhanced charge mobility (μ).191 Within the combinatorial systems investigated by Parkin et al., the most oxygen deficient sites were observed at the thickest sections and yielded the lowest film resistivities. It was thus concluded that rapid film growth encouraged oxygen vacancy formation and that charge mobility was more important than the number of charge carriers within the 0.0004 ≤ x ≤ 0.0194 regime in NbxTi1−xO2. In fact, the lowest bandgaps were seen at the most oxygen deficient sites and demonstrated enhanced visible light (> 420 nm) photocatalysis as well.
 Fig. 29  A 3D plot of the resistivity (Ωm), bandgap (eV) and photocatalytic activity (molecules reduced cm−2 s−1) for several positions along a strip of a compositionally graded Nb-doped anatase thin-film; formed through the combinatorial APCVD combination of TiCl4, NbCl5 and ethyl acetate precursors in a cold-walled reactor set-up (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass. 
12. Photovoltaic optimisation
A photovoltaic cell is a specialised semiconductor diode that converts light into direct current electricity. Typical bulk modules consists of a TCO layer (such as In-doped SnO2), an anti-reflection coating (such as Si3N4), a p-type doped crystalline Si semiconductor layer with some n-type dopants diffused at the top and a metallic electrode layer (typically Al) stacked on top of each other. However, such bulk solar cells use thick Si wafer and tend to have high production cost to wattage generated ratios. Because of this, thin-film solar cells have been explored. Although far less efficient than bulk solar cells, their cost to wattage ratios are higher because of cheaper materials costs. Typical inorganic thin-film solar cells utilise amorphous Si, Cd–Te or Cu–In–Ga–Se sandwiched semiconductor layers. The combinatorial approach has subsequently been applied in aid of increasing the speed of optimisation of such modules.
12.1. Amorphous Si
In spite of more than 30 years of thin-film hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) research improving the properties of this material and performance of devices for solar cell applications remain a significant technical challenge.194 For example, the properties of such thin-films near their transition from an amorphous to microcrystalline phase not only depends on the atomic H content, but also on as substrate temperature, reagent mixture ratio and gas pressure.195 Using a combinatorial hot-wire CVD thin-film approach, Wang et al. deposited a range of a-Si:H materials on glass.67,68,70 A tungsten wire was heated to 2000 °C using an electric current and placed in close proximity to the substrate surface. A series of motorised shutters and inter-changeable shadow masks controlled the film thickness of each discrete sample deposited. The SiH4 and H2 process gases were flowed over the substrate where they decomposed into their component radicals and reacted to form the epitaxial films (1 Pa). By varying the ratio and pressure of the process gases, a library of 130 discrete s-Si:H materials were formed.
Using Raman and UV-visible spectroscopy, the phase and thickness of the discrete sample libraries were mapped. At the lowest SiH4 flow rates (3–8 cm3 min−1), the transition from amorphous to microcrystalline Si (μc–Si) required very low H2 dilutions, as shown in Fig. 30(a). However, at higher SiH4 flow rates (16–22 cm3 min−1) higher H2 dilutions were required to deposit μc–Si. The growth rate was also studied as a function of SiH4 and H2 precursor dilutions. The highest growth rate (16.0 Å s−1) was achieved when no H2 dilutant was added for a SiH4 flow rate of 22 cm3 min−1. Increasing dilutions of H2 inhibited the growth rate with a logarithmic dependence. The phase formation was also studied as a function of final film thickness for a constant SiH4 flow rate of 8 cm3 min−1 and various H2 dilutions and it was generally found that films more than 150 nm thick predominantly formed the μc–Si phase.67 By placing a buffer layer ranging in thickness from ≈10–70 nm and Pd contact between 180 discrete thin-film samples, the dark current was assessed and an optimum buffer layer thickness of ≈45 nm was found; improving the functionality by a factor of 10 compared with the 70 nm thick buffer layer.
 Fig. 30  (a) microcrystalline: amorphous Si phase formation (%μc–Si) and (b) deposition rate (Å s−1) dependence for various partial pressures of H2 gas at constant SiH4 gas flow rates (3, 8, 16, 22 cm3 min−1) from combinatorial hot-wire CVD depositions over a single substrate (1 Pa, wire 2000 °C, glass substrate 200 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright John Wiley & Sons Inc 2004. 
12.2. 
          Perylene dye organics
Organic solar cells utilising conductive organic polymers and small organic molecules for light absorption and charge transport have increased in popularity given their cheap manufacturing costs, material flexibility and highly tuneable bandgap. However, the long term stabilities and low quantum efficiencies of such modules remain a concern.196
Using the combinatorial approach, Kraush et al. formulated and tested a series of 64 discrete perylene dye sensitised Cu phalocyanine solar cells.69 An In-doped SnO2 TCO substrate was first coated with an even layer (35 nm) of Cu phalocyanine. Dimethyl perylene tetracarboxyl-diimide (DMPTI) and/or bis-benzimidazole perylene (BBIP) sensitizers were deposited (25 nm layer) within separate grid squares (0.12 cm2) and then coated with TiO2 (0, 15 or 30 nm layer). The 64 unique positions were tested over a period of 800 hours of continuous operation to a visible light source cut off at <320 nm. The current density and open circuit voltage at each position was measured, displaying the power generated and HOMO–LUMO separations respectively. The most active modules over the entire period were observed within the BBIP sensitized cells not coated with TiO2, where open-circuit voltages of 0.27 V and current densities of 0.27 mA.cm−2 were still observed after 800 hours. Although the open-circuit voltage did not change much over the entire period, the current density fell by almost 50%. Modules coated with TiO2 electron transfer layers were initially most highly active, but fell most rapidly in activity over time. It was suggested that this rapid diminishment was due to the TiO2 layer photocatalytically degrading the sensitiser layer in contact.
13. Transparent conducting oxide optimisation
Transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) play a key role in a number of thin-film optoelectronic devices including flat panel displays, low emissivity windows, photovoltaics, electrochromic devices and anti-static coatings.197 The bulk of these applications rely on established n-type semiconductors, such as F-doped or In-doped SnO2 and Al-doped ZnO.198 Due to the limited availability of indium metal, there has been a considerable drive to find new materials to replace In-doped SnO2, which has been applied exclusively in flat-panel displays. Next generation devices will require improved existing TCOs or new exotic materials, such as binary and ternary metal oxide thin-films. In order to facilitate more general binary-ternary studies, and perhaps even more complex quaternary studies, the combinatorial thin-film approach may yield the most rapid discoveries.
13.1. Zn–Sn oxides

          Zn2SnO4 and ZnSnO3 thin-films have demonstrated conductivities ranging from 50–100 Ω−1 cm−1 and 250 Ω−1 cm−1 respectively.199,200 However, In-doped SnO2, one of the industry standards, has shown more promising conductivities of 104 Ω−1 cm−1.198 Nevertheless, Perkins et al. decided to investigate Zn–Sn oxide phase space using the combinatorial thin-film approach for two reasons.77 Firstly, Zn2SnO4 is an important interface layer in highly efficient CdS/CdTe polycrystalline solar cells (16.5% efficiency)201 and secondly ZnSnO3 has a very high electron work function (5.3 eV) which is attractive for hole extraction in polymer photovoltaics.199
Using a magnetron PVD sputtering synthesis, libraries with continuous gradients in the Zn/Sn cation ratio were deposited on glass substrates from Zn and Sn metal targets (O2, 5 Pa 250 °C). Films were post annealed under a flow of N2 at 625 °C. A large range of phase space was covered in two depositions with Zn/ Sn ratios ranging from ≈2–8 and ≈0.5–2.5 respectively. In each library, 56 positions were investigated using high-throughput methods. For instance, using a UV-visible CCD-based fibre-optic coupled spectrometer, the full transmittance or reflectance spectrum from 200–1100 nm could be analysed in just one second per sample. From such optical measurements, the material bandgap and thickness were derived. In addition, the number of charge carriers and electron mobility could be estimated. This is because TCO materials show a decrease in the optical transmission within the infrared due to plasma oscillations of the conducting electrons; where plasma edges generally shift to shorter wavelengths with increased carrier concentrations and conductivities. Given the film thickness was almost invariant over the two continuous libraries, film conductivities could be directly compared. The conductivity was mapped using a 4-point probe and displayed as a function of the Zn/Sn ratio determined, as shown in Fig. 31. Two local maxima were observed at Zn/Sn ratios of 1 and 2. From XRD studies these maxima corresponded to the ZnSnO3 and Zn2SnO4 compounds respectively. Perkins et al. subsequently deposited uniform films of each of these materials using a PLD set-up, a KrF excimer laser and ZnSnO3/Zn2SnO4 ceramic disks (O2, 5 Pa, 500 °C). The ZnSnO3 thin-film showed the most promising properties for TCO applications of the two systems, with sheet conductivity = 54 Ω−1 cm−1, carrier concentration = 3.5 × 1019 cm−3 and carrier mobility = 33 cm2 V−1 s−1.
 Fig. 31  Conductivity maps of the two Zn–Sn oxide libraries where Zn/Sn ratios ranged from (a) ≈2–8 and (b) ≈0.5–2.5; produced from the combinatorial magnetron sputtering of Zn and Sn targets on glass (O2, 5 Pa 250 °C) and post-annealed at 625 °C in a N2 atmosphere. Contour lines indicate Zn/Sn ratios and colour codes represent the logarithm of the conductivity (log10Ω−1 cm−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, copyright Elsevier 2002. 
13.2. Sr2Rh1−xRuxO4
Layered perovskites of K2NiF4-type oxides have an anisotropic electronic structure, and can exhibit interesting physical phenomena such as high Tc superconductivity in La2−xSrxCuO4 and charge/spin stripes in La2−xSrxNiO4. Bulk polycrystalline Sr2RhO4 compounds also exhibit the layered perovskite structure of K2NiF4, but had not been investigated in the thin-film format until the combinatorial study by Koinuma et al.80 With knowledge that Sr2RuO4 materials formed analogous perovskite structures, Koinuma et al. used a combinatorial PLD approach to deposit Sr2Rh1−xRuxO4 thin-films over the full compositional range in just two depositions. A KrF excimer laser was used to ablate ceramic Sr2RhO4 and Sr2RuO4 targets through a moving shadow mask to create the desired Rh/Ru compositional gradient (O2, 0.1 Pa). The targets were sputtered in such a way as to form films of even thickness (120 nm). In addition, a Nd:YAG laser was used to create a heating gradient from 650–850 °C across the substrate. The continuously graded libraries were post-annealed at 450 °C for an hour in pure O2 (105 Pa). Crystalline Sr2Rh1−xRuxO4 oriented in the (001) crystallographic direction was found to deposit only over a narrow temperature range of 720–770 °C (Fig. 32(a)). The optimum deposition temperature for maximum film crystallinity depended highly on the Rh/Ru ratio (Fig. 32(b)).
 Fig. 32  (a) The intensity of the (006) peak in XRD patterns as a function of substrate temperature taken over the continuous Sr2Rh1−xRuxO4 combinatorial film; where red to purple represents maximum crystallinity to amorphous and (b) the resistivity of representative positions along the dotted white line (regions of maximum intensity in the (006) plane); formed from the PLD of Sr2RhO4 and Sr2RuO4 targets on LSAT substrates (O2, 0.1 Pa). Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, copyright Elsevier 2004. 
Over the entire compositional range of 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 two metal-insulator transitions were observed. The pure Sr2RhO4 thin-film (x = 0) showed metallic behaviour from 2–350 K, with a resistivity of 7 × 10−3 Ω.cm at 2 K. This was in contrast with bulk samples, where resistivities near absolute zero were reported to be ≈7 Ω.cm and showed insulating behaviour above 200 K.202 Such a discrepancy reflected the anisotropic transport properties often observed in layered thin-film perovskites. Low level doping of Ru (x = 0.02) gave rise to a metal-insulator transition and further doping (x = 0.09) caused insulating behaviour below 350 K. At the other end of the spectrum, Sr2RuO4 (x = 1) showed metallic character over the entire temperature range from 2–350 K. The residual resistivity was as low as 10 Ω.cm and compared well with thin-films fabricated previously.203 When these Ru sites were replaced with Rh ions, this metallic nature remained until x ≈ 0.88. At this point, another metal-insulator transition occurred over 0.62 ≤ x ≤ 0.88. For 0.02 ≤ x ≤ 0.62, purely insulating behaviour was observed.
13.3. Ni–Mn–Co oxides
Ni–Co oxides with spinel crystal structure AB2O4 have attracted interest for infra-red TCO applications (IRTCO).204 Such IRTCO materials have a range of possible applications in optoelectronic devices such as flat panel displays, infrared sensors, and solar cells.205 Infra-red transmission of highly conducting n-type TCOs is severely limited by their free carrier absorption; p-type TCOs, such as Co3O4 and NiO, typically show excellent infra-red transmission but markedly lower conductivity when compared to their n-type counterparts. Ternary spinel oxides containing Mn, Co and Ni exhibit p-type electrical conduction and an optically transparent window from 6000 to 14000 nm.206 Their electrical conductivity and hole hopping activation energy depend strongly on chemical composition. In order to be useful in IRTCO devices, these ternary alloys must be screened for the most advantageous electrical transport characteristics of low resistivity and low hopping activation energy.
Using a combinatorial thin-film approach, Kukuruznyak et al. were able to deposit almost the entire range of binary and ternary Ni–Mn–Co oxides on a single substrate.78 Using a combinatorial PLD synthesis, a KrF excimer laser ablated Mn2O3, Co3O4 and NiO targets through a series of moving shutters onto a rotating Nb-doped SrTiO3 (0.8 at% Nb) (100) substrate (O2, 0.1 Pa, 400 °C). The parameters were controlled such that all compositions deposited over the continuous library were ≈100 nm in total thickness. The continuous library was subsequently annealed at 600 °C for 30 minutes (O2, 0.1 Pa) to induce a homogenous inter-diffusion of the elements. Using a scanning graphite probe the film resistivity and hole hopping activation energies were mapped, as shown in Fig. 33. Several thousand positions were investigated revealing interesting physical-functional property relationships. For instance, from the resistivity map in Fig. 33(a), a region of low resistivity (yellow colour) around the centre of the Ni–Co binary region was observed. This represents a well-known branch of NiO–Co3O4 alloys, where the point of maximum conductivity corresponds to the compound CoNi2O4 (point A). Although this material showed the most promising conductivity of all binary and ternary alloys screened, binary Co–Ni oxides exhibit significant resistivity–temperature dependence as observed in Fig. 33(b), where Ea ≈ 0.3 eV. Consequently such materials could not be used in infra-red sensors. However, the ternary oxide alloys (Mn0.45Ni0.63Co1.92O4-Mn0.69Ni0.81Co1.50O4) distributed along the arc labelled BC in Fig. 33(a) and (b) showed much lower temperature sensitivities and an Ea ≈ 0.1 eV. These compounds also showed desirable resistivities for electronic device implementation. It was thus suggested that these newly discovered ternary mixtures might find use in infra-red sensors and other modules where minimal thermal influence is warranted.
 Fig. 33  (a) resistivity (Ω.cm) and (b) hole hopping activation energy (eV) maps of the continuous Ni–Mn–Co oxide thin-film phase space; deposited from the combinatorial PLD ablation of Mn2O3, Co3O4 and NiO targets through a series of shadow masks onto a Nb-doped SrTiO3 (0.8 at% Nb) (100) substrate (O2, 0.1 Pa, 400 °C) and post-annealed at 600 °C for 30 minutes (O2, 0.1 Pa). Reproduced with permission from ref. 78, copyright Elsevier 2006. 
13.4. Li-doped NiO
Most TCO materials are n-type semiconductors with free electrons resulting from extrinsic donors as well as intrinsic donors. However, in optoelectronic devices such as solar cells, p-type TCO materials are also required. The wide bandgap semiconductor NiO (3.6–4.0 eV) is an interesting candidate of this class of material, yet exhibits low conductivity. Nevertheless, the resistivity of NiO can be lowered by increasing the number of Ni3+ ions through doping monovalent cations such as Li.207 Using a combinatorial PLD method, Koinuma et al. approached the problem of optimising Li-doped NiO thin-films for p-type TCO application.75 A KrF excimer laser ablated NiO and Li0.2Ni0.8O ceramic targets through a lateral moving shadow mask onto an MgO (100) substrate (O2, 0.1 Pa, 600 °C) to form a continuous range of LixNi1−x thin-films where 0.10 ≤ x ≤ 0.00. The deposition was conducted at 600 °C where an optimal balance between Li holding and crystallinity was observed. The deposition parameters were controlled so that a film with even thickness was formed (40 nm). Films showed greater than 80% transparency over the visible (400–800 nm). Interestingly, Li doping caused a red-shift in the absorption edge of the material, where a linear increase in the optical bandgap from Li0.1Ni0.9O (3.62 eV) to NiO (3.32 eV) was observed. The position of highest Li insertion (x = 0.1) showed the greatest conductivity (1.42 Ω.cm), which decreased linearly with a reduction in doping to the NiO pure end (x = 0.0, 0.02 Ω.cm). Hall effect measurements confirmed the charge transfer to be p-type and estimated the average hole concentration and carrier mobility to be 3 × 1018 cm−3 and 0.27 cm2 V−1 s−1 respectively at x = 0.05; in accordance with the literature.208
13.5. Ga-doped ZnO

          ZnO based TCO materials provide a cost-effective solution over In-doped SnO2, having been applied as electrodes in solar cell modules. Since Ga and Al have an affinity with ZnO, Ga-doped ZnO and Al-doped ZnO are regarded as the most promising alternatives to In-doped SnO2, which shows typical resistivities of 1–2 × 10−4 Ω.cm. While Ga dopants behave as donors at low concentrations, excess insertion above a threshold has been shown to be disadvantageous to resistivity. Regardless of this, most of the studies of Ga-doped ZnO in the literature have worked with a fixed concentration of Ga that has not been optimised. With this in mind, Akazawa utilised combinatorial thin-film methods to optimise the dopant level.76 Using a combined magnetron PVD sputtering and electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) plasma, he deposited a range of continuous Ga-doped ZnO libraries at a variety of temperatures (70, 100, 200, 300 °C). Separate ceramic ZnO and Ga2O3 targets were co-sputtered onto silica substrates via a plasma and sputter-gun respectively (Ar, 5 × 10−2 Pa). The deposition parameters were controlled so that continuously graded Ga-doped ZnO thin-films (0–23 wt% doping) of even thickness (330 nm) formed. All positions showed a 90% transparency over the 400–800 nm range and preferential orientation in the (001) c-axis. Within the continuous film deposited at 70 °C, the carrier mobility (μ) decreased with doping. This was related to the hindrance of electronic motion with the incorporation of Ga impurity ions. However, since Ga doping introduced charge carriers, the optimal balance between charge carrier concentration and electron mobility was found at a doping level of 5.5 wt%. When the reaction was conducted at increasingly higher temperatures, this optimum dopant level shifted from 5.5 wt% at 70 °C, to 3.5 wt% at 200 °C to 2.5 wt% at 300 °C; as shown in Fig. 34(a).
 Fig. 34  Plot of (a) film resistivity (mΩ.cm) versus Ga content (% wt) and (b) carrier concentration, mobility and resistivity versus temperature at the best performing Ga concentration in that series over a range of continuously varying Ga-doped ZnO thin-films produced by the combinatorial PVD of ceramic ZnO and Ga2O3 targets on glass substrates (Ar, 5 × 10−2 Pa). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, copyright ACS Publications 2010. 
The optimum Ga dopant level was higher at lower deposition temperatures because a greater number of crystal defects in the ZnO lattice could better accommodate insertion. The higher number of oxygen vacancies at low temperatures was also highly beneficial to the electrical conduction, where at higher temperatures these defects diminished. However, films made at low temperatures suffer more from grain boundaries that inhibit carrier mobility. The film with lowest resistivity was produced at the intermediate temperature of 200 °C, where an optimal balance between film crystallinity (lower grain boundaries) and oxygen vacancies was found (Fig. 34(b)). At this temperature, Ga ions better substituted Zn sites rather than inserting interstitially; injecting more charge carriers into the system per Ga ion. Interestingly, this film (3.5 wt% Ga, 200 °C) showed a resistivity of 2.8 × 10−4 Ω.cm and was comparable to that of In-doped SnO2.
14. Shape memory optimisation
Shape memory alloys form a class of materials in which large deformations can be induced and recovered through temperature or stress changes (pseudoelasticity). These large deformations result from martensitic phase changes in which the material can inter-change with little thermal activation between the martensitic phase (body-centred tetragonal), capable of large strains, and the cold-forged austenite phase (face-centred cubic). The shape change is normally reversible for a large number of cycles, forming a phase-temperature/stress hysteresis. This function has been commercially exploited in pipelines, aircraft engines, orthopaedic medicine, dental braces and even the bendable frames of reading glasses.
14.1. Ni–Ti–Cu
The 50:50 Ni-Ti alloy, otherwise known as “Nitinol”, is today one of the most popular shape memory alloys used in the medical field, owing to its biocompatibility and high mechanical recovery after being delivered from a compact system.209 However, the material shows undesirable fatigue properties along with high temperature/stress hysteresis. To this end, extensive research has been carried out to understand and optimise these materials through alloying with Cu and other metals.
With the recent introduction of a theory that describes the optimal conditions for long-lasting shape memory alloys,210 Cui et al. utilised the combinatorial thin-film approach to probe the thermal activation hysteresis for a range of Ni–Ti–Cu ternary alloys.72 The theory explained how the microstructure and shape-memory effect are tied to the crystalline symmetry and geometric compatibilities. Two conditions were outlined where (i) no volume change should occur upon the martensitic phase change and (ii) the austenite phase should be directly compatible with a single variant of martensite. These conditions could be quantified through XRD experiment in situ. Intriguingly, one of the best known shape memory alloys Ni40.5Ti49.5Cu10 obeyed these theoretical criteria, showing low activation energy hysteresis at 100 MPa/20 °C.211 Using a magnetron co-sputtering technique with a series of shadow masks, Cui et al. deposited over 2000 discrete Ni–Ti–Cu samples (each 1.5 × 1.5 mm2) onto SiO2 coated (400 nm layer) Si wafers from separated metallic targets.72 The discrete libraries were annealed for 2 hours at 550 °C to relieve substrate-film stresses and ensure the complete homogenous inter-diffusion of components. Given that a change in conductivity occurs upon a martensitic phase change, screening changes in the electrical conductivity with varying temperature unveils the hysteresis activation energy. This activation energy was mapped for the 2000+ compositions and is displayed in Fig. 35. This hysteresis ranged from 20–60 °C, with the region of minimum activation energy located near Ti55Ni43Cu12. Within this region the thermal hysteresis decreased with increasing Cu concentration until a plateau of ≈10 at.% was reached, agreeing well with the literature. From in situ high-throughput synchrotron XRD studies, the phase volume change and phase compatibility was assessed in accordance with the theory. The sample that displayed the lowest activation energy in its shape-memory phase change (Ti55Ni33Cu12) matched the theoretical criteria best. Cui et al. proposed how this criterion, when combined with combinatorial methods, might be used to discover new highly reversible alloys.
 Fig. 35  Thermal activation energy map for the martensitic phase change in Ni–Ti–Cu ternary alloys produced by the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of more than 2000 discrete samples from separate metal targets onto SiO2 coated Si wafers (annealed 550 °C, 2 hours). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright Nature Publishing Group 2006. 
Following this work, Löbel et al. also investigated the shape memory properties of the Ni–Ti–Cu ternary system.71 Using an analogous magnetron co-sputtering set up to Cui et al.,72 a discrete library of more than 500 unique samples were deposited onto SiO2 coated (1500 nm layer) Si (100) substrates (Ar, 0.66 Pa, annealed 500 °C-1 hour). A range of ternary Ti100−x−yNixCuy alloys from 0 ≤ y ≤ 40 were formed. Analogous to Cui et al., an activation energy map for the martensitic phase changes was composed. In addition, Löbel et al. investigated the pathway of this phase transition by measuring the changes in film resistance during the hysteresis cycle. The typical phase pathway involves the transition from the high temperature cubic austenite phase (B2) to the low temperature monoclinic martensite phase (B19′). However, upon increasing the Cu-content within the Ti-rich ternary phase region, a two-step transition pathway through an intermediate orthorhombic martensite phase (B19) occurs. Cui et al. observed large decreases in the thermal activation energy for the martensitic shape change with increased Cu doping over the Ti55Ni45−xCux regime; reaching a plateau when x ≥ 10.72 Löbel et al. observed a similar effect over the Ti51Ni49−xCux regime, which plateaued at x ≥ 6.5. Nevertheless, the reason for this plateau was explained by Löbel et al. through assessing the phase pathway, as shown in Fig. 36. Upon reaching the thermal plateau, the mechanism changed from the typical B2–B19′ to the two-step B2–B19–B19′ transition. This provided an explanation as to why increased alloying of Cu above this level did not decrease the activation energy.
 Fig. 36  Plot of the thermal activation energy and mechanistic pathway for the for the martensitic phase change in Ti51Ni49−xCux (0 ≤ x ≤ 27) ternary alloys produced by the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of more than 500 discrete samples from separate metal targets onto SiO2 coated Si wafers (Ar, 0.66 Pa, annealed 500 °C-1 hour).Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, copyright Elsevier 2008. 
14.2. Ni–Ti–Pd
One of the first examples of an applied micro-actuator was based on the high-temperature shape memory characteristics of Ti50Ni40Pd10 and Ti50Ni20Pd30 thin-films.212 Later, Ti51.0Ni25.5Pd23.5 thin-films were successfully applied in high temperature micro-valves with short cooling times and rapid actuation cycling frequencies.213 Nevertheless, most of the alloys investigated within this system have been close in composition to Ti50Ni50−xPdx. In order to thoroughly optimize this system for thin-film actuator applications, a wider picture of the ternary phase space was needed. Zarnetta et al. investigated this un-covered phase space using a combinatorial approach.73 With a similar set-up to Löbel et al.,71 the magnetron co-sputtering PVD method was used to deposit more than 360 discrete Ni–Ti–Pd alloys of unique composition (Ar, 0.66 Pa, annealed 500 °C-1 hour). Separate metal targets were deposited onto SiO2 coated (1500 nm layer) Si (100) substrates. The sputtering rates were optimised so as to deposit consistently thick films (1000 nm). Through XRD studies and resistivity measurements, the shape memory mechanisms and thermal activation energies were mapped across the ternary space. At low Pd contents, a two-stage martensitic phase transformation took place, where the high temperature cubic austenite phase (B2) transformed via an intermediate trigonal martensite phase (R) into the low temperature monoclinic martensite phase (B19′). Compared with higher Pd content materials, where a direct phase transfer from B2–B19′ took place (Pd > ≈10 at%), these transformations occurred at moderate temperatures (≈60 °C) with low thermal activation (1 to 4 °C). These processes are summarised in Fig. 37a and b. A linearly increasing thermal activation energy was seen with higher Pd and Ti content over the B2–B19′ transformation regime and was attributed to increased precipitation of Ti2Pd aggregates (Ti > ≈59 at%). With respect to micro-actuator applications, optimised properties (i.e. low thermal hysteresis activation energy and high transformation temperatures) were found for Ti50Ni50−xPdx where 20 ≤ x ≤ 30. In this region the transformation temperatures were above 100 °C and the thermal activation energy was ≈10 °C. However, for high-speed actuator applications it was suggested that compositions close to Ti54.5Ni36Pd9.5 would be optimal given the low thermal activation energy (≈1 °C).
 Fig. 37  Ternary maps displaying the (a) mechanistic pathway for the for the martensitic phase changes and (b) the thermal activation energy in Ni–Ti–Pd thin-film alloys produced by the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of more than 360 discrete samples from separate metal targets onto SiO2 coated Si wafers (Ar, 0.66 Pa, annealed 500 °C-1 hour). Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, copyright Elsevier 2007. 
15. Thermo-electric optimisation
The thermoelectric power of a material is a measure of the magnitude of an induced thermoelectric voltage in response to a temperature difference across that material. Classically, an applied temperature difference causes charged carriers in the material, whether they are electrons or holes, to diffuse from the hot side to the cold side, similar to a gas that expands when heated. Mobile charged carriers migrating to the cold side leave behind their oppositely charged and immobile nuclei at the hot side thus giving rise to a thermoelectric voltage, denoted by the Seebeck coefficient (S) where: (4)and ΔV denotes the thermo-electric voltage, E the electric field and Δ/∇T the temperature difference/gradient across the material. Therefore, semiconductors doped with excess electron donors (n-type) or holes (p-type) can show large positive or negative thermo-powers depending on the number of charge carriers within the system.
Thin-film thermo-electric devices were investigated for energy harvesting applications and temperature measurements in turbine engines used for propulsion and power generation. These thin-films add an almost negligible mass to the coated components and thus do not disturb the vibrational modes in smaller blades. At present, the materials with highest thermo-electric performance are inter-metallic compounds such as Bi2Te3.214 However, their practical application to power generation has been limited by many material problems such as low melting points, poor oxidation resistance and insufficient conversion efficiencies over the typical operating temperature range of waste heat (300–800 °C). This has led to the surge of interest in discovering new or optimising existing thermo-electric materials.81–85
15.1. Ba-doped Ca3Co4O9 and (La1−xCax)VO3

          Sr and Bi substituted Ca3Co4O9 whiskers were reported to have high thermo-electric powers with greatest figures of merit at temperatures above 750 °C.215 The Ca3Co4O9 structures contain tilted octahedral CoO2 layers that undergo rhombohedral distortions inducing thermo-electric power. Using a combinatorial approach, Koinuma et al. attempted to optimise the thermo-electric properties of the Ca3Co4O9 system by systematically substituting Ca sites with Ba.84 Through a combinatorial PLD synthesis, CaCO3, Co3O4, and BaCO3 targets were ablated using a KrF excimer laser onto TiO2 rutile (100) substrates through laterally moving shadow masks (O2, 10 Pa, 700 °C). The deposition parameters were controlled to produce 10 discrete (Ca1−xBax)3Co4O9 samples approximately 300 nm in thickness over 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.2. Films were post-annealed to reduce oxygen deficiencies (O2, 105 Pa, 400 °C). Films consistently adopted the Ca3Co4O9 structure, regardless of the Ba doping level and were highly oriented in the c-axis. Systematic lattice expansions in the c-axis from 10.953 Å (x = 0) to 10.991 Å (x = 0.2) occurred and were attributed to the large differences in cationic radii of Ca2+ (1.00 Å) and Ba2+ (1.35 Å).
A multi-channel power factor measurement system was used to assess the thermo-electric properties. The conductivity decreased rapidly from 28 Ω−1 cm−1 at x = 0 to 5.0 Ω−1 cm−1 at x = 0.02 and plateaued with further doping. However, almost no change in the Seebeck coefficient for all levels of Ba doping was observed. The conductivity decrease was attributed to the deterioration of ionic periodicity caused by the introduction of steric Ba2+ ions. Nevertheless, the flat response of Seebeck coefficient showed how Ba substitution in Ca3Co4O9 was not the appropriate solution for functional optimisation.

Vanadium oxides possess various interesting properties due to their multivalent nature. In general, heavy electron systems generate large thermo-electric power due to the high density of states at the Fermi level. Thus, vanadium oxides were suggested as good candidates for efficient thermo-electric materials. Koinuma et al. investigated (La1−xCax)VO3 phase space through the combinatorial approach.81 Using a combinatorial PLD set-up, LaVO3 and CaVO3 targets were ablated through a lateral moving shadow mask onto SrTiO3 (100) substrates to create 15 unique samples spanning the (La1−xCax)VO3 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 range (Ar, 0.1 Pa, 800 °C). XRD diffraction studies confirmed the materials formed solid-solutions, following Vegard's law of alloying with linear variation in the c-axis from 4.04 Å at x = 0 (pure LaVO3, La3+ = 1.03 Å) to 3.75 Å at x = 1 (pure CaVO3, Ca2+ = 1.00 Å). Using a high-throughput multi-channel system, Koinuma et al. systematically investigated the thermo-electric properties of the 15 unique compositions (Fig. 38).
 Fig. 38  A plot of the Seebeck coefficient (μV.K−1), resistivity (Ω.cm) and thermo-electric power (μW.cm−1K−2) against composition for a range of discrete (La1−xCax)VO3 thin-film materials over 0 ≤ x ≤ 1; formed from the combinatorial PLD of LaVO3 and CaVO3 targets through a shadow mask onto SrTiO3 (100) substrates (Ar, 0.1 Pa, 800 °C). Power factor (α) = S2/ρ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, copyright IOP Publications 2004. 
The Seebeck coefficients near the CaVO3 end of the combinatorial library were close to zero (0 to −5 mV.K−1), whereas those near the LaVO3 end were highly negative (≈−310 mV.K−1). This was attributed the higher carrier concentration in LaVO3, where introduction of Li3+ sites induced the oxidation of V3+ cations to V4+ and the injection of electrons into the system. A transition point occurred at x = 0.2, where La0.8Ca0.2VO3 became metallic. The Seebeck coefficient in the Ca rich end of La1−xCaxVO3 (0.6 ≤ x ≤ 1.0) was highly temperature sensitive, switching from slightly positive to slightly negative values. This was due to the metallic nature of the material where both electron and hole carriers competed to be the dominant species. The pure LaVO3 composition represented an excellent starting material for future optimisations, displaying the highest power factor (α) of 0.6 μW cm−1K−2.
15.2. Ce-doped SrTiO3
La–Sr titanates have shown promising thermo-electric properties, demonstrating power factor values of 36 mW cm−1K−2 at 300 K for a bulk single crystal of composition La0.02Sr0.98TiO3.216 Its strong thermo-electric effect was related to the large entropy the free electron carriers possess within the mixed valence configuration. Ohtomo et al. investigated the Ce–Sr titanate phase space through a combinatorial approach to find the optimal composition for thermo-electric properties.83 Using a combinatorial PLD set-up, individual ceramic SrTiO3 and CeTiO3 targets were ablated onto LSAT substrates using a KrF excimer laser through a lateral moving shadow mask to form 12 discrete compositions ranging from 0.0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5 in CexSr1−xTiO3 (O2, 10−3 Pa, 830 °C). The deposition conditions were controlled to form films of consistent thickness ≈100 nm. All samples were solid-solutions with perovskite phase symmetry. The film resistivity, charge carrier concentration and carrier mobility were assessed through Hall effect measurements. It was found that substituting Sr2+ ions for Ce3+ ions significantly increased the number of electron carriers from 8 × 1017 cm−3 at x = 0 to 1 × 1021 cm−3 at x = 0.2. Further doping did not yield such dramatic increases, peaking at 8 × 1021 cm−3 at x = 0.5. However, the electron mobility found a maximum at x = 0.2, where this composition showed the most pronounced thermo-electric properties. For the Ce0.2Sr0.8TiO3 composition (x = 0.2), the room temperature values of S (Seebeck) and σ (conductivity) were 70 mV/K and 1.3 × 103 Ω−1 cm−1 respectively. With increasing temperature, the absolute value of S systematically increased, whereas σ decreased. This resulted in a small but continuous increase in the thermo-electric power, doubling from 7 mW.cm−1K−2 at 25 °C to 14 mW.cm−1K−2 at 625 °C.
15.3. ZnxInyOx+1.5y
Wide bandgap semiconducting oxides are ideal for candidates for high thermo-electric applications as they are resistant to oxidation and stable at high temperatures. Charge carriers in most transparent conducting oxides are due to oxygen vacancies, thus sputtering in partial pressures of oxygen typically decreases electrical conductivity. Thermoelectric studies on bulk ZnO and In2O3 [ZnO:In2O3] ceramics have resulted in a maximum figure of merit value of m = 3;217 where: Thermo-electric figure of merit = S2σT/κ(5)and κ is the material's thermal conductivity. However, the authors only investigated a few compositions. For this reason, Gregory et al. applied combinatorial methods to fully explore the ZnxInyOx+1.5y system.85 Using a magnetron sputtering system, continuously graded thin-films were formed covering almost all combinations over the Zn-In range; where 0.05 ≤ δ ≤ 0.92 and δ = WIn/(WIn + WZn). The libraries were heat-treated for 5 hours at 500 °C under N2, characterised and then annealed in air for 1 hour at 500 °C before being characterised once more. The as-deposited materials showed resistivities between 0.002 and 0.007 Ω.cm which increased by a factor of 10 upon annealing in N2 and a factor of 100 upon annealing in air. Converse to this, the Seebeck co-efficient increased dramatically upon annealing, suggesting that a loss in oxygen vacancies was compensated by selectively increased phonon scattering over the Zn-rich region of 0.1 ≤ δ ≤ 0.55 (Fig. 39(a)). The compositions with the largest and most stable power factors were observed within the 0.85 ≤ δ ≤ 0.95 range (Fig. 39(b)). The two most promising compositions for thermo-electricity applications corresponded to Zn2In6O11 (δ = 0.85) and Zn4In6O13 (δ = 0.72) which displayed the optimum power factors and Seebeck coefficients respectively.
 Fig. 39  (a) Seebeck coefficients (μV/°C) and (b) power factors (μWcm−1K−2) over a range of continuous ZnxInyOx+1.5y thin-film materials where δ = WIn/(WIn + WZn); formed by the combinatorial magnetron co-sputtering of separated ZnO and In2O3 targets on alumina substrates (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 25 °C) and annealed as stated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2011. 
16. Overview and future outlook
The publication rate for research papers devoted to thin-film combinatorial research has steady increased from 31 publications in 1996–2000, to 201 publications in 2001–2005 to 311 publications in 2006–2010. Using such methods, a wide-range of material compositions were optimised for a variety of functions. Nevertheless, most functional properties depend on more than just composition. For instance, in the field of photocatalysis, the activity depends upon several factors including bandgap, crystallinity, surface roughness and film thickness. Although most groups using the combinatorial thin-film approach as a route to optimising functional properties have utilised precise deposition methods that produce highly epitaxial and evenly smooth films; slight variations in film crystallinity, surface roughness etc. were not always accounted for. In order for combinatorial methods to carry more weight as a leading materials approach, a characterisation that covers all avenues of related functionalities should be consistently addressed. Several examples in this review used combinatorial methods to produce and assess more than 100–1000+ unique material compositions. However, smaller libraries usually containing only 10–20 unique members were more common. For the true power of the combinatorial approach to take root, more states should be assessed in a given study. This would ensure the true optimum composition is established and previously unexplored phase space is not missed for new and unique materials discoveries. Alongside this, characterisation tools should be further developed to meet the requirements of rapid screening.
An added benefit of the thin-film approach is the wider range of materials that can be formed, previously unattainable in the bulk. Given the commercial boon in the technological application of thin-film materials, their investigation from the combinatorial perspective could significantly improve the development of this technology in their applied format.
Within the field of thin-film combinatorial optimisation, PVD techniques have been applied in predominance over CVD or wet-chemical methods. Where thin-film combinatorial PVD methods have the advantage of tailoring compositional gradients with high precision, these materials inherently suffer from epitaxial stresses and strains due to lattice mismatch with the underlying substrate. However, films formed from CVD suffer less from these effects as the process relies upon the chemical reaction of precursors. CVD can also produce films with excellent conformal coverage on non-flat substrates; where PVD methods typically fail. There are also a multitude of CVD variants, each with specific benefits. For instance, aerosol-assisted CVD (AACVD) can introduce heavy precursors or even nanoparticles within depositions and could provide an avenue for the combinatorial investigation to the intrinsic effect of nanoparticle concentration, size, monodispersity etc. within a host medium. Also, equipment start-up costs are typically cheaper for CVD apparatus over PVD. Indeed, the combinatorial CVD method is yet to be explored in as much depth as PVD methods and is certainly an open canvas. The difficulty of CVD is getting precise compositional gradients, something to which PVD excels.
Most researchers have used the combinatorial approach to rapidly investigate phase space already covered by individual synthetic operations. Although the combinatorial approach can refine compositions for an optimised functional performance it has the unique power of being able to rapidly unravel previously unexplored phase space. As shown by Van Dover et al. in their discovery and optimisation of Zr0.2Sn0.2Ti0.6O2 di-electric thin-films for DRAM applications,12 combinatorial exploration and optimisation should be more frequently unified in discovering promising candidates and maximising their functional benefits.
Acknowledgements
IPP wishes to thank the Royal Society and Wolfsen Trust for a merit award. The EPSRC are also thanked for funding.
References
J. Zhao, Progress in Materials Science, 2006, 51, 557 CrossRef .
X.-D. Xiang, Annual Review of Materials Science, 1999, 29, 149 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Woo, K. W. Kim, H. Y. Cho, K. S. Oh, M. K. Jeon, N. H. Tarte, T. S. Kim and A. Mahmood, QSAR & Combinatorial Science, 2005, 24, 138 CAS .
Z. H. Barber and M. G. Blamire, Materials Science and Technology, 2008, 24, 757 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jurgen, Science, 2000, 287, 1960 CrossRef .
A. Boettcher, G. Haase and R. Thun, Zeitschrift fur Metallkunde, 1955, 46, 386 CAS .
J. J. Hanak, Journal of Materials Science, 1970, 5, 964 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Hanak, Journal of Applied Physics, 1972, 43, 1666 CrossRef .
X.-D. Xiang, X. Sun, G. Briceño, Y. Lou, K. Wang, H. Chang, W. G. Wallace-Freedman, S. W. Chen and P. G. Schultz, Science, 1995, 268, 1738 CAS .
G. Briceno, H. Chang, X. Sun, P. G. Schultz and X.-D. Xiang, Science, 1995, 270, 273 CAS .
E. Danielson, J. H. Golden, E. W. Mcfarland, C. M. Reaves, W. H. Weinberg and X. D. Wu, Nature, 1997, 389, 2331 Search PubMed .
R. B. Van Dover, L. F. Schneemeyer, R. M. Fleming and H. A. Huggins, Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 1999, 61, 217 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Chen, Y. Furubayashi, Y. Hirose, T. Hitosugi, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 2007, 40, 5961 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuykendall, P. Ulrich, S. Aloni and P. Yang, Nature Materials, 2007, 6, 951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Perkins, Applied Surface Science, 2004, 223, 124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Atsumoto, M. M. Urakami, Z. J. In and A. O. Htomo, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 1999, 38, 603 Search PubMed .
K. W. Kim, M. K. Jeon, K. S. Oh, T. S. Kim, Y. S. Kim and S. I. Woo, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2007, 104, 1134 CrossRef CAS .
S. Okamura, R. Takeuchi and T. Shiosaki, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 2002, 41, 6714 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Kim, T. S. Kim, M. K. Jeon, K. S. Oh, C. H. Jung and S. I. Woo, Applied Physics Letters, 2008, 92, 052911 CrossRef .
B. Xia, F. Chen, S. A. Campbell, J. T. Roberts and W. L. Gladfelter, Chemical Vapor Deposition, 2004, 10, 195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, Z. Zhang, S. A. Campbell and W. L. Gladfelter, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2004, 14, 3203 RSC .
G. Liu, J. Wolfman, C. Autret-Lambert, J. Sakai, S. Roger, M. Gervais and F. Gervais, Journal of Applied Physics, 2010, 108, 114108 CrossRef .
B. Xia, Y. S. Chu and W. L. Gladfelter, Surface and Coatings Technology, 2007, 201, 9041 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cooper and P. Mcginn, Journal of Power Sources, 2006, 163, 330 CrossRef CAS .
P. Strasser, Q. Fan, M. Devenney, W. H. Weinberg, P. Liu and J. K. Nørskov, The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2003, 107, 11013 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu, J. S. Cooper and P. J. McGinn, Journal of Power Sources, 2006, 161, 106 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Whitacre, Electrochimica Acta, 2008, 53, 3680 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cooper and P. Mcginn, Applied Surface Science, 2007, 254, 662 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Easton, A. Bonakdarpour, R. Yang, D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2008, 155, B547 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garsuch, R. Yang, A. Bonakdarpour and J. R. Dahn, Electrochimica Acta, 2008, 53, 2423 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Olk, Measurement Science and Technology, 2005, 16, 14 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Olk, G. G. Tibbetts, D. Simon and J. J. Moleski, Journal of Applied Physics, 2003, 94, 720 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dam, R. Gremaud, C. Broedersz and R. Griessen, Scripta Materialia, 2007, 56, 853 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gremaud, C. P. Broedersz, D. M. Borsa, A. Borgschulte, P. Mauron, H. Schreuders, J. H. Rector, B. Dam and R. Griessen, Advanced Materials, 2007, 19, 2813 CrossRef CAS .
C. Borgia, T. Scharowsky, A. Furrer, C. Solenthaler and R. Spolenak, Acta Materialia, 2011, 59, 386 CrossRef CAS .
D. Diechle, M. Stuber, H. Leiste, S. Ulrich and V. Schier, Surface and Coatings Technology, 2010, 204, 3258 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stuber, U. Albers, H. Leiste, K. Seemann, C. Ziebert and S. Ulrich, Surface and Coatings Technology, 2008, 203, 661 CrossRef .
A. Rar, J. J. Frafjord, J. D. Fowlkes, E. D. Specht, P. D. Rack, M. L. Santella, H. Bei, E. P. George and G. M. Pharr, Measurement Science and Technology, 2005, 16, 46 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Fleischauer, T. D. Hatchard, A. Bonakdarpour and J. R. Dahn, Measurement Science and Technology, 2005, 16, 212 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn, R. E. Mar and A. Abouzeid, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2006, 153, A361 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. W. Todd, R. E. Mar and J. R. Dahn, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2006, 153, A1998 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sano, T. Matsumoto, Y. Matsumoto and H. Koinuma, Applied Surface Science, 2006, 252, 2493 CrossRef CAS .
E. Danielson, M. Devenney, D. M. Giaquinta, J. H. Golden, R. C. Haushalter, E. W. McFarland, D. M. Poojary, C. M. Reaves, W. H. Weinberg and X. D. Wu, Science, 1998, 279, 837 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fowlkes, J. M. Fitz-Gerald and P. Rack, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 510, 68 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fowlkes, P. D. Rack, R. Bansal and J. M. Fitz-Gerald, Materials Research, 2003, 764, 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Muramatsu, T. Yamamoto, T. Hayakawa and H. Koinuma, Applied Surface Science, 2002, 189, 319 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Y. Guan and P. Rack, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 1721 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, J. D. Fowlkes, J. M. Fitz-Gerald and P. D. Rack, Applied Physics A, 2003, 80, 787 CrossRef .
J. D. Peak, C. L. Melcher and P. D. Rack, IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, 2008, 55, 1480 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyata, Y. Mochizuki and T. Minami, IEICE Transactions on Electronics, 2005, E88–C, 2065 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Yoo, C. Gao, I. Takeuchi, X. Sun, H. Chang, X.-D. Xiang and P. G. Schultz, Science, 1998, 279, 1712 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sano, T. Matsumoto, Y. Matsumoto and H. Koinuma, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids, 2005, 66, 2112 CrossRef CAS .
U. S. Joshi, K. Itaka, Y. Matsumoto and H. Koinuma, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 2009, 321, 3595 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guan, X. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Potter, K. Sorge and P. Rack, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6063 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, S. Xu, Y. K. Yoo, Q. Xue, H. Lee, S. Cheng, X.-D. Xiang, G. F. Dionne and I. Takeuchi, Applied Physics Letters, 2005, 86, 052503 CrossRef .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Murakami, T. Shono, T. Hasegawa, T. Fukumura, M. Kawasaki, P. Ahmet, T. Chikyow, S. Koshihara and H. Koinuma, Science, 2001, 291, 854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Murakami, T. Hasegawa, T. Fukumura, M. Kawasaki, P. Ahmet, T. Chikyow, K. Nakajima and H. Koinuma, Applied Surface Science, 2002, 189, 344 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kafizas, C. W. Dunnill and I. P. Parkin, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2010, 20, 8336 RSC .
A. Kafizas, A. Mills and I. P. Parkin, Analytica Chimica Acta, 2010, 663, 69 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kafizas and I. P. Parkin, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2010, 20, 2157 RSC .
A. Kafizas, D. Adriaens, A. Mills and I. P. Parkin, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2009, 11, 8367 RSC .
A. Kafizas, G. Hyett and I. P. Parkin, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2009, 19, 1399 RSC .
A. Kafizas, C. W. Dunnill, G. Hyett and I. P. Parkin, ECS Transactions, 2010, 25, 139 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hyett, M. Green and I. P. Parkin, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2006, 128, 12147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kafizas, C. Crick and I. P. Parkin, Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, 2010, 216, 156 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hyett, M. Green and I. P. Parkin, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2007, 129, 15541 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Moutinho, B. To, J. Perkins, D. S. Ginley, H. M. Branz and D. Han, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2003, 1 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 430, 78 CAS .
H. Hansel, H. Zettl, G. Krausch, C. Schmitz, R. Kisselev, M. Thelakkat and H. Schmidt, Applied Physics Letters, 2002, 81, 2106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, F. Liu and D. Han, Macromolecular Rapid Communications, 2004, 25, 326 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lobel, S. Thienhaus, A. Savan and A. Ludwig, Materials Science and Engineering: A, 2008, 481–482, 151 CrossRef .
J. Cui, Y. S. Chu, O. O. Famodu, Y. Furuya, J. Hattrick-Simpers, R. D. James, A. Ludwig, S. Thienhaus, M. Wuttig, Z. Zhang and I. Takeuchi, Nature materials, 2006, 5, 286 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zarnetta, A. Savan, S. Thienhaus and A. Ludwig, Applied Surface Science, 2007, 254, 743 CrossRef CAS .
C. Borgia, S. Olliges, M. Dietiker, G. Pigozzi and R. Spolenak, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
U. S. Joshi and H. Koinuma, Indian Journal of Pure & Applied Physics, 2007, 45, 62 CAS .
H. Akazawa, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces and Films, 2010, 28, 314 CAS .
J. Perkins, J. A. del Cueto, J. L. Alleman, C. Warmsingh, B. M. Keyesa, L. M. Gedvilasa, P. A. Parilla, B. To, D. W. Readey and D. S. Ginley, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 411, 152 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kukuruznyak, P. Ahmet, T. Chikyow, A. Yamamoto and F. Ohuchi, Applied Surface Science, 2006, 252, 3828 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martel, F. Caballero-Briones, R. Castro-Rodríguez, J. Méndez-Gamboa, N. Romeo, A. Bosio and J. L. Peña, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 518, 413 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wakisaka, T. Koida, Y. Matsumoto, K. Itaka and H. Koinuma, Applied Surface Science, 2004, 223, 264 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, K. Itaka, H. Minami, H. Kawaji and H. Koinuma, Science and Technology of Advanced Materials, 2004, 5, 543 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, T. Kita, T. Fukumura, A. Ohtomo, K. Ueno and M. Kawasaki, Applied Surface Science, 2007, 254, 777 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, A. Ohtomo and M. Kawasaki, Applied Surface Science, 2007, 254, 768 CrossRef CAS .
H. Minami, K. Itaka, H. Kawaji, Q. Wang, H. Koinuma and M. Lippmaa, Applied Surface Science, 2002, 197–198, 442 CrossRef CAS .
O. J. Gregory and M. Amani, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2011, 158, J15 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iwasaki, N. Itagaki, T. Den, H. Kumomi, K. Nomura, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, Applied Physics Letters, 2007, 90, 242114 CrossRef .
W. Cheong, S. Yoon, J. Shin and C. Hwang, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2009, 54, 544 CrossRef CAS .
T. Iwasaki, N. Itagaki, T. Den, H. Kumomi, K. Nomura, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, Applied Physics Letters, 2007, 90, 242114 CrossRef .
M. K. Ryu, S. Yang, S.-H. K. Park, C.-S. Hwang and J. K. Jeong, Applied Physics Letters, 2009, 95, 072104 CrossRef .
J. Honglyoul, M. Joon Chul, Y. Joonseok and P. Changwoo, Journal of the Korean Physical Society, 2010, 56, 1843 CrossRef .
G. Jas and A. Kirschning, Chemistry- A European Journal, 2003, 9, 5708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Walter, G. Basset, T. Beierlein, A. Von Muhlenen and G. Nisato, Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 2010, 48, 1587 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Simon, N. Eidelman, S. B. Kennedy, A. Sehgal, C. A. Khatri and N. R. Washburn, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 6906 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. H. Rossiny, J. Julis, S. Fearn, J. A. Kilner, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Yang and J. R. G. Evans, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Pullar, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Yang, J. R. G. Evans, A. N. Salak, D. A. Kiselev, A. L. Kholkin, V. M. Ferreira and N. Alford, Journal of Electroceramics, 2008, 22, 245 CrossRef .
R. Pullar, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Yang, J. Evans, P. Petrov, A. Salak, D. A. Kiselev, A. Kholkin and V. Ferreira, Journal of the European Ceramic Society, 2007, 27, 4437 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lin, S. Kellici, K. Gong, K. Thompson, J. R. G. Evans, X. Wang and J. A. Darr, Journal of Combinatorial Chemistry, 2010, 12, 383 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kellici, K. Gong, T. Lin, S. Brown, R. J. H. Clark, M. Vickers, J. K. Cockcroft, V. Middelkoop, P. Barnes, J. M. Perkins, C. J. Tighe and J. A. Darr, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 2010, 368, 4331 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Segawa, A. Ohtomo, M. Kawasaki, H. Koinuma, Z. Tang, P. Yu and G. Wong, Physica Status Solidi B-Basic Research, 1997, 202, 669 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vegard, Zeitschrift für Physik, 1921, 5, 17 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, J. C. Yu, D. Lo and S. K. Lam, Journal of Catalysis, 1999, 183, 368 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tauc, Materials Research Bulletin, 1968, 3, 37 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahanty, Journal of Crystal Growth, 2004, 261, 77 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ertekin, P. A. Greaney, D. C. Chrzan and T. D. Sands, Journal of Applied Physics, 2005, 97, 114325 CrossRef .
J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, W. Shan, K. Yu, J. Ager, E. Haller, H. Lu and W. Schaff, Physical Review B, 2002, 66, 1 Search PubMed .
T. Shubina, S. Ivanov, V. Jmerik, D. Solnyshkov, V. Vekshin, P. Kop'ev, A. Vasson, J. Leymarie, A. Kavokin, H. Amano, K. Shimono, A. Kasic and B. Monemar, Physical Review Letters, 2004, 92, 1 CrossRef .
A. I. Kingon, J.-P. Maria and S. K. Streiffer, Nature, 2000, 406, 1032 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Wilk, R. M. Wallace and J. M. Anthony, Journal of Applied Physics, 2001, 89, 5243 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hwang, Materials Science and Engineering B, 1998, 56, 178 CrossRef .
R. C. Smith, N. Hoilien, J. T. Roberts, S. A. Campbell and W. L. Gladfelter, Chemistry of Materials, 2002, 14, 474 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Schneemeyer, R. B. van Dover and R. M. Fleming, Applied Physics Letters, 1999, 75, 1967 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. S. Lee, H. Wang, Y. Li, S. R. Foltyn, Q. X. Jia, G. E. Collis, A. K. Burrell and T. M. McCleskey, Applied Physics Letters, 2004, 85, 5007 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maiti, R. Guo and A. S. Bhalla, Applied Physics Letters, 2007, 90, 182901 CrossRef .
K. Sreenivas and M. Sayer, Journal of Applied Physics, 1988, 64, 1484 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rouquette, J. Haines, V. Bornand, M. Pintard, P. Papet, C. Bousquet, L. Konczewicz, F. Gorelli and S. Hull, Physical Review B, 2004, 70, 014108 CrossRef .
J. Bharathan and Y. Yang, Applied Physics Letters, 1998, 72, 2660 CrossRef CAS .
R. Takayama and Y. Tomita, Journal of Applied Physics, 1989, 65, 1666 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen and J. R. G. Evans, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11299 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rende, W. F. Maier, K. Schwarz and U. Rabe, Advances in Mass Data Analysis of Signals and Images in Medicine, Biotechnology and Chemistry, 2007, 4826, 80 CrossRef .
T. Iijima, G. He and H. Funakubo, Integrated Ferroelectrics, 2001, 36, 255 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Park, B. S. Kang, S. D. Bu, T. W. Noh, J. Lee and W. Jo, Nature, 1999, 401, 682 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Jeon, Y. Kim, J. M. Sohn and S. I. Woo, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 2004, 37, 2588 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hjort, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 1996, 234, L11 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cuevas, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 1997, 253–254, 158 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. A. den Broeder, S. J. van der Molen, M. Kremers, J. N. Huiberts, D. G. Nagengast, A. T. M. van Gogh, W. H. Huisman, N. J. Koeman, B. Dam, J. H. Rector, S. Plota, M. Haaksma, R. M. N. Hanzen, R. M. Jungblut, P. A. Duine and R. Griessen, Nature, 1998, 394, 656 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kyoi, Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 2004, 372, 213 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. H. Niessen and P. H. L. Notten, Electrochemical and Solid State Letters, 2005, 8, A534 CrossRef CAS .
N. Markovic, Surface Science Reports, 2002, 45, 117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukerjee, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 1995, 142, 1409 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukerjee, S. Srinivasan, M. P. Soriaga and J. McBreen, The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1995, 99, 4577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Drillet, A. Ee, J. Friedmann, R. Kotz, B. Schnyder and V. Schmidt, Electrochimica Acta, 2002, 47, 1983 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, E. Kreidler, L. Xiong, J. Luo and C. J. Zhong, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2006, 153, A1637 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Beard and P. N. Ross, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 1986, 133, 1839 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Shukla, M. Neergat, P. Bera, V. Jayaram and M. S. Hegde, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 2001, 504, 111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Abe, G. M. Swain, K. Sashikata and K. Itaya, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 1995, 382, 73 CrossRef .
F. Lima, M. J. Giz and E. A. Ticianelli, Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society, 2005, 16, 328 CrossRef CAS .
V. Stamenković, T. J. Schmidt, P. N. Ross and N. M. Marković, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 2003, 554–555, 191 CrossRef .
C. C. Hays, R. Manoharan and J. B. Goodenough, Journal of Power Sources, 1993, 45, 291 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patterson, Physical Review, 1939, 56, 978 CrossRef CAS .
G. Burstein, Corrosion Science, 2005, 47, 2858 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sawai and N. Suzuki, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2004, 151, A682 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jaouen, F. Charreteur and J. P. Dodelet, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2006, 153, A689 CrossRef CAS .
E. Easton, T. Buhrmester and J. Dahn, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 493, 60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre and J. P. Dodelet, Electrochimica Acta, 2003, 48, 2749 CrossRef .
W. Nakkiew and C. R. Liu, ASME Conference Proceedings, 2009, 2009, 429 Search PubMed .
J. K. Luo, A. J. Flewitt, S. M. Spearing, N. A. Fleck and W. I. Milne, Materials Letters, 2004, 58, 2306 CrossRef CAS .
CNet News-CBS Interactive. http://news.cnet.com.
R. L. Smith and G. E. Sandland, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers 1847–1996, 1922, 102, 623 CrossRef .
K. Tönshoff, B. Karpuschewski, A. Mohlfeld, T. Leyendecker, G. Erkens, H. G. Fuß and R. Wenke, Surface and Coatings Technology, 1998, 108–109, 535 CrossRef .
J. Müller and D. Neuschütz, Vacuum, 2003, 71, 247 CrossRef .
K. Bobzin, E. Lugscheider, M. Maes and C. Pinero, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 494, 255 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y.-H. Yu, B. H. Singh, L. D. Marks, S. C. Lee and Y. W. Chung, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces and Films, 2000, 18, 2333 CAS .
D. E. Ashenford, F. Long, W. E. Hagston, B. Lunn and A. Matthews, Surface and Coatings Technology, 1999, 116–119, 699 CrossRef CAS .
MatWeb-Material property data. http://www.matweb.com.
H. Cho, K. J. Hemker, K. Lian, J. Goettert and G. Dirras, Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 2003, 103, 59 CrossRef .
Nexeon News. http://www.nexeon.co.uk/news/record-li-ionbattery-performance.
J. Wolfenstine, J. L. Allen, J. Read and D. Foster, Army Research Laboratory, 2006, 1 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 90, 281 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bonakdarpour, K. C. Hewitt, R. L. Turner and J. R. Dahn, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2004, 151, A470 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Fleischauer and J. R. Dahn, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2004, 151, A1216 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Hatchard and J. R. Dahn, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2004, 151, A1628 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Whitacre, W. C. West and B. V. Ratnakumar, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 2003, 150, A1676 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shechtman, I. Blech, D. Gratias and J. Cahn, Physical Review Letters, 1984, 53, 1951 CrossRef CAS .
A. Inoue, Y. Bizen, H. M. Kimura, T. Masumoto and M. Sakamoto, Journal of Materials Science, 1988, 23, 3640 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and S. B. Kim, Journal of Power Sources, 2002, 109, 57 Search PubMed .
K. Amine, H. Tukamoto, H. Yasuda and Y. Fujita, Journal of Power Sources, 1997, 68, 604 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tsybeskov, J. Vandyshev and P. Fauchet, Physical Review B, 1994, 49, 7821 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Partirdge, Polymer, 1983, 24, 733 CrossRef .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Applied Physics Letters, 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maestro, D. Huguenin, A. Seigneurin, F. Deneuve, P. Le Lann and J. F. Berar, Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 1992, 139, 1479 CrossRef CAS .
V. Fernicola and L. Crovini, Journal of Lightwave Technology, 1995, 13, 1331 CrossRef .
K. M. Kinsman, J. McKittrick, E. Sluzky and K. Hesse, Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 1994, 77, 2866 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dietl, Semiconductor Science and Technology, 2002, 17, 377 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sullivan and S. Erwin, Physical Review B, 2003, 67, 144415 CrossRef .
L. C. J. Pereira, M. R. Nunes, O. C. Monteiro and A. J. Silvestre, Applied Physics Letters, 2008, 93, 222502 CrossRef .
Z. Szotek, W. M. Temmerman, A. Svane, L. Petit, P. Strange, G. M. Stocks, D. Ködderitzsch, W. Hergert and H. Winter, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, 2004, 16, S5587 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mahadevan, A. Zunger and D. Sarma, Physical Review Letters, 2004, 93, 177201 CrossRef .
A. Kaminski and S. Das Sarma, Physical Review Letters, 2002, 88, 247202–1 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Goodeve and J. A. Kitchener, Transactions of the Faraday Society, 1938, 34, 570 RSC .
Pilkington NSG. http://www.pilkington.com/.

          TOTO: Principle of Hydrotect Technology. http://www.toto.co.jp/docs/hyd_patent_en/.
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. Tryk, Surface Science Reports, 2008, 63, 515 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kafizas, S. Kellici, J. A. Darr and I. P. Parkin, Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry, 2009, 204, 183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin, E. Finazzi, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi, M. C. Paganini and E. Giamello, Chem. Phys., 2007, 339, 44 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Dunnill, Z. A. Aiken, J. Pratten, M. Wilson, D. J. Morgan and I. P. Parkin, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2009, 207, 244 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Swanepoel, Joural of Physics E-Scientific Instruments, 1983, 16, 1216 Search PubMed .
A. Mills and M. Mcfarlane, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 22 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills and M. McGrady, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 193, 228 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, J. Wang, S.-K. Lee and M. Simonsen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2721 RSC .
R. Beranek and H. Kisch, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 761 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Sheppard, T. Bak and J. Nowotny, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 611 CAS .
H. Kamisaka, T. Hitosugi, T. Suenaga, T. Hasegawa and K. Yamashita, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 034702 CrossRef .
L. J. van der Pauw, Philips Research Reports, 1958, 13, 1 Search PubMed .
J. I. B. Wilson, J. McGill and S. Kinmond, Nature, 1978, 272, 152 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Mahan, J. Carapella, B. P. Nelson, R. S. Crandall and I. Balberg, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 69, 6728 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Lewis and D. C. Paine, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 22 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Gordon, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 52 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, MRS Bull., 2000, 25, 38 CrossRef CAS .
T. Minami, H. Sonohara, S. Takata and H. Sato, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 33, L1693 CAS .
X. Wu, S. Asher, D. H. Levi, D. E. King, Y. Yan, T. A. Gessert and P. Sheldon, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 4564 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimura, M. Itoh, Y. Inaguma and T. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1994, 49, 5591 CrossRef CAS .
S. Madhavan, D. G. Schlom, A. Dabkowski, H. A. Dabkowska and Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 559 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Windisch, K. F. Ferris and G. J. Exarhos, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2001, 19, 1647 CAS .
S. Goodwin-Johansson, P. H. Holloway, G. McGuire, L. Buckley, R. Cozzens, R. Schwartz and G. J. Exarhos, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2000, 3987, 225 CAS .
R. Dannenberg, S. Baliga, R. J. Gambino, A. H. King and A. P. Doctor, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 2590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Adler and J. Feinleib, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 2, 3112 CrossRef .
H. Sato, T. Minami, S. Takata and T. Yamada, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 236, 27 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Kauffman and I. Mayo, The Chemical Educator, 1997, 2, 1 Search PubMed .
K. Bhattacharya, S. Conti, G. Zanzotto and J. Zimmer, Nature, 2004, 428, 55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miyazaki and A. Ishida, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 1999, 273–275, 106 CrossRef .
E. Quandt, C. Halenea, H. Hollecka, K. Feitb, M. Kohlb, P. Schloβmachera, A. Skokana and K. D. Skrobanck, Sens. Actuators, A, 1996, 53, 434 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Kohl, K. Okutsu and S. Miyazaki, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2004, 378, 205 CrossRef .
C. Satterthwaite and R. Ure, Phys. Rev., 1957, 108, 1164 CrossRef CAS .
R. Funahashi, I. Matsubara, H. Ikuta, T. Takeuchi, U. Mizutani and S. Sodeoka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 39, L1127 CAS .
T. Okuda, K. Nakanishi, S. Miyasaka and Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 63, 113104 CrossRef .
H. Kaga, R. Asahi and T. Tani, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, 3540 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Andreas Kafizas
	Andreas Kafizas is a finishing PhD student in Professor Ivan Parkin's group. He obtained his MSci in Chemistry with honours from University College London in 2007. During his PhD he held a demonstratorship position. He won the Ramsay medal for best graduating doctor of Chemistry in 2011. His research interests focus on studying the photocatalysis of titania based thin-films from a combinatorial approach.

Ivan P. Parkin
	Ivan Parkin is a Professor of Inorganic and Materials Chemistry and Head of Department at University College London. He obtained his BSc and PhD from the Imperial College London and was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Indiana. During his career he has published more than 330 research papers and has made 8 contributions to books. His laboratory focuses on the preparation of inorganic thin-films and nanomaterials by innovative routes.

 	Fig. 1  The combinatorial metal-organic CVD deposition of InxGa1−xN nano-wires with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 from InCl3, GaCl3 and NH3. (a) Top-down SEM image of the nano-wires formed from the GaN rich section at the top to the InN rich section at the bottom with transitional Ga/In gradients in-between (b) the corresponding photo-luminescence colours and (c) the compositional relationship of In component to the bandgap energy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14, copyright Nature publishing group 2007.	 
field of merit = εr × εo × Ebr = C × Vbr/A	(1)
C = εr × εo × A/film thickness	(2)

 	Fig. 2  The combinatorial low pressure CVD deposition of a Ti–Hf–Sn oxide system from singled source precursors Sn(NO3)4, Hf(NO3)4 and Ti(NO3)4 (400–500 °C, 500 Pa, O2). Figures (a–c) show the weighted content of each metal source determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and (d) calculated di-electric constants from high-throughput capacitance measurements. Reproduced with permission from reference 110, copyright ACS publications 2002.	 

 	Fig. 3  The combinatorial PLD of Zn doped Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1−xZrxO3 from 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3 using Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti1O3 and Ba0.6Sr0.4Ti0.7Zr0.3O3 targets through a computer guided mask. (a) The Zr to Ti ratio from EDX analysis and (b) the Zr concentration dependence on the di-electric constant (εr), tunability (nr), and loss tangent (D). Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, copyright AIP journals 2010.	 

 	Fig. 4  The XRD derived unit cell lattice parameters and phase symmetry behaviour of PbZrxTi1−xO3 with 0 ≤ x ≤ 1; assessed from a discrete combinatorial library formed through the ink-jet printing of [Ti[OCH(CH3)2]4], [Zr(OC4H9)4] and [Pb(OCOCH3)2] dissolved in 2-methoxy ethanol, calcined at 650 °C for 30 minutes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18, copyright Institute of Pure and Applied Physics 2002.	 

 	Fig. 5  A stack of XRD patterns taken across a continuous Bi4−xCexTi3O12 thin-film with 0 ≤ x ≤ 4 synthesised by the magnetron sputtering of Bi2O3, TiO2, and CeO2 targets through a computer guided moving shutter (Ar:O2 = 3:1, 0.5 Pa, 300 °C) and crystallised at 700 °C for 1 hour (O2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, copyright AIP Journals 2008.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Normalised preferred orientation in the (117) crystal plane and (b) polarisability (μC cm−2) for varying La content over the 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25 regime for the Bi3.75LaxCe0.25−xTi3O12 continuous combinatorial system; synthesised through a liquid source misted CVD deposition of Bi–La and Bi–Ce titanates form solution onto silicon wafers and annealed at 700 °C (1 hr, O2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 17, copyright National Academy of Sciences 2007.	 

 	Fig. 7  The H2 absorption temperature at 3.17 bar H2 pressure for a variety of discrete thin-film samples within a Mg–Ni–Fe library; synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of separated Mg, Ni and Fe sources onto sapphire substrates (Ar, 2 × 10−6 Pa, 350 °C).). Reproduced with permission from ref. 32, copyright IOP Publishing 2005.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) changes in log10(transmission) at 90 °C as a function of H2 pressure and atomic fraction y in the MgyTi1−y binary alloy system and (b) variation in hydride formation enthalpy in the MgyNizTi1−y−z system from the Van't Hoff plots for each pixel of colour data; synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of separated Mg, Ni and Ti sources (Ar, 10−7 Pa, 25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34, copyright John Wiley & Sons Inc 2007.	 

 	Fig. 9  Summary of the anodic catalytic oxidation of 1 M CH3OH in 0.5 M H2SO4 activity trends for the most active samples in the combinatorial study normalised to the activity of pure Pt; where the discrete library of 64 samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ru, W, Co and Ni metal sources through a lithographic mask onto a pre-wired grid of Ti substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, copyright ACS Publications 2003.	 

 	Fig. 10  
XRD stacks for the Pt/Ru–Co binary systems in addition to a 2θ° colour map for the shift in (111) peak with alloying; where the discrete library of 63 samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ru, and Co metal sources through a shadow mask onto a pre-wired grid of Ti–N coated Si substrates (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 900 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 24, copyright Elsevier 2006.	 

 	Fig. 11  Compositional-activity maps for the (a) Pt–Ru–W and (b) Pt–Ru–Co systems for the electro-catalytic oxidation of methanol; where the discrete library of 63 samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ru, and W/Co metal sources through a shadow mask onto a pre-wired grid of Ti–N coated Si substrates (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 900 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, copyright Elsevier 2006.	 

 	Fig. 12  The onset potential required for the catalytic reduction of O2 tested for a range of (a) binary Pt–Ru and (b) ternary Pt–Co–Cr discrete catalysts produced by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of metal targets (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 900 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, copyright Elsevier 2007.	 

 	Fig. 13  Tafel curves showing the voltage onset region measured from the catalytic oxidation of a saturated O2 1 M H2SO4 solution, where the discrete library of 18 Pt–Ni–Zr samples was synthesised by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Pt, Ni, Zr and Ni/Zr targets onto pre-wired Au coated electrodes (Ar, 3 Pa, 23 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 27, copyright Elsevier 2008.	 

 	Fig. 14  Current densities (mA cm−2) for the catalytic reduction of O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at room temperature of several Fe–C–N samples annealed at either 800, 900 or1000 °C; formed by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Fe and C in a 40/60 N2/Ar environment (0.16 Pa, 23 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 29, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2008.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 15  (a) the calculated and (b) the measured ternary phase diagram for the Ni–Fe–Cr system from a single compositionally graded thin-film that covered all binary/ternary phase space achieved through an electron beam evaporation PVD deposition on sapphire (air, 10−3 Pa, annealed at 875 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 38, copyright IOP Publishing 2005.	 


Stuber et al. (ref. 38)	
PVD
                    magnetron sputtering of CrN:AlN 70:30 pressed powder and Al2O3 (Ar, 0.6 Pa, 200 °C)	23.9	43.6	13.5	18.7	1.82	2.10	1211	1.19
24.5	42.4	14.6	18.2	1.73	2.04	1129	1.11
25.1	41.3	15.8	17.6	1.65	1.9	1133	1.11
26.4	38.7	18.3	16.4	1.47	1.88	1123	1.10
28.0	33.9	22.9	14.5	1.21	1.66	1051	1.03
30.2	28.7	27.7	13.5	0.95	1.44	1067	1.05

PVD
                    magnetron sputtering of CrN:AlN 70:30 pressed powder and Al2O3 (Ar:N2 50:50, 0.6 Pa, 200 °C)	19.8	31.6	8.6	40.0	1.60	1.06	2531	2.48
20.1	32.3	9.3	38.3	1.61	1.10	2233	2.19
21.4	31.1	9.3	38.3	1.45	1.10	2326	2.28
23.6	28.4	11.8	36.2	1.20	1.08	2420	2.37
24.4	27.6	12.4	35.6	1.13	1.08	2485	2.44
26.2	24.0	16.8	32.9	0.92	1.01	2249	2.21
Diechle et al. (ref. 37)	
PVD
                    magnetron sputtering of Cr2O3 and Al2O3 (Ar:O2 80:20, 0.4 Pa, 500 °C)	27.4	11.3	61.1	—	0.41	0.63	2370	2.32
25.0	14.2	60.6	—	0.57	0.65	2620	2.57
17.8	22.4	59.6	—	1.26	0.67	2430	2.38
13.5	26.9	59.4	—	1.99	0.68	2280	2.24
9.8	30.1	59.8	—	3.07	0.67	2150	2.11

 	Fig. 16  (a) Example XRD patterns typifying the characteristics of the four distinct film types over the Ni1−xWx alloy regime (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.85) and (b) the material hardness (GPa) versus the corresponding alloy composition for continuously graded thin-film alloys pre and post annealing at 525 °C; formed through the combinatorial PVD sputtering of Ni and W metal targets on Si based substrates (Ar, 1.9 Pa, 25 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35, copyright Elsevier 2005.	 

 	Fig. 17  A plot of capacity (mA h g−1) for 64 discrete amorphous Si1−xSnx materials tested in a Li-ion battery cell formed from the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of Si and Sn targets through stationary masks onto rotating pre-wired Cu substrate pads (Ar, 0.2 Pa, 23 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 39, copyright IOP Publishing 2005.	 

 	Fig. 18  Extrapolated reversible charge-discharge capacity for an 18650 commercial Li-ion battery cell based on a LiCoO2 positive electrode and 64 various Si–Al–Mn negative electrodes; formed from the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of Si, Al and Mn targets through stationary masks onto rotating pre-wired Cu substrate pads (Ar, 0.2 Pa, 23 °C). The shaded region corresponds to the composition range of Si–Al–Mn that can be amorphously melt-spun. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2004.	 

 	Fig. 19  The specific capacities of (a) SnxMo1−x and (b) Sn1−xMx (M = Mo, Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu) thin-films in a Li-ion battery test cell for a range of discrete compositions formed by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of metal targets onto a pre-wired array of Cu pads. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, copyright IOP Publishing 2005 and (b) from ref. 41, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2006.	 

 	Fig. 20  Charge-discharge capacity (μA h cm−2) for a range of discrete LiMnxNi2−xO4 materials as positive electrodes in Li-ion test cell environments; produced by the combinatorial PVD sputtering of LiMn2O4 and LiNiO2 targets onto an array of pre-wired Pt/Ti pads. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2003.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) layout of the various targets used in the combinatorial magnetron sputtering PVD of a series of phosphors and (b) an image of the ensuing photo-luminescence exhibited from these 2500+ samples when excited with UVC- 254 nm light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11, copyright Nature Publishing Group 1997.	 

 	Fig. 22  Digital photographs of the as-deposited quaternary library under (a) ambient light (b) under UVC–254 nm light; synthesised through the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of GaO2, Gd2O3, SiO2, ZnO2 and Y2O3 main and CeO2, EuF3, Tb4O7, Ag, TiO2 and Mn3O4 dopant targets through a series of quaternary shadow masks on a Si wafer substrate (annealed 1000 °C, Ar). Reproduced with permission from ref. 51, copyright Nature Publishing Group 1998.	 

 	Fig. 23  A plot of the normalised cathodo-luminescence intensity versus corresponding Gd/Cr dopant level (at%) from continuously graded Gd-doped Y2O3, Gd-doped Y3Al5O12 and Cr-doped Y3Al5O12 thin-films; synthesised by a combinatorial magnetron sputtering process onto Si (001) substrates.	 

 	Fig. 24  Photographs of the photo-luminescence across continuously graded combinatorial thin-films of Y1−xEuxCa4O(BO3)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) and Y1−yTbyCa4O(BO3)3 (0 ≤ y ≤ 1); synthesised by the combinatorial PLD of TbCa4O(BO3)3/EuCa4O(BO3)3 and YCa4O(BO3)3 targets on SiO2 substrates (O2, 10−4 Pa, 500 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 52, copyright Elsevier 2006.	 

 	Fig. 25  
            SQUID magnetism map (200 × 200 μm) of a Ti0.94Co0.06O2 thin-film sample on a LaAlO3 (001) substrate; formed from the combinatorial MBE deposition of TiO2 and Co0.5Ti0.5O2 targets (Ar, 10−3 Pa, 670–720 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 57, copyright Elsevier 2002.	 


12	4.8–7.8	18	—	630	Pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N (0.06 ≤ δ ≤ 0.25).66
3.0	6.8	—	4.1	500	Pure pseudo-brookite Ti3−δO4N to pure Ni-doped anatase phase mixtures.63
2.0	6.8	0.86	—	500	Ns-doped anatase and rutile phase mixtures (0 ≤ Ns: Ti ≤ 11%, 0 ≤ anatase ≤ 100%, 0 ≤ rutile ≤ 41%).60
3.9	8.1	0.0086	—	500	Ns/Ni-doped to pure Ni-doped anatase (0 ≤ Ns: Ti ≤ 11%, 1.0 ≤ Ni: Ti ≤ 4.3%).65
3.0	6.8	—	—	600	
                    Anatase and rutile phase mixtures (0 ≤ anatase ≤ 100%, 0 ≤ rutile ≤ 80%).64

 	Fig. 26  Plot of phase composition versus the time taken to reach a plateau in the red component of digital colour in the photocatalytic reduction of DCIP “intelligent ink” over a phase compositionally graded thin-film formed by the combinatorial APCVD of TiCl4, ethyl acetate and t-butyl amine (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Bar chart comparing the Ns: Ti% and time taken to reach a minimum in the green component of digital colour (Gmin) for 9 unique positions across the film that were closest to the reactor inlet and (b) a bar chart comparing the % rutile component as well as Ns: Ti % and Gmin for 9 unique positions across the middle section of the film; formed by the combinatorial APCVD of TiCl4, ethyl acetate and NH3 (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass.	 

 	Fig. 28  A series of digital photographs taken during the photo-reduction reaction (UVA-365 nm) of a Rz-based “intelligent ink” layer evenly cast over an anatase semiconductor thin-film with varying levels of Ns and Ni dopant; formed by the combinatorial APCVD of TiCl4, ethyl acetate and NH3 (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass.	 

 	Fig. 29  A 3D plot of the resistivity (Ωm), bandgap (eV) and photocatalytic activity (molecules reduced cm−2 s−1) for several positions along a strip of a compositionally graded Nb-doped anatase thin-film; formed through the combinatorial APCVD combination of TiCl4, NbCl5 and ethyl acetate precursors in a cold-walled reactor set-up (N2carrier gas, 500 °C) on glass.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) microcrystalline: amorphous Si phase formation (%μc–Si) and (b) deposition rate (Å s−1) dependence for various partial pressures of H2 gas at constant SiH4 gas flow rates (3, 8, 16, 22 cm3 min−1) from combinatorial hot-wire CVD depositions over a single substrate (1 Pa, wire 2000 °C, glass substrate 200 °C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright John Wiley & Sons Inc 2004.	 

 	Fig. 31  Conductivity maps of the two Zn–Sn oxide libraries where Zn/Sn ratios ranged from (a) ≈2–8 and (b) ≈0.5–2.5; produced from the combinatorial magnetron sputtering of Zn and Sn targets on glass (O2, 5 Pa 250 °C) and post-annealed at 625 °C in a N2 atmosphere. Contour lines indicate Zn/Sn ratios and colour codes represent the logarithm of the conductivity (log10Ω−1 cm−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, copyright Elsevier 2002.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) The intensity of the (006) peak in XRD patterns as a function of substrate temperature taken over the continuous Sr2Rh1−xRuxO4 combinatorial film; where red to purple represents maximum crystallinity to amorphous and (b) the resistivity of representative positions along the dotted white line (regions of maximum intensity in the (006) plane); formed from the PLD of Sr2RhO4 and Sr2RuO4 targets on LSAT substrates (O2, 0.1 Pa). Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, copyright Elsevier 2004.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) resistivity (Ω.cm) and (b) hole hopping activation energy (eV) maps of the continuous Ni–Mn–Co oxide thin-film phase space; deposited from the combinatorial PLD ablation of Mn2O3, Co3O4 and NiO targets through a series of shadow masks onto a Nb-doped SrTiO3 (0.8 at% Nb) (100) substrate (O2, 0.1 Pa, 400 °C) and post-annealed at 600 °C for 30 minutes (O2, 0.1 Pa). Reproduced with permission from ref. 78, copyright Elsevier 2006.	 

 	Fig. 34  Plot of (a) film resistivity (mΩ.cm) versus Ga content (% wt) and (b) carrier concentration, mobility and resistivity versus temperature at the best performing Ga concentration in that series over a range of continuously varying Ga-doped ZnO thin-films produced by the combinatorial PVD of ceramic ZnO and Ga2O3 targets on glass substrates (Ar, 5 × 10−2 Pa). Reproduced with permission from ref. 76, copyright ACS Publications 2010.	 

 	Fig. 35  Thermal activation energy map for the martensitic phase change in Ni–Ti–Cu ternary alloys produced by the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of more than 2000 discrete samples from separate metal targets onto SiO2 coated Si wafers (annealed 550 °C, 2 hours). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright Nature Publishing Group 2006.	 

 	Fig. 36  Plot of the thermal activation energy and mechanistic pathway for the for the martensitic phase change in Ti51Ni49−xCux (0 ≤ x ≤ 27) ternary alloys produced by the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of more than 500 discrete samples from separate metal targets onto SiO2 coated Si wafers (Ar, 0.66 Pa, annealed 500 °C-1 hour).Reproduced with permission from ref. 71, copyright Elsevier 2008.	 

 	Fig. 37  Ternary maps displaying the (a) mechanistic pathway for the for the martensitic phase changes and (b) the thermal activation energy in Ni–Ti–Pd thin-film alloys produced by the combinatorial magnetron PVD sputtering of more than 360 discrete samples from separate metal targets onto SiO2 coated Si wafers (Ar, 0.66 Pa, annealed 500 °C-1 hour). Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, copyright Elsevier 2007.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 38  A plot of the Seebeck coefficient (μV.K−1), resistivity (Ω.cm) and thermo-electric power (μW.cm−1K−2) against composition for a range of discrete (La1−xCax)VO3 thin-film materials over 0 ≤ x ≤ 1; formed from the combinatorial PLD of LaVO3 and CaVO3 targets through a shadow mask onto SrTiO3 (100) substrates (Ar, 0.1 Pa, 800 °C). Power factor (α) = S2/ρ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, copyright IOP Publications 2004.	 
Thermo-electric figure of merit = S2σT/κ	(5)

 	Fig. 39  (a) Seebeck coefficients (μV/°C) and (b) power factors (μWcm−1K−2) over a range of continuous ZnxInyOx+1.5y thin-film materials where δ = WIn/(WIn + WZn); formed by the combinatorial magnetron co-sputtering of separated ZnO and In2O3 targets on alumina substrates (Ar, 10−4 Pa, 25 °C) and annealed as stated. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, copyright The Electrochemical Society 2011.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
