Semiconductor and ceramic nanoparticle films deposited by chemical bath deposition  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B616684A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B616684A
(Invited Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2181-2196Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSemiconductor and ceramic nanoparticle films deposited by chemical bath deposition

        
          
            Gary 
            Hodes
          
        
      
Dept. of Materials and Interfaces Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 76100, Israel
Received 
      14th November 2006
    , Accepted 20th December 2006First published on 9th February 2007AbstractChemical bath deposition (CBD) has been used to deposit films of metal sulfides, selenides and oxides, together with some miscellaneous compounds, beginning nearly 140 years ago. While it is a well-known technique in a few specific areas (notably photoconductive lead salt detectors, photoelectrodes and more recently, thin film solar cells), it is by and large an under-appreciated technique. The more recent interest in all things ‘nano’ has provided a boost for CBD: since it is a low temperature, solution (almost always aqueous) technique, crystal size is often very small. This is evidenced by the existence of size quantization commonly found in CBD semiconductor films. The intention of this review is to provide readers, many of whom may not even be aware of the CBD technique, with an overview of how the technique has been used to fabricate nanocrystalline semiconductor (this terminology also includes oxides often classified as ceramics) films and some properties of these films. The review begins, after a short introduction, with a general description of the CBD method, designed to give the reader a basic knowledge of the technique. The rest of the review then focuses on nanocrystalline (or, in the few cases of amorphous deposits, nanoparticle) films. The various factors which determine crystal size are first discussed. This is followed by some of the many examples of size quantization observed in the films. Since CBD films are usually porous, surface effects can be very important, and various surface-dependent properties (light emission and surface states) as well as surface modification, are treated: (although some properties, like emission, can be strongly dependent on both surface and ‘bulk’). Because of the fact that many CBD films have been made specifically for use as photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical cells, there is next a chapter on this topic with a few examples of such photoelectrodes. Film structure and morphology follows with examples of patterning, porosity and crystal shape. The review concludes with some of the author’s opinions as to what the near future holds for CBD development in general.
1. Introduction
Among the many different methods available to deposit films of semiconductors, chemical bath deposition (CBD) must rank as conceptually the simplest. CBD refers to depositions from solution (usually aqueous) where the required deposit is both chemically generated and deposited in the same bath. Thus, deposition from a supersaturated solution or spin coating from a colloidal sol are not included under the aegis of CBD: in both cases, the layer material must be pre-prepared. Neither is sol–gel layer formation, although it could be reasonably argued that the cross-linking which occurs during the process constitutes a chemical reaction. Successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) is a related technique, where a substrate is first dipped in an ionic solution of one component, rinsed, then dipped in a solution of the second component and rinsed; this ideally results in a single monolayer of the desired compound. Liquid phase deposition (LPD) (see section 2.2) is a specific subset of CBD often used for acidic oxides. Scheme 1 illustrates, in a highly simplified manner, some of these techniques.
 Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of different techniques of solution deposition of films. M+ refers to a cation (usually a metallic precursor); A− an anion; X-L a precursor compound where X is the non-metallic species (generally a group VI element) and L a ligand. 
In spite of it being so simple, it is one of the least known. If scientists or engineers in general would be asked to name some semiconductor film deposition methods, evaporation, chemical vapour deposition, sputtering, maybe even electrodeposition, would be the most obvious techniques that would spring to mind: CBD would probably be well down the list (with the obvious exception of those who work with the method). A part of the reason (probably not the main part, which remains non-obvious) is the many different terms used to denote CBD: chemical solution deposition (used to be more popular, but a consensus is beginning to appear favouring CBD), chemical deposition (when it is clear that chemical vapour deposition—a very different technique—is not meant) and liquid phase deposition (used for certain oxide depositions).
The relative obscurity of CBD is certainly not due to it being a relatively new technique. The first (although not well-known) appearance of the technique in 1869 was in an obscure (at least today) journal, describing the splendid colours of sulfide layers obtained from thiosulfate solution of copper, lead and antimony salts.1 The colours were very likely interference patterns, and the fact that this paper was the first to describe CBD of compound semiconductor films was probably not obvious to the author (it may be presumed that the term ‘semiconductor’ was also not obvious at that time).
An early driving force for CBD was the report of photoconductivity in CBD PbS films a century ago.2,3 PbS (and PbSe) layers deposited by CBD were later used as IR detectors and outperformed layers deposited by vacuum evaporation (much of this detector research remained unpublished as it occurred around the time of World War II). A more recent driving force, considered largely responsible for the renaissance of CBD, was the discovery that CBD CdS films deposited onto CdTe (and later, onto CuInSe2) films were shown to give superior photovoltaic cells compared with the previously evaporated CdS.4–7
Another cause of interest in this technique, and the one most relevant to this review, is due to the fact that the crystals in (as-deposited) CBD films are often very small. Considering the current interest in nanoparticles, CBD is an excellent technique to deposit nanocrystalline films. If the nanocrystals are small enough, which they often are, they exhibit size quantization, the most obvious manifestation of which is an increase in the optical bandgap with decrease in crystal size as was shown first for CBD CdSe8 and shortly after for PbSe.9 Subsequently, a wide range of CBD semiconductor films exhibiting size quantization has been reported. However, size quantization is not the only reason for the growing interest in these nanocrystalline films and even somewhat larger crystals, which do not exhibit size quantization, are studied for a range of reasons.
This review is divided into two main sections. The first (and smaller) one is a general and rather brief description of CBD, without any emphasis on nanocrystals. This is important to better understand and appreciate the second and main section, which deals specifically with nanocrystalline CBD semiconductor films. We do not consider a range of important subjects, such as the use of CBD films in photovoltaic cells, unless nanocrystallinity is an important aspect of the work.
2. General description of CBD
The range of materials which have been deposited by CBD is wide. Table 1 lists those binary compounds which have been reported to date. This list does not include about 30 known ternary compounds. Most materials are sulfides, selenides or oxides, but the list of other materials, while much smaller, is gradually increasing.
Table 1 List of binary compounds deposited by CBD (ref. 10 describes methods of deposition and properties of most of these compounds)




Sulfides
Selenides
Oxides




Ag2S
Ag2Se
Ag2O AgO


As2S3
 
 


Bi2S3
Bi2Se3
 


CdS
CdSe
CdO


CoS
CoSe
Co–O


CuxS
CuxSe
Cu2O


HgS
HgSe
 


In2S3
 
In2O3


MnS
 
Mn–O


Mo-S
MoSe
 


NiS
NiSe
NiO


PbS
PbSe
PbO2


PdS2
 
 


Sb2S3
Sb2Se3
Sb2O3


SnS
SnSe
 


SnS2
SnSe2
SnO2


TlS
TlSe
Tl2O3


ZnS
ZnSe
ZnO


Miscellaneous materials
CdTe, SiO2, Y2O3, ZrO2, V–O, TiO2, Cr(OH)3, AgI, AgBr, AgCl, (basic) carbonates of Pb,Y,Ce,Cd




There are several possible mechanisms for CBD, and often the size of the crystals in the films may depend on the mechanism. It is convenient to separate the materials deposited into two groups: sulfides and selenides (and a brief mention of tellurides) in one and oxides in the other.
2.1 Sulfides/selenides
A casual reader of a selection of papers on CBD would be excused for believing that the predominant mechanism for sulfide/selenide deposition is the following, using CdS (possibly the most commonly-deposited semiconductor) deposited using thiourea as an example.
Hydrolysis of thiourea to sulfide: (1)followed by ionic reaction between free Cd and sulfide ions: (2)If the ion product, [Cd2+] [S2−], exceeds the solubility product, Ksp, of CdS (ca. 10−28), then CdS can form as a solid phase.
This mechanism, an ion-by-ion mechanism, may certainly occur in some cases, but by no means in all. An alternate pathway occurs if the conditions are such that Cd(OH)2 can form (not necessarily as a clearly visible precipitate, but often a colloid visible only by light scattering using a laser).
The corresponding mechanism is then: (3)The presence or absence of the hydroxide in the deposition solution is easily controlled (mainly by complexation and pH). Thus, if [Cd2+][OH−]2 > ca. 10−14 (Ksp of Cd(OH)2), then Cd(OH)2 can form as a solid phase, but if its concentration is not too high, it may remain as a colloid.
The importance of differentiating between these two mechanisms and controlling them is that the crystal size of films formed in the cluster mechanism is normally smaller than that in the ion-by-ion mechanism.11 This will be discussed further in the section on nanocrystalline films.
The above mechanisms assume reaction with free chalcogenide. Another possibility, which does not require the formation of the chalcogenide ion, is decomposition of a complex between the chalcogen precursor and the metal (ion or hydroxide). All the chalcogen precursors form complexes of varying stability with metal ions or salts. Thus: (4)followed by breaking of the S–C bond to form CdS.
A similar mechanism can occur based on a hydroxy-thiourea complex, (OH)2Cd·SC(NH2)2. These mechanisms are known as complex-decomposition reactions and some studies have supported the complex decomposition, rather than the free sulfide mechanism for CdS deposited from common ammonia baths using thiourea.12,13 It is more difficult to distinguish between the free chalcogen and complex decomposition mechanisms than the ion-by-ion and cluster mechanisms. However, unlike the ion-by-ion vs. cluster mechanism, there is no evidence (at the moment) to suggest that one or the other mechanism is important for determining crystal size, and so, for the purpose of this review, it is less important.
While thiourea is probably the most commonly-used sulfur precursor, thioacetamide is also commonly used and thiosulfate, while much less common, is also sometimes used. Thiourea can only be used to form sulfides in relatively alkaline solutions, while both thioacetamide and thiosulfate can also be used in acid solution (although thiosulfate decomposes to give elemental S if the pH is too low). Thioacetamide, which is usually used in acidic solution, is commonly used for ions which hydrolyse readily, even in moderately acidic solutions; a common example being In3+.
Selenides are most commonly deposited from selenosulfate (Na2SeSO3), prepared by dissolving elemental Se in Na2SO3 solution. It is the Se analogue of thiosulfate, with one S (the labile one) exchanged by a Se. It can only be used in solutions of pH greater than ca. 7, as it decomposes to elemental Se at lower pH. Selenourea (the Se analogue of thiourea), can be used at more acid pH. However, while selenourea was once the main Se source in CBD, it has, to a large extent, been superseded by selenosulfate, which is more stable and cheaper.
There have been very few reports on CBD of tellurides. This is due to the instability of tellurium precursors and the very negative potential for telluride formation. CdTe films have been formed by using hydrazine—a strong reducing agent—in a deposition solution containing TeO2.14 Deposition of CdTe has also been reported using the tellurium analogue of selenosulfate (tellurosulfate).15 While Te is only very slightly soluble in sulfite (in fact, it was considered to be insoluble), it is apparently enough to deposit tellurides. For both methods, stoichiometric films are difficult to obtain with elemental Te also typically formed. A recent study has also described conversion of CD Cd(OH)2 films to CdTe using a solution of Te in hydroxymethane sulfinic acid.16
2.2 Oxides
There are many different ways of depositing oxides. However, most of them involve hydrolysis of metal cations. At present there is no clear correlation between mechanism of oxide deposition and crystal size. Only the two most common methods of depositing oxides are briefly treated here (see ref. 17 and chapter 7 of ref. 10 for a more detailed treatment of oxide deposition).

2.2.1 Direct hydrolysis of metal salts. 
This is exemplified by the hydrolysis of Fe3+, a readily hydrolysable ion (5a)which continues in the following sequence: (5b)Increase in temperature and in pH increases the rate of hydrolysis. As in all CBD reactions, it should not be uncontrollably fast in order to allow film formation, and not simply precipitation, to take place. Hydrolysis of urea, which slowly increases the pH, is a common method of controlling the hydrolysis rate. The product may be either a hydroxide (which can be further dehydrated to an oxide) or an oxide (or hydrated oxide) directly, depending on the stability of the hydroxide. Many hydroxides, particularly of acidic ions, are not stable; others may be formed, but are readily dehydrated (e.g., Zn(OH)2 can be dehydrated either by gentle heating or even at room temperature by the presence of, e.g., ethanol).


2.2.2 Hydrolysis using boric acid/fluorocomplexes. 
This technique (often called liquid phase deposition—LPD) is commonly used for highly-charged, acidic ions which form fluorocomplexes, e.g., for SiO2 and TiO2. The boric acid removes the HF formed in the equilibrium hydrolysis of the fluorocomplex, shifting the equilibrium in favour of hydrolysis as shown below for TiO217 (6a) (6b)

2.3 The substrate
CBD is a film deposition technique, which means deposition occurs onto a substrate. Sometimes there is a choice of substrates, limited only by the intended purposes of the film (e.g., must it be transparent or electrically conducting?). In other cases, the substrate is a given (e.g., CuInSe2 for photovoltaic cells), although even here, treatment of the substrate may be important, as is often the case for any type of deposition.
An advantage of CBD is that deposition can be carried out, in principle, on virtually any substrate material and on any shape of substrate. Of course, the substrate must be chemically stable in the deposition solution. Glass is a common substrate when light transparency is required. In spite of its perceived inertness, the surface of glass is actually very reactive, due to the presence of surface hydroxyl groups. Also, different glasses may behave very differently, as was clearly demonstrated in an early experiment on the relative adhesion of CBD PbS on different types of glass; best adherence was obtained on Pb- and Zn-containing glasses, while adherence was poorest on silica.18 This was ascribed to enhanced binding by virtue of the insoluble sulfides formed by these metals.
Many plastics can be coated by CBD, although again, the adhesion varies from one plastic to another and can be improved by various surface treatments. The presence of monolayers on a substrate can also affect the adhesion of a film and this has been exploited to pattern CBD films. By choice of the monolayer endgroup, deposition can be directed either to just the monolayer (if the substrate itself does not allow adherent films) or away from the monolayer or even to only certain parts of the monolayer (where two different endgroups are used). This is discussed later; some examples are given in ref. 19–21.
The crystallographic properties of the CD film are sometimes dependent on the nature of the substrate, e.g., epitaxial deposition on a crystallographically-ordered substrate (ref. 22–25 give some examples). This may occur where an ion-by-ion mechanism is operative: in a cluster mechanism, where clusters of a precursor hydroxide mediate the deposition, epitaxial deposition, even on an ordered substrate, is unlikely.
As pointed out by Froment and Lincot,26 the lateral homogeneity of a CBD film tends to be very good, even on irregular surfaces since the growth is often under kinetic control via surface reactions. This is a major advantage of CBD which is not shared by most other deposition techniques.
3. Nanocrystalline semiconductor films
3.1 Factors which control crystal size
Having completed the brief overview of CBD in general, we now turn our attention for the rest of this article to nanocrystalline films. To begin with, the main factors which control crystal size will be considered in some detail. There are a number of methods used to measure crystal size: X-ray diffraction (XRD) peak broadening, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and, for larger crystal sizes, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) are the usual methods. However, in CBD, where the crystal size is quite often small enough to exhibit size quantization (increase in bandgap with decrease in crystal size), measurement of the optical transmission (or, as often presented, absorption) spectra is the fastest and most convenient method to provide an estimate of crystal size. This method is indirect, and is best used in routine measurements after previous correlation between crystal size (measured directly) and optical spectra have been carried out. Also, as will be seen later, this correlation may need to be modified for very small crystal sizes due to interaction between neighbouring crystals.

3.1.1 Temperature. 
The effect of temperature on crystal size is intuitively well-known. Higher temperatures mean faster diffusion on a substrate and interdiffusion between separate crystals, leading to larger crystals. However, since CBD is a solution technique, and almost always occurs from aqueous solutions, with the resulting limited temperature range, there is another effect of temperature which may be more important. This is the balance between kinetic and thermodynamic stability of very small crystals (better termed nuclei) in an aqueous phase, and is based on kinetic stabilization of very small nuclei, which are thermodynamically unstable in solution. The limit of thermodynamic stability (the critical nuclei radius, RC), is determined by the balance between surface and bulk energies of the growing nucleus. This balance depends not only on the material itself but very importantly also on the surrounding (liquid, in our case) phase, which can have a major effect on the surface energy. As an example of this effect, we consider a cluster mechanism for CdS or CdSe deposition, where Cd(OH)2 colloids are the primary reacting species. The relevant equilibria are: (7a)A number, n, of these molecules can form a cluster, [Cd(OH)2]n. This cluster can continue to grow by collecting a variety of solution species, e.g.: (7b) (7c)or (7d) (7e)This may continue until, eventually, the cluster is large enough to be thermodynamically stable (i.e., does not redissolve). However, if the cluster is smaller than the critical nucleus size, then the nucleus can also redissolve. The lifetime of the nucleus will then depend on its size and also on the temperature: lower temperatures will slow down the redissolution step. Thus lower temperature increases the chance that a sub-critical nucleus will eventually grow to a stable size rather than redissolve: (this will be offset, to a greater or lesser extent, by a slower growth rate). This kinetic stabilization of small nuclei results in a greater total density of nuclei and therefore smaller crystal size, since the total quantities of reactants are fixed.
The effect of deposition temperature on the crystal size (shown indirectly as bandgap) is demonstrated for CdSe deposited by the cluster mechanism in Fig. 1 (the rightmost spectrum should be ignored for the moment). The crystal size varies from 3.5 nm (1 °C) to 8.5 nm (80 °C).
 Fig. 1  Optical transmission spectra of CBD CdSe films (typically 100–150 nm thick) deposited at different temperatures (shown on each spectrum). The films are deposited by the cluster mechanism except for the rightmost spectrum (80 °C, HC), which is deposited by the ion-by-ion mechanism. The approximate bandgaps can be estimated from the spectra as corresponding to slightly higher energies (top axis) than the onset of absorption (the onset of the sharp drop in transmission). Approximate crystal sizes in nm are (from the 1 °C to the 80 °C HC): 3.5, 4.5, 5.0, 6.5, 8.5, 20. 


3.1.2 Deposition mechanism. 
For chalcogenide semiconductors, the crystal size has been shown to be dependent on the deposition mechanism: the cluster mechanism results in smaller crystal size than the ion-by-ion mechanism.11 In the cluster mechanism, the size of the metal hydroxide colloids present in the deposition solution is expected to define the product crystal size, and this size will depend largely on temperature as described above. For the ion-by-ion reaction, nucleation is generally slower and growth often occurs only at a solid surface and not (or at least much less) in the bulk of the solution. Nucleation therefore is confined to two dimensions in contrast to three dimensions for the cluster mechanism. The crystal growth may terminate when adjacent crystals touch each other or by some other termination mechanism, e.g., adsorption of a surface-active species. The substrate may affect the surface energy of the growing nuclei and therefore can modify the critical radius (the presence of a surface may stabilize a nucleus which is unstable in the isolated form). However, the balance between surface and bulk energies is also valid for the ion-by-ion mechanism on a substrate, although it is not necessarily the most important factor. It should be noted that, for both reaction mechanisms, these considerations should be valid regardless of whether the mechanism proceeds via free chalcogenide ions or by a complex decomposition mechanism.
The effect of deposition mechanism is seen in Fig. 1 by comparison of the two 80 °C spectra. The rightmost spectrum (HC 80 °C) corresponds to the ion-by-ion mechanism, and the crystal size, measured by XRD, is ca. 20 nm (too large to exhibit size quantization). The crystal size of the 80 °C cluster mechanism deposit is ca. 8.5 nm. While the effect of temperature is gradual, as seen in Fig. 1, that of the mechanism is sudden, as seen in Fig. 2, where the sudden transition on varying the complex : metal ratio is shown for two different solution temperatures. The spectra are independent of the NTA : Cd ratio (where NTA, nitrilotriacetate, is the complex used) until the transition between hydroxide-containing and hydroxide-free solutions is reached, whereupon they suddenly undergo a red shift (increase in crystal size; decrease in bandgap) and then no further change as the NTA : Cd ratio increases further. The crystal sizes in these films were also shown, by XRD, to change only at the NTA : Cd ratio where the spectrum changes and the experimental results agreed with thermodynamic calculations on the region of existence of Cd(OH)2 as a function of temperature, pH and solution composition.11
 Fig. 2  Optical transmission spectra of CdSe films deposited at 10 °C (top) and 80 °C (bottom) with varying complexant (NTA) : Cd molar ratios (shown in the figures). The approximate bandgaps estimated from the spectra are indicated by the vertical lines. (Adapted from ref. 10.) 
The transition between hydroxide-containing and hydroxide-free solutions is determined by several parameters. Decrease in the complex : metal concentration ratio and increase in temperature and pH will all favour hydroxide formation. The increase in temperature affects several parameters: it increases the solubility of Cd(OH)2, which will decrease the solid hydroxide formation. Opposing this, it will decrease the complex stability and increase the ion product of water, both of which will favour hydroxide formation. As seen in Fig. 2, the overall effect of increasing temperature is to favour hydroxide formation (a greater complex : metal ratio is required at higher temperature to prevent hydroxide formation, and thus favour the ion-by-ion mechanism).


3.1.3 Illumination. 
A number of studies have found decreases in bandgap up to 0.2 eV (increase in crystal size) if the deposition solution is illuminated during deposition.27–29 This is probably due to photoelectrochemical reactions which occur at the crystal surface. CdSe can also be electrodeposited from the chemical deposition solution. Electrons (either from an external source, as in the case of electrodeposition, or generated by illumination during CBD) can reduce selenosulfate to selenide, which reacts with Cd ions, causing (photo)electrodeposited CdSe to form on the crystals and thereby increasing the crystal size. Only light which is absorbed by the semiconductor can cause this effect, as expected based on the photoelectrochemical mechanism. In addition, a certain minimum intensity is needed to cause a measurable red shift, but the effect saturates at high light intensities. At low intensities, recombination was assumed to remove the photogenerated electron before it had time to reduce selenosulfate, hence the threshold. As intensity increases, there is an increasing likelihood of photoelectrochemical reduction. The saturation was explained by assuming that only one electron/hole pair was effective; further increase in intensity had no further effect.28,29 It might be that the electrons are rapidly transferred to the electrolyte (forming CdSe) leaving longer-lived trapped holes which then cause Auger recombination of subsequent electron/hole pairs).


3.1.4 Film thickness. 
Since the composition of the deposition solution is changing during deposition, it is not surprising that the crystal size may also change throughout the deposition. An extreme case of this would be if, because of the increasing complex : metal ratio (in most cases the complex concentration is constant while that of the metal decreases during deposition), the mechanism changes from a cluster growth to an ion-by-ion growth. However, even without such a sudden change, the crystal size often increases during growth, although usually modestly. This occurs since the reactant concentration is continually decreasing. It was shown that, for CdSe deposition, reducing the concentration of all reactants to one half the original concentration resulted in a bandgap increase of between 0.05 and 0.10 eV, corresponding to a size increase of ca. 10%.27 This can be explained based on the concept of kinetic stabilization of small nuclei described above. Small nuclei are stabilized at lower temperatures, thus providing a greater chance of growth to a size where the crystal will be thermodynamically stable and resulting in a smaller crystal size. However, the lower the concentration of reactants (selenosulfate and free Cd2+, the latter which will decrease due both to decrease in total Cd concentration and increase in complex : Cd ratio), the slower will be this growth and therefore, as with increased temperature, the greater likelihood of redissolution of the small nuclei, resulting in a larger final crystal size. This concentration effect is important not only in the context of varying film thickness (deposition time) but also as a means for fine control of crystal size.
Increases in crystal size with increasing film thickness have been reported in a number of studies.27,29–31 This increase in size does not occur throughout the entire film thickness, but rather results in films of smaller crystal size at the substrate and slowly increasing size farther away from the substrate. This can be seen in two ways. In one, the photoluminescence peak red-shifted and widened as the deposition time (and therefore crystal size) increased.30 In another method, modulated electrotransmission (ET) and electroreflection (ER) spectroscopies (where modulation of the potential of the film in an electrolyte results in corresponding changes in the absorption and reflection) of a CD CdSe film were compared (Fig. 3). The bandgap of the film is ca. 2.1 eV, but the ET spectrum is broader and shifted mainly to the high energy side compared to the ER spectrum. Since the ER spectrum samples the near surface region of the film and the ET spectrum the total film, this difference implies that the film is composed of smaller crystals close to the substrate and larger ones toward the surface.
 Fig. 3  Modulated electrotransmission (ET—solid line) and electroreflectance (ER—dotted line) spectra of a CD CdSe film deposited from a NTA/selenosulfate bath at 30 °C. The experiments were carried out in an electrolyte containing sulfide and sulfite (the latter to prevent formation of coloured polysulfide) at a pH of 10 (buffered with NaH2PO4). 
Thicker films with a crystal size more characteristic of thin films can be formed by depositing on an existing thin film from a new solution and repeating this to the desired thickness. This, together with the ET/ER results, suggests that the main reason for increase in crystal size with continuing deposition is not simply deposition on already deposited crystals but because of changes in the composition of the deposition solution.


3.1.5 Annealing. 
Annealing is a post-deposition method of increasing crystal size common to all deposition techniques. Since it is often used to ‘improve’ properties of CBD films, a few words on its use are in order here. In most cases, CBD films are annealed not simply to increase crystal size but rather to improve certain properties, often photoelectrochemical performance of photoelectrodes. Annealing may have other important effects on CBD films besides change in crystal size, for example, change in surface chemistry (depending on the annealing atmosphere). Here we confine ourselves to its effect on crystal size.
The increase in crystal size with annealing depends on temperature and time of annealing as well as on the material annealed and on the annealing atmosphere. For CdSe and CdS, which are usually annealed in air or sometimes in an inert atmosphere, as a rule of thumb, increase in crystal size is slow up to a temperature of ca. 300 °C and increases greatly at a temperature somewhere between 300 and 400 °C (with further growth at higher temperatures), together with a phase transformation (if the original film is sphalerite, as it tends to be in CBD films) to wurtzite structure. This can be seen in Fig. 4, which shows TEM images of a CBD CdSe film as deposited and after sequential annealing treatments. While the growth is small up to 300 °C, most of the spectral redshift with increasing temperature is seen in this region, since only a small growth is necessary to change the bandgap appreciably (see, e.g., Fig. 1 and associated text).
 Fig. 4  TEM micrographs of a nanocrystalline CdSe film as deposited (upper left) and after air annealing for 20 min at increasing temperatures up to 500 °C (lower right). The 50 nm scale is the same for all micrographs except for the 450 and 500 °C ones, which are marked by the 100 nm scale. (S. Gorer and G. Hodes, unpublished results.) 


3.1.6 Post deposition solution treatment. 
Increases in the crystal size of CBD CdSe and PbSe films have been observed after treatment with strongly alkaline solutions.32 A detailed study of this effect in PbSe films led to the conclusion that the alkaline solutions dissolved the oxidized surface of the nanocrystals and slowly dissolved the PbSe, redepositing it as an Ostwald ripening to form larger crystals.33 For PbSe, the crystal size could be controllably increased up to 4 times (from typically 5 nm up to 20 nm). The same treatment increases the size of CdSe nanocrystals only by some tens of percent. PbSe is probably more susceptible to this treatment because of the very strong complexation of Pb by hydroxide, in contrast to Cd.

3.2 Size quantization in CBD films
When considering size quantization in CBD films, we should first compare the size-quantized nanocrystals (quantum dots) obtained in these films with the more common colloidal quantum dots (ref. 34 and 35 review the preparation and (in the case of ref. 34) properties of colloidal nanoparticles). Colloidal quantum dots are almost always prepared with a more or less strongly-adsorbed capping agent (tri-octyl phosphine oxide—TOPO) is the most common). This capping agent has several effects on the nanocrystals: it results in growth termination; it separates one nanocrystal from another, both in the colloid (preventing aggregation) and also if the colloid is made into a solid phase, such as a film or free-flowing powder; it protects the crystal surface (at least to some extent) against chemical reaction; it passivates electronic surface states on the nanocrystals, resulting in enhanced band-to-band luminescence. CBD quantum dots, in contrast, are uncapped as deposited (i.e., they have no intentionally-introduced adsorbed species on the individual nanocrystal surfaces). This fact leads to several differences in the properties of the CBD and capped quantum dots.
The capped colloids can be prepared with a smaller size distribution than CBD films, due both to the ability to better control crystal size, largely mediated by the capping species, as well as the possibility of post-preparation size selection (such as by selective precipitation and centrifugation). The other main advantage of colloids is that luminescence is generally much more efficient due to the passivation by the cap; luminescence of CBD films is usually weak. Colloidal crystals can also be grown with a higher bandgap shell, which further increases the luminescence yield. In principle, this could also be accomplished for CBD films, but it does not seem to have been done up to now.
Against this (admittedly strong) superiority of colloidal quantum dots, CBD films do have some positive points. The individual nanocrystals in CBD films are closer together (touching) than even solid quantum dot arrays, films or powders, where the neighbouring nanocrystals are separated by the (usually long chain) capping agent. This means that electronic interaction between neighbouring crystals in the CBD films is greater than in arrays made from colloids. For applications where charge flow through the film is required, this is likely to be an advantage. Another potential advantage of the CBD films is that they are prepared in situ as a film while the colloidal quantum dots require further processing if the film form is needed.
Since size quantization was first observed in CBD films,8 there have been numerous reports of increased bandgap (the most visible manifestation of this size quantization) in various CBD semiconductors. CdS and CdSe are the two most common semiconductors where size quantization has been reported in CBD films, but there are many others. It should be noted that CBD Cu chalcogenides show large variations in bandgaps between different studies. These differences are likely to be due largely to the Burstein-Moss effect (partial band filling) in these typically degenerate semiconductors; however crystal size may still affect the measured bandgaps.
We have already given examples of size quantization in CdSe films (Fig. 1) in our general discussion of factors influencing crystal size. CdSe is a good example for this size quantization since its bandgap varies over much of the visible range as a function of crystal size, and therefore the visible colour changes are very marked—from deep red through orange to yellow. However, there are other materials which, if less visually striking than CdSe, exhibit greater changes in bandgap due to size quantization. PbSe is a good example of this, due mainly to its very low electron/hole effective mass (the degree of size quantization is inversely proportional to this effective mass, through the simple particle in a box model of charge localization). CBD PbSe films exhibit a wide range in bandgaps from the bulk value (0.28 eV) up to 1.5 eV for a crystal size of 3.5 nm.11,36 This wide range in bandgaps attainable with CBD PbSe films can be used to tailor photodetectors. Not only can the onset of detection be varied, but, due to the (controllable) ability of PbSe to deposit with a bimodal crystal size distribution under certain conditions,32 a wide spectral range can be obtained. Fig. 5 shows photoelectrochemical photocurrent responses of four different PbSe films with crystal sizes varying from 4 nm (a) and with increasing concentration of larger (6–12 nm) crystals (b)–(d). The roughly flat response obtained in (c) is not obtained in commercial PbSe photodetectors, which have low sensitivity in the visible and near-IR region.
 Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical photocurrent spectra (in a selenosulfate-based electrolyte) of CBD PbSe films deposited under various conditions with four different crystal sizes (see text). The cutoff at 1400 nm is due to absorption by the water. (From S. Gorer, PhD thesis, Feinberg Graduate School, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, 1996.) 
Another aspect of size quantization in CBD films is directly related to the absence of capping agents in these films, and the resulting closer contact between crystals. This aspect is overlap interaction between neighbouring crystals, where charge (usually electrons) in one crystal overlaps (tunnels) to some extent into a nearby one. This interaction results in a reduction of localization and therefore of the degree of size quantization. For capped nanocrystal colloids assembled into a film, this interaction has been observed only for very small crystal size (≤2 nm).37–40 For CBD CdSe, however, some loss in size quantization (observed as a red spectral shift) has been observed up to 4 nm crystal size41 (shown later in Fig. 9 in connection with another phenomenon). This shift occurs in an already aggregated film and is caused mainly by increased contact between crystals due to capillary forces which operate when the films are dried. If the films are kept in solvent, there is little or no interaction, and if dried from a low surface tension solvent (such as ethanol instead of water), the interaction is considerably reduced.
3.3 Surface properties of CBD nanocrystalline films
In this section, we discuss the surfaces of individual crystals in the CBD films and the effects of these surfaces on the film properties. There is considerable overlap between this section and the previous one on size quantization: nevertheless it is an independent subject in its own right.

3.3.1 Luminescence (emission). 
Measurement of the optical transmission (absorption) spectrum of a quantum dot film is the simplest way to obtain an estimate of the effective optical bandgap and is commonly used in the characterization of CBD films. Apart from very few exceptions (discussed below), the absorption spectrum of a quantum dot film, while dependent on quantum dot size, is independent of adsorbed species. This is in stark contrast to emission (luminescence) spectra, where both intensity and spectral shape are strongly dependent on the state of the quantum dot surface. The reason for this is that while absorption is dominated by the interior levels (the valence and conduction levels†), emission is often dominated by surface electronic levels (surface states). The cross section for absorption through these levels is small compared to the ‘bulk’ (commonly called ‘interior’ levels in quantum dots), but their occupancy by excited carriers and emission probability may be high. As noted above, colloidal quantum dots are normally electronically passivated to minimize this sub-bandgap surface state emission (which will be at a lower energy than the band-to-band emission, and if the surface states occur over a broad energy range, may result in non-radiative recombination of electrons and holes). CBD films are generally not deliberately passivated and, as mentioned earlier, their emission yield is usually poor. In addition, a close-packed assembly of quantum dots is likely to emit more poorly compared to the same quantum dots in dispersed form, due to efficient energy transfer to larger dots and eventual recombination at that fraction of dots which contain more efficient non-radiative recombination centres.42
While the emission yield of CBD films is normally low, both the yield and spectral shape can vary considerably without any obvious reason. Thus CdSe quantum dot films typically exhibit two main emission peaks: a band-to-band emission‡ and a broad, deep sub-bandgap emission, centred roughly around 1.6 eV, from surface electronic levels. However, comparing different reports of the CdSe films prepared by apparently the same method, one or the other of these peaks usually dominated and it is not always clear what caused the variation. Some degree of understanding is being reached in this regard. Water has been shown to electronically passivate, at least to some extent, sub-bandgap states in CBD CdSe quantum dot films.43 Thus adsorbed water can change, sometimes drastically, the luminescence spectrum of CBD CdSe films.44 An example is shown in Fig. 6. The PL spectra of a CdSe film in vacuum (dry) is completely dominated by a broad sub-bandgap response with only a small bandgap component, in comparison to the bandgap-dominated emission (although still containing a considerable sub-bandgap component) in a humid atmosphere.
 Fig. 6  Photoluminescence of CBD CdSe film (ca. 4 nm crystal size) under humid and dry (vacuum) conditions. [E. Lifshitz, I. Dag, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, unpublished results.] 
Optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) of these films showed that the trapping sites were of low symmetry, confirming the expectation that they were located at the nanocrystal surface rather than in the bulk.45
The bandgap emission from CBD CdSe films was found to be greatly increased by both illumination (from a powerful laser) and exposure to ambient water vapour.46 The films were deposited on p-type Si (the effect was not seen for films on glass substrates). The exact details of film deposition were also important, with Cd–OH surface species apparently playing a role. The emission increase was attributed to a combination of electron injection form the Si substrate, surface passivation by water and trap modification and saturation.
Although not involving CBD films, we note that passivation by water, induced by illumination, was also invoked to explain increased emission from capped CdSe quantum dots, formed into layers.47 The untreated films exhibited both a bandgap and a sub-bandgap emission of roughly comparable magnitude. Exposure to both light and water vapour resulted in a large (×20) increase in the bandgap emission but no major change in the sub-bandgap emission; i.e., the emission was now almost all bandgap emission.

3.3.2 Surface states in CBD CdSe
This section is related to the previous one in that emission depends strongly on the presence and nature of surface states on nanocrystals. However, in this section, we discuss other aspects of surface states in CBD films.
Surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPV), which is a sensitive probe of surface states, was used to show that adsorbed water passivated surface states.43 This is seen in Fig. 7A, which shows a gradual onset at ca. 1.6 eV for the film in dry ambient, followed by a sharper supra-bandgap onset at ca. 2.1 eV in a humid (normal) ambient. In the same study, it was shown that very mild etching of the CdSe films (ca. 4.5 nm crystal size) with dilute HCl changed the trapping characteristics of the CdSe from dominant hole trapping to dominant electron trapping, seen as a change in the direction of the SPV signal (Fig. 7B). Also, the dominant electron trapping of the etched films was only manifested in the presence of water vapour: in a dry atmosphere, hole trapping remained dominant. although the spectra are very different in shape than the non-etched films, reflecting a different distribution of states. The 1.6 eV onset for the sub-bandgap signal in the as-deposited sample agrees with the sub-bandgap emission seen in several studies and shown in the previous section. Changes from dominant electron to hole trapping have also been observed, by chemically resolved electrical measurements (CREM) using an XPS spectrometer in CBD CdSe films on Si.48 The initial deposition on Si is Cd(OH)2, dominated by electron traps (in contrast to the CdSe, which forms most of the film, and is dominated by hole traps). There is an interplay between the two trapping characteristics of the two layers depending on the CREM measurement parameters.
 Fig. 7  (A) Surface photovoltage spectra of a CBD 4.5 nm crystallite size, 70 nm CdSe film in a humid and a dry ambient. (B) Surface photovoltage spectra of a similar as-deposited film after the following sequence of treatments: (1) as-deposited, humid ambient; (2) after etching, humid ambient; (3) in a dry ambient. The essential features of spectra 2 and 3 are reversibly reproduced upon changing back and forth between a humid and a dry ambient. Adapted from ref. 41. 
Conducting scanning probe microscopy of isolated CdSe nanocrystals (mostly electrodeposited but also CBD) in a dry atmosphere showed the presence of peaks corresponding to both hole and electron trap states, both centred ca. 0.3 eV from the corresponding delocalized levels.49 These peaks were not seen in a humid atmosphere.

3.3.3 Surface modification. 
CBD films of CdSe or CdS, treated with aqueous cyanide solution, exhibit blue shifts in their optical spectra that scale inversely with the crystal size and can reach 0.3 eV for a crystal size of ca. 3.5 nm.41,50 This is shown in Fig. 8, where the increase in bandgap is plotted against the bandgap of the untreated film (the data bounded by the rectangle in the top right hand side should be ignored for now; it will be discussed later). The inset shows the transmission spectra of an as-deposited film, the film after cyanide treatment and finally again after rinsing with water. Rinsing off the cyanide returns the spectrum to its original position. (Repeated cyanide treatment thins down the film and eventually removes it.) Thus the effect is reversible within the stability limits of the cyanide treatment.
 Fig. 8  Increase in bandgap of as-deposited CdSe films due to cyanide treatment as a function of measured bandgap of the (untreated) films. The approximate crystal size, measured either by correlation with the absorption spectra or, in some cases, by XRD line broadening, is given on the upper scale. The inset shows an example of the spectrum of an as-deposited film with crystal size ca. 3.5 nm (solid line), after cyanide treatment (dash–dot line) and after subsequent rinsing with water (dashed line). The data in the rectangular box near the top, right side of the figure are from measurements on aged films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
This effect was explained by electrostatic compression of the already localized electron wavefunction in the quantum dots by the strongly-adsorbed, negative CN−. Cyanide binds strongly to both Cd and S(e) sites at the crystal surface, and covers the surface efficiently, thus presumably sterically inhibiting cation access to the surface (a separation of an inner negative charge (CN−) and outer positive charge (K+) was supported by Kelvin probe work function measurements). Such a mechanism requires lack of symmetry, since a spherically symmetrical negative charge on a spherical nanocrystal would not affect charge in the crystal. Lack of symmetry would arise both from the fact that the crystals are not truly spherical and/or due to coupling between crystals in the aggregated film. Another possibility to explain the observed effect is that the cyanide modifies the electronic structure of the CdSe. The nature of the surface chemistry has been shown to change the electronic structure of small Si clusters.51,52 These clusters (around 1 nm) are essentially all surface, but the CdSe nanoparticles can have as many as half of all their atoms at the surface, and thus it is not unreasonable to draw a parallel. On the other hand, while the effect of the bandgap-modifying surface adsorbent (oxygen) was to decrease size quantization in these Si quantum dots, in the case of cyanide on CdSe and CdS, the surface adsorbent increases the size quantization, which points to a fundamental difference between the two effects.
The data points in the rectangle in Fig. 8 appear, at first sight, to be inconsistent with the other data. Normally, the optical spectra of these samples were measured immediately after preparation. In the case of those samples with data points in the rectangle, the spectra were measured some time (hours or even days) after deposition. As discussed in the section on size quantization above, for nanocrystals smaller than 4 nm, the optical spectra of the films gradually redshift after deposition (aging), mainly due to capillary force-induced interaction between the nanocrystals. Cyanide treatment of these films then has an additional effect: it removes the effect of this interaction (in electronic terms—not physically) in addition to its effect on non-aged films. This is demonstrated in Fig. 9, which shows the effect of aging and subsequent cyanide treatment for CdSe films of two different crystal sizes. The final spectra of the cyanide-treated films are the same, regardless of whether the films were aged or not; i.e. the blueshift due to cyanide treatment is larger for aged films than for fresh ones. This explains the apparently anomalous data points in the rectangle in Fig. 8. Incidentally, the top scale in Fig. 8 is increasingly invalid for crystal size smaller than 4 nm, since the bandgap in these small crystals is determined not only by the physical crystal size, but also by the degree of interaction.
 Fig. 9  Changes in (normalized) transmission spectra of CdSe films, deposited by chemical solution deposition, and with XRD-measured crystal sizes of 3.7 nm (5 °C deposition)—top image and 3.3 nm (0 °C deposition)—bottom image. The as-deposited film is designated by 1 and the same film after cyanide treatment (3 min in 0.8 M aqueous KCN) by 2. Separate as-deposited films (closely similar in the bandgap region to the previous ones, therefore not show separately to simplify the images), after spectral stabilization (1A) followed by cyanide treatment (2A). Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 

3.4 Photoelectrochemistry in nanocrystalline films
Many papers on CBD, particularly earlier ones, were directed toward use of the deposited films as photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical cells (PEC). A PEC is a solar cell where light is absorbed in a semiconductor film (the photoelectrode) immersed in an electrolyte. The photoelectrode is connected through a load to a second ‘counter’ electrode.53 The semiconductor/electrolyte junction is generally less sensitive to the form of the semiconductor (e.g., small crystal size, irregular morphology) than an equivalent solid junction, reducing the demands on the semiconductor itself; this is an important reason that CBD films have often been investigated as photoelectrodes. At the same time, the stability of such liquid junctions is often not very good because of photoelectrochemical reactions which alter the semiconductor surface. In this section, we are concerned only with those aspects of CBD photoelectrodes directly related to their nanocrystallinity.
Before discussing the photoelectrochemistry of nanocrystalline CBD films, it is important to first explain the concept of space charge layer (or built in field) in a semiconductor. This space charge layer is formed at a junction between a semiconductor and either a dissimilar semiconductor, a metal or an electrolyte, due to equilibration of the Fermi levels (electrochemical potentials) between the different phases and the resulting transient charge flow. It extends from the junction into the bulk of the semiconductor for a characteristic distance (the space charge layer width) which varies inversely with the square root of the doping density of the semiconductor. This width is typically tens to hundreds of nm, but can be even more for very low doped semiconductors. If we consider an isolated semiconductor particle of, say, 10 nm, surrounded by an electrolyte, then unless this particle is very highly doped indeed (and the opposite is more likely for such particles), then there will be very little built in field in the semiconductor; it will be completely depleted.54,55 In a film made up of aggregated nanoparticles (as is typical of CBD films), electrolyte can penetrate the porous film, contacting every individual particle in the film, and thus deplete it. This simple picture may be modified for the first nanoparticle layer on the metallic contact, but it should be true for most of the film. The importance of this concept is that solar cells are normally based on separation of photogenerated charge in or near a space charge layer. If there is no space charge layer, then separation can not occur by this mechanism.
Another mechanism for charge separation in a PEC is the kinetic mechanism, which does not require a built in field in the semiconductor.56,57 In this mechanism, one charge is preferentially transferred to the electrolyte. This leaves the other charge relatively free to be transported to the contact, with reduced chances of recombination, since the opposite charge is removed relatively quickly by the electrolyte. This mechanism can occur in nanocrystalline PECs particularly if the semiconductor layer is porous (the normal situation for a CBD layer), since the electrolyte can penetrate the porous layer and contact individual crystals, thereby facilitating removal of one charge (the one preferentially transferred to the electrolyte).
In the following brief overview of PECs using CBD semiconductor films, some examples are given which indicate principles and potentialities of the CBD films used for this purpose. In many cases, CBD photoelectrodes were annealed, which resulted in crystal growth and, usually, in improved PEC performance. Since our present interest is in the nanocrystalline films, we consider only non-annealed films here.
CBD CdSe films (typical crystal size 4–5 nm) were found to exhibit “n-type’ behaviour. This means that photogenerated electrons flowed toward the substrate (holes to the electrolyte). However, the CdSe itself was found to be essentially intrinsic (by XPS valence band measurements). A very mild etch of the CdSe film with dilute HCl resulted in a reversal of photocurrent flow (to “p-type” behaviour).9,58 (Fig. 10). Further experiments showed a correlation between the direction of photocurrent flow and charge trapping characteristics of the crystal surface: preferential hole trapping correlated with preferential hole injection into the electrolyte (and thus “n-type” behaviour) and vice versa59 (see Fig. 7 and the associated discussion above).
 Fig. 10  Current–voltage characteristics under chopped illumination (≈AM1) of a nanocrystalline (4–5 nm) CdSe film, deposited by CBD, in a polysulfide electrolyte. The top scan is for as-deposited CdSe and the bottom scan after etching with dilute HCl. Adapted from ref. 56. 
Photocurrents of these (unannealed) CBD CdSe films in polysulfide electrolytes reached (in favourable cases) over 1 mA cm−2 short circuit current, 500 mV open circuit voltage and fill factors of 0.5 (for approximately solar illumination). In general, unannealed CBD films gave low photocurrents (fractions of a mA cm−2 under roughly solar irradiation), although there are a few cases of greater photocurrents reported. One is for Sb2S3 (Eg = 1.85 eV), where a photocurrent of 2 mA cm−2 at 40 mW cm−2 illumination was measured.60 Another was Cd0.925Pb0.075S (it was not clear whether this was a single phase or, as seems likely, a mixture of phases), with a reported photocurrent of 2.8 mA cm−2 at 50 mW cm−2.61 These represent estimated monochromatic quantum efficiencies (at optimal wavelengths) of around 50% in the best cases, which are very high considering (a) the very small crystal size (which was once assumed to cause very low photocurrents) and (b) the fact that these films are as-deposited (not annealed).
The two main pathways for photocurrent loss are recombination of electrons and holes in the CdSe and, possibly more importantly, injection of electrons into the electrolyte (in parallel with hole injection—indirect recombination). Recombination of charges at the substrate itself is another pathway for photocurrent loss; however, by judicious choice of the substrate material (it should be a very poor electrocatalyst for charge injection into the electrolyte), this need not be severe in a PEC. In a solid state cell, on the contrary, recombination and shorting at the substrate is much more likely to be a problem and this is manifested by the necessity of a blocking layer at the substrate in many solid state cells.
3.5 Film structure and geometry
This section covers a number of different aspects—all connected with morphology and geometry of the films.

3.5.1 Patterning. 
Most patterning studies have been carried out using monolayers. A frequent basis for the patterning is that nucleation occurs more readily on hydrophilic surfaces than on hydrophobic ones, although other more specific chemical or electrostatic interactions between the deposited material and the monolayer end group may also play a role. A schematic example of this type of patterning is shown in Fig. 11. A long chain thioacetate-terminated trichlorosilane is self-assembled onto an oxidized Si substrate (a) and (b). The thioacetate is somewhat hydrophobic. Exposure of this monolayer to UV radiation through a fine mesh grid mask (c) results in photooxidation of the thioacetate to hydrophilic sulfonate groups (d). Deposition of TiO2 from an aqueous solution of TiCl4/HCl at 80 °C occurred only on the UV-exposed (hydrophilic) regions of the substrate20 (Fig. 11e and 12).
 Fig. 11  Cartoon demonstrating self-assembly of a long chain thioacetate-terminated trichlorosilane on an oxidized Si substrate (a) and (b). Exposure of this monolayer through a fine mesh grid mask to UV radiation (c) photo-oxidizes the somewhat hydrophobic thioacetate in air to hydrophilic sulfonate endgroups (d). Deposition of TiO2 from an aqueous solution of TiCl4/HCl at 80 °C on the UV-exposed (hydrophilic) regions of the substrate (e). 
 Fig. 12  SEM micrograph of patterned TiO2 deposit (left side) and Ti elemental mapping of this sample (right side). Adapted with permission from ref. 20, copyright 1996, American Institute of Physics. 
A different approach to patterning exploits differences in adhesion to deliberately remove depositing material. Octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) monolayers were selectively illuminated by UV through a mask, forming silanol groups on the exposed regions. TiO2 was deposited under ultrasonication. The poorly-adhering layers to OTS were removed by the sonication, leaving deposition to occur on the silanol regions. TiO2
						‘wires’ of 300 nm typical width and 100–200 nm spacing were deposited.62
In cases where deposition occurs readily on the bare substrate, patterning of a hydrophobic monolayer on the substrate can prevent deposition on the ML-covered areas, so that only the bare substrate will be coated. An example of this is CdS deposition on octadecylphosphonic acid-coated mica, where deposition occurred only on the bare mica.63
These few examples show the possibilities for using monolayers to pattern CBD films. Of course, since CBD films are conformal, their morphology will be dictated by the morphology of the substrate. For example, if deposition is carried out on a porous substrate, then the pores of the substrate will be (more or less) filled by the deposit. We do not cover this aspect here, although it is important, e.g., for coating porous TiO2 with a light absorbing semiconductor for solar cells.
Illumination can increase the rate of CBD in some cases. This has been reported for PbS64 and we have observed it to have a strong accelerating effect for PbSe deposition.65 It is clear that this effect can be used, at least to some extent, to pattern the deposition by illumination through a mask. Additionally, since deposition on the illuminated regions often results in a lower bandgap (see above), this results in ‘darker’ and also thicker patterned regions compared with the non-illuminated areas as was seen for CdSe.66 We have seen such patterning if CdSe is deposited under illumination through a slit as a series of light and dark bands due to interference near the edges of the slit.
Photodeposition of chalcogenides has been demonstrated whereby absorption of UV radiation by solution chalcogen-containing species (such as thiosulfate or selenite) results in formation of metal chalcogenide which deposits on a nearby substrate.67,68 Another example of photodeposition is the photoreduction of Cr(VI) (potassium chromate) to Cr(III) (amorphous Cr(OH)3) on glass substrates. By using two interfering laser beams, a fringe pattern was obtained.69 Patterns obtained by these photochemical reactions in solution are rather coarse and it is not clear whether fine scale patterning is possible, considering that the reaction occurs in the solution rather than being localized at the substrate.


3.5.2 Porosity. 
CBD films, formed from aggregated crystals, are usually porous. Thus CdSe films deposited from NTA complexed solutions are typically 40% CdSe (60% air).70 Note that for thin films, where complete coverage by the deposit has not been attained (this thickness will be comparable to or be greater than the aggregate size, rather than the crystal size), the porosity is often larger. It has been demonstrated that the porosity (as well as aggregate size) may also be a function of the substrate: more porous CdSe films, with larger aggregate size and poorer adherence, were deposited on C-coated glass compared with clean glass.71


3.5.3 Crystal/particle shape. 
There are several factors involved in determining crystal shape. Thus Vayssieres et al. point out the importance of lowering interfacial tension, not only in lowering the nucleation energy barrier and therefore reducing particle size, but also in changing from a spherical shape (which minimizes surface energy) to a shape dictated by the crystallographic symmetry when the system is closer to thermodynamic equilibrium.72 The relative stability of different crystal faces can also be exploited to alter the topography of the crystal. For example, CBD ZnO, which tends to grow as hexagonal pillars, if left to age in the deposition solution has been shown to form hexagonal tubes due to preferential dissolution of the Zn basal plane (Fig. 13a).73
 Fig. 13  (a) ZnO microtubes grown on a F-doped SnO2 substrate. Inset shows a magnified image of one tube. Initially, hexagonal columns grow, but with increasing reaction time, these become hollowed out to give the tubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. (b) ZnO helical rods grown, with sodium citrate added, on a predeposited ZnO columnar substrate grown in the absence of citrate (the image shows growth on a single (0002) ZnO column). Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. Both types of deposit were grown from hexamethylene tetramine baths. 
Adsorption of ‘surfactants’ (meaning surface active compounds) is a well-known method of controlling crystal shape by preferential adsorption onto certain crystal faces, therefore favouring growth of other faces where there is less or no adsorption. In this respect, it might be expected that strongly adsorbed surfactants would be incompatible with film formation, since they would tend to prevent aggregation which is most often a feature of CBD film growth. The best surfactants for film growth may be the ones which are not too strongly adsorbed. Acetate ions have been shown to promote relatively large diameter columnar growth in ZnO.74 The presence of a low concentration of citrate (more strongly adsorbed than acetate) slowed the growth of the (0002) plane of ZnO due to specific adsorption, resulting in growth of flat hexagonal plates 15 nm thick. These plates grew in a helical manner resulting in pillars ca., 1 μm high, 500 nm in base width and narrowing down to <30 nm at the tip.75 (Fig. 13b). A similar spiral growth mode has also been seen in laser-ablated MBE-grown ZnO, although the reason for the morphology was apparently different.76 As another example of preferential adsorption, it has been suggested that hexamine, a non-polar reagent sometimes used in ZnO baths, is preferentially adsorbed on the non-polar faces (the sides of ZnO columns), resulting in preferential growth along the polar axis as observed.77 We note that this growth mode is very common for ZnO, where amines (or ammonia) of one type or another are very often used as complexants.
As is well known in colloidal science, the surface charge is an important factor in determining the rate of colloid aggregation. In CBD of ZnS using thioacetamide as a sulfur source, the size of the aggregates in the films (as well as in precipitates) were larger when Cd was in excess compared to excess of thioacetamide (which complexes Cd and therefore reduces the free Cd2+ (and CdOH+) concentration drastically. This was explained by a positive shift in the surface charge of the negatively-charged ZnS colloids, therefore allowing faster aggregation and larger clusters. Note that the primary crystal size (ca. 4 nm) did not change much with different Zn : thioacetamide ratios.78
Another example of how a combination of different factors can be invoked to explain morphology and also the phase of the crystals is given by deposition of TiO2 films from acidic (pH ca. 1) TiOSO4 solutions. Rutile or anatase films could be deposited by fine control of pH as well as Ti concentration (higher pH and [Ti] favoured anatase). This was explained by a thermodynamic argument based on the equilibrium between Ti(OH)22+ (the expected dominant species) and the solid rutile or anatase phases. The morphology (generally needle-shaped (typically 10–20 nm in diameter) except for fast depositions, which were more spherical, and varying large-scale morphologies) depended on a combination of surface-active anions, reaction rate and also whether the substrate was hydrophilic or hydrophobic. An additional degree of control of the deposition was obtained by adding urea, which increased the pH, but complexed the Ti and overall slowed the rate of formation of TiO2.79
As a final and specific example of shape determination, it was found that under certain conditions, narrow ZnO nanowires (ca. 50 nm diameter) grew on larger nanorods (100–500 nm diameter), intertwining as they became longer. Of particular note, some of these wires were found to be hollow tubes. Analysis showed that the wires contained N but the tubes did not. Calcination of the wires also resulted in tubes. This led to the conclusion that the tubes were formed by inclusion of a hydroxy Zn—amine complex which was removed either by dissolution over time or by calcination.80

4. Anticipated future developments
It is hoped that this overview, while not meant to be comprehensive, has provided the reader with both the background to enable a reasonable understanding of the chemical bath deposition technique and the main factors which affect the size of the crystals in CBD films, as well as a selection of examples demonstrating the various types of films obtained and some of their properties, in particular those which are related to nanocrystallinity of the films.
What kind of developments can be expected from this field in the next several years? Some of these are reasonably obvious, such as deposition of new materials, better understanding of specific (possibly also more general) deposition mechanisms and solar cell-related improvements (the latter is expected since a large part of the interest in CBD is solar cell related). A section of CBD which we have neglected in this paper is deposition of ternary materials and the related deposition of doped semiconductors. The reason we have neglected these topics is that for the most part, they have not dealt specifically with nanocrystallinity, which is the stated emphasis of this paper. However, our own (unpublished) experience with Cu-‘doped’ CdSe where, for small crystal size, the Cu (probably a Cu–Se species) is segregated at the CdSe surface, leads us to believe that there is considerable scope for developments in this subject. This area of CBD can be extended to nanocrystalline composite deposits, an area which has only very recently begun to be addressed, and will certainly be more researched in the near future.
If we can reasonably predict at least some of the expected developments in the actual deposition techniques, it is more difficult to forecast potential applications (other than those related to solar cells) of CBD nanocrystalline films. Luminescence (photo- and electro-) for use in light emitting devices is a possibility, however light emission from CBD films is almost always less efficient than from materials made by other techniques. Photoconductivity detectors based on (PbSe and PbS) CBD films have already long ago proven themselves, although improvements are possible, e.g., spectral sensitivity tailoring by controlling the bandgaps through size quantization. Selective light absorption and reflection is another well-known potential use for CBD films, and bandgap control through size quantization is an important feature here. Selective absorption, particularly for use as window materials, is also very dependent on free carrier density (which can dictate infrared transmission). The free carrier concentration in CBD semiconductors is a rather neglected area. Suffice to note, our own observations are that PbSe and PbS films may in some cases be highly transmitting in the mid infrared (at lower photon energies than the bandgaps), and in others, poorly transmitting. It is a realistic hope that other applications, not yet considered for these films, will appear.
Acknowledgements
The G. M. J. Schmidt Minerva Center for Supramolecular Chemistry and the US–Israel Binational Science Foundation are gratefully acknowledged for financial support.
References
C. Puscher, Polytechn. J., 1869, 190, 421 Search PubMed .
G. Rosenheim, W. Stadler and V. J. Mayer, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1906, 49, 1 .
G. Rosenheim, W. Stadler and V. J. Mayer, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1906, 49, 13 .

          R. W. Birkmire, B. E. McCandless, W. N. Shafarman and R. D. Varrin, Jr, in 9th ECPV Solar Energy Conf., Freiberg, Germany,  1989, p. 134 Search PubMed.

          R. H. Mauch, M. Ruckh, J. Hedström, D. Lincot, J. Kessler, R. Klinger, L. Stolt, J. Vedel and H.-W. Schock, in 10th ECPV Solar Energy Conf., Lisbon, Portugal,  1991, p. 1415 Search PubMed.
T. L. Chu, S. S. Chu, C. Ferekides, C. Q. Wu, J. Britt and C. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 70, 7608 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Chu, S. S. Chu, N. Schultz, C. Wang and C. Q. Wu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2443 CAS .
G. Hodes, A. Albu-Yaron, F. Decker and P. Motisuke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1987, 36, 4215 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes and A. Albu-Yaron, Proc. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 88–14, 298 CAS .

Chemical Solution Deposition of Semiconductor Films, ed. G. Hodes, Marcel Dekker Inc.,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. Gorer and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5338 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ortega-Borges and D. Lincot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 3464 CAS .
J. M. Doña and J. Herrero, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 4081 CAS .
G. K. Padam and S. K. Gupta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 53, 865 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Patil, P. D. More, D. S. Sutrave, G. S. Shahane, R. N. Mulik and L. P. Deshmukh, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2000, 65, 282 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sotelo-Lerma, R. A. Zingaro and S. J. Castillo, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 623, 81 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Niesen and M. R. De Guire, J. Electroceram., 2001, 6, 169 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Smith, J. Sci. Instrum., 1927, 4, 115 Search PubMed .
J. H. Fendler, Isr. J. Chem., 1993, 33, 41 CAS .
R. J. Collins, H. Shin, M. R. DeGuire, A. H. Heuer and C. N. Sukenik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 860 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Breen, J. T. Woodward, D. K. Schwartz and A. W. Apblett, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 710 CrossRef CAS .
M. Froment, M. C. Bernard, R. Cortes, B. Mokili and D. Lincot, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2642 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lincot, R. Ortega-Borges and M. Froment, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 569 CrossRef CAS .
M. Isshiki, T. Endo, K. Masumoto and Y. Usui, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2697 CAS .
M. Shandalov and Y. Golan, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2004, 28, 51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Froment and D. Lincot, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 1293 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes, Isr. J. Chem., 1993, 33, 95 CAS .
P. Nemec, D. Mikes, J. Rohovec, E. Uhlirova, F. Trojanek and P. Maly, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, 69–70, 500 CrossRef .
F. Trojanek, R. Cingolani, D. Cannoletta, D. Mikes, P. Nemec, E. Uhlirova, J. Rohovec and P. Maly, J. Cryst. Growth, 2000, 209, 695 CrossRef CAS .
R. Garuthara and G. Levine, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 401 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Rai, H. D. Bist, R. S. Katiyar, M. T. S. Nair, P. K. Nair and A. Mannivannan, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 1310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gorer, A. Albu-Yaron and G. Hodes, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1243 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sarkar, S. Kababya, S. Vega, H. Cohen, J. C. Woicik, A. I. Frenkel and G. Hodes, Chem. Mater. Search PubMed  , in press.
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O’Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gorer, A. Albu-Yaron and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16442 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vossmeyer, L. Katsikas, M. Giersig, I. G. Popovic, K. Diesner, K. A. Chemseddine, A. Eychmuller and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7665 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Artemyev, A. I. Bibik, L. I. Gurinovich, S. V. Gaponenko and U. Woggon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 60, 1504 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Artemyev, U. Woggon, H. Jaschinski, L. I. Gurinovich and S. V. Gaponenko, J. Phys. Chem., 2000, 104, 11617 Search PubMed .
O. I. Micic, S. P. Ahrenkiel and A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 4022 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sarkar and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7214 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, C. B. Murray, M. F. Rubner and M. G. Bawendi, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 216 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kronik, N. Bachrach-Ashkenasy, M. Leibovitch, E. Fefer, Y. Shapira, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1748 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lifshitz, I. Dag, I. Litvin, G. Hodes, S. Gorer, R. Reisfeld, M. Zelner and H. Minti, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 188 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lifshitz, I. Dag, I. D. Litvin and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 9245 CrossRef CAS .
M. Simurda, P. Nemec, F. Trojanek and P. Maly, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 453–454, 300 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Cordero, P. J. Carson, R. A. Estabrook, G. F. Strouse and S. K. Buratto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12137 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. K. Sarkar, H. Cohen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 182 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Cohen, S. K. Sarkar and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25508 CrossRef CAS .
B. Alperson, I. Rubinstein and G. Hodes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 63, 081303(R) .
S. Sarkar, N. Chandrasekharan, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 5045 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, L. Brus and R. Friesner, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 163 CrossRef CAS .
A. Puzder, A. J. Williamson, J. C. Grossman and G. Galli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2786 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 1 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hodes and M. Grätzel, New J. Chem., 1984, 8, 509 Search PubMed .
G. Hodes, I. D. J. Howell and L. M. Peter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 3136 CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, U. Björksten and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1992, 27, 293 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Hodes, I. D. J. Howell and L. M. Peter, in Photochemical and Photoelectrochemical Conversion and Storage of Solar Energy; Tian, ed. Y. Z. W. Cao, Int. Acad. Publishers, Beijing, China,  1993, p. 331 Search PubMed .
L. Kronik, N. Bachrach-Ashkenasy, M. Leibovitch, E. Fefer, Y. Shapira, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1748 CrossRef CAS .
O. Savadogo and K. C. Mandal, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, L16 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Deshmukh, B. M. More, C. B. Rotti and G. S. Shahane, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1996, 45, 145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Masuda, N. Saito, R. Hoffmann, M. R. DeGuire and K. Kuomoto, Sci. Tech. Adv. Mater., 2003, 4, 4 Search PubMed .
M. L. Breen, J. T. Woodward, D. K. Schwartz and A. W. Apblett, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 710 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Nair, V. M. Garcia, A. B. Hernandez and M. T. S. Nair, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1991, 24, 1466 CrossRef CAS .

          S. K. Sarkar and G. Hodes, unpublished results.
M. Simurda, P. Nemec, F. Trojanek, P. Maly, T. Miyoshi and K. Kasatani, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 457 CrossRef CAS .
F. Goto, M. Ichimura and E. Arai, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1997, 36, L1146 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sasaki, K. Shibayama, M. Ichimura and K. Masui, J. Cryst. Growth, 2002, 237–239, 2125 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hugonnot, M.-H. Delville and J. P. Delville, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 248, 479 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Yochelis and G. Hodes, to be published.
M. Simurda, P. Nemec, P. Formanek, I. Nemec, Y. Nemcova and P. Maly, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 511–512, 71 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, A. Hagfeldt and S. E. Lindquist, Pure Appl. Chem., 2000, 72, 47 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, K. Keis, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4395 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Boyle, K. Govender and P. O’Brien, Chem. Commun., 2002, 80 RSC .
Z. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. Mckenzie and M. J. Mcdermott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12954 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, I. Ohkubo, H. Koinuma, Z. K. Tang, P. Yu, G. K. L. Wong, B. P. Zhang and Y. Segawa, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1998, 56, 239 CrossRef .
A. Sugunan, H. C. Warad, M. Boman and J. Dutta, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2006, 39, 49 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamaguchi, T. Yoshida, D. Lincot and H. Minoura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamabi and H. Imai, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 609 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, V. Kumar, Y. Li, H. Zhang, T. J. Marks and R. P. H. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1001 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† We use the terms valence and conduction levels rather than bands, since in quantum dots, the bands are no longer quasicontinuous as in bulk material.‡ For different reasons, what is called band-to-band emission is often at a slightly lower energy than the bandgap estimated from absorption spectra and is not necessarily true band-to-band emission. However, we will not consider these fine differences here.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2007
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic diagram of different techniques of solution deposition of films. M+ refers to a cation (usually a metallic precursor); A− an anion; X-L a precursor compound where X is the non-metallic species (generally a group VI element) and L a ligand.	 

Ag2S	Ag2Se	Ag2O AgO
As2S3	 	 
Bi2S3	Bi2Se3	 
CdS	CdSe	CdO
CoS	CoSe	Co–O
CuxS	CuxSe	Cu2O
HgS	HgSe	 
In2S3	 	In2O3
MnS	 	Mn–O
Mo-S	MoSe	 
NiS	NiSe	NiO
PbS	PbSe	PbO2
PdS2	 	 
Sb2S3	Sb2Se3	Sb2O3
SnS	SnSe	 
SnS2	SnSe2	SnO2
TlS	TlSe	Tl2O3
ZnS	ZnSe	ZnO
Miscellaneous materials	CdTe, SiO2, Y2O3, ZrO2, V–O, TiO2, Cr(OH)3, AgI, AgBr, AgCl, (basic) carbonates of Pb,Y,Ce,Cd
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5a)
	(5b)
	(6a)
	(6b)
	(7a)
	(7b)
	(7c)
	(7d)
	(7e)

 	Fig. 1  Optical transmission spectra of CBD CdSe films (typically 100–150 nm thick) deposited at different temperatures (shown on each spectrum). The films are deposited by the cluster mechanism except for the rightmost spectrum (80 °C, HC), which is deposited by the ion-by-ion mechanism. The approximate bandgaps can be estimated from the spectra as corresponding to slightly higher energies (top axis) than the onset of absorption (the onset of the sharp drop in transmission). Approximate crystal sizes in nm are (from the 1 °C to the 80 °C HC): 3.5, 4.5, 5.0, 6.5, 8.5, 20.	 

 	Fig. 2  Optical transmission spectra of CdSe films deposited at 10 °C (top) and 80 °C (bottom) with varying complexant (NTA) : Cd molar ratios (shown in the figures). The approximate bandgaps estimated from the spectra are indicated by the vertical lines. (Adapted from ref. 10.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Modulated electrotransmission (ET—solid line) and electroreflectance (ER—dotted line) spectra of a CD CdSe film deposited from a NTA/selenosulfate bath at 30 °C. The experiments were carried out in an electrolyte containing sulfide and sulfite (the latter to prevent formation of coloured polysulfide) at a pH of 10 (buffered with NaH2PO4).	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM micrographs of a nanocrystalline CdSe film as deposited (upper left) and after air annealing for 20 min at increasing temperatures up to 500 °C (lower right). The 50 nm scale is the same for all micrographs except for the 450 and 500 °C ones, which are marked by the 100 nm scale. (S. Gorer and G. Hodes, unpublished results.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoelectrochemical photocurrent spectra (in a selenosulfate-based electrolyte) of CBD PbSe films deposited under various conditions with four different crystal sizes (see text). The cutoff at 1400 nm is due to absorption by the water. (From S. Gorer, PhD thesis, Feinberg Graduate School, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel, 1996.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoluminescence of CBD CdSe film (ca. 4 nm crystal size) under humid and dry (vacuum) conditions. [E. Lifshitz, I. Dag, S. Gorer and G. Hodes, unpublished results.]	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Surface photovoltage spectra of a CBD 4.5 nm crystallite size, 70 nm CdSe film in a humid and a dry ambient. (B) Surface photovoltage spectra of a similar as-deposited film after the following sequence of treatments: (1) as-deposited, humid ambient; (2) after etching, humid ambient; (3) in a dry ambient. The essential features of spectra 2 and 3 are reversibly reproduced upon changing back and forth between a humid and a dry ambient. Adapted from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 8  Increase in bandgap of as-deposited CdSe films due to cyanide treatment as a function of measured bandgap of the (untreated) films. The approximate crystal size, measured either by correlation with the absorption spectra or, in some cases, by XRD line broadening, is given on the upper scale. The inset shows an example of the spectrum of an as-deposited film with crystal size ca. 3.5 nm (solid line), after cyanide treatment (dash–dot line) and after subsequent rinsing with water (dashed line). The data in the rectangular box near the top, right side of the figure are from measurements on aged films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Changes in (normalized) transmission spectra of CdSe films, deposited by chemical solution deposition, and with XRD-measured crystal sizes of 3.7 nm (5 °C deposition)—top image and 3.3 nm (0 °C deposition)—bottom image. The as-deposited film is designated by 1 and the same film after cyanide treatment (3 min in 0.8 M aqueous KCN) by 2. Separate as-deposited films (closely similar in the bandgap region to the previous ones, therefore not show separately to simplify the images), after spectral stabilization (1A) followed by cyanide treatment (2A). Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Current–voltage characteristics under chopped illumination (≈AM1) of a nanocrystalline (4–5 nm) CdSe film, deposited by CBD, in a polysulfide electrolyte. The top scan is for as-deposited CdSe and the bottom scan after etching with dilute HCl. Adapted from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cartoon demonstrating self-assembly of a long chain thioacetate-terminated trichlorosilane on an oxidized Si substrate (a) and (b). Exposure of this monolayer through a fine mesh grid mask to UV radiation (c) photo-oxidizes the somewhat hydrophobic thioacetate in air to hydrophilic sulfonate endgroups (d). Deposition of TiO2 from an aqueous solution of TiCl4/HCl at 80 °C on the UV-exposed (hydrophilic) regions of the substrate (e).	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM micrograph of patterned TiO2 deposit (left side) and Ti elemental mapping of this sample (right side). Adapted with permission from ref. 20, copyright 1996, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) ZnO microtubes grown on a F-doped SnO2 substrate. Inset shows a magnified image of one tube. Initially, hexagonal columns grow, but with increasing reaction time, these become hollowed out to give the tubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. (b) ZnO helical rods grown, with sodium citrate added, on a predeposited ZnO columnar substrate grown in the absence of citrate (the image shows growth on a single (0002) ZnO column). Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society. Both types of deposit were grown from hexamethylene tetramine baths.	 
Footnotes
† We use the terms valence and conduction levels rather than bands, since in quantum dots, the bands are no longer quasicontinuous as in bulk material.
‡ For different reasons, what is called band-to-band emission is often at a slightly lower energy than the bandgap estimated from absorption spectra and is not necessarily true band-to-band emission. However, we will not consider these fine differences here.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2007
