Recent advances in two-dimensional-material-based sensing technology toward health and environmental monitoring applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR10178K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR10178K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3535-3559Recent advances in two-dimensional-material-based sensing technology toward health and environmental monitoring applications

        
          
            Deepika 
            Tyagi†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Huide 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Weichun 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lanping 
            Hu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yanfeng 
            Tang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zhinan 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengbiao 
            Ouyang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aShenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology, Engineering Technology Research Center for 2D Material Information Function Devices and Systems of Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
bCollege of Electronic Science and Technology of Shenzhen University, THz Technical Research Center of Shenzhen University, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronics Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
cCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nantong University, Nantong 226019, Jiangsu, P. R. China
Received 
      1st December 2019
    , Accepted 8th January 2020First published on 9th January 2020AbstractMonitoring harmful and toxic chemicals, gases, microorganisms, and radiation has been a challenge to the scientific community for the betterment of human health and environment. Two-dimensional (2D)-material-based sensors are highly efficient and compatible with modern fabrication technology, which yield data that can be proficiently used for health and environmental monitoring. Graphene and its oxides, black phosphorus (BP), transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), metal oxides, and other 2D nanomaterials have demonstrated properties that have been alluring for the manufacture of highly sensitive sensors due to their unique material properties arising from their inherent structures. This review summarizes the properties of 2D nanomaterials that can provide a platform to develop high-performance sensors. In this review, we have also discussed the advances made in the field of infrared photodetectors and electrochemical sensors and how the structural properties of 2D nanomaterials affect sensitivity and performance. Further, this review highlights 2D-nanomaterial-based electrochemical sensors that can be used to check for contaminations from heavy metals, organic/inorganic compounds, poisonous gases, pesticides, bacteria, antibiotics, etc., in water or air, which are severe risks to human wellbeing as well as the environment. Moreover, the limitations, future prospects, and challenges for the development of sensors based on 2D materials are also discussed for future advancements.Deepika TyagiDr Deepika Tyagi received her BS in Physics in 2010 from the University of Delhi. Then, she obtained her MS in Physics at the Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, in 2013. She joined the PhD program at the College of Optoelectronics and Physics, Shenzhen University, in 2018. Her key research focuses on two-dimensional-material-based sensors and photodetectors. Her research interests also include the study of metamaterials for optical communication applications.Huide WangDr Huide Wang was born in Hubei, China, in 1993. He is now a PhD candidate in the International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology (ICL), Shenzhen University, under the supervision of Professor Han Zhang. His research interests focus on the optoelectronic applications of 2D materials and vdW heterostructures.Han ZhangProf. Han Zhang was born in Wuhan, China, in 1984. He is currently a director at the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. Until now, he has published over 300 scientific publications and 60 patents. His current research focus is on the optoelectronics of low-dimensional materials and devices. His publications have received >25000 citations, with an H-index of 82. He has also been selected as a highly cited researcher by Clarivate Analytics at 2018 and has been awarded/enrolled with “the Second Prize of Natural Science Award”, “China's Top 10 Optical Breakthroughs”, and “NSFC Outstanding Young Scholar Fund”.
1. Introduction
The primary concern for our safe and constructive existence on this planet requires environmental monitoring for the safety of human health, a check on chemical processing, controlling the qualities of air and water, and detection methods for gas and infrared (IR) radiation. Contaminants, such as heavy metals, organic/inorganic compounds, poisonous gases, pesticides, bacteria, antibiotics, etc., in water or air, are a severe risk to human wellbeing as well as the environment.1 The presence of ambient noise, which interferes with different signals, necessitates higher sensitivity of devices as the signal-to-noise ratio can drastically decrease. The ability of any sensor to resolve a signal and process it with accuracy considerably depends on the properties of its constituting material and an advanced degree of the manufacturing technique. The preconditions for the industrial-scale production of such devices involve the safety of users and commercial benefit to the enterprise. Along with this, the processing speed during manufacturing needs to match up with the requirements of the ever-growing market. The technology pertaining to photon detection has progressed from noisy photomultiplier tubes to single-photon detectors. This has been achieved by competitive and complimenting research between different fields, mainly constituting material research (microscopic) and manufacturing techniques (macroscopic). Sensing devices are required to be portable, durable, and easy to operate because they are often used in complex environments.
Many sensing techniques have been developed so far, e.g., surface-enhanced Raman scattering,2 plasma mass spectrometry, electrochemistry,3 chemiluminescence,4 fluorescence,5,6 and many more. Although most of these techniques have the advantages of high precision and reliable repeatability, the main disadvantages marring these techniques are the high cost of fabrication, complex sample preparation, and difficult operation, which severely limit their practical applications.7,8 Conventional semiconductor-based sensors have been investigated and researched to achieve performance goals since a very long time. However, the efficiency of these devices is often limited by their operating conditions, such as high operating temperature (200–500 °C) and variations in performance and accuracy with humidity and longer operating time. Therefore, the development of sensing materials with excellent comprehensive performance rather than relying on the progress of preparation technology is expected to be the most effective way for the growth of the next age of detection technology. Generally, a reduction in the order of dimensionality of the sensing material accompanied with a scale-up in production can facilitate natural amplification in their response, among their optical, electrical, or chemical properties, or all of them at once. The system of ordered assembly of low-dimensional materials in a layer-by-layer sequence or in the form of arrays has been studied for their sensing capabilities in terms of their physical and chemical properties. Zero-dimensional (0D) structures are mainly particles with spherical geometry in scales ranging from nanometers to angstroms. Quantum dots are the most common 0D materials and can be assembled in the form of layered structures by employing various deposition mechanisms. Metallic nanoparticles are a type of quantum dot material; however, certain organic materials have uniquely made their way to the top. Fullerene, more commonly known as buckyballs, comprises a spherical structure of 60 carbon atoms, and it is another allotrope of carbon that satisfies the conditions of a 0D material. Many artificial allotropes follow the footsteps of the fabrication of C60 and are like their predecessor in their behaviors and properties: the most common examples are C70 and C540.9 The formation of layered structures require detailed studies of their properties; molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) and organic molecular beam deposition (OMBD) are the most common methods to form thin films to be employed in organic hybrid solar cells and sensing devices. Further, metal quantum dots, Janus particles, and metal–metal or metal–nonmetal heterostructures are the fundamental building blocks for fostering sensing applications.10
One-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials are suitable for their detection capability because they have a large surface-to-volume ratio as well as unique physiochemical and optical properties. 1D materials, such as nanowires (NW)11 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs),12,13 have shown worthwhile performances for sensing techniques due to their compactness, low power consumption, high sensitivity, and fast response. CNTs are inherently considered as 1D structures even though they have a coiled surface, where the movement of charges and concentration of electron density near the surface is considerably larger in comparison to 0D materials due to sheer size effects. The aspect ratio of such structures allow many nanorods and nanotubes fabricated from metals (like Ag, Au, etc.) or from nonmetals (like Si, TiO2, etc.) to be treated as 1D structures.14 The simplified constraint to render such rod-like structures as 1D materials is that the extent of longitudinal growth is considerably larger than the base diameter. TiO2 nanorods exhibit excellent applications in water splitting for use as photochemical sensors,15 and Si nanorods have been applied as antireflective coating in the form of an accessory in selectively sensing devices.16
In 2004, the first two-dimensional (2D) material—a graphene sheet—was successfully isolated from highly oriented pyrolytic graphite by micromechanical exfoliation, which led to a revolution in research spanning both theoretical and experimental aspects.17,18 Separate groups working in physics, chemistry, material sciences, and many other interdisciplinary studies have utilized the extent of this discovery with overlapping and complementary fields of interest. Other 2D nanomaterials such as topological insulator (TI),19–21 black phosphorus (BP),22–27 and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),28–31 which have unique structural,32,33 mechanical,34 electrical, optical, catalytic,29,35 and sensing properties,36,37 have also shown promising applications in various fields such as optical devices,21,38–43 optoelectronic devices,26,44,45 batteries,46 sensors,47–52 and biomedicine.27,28,53–57Table 1 lists the interesting highlights of different materials with various dimensionalities (0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D) with regard to their potential utility in detection applications.
Table 1 Highlights of different materials of various dimensionalities (0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D) with regard to their potential utility in detection applications




Dimension
Typical structures
Advantages
Disadvantages




0D



Region and stereo selective functionalization58
Low conductivity


Atomic control of structure property relationship
Difficulty with device integration


Large area to volume ratio
Limited stability of devices


Single molecular electronic based sensing59
Potential toxicity63


Tunable size and shape60–62




1D



High surface to volume ratio64
Required chemical modification to enhance selectivity


High aspect ratio
Difficulty in establishing reliable electrical contacts


Excellent stability
Difficult purification


High density of reactive sites
Limited structure and precision control66


Good thermal stability




Compatible with device miniaturization65–67




2D



Wide tenability of conductivity
Lack of mass production of material with large area, high and uniform quality


Large surface to volume ratio
Lack of facile, effective and reliable strategies for device integration


Thickness depending electronic properties
Limited stability of dome forms at ambient conditions69,70


Good optical transparency




Excellent mechanical flexibility




Good functionalization ability




Potential for good processibility




Compatible with ultra-thin silicon channel technology67–70




3D



Good mechanical strength
Low surface area


Good thermal stability
Difficulty with miniaturization


Easy to interface with solid state device
Slow dynamic of analyte transport71


Good design ability to improve selectivity




Strong analyte binding71






2D materials have a large surface-to-volume ratio as compared to 0D, 1D, and 3D materials.72 Such a large ratio induces a considerably large surface area for interactions between the 2D material and analyte, which, in turn, makes such 2D materials to become more suitable for sensor applications. Such sensors can be used to detect low-concentration analytes.73 2D materials have a wide range of conductivities as compared to their 1D and 3D counterparts. A fine-tuning in the configuration of 2D nanomaterials leads to variations in their bandgaps as well as conductivities (Fig. 3).74 Moreover, the tuning of the morphological properties of 2D materials enhances their electrical properties, making them more efficient toward signal transduction due to molecular binding events.30 The rich surface chemistry of 2D nanomaterials and the conductive properties that change with the external environment make them very suitable for health and environmental monitoring, biomedicine, and other applications.75,76 Their atomic-size thickness plays an important role in variations in their inherent properties, namely, fluorescence, conductivity, magnetic permeability, and reactivity. 2D nanomaterials cover a broad range of conductivities depending on their applications. In comparison to other dimensional materials, 2D materials have better compatibility with metal electrodes because of their large lateral sizes.77 It is imperative for materials to be compatible with standard thin-film fabricating techniques; 2D materials show excellent compatibility with ultrathin silicon channel technology,67–70 whereas 0D materials face difficulty with device integration, 1D materials have difficulties in establishing electrical contacts, and 3D materials still have challenges to overcome device miniaturization.78 Hence, 2D materials are the best suited for compactly designed sensors. Some 2D materials exhibit excellent mechanical strength and remarkable optical transparency, which are not possessed by 0D, 1D, and 3D materials. Furthermore, the fine-tuning of structural properties, defect engineering, and doping have been achieved by the use of advanced technologies in preparation methods.69 These modifications have helped in achieving precision in the desired physicochemical properties. The understanding of the relationship between the properties and structures of 2D materials is made possible by advancements in characterization and integration methods, which allows investigating the structural and compositional features of 2D materials. In this survey, we focus on reviewing the ongoing advances made in 2D nanomaterials toward ecological and health monitoring applications. In particular, we investigate the improvements in 2D materials and their utilization in sensors for IR radiation, heavy particles, natural mixes, pesticides, antibiotics, and microbes dependent on 2D nanomaterials along with various detection technologies.
2. Unique features of 2D materials in sensing applications
2D materials have strikingly remarkable material properties with promising efficacy when used in detection strategies.79 The assembly of such 2D materials over a large scale with faithful reproduction in their properties can play a key role in device manufacturing. These 2D materials exhibit variations in thickness ranging from atomic-layer length (few microns) and lateral dimensions of a few centimeters.80 Because of its one-of-a-kind physical, chemical, optoelectronic, thermal, and mechanical properties, graphene has proven its suitability for applications in electronic devices, photonic devices, energy conversion and storage, and sensing.81–83 The assorted varieties of 2D materials (Fig. 1) have significantly grown and include BP,84 hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN),85 TMDCs,86 layered metal oxides (MOs),87 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),88 covalent organic frameworks (COFs),89 and other 2D compounds.69
 Fig. 1  Classification of layered materials on the basis of stability. 
The high surface-to-volume ratios of monolayered 2D materials enhances their chemical reactivity than that of their bulk form (they are inert).72 The conductivity of 2D materials varies from that of an insulator to that of a metal depending on the bandgap, and it can be modified by using a number of methods such as introducing defects within the structure, doping or fictionalization, or by changing the number of layers (Fig. 2).70,90 A fine-tuning of the configuration of 2D nanomaterials leads to variations in their bandgaps and conductivity (Fig. 3).74
 Fig. 2  Heterostructures of 2D layered materials. 
 Fig. 3  Conductivities, electron and hole mobilities, and bandgaps on the EM spectrum of different layered materials. 
Bandgap alteration of molybdenum disulfide monolayers can be achieved by applying mechanical force or electric field. This makes them efficient in signal transduction and more suitable for use in detectors. Variations in geometry and size can alter the ratio between the bulk and edge structures, which can lead to spatial confinement in specific dimensions and therefore change the electrical and mechanical behaviors. 2D materials have a high lateral size than their 1D counterparts, which enables them to maintain good electrical contacts.30,77 Due to their atomic-size thickness, they demonstrate exceptional compatibility with thin-film fabrication techniques. High tensile strength and flexibility are required for materials to be used in sensing equipment.91 Parameters such as exceptionally high tensile strength as well as flexibility of the atomic-size thickness allow graphene to be incorporated into the thin-film growth mechanism using direct transfer. This outstanding mechanical strength and flexibility of graphene makes it compatible with wearable electronic devices. Quantitatively, graphene has the ability to withstand lateral variations under lengthwise compression as it has high Young's modulus (1000 GPa) and high strain limit (∼25%). Further, the optical conductivity of graphene is linear with the electromagnetic (EM) field in the zero-frequency limit, which gives graphene very high optical transparency (>90%).92 All these remarkable optical, physical, chemical, and thermal properties enable 2D nanomaterials to be promising candidates for use in sensing devices.
3. 2D materials used in sensing applications
3.1 Graphene
Graphene sheets have a hexagonal lattice structure that involves a single layer of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms covalently bound together (Fig. 4). Graphite (3D), CNTs (1D), and fullerenes (0D) are its carbon-based allotropes.81 A sole sheet of graphene has a lattice constant of nearly 1.42 Å. van der Waals interactions hold the individual layers together to form bulk (3D) graphite with a distance of 3.35 Å between the adjacent layers. In 2004, Andre Geim and Konstatin Novoselov obtained monolayer graphene from bulk graphite by the mechanical exfoliation method.79 Graphene became a wonder material with several applications in material sciences because of its astonishing physical and chemical properties.12,69 The conductivity of graphene was reported to be 15000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature (RT), where the hole and electron mobilities are nearly equal. A direct and zero bandgap makes graphene the most desirable 2D nanomaterial, where the conductivity and bandgap depend on the stacking of layers of graphene.12 The theoretically obtained specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1) of graphene is twice that of CNTs.93 Reportedly, graphene is 100 times stronger than a film of steel of the same thickness and can withstand stress better than any other 2D nanomaterial.94 Scotch tape,79 solution-phase exfoliation,95 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),96 and organic synthesis97 techniques have been used for the preparation of graphene. The Scotch tape or drawing method induces the least amount of morphological defects, thereby yielding the best-quality graphene.98
 Fig. 4  Graphene (2D) has hexagonal lattice structure, which is a monolayer of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms covalently bound together. Fullerenes, CNT and graphite are carbon based allotropes with 0D, 1D and 3D respectively. 
The epitaxial growth of graphene using CVD is done by raising the temperature (>1100 °C) of silicon carbide (SiC) and lowering the pressure (10−6 Torr) as well as in the presence of a carbon source, i.e., hydrocarbon vapors.99 However, the main challenge of using CVD is to produce a consistent monolayer of graphene, which requires further advances.80
Basically, the solution-phase exfoliation method is the formation of graphene oxide (GO) achieved by the oxidation of graphite under strongly acidic conditions.69 Graphene morphology can be reversed from GO by treating it thermally, electrically, or chemically.100 High conductivity, sufficiently high specific surface area, high tensile strength, and ease of fabrication make graphene an excellent material for sensing applications.101 The perturbation in electronic properties of graphene occurs due to the interaction or transfer of surface electrons between graphene and the analyte.102 Studies have indicated that the electrical conductivity can be modulated via changes in the doping state during the adsorption of diverse gas molecules by graphene.103 Charge transport through graphene is highly responsive to its surrounding due to its atomic-size thickness.82 Due to the unique and rich surface chemistry of its crystal lattice, graphene has intrinsically low electrical noise, enabling it to test charge fluctuations.79,104 Changing an electron in the bulk of graphene can alter its resistance in a step-wise manner, resulting in sensitivity toward a single molecule.105 Due to the outstanding mechanical strength and flexibility of graphene, it is compatible with wearable electronic devices.104,106,107 Doped-graphene-based sensors have shown better sensitivity toward gas molecules than that by pristine graphene. Many other complicated methods have been used to modify the morphology of graphene in order to exploit it to its maximum potential in sensor applications, namely, adding other functional nanostructures, organic receptors, polymers, proteins, or nucleic acids.108–110 A deeper understanding of surface science, changed surface characteristics, crystal defects, and electronic properties need to be considered when applying graphene toward sensing applications.
3.2 BP
In 1914, Bridgman synthesized a stable allotrope of phosphorus by adding another element to an application based on an artificial element, namely, BP. This was achieved by exposing the allotrope of phosphorus (white phosphorus) to elevated temperatures and pressures (200 °C and 1.2 GPa).111 Few decades later, Ye's group isolated single atomic layers of 2D BP using the mechanical exfoliation method. The bandgap in the resultant 2D material is layer-dependent, having a hinge-like structure that induced anisotropy into such structures.112 These structures behave as having a quasi-one-dimensional excitonic characteristic, which gives the BP monolayer its unique characteristics. 2D BP composed of sp3-hybridized phosphorus atoms is present as a single-element crystalline material organized in a layered orthorhombic crystal structure (Fig. 5).113,114 It yields a honeycomb lattice structure with noteworthy non-planarity in the form of structural edges.115
 Fig. 5  (a) Layers of phosphorene stacked together to form BP. (b) Schematic diagram of single-layered phosphorene. 
van der Waals interactions are responsible for the stacking of multiple 2D-layered BP to form multilayers with an interlayer distance of 5.5 Å. The triangular pyramidal structure of phosphorus atoms can be attributed to the covalently bonded phosphorus atoms with a lone pair of electrons. Layer multiplicity makes the tunable direct bandgap of BP modulate in the order of 1.51 eV for a single-layer system to 0.59 eV for a five-layer system.116 The layered structure of the BP monolayer from the bottom-to-top approach yields further modulation in the bandgap, although the deviation in the bandgap gradually decreases as stacking increases. A high drain current and carrier mobility is observed for multilayered BP.111 The direction of edges and functional groups allow further adjustments in the BP bandgap.
BP's narrow bandgap and anisotropic conductance make it suitable for applications in electrical sensing technologies.22 BP has high chemical adsorption energy because of its wrinkled surface structure, which offers several accessible adsorption sites for interactions with analytes. The introduction of structural ripples along with a finite quantity of dopants on the surface117 of BP improves charge transfer and sensitivity toward analytes. Further improvements in techniques to control the orientation within the fabricated layers of BP as its edge plane sites have a higher electron transfer rate than that of the basal planes, making it suitable for sensing devices.22 Phosphoric acid species that form under humidity is the main challenge that needs to be overcome in the process of device manufacturing and its applicability.118 The incorporation of protective coatings, nanomaterials, or ionic liquids are well-known methods to overcome the stability challenges of BP against deprivation under ambient conditions.119
3.3 TMDCs
2D materials exhibit similar properties as those of graphene in terms of their large structural variations as they demonstrate a variety of possible structures, namely, closed- or open-ended nanorods, flakes or sheets, hexagonal platelets, plate-like crystallites, trigonal sheets, and several more. The closest contender to exhibit similar properties in terms of exfoliation is a group of materials called TMDCs; they are inorganic compounds having X–M–X covalent bonds, where M is a transition metal and X denotes the chalcogen series (S, Se, or Te).120 The symmetry of MX2 can either be trigonal-prismatic (D3h) or anti-prismatic (D3d) with a coordination number of 6, as shown in Fig. 6. van der Waals interactions make TMDCs a unique material for interlayer diffusion that can yield high charge mobility. These TMDCs can form monolayers that when stacked together form a multilayer that is held only by van der Waals interactions,121,122 thereby making them highly suitable for friction reduction applications. In 1986, monolayers of MoS2 were first prepared through lithium intercalation by the solution suspension method.123 The main challenge in the exfoliation technique for fabricating single-layer TMDCs is their inapplicability to form large-area monolayers for significant amplification.124 These materials can also be utilized in energy conversion and energy storage devices. The resistance of the formed compounds with different combinations of TMDCs varies from nonmetallic to metallic compounds. NbS2 and TaS2 induce metallic resistance, whereas HfS2 is essentially nonmetallic. The most interesting resistive range for device applications is the specific semiconductor range formed by MoS2, WS2, WTe2, and TiSe2.120 The stoichiometry of the compound formed by the transition metal group elements and chalcogens depends upon the method of preparation and the subsequent strategy followed. Bottom-up and top-down strategies have their own pros and cons with regard to the quality of the end product.125,126 The bottom-up strategy requires strict control over the elemental composition formed during the reaction. Further, these methods require a control chamber and higher-temperature furnaces to produce these materials. The bottom-up strategy provides one unique advantage: the introduction of a small dopant at the interstitial locations that can lead to a drastic change in the physical and chemical properties.127 The electronic and physical properties of the monolayer or a few layers of TMDCs are inherently different from their bulk counterparts, which has already been established and discussed in the same context of graphene.128 In addition, the thermal and chemical stabilities of TMDCs are relatively high, enabling these materials to show potential for use in gas sensors and future sensing devices.129 The top-down preparation strategy requires the bulk forms of TMDCs to be exfoliated by sonication in the presence of small and highly mobile ions to separate sheets in the form of a monolayer. The transfer of this monolayer by either Scotch tape or from suspension onto a suitable substrate is also a challenging task for device applications. The exfoliated single layer with the basal plane and prismatic edge allows structural variations when associated with a compound, which determines the assembly properties.120 These structural variations, in turn, affect the electrical and chemical properties of the single layer itself, and these variations get amplified when these monolayers are assembled to form a device. One of the most evident variations in the chemical properties of the monolayer is the widening of the bandgap due to the disruption in the s–pz orbital interactions between the atoms of the layers within the nearest-neighbor distance. A high level of atomic control makes the reactivity and electronic properties of 2D TMDC nanosheets extremely adjustable.128 In spite of adjusting the compositional features, a wide range of synthesis options to develop TMDCs need to be taken into account. Both the earlier mentioned aspects play a vital role in sensitivity toward various analytes.
 Fig. 6  The crystal structure of monolayer MoS2 showing a layer of molybdenum atoms (blue) sandwiched between two layers of sulfur atoms (yellow). (a) 3d view of the monolayer MoS2, (b) planar view from z axis, (c) planar view from y axis, (d) planar view from x axis. 
3.4 MOs
MOs stand out as the most different class of solids, showing an assortment of structural properties.130 Depending upon the presence or absence of van der Waals layered structures in the mass, MOs can be categorized into two classes: 2D layered MOs (e.g., MoO3 (Fig. 7) and WO3) and 2D nonlayered MOs (e.g., ZnO and SnO2 nanosheets).131,132 To obtain nanosheets, the weak attraction between the layers is ideal for liquid- or gas-stage techniques that necessitate the exfoliation of layers from the bulk material.133 High stability under air and water can be obtained by removing the basal surfaces of layered MOs using oxygen molecules. Top-down methodologies cannot be used for such MOs because they do not possess an intrinsically layered structure. This is because of the presence of a strong chemical bond; however, by adjusting the morphological features of such MOs, an atomic-scale thick sheet can be obtained.134 The major aspects that decide the surface characteristics of MOs are the number of oxygen particles and ionic characteristic of the metal–oxygen bond.135 Oxygen trapped at the surface is quintessential for atomic adsorption, charge exchange, and reactant performance.135 The high polarizability of O2− induces 2D MOs to exhibit a large, nonlinear, and uneven distribution of charge in the cross sections. This causes a built-up of an electrostatic shielding zone (thickness: 1–100 nm) that, in turn, results in extraordinary local and interfacial properties.136 The surfaces of 2D MO can be electronically enacted because of the solid ionic characteristic of transition metal oxides. By increasing the temperature (T > 250 °C) under the ambient conditions, but maintaining it under the melting point, the conductivity can be further improved as MOs show a semiconductive behavior.64 This property allows MOs to be widely implemented in gas sensor technologies. The fabrication cost of MOs is less as compared to other sensing devices as they have an intrinsic 2D arrangement.137 They are chemically inert at high temperatures and high moisture.138 Hence, the use of MOs toward versatile and scale-down detection strategies requires higher working temperatures. This shortcoming necessitates intensive research in contrast with sensors that require RT operations.139 The 2D subfamily of MOs is the key in overcoming the disadvantages of working temperature for detecting gaseous analytes.68
 Fig. 7  The ideal crystal structure of MoO3: (a) unit cell, (b) corner-connected and (c) edge-connected octahedral. (d) H intercalated MoO3 crystal structure. 
3.5 MOFs
MOFs are porous hybrid materials in their crystalline form that are fashioned by the self-assembly of inorganic metallic node molecules with organic ligands, such as carboxylates, hydroxyls, and thiols.140 Further, MOFs exhibit a large variety of crystalline structures in all forms, namely, linear assembly, single layer, and bulk depending upon the linker and metallic node interaction involving different space groups.141 Yashi and his group were the first to report the concept of MOFs.142 In 1995, MOF-5 based on Zn was reported by them with a specific surface area of 2900 m2 g−1 and 60% porosity.143 The luminescence properties of MOFs have assisted researchers to use them as chemical sensors (in aqueous solutions) as the sensing element.144 Ru-MOFs were developed by Chi's group for the detection of Hg2+ in water since fluorescent and electroluminescent signals are released when Hg2+ ions decompose Ru-MOFs.145 MOFs have a high Langmuir surface area (>10000 m2 g−1), which makes them highly adsorbent toward analytes.146 2D sheets of MOFs can be formed via the top-down and bottom-up techniques. Layered bulk MOFs can be exfoliated through sonication in the top-down technique, which induces the breaking of the van der Waals or hydrogen bonding between the stacks. In the bottom-up synthesis process, the growth of 2D MOFs is allowed only in the direction toward the basal plane while constraining growth along the vertical direction. The low electrical conductivity of MOFs limits their applications in electrically transduced sensors, but it has been improved over time.71,147 There have been numerous reports on the integration and immobilization of charges by using molecular cages and scaffolds.71 The coordination symmetry shown by the late transition metal ions is generally planar and the electrical conductivity of MOFs prepared with aromatic ligands comprising hetero-donor atoms such as O, S, or NH is comparatively high.
The different packing modes of 2D MOFs depend upon the linker or metal ion properties; these modes can be staggered, eclipsed, or slipped-parallel, which influence the mobility of charges across the stacked layers.88 The bandgap can be engineered with the choice of ligand, oxide ion state, and structural motifs. These structural modifications yield electrical conductivities in the range of 10−6 S cm−1 to 2500 S cm−1 at RT.88,148 The presence of imperfections, edges, and forever-caught adsorbents obscure the chemical condition of the top surface of these MOFs. Most of the reported MOFs are topologically nonconducting. Planar and entirely conjugated ligands can ascend to MOFs, which can consolidate into common MOFs in terms of porosity, huge surface area, and adjustability. A combination of these properties provides elevated responses in gas sensing in the full range of operating temperatures and ambient conditions. The drawback that needs to be overcome for the full applicability of MOFs in sensing technology is the abundance of metals and their corresponding dopants along with device longevity.
3.6 Other 2D materials
Synthesizing and finding applications of materials with planar geometry have been the bread and butter for many researchers in the scientific community; however, some materials have found their way into sensing technology purely by accident. This section deals with all the candidates and contenders extending from the most abundant carbon-based materials to precious-element-based materials. Other 2D nanomaterials, such as carbon nitrides, MXenes, and layered group III–IV semiconductors, have shown immense potential in sensor and detector applications. Xenes belong to the IVA group of elements, which also include silicene, germanene, and stanene.67,70 Silicene has a weak π-bond as it has a large bond length (∼2.28 Å). Its hexagonal arrangement is stabilized by bringing Si atoms sufficiently close to facilitate a stronger overlap of their pz orbital; hence, a mixed sp2–sp3-hybridized orbital is necessary. Xenes degrade and oxidize faster under ambient conditions, but they are highly reactive toward stabilization in other forms; this property can only be exploited once, but it can provide faster sensing (especially in preventing disasters where the response time is more critical than long-term sensor utilization). Depending on the substrate properties, their electrical conductivities range from insulator to semimetallic.
Metals are the principal materials that can be utilized and explored for sensing and industrial applications.149,150 Their most common crystalline forms, which are BCC (body-centered cubic), FCC (face-centered cubic), and HCP (hexagonal close-packed) are acquired at the lower level of dimensionality.151,152 As the thickness of the metal layer decreases, the contribution from electrons situated close to the surface to the total conductivity of the material increases. Metal nanoplates and nanosheets have also shown some exclusive sensitivity toward analytes in comparison to nanostructures with other shapes.153 The bottom-up method is used to prepare thin metal sheets from metal salts or metal nanoparticles; the top-down approach that uses electron-beam nanolithography, nanoimprint lithography, or hole-mask colloidal lithography have been developed for the same purpose.150 Metals such as iron, zinc, and copper get oxidized in the presence of moisture, whereas nanosheets of metals such as palladium, platinum, and gold can be developed as they are inert. Hence, they provide a unique chance to sense traces of molecules in an oxygen-rich environment. Thin metallic structures with an excess of unsaturated atoms are complicated to stabilize, and their production remains a daunting task as atoms are closely packed in metals.
Here, h-BN, which is also known as “white graphene”, exhibits periodic structures similar to that of graphene but with different stack ordering.154 In its bulk form, h-BN has interlayer separation of 3.30 ± 0.03 Å, behaving as an insulator with a bandgap of 5.2 eV. The thermal conductivity shows huge disparity in the experimentally obtained value (380 W m−1 K−1) as compared to the theoretically calculated value (2000 W m−1 K−1). The dielectric properties and resistance against oxidation at higher temperatures are unique features of stacked h-BN.133,155 Doped h-BN nanosheets have excellent response toward gas molecules.154
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is another material that shows a layered structure similar to that of graphene with carbon and nitrogen atoms present in sp2 hybridization.156 Diverse structural models for the geometry of g-C3N4 exist, such as triazine and heptazine.157 The bandgap (2.5–2.8 eV) of g-C3N4 yields poor electrical conductivity, whereas the surface behavior of g-C3N4 arises from the presence of terminal hydrogen and nitrogen, having large affinity toward many analytes. The bandgap can be turned and tailored with the presence of homogeneously dispersed carbon and nitrogen atoms; this leads to better thermal stability and enhanced performance for device applications.
The selective etching of a particular element from Mn+1AXn phases, where M is a transition metal, A is a group IIIA or IVA element, and X can either be C and/or N, with n = 1, 2, or 3, can be used to form MXenes. The resulting material from this selective etching is a 2D transition metal carbide. During the chemical etching process, functional groups such as fluorine and hydroxide (OH) are usually established on the surfaces of the etched MXenes.158 These surface terminations control the surface activation properties, as predicted by the DFT theories. Single layers of MXenes are metallic in nature with high electron density lying near the Fermi level.159
Similar to TMDCs, there exists another group of materials having almost similar properties, namely, metal chalcogenides (MX), where the metal can either be In or Ga and X can be S, Se, or Te. In the bulk form, two layers of chalcogens form the X–M–M–X structure, where an individual layer can be recognized as a dual intercalated layer of gallium or indium. The van der Waals interactions are responsible to maintain the stacking of layers at an interlayer distance of ∼8 Å. The atomic-size thickness of the thin films made from these elements in the form of a layered semiconductor exhibit low stability under ambient conditions. A single pair of Se atoms sits on top of the valance band in InSe, which allows the surface to be reactive toward oxygen and water.160
4. Applications
4.1 IR photodetection
The environmental aspect of IR detection requires the ability of the detector to sense temperature gradients and minute fluctuations in the magnitude and time scales. These are vital for oceanic and atmospheric studies along with applications in the agricultural field. IR photodetectors (PDs) are gaining extraordinary attention as they have extensive applications in civil and military fields in contrast to the large-scale deployment of instruments such as LIDARs.161 Low-dimensional materials are extensively used in UV- to IR-light detection. They exhibit extraordinary performance in device manufacturing for sensing applications. The properties that are responsible for this compatibility are subwavelength photon confinement, small response time, and applicability in combination with plasmonic nanostructures, heterostructures, and waveguides.162–165 Various fundamental phenomena and the foundation of optoelectronics started with the understanding of interaction of light with matter. When extended with the study of bandgaps in different materials, elements and their doped counterparts from the periodic table showed phenomenal variations and properties. Semiconductor-based PDs in the IR range have been used for various applications in telecommunications, astronomy, surveillance, motion detection,161 and the detection of harmful gases in the atmosphere. Fig. 8 shows some applications of IR PDs.
 Fig. 8  Main applications of IR photodetectors with different wavebands. 
In the past few years, scientific studies and developments have been focused toward the nanoscale light-material interactions, giving an edge to researchers in developing extremely capable PDs having a selective response toward a particular frequency of the EM spectrum.166,167 Compact geometry and low response time (in picoseconds) have yielded high-performance PDs for optoelectronic communication and cameras with high frame rates.166 For IR photodetectors (IRPDs), lead sulfide (PbS) nanocrystals are relatively substantive materials and PbS-based PDs can be used in a variety of applications because of their low manufacturing cost, sensitivity toward a large band of spectrum, and compatibility of PbS material over a variety of substrates. Low-dimensional nanostructured materials coupled with a p–n or Schottky junction can yield a system with a low leakage current along with sensitivity toward the color and polarization of IR.168 The response time for detection can be drastically reduced along with the operational temperature for such nanostructured devices. Region-specific highly sensitive light detectors and imaging devices can be developed by using black silicon (BS) available at a low cost. The fine-tuned and narrow bandgap of such nanostructures allow higher absorbance (in the range of 90%) over the spectral range of 250–2500 nm.169 In addition, practical device applications are possible because of the high photoconductive gain and responsivity (0.57 A W−1 at λ = 1050 nm).170 Functionality improvements of the nanodevices require a crucial input in terms of novelty in the research of materials and implications of variations in the dimensionality, architecture, and size. Lately, GaN-NW-based PDs have been reported with high photocurrent gain at RT. Furthermore, PDs based on core–shell NWs have been reported with high-speed photoresponse (in the range of picoseconds) and mobility in the mid-infrared (MIR) range at RT. These core–shell NWs are made from InGaN-, InAs/InP-, and InAs/InAsSb-based materials; a schematic of an example device is shown in Fig. 9a, where a Cr/Au-based ohmic–ohmic contact was developed. Corresponding I–V characteristics for these devices are shown for different wavelengths (Fig. 9b and c; Fig. 9d shows the light and dark current responses of the Schottky–ohmic combination).171,172 In addition, 2D materials and their heterojunctions have broad application prospects in the field of flexible infrared optoelectronic detection in the future.173Table 2 lists some reported work related to photodetectors.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of InAs-NW-based PDs and photoresponse analysis of such devices. 
Table 2 List of low-dimensional materials and their wavelengths, responsivities, detectivities, and speeds for use in IR detectors




Category
Materials
Wavelength (μm)
Responsivity (A W−1)
Detectivity (Jones)
Speed
Ref.




Epitaxially grown QDs
InGaAs/GaAs/AlGaAs
17
0.15
1.0 × 107
—

174



GaSb/AlSb
3.0
—
1.8 × 1011
—

175



GaAs/AlGaAs
8.0
0.044
4.5 × 1011
—

176



InGaAs/GaAs
10.2
2.16
1.0 × 1011
—

177



Quantum wells
InGaAs/InP
8.0
7.0
7.4 × 1010
—

178



Colloidals wells
HgTeQDs
2–65
—
—
—

179



HgTeQDs
2.0
—
2 × 1010
2 kHz

180



HgTeQDs
4.2–9
0.145
—
—

181



PbSQDs
1.3
1.0 × 103
1.8 × 1013
18 Hz

182



Nanowires
InP
0.83
2.8 × 105
9.1 × 101
139 ms

183



InAs
1.5
5.3 × 103
—
—

171



InAs
2–3
4.0–0.6
2.0 × 1012
∼0.1 ms

184



Hybrid heterostructures
PbS QDs/Gr
0.895
1.0 × 107
—
0.3–1.7 s

185



PbS QDs/Gr
0.6–1.4
5 × 107–5 × 105
7.0 × 1013
—

186



B–Si QDs/Gr
0.4–4
∼1012
∼1013
—

187



Perovskite/TiO2/Si
1.1
0.87
6 × 1012
—

188






4.1.1 BP, graphene, and heterostructures (2D materials) for use in IR detectors. 
Recently researched 2D materials such as graphene and BP are gaining intense considerations for use in IR sensing devices.189,190 Field effects and strains tune the electronic properties of 2D materials facilitating their use as building blocks in flexible and foldable electronics with excellent tolerance against fracture under external strains.191 Graphene and BP are mostly explored for IR photodetection because of their ability to absorb a large range of low-energy photons in the IR region. Graphene absorbs 2.3% incident photons irrespective of the wavelength at atomic-size thickness and the absorption efficiency can be improved by changing the stacking sequence or by incorporating graphene into other nanostructures.192 Graphene-based PDs have an operational domain extending up to the extremely high frequency of 500 GHz.193 Graphene/metal junction, tunneling barrier junctions, and graphene stacking are various methods that have been used for the efficient partition of photon-excited carriers at shorter timescales.190 The separation of carriers excited by photons at the rates of picoseconds can be achieved by either metal–graphene or tunneling-barrier junctions when stacked in the form of ordered multilayers using different deposition techniques. By incorporating graphene and CQDs into a single device, ultrahigh gain in the photocurrent can be achieved.194 In a hybrid heterostructure-based PD, the charge carriers generated due to photon excitations get separated at the interface. The implementation of dyes of the organic nature facilitates the formation of nanostructures with high extinction coefficients, which are one of the many examples for optical sensitization.195 Recently, PDs based on PbS CQDs and graphene hybrid heterostructures yielding significant photoresponsivity of 107 A W−1 in the near-IR (NIR) region have been reported.186 Light absorption and carrier transportation occurring in the PbS CQD layer and graphene layer are shown in Fig. 10a. Band misalignment yields the movement of photogenerated carriers that separate out at the graphene/QCD layer interface while retaining the electrons and holes in the CQD and graphene layer, respectively. A variety of doping sequences and choices of dopants can be used to engineer the bandgap, and the electrical conductance achieved by this method is sufficiently high. B-doped (Si:B) QDs (Fig. 10b) can be fabricated to achieve mid-wavelength infrared (MWIR) photodetection with ultrahigh sensitivity.187
 Fig. 10  (a) Structure of PbS CQDs/graphene PD. (b) Representation of intense near field absorption using B-doped Si QD/graphene composite based PD. (c) Schematic illustration of multi interface hetero-structure using B-doped Si QDs PbS/TiO2/graphene based PD. (d) Schematic representation of hetero-structure based PD using Bi2Te3 nanoplatelets/graphene nanocomposites. 
Tuning the morphology, structural phase, and surface chemistry of Si:B QDs-conjugated graphene devices allows photodetection in the UV–MIR range with sensitivity of 109 A W−1 at gain of ∼1012 and detectivity of ∼1013 Jones. Different hybrid heterojunctions of Ge and graphene, PbSe and MoS2, and HgTe and MoS2 exhibit detection and high spectral response extending from the visible to IR ranges. Particularly enhanced detectivity and responsivity in the narrow bands of the NIR spectrum could be achieved by employing heterostructures with multiple interfaces instead of a single heterojunction structure (Fig. 10c and d).172,188 The study of selectively engineered heterojunctions in terms of their optical and electrical properties depending upon the morphological properties can provide a considerable advancement in the detection efficiency and performance selective to bands of IR radiation.

4.2 Electrochemical sensors
Substantial metals, inorganic–natural mixes, harmful gases, pesticides, antiinfection agents, and microscopic organisms are considered to be a worldwide ecological contamination issue, having significantly contributed by people as a side-effect of modern development. This toxicity has been present since the modern upheaval, and its accumulation in nature has been expanding ever since. These toxic substances are unconsciously dumped into water bodies or disposed of with carelessness. The cost to be paid by future generations will significantly rely on the present procedures of evacuation and detection of such harmful substances to treat such foes of both nature and mankind. Electrochemistry, fluorescence, chemiluminescence, surface-enhanced Raman scattering,196 and plasma mass spectrometry are distinctive measurement techniques that have been used for observing ecological contaminations from collected samples. Metal NPs, MOs, CNTs, silicon NWs, and graphene can be used for building electrochemical sensors for the detection of contaminants. Electrochemical sensors have been widely used for chemical sensing as they have the ability to produce selective and quantitative data from a specific system.197 The data or information from electrochemical sensors can be collected in the form of the accumulation of charges, current signal, potential change, or change in impedance of the medium between the electrode.198 Electrochemical sensors can be categorized depending on the type of data collected by them. There are four main types of electrochemical sensors: potentiometric, voltammetric, amperometric, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) sensor. A simplified design of the working mechanism of a two-electrode-based potentiometric sensor and its analysis at thermal equilibrium allowing chemical reaction to occur without applying any potential make the electrochemical sensor suitable for chemical sensing at a large scale.199,200 The activity of the targeted ions can be referred to as the input signal and the transducers are used to convert these ions into electrons, yielding electric potential as the output of the sensor.201 A simplistic design is the main advantage of a potentiometric sensor. Secondly, sample analyses can be done under thermal equilibrium, which ensures that no other chemical reactions take place. As there is no oxidation reduction reaction, a potentiometric sensor can detect redox-inert species. A higher amount of ions other than the targeted analytes can alter the results; this problem has been improved over time.
The second and third types of electrochemical sensors measuring a change in current arising due to electron transfer under the applied potential are voltammetric and amperometric sensors.102,197,198,202 There are various types of voltammetric sensors, such as linear sweep voltammetry, staircase voltammetry, squarewave voltammetry (SWV), cyclic voltammetry (CV), etc. In the voltammetric technique, the potential is linearly swept with time between the working and reference electrodes and the current is measured at the working electrode.203 Linear sweep voltammetry is more useful in cases where the reaction is irreversible, such as that used to examine direct methane production via a biocathode.204 The derivative of linear sweep voltammetry yields staircase voltammetry in which oxidation or reduction from a chemical reaction is noted as the crest or trough in the current signal.205 SWV is the superposition of staircase and squarewave potentials, which is visible as modified staircase voltammetry, and the current is measured at the working electrode.206 It is easy to monitor the molecular concentration as the current magnitude proportionally varies with the reduced or oxidized molecules.207,208 In CV, the potential at the working electrode linearly ramps with time and biasing can be reversed after completing one cycle; thereafter, the current is measured.207 CV is mostly used in electrochemical sensors to determine the diffusion coefficients and ion concentration via the redox reaction.209 To further enhance the sensitivity of the sensing devices, other techniques of voltammetry have been used, such as normal pulse voltammetry (NPV), anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV), cathodic stripping voltammetry (CSV), and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV).197,210,211 The benefit of using voltammetry is that both negative and positive biasing can be used to study the redox profile of the chemicals. Amperometry sensors allow the potential to be fixed and the current is measured at the working electrode. The advantage of amperometry sensors is that any perturbation or disturbance does not affect the sensor performance, which makes them suitable for monitoring the environment and wearable sensors. The fourth and last electrochemical sensor, which has the ability to determine the relaxation parameters for a range of frequencies, is the impedance sensor.212 Electrode systems such as amperometry and voltammetry use an AC signal across the electrodes instead of steady potential or no potential, and the change in current is measured.213 EIS is used for 2D materials to determine the properties of a specific sensing technique. Parameters such as rate constant, conductive junction between the electrode and 2D material, and diffusion coefficient, which are necessary for fabricating a sensor, can be determined via the EIS technique.214 These techniques are expected to be used for applications such as wearable sensors or environmental monitoring.

4.2.1 Heavy metal ion detection. 
Many metal particles released into the surroundings lay undecomposed or stay forever as complex compounds; this situation has expanded multifold with modern development. The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared rules for estimations of various metal particles for drinking water. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a high-speed, responsive, and basic demonstrative technique for sensing and observing metal toxins in water and soil.
ASV can be used to distinguish a majority of toxic metals. However, poor response, poor limit of detection, and high reduction potential has restricted the application of ASV in substantial metal particle detection. To overcome the problem with conventional ASV, graphene and other 2D materials have been used in the developed electrochemical sensors. Recently, ultrasensitive 2D-nanomaterials-based tailored terminals have been utilized to exclusively detect metals such as mercury (Hg(II)), lead (Pb(II)), cadmium (Cd(II)), copper (Cu(II)), zinc (Zn(II)), and iron (Fe(III)) with good accuracy.215,216 For example, Wang's group utilized ASV to delicately and specifically identify Hg(II) by embedding Cu7S4–Au nanoparticles with MoS2 nanocomposites. They found the critical impacts of the structural chemistry of Au as well as the rich surface chemistry of monolayer MoS2 to be the reasons for the good performance of ASV in Hg(II) detection.217 A SnO2/reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-based electrochemical sensor was created by Huang and collaborators, which could simultaneously and specifically distinguish four metal particles, namely, cadmium(II), lead(II), copper(II), and mercury(II). Similarly, a graphene-based electrochemical sensor utilizing screen-printed carbon was built by Chaiyo et al. for the identification of zinc, cadmium, and lead.257 In Fig. 11a, by utilizing square-wave ASV, it was shown that a functionalized-graphene-nanocomposite-based tailored cathode could yield better results in the detection of zinc(II), cadmium(II), and lead(II) in contrast to that obtainable by using the original terminal. Mao's group distinguished mercury particles (Hg2þ) by using cysteamine-functionalized GO. Motivated by the energizing technique, a few fascinating identification procedures have been formulated for Hg2þ detection (Fig. 11b). For example, the interaction between thymine-Hg2þ–thymine (T-Hg2þ–T) and polypyrrole–Hg2þ coordination can enrich the surface chemistry, eventually yielding better performance.218
 Fig. 11  (a) Diagrammatic representation of graphene-based tailored electrodes for Zn(II), Cd(II), and Pd(II) detection. (b) Schematic representation of the reaction events for Hg2þ detection. (c) Schematic illustration of Hg2þ detection using CS@3D-rGO@DNA-nanocomposite-based electrochemical biosensor. (d) Schematic representations of Pb2þ and Hg2þ detection. 
In view of the T-Hg2þ–T coordination science, Zhang and associates developed a device based on an ultradelicate electrochemical component to verify the presence of Hg2þ. The data obtained from the electrochemical sensor based on graphene for the detection of three distinct samples from the environment were found to be comparable with atomic fluorescence spectrometry results.219 By utilizing a similar association, three-dimensional rGO, and chitosan particles, Zhou's group formulated a label-free detection methodology for Hg2þ detection in water (CS@3DrGO, Fig. 11c). Under the best conditions, the acquired biosensor displayed a small recognition limit with high repeatability and selectivity, which could determine Hg2þ in tap water and other water samples.49 As shown in Fig. 11d, Zhang's group immobilized both particle-explicit DNA and DNAzyme on amino-functionalized rGO-tailored cathode to specifically distinguish lead(II) and mercury(II).258 Life-threatening conditions such as heart and kidney failures can be the result of the lopsidedness of ionic electrolytes in the body as they are essential for cell signaling and cell functioning. Hence, it is important for electrochemical sensors to ensure the required electrolytic concentration in biological samples to maintain balance. The proposed 2D-nanomaterial-based electrochemical sensors are capable of tracing metal ions in soil and drinking water with better sensitivity and selectivity.


4.2.2 Detection of organic compounds. 
Serious issues that have exasperated over in the last few decades are the release of natural mixes from mechanical waste and degradation of concoction-based household waste. For instance, 1,2-dihydroxybenzene (catechol, CC) is a phenolic compound having high lethality and low degradability, which is broadly utilized in color, oil processing plants, plastics, cancer-prevention agents, beauty care products, medical drugs, pesticides, and photography. An increased amassing of CC is responsible for eczematous dermatitis, depletion of the focal sensory system (CNS), and delayed ascent of circulatory strain. 2D materials such as graphene and MoS2 are broadly utilized to fabricate electrochemical sensors for the detection of natural compounds.221 Wang's group utilized diverse metal-nanoparticles-upheld MoS2 nanocomposites as the stage for CC detection for improving sensitivity toward toxic organic compounds. Fig. 12a shows the synergistic impact: the sensing performance of modified electrodes using gold–platinum nanoparticles on MoS2 nanosheets (MoS2–Au@Pt) was found to be superior than that of pristine MoS2-nanosheet-based electrodes. The contamination of CC in river water and tap water could be identified with MoS2–Au@Pt-based tailored electrodes.222 Ag NP/polydopamine graphene, rGO, and Au NP/graphene are graphenes-based nanomaterials that have been utilized to detect CC with high efficiency. It is noteworthy that CC and hydroquinone (HQ) regularly exist together because they are two dihydroxybenzene isomers due to their overlapping peaks at the ordinary anode; it is difficult to separately detect CC and HQ. Accordingly, Hg2þ 2D-nanomaterials-based electrodes yield an approach to distinguish them at the same time. By utilizing the CV strategy, Ma et al. built a Au/graphene-nanocomposite-tailored electrode to distinguish CC and HQ (Fig. 12b).223
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of electrochemical sensors based on MoS2 for CC detection. (b) Representation of graphene-based electrochemical sensors for the simultaneous detection of CC and HQ. (c) Schematic of graphene-NR-supported Pt–Pd concave nanocubes. 
2D-nanomaterial-based electrochemical sensors have also been used to identify nitroaromatic compounds. Chen's group found that Pt–Pd with a graphene-nanocomposite-based cathode had a higher current signal for 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) identification than that obtained using pristine-graphene-based electrodes (Fig. 12c). Wang's, Pumera's, Yang's and Xia's groups utilized comparative sensing techniques for TNT detection.
As referenced above, the presence of various explosives such as 2,4-dinitrotoluene (2,4-DNT), 1,3-dinitrobenzene (1,3-DNB), and 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene (TNB) can be determined by utilizing graphene or graphene-nanocomposites-based tailored electrodes. Guo et al. utilized porphyrin-functionalized graphene-adjusted terminals to determined nitroaromatic explosives, which could identify as low as 1 ppb of 2,4-DNT, 0.5 ppb of TNT, 1 ppb of TNB, and 2 ppb of 1,3-DNB.224 Other natural mixes have similarly been identified by 2D-nanomaterials-based electrochemical sensors; for example, p-dihydroxybenzene, nitromethane, 4-chlorophenol, 4-nitrophenol, honokiol, bisphenol-A, and so on. As shown in Fig. 12d, one-advance N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP)-peeled graphene nanosheets as the sensing stage for phenols discovery, including HQ, CC, 4-chlorophenol, and 4-nitrophenol, were utilized by Wu et al. for multistep substance oxidation; NMP-shed graphene nanosheets demonstrated better electrocatalytic movement toward the oxidation of phenols.220,225 Layered MoS2 and graphene composite as the detection stage were utilized for acetaminophen recognition, as created by Huang and collaborators. Fantastic recognition execution of the created sensor could be ascribed to the vigorous composite structure and synergistic impact of MoS2 and graphene.226 Different nanocomposites-based modified electrodes have been reported for use in electrochemical sensors to maximize or improve their selectivity and responsivity. 2D-nanocomposite-based electrochemical sensors have proven to be better sensors than conventional sensors in terms of distinguishing various organic compounds present in the environment or human body. It has also been shown that pristine-nanomaterial-based electrodes are less effective than blended-nanocomposites-based modified electrodes for the detection of different organic compounds. Further development and improvements can be foreseen in commercialization that can serve the purpose of health and environmental monitoring.


4.2.3 Detection of pesticides. 
Contamination brought about by pesticides, mainly organophosphorus pesticides, is gravely destructive to human and animal wellbeing. Pesticides effectively gather on the leaves of vegetables and organic products, prompting them to possibly become unsafe for buyers since they cause an unfriendly impact on the capacity of the human body and even hindering acetylcholinesterase (AChE) action. Electrochemical sensors for pesticide detection utilize low-dimensional materials and their device congregations.227 As shown in Fig. 13a, AChE on gold nanoparticles and GOs nanosheet (AChE/Au NPs/cr-Gs) have been developed by Lin and coworkers to determine the presence of organophosphate pesticides. They also used graphene-based nanocomposites to detect paraoxon-ethyl, which was exceptionally delicate and rapid.228 In 2016, Mogha et al. detected chlorpyrifos by immobilizing AChE in zirconium oxide and rGO nanohybrids.229 Numerous pesticides, such as dichlorvos, methyl parathion, carbofuran (CBF), and triazophos have been distinguished by utilizing equivalent electrochemical sensors. Wang and collaborators built a nonenzymatic electrochemical sensor for CBF and carbaryl (CBR) detection using (rGO/CoO) nanocomposites to diminish the negative impact of AChE. A nonenzymatic AChE-based electrochemical sensor could simultaneously show the presence of CBF and CBR with high affectability, selectivity, and steadiness. Significantly, the results from 2D electrochemical sensors showed equally good outcomes as those reported for high-performance fluid chromatography (HPLC).152 MoS2–graphene-nanocomposite-based nonenzymatic electrochemical sensors for detecting organophosphate pesticides have been developed by Chen's group (Fig. 13b).220 Such a sensor could reveal the recuperations of MP discovery in homogenized fruits like kiwi, apple, tomato, and cabbage.230 Similarly, nonenzymatic electrochemical sensors using graphene effectively detected isoproturon (CH18N2O, urea), carbendazim (C9H9N3O2), methyl parathion (Azophos, C8H10NO15HP), fenitrothion (C9H12NO5PS), and paraoxon (C10H14NO6P).231 Detecting the presence of harmful and toxic pesticides in food products using 2D electrochemical sensors have been reported by many research groups; such sensors showed equally good outcomes as those reported from HPLC. The detection limits have also been improved (i.e., lowered) using 2D nanomaterials. These sensors can help organizations to limit pesticides usage on plants and food products as they can lead to severe health issues.
 Fig. 13  (a) Representation of AChE/AuNPs/cr-Gs assembly for pesticide detection using PDDA. (b) A dependable and strong methyl parathion sensor using heterostructured MoS2–graphene nanocomposite assembly. 


4.2.4 Detection of antibiotics. 
Antibiotics are considered to be serious contaminants because of their overuse in both humans and animals. As we are probably aware, antibiotics are frequently utilized to treat illnesses; however, over time, adverse impact on kidneys and poor reaction to illnesses have become common medical problems due to the steady buildup in sustenance items. Hints of a few antiinfection agents, like metronidazole, chloramphenicol,232 midecamycin,233 azithromycin,234 penicillin,235 linezolid,236 antibiotic medication,237 levofloxacin,238 and ofloxacin,239 were distinguished by the electrochemical method. Zhang and his group identified metronidazole using an electrochemical sensor based on petal-like silver decorated on graphene (Fig. 14a). Moreover, they additionally discussed the process of electron transfer in the electrochemical sensor.239 MoS2–polyaniline nanocomposite, as an electrochemical-detecting material, was utilized by Chen et al. to sense chloramphenicol. Pei and collaborators manufactured electrochemical aptasensors for kanamycin antimicrobial recognition by utilizing thionine-improved graphene and Pt–Cu alloy (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  (a) Diagrammatic illustration of a kanamycin aptasensor. (b) Representation of the process of immunosensor fabrication. (c) Design of electrocatalytic reduction of metronidazole p-GR-Ag/GCE process. 
The developed aptasensor demonstrated wide direct range and low identification limit with great selectivity and sensitivity.240 Guo and colleagues utilized graphene-based nanocomposites to develop electrochemical aptasensors for the identification of penicillin.241 Other than aptasensors, Wei et al. fabricated an immunosensor for the label-free recognition of kanamycin based on graphene sheet/Nafion/thionine/Pt nanoparticles composite (GS-Nf/TH/Pt). The high electron exchange capacity of graphene and Pt NPs extraordinarily increased the peak current of thionine, prompting the improved performance of the structured immunosensor for kanamycin sensing. In the subsequent year, Wei's group fabricated a graphene-based immunosensor to check the presence of kanamycin (Fig. 14c).259 They found that the built immunosensor could proficiently show the presence of kanamycin in meat because of its high affectability, selectivity, and short examination time (3 min).242 Although antibiotics have been used to treat illnesses, if the dose is higher than that required, it can eliminate microorganisms that are beneficial to the bodily functions of humans or animals. Hence, checking on the dose or content of the antibiotic is equally important. 2D electrochemical sensors serve the purpose of detecting them with good selectivity and responsivity.


4.2.5 Detection of bacteria. 
Microbiological contamination, particularly bacterial contamination, has received increasing consideration since it can be a source of food- and water-borne illnesses. Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) is a Gram-positive bacterium, which is disseminated in air, drinking water, and transitory sustenance. As shown in Fig. 15a, based on aptamer and graphene, Lian et al. fabricated a rapid electrochemical sensor for determining the presence of S. aureus in food items and its detection in milk at a low detection limit.51 Further, using gold-nanoparticles-embellished graphene oxide (GO–Au NPs), Wang's group fabricated an impedimetric aptasensor for detecting S. aureus.243 A label-free impedimetric invulnerable sensor for Escherichia coli O157:H7 utilizing gold-nanoparticles-bolstered graphene paper (Au NPs–GP) was created by Ying's group. Signal amplification and particular signal slicing techniques were slowly utilized to improve microorganism detection. By using sulfonated graphene-based brightened gold nanoparticles, Wang and his group formed an electrochemical immunosensor to break down E. coli O157:H7. As shown in Fig. 15b, a traditional sandwich-type immunosensor shaped like E. coli O157:H7 was fabricated.
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the electrochemical sensing mechanism for S. aureus detection. (b) Mechanism of the tailored electrode using sulfonated graphene-poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) gold nanoparticles (SG-PEDOT-AuNPs) for the detection of E. coli O157:H7. (c) Illustration of the electrochemical sensor for the detection of Shewanella oneidensis. 
Other than S. aureus and E. coli, other microscopic organisms such as Shewanella,244Staphylococcus arlettae,245Salmonella pullorum,246Cronobacter sakazakii,247 salmonella,248 and Mycobacterium tuberculosis249 were delicately and specifically determined by 2D-materials-based electrochemical sensors. As shown in Fig. 15c, a sandwich-type graphene-based nano-enhancer was developed by Wen et al. to recognize Shewanella oneidensis with ultrahigh sensitivity.260 Techniques that allow the precise tuning of the size, shape, morphology, and structure of 2D nanomaterials may facilitate their incorporation into integral electrochemical immune sensors and can provide favorable conditions for sensing bacteria in the environment. Implanting gold, platinum, aluminum, and other 2D nanomaterials can enhance their detection limit by increasing their reactivity toward biological samples.

5. Future perspectives
Graphene, graphene derivatives (GO, rGO), and other 2D materials (BP, TMDCs, h-BN, etc.) exhibit exclusive material properties. The sufficiently large surface-to-volume ratio enables these nanomaterials to be used in a broad range of applications such as storage and conversion of energy, health and environmental monitoring, PDs, and medicines. Tuning their morphological structure and morphology not only provides a better opportunity to understand the basic phenomenon in physics but also enhances their performance in every application.
In the future, we need to focus on overcoming the challenges of lower detection limits, selectivity, instability of some materials, and elimination of undesired contamination that affect sensor performances. Sensors based on 2D nanomaterials have detection limit in parts per billion and can be lowered to parts per trillion by incorporating UV light in sensors or by purifying gases as they can in situ clean the sensing material.250 Adding dopants or defects can also improve the detection limit as this facilitates better interactions between the modified 2D material and gases due to effective charge transfer.251 A major aspect still overlooked by researchers and industries is the biocompatibility of such materials and their effect on the environment once they run out of their lifetime. Selectivity challenge, i.e., the inability of the sensor to distinguish the detected particle can be resolved by methods such as controlling the temperature, using filters, and manipulation of electronic noise. Doping a 2D material with metal, MOs, and polymer is another approach to enhance the selectivity performance as this can alter the interaction process between the 2D material and particles/gases. The stability of materials used for sensing is a prerequisite for their practical applications. Materials that are unstable in the ambient environment, such as BP, can be treated by means of polymer coating,252 surface functionalization,55 and doping of other elements,2 which can considerably improve their stability. The challenge for 2D-materials-based sensors in biomedical areas is environmental stability. The interactions of 2D materials with complex biological environments can cause degradation in sensor performance.75 Environmental stability limits the application of 2D materials in biosensors that needs to be overcome without affecting the sensitivity and selectivity of the device, which can be overcome by the detailed study of stability and coating mechanisms of 2D materials. Biofouling is a condition where microorganisms, plants, and algae accumulate on any surface that has moisture or water, which, in turn, affects the sensor performance. Polymer coating can control biofouling to a certain extent.253,254 Graphene has been used by Han's group as an antifouling material and can be used to treat saline water. Further, Feng Li's group could show that layered materials have a tremendous impact on permeability and antifouling performance of the hierarchal membrane. Applications such as water filtration, water desalination, and emulsified oil/water separation have used the antifouling properties of 2D materials255,256 and can be useful in addressing the problem of biofouling as well as stability degradation. The elimination of unwanted contamination in the sensor has become imperative. Methods such as annealing of the sensor under a vacuum have been used to remove contaminations introduced in the sensor during lithography or etching processes. An understanding of the interaction mechanisms between the particles causing environmental pollution and 2D materials is the key to maximize the performance of 2D-materials-based sensors. Future works in this area also needs to investigate the intrinsic properties of 2D layered materials and the effect of molecules of specific samples on their properties, as well as the corresponding sensing mechanisms.
6. Conclusions
In this survey, we listed the latest progresses made in improving the field of 2D-materials-based sensors to give a review of the developments seen in this area extending from morphological features to device engineering. Similarly, we showed how structural and compositional highlights, just as the surface science of 2D nanostructures, control their electrical properties, eventually permitting captivating applications in the advancement of sensors. Explicit advances in the use of 2D nanomaterials in detecting strategies were outlined with regard to five noteworthy group of analytes, namely, heavy metal particles, microorganisms, IR, pesticides, and biomolecules, and we discussed this from both the recording and logical viewpoints. Tuning the morphology, including the dimension, thickness, crystallinity, designed deformities, adding dopants, etc., has been accomplished with recent headways in the preliminary strategies for 2D nanomaterials. Selectivity and affectabilty of 2D material based sensors can be improved further by adding nanoparticles or ploymers to the pristine 2D materials. A significant improvement in sensitivity is induced by the minimization of thickness of the 2D layer, which increases the surface-to-volume proportion. This must be improved with better assembly of the 2D nanoparticles during fabrication. Structural deformities arise while synthesizing 2D materials can impact the electronic properties and therefore have an impact on the sensing performance: these impacts need a more profound understanding as they may have both positive and negative responses. Detecting advances and their relevance in the exponentially developing interest requires further development, research, and improvement for the large-scale manufacturing of ultrathin epitaxial 2D materials with the desired structure in a very controllable manner, which remains important in this field. To address these difficulties, thorough computational techniques demonstrated along with an investigative evaluation of the structural properties via in situ transmission electron microscopy and other spectroscopic methods are required. Structural disfigurements, material decay, and thermal hazards may occur in 2D nanostructures as they experience oxidation in ambient conditions, thereby restricting their commercial applications. To stabilize these nanomaterials during the synthesis process is equally important as their storage. These difficulties might be overcome by the development of novel nanomaterials.
The improvement of these detecting advances may prompt noteworthy improvements in systemic advances with regard to ease of fabrication, low cost, and prevalent detecting performance. Although the investigation of new 2D nanostructures is still in its infancy, the extraordinary variety of such materials that have emerged from their interesting physical and compound structures is probably going to additionally combine their features in the field of nanoscience, and it is likely that business and modern advances can combine their advantages in the coming years.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research was partially supported by the Financial supports from the Science and Technology Development Fund (No. 007/2017/A1 and 132/2017/A3), Macao Special Administration Region (SAR), China, and National Natural Science Fund (Grant No. 61875138, 61435010, and 6181101252), and Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (KQTD2015032416270385, JCYJ20150625103619275, and JCYJ20170811093453105). Authors also acknowledge the support from Instrumental Analysis Center of Shenzhen University (Xili Campus).
Notes and references
S. Su, W. Wu, J. Gao, J. Lu and C. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18101–18110 RSC .
Y. Ge, S. Chen, Y. Xu, Z. He, Z. Liang, Y. Chen, Y. Song, D. Fan, K. Zhang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6129–6135 RSC .
Y. Zhao, F. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zuo and C. Fan, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Liu, D. Li and C. Fan, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 514–518 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Wan, A. Ali, S. Deng, Y. Su, C. Fan and S. Yang, Sci. China: Chem., 2016, 59, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, P. Xu, S. Gao, S. Zhang, X. Zhao, C. Fan and X. Zuo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 47, 520–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Labib, E. H. Sargent and S. O. Kelley, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9001–9090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wan, Y. Su, X. Zhu, G. Liu and C. Fan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 47, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ueno, K. Sasaki, K. Saiki and A. Koma, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, F. Guo, B. Kiraly, X. Mao, M. Lu, K. W. Leong and T. J. Huang, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 2097–2102 RSC .
S. Su, Y. He, M. Zhang, K. Yang, S. Song, X. Zhang, C. Fan and S.-T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 023113 CrossRef .
J.-H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami and M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dou, Z. Jiang, W. Deng, J. Su, S. Chen, H. Song, A. Aldalbahi, X. Zuo, S. Song and J. Shi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 781, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kvasnička and J. Homola, Biointerphases, 2008, 3, FD4–FD11 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Ismail and D. W. Bahnemann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 128, 85–101 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Q. Xi, J. K. Kim and E. F. Schubert, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1385–1387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang and H. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3483–3507 RSC .
F. Perreault, A. F. De Faria and M. Elimelech, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5861–5896 RSC .
Y. Chen, C. Zhao, S. Chen, J. Du, P. Tang, G. Jiang, H. Zhang, S. Wen and D. Tang, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2014, 21, 116–122 Search PubMed .
H. Mu, Z. Wang, J. Yuan, S. Xiao, C. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Xue, H. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 832–841 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Miao, G. Jiang, S. Chen, J. Liu, X. Fu, C. Zhao and H. Zhang, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 7681–7693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Abbas, B. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Cong, N. Aroonyadet, M. Köpf, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5618–5624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bullock, M. Amani, J. Cho, Y.-Z. Chen, G. H. Ahn, V. Adinolfi, V. R. Shrestha, Y. Gao, K. B. Crozier and Y.-L. Chueh, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 601 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, A. Pospischil, M. Bhuiyan, H. Jiang, H. Tian, D. Farmer, B. Deng, C. Li, S.-J. Han, H. Wang, Q. Xia, T.-P. Ma, T. Mueller and F. Xia, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4648–4655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, S. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. Yang, F. Liu, Y. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Yi, H. Zhang, L. Liao, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703811 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, W. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, D. K. Sang, C. Xing, Z. Li, B. Dong, F. Xing, D. Fan, S. Bao, H. Zhang and Y. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gan, H. Zhao and X. Quan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 56–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, C. Zang, Z. Huang, H. Zhang, L. Ren, X. Qi and J. Zhong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 19502–19512 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Late, Y.-K. Huang, B. Liu, J. Acharya, S. N. Shirodkar, J. Luo, A. Yan, D. Charles, U. V. Waghmare and V. P. Dravid, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4879–4891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, N. Li, H. Yu, Z. Wei, M. Liao, P. Chen, S. Wang, D. Shi, Q. Sun and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702076 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, K. Zhang, X. F. Liu, H. Zhang, T. C. Sum, A. H. Castro Neto and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2681 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. Lv, Y. X. Li, H. F. Ma, Z. Zhu, Z. P. Li, C. Y. Guan, J. H. Shi, H. Zhang and T. J. Cui, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Ren, H. Zhang, Z. Huang, X. Qi, X. Wei and J. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 142–151 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Ge, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, S. Wang, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700396 CrossRef .
S. J. Kim, H.-J. Koh, C. E. Ren, O. Kwon, K. Maleski, S.-Y. Cho, B. Anasori, C.-K. Kim, Y.-K. Choi, J. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and H.-T. Jung, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 986–993 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, J. Shen, G. Ge, Y. Zhang, W. Jin, W. Huang, J. Shao, J. Yang and X. Dong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, W. Liang, S. Luo, Z. He, Y. Ge, H. Wang, R. Cao, F. Zhang, Q. Wen, J. Li, Q. Bao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700229 CrossRef .
P. Yan, R. Lin, H. Chen, H. Zhang, A. Liu, H. Yang and S. Ruan, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2015, 27, 264–267 CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Song, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, B. Dong, Y. Xiang, F. Xing, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700221 CrossRef .
L. Lu, X. Tang, R. Cao, L. Wu, Z. Li, G. Jing, B. Dong, S. Lu, Y. Li, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, L. Miao, G. Jiang, Y. Chen, X. Qi, X.-F. Jiang, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, H. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Wang, S. Tang, J. Shao, Z. Sun, H. Xie, H. Wang, X.-F. Yu and P. K. Chu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6996–7002 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, Z. Guo, S. Li, Q. Bao and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600305 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, Z. Li, Z. Huang, D. Sang, H. Qiao, X. Qi, J. Li, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606834 CrossRef .
R. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wan, X. Wen, C. Sun, B. K. Chandran, H. Zhang, X. Sun and X. Chen, Small, 2015, 11, 5409–5415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Y. Guo, P. Wan, H. Zhang, X. Chen and X. Sun, Small, 2016, 12, 3748–3756 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Liu, W. Chen, W. Jin, J. Zhou, H. Zhang and G. S. Zakharova, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 226, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, L. Tong, S. Tang, Z. Guo, H. Zhang, P. Li, H. Wang, C. Du and X.-F. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5391–5399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lian, F. He, H. Wang and F. Tong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 314–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Wang, D. K. Sang, Z.-N. Guo, R. Cao, J.-L. Zhao, M. N. U. Shah, T.-J. Fan, D.-Y. Fan and H. Zhang, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 087308 CrossRef .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Xu, M. A. Islam, Z. Li, S. Chen, P. E. Saw, H. Zhang, Z. Bharwani, Z. Guo, J. Shi and O. C. Farokhzad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11896–11900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, Z. Li, Z. Sun, J. Shao, X.-F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Wang, Q. Xiao, H. Wang, Q.-Q. Wang, H. Zhang and P. K. Chu, Small, 2016, 12, 4136–4145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Cui, Y. Zhou, W. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, H. Wang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602896 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, G. Jing, X. Liang, M. Qiu, Z. Li, R. Cao, X. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8096–8101 RSC .
C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 43–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hirsch and F. Hauke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4338–4354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiang, X. Wang, C. Jia, T. Lee and X. Guo, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4318–4440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pedireddy, H. K. Lee, W. W. Tjiu, I. Y. Phang, H. R. Tan, S. Q. Chua, C. Troadec and X. Y. Ling, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yue, F. Lisdat, W. J. Parak, S. G. Hickey, L. Tu, N. Sabir, D. Dorfs and N. C. Bigall, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2800–2814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yildirimer, N. T. Thanh, M. Loizidou and A. M. Seifalian, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 585–607 CrossRef CAS .
E. Comini and G. Sberveglieri, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, B. Cai, Q. Tang, Y. Tong and Y. Liu, Sensors, 2014, 14, 13999–14020 CrossRef .
K. J. Choi and H. W. Jang, Sensors, 2010, 10, 4083–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, T. Ma, N. Pinna and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702168 CrossRef .
G. Neri, Chemosensors, 2017, 5, 21 CrossRef .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han and G.-H. Nam, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Varghese, S. Varghese, S. Swaminathan, K. Singh and V. Mittal, Electronics, 2015, 4, 651–687 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, A. E. K. Sood, K. E. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Lei, S. Gao, B. Pan, J. Zhou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10569–10572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kurapati, K. Kostarelos, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6052–6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, A. Halder, Y. Tang, C. Hou, H. Wang, J. O. Duus and Q. Chi, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1944–1986 RSC .
M. Zeng, Y. Xiao, J. Liu, K. Yang and L. Fu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6236–6296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Z. Yan, K.-I. Jang, W. Huang, H. Fu, J. Kim, Z. Wei, M. Flavin, J. McCracken and R. Wang, Science, 2015, 347, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Vlassiouk, Y. Stehle, P. R. Pudasaini, R. R. Unocic, P. D. Rack, A. P. Baddorf, I. N. Ivanov, N. V. Lavrik, F. List and N. Gupta, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109 CrossRef .
M. Pumera, A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, E. L. K. Chng and H. L. Poh, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2010, 29, 954–965 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. Yin, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 3480–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khandelwal, K. Mani, M. H. Karigerasi and I. Lahiri, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2017, 221, 17–34 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, T. V. Williams and J. W. Connell, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2009, 1, 277–283 CrossRef .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, R. B. Kaner, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3946–3946 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ko, L. Mendecki and K. A. Mirica, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7873–7891 RSC .
E. Jin, M. Asada, Q. Xu, S. Dalapati, M. A. Addicoat, M. A. Brady, H. Xu, T. Nakamura, T. Heine and Q. Chen, Science, 2017, 357, 673–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, Small, 2017, 13, 1603994 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, I. Jeerapan and J. Wang, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 464–482 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang and I. McGovern, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A.-F. Tran-Van and H. A. Wegner, in Polyarenes I, Springer,  2013, pp. 121–157 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132–145 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. He, S. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
S. Tang and Z. Cao, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 044710 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schedin, A. Geim, S. Morozov, E. Hill, P. Blake, M. Katsnelson and K. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Singh, M. Meyyappan and H. S. Nalwa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34544–34586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hussain, P. Panigrahi and R. Ahuja, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8100–8105 RSC .
X.-L. Wei, Y.-P. Chen, W.-L. Liu and J.-X. Zhong, Phys. Lett. A, 2012, 376, 559–562 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Zhang, Y.-B. Chen, K.-G. Zhou, C.-H. Liu, J. Zeng, H.-L. Zhang and Y. Peng, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 185504 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Du, X. Lin, Z. Xu and D. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8760–8775 RSC .
R. Gusmao, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8052–8072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cartz, S. Srinivasa, R. Riedner, J. Jorgensen and T. Worlton, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 71, 1718–1721 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
A. A. Kistanov, Y. Cai, K. Zhou, S. V. Dmitriev and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6876–6884 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kuriakose, T. Ahmed, S. Balendhran, V. Bansal, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and S. Walia, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 032001 CrossRef .
G. Abellán, S. Wild, V. Lloret, N. Scheuschner, R. Gillen, U. Mundloch, J. Maultzsch, M. Varela, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10432–10440 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kumar, F.-Y. Wu, T. Chou and L.-H. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 632, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, S. Li, Y. Sun, X. Feng and C. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2854–2857 RSC .
P. Joensen, R. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Wilson and A. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, S.-W. Min, Y.-G. Chang, M. K. Park, T. Nam, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3695–3700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi and H. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, Z. Wu, C. Han, J. He, Z. Ni and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100–3128 RSC .
J. V. Lauritsen, J. Kibsgaard, S. Helveg, H. Topsøe, B. S. Clausen, E. Lægsgaard and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1989, 40, 291–326 CrossRef CAS .
P.-R. Huang, Y. He, C. Cao and Z.-H. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kalantar-zadeh, J. Z. Ou, T. Daeneke, A. Mitchell, T. Sasaki and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 73–89 CrossRef .
K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Tang, M. Wang, K. L. Wang, A. Shailos, K. Galatsis, R. Kojima, V. Strong, A. Lech and W. Wlodarski, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 429–433 RSC .
J. E. ten Elshof, H. Yuan and P. Gonzalez Rodriguez, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600355 CrossRef .
J. Mannhart and D. Schlom, Science, 2010, 327, 1607–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Helander, Z. Wang, J. Qiu and Z. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 412 Search PubMed .
S. Kanan, O. El-Kadri, I. Abu-Yousef and M. Kanan, Sensors, 2009, 9, 8158–8196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, Z. Xie, Z. Liang, W. Liang, T. Fan, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700884 CrossRef .
C. Wang, L. Yin, L. Zhang, D. Xiang and R. Gao, Sensors, 2010, 10, 2088–2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Batten, N. R. Champness, X.-M. Chen, J. Garcia-Martinez, S. Kitagawa, L. Öhrström, M. O'Keeffe, M. P. Suh and J. Reedijk, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1715–1724 CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, G. Li and H. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 1999, 402, 276 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Lustig, S. Mukherjee, N. D. Rudd, A. V. Desai, J. Li and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3242–3285 RSC .
X. Lin, F. Luo, L. Zheng, G. Gao and Y. Chi, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4864–4870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, F. Luo, L. Zheng, G. Gao and Y. Chi, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4864–4870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Farha, I. Eryazici, N. C. Jeong, B. G. Hauser, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, R. Q. Snurr, S. T. Nguyen, A. Yazaydın and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15016–15021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Hendon, A. J. Rieth, M. D. Korzyński and M. Dincă, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 554–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, X. Huang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 95–111 RSC .
J. Niu, D. Wang, H. Qin, X. Xiong, P. Tan, Y. Li, R. Liu, X. Lu, J. Wu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3313 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, J.-Q. Wang, F. Liu, J. Huang, X. Meng, J.-M. Basset, Y. Han and F.-S. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Y. Feng, F. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim and K. L. Shepard, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Miller, A. B. Jorge, T. Suter, A. Sella, F. Cora and P. McMillan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15613–15638 RSC .
E. Kroke and M. Schwarz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 493–532 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. H. Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, Z. J. Xu and L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8769–8769 RSC .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. Biscaras and A. Shukla, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5981–5986 RSC .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, H. D. Wang, Z. N. Guo, D. K. Sang, L. Y. Zhang, Q. L. Xiao, Y. P. Zhang, D. Y. Fan, J. Q. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 1900020 CrossRef .
C. Cheng, J. Li and X. Cheng, J. Lumin., 2017, 188, 252–257 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue and G. Allan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoshita and H. Sakaki, Phys. B, 1996, 227, 373–377 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saran and R. J. Curry, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 81 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lefèvre and F. Forget, Nature, 2009, 460, 720 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Thompson, A. Alhodaib, A. P. Craig, A. Robson, A. Aziz, A. Krier, J. Svensson, L.-E. Wernersson, A. M. Sanchez and A. R. Marshall, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 182–187 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Crouch, J. Carey, M. Shen, E. Mazur and F. Genin, Appl. Phys. A, 2004, 79, 1635–1641 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhong, A. Guo, G. Guo, W. Li and Y. Jiang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 322 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Miao, W. Hu, N. Guo, Z. Lu, X. Zou, L. Liao, S. Shi, P. Chen, Z. Fan and J. C. Ho, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3628–3635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ilyas, D. Li, Y. Song, H. Zhong, Y. Jiang and W. Li, Sensors, 2018, 18, 4163 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ariyawansa, A. Perera, X. Su, S. Chakrabarti and P. Bhattacharya, Infrared Phys. Technol., 2007, 50, 156–161 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-B. Tian, T. Schuler-Sandy and S. Krishna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 083501 CrossRef .
L. Gendron, C. Koeniguer, V. Berger and X. Marcadet, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 121116 CrossRef .
S. Chakrabarti, S. Adhikary, N. Halder, Y. Aytac and A. Perera, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 181102 CrossRef .
W. Wu, A. Bonakdar and H. Mohseni, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 161107 CrossRef .
N. Goubet, A. Jagtap, C. Livache, B. Martinez, H. Portalès, X. Z. Xu, R. P. Lobo, B. Dubertret and E. Lhuillier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5033–5036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, H. Lu, N. M. Abdelazim, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, W. Ren, S. V. Kershaw, A. L. Rogach and N. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5614–5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, G. fu Wu and K. W. C. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 362–369 RSC .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, J. Wang, W. Hu, L. Liao, H. Fang, N. Guo, P. Wang, F. Gong, X. Wang and Z. Fan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2548–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, W. Hu, P. Wang, N. Guo, W. Luo, D. Zheng, F. Gong, M. Luo, H. Tian and X. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6416–6424 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Z. Liu, J. Li, G. A. Tai, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5878–5883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. De Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, L. Ma, S. Du, Y. Xu, M. Yuan, H. Fang, Z. Wang, M. Xu, D. Li and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9854–9862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cao, Q. Liao, K. Deng, L. Chen, L. Li and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1722–1730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hafeez, L. Gan, H. Li, Y. Ma and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4551–4560 CrossRef CAS .
F. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. Ferrari, M. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rodin, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, L. Yu, H. Wang, W. Fang, X. Ling, Y. Shi, C.-T. Lin, J.-K. Huang, M.-T. Chang and C.-S. Chang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1852–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Buckley, J. Chiles, A. N. McCaughan, G. Moody, K. L. Silverman, M. J. Stevens, R. P. Mirin, S. W. Nam and J. M. Shainline, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 141101 CrossRef .
K. K. Manga, J. Wang, M. Lin, J. Zhang, M. Nesladek, V. Nalla, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1697–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Z. Guo, D. K. Sang, H. Wang, Y. Xu, S. Tang, Q. Luo, R. Cao, X. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2019, 50, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Zhang, H. Ju and J. Wang, Electrochemical sensors, biosensors and their biomedical applications, Academic Press,  2011 Search PubMed .
E. Bakker and M. Telting-Diaz, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 2781–2800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bakker, P. Bühlmann and E. Pretsch, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 3083–3132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bobacka, A. Ivaska and A. Lewenstam, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 329–351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, A. Stein and P. Bühlmann, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 76, 102–114 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Turner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3184–3196 RSC .

          D. A. Skoog, F. J. Holler and S. R. Crouch, Principles of instrumental analysis, Cengage learning,  2017 Search PubMed .
S. Cheng, D. Xing, D. F. Call and B. E. Logan, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 3953–3958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Christie and P. J. Lingane, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1965, 10, 176–182 CAS .
L. Ramaley and M. S. Krause, Anal. Chem., 1969, 41, 1362–1365 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, J. Leddy and C. G. Zoski, Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, Wiley, New York,  1980, vol. 2, p. 231 Search PubMed .
M. Campredon, R. Guglielmetti, A. Samat, G. Gronchi and A. Alberti, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1993, 19, 307–318 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Nicholson, Anal. Chem., 1965, 37, 1351–1355 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kimmel, G. LeBlanc, M. E. Meschievitz and D. E. Cliffel, Anal. Chem., 2011, 84, 685–707 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1027–1036 CrossRef CAS .

          V. F. Lvovich, Impedance spectroscopy: applications to electrochemical and dielectric phenomena, John Wiley & Sons,  2012 Search PubMed .

          E. Barsoukov and J. R. Macdonald, Impedance spectroscopy: theory, experiment, and applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2018 Search PubMed .
M. A. Bissett, S. D. Worrall, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. Dryfe, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 201, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, X. Chen, K. Wu, M. Zhang and W. Huang, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sahoo, B. Panigrahy, S. Sahoo, A. Satpati, D. Li and D. Bahadur, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 43, 293–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, S. Xu and L. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 352–360 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Zhao, X. Chen, Q. Yang, J.-H. Liu and X.-J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2180–2182 RSC .
Y. Zhang, G. M. Zeng, L. Tang, J. Chen, Y. Zhu, X. X. He and Y. He, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 989–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Su, S. Chen and C. Fan, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 97–106 CrossRef .
K.-J. Huang, L. Wang, Y.-J. Liu, T. Gan, Y.-M. Liu, L.-L. Wang and Y. Fan, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, W. Cao, C. Zhang, X. Han, H. Yu, D. Zhu, J. Chao, C. Fan and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 76614–76620 RSC .
X. Ma, Z. Liu, C. Qiu, T. Chen and H. Ma, Microchim. Acta, 2013, 180, 461–468 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, Y. Lei and C. M. Li, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 885–893 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Q. Cheng and K. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3294–3299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Huang, L. Wang, J. Li and Y.-M. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 178, 671–677 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, X. Zuo, S. Su, Z. Tang, A. Wu, S. Song, D. Zhang and C. Fan, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1182–1186 RSC .
Y. Yang, A. M. Asiri, D. Du and Y. Lin, Analyst, 2014, 139, 3055–3060 RSC .
N. K. Mogha, V. Sahu, M. Sharma, R. K. Sharma and D. T. Masram, Mater. Des., 2016, 111, 312–320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, X. Miao, T. Zhou and L. Zhang, Talanta, 2011, 85, 1344–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, Q. Wei, D. Wu, H. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Feng and B. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 366–371 CrossRef CAS .
R. Karthik, J. Vinoth Kumar, S.-M. Chen, C. Karuppiah, Y.-H. Cheng and V. Muthuraj, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6547–6559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xi and L. Ming, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4, 3013–3018 RSC .
J. Y. Peng, C. T. Hou, X. X. Liu, H. B. Li and X. Y. Hu, Talanta, 2011, 86, 227–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, L. Tang, L. Huang, Z. Han, J. Wang and H. Pan, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2014, 39, 92–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Prashanth, N. L. Teradal, J. Seetharamappa, A. K. Satpati and A. Reddy, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 133, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Gao, G. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Li, S. Wang and Y. Sang, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 1936–1942 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, L. Zhu and J. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 642–647 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wong, T. A. Silva, F. C. Vicentini and O. Fatibello-Filho, Talanta, 2016, 161, 333–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, Y. Yin, H. Yu, W. Guo and M. Pei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 77, 752–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Guo, M. Pei and F. Ding, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 4391–4397 RSC .
S. Yu, Q. Wei, B. Du, D. Wu, H. Li, L. Yan, H. Ma and Y. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 48, 224–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jia, N. Duan, S. Wu, X. Ma, Y. Xia, Z. Wang and X. Wei, Microchim. Acta, 2014, 181, 967–974 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wen, S. Zhou and Y. Yuan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 44–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bhardwaj, S. K. Bhardwaj, J. Mehta, G. C. Mohanta and A. Deep, Anal. Biochem., 2016, 505, 18–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wan, Z. Lin, D. Zhang, Y. Wang and B. Hou, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 1959–1964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fei, W. Dou and G. Zhao, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 757–764 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Dou, L. Fu and G. Zhao, Anal. Biochem., 2013, 434, 218–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Jiang, F. Jia, Y. Yu, J. Chen and Z. Wang, J. Microbiol. Methods, 2014, 98, 94–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, C. Jiang and S.-H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2017, 4, 021304 Search PubMed .
S. W. Lee, W. Lee, Y. Hong, G. Lee and D. S. Yoon, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1788–1804 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, W. Wang, Y. Ge, H. Guo, X. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Deng, Z. Lu and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702437 CrossRef .
C. Yoshikawa, B. Delalat, F. Huang, S. Braun, N. Nishijima, N. H. Voelcker, P. Kingshott and H. Thissen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 3520–3527 RSC .
Z. Wang, G. Fei, H. Xia and H. Zuilhof, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 6930–6935 RSC .
D. H. Seo, S. Pineda, Y. C. Woo, M. Xie, A. T. Murdock, E. Y. Ang, Y. Jiao, M. J. Park, S. I. Lim and M. Lawn, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 683 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, R. Gao, T. Wu and Y. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 543, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaiyo, E. Mehmeti, K. Žagar, W. Siangproh, O. Chailapakul and K. Kalcher, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2016, 918, 26–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Ye, D. Peng, L. He, F. Yan, Y. Yang, H. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Q. Wei, B. Du, D. Wu, H. Li, L. Yan, H. Ma and Y. Zhang, Biosen. and Bioelectron., 2013, 48, 224–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wen, S. Zhou and Y. Yuan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 44–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Deepika Tyagi	Dr Deepika Tyagi received her BS in Physics in 2010 from the University of Delhi. Then, she obtained her MS in Physics at the Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, in 2013. She joined the PhD program at the College of Optoelectronics and Physics, Shenzhen University, in 2018. Her key research focuses on two-dimensional-material-based sensors and photodetectors. Her research interests also include the study of metamaterials for optical communication applications.
Huide Wang	Dr Huide Wang was born in Hubei, China, in 1993. He is now a PhD candidate in the International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology (ICL), Shenzhen University, under the supervision of Professor Han Zhang. His research interests focus on the optoelectronic applications of 2D materials and vdW heterostructures.
Han Zhang	Prof. Han Zhang was born in Wuhan, China, in 1984. He is currently a director at the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. Until now, he has published over 300 scientific publications and 60 patents. His current research focus is on the optoelectronics of low-dimensional materials and devices. His publications have received >25000 citations, with an H-index of 82. He has also been selected as a highly cited researcher by Clarivate Analytics at 2018 and has been awarded/enrolled with “the Second Prize of Natural Science Award”, “China's Top 10 Optical Breakthroughs”, and “NSFC Outstanding Young Scholar Fund”.

0D	

	Region and stereo selective functionalization58	Low conductivity
Atomic control of structure property relationship	Difficulty with device integration
Large area to volume ratio	Limited stability of devices
Single molecular electronic based sensing59	Potential toxicity63
Tunable size and shape60–62	

1D	

	High surface to volume ratio64	Required chemical modification to enhance selectivity
High aspect ratio	Difficulty in establishing reliable electrical contacts
Excellent stability	Difficult purification
High density of reactive sites	Limited structure and precision control66
Good thermal stability	

Compatible with device miniaturization65–67	

2D	

	Wide tenability of conductivity	Lack of mass production of material with large area, high and uniform quality
Large surface to volume ratio	Lack of facile, effective and reliable strategies for device integration
Thickness depending electronic properties	Limited stability of dome forms at ambient conditions69,70
Good optical transparency	

Excellent mechanical flexibility	

Good functionalization ability	

Potential for good processibility	

Compatible with ultra-thin silicon channel technology67–70	

3D	

	Good mechanical strength	Low surface area
Good thermal stability	Difficulty with miniaturization
Easy to interface with solid state device	Slow dynamic of analyte transport71
Good design ability to improve selectivity	

Strong analyte binding71	


 	Fig. 1  Classification of layered materials on the basis of stability.	 

 	Fig. 2  Heterostructures of 2D layered materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Conductivities, electron and hole mobilities, and bandgaps on the EM spectrum of different layered materials.	 

 	Fig. 4  Graphene (2D) has hexagonal lattice structure, which is a monolayer of sp2-hybridized carbon atoms covalently bound together. Fullerenes, CNT and graphite are carbon based allotropes with 0D, 1D and 3D respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Layers of phosphorene stacked together to form BP. (b) Schematic diagram of single-layered phosphorene.	 

 	Fig. 6  The crystal structure of monolayer MoS2 showing a layer of molybdenum atoms (blue) sandwiched between two layers of sulfur atoms (yellow). (a) 3d view of the monolayer MoS2, (b) planar view from z axis, (c) planar view from y axis, (d) planar view from x axis.	 

 	Fig. 7  The ideal crystal structure of MoO3: (a) unit cell, (b) corner-connected and (c) edge-connected octahedral. (d) H intercalated MoO3 crystal structure.	 

 	Fig. 8  Main applications of IR photodetectors with different wavebands.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of InAs-NW-based PDs and photoresponse analysis of such devices.	 

Epitaxially grown QDs	InGaAs/GaAs/AlGaAs	17	0.15	1.0 × 107	—	
174

GaSb/AlSb	3.0	—	1.8 × 1011	—	
175

GaAs/AlGaAs	8.0	0.044	4.5 × 1011	—	
176

InGaAs/GaAs	10.2	2.16	1.0 × 1011	—	
177

Quantum wells	InGaAs/InP	8.0	7.0	7.4 × 1010	—	
178

Colloidals wells	HgTeQDs	2–65	—	—	—	
179

HgTeQDs	2.0	—	2 × 1010	2 kHz	
180

HgTeQDs	4.2–9	0.145	—	—	
181

PbSQDs	1.3	1.0 × 103	1.8 × 1013	18 Hz	
182

Nanowires	InP	0.83	2.8 × 105	9.1 × 101	139 ms	
183

InAs	1.5	5.3 × 103	—	—	
171

InAs	2–3	4.0–0.6	2.0 × 1012	∼0.1 ms	
184

Hybrid heterostructures	PbS QDs/Gr	0.895	1.0 × 107	—	0.3–1.7 s	
185

PbS QDs/Gr	0.6–1.4	5 × 107–5 × 105	7.0 × 1013	—	
186

B–Si QDs/Gr	0.4–4	∼1012	∼1013	—	
187

Perovskite/TiO2/Si	1.1	0.87	6 × 1012	—	
188


 	Fig. 10  (a) Structure of PbS CQDs/graphene PD. (b) Representation of intense near field absorption using B-doped Si QD/graphene composite based PD. (c) Schematic illustration of multi interface hetero-structure using B-doped Si QDs PbS/TiO2/graphene based PD. (d) Schematic representation of hetero-structure based PD using Bi2Te3 nanoplatelets/graphene nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Diagrammatic representation of graphene-based tailored electrodes for Zn(II), Cd(II), and Pd(II) detection. (b) Schematic representation of the reaction events for Hg2þ detection. (c) Schematic illustration of Hg2þ detection using CS@3D-rGO@DNA-nanocomposite-based electrochemical biosensor. (d) Schematic representations of Pb2þ and Hg2þ detection.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of electrochemical sensors based on MoS2 for CC detection. (b) Representation of graphene-based electrochemical sensors for the simultaneous detection of CC and HQ. (c) Schematic of graphene-NR-supported Pt–Pd concave nanocubes.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Representation of AChE/AuNPs/cr-Gs assembly for pesticide detection using PDDA. (b) A dependable and strong methyl parathion sensor using heterostructured MoS2–graphene nanocomposite assembly.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Diagrammatic illustration of a kanamycin aptasensor. (b) Representation of the process of immunosensor fabrication. (c) Design of electrocatalytic reduction of metronidazole p-GR-Ag/GCE process.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the electrochemical sensing mechanism for S. aureus detection. (b) Mechanism of the tailored electrode using sulfonated graphene-poly-(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) gold nanoparticles (SG-PEDOT-AuNPs) for the detection of E. coli O157:H7. (c) Illustration of the electrochemical sensor for the detection of Shewanella oneidensis.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
