Recent progress, challenges, and prospects in emerging group-VIA Xenes: synthesis, properties and novel applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR07444F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR07444F
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 510-552Recent progress, challenges, and prospects in emerging group-VIA Xenes: synthesis, properties and novel applications

        
          
            Ayesha Khan 
            Tareen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Karim 
            Khan
          
          
        
      *bcd, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Aslam
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xinke 
            Liu
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Guangdong Research Center for Interfacial Engineering of Functional Materials, Shenzhen University, 3688 Nanhai Ave, Shenzhen, 518060, People Republic of China. E-mail: xkliu@szu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Collaborative Innovation Centre for Optoelectronic Science & Technology, Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Micro-Nano Photonic Information Technology, Guangdong Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, P.R. China. E-mail: karim_khan_niazi@yahoo.com
cSchool of Electrical Engineering & Intelligentization, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan (DGUT), Dongguan, 523808, Guangdong Province, P. R. China
dGovernment Degree college Paharpur, Gomel University, Dera Ismail Khan, Khyber Pakhtoonkhwa (K.P.K.), 29220, Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Received 
      17th October 2020
    , Accepted 18th November 2020First published on 20th November 2020AbstractThe discovery of graphene (G) attracted considerable attention to the study of other novel two-dimensional materials (2DMs), which is identified as modern day “alchemy” since researchers are converting the majority of promising periodic table elements into 2DMs. Among the family of 2DMs, the newly invented monoelemental, atomically thin 2DMs of groups IIIA–VIA, called “Xenes” (where, X = IIIA–VIA group elements, and “ene” is the Latin word for nanosheets (NSs)), are a very active area of research for the fabrication of future nanodevices with high speed, low cost and elevated efficiency. Currently, any novel structure of 2DMs from the typical Xenes will probably be applicable in electronic technology. Analysis of their possible highly sensitive synthesis and characterization present opportunities for theoretically examining proposed 2D-Xenes with atomic precision in ideal circumstances, thus providing theoretical predictions for experimental support. Several theoretically predicted and experimentally synthesized 2D-Xene materials have been investigated for the group-VIA elements (tellurene (2D-Te), and selenene (2D-Se)), which are similar to topological insulators (TIs), thus potentially rendering them suitable materials for application in upcoming nanodevices. Although the investigation and device application of these materials are still in their infancy, theoretical studies and a few experiment-based investigations have proven that they are complementary to conventional (i.e., layered bulk-derived) 2DMs. This review focuses on the synthesis of novel group-VIA Xenes (2D-Te and 2D-Se) and summarizes the current development in understanding their basic properties, with the current advancement in signifying device applications. Lastly, the future research prospects, further advanced applications and associated shortcomings of the group-VIA Xenes are summarized and highlighted.Ayesha Khan TareenDr Ayesha Khan Tareen (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7238-6366) is currently a Post-Doctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. She received her Post-Doctoral (2D materials) training from Shenzhen University, Ph.D. (Physical Chemistry/Materials) in 2018 from Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), M.Phil. (Analytical Chemistry) in 2015 from “The Islamia University of Bahawalpur” and B.Sc. (Honors) in Chemistry in 2012 from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan. Her research interests are in magnetic/superconductivity and transition metal nitride material synthesis and applications in different directions especially for magnetic materials, photo-catalysts, fuel cells, and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).Karim KhanDr Karim Khan (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8689-9245) was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He received his B.Sc. degree (2005) from Gomal University, M.Sc. (2009) in Physics from University of Peshawar, M.Phil. (2012) in Solid State Physics from the University of the Punjab, Pakistan, and did research in the “National Centre for Physics”, Quaid-e-Azim university, Pakistan. He received his Ph.D. (2016) from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and he also served as a Postdoctoral Fellow (2017–2019) at Shenzhen University, China. To date, he has over 60 scientific publications and 2 patents. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices and developing sensors for biomedical application.Han ZhangProf. Dr. Han Zhang (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0166-1973) received his B.S. Degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and Ph.D. from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is currently the Director of the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D-materials and Devices, and the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. His current research focuses on the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of 2D-materials. He was also the Highly Cited Researcher of the Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019. He was awarded Fellow of the Optical Society of America in 2019. In the past five years, Prof. Han Zhang's group has published more than 100 papers, including 2 in Physics Reports, 1 in PNAS, 3 in Chem. Soc. Rev., 6 in Nat. Comm., and 10 in Adv. Mater. The total citations of all his publications is more than 39000 times, and his H index is 101.
1. Introduction
Modern science has witnessed the quick development of two-dimensional materials (2DMs) along the whole Periodic Table,1–3 where each individual member has fascinating properties with practical significance.1–4 Graphene (G) was the first innovated member of the 2DM family,5,6 and this research has expanded very rapidly to other members of group-IVA, and to the neighboring IVA group in the Periodic Table.5–9 In 2004, the discovery of Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov based on the isolation and characterization of 2D-G for first time,10–12 which was just a single atomic C-layer, was very exciting. Subsequently, 2D-G gained attention from researchers due to its fascinating properties, e.g., remarkably conductivity, moderate mobility, and high mechanical strength.13–15 The discovery of single-atom, self-supporting stable nanosheets (NSs) was very unexpected because of the Mermin–Wagner theorem16,17 at that time. According to this theorem, a free standing 2D-crystal does not show long-range arrangement at different temperatures. However, later on, Nelson and Peliti18 (1987) theoretically proved that the harmonic combination between the in and out of plane lattice vibrations is very significant for membrane stability. Thus, the anharmonic coupling membrane became overall relatively flat, except that the membrane showed essential corrugations (ripples), which were shown via power law achievement of atomic-displacement association functions. The system remained 2D and was almost crystalline.19,20 Therefore, the story of the 2DM family started and confirmed from the discovery of 2D-G. The discovery of 2DMs did not stop only at normal metals, but continued through Periodic Table up to transition metal (TM)-based 2DMs. Most of them consist of two (MoS2, WSe2, etc.) or more elements (Mo2CTx, CrPS4, Bi2Sr2CaCu2Ox, etc.).21,22 Currently, single-layer (SL) and few-layer (FL) MoS2 represent a solid option as band gap (BG) 2D-layered materials. The more stable configuration of MoS2 is a layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), and the story of 2DMs was then further extended from graphene derivatives to other families/groups in the Periodic Table, e.g., Group-(III-VI) A.
The practical applications of 2D-G involve the isolation of one-atom thin NSs of carbon (C) from graphite, which is an ideal perspective to obtain 2D-Xenes, but researchers still consider the sample to be the 2D form of 2D-G, even when it is two, three, and more layers thick, which is called BL or FL 2D-G. The electronic nature of 2D-G demonstrates that it is a gapless semi-conductor (SC) with a mono-atomic honeycomb structure10 and displays Dirac cones19,23,24 at the Fermi-level of electrons.24–27 Dirac cones act like massless fermions, exhibiting outstanding properties, for instance, exceptionally elevated electron mobility,28 appearance of the quantum Hall effect (QHE),29 pseudo-magnetic effects, and Klein tunneling. Hence, it shows a wide range of applications, for example, optoelectronics,30 nano-electronics,31 nano-plasmonics, biosensors,32 Hall-effect sensors33 through the goal of drastic miniaturized devices. It conducts electricity/heat efficiently and is nearly transparent, and thus, is appropriate for the fabrication of transparent flexible electrodes.34–36 In fact, the gate modulation and extremely high mobility of Dirac fermions in 2D-G make it an excellent candidate for application in radio-frequency transistors and ultra-thin conductive electrodes, but unsuitable for ultra-fast logic applications. The most reasonable substitutes for 2D-G are other elements within same group (IVA) of the Periodic Table, since other elements within the same group have the same number of electrons. To date, the number of theoretically calculated and experimentally formed 2D-Xene materials of group-IVA, i.e., siblings of G besides 2D-G are silicene, germanene, and stanene.
However, the disadvantage of 2D-G is its gapless nature, which hinders its applications in some photonic and electronic devices, particularly in logic applications, which demand a suitably large on and off state ratio in transistor current. Therefore, either 2D-G BG modulation by BG engineering is required or exploring other potential 2DM Xenes are required with required properties because band engineering also has some limitations, such as all the C-atoms cannot be removed from 2D-G sheets. Binary 2DMs demonstrate outstanding flexibility for modification of their properties via stoichiometry manufacturing. However, it is hard to alter the BG in most binary 2DMs (e.g. TMDCs) since the BGs of these 2DMs are generally too big for application in optical devices. Accordingly, the inspiring discovery of 2D-G has encouraged researchers to explore other potential 2DM Xenes that can be manufactured on a large scale. If the abovementioned shortcomings are overcome by functionalization for 2D-G to act like a typical SC-material or finding alternatives and new 2DM Xenes as a complement for 2D-G to overcome its limitations, then a great industrial revolution will occur in the fabrication of nanodevices. Therefore, 2D-Xenes are comparatively ideal materials with BGs that can be easily tuned and intrinsically strong spin orbit coupling (SOC).37 Suitable BG modulation has potential significance for novel, nanosize electronic, optoelectronic and energy devices owing to achieving finite BGs, higher flexibility, nonexistence of dangling bonds and substantial resistance to shorter channel effects. Therefore, it is a very hot topic to discuss the discoveries of other 2DM Xenes with facile synthetic methods suitable for large scale production, their properties, and nanodevices level production.
The other significant properties that have caused 2DM-Xenes to attract attraction for application in a range of devices include magnetism,13,38 superconductivity,39 Rashba-type spin-splitting,40 and quantum spin Hall effect (QSHE).41 Across the Periodic Table, researchers have developed groups of 2DMs, where each family is shown by different colors in Fig. 1. Most of these 2DMs shown in Fig. 1 were theorized to exist before the “reawakening” of 2DMs due to the primary work on 2D-G, and current work in the area of 2DMs has formed the future of these atomically thin materials. The key elements in each group are thin analogues of 2D-G. Fig. 1(b) shows a timely update of the successful theoretical and/or experimentally predicted elemental 2DMs to date, in the post-2D-G period, to the best of our knowledge. Among the 2DMs, the research significance in monoelement-materials (2D-Xenes) has been rejuvenated in the last few decades, driven mainly by the exploration of atomic-sized materials beyond 2D-G, which exhibit novel and significant properties.
 Fig. 1  (a) 2DMs based on the periods in the Periodic Table, and crystal structure of 2D-tellurium (2D-Te). (b) Timeline of the experimentally formed current monoelemental 2DM Xenes, where “Th.” means theoretical. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley. 
Experimental recognition of non-G monoelement, 2D-analog materials, for instance, 2D-Si and phosphorene were the start of an ever-expanding list of the monoelemental material 2D-Xene family, which were stimulated or experimentally formed materials in atomic-size thin NS structures. Afterward, a similar investigations were also attempted for the neighboring groups of 2D-G, i.e. IIIA, VA and VIA. The others neighboring group (VA and VIA) in the periodic table, removed this barrier with a sizeable BG, which is highly necessary in logic electronics. Group-(IIIA–VIA) Xenes (X = B (borophene),43,44 C (G), Si (2D-Si),45–50 Ge (2D-Ge),37,51 Sn (stanene),45,48,52,53 P (phosphorene),32,54 As (arsenene),55 Sb (antimonene),56–65 Bi (bismuthene (2D-Bi)),66 Te (2D-Te)37,67) and Se (2D-Se) have been studied, which have a wide range of properties, most of which have not been discovered to date. Among them, group-IIIA (borophene (B)) acts like metallic materials, group-IVA 2D NS materials (G, silicene (Si), germanene (Ge), and stanene (Sn)) are semimetallic, group-VA elements (phosphorene (P), arsenene (As), antimonene (Sb), and bismuthene (Bi)) act like semiconductors (SCs) and group-VIA elements (tellurene (Te)) exhibit metallic and SC behavior, thus rendering them prospective materials for next-generation nanodevices. These monoelemental atomic-size 2DMs contain single atomic variants of the group-(IIIA–VIA) elements, the properties of which have already been verified by stimulation, for example, close to room temperature (RT) topological insulator (TI) in 2D-Bi, elevated electron-mobility in 2D-phosphorous and 2D-Si, and substantial Li-ion storage capacity in borophene. The isolation of these materials in the post-G era began using 2D-Si in 2010, with rapid development to experimental recognition and theoretical calculation of 15 of the 18 main groups elements existing as solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP).
The elemental 2DMs have potential as a new area of materials science together with possible applications and they offer ultimate thickness (t) scaling for nanoelectronics, which may significantly introduce electrostatic power and permit low power utilization. Group-IVA elements e.g., 2D-Si, germanene (2D-Ge), and stanene, which are considered as the cousins of G, i.e., unconventional Si and Ge 2D-allotropes having honeycomb arrangement, present tantalizing prospects to achieve superior efficiency with direct compatibility with Si-technology. Specifically, 2D-Si, 2D-Ge, and stanene, made of Si, Ge, and Sn, respectively, probable form a buckled configuration, rather than a flat honeycomb (sp2) lattice due to the preferential sp3 bonding rather than sp2 bonding. Their strong SOC causes a sizable BG compared to the zero gaps in 2D-G, making them well suited for flexible electronics. This novel area of 2DMs has just begun and the extent of its probable properties and large scale device applications still remain mostly unexploited. It should be noted that most 2DMs have been rediscovered and that modern research is an extension of work in already performed in this field decades ago. In the 1960s,68 graphite oxide was formed, SL/FL MoS2 was discovered a few decades ago69,70 and black phosphorus (BP) was initially formed in 1914.70 Additionally, each 2DM, especially 2D-Xenes have their own advantages and limitations based on their fabrication methods, properties, and nanodevice applications. In this review, we mainly focus on group-VIA elements. Group-IVA 2D materials are non-layered materials, for instance Te and Se are exfoliated from bulk materials because of their particular chain configuration. The 2D-Xene non-layered materials exhibit different novel properties, such as dangling bonds, novel structural distortion, verifiable BGs, and improved carrier mobility. The group-VIA elements have a valence arrangement of ns2np4, and the corresponding very stable configurations demonstrate efficient transformations from di-atomic molecules (O) via chains, rings, and helices (S, Se, and Te) to cubic lattice in one element (Po). To date, the existing 15-elemental main-group 2DMs theoretically studied have been experimentally verified by a range of fascinating applications, with a few experimentally synthesized and applied in devices. Through the exploration of 2DMs, some are envisaged as topological insulators (TIs), a new quantum state of matter. Typically, TIs are classified as to exhibit SOC. Because it is momentum dependent, SOC has diverse effects on different spins, resulting in the spin-momentum locking property (helicity) of the surface periphery.
The Group-VIA Te element is a chalcogen elements and its chemical structure is similar to that of selenium (Se) and sulfur (S).71 The Te element is found in the Earth's crust, which is analogous to platinum (Pt); however, Te element is very abundant in nature. The Te element has attractive potential characteristics, e.g., semi-conducting, photo-conductive, thermo-electric, topological, and acoustic-optic properties, and thus can be applied in different opto-electronics devices such as sensors and energy technology nanodevices. The very stable configuration of the Te element at atmospheric temperature and pressure (ATP) is a trigonal structure comprised of helical chains along the c-axis, and every atom has covalent bonds with two other adjacent atoms in a chain, but the bonding in the inter-chains is comparatively weak. This intrinsic anisotropic composition makes it a perfect candidate for the formation of one-dimensional (1D) nanosize structures. For example, 1D-Te nano-crystals, Te-nanotubes (Te-NTs), nano-rods, nanowires, and nano-belts, can be formed via special methods. However, despite the strong trend of its development into a 1D nano-architecture, it is also feasible for the Te element to form 2D-configurations. Currently, hexagonal-Te (h-Te) nano-plates were effectively formed on mica-NSs with good flexibility via van der Waals epitaxy (vdWE). Although, the h-Te nano-plates have a thickness (t) ≈32 nm, it is different from thin atomic-size 2D-crystals. However, the fabrication of a SL of 2D-Te was attempted on the surface of CdTe (111) by applying the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) technique, but the crystal structure of SL 2D-Te could not be obtained due to the strong covalent bonding in the adsorbed Te-atoms and substrate. Thus, whether the 2D-SL configuration can be able to recognize for all members in the class of chalcogenides, as achieved in the C-group and pnictogenides, is still an open question.72
The Te element is a central part of numerous functional materials such as tellurides for various common technological applications, for example, photovoltaics, thermoelectric devices, and infrared (IR) imaging. Bulk Te is composed of a trigonal configuration, where each helical Te-atom chain is stacked and weakly joined and spirals around the [0001] axes direction at the center and corners of the h (hexagonal)-elementary cell. Every Te atom forms a covalent bond with two other adjacent atoms along a similar chain. Trigonal Se (t-Se) is a 1D-like elemental SC material, wherein the Se atoms are covalently bonded in a spiral chain along the c-axis with two adjacent atoms rotated by 120°. These atomic chains are stacked together in the radical direction via vdW interactions to for a hexagonal arrangement. t-Se has gain wide interest because of its fascinating properties, for example, high photoconductivity, piezoelectricity, thermoelectricity and nonlinear optical response. Its high photoconductivity makes it a potential candidate for use in highly efficient solar cells and optoelectronic devices.73–75 Because of its anisotropic chain structure, Se tends to for 1D structures, for example, nanowires, nanotubes and nano-belts. These 1D structures possess a high proportion of peripheries, causing their bulk to show poor electrical conductivity due to local states and contacts, and thus electrical noise becomes serious with a decrease in size, as explained by Hooge's rule.76,77 Thus, for the utilization of Se in highly efficient electronic and opto-electronic devices, it will be practical to extend its nanostructures to 2D structures.
The 2D group-VI materials can be differentiated from other 2D SCs (e.g., TMDs and BP) due to their superior electrical properties. The superior predicted carrier mobility of 2D group-VI materials supports their applications in device. In comparison to other elemental 2D materials such as BP, 2D-Se and 2D-Te have an admirable stability. Some device applications have been studied with 2D group-VI materials, revealing good activity and indicating the possibility of applying 2D group-VI materials in upcoming nanoelectronics. Since Se and Te possess the same crystal structure, it can be effectively combined in a 2D-Te structure using a substrate-free solution method. 2DMs obtained from 1D vdW materials such as 2D-Se NSs should have wide applications in electronic and opto-electronic devices. Among the different types of structures/forms of the group-VIA family, here we are mainly interested in the 2D-Xene form of the group-VIA elements, especially the recently discovered 2D-Te and 2D-Se monoelement NSs.72 Therefore, in this topical review, we will explain different theoretical and experimental studies based on potential synthesis methods to form group-VIA Xenes, offer a brief summary of the major results regarding their properties, both that obtained from theoretical calculations and experimental investigations, and finally we will discuss the applications of the group-VIA 2D-Xenes discovered to date. Moreover, we present some fundamentally oriented applications in different nano-devices from the lab to industrial level in the near future with some good future suggestions. Thus, in next sections we will discuss in detail the synthetic methods, properties, applications, challenges, and future suggestions of group-VIA 2D-Xenes, which will make it easy for researchers to understand them, and hence further boost the research on group-VIA 2D-Xenes and their industrial applications.
2. General properties of group-VIA 2D-Xenes
Only a few investigations have been performed on group-VIA elemental 2DMs. However, there is increasing research interest based on the theoretically studied potential properties of group-IVA elements, especially thin-film tellurium. Generally, the bulk configurations of group-VIA elements consist of 0D rings and 1D chains with just two-fold coordination bonding. Therefore, it is necessary to solve their 2D structure, similar to group III–V elements. Comparable to their 3D-analogs, all the investigated monoelemental group-VIA 2DM Xenes (2D-Te and 2D-Se), which have been theoretically and/or experimentally studied, have allotropes of differing crystal lattices.71 2D-Te is a promising member of the group-VIA 2D-Xene family based on a few experimental and theoretical studies, while 2D-Se has also been theoretically and experimentally demonstrated. After decades of development, numerous group-VIA 2D-Xene materials have been studied, and their chemical, physical, electronic, magnetic, and thermal properties examined, which are adaptable and material dependent, creating materials for specific advanced nanodevices applications. Here, we will explore the properties of the group-VIA 2D-Xenes (2D-Te, and 2D-Se) at 300 K obtained from DFT and experimental-based results, which will facilitate the further development/investigation of facile synthetic techniques and also easily characterize a new variety of group-VIA 2D-Xene materials with fascinating potential device applications. We will also discuss the effects of strain, electric field, doping concentration, and chemical functionalization on the physical properties to adjust the BG toward enabling novel and electrifying uses.
2.1. Crystal structure of group-VI Xenes
The categorization of materials based on their crystal structure is very important to determine most of their expected properties, and hence based on their calculated/predicted properties, study their fascinating future nanodevice applications.78–83 The group-VIA members, e.g., Te, has a trigonal configuration with intrinsic anisotropy, and is multi-functional, for example, semiconducting, photoconductive, thermoelectric, and piezoelectric, for application in electronics, sensors, opto-electronics, energy devices, etc. Therefore, here we will discuss the possible crystal configuration of the group-VIA Xene crystal (2D-Te, and 2D-Se). Fig. 2(a) shows the theoretically calculated three-monolayer (ML) Se structures, namely the 1T-MoS2-like structure (t-Se), tiled helical-chain structure (c-Se), and square structure (s-Se).84 The t-Se phase has a 1T-MoS2-like sandwich structure, where each layer has three layers of Se-atoms, which is relatively different from the majority of elemental 2D materials.85,86 The second structure is the c-Se phase, which is fabricated by a series of helical Se-chains and arranged parallel in a plane. The monoclinic s-Se unit cell has just two atoms in its square lattice, in which one atom is located at the corner and other one off-center toward the corner. The theoretical calculation of their electronic structures shows that both t-Se and c-Se are indirect-bandgap (BG) SCs, while s-Se shows a semimetal nature. The lowest energy formation for c-Se shows that it is the most stable phase and it shares a comparable helical-chain arrangement with bulk Se.
 Fig. 2  (a) Scheme showing the top/side views of three 2D-Se structures: 1T-MoS2-analogue structure (t-Se), tiled helical-chain structure (c-Se), and square structure (s-Se).84 (b) α-Te crystal structure. (c) β-Te top/side views of its crystal configuration. (d) γ-Te top/side views of its crystal structure. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier. 
As can be seen from the optimized crystal parameters values, which are mentioned in Table 1, even though the theoretical values showed thermodynamic durability with these three crystal phases, the experimental-based 2D-Se mostly possesses the c-Se crystal configuration.88,89 Similarly, Qiao et al. theoretically studied the crystal phases of 2D Te, which are the α- β- and γ-phase.90 Under normal conditions, the α-phase Te structure, as shown in Fig. 2(b), is the most stable phase due to is FL thickness, which was also prepared via an experimental approach.91 FL Te has a similar trigonal structure as bulk Te, where each helical chain is covalently bound to Te-atoms, which are arranged parallel and oriented along the [001] direction. When its thickness is reduced to ML, the α-phase will convert into a more stable phase, i.e., the β-phase (Fig. 2(c)), where the Te-helical chain approaches an adjacent chain and form an additional mirror symmetry. This different ML phase was experimentally prepared via epitaxial ML Te on pyrolytic graphite (HOPG). The topographic analysis indicated its in-plane lattice reliably with the calculated β-phase.92 The γ-phase Te, as shown in Fig. 2(d), is analogous to the 1T-MoS2 phase. It is predictable to transfer from the α-phase to a lower energy when the number of Te-atoms in each chain is three, six, or nine. Even though the α-phase is very stable independent of the ML thickness, the minor energy difference among the 3 crystal phases and their geometrical resemblance may result in reversible phase transitions of α-β or α-γ via strain or doping engineering.87 The experimentally synthesized group-VI elemental 2D materials with stable phases are c-Se and α-Te, both of which have helical chains.93 These chains of Se or Te atoms stack together through weak bonding to form 2D NSs and 3D bulk. The weak inter-chain interactions in the crystal arrangement has 2 directions, which is very different from conventional 2D materials with weak interlayer interaction.94 The structure anisotropy of Se and Te gives them a strong trend toward 1D growth or exfoliation, which brings some difficulties in the fabrication of group-VI 2D materials.93 Additionally, there is limited research on the phase transitions in other c-Se and α-Te crystal phases.
Table 1 DFT-TS-calculated lattice constants, bond size, and formation energy, Ef, of 2D-Se. The structural and energy properties of bulk-Se are also listed for reference




Material
Lattice constant (Å)
Bond length (Å)
Formation energy Ef = E2D − Ebulk (eV)




Where, E2D is the total energy per atom of 2D-Se and Ebulk is the energy per atom of bulk-Se.




T–Se

a = b = 3.74
2.67
0.236


C–Se

a = 4.99

d1 = 2.40
0.122



b = 4.13

d2 = 2.37


S–Se

a = b = 3.65

d1 = 2.40
0.264



d2 = 2.71


Bulk-Se

a = b = 4.11
2.46
0



c = 5.16




The material properties of mono-element group-VIA Xenes (2D-Te and 2D-Se) are not only determined by their chemical structure, but are also related to their allotropes. Various 2D-allotropic forms of the group-VIA family have been suggested (here, Te and Se elements), including their atom bulk-like helical pattern of covalent bonding spiraling along the c-axis.95 Die to their intrinsic structural anisotropy, the previously described formation techniques mainly confirm the 1D-Te nanosize structures. On the other hand, less is known regarding their 2D nanosize structures, synthetic methods, properties and applications.42 Therefore, Xian et al. reported a theoretical study about 2D-Te allotropes96,97 and predicted analogous potential 2D-configurations with compelling nature and varying stability. They found that the most stable low-dimension allotrope is the 1D-helical chain for both Te and Se; however, a few accurate 2D-structures were also calculated to be achievable for example, “rectangular 2D-Te” and “square 2D-Te” (Fig. 3). The calculated particular cohesive energies were about 0.06 eV per atom and 0.13 eV per atom, which are superior to the 1D-chains.
 Fig. 3  (a) Allotropes of group-VIA elemental 2DMs. Adopted with permission.42 Copyright YY, publisher, 2D-Te top and side views structures in (b) α-Te, (c) β-Te, and (d) γ-Te. (e) Surface Brillouin zones (BZs) of the α (or γ) and β-phases. This figure was adapted/reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the American Physical Society. 
The experimental fabrication of ultrathin Te-films by applying the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and physical vapour deposition (PVD) techniques showed α-type stacking together with the existence of a range of new polymorphs.98 Similar to other monoelemental 2DMs, “square” 2D-Se and 2D-Te were suggested to be more stable in their non-planar (buckled) pattern. Additionally, these meta-stable phases were suggested to be sufficiently active probably due to their stabilization by the proper epitaxially matched substrates. For example, Au. Zhu et al. applied a particle swarm optimization technique and first-principles DFT simulations to the 2D-Te crystal structure. They calculated that there are three potential 2D re-constructions of the Te-lattice at “magic t”, N = 3, 6, 9, 12, and 15 atoms, a stable h α-type, metastable rectangular β-type, and a metastable h γ-type modernization (Fig. 3). For this “magic” t aspect in multi-valent Te, the atoms in the center show metallic, σ-bonding nature, and the outer two atoms bonded toward the centre atom similar to a metal–ligand interaction.42
DFT calculations indicate that 2D-Te exists in four allotropic phases, i.e. α-Te (1T-MoS2-like), β-Te (tetragonal phase), γ-Te (H-MoS2-like) and square-Te (square phase).37,100 The α-phase is very stable, while the β- and γ-phases are metastable phases. More specifically, the results reported by Zhili Zhu et al.99 specified a new category of SL 2D-Te, consisting of metalloid Te element, including stable α-Te (1T-MoS2-like), metastable tetragonal (β-Te), and γ-Te (2H-MoS2-like) compositions. The basic development system was intrinsically embedded in multivalent Te, in which the central Te layer behaves like a metal (e.g., Mo), and the two outer layers like a SC (e.g., S). Recently, the proposed allotropes of 2D-Se indicate that C–Se, a smooth 1D-chain configuration, has ferroelectric property together with natural in-plane ferroelectric polarization of ∼2.68 × 10−10 C m−1 per layer.42 They also illustrated that α-Te instinctively acquired by magic t dividable through three layers was reduced beside the [001] trigonal configuration of the bulk-Te. The α- and β-Te forms have higher electron and hole mobilities compared to that of MoS2. Additionally, they also presented initial but realistic experimental-based proof for the layering of Te on HOPG substrates, which showed the significance of multi-valency in the layering form of Se. These results efficiently extend the realm of 2DMs to the group-VIA elements.99Fig. 3(b–d) show the optimized structures of the SL 2D-Te, with the three diverse allotropes indicated by α-, β-, and γ-Te, respectively. The α- or γ-Te unit cell is hexagonal, and it is rectangle for β-Te, as can be seen by the red parallelogram showing the unit cell structures for (α-Te/γ-Te hexagonal, β-Te, and rectangular) together with the electron density of each unit cell.
Further progress is anticipated to be achieved by researchers investigating the basic properties of 2D-Te and 2D-Se to implement their novel devices applications. A current theoretical study suggested that under ordinary equilibrium conditions,71 the α-phase obtained from the bulk trigonal configuration is a very stable FL 2D-Te phase,101 and the tetragonal β-phase is very stable for SL 2D-Te because of the structural relaxation.102 Conversely, experimental findings for the synthesis of atomic-size 2D-Te give fascinating outcomes. The vdWE-based, SL Te-film formed by Chen and colleagues on HOPG substrates103 contain a crystal configuration and in-plane lattice equivalent to that of the predicted β-phase.102 Moreover, Huang and co-authors104 studied vdWE SL Te-films grown on 2D-G layers, exhibiting a large lattice of 4.42–5.93 Å, which are very dependent on the bulk trigonal arrangement, where parallel arranged Te helical-chains smoothly lie in the substrate plane. The structure classification from the research by Wu and co-authors105 verified that these solution-based fabricated, free-standing FL 2D-Te crystals possess a bulk trigonal formation. This is consistent with the results of the simulations performed by Ji and co-workers, which showed that the α-phase resulting from the bulk trigonal configuration is a very stable phase of FL 2D-Te.101
The structural divergence seen in 2D-Te resulting from different synthetic methods indicate that the complicated underlying mechanisms of these methods drive the creation of SL and FL 2D-Te structures, and thus requires more research to advance the theoretical study and experimental exploration of thin atomic-size 2D-Te, for example, the role of synthesis kinetics in its basic structure phase alteration. Furthermore, the substrate probably plays a significant role in the structure and properties of 2D-Te.71 The α- and β-phase 2D-Te band structures indicate that α- and β-2D-Te are SC, while the γ-phase is metallic in nature. The structural factors (a, b = lattice constants, d = bond length (BL), and dz = interval distance in Te-layers), cohesive energy “Ec” and charge transfer the ΔQ of each optimized configuration are presented in Table 2.71 It is estimated that the fascinating, flexible material nature and technological application of 2D-Te and 2D-Se will instigate various stimulating prospects in their basic study and industrial use.71Table 3 shows the novel forms of group VI 2D-Xenes.
Table 2 Calculated lattice parameters (a, b), bond length (D), internal distance between the upper and lower layers (dz), cohesive energy (per unit formula) (Ecoh) and band gap for the monolayer in the α-phase of 2D-Se and 2D-Te based on the PBE level of theory and HSE06 hybrid calculation (Luz Ramírez-Montes)106




Crystal

a, b (Å)

D (Å)

d

z
 (Å)

E
coh (eV per atom)
PBE (eV)
HSE06 (eV)




α-Se

a = b = 3.72
2.66
3.15
2.72
0.75
0.78 (0.76)a


β-Se

a = 3.72, b = 4.92
3.38–2.65
1.77
2.77






γ-Se

a = b = 3.59
2.71
3.50
2.46






α-Te
4.15 (4.15)a
3.02 (3.03)a
3.66 (3.67)a
2.60 (2.62)a
1.13
1.10 (1.16)a


β-Te
4.17–4.59 (4.17–4.59)a
3.02–2.76 (3.02–2.76)a
2.16 (2.16)a
2.55 (2.56)a






γ-Te
3.92 (3.92)a
3.08 (3.08)a
4.16 (4.16)a
2.46 (2.46)a








Table 3 Calculated structural parameters, Ecoh and (a, b and d) for the lowest energy freestanding structures of 2D-Se and 2D-Te99,100




Structure

a


b (Å)

d (Å)

E
coh (eV per atom)




Rings Se
8.80
—
1.74
−2.76


Chains Se
4.01
4.98
1.76
−2.78


Square Se
3.65
—
0.77
−2.65


Rectangular Te
4.17
5.49
2.16
−2.57


Square Te
4.08
—
0.92
−2.51




In summary, the novel 2D configurations of Se and Te have very attractive electronic configurations through the two-gap semi-Dirac cones in the square BZ, which are 2D TIs. The 2D-Se and 2D-Te layer-dependent properties in the FL form of the trigonal Te geometry are similar to that of their bulk. When 2D-Se and 2D-Te are ML, they show α- β- and γ-phases depending on the thermodynamic stability of the system.107 2D-Se and 2D-Te have a non-layered structure in the α- β- and γ-phases and become layered when they have a square crystal structure.100 Thus, these fascinating properties make them an attractive platform for discovering extraordinary phenomena originating from semi-Dirac dispersions and potential candidates for 2D electronic and spintronic applications. Finally, as an example using Te on an Au(100) substrate, it has been established that it can be grown on appropriate substrates with a square symmetry. The structure discrepancy indicates complex structure formation mechanisms and transition kinetics, which are indispensable for the preparation and experimental exploration of other crystal configurations.
2.2. Electronic structure and optical response of group-VIA 2D-Xenes
Generally, the properties of synthesized materials mainly rely on the protocols used.71 Alternatively, here, the experimental characterization-based and theoretical simulation-based properties of 2D-Xenese will be discussed. These theoretically based experimentally observed properties of group VIA 2D-Xenes will also assist in achieving the required properties based on the suitable applied synthetic conditions for the investigation of novel fabricated group VIA 2D-Xene nanodevice applications.42 The BGs in nanosized materials play an essential part in their optoelectronic properties, and hence their possible applications. Similar to varying the quantity of SOC in semimetals, numerous methods have been applied for this purpose by means of theoretical simulations, which in all cases have been confirmed to modulate (or open) the BG of monoelemental 2DMs. In group-VIA elements, the α- and β-2D-Te were calculated to have a nearly direct BG of 0.75 and 1.47 eV, respectively. Experimentally, SLs of 2D-Te with helical chains (<0001>) aligned beside the substrate plane exhibited a BG as large as ≈1 eV (vs. 0.34 eV in bulk) by STS, that is, a linearly reduced bulk value with an increase in the Te t.108 This type of action opens the possibility for t-dependent optical BG tuning from the IR to near-IR (NIR) region.42,71 The electronic band structure in SL and FL 2D-Te has been currently discovered by a range of theoretical methods, for instance, DFT.
Ji and co-workers reported an indirect BG of 1.17 eV for BL 2D-Te and predicted a decrease in BG by enlarging the number of layers/t in FL 2D-Te.101 When the number of layers of 2D-Te was increased, the valence band maximum (VBM) significantly changed from −4.98 to −4.35 eV, approximately 3× the conduction band maximum (CBM). These results show the creation of p-type contact in FL 2D-Te with mainly metal electrodes. This is reliable with the device nature of FETs fabricated via solution-based developed 2D-Te.105 Fascinatingly, the band structures of FL 2D-Te were expected to contain a four-fold valley degeneracy in the first BZ for the VB, probably because of (pseudo) spin non-degeneracy due to the strong SOC in Te.101 This “camel back” formed VB generally originates in the TIs with band inversion and plays a major role in the enhancement of thermo-electrics. Through hybrid DFT simulations, Zhu and co-workers calculated that SL α-and β-2D-Te exhibited indirect BGs of 1.15 and 1.79 eV, respectively.102 The band structures and BGs for SL and FL 2D-Te were also experimentally investigated. Huang and co-authors reported a gap of 0.92 eV for epitaxial SL 2D-Te on 2D-G and a t-dependent BG, in agreement with theoretical calculations.71,101,102,109
Jaspreet Singh and co-workers110 reported that α-Te and α-Se both have indirect BG SCs with the calculated BG of 0.70 eV and 0.76 eV, respectively, at the GGA-PBE level of theory (Fig. 4). The HSE06 hybrid functional-based calculated BGs were 1.16 eV and 1.11 eV, respectively.111 The smaller BG of α-Te compared to that of α-Se is contributed from the smaller electronegativity and large size and of Te, resulting in a wide VB near the Fermi level. The calculated α-Se and α-Te work functions are 5.06 eV and 4.67 eV, respectively. The partial density of states (PDOS) indicates that near the Fermi level states, the Se/Te atom p-orbitals mainly participate, which have a coordination number of three. Between the in-plane (px, py) and out-of-plane (pz) orbitals atoms, there is strong hybridization with the coordination number of ‘six’, which is obvious in the VB region (Fig. 4(a and b)).
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Electronic band structure of monolayer α-Se and α-Te and respective PDOS. Indirect BG transition and BG values are also provided. In the PDOS, ‘1’ and ‘2’ indicate the contribution from the atoms with the coordination number of ‘six’ and ‘three’, respectively. (c) Optical absorbance and (d) Electron energy loss spectra of monolayer α-Se and α-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The α-Te and α-Se optical absorbance calculation showed that the absorption spectrum peaks are closely related to the respective interband transition in the electronic band structure. The optical absorbance can be gained from the imaginary dielectric (ε2) by applying the following relation:112 (ω) = /cLε2(ω)(1)where L is the supercell length along the z-direction. In the absorption spectra, the absorption edge at ≈0.7 eV is consistent with the BG of α-Te and α-Se (Fig. 4(c)). In the UV–visible region, a strong absorption is illustrated at 1.6 eV (1.4 eV) and 2.4 eV (2.2 eV) for α-Te (α-Se). The absorption spectra are consistent with the GW + BSE calculations method.113 The value of the static dielectric constant (εs) was calculated to be εs = ε1(0) to be 11.6 and 13.9 for α-Se and α-Te, respectively, which is higher compared to that of MX2 (M = W, Mo, X = S, Te, Se) monolayers.114 This is because of the smaller BG of α-Se and α-Te than that of MX2 monolayers and is consistent with two-band model for SCs.115 The electron energy loss spectrum (EELS) can also be calculated by applying eqn (2): {−1/(ω)} = ε2(ω)/ε21(ω) + ε22(ω)(2)where ε2 and ε1 are the imaginary and real parts of the dielectric function.
In the EELS, the ML material peaks show plasmonic features (electrons excitation). The plasmon frequencies are observed at 6.1 eV (4.8 eV), 7.6 eV (6.2 eV), and 11.0 eV (9.0 eV) for α-Se (α-Te) (Fig. 4(d)). Low energy plasmonic features may be contributed from the excitation of π-electrons, while the higher energy plasmonic features are from both the σ- and π-electrons in MLs. The smaller SL BG observed is because of the finite density of states under 2D-G close to the Fermi level. STM mapping of the real space band summary demonstrated that epitaxial SL and FL 2D-Te were p-type SCs with Fermi levels positioned underneath the center of the BG.104 Comparable BG evolutions were also described for epitaxial FL 2D-Te on a HOPG substrate. Additionally, t is dependent on the BG from the MIR to red range, which is of enormous importance to the numerous talented nanodevices in the MIR and terahertz use. 2D-Te was also expected to have a very large RT carrier mobility in the range of 102 to 103 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is much bigger than that of the TMDCs and the FL-BP.116 Electrical analysis of a FL 2D-Te transistor yielded “hole” mobilities consistent with the expected ranges. This large RT mobility in 2D-Te is beneficial for manufacturing energy efficient, high speed electronic devices. For the carrier mobility and electronic transport of 2D-Te, anisotropy was supposed considering its structural anisotropy, explaining the wide degree of relations in the Te-chain (weak, vdWs) and the along chain (strong, covalent) directions. However, the experimental results only showed a small degree of anisotropy (1.13) for FL 2D-Te. This surprising weak anisotropy in electronic transfer motivates interest on in-depth knowledge on the character of the inter chain connections in 2D-Te. Current simulations suggested that the Te electron lone pair delocalization decreases the effective mass and alters the potential in the inter-chain region, thus boosting electron transport across the chains and inter-chain contacts. Electrons lone-pairs were delocalized through density depletion in their original location and density enrichment in the inter chain area, which includes “metallic bond” or “quasi-bonding like covalent” nature in the inter chain contact.101 This can also be known through the comparatively weak attraction of the nucleus and multi-valence character of Te, which is a metalloid element, through its double nature of metal and nonmetal.71,116
Electronic properties are governed by the BGs and their SOC. For the group-VIA 2D-Xene elements, i.e., 2D-Te, the electronic band structure in ML and FL was recently investigated via a range of theoretical methods, for instance, DFT.117,118 For BL 2D-Te, an indirect BG (1.17 eV) and reduction in BG are expected when 2D-Te layer t increased to FL. Once the 2D-Xene Te-layer number increases, the VBM is considerably altered from 4.98 to −4.35 eV, approximately three times that of CBM, which suggests the arrangement of a p-type contact among the FL 2D-Te for the majority of metal electrodes. This is in accordance with the characteristics of FET devices synthesized from solution-based formed 2D-Te. The FL 2D-Te band structures indicate that the first BZ of the VB contains four-fold valley degeneracy because of the spin non-degeneracy generated from the strong SOP in Te. These “camel back” shape VB are generally observed in TIs. Hybrid DFT-based calculations119 showed that ML α-and β-2D-Te possess indirect BGs of about 1.15 and 1.79 eV, respectively. They have tunable anisotropic Dirac cones, which exhibit three phases beneath different strains, i.e., planar square (PS), buckled square (BS) phase, and buckled rectangular (BR) phase.120 The theoretically calculated buckled square lattice, square 2D-Se, and 2D-Te show anisotropic Dirac-cone dispersions close to the Fermi level at P1 along the Γμ1 direction, where SOC causes opening of the BG of ≈0.1 eV, which is comparable to 2D-Se. These features are guidelines for 2D-TIs. The band topology of TIs, which was also studied through a nonzero Z2 invariant, was superior to that in both square systems. Moreover, the gap ≈0.1 eV in the square 2D-Se and 2D-Te polymorphs was sufficient to understand QSHE at RT, a finding that can develop the interesting area of spintronics and electronics.42 For epitaxial FL 2D-Te on a HOPG substrate, the BG evolution was also reported.92
Additionally, the t-dependent BG from the mid-IR (MIR) to red range is of significant importance in numerous promising technological devices for MIR and terahertz use.42 2D-Te was also predicted to possess extraordinary huge RT carrier mobilities in the range of 100 to 1000 of cm2 V−1 s−1, much larger compared to that of 2D-TMDCs sand FL-BP. The electrical characterization of FL 2D-Te transistor-based devices yielded reliable hole mobilities in the proposed ranges. The large RT-mobility in 2D-Te Xenes make them suitable for manufacturing energy efficient and high speed electronics. Considering the 2D-Te Xene structure anisotropy, the electronic and carrier mobility transport was predictable. In contrast, FL 2D-Te experimentally revealed just a small degree of anisotropy (1.13).121 In 2D-Te, this unanticipated weak anisotropy for electronic transport instigates an additional understanding of the inter-chain interactions. Electrons lone pairs were also delocalized through density depletion in their original positions and improvement of inter-chain region density, which included “covalent-like quasi-bonding” or “metallic bonding” characteristics in an inter-chain interface. This was also recognized through their multi-valence nature and relatively weak nucleus attraction for Te, which is a metalloid element with metal and nonmetal characteristics.120
Dan Wang et al.122 theoretically studied 2D Se NSs, and their research showed that the monolayer α-Se exhibits outstanding bipolar conductivity, having a slightly higher hole mobility near to that of graphene, and ML β-Se showed a robust in-plane spontaneous electric polarization of 13.46 μC cm−2 and polarization reversing barrier of 422 meV per cell. These results demonstrate that 2D-Se is a potential material for application in high speed electronic devices and widen the 2D ferroelectric material family, particularly the elemental ferroelectric material family. Fig. 5(a and b) show the α- and β-Se band structures acquired from the PBE level of theory, respectively. α- and β-Se were shown to be SC in nature, with indirect BGs. The calculated BGs of the α- and β-Se are 0.70 and 1.76 eV, respectively, which are more probably owing to semi local PBE error. Similarly, hybrid DFT calculations with the HSE06 hybrid functional showed (Fig. 5(c)) that the BGs of α- and β-Se increased to 1.11 and 2.64 eV, respectively. The SOC effects originate from the slight splitting of the energy bands compared two calculations carried out with and without SOC. The calculated HSE + SOC BG of α-Se became 1.06 eV, which is close to that of Si, and β-Se became 2.53 eV, which is close to that of ZnSe.123 Carrier mobility is significant parameter to calculate the conductivity of SCs. It governs the conductivity of SC materials and influences the working speed of electronic devices. Fig. 5(d) shows a comparison between the electron and hole mobility of 2D Se with single crystal Se124 and some conventional 2DMs, for example 2D Te,99 graphene,125 silicene,126 phosphorene,127 SL MoS2,128 SnS2, and SnSe2.129 This clearly shows that SL α-Se has high electron and hole mobility (μe = 6.97 × 103, and μh = 9.48 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1), then α-Te (μe = 2.09 × 103, and μh = 1.76 × 103 cm2 V−1 s−1),99 which to some extent is lower than that of graphene.122
 Fig. 5  Band structures of (a) α-Se and (b) β-Se gained from the PBE level of theory without (black solid) and with (red dashed) SOC. (c) BGs gained from PBE (PBE + SOC) and HSE (HSE + SOC) calculations, as shown with blue and red bars, respectively. (d) Comparison of the carrier mobilities. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley. 
2.3. Isotropic and anisotropic properties of group-VIA 2D-Xenes71
The recent simulation-based study proposed that a comparable isotropic development for light absorption in FL 2D-Te, presenting a good broadband absorbance, approximately twice to thrice that of BP for perpendicular incidental light linearly polarized in two major in-plane orders. Fascinatingly, the calculated results also demonstrated layer-dependent absorbance, where the absorption efficiency considerably increased with a decrease in the t of FL 2D-Te.101 This idea was because of the t relying on the interlayer hybridization of electronic structure and dispersion of band that turn into greater form as the layer t increases. This calculated elevated, isotropic optical absorbance through good mobility proposes the ability of 2D-Te to be used in photonics and opto-electronics. The basic light and matter interaction in 2DMs Xenes can be investigate and understood by applying spectroscopy techniques, for example, Raman scattering. Recently,130 RT-based angle-resolved polarized Raman spectroscopy showed solution-formed 2D-Te crystals with a specific t, and the significant t-dependent variations in the Raman vibrational modes were calculated (Fig. 6(a)). Specifically, thick 2D-Te (∼20.50 nm) show three Raman-active modes reliably by means of the earlier results in bulk and nano-structured Te, signifying its “bulk” symmetric uniqueness despite its 2D-structure. In 2D-Te crystals, in the “intermediate” t range of 9.1–20.5 nm, the E1 longitudinal (LO) phonon mode appears in the Raman spectra since the deforming ability of the 2D-Te lattice is boosted and the electro-optic result becomes weaker. For 2D-Te, although t decreases more up to FL (<9.1 nm), degeneracy in the E1 transverse (TO) phonons and LO phonons occurs with peak expansion, which may be due to the t-dependent intra-chain atomic dislocation, electronic band configuration modification, and symmetry tasks for all the bands. The major peak-shift can be observed in the Raman spectrum, e.g., blue-shifts in the A1 and E2 modes, while the 2D-Te t is reduced, which is possibly recognized as improved interlayer contacts with a decrease in t. This type of a strange achievement was probably due to the distinctive chiral-chain configuration of 2D-Te. The impact of Raman measurements in nano-belt like 2D-Te was additionally examined, demonstrating anisotropic strain in two major in-plane crystal directions (Fig. 6(b)).130 The Raman intensity based on theoretical calculations of bi-layer 2D-Te as a function of vibration frequency was studied,101 which showed splitting and inconsistent shifting in the frequency, which is consistent with the experimental results. Similarly, in the study by Qin et al., 2D-Se FL nanosheet showed a strong in-plane anisotropic characteristic, which was observed from angle-resolved Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 6(c)).88
 Fig. 6  (a) Raman spectra with variable t. (b) Raman spectra of 2D-Te with tensile and compressive c-axis strains. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Angle-resolved Raman spectra for the evolution of FL Se nanosheets with angles between the crystal direction and incident laser polarization. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) Angle-resolved Raman spectra for FL Se nanosheets evolution with angles between crystal direction and incident laser polarization. 
2.4. Magneto-transport properties of group-VIA Xenes
In 2D-materials, the magnetic effect study is different compared to that for bulk materials. Specifically, their transition temperature relies on the spin dimension (n). 2D-materials have different magnetic properties than that of their bulk. The long range spin order is limited by the theoretical state, where the spontaneous symmetry breaking necessary for magnetism is not obtainable in isotropic 2D-magnetic materials. This is because spin waves have finite DOS and are gapless, and hence easy to excite, annihilating magnetic order. Consequently, external magnetocrystalline anisotropy for instance, an external magnetic field is necessary for 2D with n = 3 to show magnetism.
2D-materials showing the QSHI or TI effect are interesting because they are conductors from the helical edges and insulators from the interior. Hence, these materials do not suffer from scattering effects like bulk materials and an external magnetic field is not required. In real 2D-systems that can support QSHI at RT, edge conduction needs to be obtained without any effect from the bulk. Salma Khatun et al.131 reported that the high BG of 0.94 eV for 2D-Te and its quasi p-type nature serve as an RT QSHI phase. In contrast, the inner part of 2D-Te MLs show VB and CB energies, and gapless states with a Dirac point observed along the edges. Near the edges, the topologically protected periphery extends inwards. This transition from gapless to a gap region opens the gap towards inside, which is gradual not sudden. These nontrivial band-structures in α-Te compared to bulk Te crystals are due to the shift in the Raman active modes vs. built-in strains when exfoliated to 2D-Te nanoflakes. For 2D-Te, the transient conductance (dI/dV) was recorded using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) in the interior and periphery to investigate the gapped and metallic states, respectively. The “V-shaped” spectrum with states filling in the bulk gap shows a conductive edge channel Fig. 7. The STM topography of the flake, the points (1–12) along which measurements were made, and the spectra are shown in Fig. 8. The Dirac point position and band edges remained unchanged when the measurements were also carried out at 80 K. This shows the robust nature of topologically protected 2D-Te with a variation in temperature. Nanoflakes with a thickness of 0.5 nm are advantageous for observing the QSHI phase in 2D-Te. Raman-active modes as a singlet (A) and two doublets (E) are because of its high atomic number and large electronic polarizability, as shown in Fig. 7(c). The Raman-active modes for both the bulk and the exfoliated samples are presented for comparison.
 Fig. 7  Differential tunnel conductance spectra of 2D-nanoflakes at (a) inside with three tip-approach currents at 440 mV and (b) different points along their edges. In (a), the VB and CB edges are marked by solid and broken lines, respectively. In the inset of (b), the dI/dV spectra periphery current is recorded. (c) Raman spectra of Te crystals and 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 8  (a) STM topography and (b) dI/dV spectra recorded at different points, as shown on topography spanning from HOPG (points 1–3) through periphery (points 4–7) to inside (points 8–12). (c) Energy level with respect to metallic HOPG, edge-state of the topological insulator, and CB and VB edges in the interior of the nanoflakes. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bulk-Te is considered an interesting material for exposing basic quantum phenomena, e.g., scattering system of carriers, surface quantum states, magneto-resistance, quantum oscillation, and TIs.132 Accordingly, Du et al.130 studied the magneto transport phenomenon in solution-based 2D-Te under an applied magnetic field in three standard axes. The temperature-based phase coherence length extracted from the weak anti-localization effect (WAL) showed its 2D transport achievement in the case of an applied magnetic field, which was normal to the [100] plane of 2D-Te. The WAL-effect disappeared when an exterior magnetic field was applied along the [110] direction (vertical to the Te chains). In contrast, when a magnetic field was applied along the [0001] 2D-Te chain direction, the analogous phase coherence length extracted from universal conductance fluctuations (UCF) shows properties of a 1D transport system. Atomic size 2D-Te with its fascinating nature was anticipated to be a good platform to explore quantum physics at the frontier of condensed matter research.71 Chemical functionalization is an efficient method to tune the optoelectronic properties of 2D-Xenes. The chemical alteration of Group VI 2D-materials via strong electron donating or accepting groups result in photoluminescence (PL) wavelength modification due to the apparent change in the electronic properties of 2D-Xenes. The electron donating nature and substituent energy levels are the main features for reducing the energy gap of 2D-G, especially G-QDs. Substituents an with electron-donating nature promote the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to a higher energy, thus narrowing the energy gap. These findings show that the HOMO/LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital) levels and energy gaps can be tailored for different applications in optoelectronics. Theoretical studies on 2D-Xenes of group-VIA suggested in-plane linear polarization for normal incident light, almost three times stronger than that of BP.117 A layer-dependent absorbance was observed, i.e., where with a decrease in the 2D-Te t-layer, the absorption efficiency substantially increased.117 This may be because of the band dispersion and the t-dependent interlayer electronic hybridization. When the layer t increases, the band dispersion and hybridization become stronger. This band dispersion and hybridization result in high mobility and high isotropic optical-absorbance, which suggests the potential of 2D-Te for application in optoelectronics and spintronics.133,134
2.5. Mechanical properties of group-VIA Xenes
Generally, the mechanical property 2DMs-Xenes is dependent on the lattice stress and strain engineering. In group-VIA, the square 2D-Te shows three structural phases under stress, i.e., buckled square phase-I, buckled rectangular phase-II, and planar square phase-III. The energy variation among these phases is comparatively small, resulting in phase transitions. To understand the phase transition mechanism when is strained applied, the effects of strain on the BL (bond length) should be considered. In the square-2D-Te unit cell system, three types of bonds are observed, i.e. short, medium and long bonds, which have distinct distances among adjacent Te-atoms (Fig. 9). The direction of each bond can clearly be seen by the reciprocal space lattice related to the real-space lattice, as shown by the black color square in Fig. 9(d). As the centre Te-atom moves to the square lattice corner atom, a short or long bond is obtained along M2-G in the reciprocal direction and intermediate bond along M1-G, which is vertical to the M2-G space.
 Fig. 9  Crystal structure bond length (δ) variations with applied strain (Δ) for the different phases of square 2D-Te. (a) Super cells inside and top views with, Δ = −4.5% in BS phase-I, (b) with Δ = 4% in BR phase-II, and (c) and with Δ = 13% in PS phase-III. (d) BZ special point in2D the Te structure with the real space lattice. (e) Applied strain effect vs. BL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Physical Society. 

Fig. 9(e) shows strain dependence of each BL. For BR phase-II, the medium or long BL. enlarges with an increase in strain, whereas the short BL. decreases. When the system was changed to BS phase-I, the three BLs became identical and a reduction in strain caused the BL to decrease. Moreover, for the BR phase-II transition into the PS phase-III, the three BLs also became identical and increased with an increase in strain.121–135 Through holes as charge carriers, there are four Dirac points and a large Fermi velocity of 9.44 × 105 m s−1 in the buckled square phase-I under Δ = −4.5% strain. By decreasing the strain at the Dirac points, the gap opened, and its value was much larger compared to that of 2D-G. Table 4 shows the square 2D-Te BL thickness, phase structures, and bond length (a, b) with strain (Δ = −4 to 14%) upon BG changes at room temperature.
Table 4 Square 2D-Te BL thickness, phases structures, and bond length (a, b) with strain (Δ = −4% to 14%) upon BG changes at room temperature120




Phase structure under strain
(a, b, Å)
Layer thickness (d, Å)
BG changes under strain




Buckled square
3.95, 3.95
1.01
0.53 eV under −4.5%


Buckled rectangular
4.28,4.17
0.85
0.24 eV under 4% strain


Planar square
3.29, 3.29
0.00
No change until 13%




In a wide strain range from −4% to 14%, the buckled rectangular phase-II demonstrated the QSHE phase. The buckled rectangular structure observed with the maximum direct B.G of 0.24 eV under Δ = 4% strain, which involved the QSHE robustness, is necessary for RT use. These outcomes also showed that the topological properties may be restricted by strain compared to SOC.137,138 The correlation coefficients of strain and BG for α-2D-Te and β-2D-Te have opposite signs (Fig. 10(a)). Additionally, β-2D-Te NSs exhibit anisotropy under strain, and thus are not influenced by strain. A small strain range is selected for α- and β-2D-Te due to the fact that the smaller the strain, the nearer to fundamental properties. Moreover, within a small strain range, i.e. up to 15%, it is easy to stretch and has a setback that is decided by the competition between the puckered structure and deformation structure. Fig. 11 shows the energy change and band gap relationship for the three phases (I, II, and III) of 2D square-Te when strain is applied.
 Fig. 10  (a) BG as functions of strain applied to 2D-Te NSs (X. H. Wang et al.).136 (b) Variations in the direct BG at Dirac points and angle θ vs. equiaxial strain for a series of structures, where black triangles and red circles show the angle θ and energy gap, respectively. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Physical Society. 
 Fig. 11  (i–n) Energy change in square 2D-Te BL thickness phase structures and different phases band structures of 2D-Te. (i) Non-SOC and (j) SOC energy bands for BS phase-I. The inset shows the first BZ structure. The locations of the four Dirac point are shown by red points. (k) Non-SOC and (l) SOC energy bands for BR phase-II. (m) Non-SOC and (n) SOC energy bands for PS phase III. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Physical Society. 
S. Jaspreet et al. experimentally studied the mechanical properties of α-Se ML. For the mechanical properties, the bonding properties were analyzed under strain (Fig. 12). Along x-direction tensile strain, the bonds (R2) in this direction are stretched and the perpendicular strain direction bonds (R1) remain constant (Fig. 12(a)). A prominent change in bond angles can be seen (θ3, θ4) in Fig. 12(b). The strain along the y-direction causes significant variations in both the bond angles and bond lengths (Fig. 12(c and d)). For instance, the bond angles show 4.7% and 5.2% change for θ1 and θ2 (Table 5), respectively, and that a critical strain results in higher tensile strength and Young's modulus along the y-direction compared to that in the x-direction.
 Fig. 12  Variation in bond lengths and bond angles of α-Se vs. tensile strain (a and b) along the x-direction and (c and d) y-direction. Vertical lines show the critical tensile strain limit. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 5 The layer thickness (d), angles (θ1, θ2, θ3, and θ4) of the relaxed and strain structures110




Strain
Layer thickness d (Å)

θ
1 (°)

Θ
2 (°)

Θ
3 (°)

Θ
4 (°)




Relaxed
3.14
91.15
88.86
90.88
89.09



ε

x
 = 6%
3.08 (−1.91%)
91.54 (−0.43%)
88.57 (−0.33%)
89.08 (−1.98%)
93.96 (5.47%)



ε

y
 = 8%
3.06 (−2.54%)
86.47 (−4.68%)
93.48 (5.20%)
93.54 (2.93%)
86.21 (−3.23%)




The band structures at various tensile strains are provided in Fig. 13. Upon increasing the tensile strain up to a critical value, the BG decreases to the minimum. In α-Se along the x- and y-directions a decrease of ∼36% and ∼42% in the BG at critical strain values, respectively, is illustrated in Fig. 13(d). The decrease in the BG of SC MLs with respect to tensile strain is contributed from the change in atomic superposition and demonstrated experimentally.139,140
 Fig. 13  Band structures of α-Se at tensile strain of (a) 0%, (b) 6% along the x-direction and (c) 8% along the y-direction. (d) BG with respect to uniaxial strain. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.6. Thermoelectric properties
The efficiency of thermoelectric conversion is measured from the figure of merit “zT” which can be determined as follows: zT = S2σT/K(3)where S is the Seebeck coefficient, (σ) is electrical conductivity, and K is thermal conductivity, which consists of electronic Ke and lattice KL. To optimize the zT, mainly the interdependent factor σ and Ke values are important. The effect of different dopant concentrations on the thermoelectric performance was studied based on the zT value. The S of 2D square 2D-Se and 2D-Te has the maximum value in the dopant range of 1012–1014 cm−2, which shows that the bipolar effect is apparent for these narrow BG 2D systems both for p- and n-type doping. The maximum S was observed when the dopant level of 2D-Te (∼1013 cm−2) was higher than that of 2D-Se (∼2 × 1012 cm−2) (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Seebeck coefficient and zT value along the zigzag (zig) and armchair (arc) directions at 300 K of 2D-Se and 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
This is because a higher concentration of dopant carriers is required to shift the chemical potential near the Fermi level due to of its comparatively larger BG compared to that of 2D-Se. As expected from the electronic band structure (Fig. 15), anisotropic S was observed for both 2D-Se and 2D-Te along the zigzag and armchair directions. Along the armchair direction, a heavier effective mass caused S to be 48 times larger compared to that in the zigzag direction for both n-type and p-type doping. 2D-Se has a maximum S value of 400 V K−1 with n-type doping, which is larger compared to that for p-type doping (300 V K−1). Overall n-type doping results in an S value of ∼1.3 times that with p-type doping in 2D-Se. Te has almost similar maximum S values upon n-type (287 V K−1) and p-type (265 V K−1) doping along the armchair direction. In a similar study for 2D square-Te, doping with n-type and p-type dopants at a high concentration of ∼1014 cm−2 resulted on an enhanced S value for both as a result of the second band valley located in ΓM2 passing to the Fermi level. This is responsible for thermoelectric conduction. At this dopant concentration range, an enhancement is not observed for 2D-Se due to its second band valley (also located in ΓM2), which is comparatively further away from the Fermi level and does not involve thermoelectric conduction. It is noticeable that the doping effect is simulated applying a rigid band model for Boltzmann transport equation (BTE), which indicates that light doping does not alter the band structure shape, but only shifts the Fermi energy. To measure the zT value, ke and σ are needed. The ke and σ cooperated scatter time (τ) can be obtained using the BTE solution. In the equation μ = τe/me*, τ is straightforwardly obtained when the effective mass me* and mobility of the carrier are known. The zT value as a function of the dopant level at 300 K is given in Fig. 14(b). It is illustrated that the armchair direction has a larger zT value compared to that in the zigzag direction. The n-type doping of 2D-Se results in the maximum zT value of 0.64 when the dopant concentration is close to 2 × 1012 cm−2. p-Type doping results in a maximum zT value of 0.46 when the dopant concentration is 1.4 × 1012 cm−2. This is because n-type doping has a comparatively larger S, whereas the other parameters, such as effective mass, mobility, and thermal conductivity are almost similar. In 2D-Te, p-type doping results in an overall larger zT value compared to n-type doping because the carrier at the VBM has a significantly larger mobility compared to that in the CBM. In addition, 2D-Te has the maximum zT value of 0.79 when the dopant level is ∼1013 cm−2. For p-type doping, the higher zT value along the armchair direction of 2D-Te than 2D-Se is due to its higher carrier mobility and lower lattice thermal conductivity.
 Fig. 15  Electronic band structure with and without SOC (red and black dash) for (a) square 2D-Se and (b) square 2D-Te. Right panel: magnified view for the zigzag (top) and armchair (medium) directions near the Fermi level. First BZ with high symmetry k-point (bottom), Δ: CBM and ★: VBM. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gang Liu142 theoretically studied the isotropic in-plane low thermal conductivity in α-Se at RT, which was abnormally lower with a value of 3.04 W m−1 K−1 compared to that of α-Te of 9.85 W m−1 K−1, possessing a similar structure and lower Debye temperature (θD). This originated from the larger anharmonicity of the acoustic phonon branch LA and TA phonons, as illustrated by the Grüneisen parameter (γ). The intrinsic lattice thermal conductivity (κL) shows an inverse relation with temperature due to the stronger phonon–phonon scattering at higher temperature. The thickness-dependent temperature intrinsic κL was calculated via the iterative scheme of BTE,143 as shown in Fig. 16(a). A low κL value of 3.04 W m−1 K−1 was obtained for α-Se at 300 K, which is even lower than that of bulk Se,144 but higher than that of square 2D-Se.145 Although, α-Se has a larger θD compared to α-Te, conventionally α-Se has a higher κL than α-Te since generally a higher θD means a higher κL.
 Fig. 16  Temperature-dependent κL (a) and frequency-resolved κL for 2D α-Se at 300 K (b). In (a), the κL of α-Te is also provided. Inset of (a) illustrates the convergence of κL with cutoff distance. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Clarivate. 
Acoustic phonons contribute mainly to the total thermal conductivity. The comparatively low relaxation times (τ) indicate the low thermal conductivity of α-Se. For α-Se, with low τ and low intrinsic κL, the total three-phonon processes (P3) are shown in Fig. 17(a and b) and the calculated Grüneisen parameter γ is shown in Fig. 17(c and d) and Fig. 17(e and f) for α-Te. A restricted κL is generated from phonon–phonon scattering,146 and the number of P3 scattering (LA, TA, and ZA) that must fulfill both energy and quasimomentum conservations was estimated.147 A larger γ and P3 leads to a lower κL. γ provides information on the thermal transport to measure the phonon anharmonicity. Strong anharmonicity of the phonons especially LA and TA leads to abnormal phenomena for lowering κL.
 Fig. 17  Group velocity of phonons (i.e., Debye temperature, θD, and elastic properties) (a) and relaxation time (b) for 2D α 2D-Se. Green, red, blue, and black colors show ZA, TA, LA, and optical phonons, respectively. (c and d) Three phonon (P3) and Grüneisen parameters for α-Se, and (e and f) for α 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Clarivate. 
2.7. Group-VIA 2D-Xene stability

2.7.1. Stability of α-2D-Te. 
Among the three allotropic phases of 2D-Te, α-Te is the most energetically stable and its experimental fabrication has been achieved to date on an Si/SiO2 substrate.148 Jingjing Min et al.149 reported that the BG nature of α-Te underwent a transition from pseudodirect at ML to indirect at BL (Fig. 18(a and d)). The CBM remains between the Γ- and M-points for both ML and BL. The “camel back” analogue structure appears at the top of the VB for the BL configuration because of the strong pz–pz interaction, which causes a shift in the VBM compared to that for ML (Fig. 18(d)), making it an indirect BG. This type of transition was also observed in 2D MoS2.91 After linear extrapolation, it was observed that the BG was tuned to 0.89 eV for BL (Fig. 18(e)) due to the weak e−–e− interaction and quantum confinement effect. This BG value obtained from the G0W0 calculation remains nearly twice that gained at the DFT/PBE level of theory (≈0.53 eV). The excitonic effects in α-Te MLs are prominent, and consequently change the absorption spectrum shape. This is obvious from comparing the optical absorbance without (i.e., GW + RPA) and with (i.e., GW + BSE), accounting for the e−–h+ interaction (Fig. 18(c and f)). These major optical properties are dominated by excitonic states. The first absorption peak, which was estimated via linear extrapolation at Lz−1 → 0, appears at 0.99 eV for ML α-Te (Fig. 18(c)). In comparison to its bulk, where excitons are very weak, in α-Te the BE appears stronger with a value of up to 0.37 eV (Table 6) because of the reduction in dimensions and weakening of the screening. As the number of layers increases, the absorption spectrum has a red shift (Fig. 18(c and f)). For BL, the first bright exciton observed at 0.78 eV is related to the direct transition from the VBM to the CB (Fig. 18(d)). The exciton BE decreases to 0.19 eV for BL. These optical gap properties allow the potential utilization of α-Te in IR devices.
 Fig. 18  (a–d) Quasiparticle band structures of (a) ML and (b) BL α-Te gained at the G0W0 level of theory with Lz = 30 Å. (b–e) Indirect BG [G0W0(I)] and minimum direct BG [G0W0(D)] obtained at the G0W0 level, and optical gap gained from BSE calculations with respect to inverse spatial separation Lz for (b) ML and (e) BL α-Te. Solid lines show linear extrapolations. (c–f) Optical absorbance of (c) ML and (f) BL α-Te gained by GW + BSE (solid lines) and GW + RPA (dotted lines), respectively. The first exciton absorption peak is represented by vertical arrows, with (g–l) the same as (a–f) but for β-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the American Physical Society. 
Table 6 Calculated effective mass m* (m0), deformation energy (DP), and μ (103 cm2 V−1 s−1) at the VBM and CBM for 2D-Se and 2D-Te along the armchair (arc) and zigzag (zig) directions. m* calculated with HSE is provided in parenthesis149




Materials
Bands

m*

m
d*
DP (eV)
 


zig
arc
zig
arc

μ
zig


μ
arc





2D-Se
VBM
0.039 (0.033)
0.35 (0.38)
0.46
1.46
3.96
42.2
0.69


CBM
0.044 (0.044)
0.52 (0.44)
0.61
0.84
4.69
93.2
0.23


2D-Te
VBM
0.051 (0.040)
0.86 (0.82)
1.03, 4.08
0.81
1.49
2.04
—


CBM
0.14 (0.11)
1.68 (1.60)
3.91, 3.97
2.88
0.14
0.02
—






2.7.2. Stability of β-2D-Te. 
The β-tellurene allotrope obtained by cleaving bulk Te along the (10) direction possesses a tetragonal geometry and is metastable. Its optimized structural parameters are presented in Table 6. Jingjing Min et al. also studied β-Te, which also shows SC behaviour, with the VBM position at the Γ-point of the BZ and CBM at the X-point (Fig. 18(g)).149 Without SOC, the quasiparticle gap of β-Te ML was calculated by the linear extrapolation method to be 1.99 eV (Fig. 18(h)), which is considerably larger than that of the α-phase. This value is 10% greater compared to the DFT/HSE06-based value (≈1.78 eV), and almost twice as large as its DFT/PBE counterpart (≈1.17 eV). It is observed that calculated quasiparticle gap is much larger compared to that of the experimentally studied BG of epitaxial β-Te on graphene (≈0.92 eV (ref. 119)), which may be related to the finite DOS underneath graphene near the Fermi level. Interlayer coupling considerably affects the band-structure properties of FL β-Te. Its indirect BG experiences a prominent decrease, reaching 1.22 eV (Fig. 18(j)), which changes in its electronic properties and ultimately affects its excitonic properties. For ML β-Te, the first exciton absorption appears at a photon energy of 1.66 eV (Fig. 18(h)), which is related to a strongly bound exciton state with a BE of 0.84 eV and larger than that of 2D MoS2 (≈0.96 eV (ref. 150)) and 2D BP (≈0.85 eV (ref. 151)). With an increase in the number of layers, the absorption spectrum exhibited a red shift (Fig. 18(i and k)) much stronger than that in FL α-Te. For bilayer β-Te, the first exciton absorption is observed at a photon energy of 1.1 eV (Fig. 18(l)), together with a smaller binding energy 0.53 eV. Here, the effect of SOC on quasiparticle BG and excitonic absorption edge is considered. Similar to α-Te, the spatial separation of Lz = 20 Å is also chosen, which is the largest computationally supported spatial separation. It was observed that with a decrease in SOC, the indirect BG is 8% (≈0.15 eV), its absorption effect on the periphery is much larger, and the optical gap decreases by ∼25% (≈0.43 eV).


2.7.3. Stability of 2D-Se. 
The properties of 2D-Se are analogous to that of Te, which drive 2D-Se to form stable 2D-Se structures. Similar to Te, α-Se like the 1T-MoS2 structure, β-Se with a tetragonal structure, γ-Se and square-Se were observed.100 Their structural stability was calculated by computational methods based on their phonon spectrum. The 2D-Se dynamic stability verified the phonon calculations carried out on the α-, β-, and γ-structures. Phonon calculations were performed with phonopy code using a 5 × 5 × 1 supercell for the BZ to determine the phonon frequencies. Fig. 19 illustrates the phonon dispersion curves along the high symmetric points, with nine phonon branches for the three allotropes, where among them, three modes are acoustic, and six modes are optical. The α-Se phonon spectrum has no soft phonon modes, and hence it is dynamically stable, whereas significant imaginary phonon modes are present in the trigonal Se, showing the structural instability of β-Se. This allow a comparative study with Te, which is also stable in the α-allotrope and metastable in the β- and γ-allotropes.
 Fig. 19  Phonon frequency for 2D-Se crystal with respect to the wave vector. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Wiley. 


2.7.4. Stability of α-2D-Se. 
The α-2D-Se structure was further studied in detail because it is the most stable allotrope of 2D-Se (Fig. 20(a)). The quasiparticle band structures are illustrated in Fig. 20(b). The α-2D-Se is SC with an indirect BG, in which its CBM lies at the Γ-point and its VBM lies between the Γ- and M-points, (Fig. 20(b)). The indirect BG (1.38 eV) confirmed from the linear extrapolation method (Fig. 20(c)) is significantly greater compared to that from the DFT/PBE (≈0.73 eV) and DFT/HSE06 (≈1.13 eV) calculations. In comparison to α-2D-Te, the BG of α-2D-Se is also slightly larger because of the higher ionizing energy from Te to Se. In contrast to the anisotropic transfer properties of 2D BP, α-Se has ultrahigh isotropic e−–h+ mobilities, which outperform 2D MoS2. α-2D-Se has considerable excitonic effects and the first exciton absorption occurs at 1.17 eV (Fig. 20(c)). This was obtained by comparing optical absorbance obtained with (e.g., GW + BSE, Fig. 20(d)) and without (e.g., GW + RPA, Fig. 20(d)) the e−–h+ interaction. It was found that this exciton state is mainly contributed through the transition from the VBM to CB, which provides an exciton BE of 0.53 eV and is much larger compared to that of α-2D-Te.
 Fig. 20  (a) Phonon spectra of α-Se. (b) Quasiparticle band structure of α-Se obtained at the G0W0 level of theory with Lz = 30 Å. This energy is the VB. (c) Indirect BG (G0W0(I)) and direct BG (G0W0(D)) obtained at the G0W0 level, and the optical gap obtained from BSE calculation of α-Se with respect to inverse Lz. (d) Optical absorbance of α-Se ML gained from GW + BSE (solid lines) and GW + RPA (dotted lines), respectively. Vertical arrows show the first exciton absorption peak. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The α-2D-Se excitonic and electronic properties are also dependent on the number of layers such as Te MLs as follows:
 (i) The VBM is slightly shifted toward the Γ-point compared to ML,
 (ii) An asymmetric camel back analogue structure emerges around the VBM,
 (iii) The exciton absorption red shifts as the thickness of the layers increases. In BL α-2D-Se, the first exciton absorption peak is located at 0.98 eV photon energy, which corresponds to the 0.29 eV BE bound exciton.149
The drawbacks of 2DMs are their environmentally unstable nature, which severely limit their use in nanodevices. Therefore, high air stability was verified in the solution-based formation of 2D-Te for an approximately total t-range from thick flakes to FL size. No major degradation was obtained from the electrical output in proto-typical 2D-Te transistors, which were exposed to air (2 months) with no encapsulation.104 Theoretical study proposes that an energy barrier exists associated with oxidation and is enough to avoid the oxidization of FL 2D-Te under normal environmental conditions. This good stability is significant to explore the basic properties and realize hi-tech application of 2D-Te. Table 7 presents the lattice constants, quasi-particle BG (Eg) and optical gap EXg considering the material exciton BE without SOP.
Table 7 Lattice constants, quasi-particle BG (Eg) and optical gap EXg, considering the material exciton BE without SOP. Direct and indirect BG shown by * and **, respectively




Material
Lattice constants (Å)
Band gap (eV)
Binding energy (eV)


(a, b)

E
g


E
Xg


E

X

b






α-Se

a = b = 3.72
1.38**
1.17
0.53


α-Te

a = b = 4.15
1.31*
0.99
0.99


β-Te

a = 5.49, b = 4.17
1.99**
1.66
0.84





3. Classification of the synthetic methods for 2D-Xenes
Generally, 2D-materials are layered materials, which are exfoliated from their bulk counterparts because of their strong in-plane covalent and out-of-plane weak vdW interactions.152 Currently, non-layered 2D materials have also attracted attention from researchers.153–156 These 2D-Xenes materials show many novel properties, for instance, abundant dangling bonds, exclusive structural distortion, variable BG, and improved carrier mobility.157–160 Generally, non-layered 2D-materials are synthesized via bottom-up methods such as vdW epitaxial method or chemical vapor deposition (CVD).161,162 However, these methods demand harsh synthetic conditions, for instance, high temperature and ultrahigh-vacuum conditions. Liquid phase exfoliation is an efficient method for the preparation of 2D materials and extensively utilized in the fabrication of layered 2D materials such as G, TMDCs, and BPs. Liquid phase exfoliation also has potential for the synthesis of a few non-layered materials, for instance Te and Se, by exfoliation from bulk materials owing to their unique chain structure. Ongoing examination of the properties of 2DMs and their incorporation into the novel technologies requires reliable fabrication techniques (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Synthesis of 2D-Xene NSs: (a) Exfoliation, (b) PVD and (c) CVD. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Wiley. 
The ability to scale up this approach is still uncertain due to some of its features, for example, the specific substrates, fabrication conditions, small crystal sizes and material instability. In contrast, top-down liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) is an excellent method for the synthesis of a large quantity of different atomic size 2DMs. However, the weak control of the thickness consistency and tiny size of the resulting materials limit its feasibility. Control of nucleation and formation in the bottom-up CVD method can guide the formation of good quality crystals of 2D-G and MoS2 with control-t, over a centimeter-sized lateral area. On the other hand, this technique requires elevated growth temperatures and the weak control of the formation environment limit its ability to be scaled up. The epitaxial formation of ultra-thin 2DMs with interesting electronic properties was also explored. However, the requirement of the appropriate substrates for epitaxial formation and harsh high vacuum system increases the complexity of the synthesis. Hence, each synthetic method has some advantages and some disadvantages, which we will discuss in detail and will specify the more suitable facile synthetic methods applied for the synthesis of group-VIA 2D-Xenes. Therefore, in this section, we will introduce the general synthetic approaches for emerging single-element group-VIA Xenes (2D-Te and 2D-Se). Furthermore, the different group-VIA 2D-Xenes synthesize, their proposed structure, and characterization will also be summarized and discussed. The synthetic methods are categorized as top-down (e.g., LPE and mechanical cleavage), bottom-up (e.g., PVD and CVD), and wet-chemical solvo-thermal reaction methods with the properties and classifications of Xenes, which are summarized for group-VIA elements.

a. Bottom-up synthesis method

The bottom-up synthesis methods for 2DMs Xenes are employed for two distinct purposes: (1) single 2D-NS growth and (2) synthesis of bulk, layered crystals, which are suitable for detachment of the discrete 2D-NSs using the top-down synthesis method. Thus far, epitaxial surface support growth under ultra-high vacuum is also a method to obtain MLs of different elemental 2D-NSs. Substrates also play a very significant role in the formation of 2D-Xenes.

b. Top-down synthesis method

The top-down synthesis methods include exfoliation techniques to synthesize 2DMs Xenes. The top-down exfoliation techniques involve removal of discrete NSs from their supporting substrates or their layered bulk crystals by different synthetic methods. In these elemental materials, chemical techniques are applied for the separation of the 2DM Xene NSs from from their substrates. Typical liquid cleaving and mechanical methods were investigated to separate the 2DM Xene NSs from their layered bulk counterparts. On the other hand, mechanical and liquid exfoliation methods are only used to layer crystals, which consist of 2DM Xene planar NSs that are connected mutually through weak vdW forces. Therefore, they are unsuitable for the formation of 2D-NSs/since they were not recognized to exist in a layered bulk material.45 The novel plasma (Ar+) thinning method was newly verified to produce phosphorene ML, which is an analogous substitute to laser-supported MoS2 thinning. The viability of these techniques allows potential chemical and other high energy thin layer substituents. Here, we discuss almost all the group-VIA 2DM-Xenes in detail, and finally we will study their application.
For the group-VIA elements, the synthesis of 2D-analogs of Se and Te was performed after great theoretical and experimental struggles.42 A 2D-Te film with t ≈10 nm was fabricated through a high vacuum thermal evaporation method around the 1970s163 and SL 2D-Se was studied by electrochemical deposition on Au (111) in 1997.164 Despite the early discovery of novel 2D-physics, the durability and nature of 2D and ultra-thin (t <10 nm) allotropes were not genuinely discovered, and their configurations were not greatly studied. Therefore, currently, Zhu et al. and Chen et al. reported the formation of the β-type 2D-Te on HOPG substrates. In contrast, Huang et al.165 studied SLs of 2D-Te with <0001> helical chains directed at the G/6H-SiC(0001) substrate plane formed via MBE. Wang et al. reported the solution phase formation of free-standing 2D-Te single crystals ∼10 nm thick, which may undergo a post-thinning method to SL (t ≈0.5 nm).165 Qin et al.42 studied the vapor phase formation of 2D-Se flakes (t = 5–15 nm, lateral dimensions ≈10 μm) in a tube furnace at ∼200 °C under an Ar-flow. These flakes showed lateral development in the [108] direction, which was predictable due to the large mean free path of gaseous Se-species at an elevated temperature. Here, we discuss in detail the different proposed/applied synthetic methods for the formation of 2D-Se, and 2D-Te.
3.1. Synthesis of 2D-Te and 2D-Se via the bottom-up approach

3.1.1. Physical vapor deposition (PVD)-based synthesis of 2D-Te/Se. 
The PVD formation technique normally requires the use of target source material and applies a temperature to the substrates to control the materials deposited along the used substrate. In the case of 2DMs, the PVD fabrication technique usually requires a vacuum atmosphere with a high-purity atomic source. Also, top-down LPE demonstrates a good output in forming large quantities of Te nanosized crystals. However, the low control of the t-uniformity and the small size of the resulting 2DMs reduce the feasibility of these methods. The epitaxy schemes were also shown to be challenging, especially for device use because of its intrinsic requirement for an elevated formation temperature, weak control in fabrication atmosphere, epitaxy substrates and pressure. There is a deficiency in the possible synthetic approaches for the controlled, substrate-free formation of large-area, single crystal 2D-Te with the development of a tunable configuration and material nature. This basic information and scientific ability are necessary to explore the fascinating nature of 2D-Te and implement the correlated device technology. In contrast to the productive development achieved in forming 1D-Te nanosized structures, much less has been reported on 2D-Te nanosized structures, their synthesis methods, and corresponding properties.71
He and co-workers studied the formation of 2D h-2D-Te nano-plates on mica by applying the PVD method in a horizontal tube furnace, with pure applied Ar-gas of 100 sccm, at 100 mbar. The Te-powder was loaded in a tube furnace and a fluorophlogopite mica [KMg3(AlSi3O10)F2] sheet or Si wafer was applied as the substrate, and the applied temperature was 750 °C and the substrate temperature was about 500 °C, for 60 min and finally the furnace was cooled naturally to RT. The fabricated 2DMs and the substrate form a weak vdW bond. The resulting 2D-Te nano-plates in their research had a small lateral size (6–10 mm) with large t (30–80 nm), and non-identical surface/edge roughness.166 However, the considerable t of these 2D-Te nano-plates much greater than the atomic level, which may reduce their material significance for basic study and scientific use in 2D-limit.
Qisheng Wang et al.166 studied the vdWE huge concentration because of its wide use in the formation of an ultrathin 2D-layered materials (Fig. 22(a and b). However, vdWE of non-layered functional materials is still not widely known. Currently, Te has a strong affinity to produce in 1D nanosize materials because of its chain like structure, and therefore the productive realization of h-2D-Te nano-plates on flexible mica NSs through vdWE was observed. The chemically inert mica surface was reported to be critical for the lateral formation of h-Te nano-plates because of its (1) easy relocation of the Te adatoms along its surface and (2) allowed large lattice mismatch. In addition, an h-2D-Te nano-plate-based photodetector (PD) was in situ formed on flexible mica-NSs. A competent photo-response was still obtained after bending the device 100 times, showing that the h-2D-Te nano-plate-based PD on mica-NSs possess high ability for use in flexible and wearable optoelectronic devices. Therefore, basic knowledge of the vdWE effect for the development of h 2D-Te nano-plates can guide the direction of vdWE for practically realizing 2D-structures of other non-layered materials.166 In summary, the t and lateral size of the h-2D-Te nano-plates were controlled to by 30–80 nm and 6–10 μm, respectively. Although Te has a strong affinity to transform into a 1D nano-architecture because of its very anisotropic crystal structure, Te nano-islands were still formed in the regular h-2D-Te nano-plates since the mica-NSs mainly amplified the lateral formation rate of the h-2D-Te nano-plates. Due to its lack of surface dangling bonds, mica can provide ideal vdWE substrates, which can significantly improve the high migration speed of the Te adatoms along its surface. This was evident with the use of Si as the substrate, in which a layer of irregular Te micro-crystals were obtained even under similar experimental conditions as that on the mica NSs. The exceptional 2D-structure of h-Te nano-plates allows the easy formation of functional electronic and opto-electronic devices. Hence, an h-Te nano-plate-base photo-detector was formed in situ on the flexible mica-NSs.166 The samples were further studied by TEM, electron energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy (Fig. 22(c–h)), which confirmed the composition of the synthesized samples as elemental SC 2D-Te.
 Fig. 22  (a) Helical chain-like crystal configuration of Te. (b) Scheme showing the evolution process of h 2D-Te nano-plates. (c–e) TEM and HR-TEM images of the 2D h-Te nano-plate. (f–h) EDX, Raman, and PL spectra of the 2D h-Te nano-plate. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Amey Apte et al.167 studied the formation of the polytypism ultrathin Te-flakes via the PVD method, where the synthesized nano-flakes exhibited a thickness of ∼7 nm to 50 μm, and their predicted structures were further confirmed by theoretically simulation. In this method, the bulk-Te was first placed on Si/SiO2 substrates and then evaporated in an Ar/H2 environment at about 650 °C, and after the cooling process, ultrathin Te-flakes were obtained (Fig. 23). Fig. 23(b) shows that the fabricated Te-flakes exhibited a thickness of ∼0.85 nm, corresponding to three atomic layers.
 Fig. 23  Synthesis of ultrathin 2D-Te-flakes by PVD.167 (a) Schematic experimental setup. (b) AFM image of the 2D-Te flakes. (c) HAADF-STEM image of the 2D-Te flakes. (d and e) TEM images of the 2D-Te flakes. (f) Atomically resolved HAADF-STEM images of three Te polymorphs, (Amey Apte et al.).167 (g and h) Se atomic structure. (i) Scheme showing the synthesis of 2D-Se via the PVD technique. (j) Low-magnification SEM image of the 2D-Se NSs on Si (111) substrate. (k) 2D-Se NSs with saw and (l) feather analogue twin structures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The TEM images (Fig. 23(d and e) confirmed the h-symmetry by three different sets of six-fold diffraction spots of the 2D-Te nano-flakes. The HR-STEM images of the 2D-Te nano-flakes confirmed (Fig. 23(c and f)) the presence of, α-, β-, and γ-Te. Finally, the temperature-dependent Raman spectra showed Raman shifts because of the lattice expansion coefficients and anharmonic behavior, which is associated with the coexistence of resultant strain and multiple polymorph nm-sized boundaries. Qin et al.168 also synthesized 2D-Se NSs by applying the PVD technique, and the 2D-Se NSs possessed large-size, high-quality, and minimum thickness of 5 nm (Fig. 23(g–l)). In this fabrication method, pure Se-power was placed in a tube furnace, and an Si (111) substrate was used for the fabrication of 2D-Se under Ar-gas at an applied flow rate of 50 sccm and 100 mbar pressure. The applied temperature was 210 °C for the source and 100 °C for the substrate for 60 min. Consequently, black-colored needle-like 2D-Se NSs coated on the Si-substrate were obtained, exhibiting a strong in-plane anisotropic property, which was determined through angle-resolved Raman spectroscopy. However, these established efforts in synthesizing 2D-Te nanosize structures are restricted by complexity in synthesizing a significant quantity of SL or FL 2D-Te with a uniform t, limited in the used substrates, applied conditions (e.g., vacuum and high temperature), and uncertain ability to be scaled-up.71 Sijie Yang et al.67 synthesized trigonal-phase ultrathin 2D-Te NSs via the PVD method on different substrates. Since the type of substrate and its surface chemistry govern the growth properties, layer-by-layer, self-oriented growth was performed on different types of substrates (GaSe, GaS, GaTe, mica, MoS2, and graphite). All the chosen substrates possessed thermal decomposition temperatures much higher than the required growth temperature (Ts = 330 °C), and therefore the synthesis of 2D-Te did not modify their 2D-surface chemistry. Finally, GaTe was determined to be the most stable in its monoclinic (anisotropic) phase and was well recognized for its pseudo-1D nature,169–172 that may potentially assist the orientation of the Te chain direction because of the extremely anisotropic nucleation and kinetics originating from its pseudo-1D crystalline nature. Thus, this vdW layer was deposited onto the SiO2/Si substrates, which were exfoliated after CVD growth for easy treatment. The optical-microscopy (OM) and SEM images of the 2D-Te synthesized NSs on selected 2D-surfaces are shown in Fig. 24(a–h). The 2D-Te deposition preferably occurred on the 2D-surfaces rather than the amorphous thermal SiO2 surfaces. As shown in Fig. 24(d and e), atomically sharp terraces were formed instead of high nucleation because the abundant chemically active sites further decreased the nucleation barrier. The 2D-Te NS deposition proceeded very well on these 2D-surfaces, which were arbitrarily directed on graphite, mica, GaTe and MoS2 with no noticeable substrate effects.
 Fig. 24  Different exfoliated 2DMs through the PVD method. OM images of the 2D-Te deposited on (a) GaTe, (b) GaS, (c) graphite, (d) mica, and (e) GaSe and (f) SEM image of 2D-Te deposited on GaSe. (g) OM and (h) SEM images 2D-Te deposited on the MoS2 (Sijie Yang et al.).67 (i) Topographic images of the Te-films on 2D-G. (j) BG evolution of Te-films with different t. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2. Epitaxial formation of 2D-Te on 2D-G by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). 
Xiaochun Huang et al.108 formed SL and FL 2D-Te films via MBE on a G/6H-SiC (0001) substrate, which were examined via in situ STM and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) (Fig. 24(i and j)). The epitaxy 2D-Te film contained in-plane helical Te-chains, which is unusual based on the configurations of the 2D-Te nano-plates in the investigation by He and co-workers166 and structural models theoretically proposed for SL 2D-Te. The synthesized 2D-Te-based films appeared as a parallel set of helical Te-chains flat-lying on the 2D-G surface, revealing the (1 × 1) facet of (1010) of bulk structure.
The BG of the 2D-Te-based film increased linearly with a decrease in t, approaching the NIR band for the SL 2D-Te. Precise band bending at the periphery in SL 2D-Te and the 2D-G substrate was conceived. The atomic level-controlled t showed its potential use in electronics and optoelectronics nanodevices. The reported vdW epitaxy 2D-Te films on the surface of 2D-G on the 6H-SiC(0001) substrate by MBE were SL and FL-films. The STM study revealed that 2D-Te films were formed with parallel helical Te chains smoothly deposited on the 2D-G surface, revealing the (1 × 1) facet of the (1010) of bulk Te. The BG of the 2D-Te films was amplified linearly through a decrease in t from 0.33 eV (bulk) to 0.92 eV (SL), including the spectral range from MIR to NIR. Furthermore, the spatially resolved STM spectra revealed upward band bending, which resulted in hole growth at the boundary of SL 2D-Te and 2D-G.108 Hence, SL and FL 2D-Te films on the G/6H-SiC(0001) substrate grown through vdWE with different t were formed in the bulk Te structure along the [1010] direction, with helical chains smoothly deposited in each layer and parallel to each other. The BG of 2D-Te increased linearly with a decrease in t up to 0.92 eV in SL-Te. In addition, upward band bending was observed at the edges of SL 2D-Te and 2D-G, manifesting local hole buildup. This implies the ability to tune the optoelectronic/electronic nature of 2D-Te.108 Similarly, Chen et al. also the showed formation of epitaxial 2D-Te NSs on HOPG substrates92 through a superior growth rate and an elevated substrate temperature compared to that applied by Huang et al.119 The epitaxial 2D-Te NSs contained in-plane, helical 2D-Te chains, which are different from the 2D-Te nanoplate structure and theoretical structural models proposed for ML 2D-Te.


3.1.3. Solution method-based synthesis of free-standing 2D-Te. 
To overcome the aforementioned challenges, for the first time, Wu and co-authors developed a substrate-free solution method to fabricate big size, free-standing, excellent 2D-Te in SL and FL form (Fig. 25).165 2S-Te was developed via the reduction of sodium tellurite (Na2TeO3) by hydrazine hydrate (N2H4) in an alkaline solution at 160–200 °C in the presence of the crystal face blocking ligand PVP. Due to the substrate-free nature and the utilization of aqueous solution in this process, the 2D-Te flakes could shift and were collect in a huge quantity via the Langmuir–Blodgett procedure on different substrates for experimental investigation and nanodevice applications. The as-synthesized 2D-Te flakes possessed edge lengths of about 50–100 mm, and t from SL to 10 nm (Fig. 25(a)). The investigation of 2D-Te showed that all the samples were formed laterally along the [0001] and [110] directions, with vertical stacking along the [100] direction. This was the earliest experiment-based understanding of great size, free-standing, good quality 2D-Te crystals via a low temperature, scalable substrate-free solution method. Also, a restricted PVP concentration was used in solution to obtain 2D-Te.173,174
 Fig. 25  (a) AFM image with different t, (b) STEM image, (c) optical image, and (d) 3D illustration structure of 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Springer Nature. 
After a specific reaction time, 1D and 2D structures emerged. Lastly, the ratio of the 2D-Te flakes that had a straight [110] edge was amplified together with a decrease in the 1D and intermediate configurations, and a plateau subsequent to complete formation was observed. The obtained morphology development suggested a balance in the kinetic and thermodynamic formation state, with an alteration from the 1D structure to the 2D form. Initially, PVP was specially adsorbed at the [100] surfaces of the nucleated seeds,174 which supported the kinetic-driven 1D formation. As the reaction proceeds, the [100] surfaces of the created structure become moderately covered because of the inadequate PVP capping. Since the [100] surfaces have a small free energy in 2D-Te, the formation of [100] surfaces along the [110] direction is considerably amplified via thermodynamic-driven assembly, guiding to formation of 1D/2D intermediary configurations. Wu and co-authors explained the maximization of the manufacturing yield, dimensions and t of the 2D-Te. This type of ability for the formation of 2DMs facilitates the modulation of the device performance by tuning the electronic configuration, e.g., a process-tunable BG (0.3–1 eV) including a spectral range from MIR to the NIR, in 2D-Te.71 A range of crystalline and amorphous substrates were used to study the effect of the surface properties on the overall crystallinity (anisotropy), where sapphire substrates represented the single crystal and as SiO2/Si surfaces generated amorphous surfaces. Similarly, GaSe, GaS, GaTe, MoS2, mica and graphite surfaces were also used to grow Te-NSs, and the obtained results for the morphology and structural properties are summarized in Table 8. In comparison, the fabrication of 2D-Te on GaS and GaSe created highly crystalline and directed pseudo-1D 2D-Te NSs. 2D-Te NSs prefer to arrange themselves energetically either similar or create a π/3 angle to terraces, as illustrated in Fig. 25(e). On the SiO2/Si substrate, somewhat different from the GaSe NSs, 2D-Te instantly turns into arbitrarily oriented. In general, the results demonstrate that preferably directed (lock-in) 2D-Te NSs can be achieved on GaSe and to a degree on GaS among six different 2D-surfaces by means of very diverse surface chemistry and structural characteristics, in addition to crystalline sapphire and amorphous SiO2.
Table 8 Summary of the synthesis of the 2D-Te on different surfaces vis the PVD method67




Substrate type
Structural Properties
Morphology of tellurene
Orientation of tellurene




Sapphire
[0001] c-cut crystalline
Mostly out of plane
Randomly oriented


SiO2/Si
Amorphous SiO2
Mostly out of plane
Randomly oriented


MoS2
H-phase (a = b = 3.19 Å)
Layer by layer (2D growth)
Randomly oriented


Mica
H-phase (a = b = 5.19 Å)
Layer by layer (2D growth)
Randomly oriented


Graphite
H-phase (a = b = 2.46 Å)
Layer by layer (2D growth)
Randomly oriented


GaS
H-phase (a = b = 3.63 Å)
Layer by layer (2D growth)
Mostly oriented tellurene chains


GaSe
H-phase (a = b = 3.82 Å)
Layer by layer (2D growth)
Highly oriented tellurene chains


GaTe
Monoclinic/anisotropic
Layer by layer (2D growth)
Randomly oriented




Yixiu Wang et al.121 reported the formation of large-size, superior 2D-Te through a substrate-free solution-based method. This process generated fine structures with a tunable t, from ML to 10 nm, and with lateral sizes of up to 100 μm. The 2D-Te chiral-chain vdW crystal provided a strong in-plane anisotropic nature and great t-dependent shift in Raman spectroscopy, which were not experienced in other 2D-layered materials. In a typical procedure, analytical-grade Na2TeO3 (4.5 × 10−4 mol) and a certain quantity of PVP were poured in double-distilled H2O (33 mL) at RT to form a homogeneous solution. Subsequently, this solution was hydrothermally treated in aqueous NH3 solution (25%) and H6N2O (80%). The resultant solid was collected through centrifugation. Then, a 2D-Te-based FET with air-stable activity at RT for more than two months, with 106 order on/off ratio (Ion/Ioff) and ∼700 cm2 V−1 s−1 field-effect mobility, μFET, was fabricated. In addition, by scaling down the channel length and incorporating it in high-k dielectrics, transistors with a considerable 1 A mm−1 current density were demonstrated. In the following section, we will elaborate on the device applications of group-VIA 2D-Xenes and also explain their advantages and limitations.


3.1.4. Tellurene fabrication via liquid-phase exfoliation method. 
Zhang et al.175 reported a top-down LPE technique for the synthesis of 2D-Te NSs with dimensions of ∼100 nm. This exfoliation method has a potential to produce a massive quantities of 2D-Te nanocrystals. However, the poor t-control and small size of the synthesized 2DMs limit the practicality of this approach. Epitaxy synthesis methods also exhibit some challenges, especially for device fabrication because of their intrinsic requirements for elevated temperature, weak control of the fabrication atmosphere, pressure and epitaxy substrates. Regarding 2D-Te, the fabrication of scalable, substrate-free NSs with tunable structures and specific properties using single crystals still needs to improve for potential device technologies. Han Zhang and co-workers studied the synthesis of 2D-Te NSs via LPE (Fig. 26(a)).176 The TEM image showed that the size of the exfoliated 2D-Te NSs was in the range of 130–210 nm with lattice fringes of 0.40 nm (Fig. 26(b and c)). The Raman spectra of the bulk-Te and 2D-Te NSs (Fig. 26(d)) showed three main peaks at 92.7 cm−1 (E1), 121 cm−1 (A1), and 143 cm−1 (E2), which were also clearly observed for bulk-Te. The AFM image (Fig. 26(e)) showed heights of 11.9 and 16.8 nm (Fig. 26(f and g)) for the 2D-Te NSs with 29 and 41 layers, respectively, based on the condition that the thickness of the ML 2D-Te NSs was probably 0.41 nm. The as-prepared ML size distribution is shown in Fig. 26(h), which is consistent with the AFM and TEM analysis. The 2D-Te and bulk-Te XRD patterns show a hexagonal crystal configuration (Fig. 26(i)). UV–vis absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 26(j)) clearly showed that 2D-Te has a wide absorption range from 280–850 nm, showing potential use in UV–vis detection devices.176
 Fig. 26  (a) Scheme showing the formation process, (b) TEM image, (c) HR-TEM analysis, (d) Raman spectra of Bulk Te and 2D-Te NSs and (e) AFM analysis of 2D-Te NSs. (f and g) Height profiles from image in (e). (h) 2D-Te size distribution, (i) XRD of 2D-Te and bulk-Te, and (j) UV–vis spectrum of 2D-Te NSs in NMP. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Wiley. 

4. Device applications of the group-VIA 2D-Xenes
4.1. 2D-Te and 2D-Se-based field-effect transistor (FET)
The electrical properties of group-VIA elemental 2DMs Xenes are traditionally estimated via the fabrication and measurement of materials during the FET process. Thus far, the FETs with active elemental 2DMs formed by Xenes containing 2D-Te and 2D-Se exhibit a wide range of mobilities Ion/Ioff. In early 2017, transistors based on 2D-Se and 2D-Te were formed on exfoliated crystals42 by Qin et al.,168 which showed p-type transport performances through a current density of approximately 20 mA mm−1 at Vds = 3 V of 2D-Se NSs (Fig. 27(a and b)). The 2D-Se NS-based FETs were fabricated by EBL, thermal evaporation, and a lift-off process.177 The transistor showed FET-type performances from directly formed SL 2D mono-element samples in the place of exfoliated crystals thus far, as is the case for all the SL FETs of 2D-Te and 2D-Se. The 2D-Se formed a mixed better orientation (4 × 4 and √13 × √13) via epitaxial formation on the Ag (111) coated mica substrate and the devices were then moved to SiO2. Ni/Au (30/100 nm) was used as metal contacts, which can extensively decrease the contact resistance in p-type FET devices because of its comparatively high work function. The devices with 16 nm thick 2D-Se showed comparatively low mobilities than the other monoelement 2DMs (0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1), and small on current (20 mA mm−1), but a high Ion/Ioff ≈106 at RT,168 which is very significant for logic-type devices to guarantee a low current leakage.
 Fig. 27  (a) Transfer characteristic of a typical 2D-Se NS FET with a thickness of 16 nm. Inset shows the AFM height profile of the device, scale bar is 5 μm. (b) Output characteristic of the same 2D-Se NSs transistor. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Transfer curves of the 2D-Te transistor of 15 nm with stability measurement for 55 days. (d) 300 nm channel length with a 11.1 nm-thick short-channel transistor holding high on-state current density. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 27(c) shows the electrical properties of the 2D-Se NS-based FET device, which illustrates the p-type transfer of carriers with a high current Ion/Ioff = 106. The terminations with H2 and OH on the 2D-Se NS surface cause p-type conduction in the FET, which was also observed in Se nano-wire and nanobelts.75 The 2D-Se NS-based FET presented a relatively low on-state current, with the maximum value of around 20 mA mm−1 at Vds = 3 V. Four-terminal FET devices were manufactured to estimate the intrinsic hole mobility of the 2D-Se NSs. The hole mobility value was expected to be 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K. In comparison to other p-type SC materials, for example 2D-Te and BP,178–180 the 2D-Se NSs have low hole mobility comparable to that of bulk Se or Se nano-belts.181 This low mobility and BG have the highest See-beck coefficient (+1250 μV K−1) among all elements and potential for thermoelectric applications. The 2D-Se NSs and transistors showed good durability at RT. In contrast, the t-dependent electrical achievement of 2D-Te crystals showed inspiring and broadly changeable electronic and t-dependent optical properties not displayed by the classic layered 2DMs.165 The FETs with RT mobility of ∼700 cm2 V−1 s−1 along the high-mobility (<0001>) direction (Fig. 27(d and e)) are shown for the 16 nm-thick solution-based formed monocrystal. Although, this RT mobility was extremely responsive to the t, it decreased radically from 600 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the 15 nm film to 30 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the 5 nm crystals, and was reduced regularly to a SL. The 2D-Te crystals of t = 7.5 nm showed p-type behavior with an on current of 300 mA mm−1 and Ion/Ioff of ≈105.165
Wu et al.71 studied a 2D-Te transistor of 15 nm transfer curves of the with stability measurement for 55 days (Fig. 27(c)). It showed a large drain current of 300 mA mm−1, high RT μFET of 700 cm2 V−1 s−1, and high Ion/Ioff ratio in the order of ∼105. The t-dependence of Ion/Ioff and μFET in the 2D-Te-based device with t from 35 nm to SL (∼0.5 nm) was used to elucidate the transport system of the 2D-Te FETs (Fig. 27(d)).71 A standard comparison with BP showed that the solution-based 2D-Te had a ∼2–3 times higher μ compared to that of BP, although a similar device configuration, structure, and mobility extraction technique were provided. By further exploring the channel scaling and integration with atomic layer deposition (ALD)-based formation of high-k dielectrics in 2D-Te transistors, the results confirmed an elevated drive current of ∼1 A mm−1 and good Ion/Ioff ∼103 at comparatively low drain bias.182 The highest drain current achieved was 1.06 A mm−1, which is similar to that of the usual SC devices and is the highest value among all 2DM transistors. This is important for the novel realization of high-performance 2D-Te-based electronics. The in-plane electrical transport besides diverse structural orders was also calculated at RT, and the usual anisotropic mobility ratio was 1.43 ± 0.10, which is somewhat lower than that of bulk-Te, maybe because of the improved surface scattering in ultra-thin 2D-Te.
The Hall effect calculations on 2D-Te performed in 1971 by Dutton and Muller based on the relation between temperature and mobility (μ) showed that ionized impurity scattering was the principal scattering means in 2D-Te films at RT, and according to the linear correlation between μ and t, it was highlighted that ionized extrinsic substances exist on the surface of the film in a concentration independent of the film t.183 When the thin film was decreased from comparatively thick (3D) to ultrathin or 2D geometries, in the surface chemistry for example, scattering became gradually more unfavorable, which may play a part in upcoming SL 2D-Te electronic nanodevices.42Table 9 shows the group VI-2D Xenes and their electrical FET electronic device-based applications at RT.
Table 9 Group VI-2D Xenes and their electrical FET electronic device applications at RT




2DM
Synthesis method
Mobilities (cm2 V−1 s−1)
SC-type transistor

I
on/Ioff
Current density (mA mm−1)
Ref.




2D-Se NSs SL
PVD
0.26
p-type
≈106
20

168



2D-Te (16 nm)
Solution based
∼700
p-type
∼105
200

165



2D-Te (7.5 nm)
Solution based
∼700
p-type
≈105
300

165



2D-Te crystal
ALD
1.43
p-type
∼103
∼1 × 103

182



2D Te-flakes
Hydrothermal method
500
p-type
103 (10 nm)
1013 cm−2

184



2D Te-flakes
Hydrothermal method
500
p-type
103 (<10 nm)
1013 cm−2

184





Qisheng Wang et al.166 studied a distinctive planar constitution of the h-2D-Te nano-plate on flexible mica-NSs, which allowed the formation of functional electronic and opto-electronic nanodevices. Here, they in situ constructed a photo-detector based on the h-2D-Te nano-plate on bendable mica-NSs, as shown in Fig. 28(a and b). Fig. 28(c) shows the I–V curves of the h-2D-e nano-plate-based nanodevices in the dark and upon exposure to a laser with a wavelength of 473 nm and light intensity of ∼761.9 W m−2. A distinct photo-conducting response was observed after irradiation of the device by the laser (λ = 473 nm). The time-dependent photo-response was measured at RT to study the device stability (Fig. 28(d)). The photocurrent (Iph) was described by the variation in Ion and Ioff. The high dark current was possibly because of the vacancies and surface defects in the h-2D-Te nano-plate. Moreover, the linear relationship between Iph and the laser intensity (161.9–761.9 W m−2) completely reflects that h-2D-Te nano-plate device exhibited typical photon-dependent resistance, which further shows that the photons produced additional e−–h+ pairs (Fig. 28(e)). An exponential function was employed to fit the increase and decay in a single cycle (Fig. 28(f)), showing that the response time (τrising) and recovery time (τdecay) were 4.4 and 2.8 s, respectively. Thus, the τrising was associated with the time taken for the dark current to increase to 1–1/e ≈63% of the maximum Iph, and τdecay was determined from 1/e ≈37% of the maximum Iph.185 The 2D-Te nano-plates were larger than both FL-GaSe nano-plates and SL MoS2.186 Thus, gas molecule absorption and desorption on its are important features, which influence the rise and decay times.185 The gas molecules may manipulate the photo-response when the surface of the 2D-Te nano-plates contain plentiful active sites. However, inside the material, trap states also strictly reduce the rise and decay speed. The 2D-Te nano-plates are possibly deficient SC and have a great quantity of trap states. Thus, the photo-generated carriers filled the trap states, and subsequently the maximum performance was achieved when the 2D-Te nano-plates were illuminated, which extended the response time. Consequently, once the light was switched off, the limited carriers were freed gradually from the trap points, which deteriorated the reset speed. Thus, the t of the 2D-Te nano-plates has a significant impact on τrising and τdecay since a thicker Te nano-plate has more trap states compared to the GaSe nano-plate and SL MoS2. The in situ formation of the h-2D-Te nano-plate photo-detector on mica-NSs made the device very flexible.
 Fig. 28  (a) Photograph of the h-2D-Te nano-plate-base device. (b) OM image of the electrode pattern. (c) I–V curves in the dark and in the presence of 473 nm laser for single h-Te nano-plate photo-detector. (d) Time-dependent photo-response of h-2D-Te nano-plate device with a voltage bias of 2 V. (e) Power reliance of Iph at 2 V bias. (f) Separate response and reset cycle. (g) 2D-Te nano-plate photo-detector I–V curves in the dark and upon exposure to 473 nm laser. Time trace of photo-response while laser toggled on and off before (h) and device after 100 times bending (i). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 28(g) displays the photo-response of an additional h-2D-Te nano-plate photo-detector on the flexible mica-NSs. A radical boost in current with 473 nm laser illumination was observed in contrast to the current in the dark. The stability of the flexible photo-detector based on the h-2D-Te nano-plates showed the photo-response of the device formed on the flexible mica-NSs, which was calculated before and after repeated bending of the device. Fig. 28(h and i) show the plot photo-response vs. time with exposure to 473 nm laser before and after constantly bending the device 100 times, respectively. Consequently, Iph decreased in the range of ∼2.7 to ∼2.3 μA and the noise current decreased from 9.3 to 7.9 μA. The minor reduction in Iph and noise current may have originated from the superior contact barrier because of the electrode contact relaxation after bending the device100 times. The high stability of the h-2D-Te nano-plate-based photo-detector on flexible mica-NSs may open up its use in flexible and wearable device. Hence, the h-2D-Te nano-plate-based photo-detector showed very large photo-responsivity (Rλ). The Rλ of the device was calculated to be 162.4 and 389.5 A W−1. Thus, the high photo-responsivity of the h-2D-Te nano-plate on flexible mica-NSs shows its potential use in optoelectronic devices. The device illuminated area utilized was 24.0 μm2 and 10.0 μm2 and both devices were applied with a voltage bias of 2 V.71 Xun Zhang et al.187 formed a Te flake-based transistor with a high Ion/Ioff ≈104, and ultralow off-state current ≈8 × 10−13 A. The FET 2D-Te device scheme, transfer curves, and hysteresis responses were measured at ambient and at 80 K and 300 K (Fig. 29(a–c), respectively). The output properties of a similar Te transistor were measured at 300 and 80 K and a negligible hysteresis because of a decrease in thermal defects at 80 K was observed (Fig. 29(d–f)). Furthermore, the Te-flake based phototransistor exhibited a huge gate dependent photo-response, while its gate voltage varied from −70 to 70 V, and Ion/Ioff was amplified ≈40-times. Thus, the H2-functionalization strategy may offer a novel advancement in manufacturing other high quality 2D materials.187
 Fig. 29  (a) Te device scheme. (b) Transfer curves, (c) hysteresis response, and (d–f) output properties of a similar Te transistor measured at 300 K and 80 K. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from Wiley. 
4.2. 2D-Te as a modulator
The fascinating properties of 2D-Te nanoflakes, for example, broadband optical absorption, response, strong light matter contact, and outstanding environment durability, make 2D-Te nanoflakes suitable for use as a modulator. Therefore, Han Zhang and co-workers176 studied a light-modulate-light structure in 2D-Te nanoflakes, and “ON” and “OFF” modes for all optical modulating performances (Fig. 30). A schematic of the light-modulate-light system with the 2D-Te nanoflakes dispersions support on spatial cross phase modulation is illustrated in Fig. 30(a). Combining the Kerr and anisotropic thermal transmission effect, the diffraction rings for both the pump and finally probe light were distorted, and the whole deformation process is presented in Fig. 30(b). Furthermore, a weak power probe light could be modulated by a pump light with a stronger power by using this light-modulate-light system and “ON” and “OFF” modes could be obtained (Fig. 30(c)). These findings make 2D-Te nanoflakes potential materials for use in photonics device. Due to the advanced properties and good potential of 2D-Te nanoflakes for modulator application, Guo et al.188 synthesized a saturable absorber using 2D-Te/polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) nanoflakes, and a highly stable fs laser with a 829 fs pulse duration was achieved (Fig. 30(f)). The 2D-Te/PVP film was attached to the end of a fiber and utilized as a saturable absorber (Fig. 30(d)). Fig. 30(e) shows the reiteration frequency of 15.45 MHz, and furthermore, no intensity fluctuation was observed in the pulse, illustrating outstanding durability of the mode-lock laser performance. To further examine its durability, RF-spectrum measurements were performed (Fig. 31(g)). The measured peak had a frequency and peak-to-background ratio of 15.45 MHz and 53 dB, respectively. These results further confirmed the extraordinary stability of the mode-locked laser.
 Fig. 30  (a) Scheme of the light-modulate-light system. (b) Diffraction rings obtained from the light-modulate-light system. (c) Optical switcher based on 2D-Te nanoflake dispersions. (d) Scheme of the 2D-Te/PVP membrane-based mode-locking erbium-doped fiber laser. (e) Pulse trains. (f) Pulse duration of modulated femto-second laser. (g) Radio-frequency spectrum, (h) calculated electric and optical field profiles and (i) simulated energy consumption of the modulator with respect to frequency for different number of layer-based 2D-Te nanoflakes in the MZI architecture 2D-Te modulator. (j) Simulated energy utilization of 2D-Te racetrack modulator as a function of frequency for different 2D-Te thickness. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Wiley. 
 Fig. 31  (a) Phonon band structure, lattice thermal conductance, scattering rate, and cumulative lattice thermal conductance. (b) Benchmark in the x- and y-direction. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the saturation intensities (modulation depths) of the Te/PVP thin films were recorded to be 44.65 (11.86%), 26 (10.5%), and 78.14 (27%) GW cm−2 at 800, 1060, and 1550 nm, respectively, establishing that the Te/PVP thin film has a great potential for a broad saturable absorption range and mode-lock laser. As previously mentioned, similar to BP, 2D-Te has a thickness-dependent BG range of 0.35–1.2 eV, which covers the MIR spectral band up to 3.5 μm. Several types of mid-IR modulators were demonstrated utilizing free carrier plasma dispersion,189,190 thermo-optic phase shift,191–193 electro-absorption (Pauli blocking or field-induced effects),194–196 and electro-refractive (Pockels) effect.197 Among these technology means, Pockels electro-optic modulators are considered to be the most popular modulators because of their intrinsic ultrafast response and potential of achieving phase-only modulation. MIR-integrated Pockels modulators were realized in Si-on-LiNbO3 experimentally.197 The broken structure inversion symmetry and enormous electro-optic activity of 2D-Te allow it to be applied as low energy and extremely fast Pockels effect modulators. Thus, Jones et al. studied the elevated performance of a waveguide-integrated Pockels effect modulator based on 2D-Te.214 The 2D-Te-based modulator illustrated a 2.7 V cm half-wave voltage-length product and 12.0 pJ per bit switching energy, which was an order of magnitude better than that of the current feature-based modulators (Fig. 30(h–j).
4.3. 2D-Te as an outstanding thermoelectric material
The increasing use of energy use and lack of fossil resources make the production of dissipate heat become increasingly significant. Therefore, thermo-electric technology gives an efficient way to transfer waste heat into electricity. Sitansh Sharma et al.198 theoretically calculated the thermoelectric characteristics of 2D-Te (Fig. 31). The HSE06 hybrid functional result gave a reasonable direct BG of 1.48 eV at the Γ-point. The elevated RT Seebeck coefficient (Sxx = 0.38 mV K−1, Syy = 0.36 mV K−1) was related with the anisotropic lattice thermal conductivity (κlxx = 0.43 W m−1 K−1, κlyy = 1.29 W m−1 K−1). The phonon band configuration shows a mean function of the optical phonons as evidence of a small thermal conductance, which is responsible for the outstanding thermoelectric performance of 2D-Te (Fig. 31(a)). At RT, the modest hole doping (n-type) of 1.2 × 10−11 cm−2, ZTxx = 0.8 was attained (Fig. 31(b)).
4.4. 2D-Te as a piezoelectric device
Due to their greater piezoelectric and mechanical performances and nanoscale structures, the piezoelectric effect of 2DMs has attracted significant attention, for instance, the inversion asymmetry of SL MoS2 proved that it possesses piezoelectricity in its 2H-phase. However, the mechanical to electrical energy conversion rate is strictly limited due to their small piezoelectric coefficients, which also obstructs their realistic device applications. On the contrary, 2D-Te nanoflakes have a large work function and the biggest strain piezoelectric coefficient among the obtainable piezoelectric materials. Consequently, it is considered to be a promising candidate for use in nano-generators. Recently, the He et al.199 studied completely wearable and stretchable nano-generators with a higher power output based on low-temperature, hydrothermally synthesized 2D-Te nano-flakes for the first time. The fabricated 2D-Te nano-flake-based nano-generator device consisted of a sandwich analogue arrangement with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-coated 2D-Te nano-flakes in the central point, and Au/textile and Au layer were used as the top and bottom electrodes, respectively. In addition, the devices were studied in three bending modes, folded, rolled and flat (Fig. 32(a and b)). Under similar strain, the regular bending tests carried out, and an open-circuit voltage of 3 V with a closed circuit current of 290 nA were achieved (Fig. 32(c and d)). The potential of the fabricated 2D-Te nano-flake nano-generator device was confirmed for converting vibrational energy into electrical energy from human behaviors, and thus the device was fastened to the human arm, and the resultant obtained output current and voltage of periodic bending was 650 nA and release was 2.5 V. In addition, when 8 N compressive force and an increased driving frequency of 10 Hz were applied to the device, the output power density was 2.07 mW cm−2, which was sufficient to light 10 LEDs. To better understand the piezoelectric device derived from 2D-Te nano-flakes, Chen et al. theoretically performed a systematic study of Janus 2D-Te due to its electronic piezoelectric nature, and durability for SL and ML Janus 2D-Te. The ML Janus 2D-Te-based calculated flexible mechanical properties and breakage in structure symmetry caused a large piezoelectric coefficient in and out-of-plane of 16.28 pm V−1 and 0.24 pm V−1, respectively. For the ML Janus 2D-TE, the applied in-plane and out-of-plane strains gave rise to a strong piezoelectric effect. In addition, different stacking sequences led to out-of-plane piezoelectric effects. In contrast, the in-plane piezoelectric effect could only survive in a few definite stacking orders. Amazingly, the calculated piezoelectric coefficients of SL and ML Janus 2D-Te were superior to that of Janus TMDCs and further well-known piezoelectric materials.
 Fig. 32  (a) Scheme for the fabrication of the TFNG devices. (b) Optical images showing the TFNG devices in different states. (c and d) Measured output voltage and current during repeated bending and unbending motions. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Elsevier. 
4.5. 2D-Se NS-based phototransistor
The Se was identified as an outstanding material for highly sensitive optoelectronics applications. Therefore, Qin et al.168 formed back-gated 2D-Se NS phototransistors (Fig. 33(a)). The transfer curves of the 2D-Se NS photo-transistor were recorded under different laser irradiation powers at Vds = 3 V (Fig. 33(b)), which showed outstanding photo-responsivity up to 263 A W−1 with a rise time and fall time of 0.1 s and 0.12 s, respectively (Fig. 33(c)). The time-dependent photo-response of laser on and off was also measured at RT (Fig. 33(d)). The response speed was identified the through rise and decay time of 0.10 s and 0.12 s respectively for Vds = 3 V and Vbg = 0 V (10–90% and 90–10% Iph change for the rise fall times, respectively). Thus, the results indicate that the Se crystal as a 2D structure of 1D vdW solid exhibit great feasibility to study the device use.
 Fig. 33  (a) Scheme showing the back-gated 2D-Se NSs phototransistor. (b)Transfer curves of the 2D-Se NSs photo-transistor recorded under different laser irradiation powers at Vds = 3 V. (c) Iph and responsivity (Rλ) with respect to laser illumination power recorded at Vds = 3 V and Vg = −80 V. The Iph line well match with data utilising the relation Iph = Pβ, where β is a constant and P is the device effective illumination power. (d) Distinctive rise or fall properties of Iph with laser on or off switching. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5. Heterostructures devices based on group-VI Xene compounds
Pure Te and Se show novel uses in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Besides pure Te and Se, group-VI-based alloys and heterostructures have also gained interest due to their attractive nature. Liu et al.201 theoretically studied group-VI compounds. Their theoretical study confirmed the durability of two SL group-VI compounds (α-Se2Te (Fig. 34(a) and α-SeTe2 (Fig. 34(b)), having a 1T-MoS2-like configuration. Specifically, α-Se2Te has a SC nature with an indirect bandgap (0.380 eV), and SL α-SeTe2 has a direct-gap SC (0.33 eV). The calculated μ values for both are ∼5400 cm2 V−1 s−1. SexTey alloy was synthesized by mixing Te and Se starting materials.202 However, experimentally, the properties of group-VI compounds and their device applications are still not studied to date. Besides these compounds, heterostructure 2D group-VI materials have real applications for devices.
 Fig. 34  (a) Crystal configuration of α-Se2Te and (b) α-SeTe2. (c) Photo-response of PD of 1D/2D hybrid structure of Se illuminated by 638, 514, and 405 nm wavelengths with 0.3 mW mm−2 intensity and 0.5 V bias voltage. (d) Self-powered photo-response of PD based on Te nanotubes, Se NSs, and Se–Te junction in KOH solution. (e) Power conversion efficiency of Te/TMD heterojunction solar cells. (f) Illustration of Se/ReS2 heterostructure and schematic of heterostructure PD. (g) Output of phototransistors under different illumination wavelengths. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Wiley. 
Chen et al.203 studied an Se 1D/2D hybrid structure formed by plasma-assisted growth, which has a broad photo-response in the UV (405 nm) to IR (1550 nm) wavelength range. Photo-transistors based on a 1D nanowire array/2D thin film hybrid configuration of Se showed an Ion/Idark current ratio of about 700 with a responsivity of 6 mA W−1 and fast photo-response in 25 ms (Fig. 34(c)). Huang et al.204 also studied a photo-electrochemical (PEC)-type photo-detection in a Se/Te heterojunction. The two-step solution synthesis-based Te NTs covered with Se formed Se-Te NTs with a heterojunction at their interface. The photo-response was measured under simulated light in KOH with a photo-responsivity of 98.8 μA W−1. The Se–Te heterojunction intrinsic electric field results in a self-powered photo-response in the P junction, which is not present in pure Te or Se PD (Fig. 34(d)). Group-VI 2D materials form hetero-structures with other 2D family members (e.g., G and TMDs). Yan et al.205 studied G electrodes with lateral p-type Ohmic contact with ML Te, resulting from the weak Fermi level pinning effect and work function match with the VBM of 2D-Te. The Te/TMD heterojunction was also investigated. According to that study, the 2D-Te and TMD construct required type-II band alignment with strong e−–h+ separation and improved sunlight absorption, which is appropriate for the formation of hetero-junction solar cells,206 with the maximum power conversion efficiency of 22.5% for the Te/WTe2 heterostructure (Fig. 34(e)). Qin et al.207 experimentally studied the Se/ReS2 hetero-structure. Se-NPs were epitaxially grown on ReS2 flakes via two-step vapor deposition. The photo-transistors formed with the Se/ReS2 heterostructure (Fig. 34(f)) showed a photo-response from 322 to 633 nm (Fig. 34(g)) with a fast response time (<10 ms). The maximum photo-responsivity was 36 A W−1 under 370 nm with 0.03 mW cm−2 power density (Vds = 3 V and Vg = 0 V). Iph was observed because of the fast transfer of photo-generated e− from the Se NPs to the underlying ReS2 flakes. Group-VI materials with a quasi-1D structure also have the advantage of mixed-dimension hetero-structures, which offer additional options for electronic devices.
Qin et al.208 studied a dual-channel photo-transistor fabricated using 1D Se/2D ReS2 hetero-structures. The heterostructure photodetector showed an enhancement in responsivity (98 A W−1 at 400 nm) with 1.7 mW cm−2 power intensity and fast response speed with a rise time of 45 ms. Similarly, an Se/InSe heterostructure-based PD was studied by Shang et al.209 with high responsivity ranging from the UV to visible region (110 mA W−1 at zero bias under 460 nm). 1D Te hetero-structures with 2D InSe devices were also reported210 to exhibit an ultrasensitive and broadband photo-response with a high Ion/Idark current ratio of over 104 and a relative responsivity of 0.45 A W−1 at vis-light and weak incident power. However, despite the numerous experimental findings, the understanding of alloys or hetero-structures of group-VI 2D materials is still vague, which delays the progress of their fascinating applications. Table 10 shows the group VI-2D Xenes and their heterostructure-based phototransistor, synthetic methods, properties and calculated results.
Table 10 Group VI-2D Xenes and their heterostructure-based phototransistor




Material type
Synthetic methods
Type of PDs
Responsivity (A W−1)
Range (nm)
Ref.




Te plates
Mica substrate
Photoconductive
389.5
473

211



Se-NSs (16 nm)
PVD
Photoconductive
263
637

168



In-Ga/Se
CVD
Photovoltaic
408 × 10−3
532

212



Se 1D/2D hybrid
Plasma-assisted Growth
Photoconductive
6 × 10−3
UV–IR (405–1550)

203



Se/Te
Two-step solution synthesis
Photo-electrochemical
98.8 × 10−6
400

204



Se/ReS2
Two-step vapor deposition
Photoconductive
36
322–633

207



1D Se/2D ReS2
CVD
Photoconductive
98
400

208



Se/InSe
CVD
Photovoltaic
110 × 10−3
UV to vis

209



1D Te/2D InSe
PVD
Photoconductive
0.45
Visible

210





6. Conclusion
Inspired by theoretical investigations and the experimental growth of group-VIA (Se and Te) 2D-Xenes, such as selenene (2D-Se) and tellurene (2D-Te), the recent study of their device applications promote the scientific research in this direction. Despite being one of the newest members in the 2D material family, the group-VI 2D materials 2D-Se and 2D-Te show fascinating properties and immense technology scope. Regardless of being the latest candidate of 2DM Xene family, 2D-Te has attracted wide attention due to its interesting and tunable properties and scientific potential, promising new opportunities in theory and experiment based studies. This review concentrated on the synthesis of the novel group-VIA 2D-Xenes (2D-Te and 2D-Si) and also summarized the recent progress to understand their crystal structure, electronic, optical, mechanical, and thermodynamic properties and spin QHE (magnetism). Moreover, their stability was also studied for real applications. These physical and chemical properties will help to modify their band gap for device applications.
Lastly, the prospects for the future research, their further advanced technological use, and the associated challenges of group-VIA Xenes were also summarized and highlighted. Their crystal structures show that 2D-Se and 2D-Te have layer-dependent properties, such as in few-layer Te preserves the trigonal Te geometry of its bulk. When 2D-Se and 2D-Te layers have ML they show α- β- and γ-phases, depending on the thermodynamic stability of the system. 2D-Se and 2D-Te have a non-layered structure when in the α- β- and γ-phases and become layered when they have square crystal structure. The electronic properties of 2D-Se and 2D-Te indicate that they are direct and indirect BG materials, respectively. The optical properties of group-VIA 2D Xenes show that they possess a layer-dependent BG from the mid-IR (MIR) to red range, which is of importance to numerous promising technological devices for MIR and terahertz use. 2D-Te has also been predicted to exhibit extraordinary RT carrier mobility in the range 100 to 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is much larger compared to that of 2D-TMDCs sand FL-BP. Electrical characterization of FL 2D-Te transistor-based devices yielded hole mobilities consistent with the propose ranges. This large RT mobility in 2D-Te Xenes make it suitable for manufacturing energy efficient and high speed electronics. Their mechanical properties show that upon increasing the tensile strain up to a critical value (15%), their BG decreases to minimum. The spin QHE properties of group-VIA Xenes indicate that they are TIs at RT, such as, the experimentally studied 2D-Te MLs, which show VB and CB energies, and gapless states with a Dirac point observed along edges. Thus, they have applications in spintronic devices. The thermodynamic properties showed theoretically studied isotropic in-plane low thermal conductivity in α-Se at RT of 3.04 W m−1 K−1, which is abnormally lower compared to that of α-Te of 9.85W m−1 K−1 and even lower than that of bulk, Se but higher than that of square 2D-Se.
Generally, 2D-materials are layered materials that are exfoliated from their bulk counterparts because of their strong in-plane covalent and out-of-plane weak vdW interactions. Generally, non-layered 2D-materials (2D-Se and 2D-Te) are synthesized via bottom-up methods such as the vdW epitaxial method or chemical vapor deposition. However, these methods demand harsh synthetic conditions, for instance, high temperature and ultrahigh-vacuum conditions. LPE is an efficient method for the preparation of 2D materials and extensively utilized in the fabrication of layered 2D materials, such as graphene, TMDCs and BPs. LPE also has potential for the synthesis of a few non-layered materials, for instance Te and Se, by exfoliation from their bulk materials owing to their unique chain structure.
To date, many device-based applications for group VI 2D materials in pristine (2D-Se and 2D-Te) and heterostructure 2D-materials have been reported, such as PDs, FETs, thermo-electrical devices, and piezo-electric devices. The 2D-Te FETs experimentally show a large Ion/Ioff ratio 106 and high μ ∼700 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is higher compared to that MoS2 and MoSe2. In addition, 2D-Te has considerable air durability compared to the air-sensitive BP. The 2D-Se-based phototransistors showed a photoresponse under different illumination powers, even down to 0.21 mW cm−2. The estimated photoresponsivity was found to be 263 A W−1 at 0.21 mW cm−2, which is higher than that of other studied 2D materials. The 2D heterostructures offer unique probable novel devices applications via stacking of diverse 2D materials. This is because heterostructures at interfaces provide band alignments and charge transfer, which decide their interesting properties.
As new members in the 2D material family, group-VI 2D materials face a few challenges, such as lack of synthetic methods, development and carrier transport knowledge, which needs ongoing research exploration. It is predictable that more complete understanding on group-VI 2D materials will be introduced with concerted efforts.
7. Perspectives and challenges for 2D-Te Xenes
Although 2D-Te nanoflakes have previously revealed outstanding application for elementary study and real use, there still remain shortcomings and opportunities for scientists. In the fabrication method, ultrathin 2D-Te nanoflakes can be fabricated via the PVD method. However, the requirement of a high vacuum environment and high-purity atomic source limit its scaled-up application. LPE is an effective technique to synthesize 2D-layered nano-architectures. On the other hand, the small level and incompetent control in the thickness of the resulting materials restrict its further utilization. Regarding PD and FETs based on 2D-Te nanoflakes, the reported studies mostly concentrated on the visible to NIR region. However, the development of ultra-broadband (UV to MIR region)-based materials is highly required. Additionally, the carrier dynamics and transport mechanism in PDs and FETs are not sufficiently clear compared to that of BP, TMDC-based PDs and FETs. Thus, plenty work remains to get better complete type of 2D-Te nanoflakes. For modulator applications, long operation durability is still a big challenge. Besides, only a few studies have been reported to date about the 2D-Te nanoflake-based free-space and waveguide modulators. Related studies need to be carried out to further explore the achievement and mechanism of the modulator. Similarly, a lot research work needs to be performed on the synthesis of 2D-Se via facile methods for its fundamental study and nanodevice applications due to its potential properties. The greater efforts for some of the modern group-VIA 2DM Xenes were limited by different factors, for example, the formation conditions of the substrates used and the tiny crystal size of the obtained materials. Thus, numerous investigations need to be done to gain a complete basic understanding of the properties of the group-VIA 2DM Xenes and utilize their full potential, with the following opportunities and challenges. A more complete understanding of the group-VIA 2D-Xenes will be achieved with upcoming technology.
The current research on group-VI 2D materials has some novel opportunities and challenges for the growth of the 2D family. Their fabrication methods are very challenging. The liquid-phase synthetic method gives a path for good-quality and single-crystal group-VI 2D Xenes. However, large-scale or wafer-scale formation depends on vapor deposition, which is essential for wafer-scale use such as integrated circuits. Devices formed with the materials synthesize via these method show inferior efficiency compared with devices based on liquid-phase synthesis materials. Thus, vapor deposition needs essential development to boost the quality of wafer-scale products and further facilitate the wafer-scale industrial use. Their carrier transport and mechanisms are not completely understood compared to other 2D SCs. Broadly, the reported FET-based group-VI 2D materials exhibit p-type transport property because of the high level of their VBM and the Fermi level pinning effect at the contacts. To understand low-power circuit, it is imperative to manufacture both n- and p-type FETs with similar channel materials. There are numerous approached to achieve this goal, e.g., contact engineering, doping, and interface engineering, which can alter the carrier transport in 2D channels and get polarization control, activity enhancement, and new applications. These methods demand understanding of the carrier transport nature, which is worth future investigation.
2D hetero-structures offer extraordinary potential applications through stacking dissimilar 2D materials sequentially. The band alignment and charge transfer 2D hetero-structures at interfaces establish their interesting properties, which require a deeper understanding. However, hetero-structures in 2D group-VI materials and other 2D materials are rarely reported experimentally. The growth of group-VI 2D material hetero-structures can extend their use in other fields, for example, tunneling devices and hetero-junction solar cells. The majority of experimentally-based group-VI 2D material structures are helical chains. On the other hand, theoretical calculations offered different thermodynamic stable crystal phases, which show unique properties from the ordinary group-VI 2D material structures. The development of allotropes and phase transition in group-VI 2D materials is extremely limited. Thus, their complicated structure formation and transition mechanisms still need to be studied.
Abbreviations

2DMsTwo-dimensional materials
GGraphene
NSsNanosheets
CCarbon
BLBilayer
FLFew-layer
BLBond length
SCSemiconductor
QHEQuantum Hall effect
QSHEQuantum spin Hall effect
RTRoom temperature
BGsBandgaps
TMDCsTransition metal dichalcogenides
BPBlack phosphorus
HOPGHighly oriented pyrolytic graphite
VBMValence band maximum
CBMConduction band maximum
TisTopological insulators
SOCSpin orbital coupling
PSPlanar square
BSBuckled square
BRBuckled rectangular
WALWeak anti-localization effect
UCFUniversal conductance fluctuations
PLPhotoluminescence
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
STMScanning tunneling microscopy
PVDPhysical vapor deposition
CVDChemical vapor deposition
ALDAtomic layer deposition
IRInfrared
LPELiquid-phase exfoliation
BZsBrillouin zones

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts.
References
Q. Meng, R. W. Xiu, J. Taeho, W. Miae, P. G. Young, S. D. Kipkemoi, L. Li-Ping, Z. Han and K. J. Seung, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. Ni, C. H. Y. X. Lim, Y. Wang, D. Y. Tang and K. P. Loh, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, S. Sun, D. Mandler, X. Wang, S. Z. Qiao and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2518–2534 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, L. Wang, M. Aslam, C. Ma, N. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2005957 CrossRef .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2019, 100254 Search PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Gou and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21622–21678 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, K. H. Thebo, U. Khan, R. Wang, S. S. Shams, Z. Han and Z. Ouyang, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 54, 1–19 CrossRef .
W. Wang, T. Zhang, A. Seliverstov, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Wang, X. Peng, Q. Lu, C. Qin and X. Pan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2070012 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Z. Shi, X. Shi, K. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14491–14527 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dai, K. Li, F. Wang, Y. Hu, J. Zhang, T. Zhai, B. Yang, Y. Fu, W. Cao and D. Jia, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2070011 CrossRef .
C. Y. Wang, C. Wang, F. Meng, P. Wang, S. Wang, S. J. Liang and F. Miao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1901107 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Mermin and H. Wagner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1966, 17, 1133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dai, K. Li, F. Wang, Y. Hu, J. Zhang, T. Zhai, B. Yang, Y. Fu, W. Cao and D. Jia, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900975 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, X. Tang, X. Fu, W. Chen, B. Shabbir, H. Zhang, Q. Liu and M. Gong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1762–1769 RSC .
D. Cassi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 68, 3631 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Ge, X. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900726 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nelson and L. Peliti, J. Phys., 1987, 48, 1085–1092 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pacchioni, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16090 CrossRef .
Y. Song, K. You, Y. Chen, J. Zhao, X. Jiang, Y. Ge, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, C. Xing and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12595–12602 RSC .
M. J. Lee, S. Lee, S. Lee, K. Balamurugan, C. Yoon, J. T. Jang, S.-H. Kim, D.-H. Kwon, M. Kim and J.-P. Ahn, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 1, 1 Search PubMed .

          J. Halim, Synthesis and transport properties of 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes), Linköping University Electronic Press,  2018 Search PubMed .
R. Arafune, C.-L. Lin, R. Nagao, M. Kawai and N. Takagi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 229701 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pletikosić, M. Kralj, P. Pervan, R. Brako, J. Coraux, A. N'Diaye, C. Busse and T. Michely, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 056808 CrossRef .
L. Chen, C.-C. Liu, B. Feng, X. He, P. Cheng, Z. Ding, S. Meng, Y. Yao and K. Wu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 056804 CrossRef .
B. Feng, O. Sugino, R.-Y. Liu, J. Zhang, R. Yukawa, M. Kawamura, T. Iimori, H. Kim, Y. Hasegawa and H. Li, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 096401 CrossRef .
J. Guo, J. Zhao, D. Huang, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Ge, Y. Song, C. Xing, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6235–6242 RSC .
A. Savin, O. Jepsen, J. Flad, O. K. Andersen, H. Preuss and H. G. von Schnering, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1992, 31, 187–188 CrossRef .
B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes and S.-C. Zhang, Science, 2006, 314, 1757–1761 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khan and M. N. Leuenberger, Nanophotonics, 2018, 7, 1589–1600 CAS .
J.-A. Yan, S.-P. Gao, R. Stein and G. Coard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 245403 CrossRef .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L.-P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .

          O. Petruk, R. Szewczyk, T. Ciuk, W. Strupiński, J. Salach, M. Nowicki, I. Pasternak, W. Winiarski and K. Trzcinka, in Recent Advances in Automation, Robotics and Measuring Techniques, Springer,  2014, 631–640 Search PubMed .
L. Falkovsky and A. Varlamov, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2007, 56, 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hwang, S. Adam and S. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 186806 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gomez De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, X. Cai, S. Yi, J. Chen, Y. Dai, C. Niu, Z. Guo, M. Xie, F. Liu and J.-H. Cho, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef .
L. Cai, J. He, Q. Liu, T. Yao, L. Chen, W. Yan, F. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhao and T. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2622–2627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ge, W. Wan, F. Yang and Y. Yao, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 035008 CrossRef .
A. Manchon, H. C. Koo, J. Nitta, S. Frolov and R. Duine, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 871 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 226801 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, G. Qiu, J. Jian, H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, C. Y. Xu, X. Xu, W. Wu, H. Wang and Peide D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(10), 10222–10229 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Xie, Z. Zhang, C. Zhong, Y. Li, Z. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1707–1713 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Yi, W. Liu, J. Botana, L. Zhao, Z. Liu, J.-Y. Liu and M.-S. Miao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2647–2653 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dávila, L. Xian, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and G. Le Lay, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 095002 CrossRef .
M. Houssa, A. Dimoulas and A. Molle, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 253002 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Lin, R. Arafune, K. Kawahara, N. Tsukahara, E. Minamitani, Y. Kim, N. Takagi and M. Kawai, Appl. Phys. Express, 2012, 5, 045802 CrossRef .
A. Molle, C. Grazianetti, L. Tao, D. Taneja, M. H. Alam and D. Akinwande, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6370–6387 RSC .
N. Gao, J. Li and Q. Jiang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 592, 222–226 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dimoulas, Microelectron. Eng., 2015, 131, 68–78 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 045423 CrossRef .
M. Liao, Y. Zang, Z. Guan, H. Li, Y. Gong, K. Zhu, X.-P. Hu, D. Zhang, Y. Xu and Y.-Y. Wang, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 344–348 Search PubMed .
L. Kou, C. Chen and S. C. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2794–2805 Search PubMed .
C. Kamal and M. Ezawa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 085423 CrossRef .
G. Abellán, P. Ares, S. Wild, E. Nuin, C. Neiss, D. R. S. Miguel, P. Segovia, C. Gibaja, E. G. Michel and A. Görling, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 14581–14586 CrossRef .
P. Ares, J. J. Palacios, G. Abellán, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703771 CrossRef .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang and Z. Ni, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down, C. Gibaja, E. Lorenzo, F. Zamora and C. E. Banks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702606 CrossRef .
V. Nagarajan and R. Chandiramouli, Phys. E, 2018, 97, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera and Z. Sofer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605299 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Z.-L. Liu, C. Cheng, X. Wu, H. Liu, C. Liu, J.-O. Wang, S.-Y. Zhu, Y.-Q. Wang and D.-X. Shi, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2133–2139 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma, S. Kumar and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2017, 8, 044013 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. He, B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, R. Hu, L. Liu, J. Song and J. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8668–8673 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y. L. Wang, J. T. Sun, C. Liu, J. O. Wang, Z. L. Liu and S. Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef .
L. Lu, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. Chen, Y. Song, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, B. Dong, Y. Xiang and F. Xing, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12, 1700221 CrossRef .
S. Yang, B. Chen, Y. Qin, Y. Zhou, L. Liu, M. Durso, H. Zhuang, Y. Shen and S. Tongay, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 104002 CrossRef CAS .
O. Heavens, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1960, 23, 1 CrossRef .
L. M. Corliss, N. Elliott and J. M. Hastings, Phys. Rev., 1960, 117, 929–935 CrossRef CAS .
W. O. Snelling, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1960, 9, 257–374 CrossRef .
W. Wu, Q. Gang, W. Yixiu, W. Ruoxing and Y. Peide, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7203–7212 RSC .

          K. W. Boyack, B. N. Wylie and G. S. Davidson, Visual Interfaces to Digital Libraries,  2002, vol. 53, pp. 764–774 Search PubMed .
Z. Jin, H. Nie, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Xu and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6455 RSC .
L. Zheng, K. Hu, F. Teng and X. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602448 CrossRef .
L. B. Luo, X.-B. Yang, F.-X. Liang, J.-S. Jie, Q. Li, Z.-F. Zhu, C.-Y. Wu, Y.-Q. Yu and L. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1942 RSC .
S. Reza, G. Bosman, M. S. Islam, T. I. Kamins, S. Sharma and R. S. Williams, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2006, 5, 523–529 Search PubMed .
A. Bid, A. Bora and A. K. Raychaudhuri, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 152–156 CrossRef .
H. Mu, Z. Wang, Y. Jian, X. Si and Q. Bao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 150608131013000 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, Z. Yang, C. Si, Z. Liang and Z. Han, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1466–1476 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, W. Wang, L. Wu, X. Jiang, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2852–2861 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, W. Huang, Z. Xie, J. Zhao, D. Ma, T. Fan, W. Liang, Y. Ge, B. Dong, J. Li and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. K. Qin, C. Y. Xu, C. Jian and Z. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4319–4328 CrossRef .
M. Tuo, C. Xu, H. Mu, X. Bao, Y. Wang, S. Xiao, W. Ma, L. Li, D. Y. Tang and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 1808–1816 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Wu, H. Gao, Y. Yang and W. Ren, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 235702 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kochat, A. Samanta and Y. Zhang, Journal, 2018, 9, 1759–1764 Search PubMed .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Pan, F. Yang, C. Wang, C. Yang and J. Wei, Sci. Bull., 2018, 063, 159–168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, G. Qiu, J. Jian, H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, C.-Y. Xu, X. Xu and W. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10222–10229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, Z. Xie, Z. Liang, W. Liang, T. Fan, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700884 CrossRef .
C. Wang, X. Zhou, J. Qiao, L. Zhou, X. Kong, Y. Pan, Z. Cheng, Y. Chai and W. Ji, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22263–22269 RSC .
Y. Wang, G. Qiu, R. Wang, S. Huang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Du, W. A. Goddard, M. J. Kim and X. Xu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 228–236 CrossRef .
J. Chen, Y. Dai, Y. Ma, X. Dai, W. Ho and M. Xie, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15945–15948 RSC .
W. Wu, G. Qiu, Y. Wang, R. Wang and P. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7203–7212 RSC .
R. Kumar, S. Sahoo, E. Joanni, R. K. Singh, R. M. Yadav, R. K. Verma, D. P. Singh, W. K. Tan, A. Pérez del Pino, S. A. Moshkalev and A. Matsuda, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2655–2694 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Lu, T. Li, J. Xu, Z. D. Xie, L. Li, S. N. Zhu and Y. Y. Zhu, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 2858–2865 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xian, A. P. Paz, E. Bianco, P. M. Ajayan and A. Rubio, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 041003 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, X. Cai, C. Niu, S. Yi, Z. Guo, F. Liu, J.-H. Cho, Y. Jia and Z. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef .
S. Vandana, V. Kochat, J. Lee, V. Varshney, S. Yazdi, J. Shen, S. Kosolwattana, S. Vinod, R. Vajtai and A. K. Roy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 045301 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, X. Cai, S. Yi, J. Chen, Y. Dai, C. Niu, Z. Guo, M. Xie, F. Liu and J.-H. Cho, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef .
L. Xian, A. P. Paz, E. Bianco, P. M. Ajayan and A. Rubio, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 041003 CrossRef .
J. Qiao, Y. Pan, F. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Chai and W. Ji, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 159–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, X. Cai, S. Yi, J. Chen, Y. Dai, C. Niu, Z. Guo, M. Xie, F. Liu, J. H. Cho, Y. Jia and Z. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef .
H.-S. Tsai, S.-W. Wang, C.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Chen, H. Ouyang, Y.-L. Chueh, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, J. Guan, Z. Lin, B. Liu, S. Xing, W. Wang and J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(8), 4619–4623 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Wu, O. V. Yazyev, H. Weng, Z. Guo, W. D. Cheng and G. L. Chai, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 115411 CrossRef .
L. Ramírez-Montes, W. López-Pérez, R. González-Hernández and C. Pinilla, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2020, 120, e26267 CrossRef .
L. Ziyuan, W. Cong and C. Yang, Small, 2020, 1, 2003319 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, J. Guan, Z. Lin, B. Liu, S. Xing, W. Wang and J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4619–4623 CrossRef CAS .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 202–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Singh, P. Jamdagni, M. Jakhar and A. Kumar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 5749 RSC .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
L. Matthes, P. Gori, O. Pulci and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 035438 CrossRef .
J. Min, C. Zhao, Z. Zeng, Y. Jia and Z. Du, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 100, 085402 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and P. Ahluwalia, Phys. B, 2012, 407, 4627–4634 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Penn, Phys. Rev., 1962, 128, 2093 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Pan, F. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Chai and W. Ji, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 159–168 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, X. Liu, J. Yin and H. Lee, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 095902 CrossRef .
X. Huang, J. Guan, Z. Lin, B. Liu, S. Xing, W. Wang and J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4619–4623 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Wu, O. V. Yazyev, H. Weng, Z. Guo, W.-D. Cheng and G.-L. Chai, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 115411 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, G. Qiu, R. Wang, S. Huang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Du, W. A. Goddard, M. J. Kim and X. Xu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 228 CrossRef .
D. Wang, L.-M. Tang, X.-X. Jiang, J.-Y. Tan, M.-D. He, X.-J. Wang and K.-Q. Chen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800475 CrossRef .
M. Grundmann, Nanotechnology, 2007, 60, 63–64 Search PubMed .
W. E. Spear and A. K. Geim, Proc. Phys. Soc., 1968, 76, 826–832 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. T. Mullen, Z. Jin, K. M. Borysenko, M. B. Nardelli and K. W. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 588–591 Search PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 330–331 CrossRef .
K. Kaasbjerg, K. Thygesen and K. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115317–115310 CrossRef .
A. Samad, A. Shafique, H. J. Kim and Y. H. Shin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11094–11099 RSC .
Y. Du, G. Qiu, Y. Wang, M. Si, X. Xu, W. Wu and P. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(6), 3965–3973 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khatun, A. Banerjee and A. J. Pal, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3591–3598 RSC .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pine and G. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1971, 4, 356 CrossRef .
Y. Du, G. Qiu, Y. Wang, M. Si, X. Xu, W. Wu and P. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3965–3973 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Wang, D. W. Wang, A. J. Yang, N. Koratkar, J. F. Chu, P. L. Lv and M. Z. Rong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 4058–4066 RSC .
W. Zhang, R. Yu, W. Feng, Y. Yao, H. Weng, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 156808 CrossRef .
R. Yu, W. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang, S.-C. Zhang, X. Dai and Z. Fang, science, 2010, 329, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, Q. Wei and A. Copple, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 085402 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 3155–3158 CrossRef .
C. Lin, W. Cheng, G. Chai and H. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 24250–24256 RSC .
G. Liu, Z. Gao, G.-L. Li and H. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 127, 065103 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Malyi, K. V. Sopiha, I. Radchenko, P. Wu and C. Persson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 2075–2083 RSC .
C. Lin, W. Cheng, Z. Guo, G. Chai and H. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 23247–23253 RSC .
L. Wei, X. Zhang and M. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8059–8064 RSC .
A. Jain and A. J. McGaughey, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 19080–19086 CrossRef CAS .
A. Apte, E. Bianco, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Yazdi, R. Rao, N. Glavin, H. Kumazoe, V. Varshney, A. Roy and F. Shimojo, 2D Mater., 2018, 6, 015013 CrossRef .
I. Min, C. Zhao, Z. Zeng, Y. Jia and Z. Du, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 100, 085402–085406 CrossRef .
D. Y. Qiu, H. Felipe and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 216805 CrossRef .
J.-H. Choi, P. Cui, H. Lan and Z. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 066403 CrossRef .
F. Wang, J. Li, F. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Z. Cheng, Z. Wang, K. Xu, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6077–6083 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang K. Cai, J. Li, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, K. Xu, F. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang, K. Wang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 617–623 CrossRef .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Ahmed Shifa, Y. Wen, F. Wang, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Yin, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603254 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Safdar, X. Zhan, F. Wang, Z. Cheng and J. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1183–1189 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Z. Sun, S. Gao, H. Cheng, Q. Liu, J. Piao, T. Yao, C. Wu, S. Hu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1057 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, W. Zhao, R. Xu, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9803–9805 RSC .
J. S. Chen, D. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8252–8254 RSC .
F. Wang, J. H. Seo, G. Luo, M. B. Starr, Z. Li, D. Geng, X. Yin, S. Wang, D. G. Fraser, D. Morgan, Z. Ma and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, Y. Jung, A. S. Disa, F. J. Walker, C. H. Ahn and J. J. Cha, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4183–4188 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Wen, F. Yao, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Li, X. Zhan, K. Xu, F. Wang, F. Wang, J. Li, K. Liu, C. Jiang, F. Liu and J. He, Small, 2015, 11, 5388–5394 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Weidmann and J. C. Anderson, Thin Solid Films, 1971, 7, 265–276 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Huang, T. E. Lister and J. L. Stickney, Surf. Sci., 2012, 392, 0–43 Search PubMed .
X. Huang, J. Guan, Z. Lin, B. Liu, S. Xing, W. Wang and J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(8), 4619–4623 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Apte, E. Bianco, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Yazdi, R. Rao, N. Glavin, H. Kumazoe, V. Varshney, A. Roy, F. Shimojo, E. Ringe, R. K. Kalia, A. Nakano, C. S. Tiwary, P. Vashishta, V. Kochat and P. M. Ajayan, 2D Mater., 2018, 6, 015013 CrossRef .
J. Qin, G. Qiu, J. Jian, H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, C.-Y. Xu, X. Xu, W. Wu, H. Wang and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10222–10229 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cai, B. Chen, G. Wang, E. Soignard, A. Khosravi, M. Manca, X. Marie, S. L. Chang, B. Urbaszek and S. Tongay, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605551 CrossRef .
S. Yang, C. Wang, C. Ataca, Y. Li, H. Chen, H. Cai, A. Suslu, J. C. Grossman, C. Jiang and Q. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2533–2539 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yamamoto, A. Syouji, T. Goto, E. Kulatov, K. Ohno, Y. Kawazoe, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 035210 CrossRef .
S. Yang, H. Cai, B. Chen, C. Ko, V. O. Özçelik, D. F. Ogletree, C. E. White, Y. Shen and S. Tongay, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12288–12294 RSC .
B. Mayers and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1875–1881 RSC .
M. Roy, S. Sen, S. K. Gupta and A. K. Tyagi, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10873–10873 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Wu, O. V. Yazyev, H. Weng, Z. Guo, W. D. Cheng and G. Chai, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 115411 CrossRef .
L. Wu, W. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, D. Ma, Y. Xiang, J. Li, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806346 CrossRef .
W. Li, K. Nomoto, K. Lee, S. Islam, Z. Hu, M. Zhu, X. Gao, J. Xie, M. Pilla and D. Jena, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 062105 CrossRef .
Y. Du, G. Qiu, Y. Wang, M. Si, X. Xu, W. Wu and P. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3965–3973 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Iqbal, M. Z. Iqbal, M. F. Khan, M. A. Shehzad, Y. Seo, J. H. Park, C. Hwang and J. Eom, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10699 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 46, 2732–2743 RSC .
K. W. Plessner, Proc. Phys. Soc., 1956, 64, 671–681 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, R. J. Nielsen, W. A. Goddard III and M. P. Soriaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6692–6698 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Dutton and R. S. Muller, Proc. IEEE, 1971, 59, 1511–1517 CAS .
X. Ren, Y. Wang, Z. Xie, F. Xue, C. Leighton and C. D. Frisbie, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4738–4744 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, Z. Wang, X. Zhan, Q. Wang, M. Safdar, Y. Wang and J. He, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 105705 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. Shi, Y. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Jiang, A. A. Suleiman, B. Jin, X. Hu, X. Zhou and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906585 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, J. Zhao, D. Huang, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Ge, Y. Song, C. Xing, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6235–6242 RSC .
M. A. Van Camp, S. Assefa, D. M. Gill, T. Barwicz, S. M. Shank, P. M. Rice, T. Topuria and W. M. J. Green, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 28009 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, N. Healy, C. J. Mitchell, J. S. Penades, M. Nedeljkovic, G. Z. Mashanovich and A. C. Peacock, Opt. Lett., 2015, 40, 268–271 CrossRef .
M. Nedeljkovic, S. Stankovic, C. J. Mitchell, A. Z. Khokhar, S. A. Reynolds, D. J. Thomson, F. Y. Gardes, C. G. Littlejohns, G. T. Reed and G. Z. Mashanovich, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2014, 26, 1352–1355 CAS .
A. Malik, S. Dwivedi, L. Van Landschoot, M. Munceb, Y. Shimura, G. Lepage, J. Van Campenhout, W. Vanherle, T. Van Opstal, R. Loo and G. Roelkens, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 28479–28488 CrossRef .
Z. Yi, S. Chakravarty, C. J. Chung and R. T. Chen, Photonics Res., 2018, 6, 254–276 CrossRef .
W. S. Whitney, M. C. Sherrott, D. Jariwala, W.-H. Lin, H. A. Bechtel, G. R. Rossman and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 78–84 CrossRef CAS .
R. Peng, K. Khaliji, N. Youngblood, R. Grassi, T. Low and M. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6315–6320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, R. Shankar, M. A. Kats, Y. Song, J. Kong, M. Loncar and F. Capasso, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6526–6532 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chiles and S. Fathpour, Optica, 2014, 1, 350–355 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma, N. Singh and U. Schwingenschlgl, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1540–1548 CrossRef .
W. He, N. Huynh Van, Y. T. Qian, J. S. Hwang, Y. P. Yan, H. Choi and D. J. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 1055–1061 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, G. Qiu, J. Jian, H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, C.-Y. Xu, X. Xu and W. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10222–10229 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, H. Wang and G.-L. Li, Phys. Lett. A, 2020, 37, 126431 CrossRef .
B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1380–1384 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-T. You, P.-J. Chen, D. Li, T.-Y. Su, L. Lee, Y.-C. Shih, C.-W. Chen, C.-C. Chang and Y.-C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35477–35486 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. You, P. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. N. Huang, Y. Ge, L. Wu, Z. Dong and X. Dai, Small, 2019, 15, 1900902 CrossRef .
J. Yan, X. Zhang, Y. Pan, J. Li, B. Shi, S. Liu, J. Yang, Z. Song, H. Zhang and M. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 6153–6163 RSC .
K. Wu, H. Ma, Y. Gao, W. Hu and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7430–7436 RSC .
J. K. Qin, G. Qiu, W. He, J. Jian, M. W. Si, Y. Q. Duan, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, H. Y. Wang and W. Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1806254 CrossRef .
J. Qin, H. Yan, G. Qiu, M. Si, P. Miao, Y. Duan, W. Shao, L. Zhen, C. Xu and D. Y. Peide, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 669–674 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, H. Chen, M. Dai, Y. Hu, F. Gao, H. Yang, B. Xu, S. Zhang, B. Tan and X. Zhang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 564–572 RSC .
F. Qin, F. Gao, M. Dai, Y. Hu, M. Yu, L. Wang, W. Feng, B. Li and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37313–37319 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chang, L. Chen, J. Wang, W. Tian, W. Zhai and B. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 21244–21251 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. U. R. Sagar, B. Zhang, W. Huang, A. Mahmood, N. Mahmood, K. Khan and H. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–77 CrossRef .
S. D. Jones, S. D. Jones, Y. Wang, H. Lin, W. Wu and J. Hu, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6(7), 1632–1638 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Ayesha Khan Tareen	Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7238-6366) is currently a Post-Doctoral fellow at Shenzhen University. She received her Post-Doctoral (2D materials) training from Shenzhen University, Ph.D. (Physical Chemistry/Materials) in 2018 from Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), M.Phil. (Analytical Chemistry) in 2015 from “The Islamia University of Bahawalpur” and B.Sc. (Honors) in Chemistry in 2012 from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan. Her research interests are in magnetic/superconductivity and transition metal nitride material synthesis and applications in different directions especially for magnetic materials, photo-catalysts, fuel cells, and dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).
Karim Khan	Dr Karim Khan (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8689-9245) was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He received his B.Sc. degree (2005) from Gomal University, M.Sc. (2009) in Physics from University of Peshawar, M.Phil. (2012) in Solid State Physics from the University of the Punjab, Pakistan, and did research in the “National Centre for Physics”, Quaid-e-Azim university, Pakistan. He received his Ph.D. (2016) from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and he also served as a Postdoctoral Fellow (2017–2019) at Shenzhen University, China. To date, he has over 60 scientific publications and 2 patents. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy producing/storage/saving devices and developing sensors for biomedical application.
Han Zhang	Prof. Dr. Han Zhang (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0166-1973) received his B.S. Degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and Ph.D. from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is currently the Director of the Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D-materials and Devices, and the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, Shenzhen University. His current research focuses on the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of 2D-materials. He was also the Highly Cited Researcher of the Clarivate Analytics in 2018 and 2019. He was awarded Fellow of the Optical Society of America in 2019. In the past five years, Prof. Han Zhang's group has published more than 100 papers, including 2 in Physics Reports, 1 in PNAS, 3 in Chem. Soc. Rev., 6 in Nat. Comm., and 10 in Adv. Mater. The total citations of all his publications is more than 39000 times, and his H index is 101.

 	Fig. 1  (a) 2DMs based on the periods in the Periodic Table, and crystal structure of 2D-tellurium (2D-Te). (b) Timeline of the experimentally formed current monoelemental 2DM Xenes, where “Th.” means theoretical. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Scheme showing the top/side views of three 2D-Se structures: 1T-MoS2-analogue structure (t-Se), tiled helical-chain structure (c-Se), and square structure (s-Se).84 (b) α-Te crystal structure. (c) β-Te top/side views of its crystal configuration. (d) γ-Te top/side views of its crystal structure. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier.	 


T–Se	
a = b = 3.74	2.67	0.236
C–Se	
a = 4.99	
d1 = 2.40	0.122

b = 4.13	
d2 = 2.37
S–Se	
a = b = 3.65	
d1 = 2.40	0.264

d2 = 2.71
Bulk-Se	
a = b = 4.11	2.46	0

c = 5.16

 	Fig. 3  (a) Allotropes of group-VIA elemental 2DMs. Adopted with permission.42 Copyright YY, publisher, 2D-Te top and side views structures in (b) α-Te, (c) β-Te, and (d) γ-Te. (e) Surface Brillouin zones (BZs) of the α (or γ) and β-phases. This figure was adapted/reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the American Physical Society.	 

α-Se	
a = b = 3.72	2.66	3.15	2.72	0.75	0.78 (0.76)a
β-Se	
a = 3.72, b = 4.92	3.38–2.65	1.77	2.77	
	

γ-Se	
a = b = 3.59	2.71	3.50	2.46	
	

α-Te	4.15 (4.15)a	3.02 (3.03)a	3.66 (3.67)a	2.60 (2.62)a	1.13	1.10 (1.16)a
β-Te	4.17–4.59 (4.17–4.59)a	3.02–2.76 (3.02–2.76)a	2.16 (2.16)a	2.55 (2.56)a	
	

γ-Te	3.92 (3.92)a	3.08 (3.08)a	4.16 (4.16)a	2.46 (2.46)a	
	


Rings Se	8.80	—	1.74	−2.76
Chains Se	4.01	4.98	1.76	−2.78
Square Se	3.65	—	0.77	−2.65
Rectangular Te	4.17	5.49	2.16	−2.57
Square Te	4.08	—	0.92	−2.51

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Electronic band structure of monolayer α-Se and α-Te and respective PDOS. Indirect BG transition and BG values are also provided. In the PDOS, ‘1’ and ‘2’ indicate the contribution from the atoms with the coordination number of ‘six’ and ‘three’, respectively. (c) Optical absorbance and (d) Electron energy loss spectra of monolayer α-Se and α-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
(ω) = /cLε2(ω)	(1)
{−1/(ω)} = ε2(ω)/ε21(ω) + ε22(ω)	(2)

 	Fig. 5  Band structures of (a) α-Se and (b) β-Se gained from the PBE level of theory without (black solid) and with (red dashed) SOC. (c) BGs gained from PBE (PBE + SOC) and HSE (HSE + SOC) calculations, as shown with blue and red bars, respectively. (d) Comparison of the carrier mobilities. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Raman spectra with variable t. (b) Raman spectra of 2D-Te with tensile and compressive c-axis strains. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Angle-resolved Raman spectra for the evolution of FL Se nanosheets with angles between the crystal direction and incident laser polarization. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c) Angle-resolved Raman spectra for FL Se nanosheets evolution with angles between crystal direction and incident laser polarization.	 

 	Fig. 7  Differential tunnel conductance spectra of 2D-nanoflakes at (a) inside with three tip-approach currents at 440 mV and (b) different points along their edges. In (a), the VB and CB edges are marked by solid and broken lines, respectively. In the inset of (b), the dI/dV spectra periphery current is recorded. (c) Raman spectra of Te crystals and 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) STM topography and (b) dI/dV spectra recorded at different points, as shown on topography spanning from HOPG (points 1–3) through periphery (points 4–7) to inside (points 8–12). (c) Energy level with respect to metallic HOPG, edge-state of the topological insulator, and CB and VB edges in the interior of the nanoflakes. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Crystal structure bond length (δ) variations with applied strain (Δ) for the different phases of square 2D-Te. (a) Super cells inside and top views with, Δ = −4.5% in BS phase-I, (b) with Δ = 4% in BR phase-II, and (c) and with Δ = 13% in PS phase-III. (d) BZ special point in2D the Te structure with the real space lattice. (e) Applied strain effect vs. BL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Physical Society.	 

Buckled square	3.95, 3.95	1.01	0.53 eV under −4.5%
Buckled rectangular	4.28,4.17	0.85	0.24 eV under 4% strain
Planar square	3.29, 3.29	0.00	No change until 13%

 	Fig. 10  (a) BG as functions of strain applied to 2D-Te NSs (X. H. Wang et al.).136 (b) Variations in the direct BG at Dirac points and angle θ vs. equiaxial strain for a series of structures, where black triangles and red circles show the angle θ and energy gap, respectively. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (i–n) Energy change in square 2D-Te BL thickness phase structures and different phases band structures of 2D-Te. (i) Non-SOC and (j) SOC energy bands for BS phase-I. The inset shows the first BZ structure. The locations of the four Dirac point are shown by red points. (k) Non-SOC and (l) SOC energy bands for BR phase-II. (m) Non-SOC and (n) SOC energy bands for PS phase III. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Variation in bond lengths and bond angles of α-Se vs. tensile strain (a and b) along the x-direction and (c and d) y-direction. Vertical lines show the critical tensile strain limit. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Relaxed	3.14	91.15	88.86	90.88	89.09

ε

x
 = 6%	3.08 (−1.91%)	91.54 (−0.43%)	88.57 (−0.33%)	89.08 (−1.98%)	93.96 (5.47%)

ε

y
 = 8%	3.06 (−2.54%)	86.47 (−4.68%)	93.48 (5.20%)	93.54 (2.93%)	86.21 (−3.23%)

 	Fig. 13  Band structures of α-Se at tensile strain of (a) 0%, (b) 6% along the x-direction and (c) 8% along the y-direction. (d) BG with respect to uniaxial strain. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
zT = S2σT/K	(3)

 	Fig. 14  Seebeck coefficient and zT value along the zigzag (zig) and armchair (arc) directions at 300 K of 2D-Se and 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Electronic band structure with and without SOC (red and black dash) for (a) square 2D-Se and (b) square 2D-Te. Right panel: magnified view for the zigzag (top) and armchair (medium) directions near the Fermi level. First BZ with high symmetry k-point (bottom), Δ: CBM and ★: VBM. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Temperature-dependent κL (a) and frequency-resolved κL for 2D α-Se at 300 K (b). In (a), the κL of α-Te is also provided. Inset of (a) illustrates the convergence of κL with cutoff distance. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Clarivate.	 

 	Fig. 17  Group velocity of phonons (i.e., Debye temperature, θD, and elastic properties) (a) and relaxation time (b) for 2D α 2D-Se. Green, red, blue, and black colors show ZA, TA, LA, and optical phonons, respectively. (c and d) Three phonon (P3) and Grüneisen parameters for α-Se, and (e and f) for α 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Clarivate.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a–d) Quasiparticle band structures of (a) ML and (b) BL α-Te gained at the G0W0 level of theory with Lz = 30 Å. (b–e) Indirect BG [G0W0(I)] and minimum direct BG [G0W0(D)] obtained at the G0W0 level, and optical gap gained from BSE calculations with respect to inverse spatial separation Lz for (b) ML and (e) BL α-Te. Solid lines show linear extrapolations. (c–f) Optical absorbance of (c) ML and (f) BL α-Te gained by GW + BSE (solid lines) and GW + RPA (dotted lines), respectively. The first exciton absorption peak is represented by vertical arrows, with (g–l) the same as (a–f) but for β-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the American Physical Society.	 


2D-Se	VBM	0.039 (0.033)	0.35 (0.38)	0.46	1.46	3.96	42.2	0.69
CBM	0.044 (0.044)	0.52 (0.44)	0.61	0.84	4.69	93.2	0.23
2D-Te	VBM	0.051 (0.040)	0.86 (0.82)	1.03, 4.08	0.81	1.49	2.04	—
CBM	0.14 (0.11)	1.68 (1.60)	3.91, 3.97	2.88	0.14	0.02	—

 	Fig. 19  Phonon frequency for 2D-Se crystal with respect to the wave vector. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Phonon spectra of α-Se. (b) Quasiparticle band structure of α-Se obtained at the G0W0 level of theory with Lz = 30 Å. This energy is the VB. (c) Indirect BG (G0W0(I)) and direct BG (G0W0(D)) obtained at the G0W0 level, and the optical gap obtained from BSE calculation of α-Se with respect to inverse Lz. (d) Optical absorbance of α-Se ML gained from GW + BSE (solid lines) and GW + RPA (dotted lines), respectively. Vertical arrows show the first exciton absorption peak. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 


α-Se	
a = b = 3.72	1.38**	1.17	0.53
α-Te	
a = b = 4.15	1.31*	0.99	0.99
β-Te	
a = 5.49, b = 4.17	1.99**	1.66	0.84

 	Fig. 21  Synthesis of 2D-Xene NSs: (a) Exfoliation, (b) PVD and (c) CVD. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Helical chain-like crystal configuration of Te. (b) Scheme showing the evolution process of h 2D-Te nano-plates. (c–e) TEM and HR-TEM images of the 2D h-Te nano-plate. (f–h) EDX, Raman, and PL spectra of the 2D h-Te nano-plate. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Synthesis of ultrathin 2D-Te-flakes by PVD.167 (a) Schematic experimental setup. (b) AFM image of the 2D-Te flakes. (c) HAADF-STEM image of the 2D-Te flakes. (d and e) TEM images of the 2D-Te flakes. (f) Atomically resolved HAADF-STEM images of three Te polymorphs, (Amey Apte et al.).167 (g and h) Se atomic structure. (i) Scheme showing the synthesis of 2D-Se via the PVD technique. (j) Low-magnification SEM image of the 2D-Se NSs on Si (111) substrate. (k) 2D-Se NSs with saw and (l) feather analogue twin structures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Different exfoliated 2DMs through the PVD method. OM images of the 2D-Te deposited on (a) GaTe, (b) GaS, (c) graphite, (d) mica, and (e) GaSe and (f) SEM image of 2D-Te deposited on GaSe. (g) OM and (h) SEM images 2D-Te deposited on the MoS2 (Sijie Yang et al.).67 (i) Topographic images of the Te-films on 2D-G. (j) BG evolution of Te-films with different t. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) AFM image with different t, (b) STEM image, (c) optical image, and (d) 3D illustration structure of 2D-Te. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

Sapphire	[0001] c-cut crystalline	Mostly out of plane	Randomly oriented
SiO2/Si	Amorphous SiO2	Mostly out of plane	Randomly oriented
MoS2	H-phase (a = b = 3.19 Å)	Layer by layer (2D growth)	Randomly oriented
Mica	H-phase (a = b = 5.19 Å)	Layer by layer (2D growth)	Randomly oriented
Graphite	H-phase (a = b = 2.46 Å)	Layer by layer (2D growth)	Randomly oriented
GaS	H-phase (a = b = 3.63 Å)	Layer by layer (2D growth)	Mostly oriented tellurene chains
GaSe	H-phase (a = b = 3.82 Å)	Layer by layer (2D growth)	Highly oriented tellurene chains
GaTe	Monoclinic/anisotropic	Layer by layer (2D growth)	Randomly oriented

 	Fig. 26  (a) Scheme showing the formation process, (b) TEM image, (c) HR-TEM analysis, (d) Raman spectra of Bulk Te and 2D-Te NSs and (e) AFM analysis of 2D-Te NSs. (f and g) Height profiles from image in (e). (h) 2D-Te size distribution, (i) XRD of 2D-Te and bulk-Te, and (j) UV–vis spectrum of 2D-Te NSs in NMP. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Transfer characteristic of a typical 2D-Se NS FET with a thickness of 16 nm. Inset shows the AFM height profile of the device, scale bar is 5 μm. (b) Output characteristic of the same 2D-Se NSs transistor. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Transfer curves of the 2D-Te transistor of 15 nm with stability measurement for 55 days. (d) 300 nm channel length with a 11.1 nm-thick short-channel transistor holding high on-state current density. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

2D-Se NSs SL	PVD	0.26	p-type	≈106	20	
168

2D-Te (16 nm)	Solution based	∼700	p-type	∼105	200	
165

2D-Te (7.5 nm)	Solution based	∼700	p-type	≈105	300	
165

2D-Te crystal	ALD	1.43	p-type	∼103	∼1 × 103	
182

2D Te-flakes	Hydrothermal method	500	p-type	103 (10 nm)	1013 cm−2	
184

2D Te-flakes	Hydrothermal method	500	p-type	103 (<10 nm)	1013 cm−2	
184


 	Fig. 28  (a) Photograph of the h-2D-Te nano-plate-base device. (b) OM image of the electrode pattern. (c) I–V curves in the dark and in the presence of 473 nm laser for single h-Te nano-plate photo-detector. (d) Time-dependent photo-response of h-2D-Te nano-plate device with a voltage bias of 2 V. (e) Power reliance of Iph at 2 V bias. (f) Separate response and reset cycle. (g) 2D-Te nano-plate photo-detector I–V curves in the dark and upon exposure to 473 nm laser. Time trace of photo-response while laser toggled on and off before (h) and device after 100 times bending (i). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Te device scheme. (b) Transfer curves, (c) hysteresis response, and (d–f) output properties of a similar Te transistor measured at 300 K and 80 K. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Scheme of the light-modulate-light system. (b) Diffraction rings obtained from the light-modulate-light system. (c) Optical switcher based on 2D-Te nanoflake dispersions. (d) Scheme of the 2D-Te/PVP membrane-based mode-locking erbium-doped fiber laser. (e) Pulse trains. (f) Pulse duration of modulated femto-second laser. (g) Radio-frequency spectrum, (h) calculated electric and optical field profiles and (i) simulated energy consumption of the modulator with respect to frequency for different number of layer-based 2D-Te nanoflakes in the MZI architecture 2D-Te modulator. (j) Simulated energy utilization of 2D-Te racetrack modulator as a function of frequency for different 2D-Te thickness. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Phonon band structure, lattice thermal conductance, scattering rate, and cumulative lattice thermal conductance. (b) Benchmark in the x- and y-direction. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Scheme for the fabrication of the TFNG devices. (b) Optical images showing the TFNG devices in different states. (c and d) Measured output voltage and current during repeated bending and unbending motions. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Scheme showing the back-gated 2D-Se NSs phototransistor. (b)Transfer curves of the 2D-Se NSs photo-transistor recorded under different laser irradiation powers at Vds = 3 V. (c) Iph and responsivity (Rλ) with respect to laser illumination power recorded at Vds = 3 V and Vg = −80 V. The Iph line well match with data utilising the relation Iph = Pβ, where β is a constant and P is the device effective illumination power. (d) Distinctive rise or fall properties of Iph with laser on or off switching. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Crystal configuration of α-Se2Te and (b) α-SeTe2. (c) Photo-response of PD of 1D/2D hybrid structure of Se illuminated by 638, 514, and 405 nm wavelengths with 0.3 mW mm−2 intensity and 0.5 V bias voltage. (d) Self-powered photo-response of PD based on Te nanotubes, Se NSs, and Se–Te junction in KOH solution. (e) Power conversion efficiency of Te/TMD heterojunction solar cells. (f) Illustration of Se/ReS2 heterostructure and schematic of heterostructure PD. (g) Output of phototransistors under different illumination wavelengths. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from Wiley.	 

Te plates	Mica substrate	Photoconductive	389.5	473	
211

Se-NSs (16 nm)	PVD	Photoconductive	263	637	
168

In-Ga/Se	CVD	Photovoltaic	408 × 10−3	532	
212

Se 1D/2D hybrid	Plasma-assisted Growth	Photoconductive	6 × 10−3	UV–IR (405–1550)	
203

Se/Te	Two-step solution synthesis	Photo-electrochemical	98.8 × 10−6	400	
204

Se/ReS2	Two-step vapor deposition	Photoconductive	36	322–633	
207

1D Se/2D ReS2	CVD	Photoconductive	98	400	
208

Se/InSe	CVD	Photovoltaic	110 × 10−3	UV to vis	
209

1D Te/2D InSe	PVD	Photoconductive	0.45	Visible	
210

2DMs	Two-dimensional materials
G	Graphene
NSs	Nanosheets
C	Carbon
BL	Bilayer
FL	Few-layer
BL	Bond length
SC	Semiconductor
QHE	Quantum Hall effect
QSHE	Quantum spin Hall effect
RT	Room temperature
BGs	Bandgaps
TMDCs	Transition metal dichalcogenides
BP	Black phosphorus
HOPG	Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite
VBM	Valence band maximum
CBM	Conduction band maximum
Tis	Topological insulators
SOC	Spin orbital coupling
PS	Planar square
BS	Buckled square
BR	Buckled rectangular
WAL	Weak anti-localization effect
UCF	Universal conductance fluctuations
PL	Photoluminescence
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
STM	Scanning tunneling microscopy
PVD	Physical vapor deposition
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
IR	Infrared
LPE	Liquid-phase exfoliation
BZs	Brillouin zones

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
