Swollen hexagonal liquid crystals as smart nanoreactors: implementation in materials chemistry for energy applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR08457A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR08457A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5793-5819Swollen hexagonal liquid crystals as smart nanoreactors: implementation in materials chemistry for energy applications

        
          
            Srabanti 
            Ghosh†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Laurence 
            Ramos
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Hynd 
            Remita
          
        
      *ac
aLaboratoire de Chimie Physique, UMR 8000-CNRS, Université de Paris-Sud, Université Paris Saclay, 91405 Orsay, France. E-mail: hynd.remita@u-psud.fr; ghosh.srabanti@gmail.com
bLaboratoire Charles Coulomb (L2C), Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France
cCNRS, Laboratoire de Chimie Physique, UMR 8000, 91405 Orsay, France
Received 
      13th November 2017
    , Accepted 21st February 2018First published on 26th February 2018AbstractMaterials are the key roadblocks for the commercialization of energy conversion devices in fuel cells and solar cells. Significant research has focused on tuning the intrinsic properties of materials at the nanometer scale. The soft template mediated controlled fabrication of advanced nanostructured materials is attracting considerable interest due to the promising applications of these materials in catalysis and electrocatalysis. Swollen hexagonal lyotropic liquid crystals (SLCs) consist of oil-swollen surfactant-stabilized 1D, 2D or 3D nanometric assemblies regularly arranged in an aqueous solvent. Interestingly, the characteristic size of the SLCs can be controlled by adjusting the volume ratio of oil to water. The non-polar and/or polar compartments of the SLCs can be doped with guest molecules and used as nanoreactors for the synthesis of various metals (Pt, Pd, Au, etc.), conducting polymers and composite nanostructures with controlled size and shape. 1D, 2D and 3D mono- and bimetallic nanostructures of controlled composition and porosity can also be fabricated. These materials have demonstrated impressive enhancements of their electrochemical properties as compared to their bulk counterparts and have been identified as promising for further implementation in energy harvesting applications. In this review article, recent research materials are described regarding the development of functional materials with much improved performances for catalysis applications. This review addresses a brief overview of swollen hexagonal mesophases as nanoreactors, describes examples of nanostructured materials synthesized in these nanoreactors, shows several examples of the energy conversion applications in solar light harvesting, fuel cells etc. and also summarizes the associated reaction mechanisms developed in the recent literature for enhanced catalytic activity.
1. Introduction
Although renewable and high capacity energy conversion devices such as fuel cells, solar cells and metal–air batteries are appealing technologies to meet the requirement of future energy demands, their development is still at an early stage due to scarcity of stable, highly active and low cost functional materials.1,2 Driven primarily by an opportunity to develop sustainable technologies, materials research area is continuing to grow with the objective of tuning the intrinsic properties of nanomaterials with multiple functionalities for energy conversion and storage applications.3–5 Significant efforts have been made to develop new techniques intended for tailoring porosity with narrow pore size distribution and morphology of nanostructured materials as technologically important materials.6 Amongst the methodologies used to fabricate nanomaterials, the soft templating approach shows immense promise towards achieving the best results expected from the field of materials research. Self-organization phenomena facilitate the assembly of individual nanoparticles (NPs) into superlattices, a key process in a soft template approach.7 Soft templating synthetic strategies involve different approaches including emulsion templating, vesicle templating, macromolecular nanoreactor, and gas bubble templating methods. In particular, Pileni and coworkers developed surfactant-based templates in controlling the size, shape and crystallinity of inorganic nanocrystals.8 Although a microemulsion templating method is effective at controlling the formation of nanospheres, it does not generally produce anisotropic nanocrystals. Moreover, the formation of microemulsions generally requires large quantities of surfactants or cosurfactants and many external factors, such as temperature and pH, influence the stability of the microemulsions. Consequently, a general method for controlling nanocrystal shapes through soft chemistry has not yet been found.
Many excellent reviews concern the knowledge accumulated regarding the fabrication and development of advanced materials from self-assembled templates.9–11 Nolte and coworkers summarized a wide range of self-assembled nanoreactors originating from synthetic and biological building blocks using both covalent and noncovalent approaches.12,13 For example, very recently, Voit et al. provided an overview on functional polymer capsules as smart nanoreactors.14 However, hydrophilic polymers tend to form aggregates in the presence of a solvent, which is not suitable for their use as soft templates. On the other hand, gas bubble templating involves several steps, including the development of gas bubbles, the attachment of nanosized seed species at the gas/liquid interface, and further aggregation/cross-linking thereof to form a continuous shell around the gas bubbles.15 A major drawback in the gas-phase template method lies in the fact that the encapsulation of species within the void space of the nascent hollow material is typically not possible in situ. Although several successful approaches have been explored, the development of catalytic nanostructures of controlled size, shape and composition is still at the foreground of research activity particularly in energy applications. While hard templates offer a reliable and intuitive approach to synthesize mesoporous metals, the complexity of the technique and the use of harmful chemicals to extract the nanomaterials synthesized inside pushed several research groups to focus on other directions using lyotropic crystals as soft templates.16
Following the first developments of mesoporous oxides by assembly processes between inorganic precursors and micellar solutions, the concept of “nanocasting” by binary liquid crystals (LCs) was developed for the synthesis of silica or metals.17 LCs appeared as perfect candidates for the matrix-guided synthesis and self-assembly of nanoscale materials as they combine order and mobility at the molecular (nanoscale) level. Liquid crystals, also known as “mesophases”, represent a unique state of matter regarding mobility and order at molecular and supramolecular levels.18,19 LCs have been defined as “orientationally ordered liquids” or “positionally disordered crystals”, which combine the properties of both the crystalline (optical and electrical anisotropy) and the liquid (molecular mobility and fluidity) states. LC phases can be obtained either by varying the temperature, thus referred to as thermotropic liquid crystals, or by addition of solvent, thus known as lyotropic liquid crystals. The present review deals with lyotropic LCs. We therefore only provide below a very brief discussion on thermotropic LCs. Thermotropic LCs are composed of anisotropic molecules, mainly rod-like molecules or disk-like molecules. The most common mesophases are nematic, smectic and discotic phases. In the nematic phase, the molecules have no positional order, but self-align to display long-range directional order. In the smectic phase, the molecules are positionally ordered along one direction in well-defined layers either oriented along the layer normal or tilted away from the layer normal. Here, the molecules thus possess 1D crystalline order. Only disk-shaped molecules form a columnar discotic phase in which they stack into liquid columns that are arranged on a crystalline lattice.18 The ability of thermotropic LCs to precisely control the size, shape, and interparticle spatial properties of nanomaterials is rarely reported because of the lack of molecular-level understanding of the interparticle interactions and reactivity. Nevertheless, efforts have been made to alter the physical properties of NPs and LCs either by covalently linking liquid crystalline molecules to NPs or by adding a low concentration of NPs to a liquid crystalline matrix.20–22 For example, Lacaze and co-workers used smectic LC topological defects for the orientation of gold nanorods and chains and the electromagnetic coupling of highly coupled gold nanorods can be controlled by light polarization.23 Ok et al. also utilized smectic LC defects as templates for quantum dot cluster arrays within the cores of the LC defects.24
On the other hand, lyotropic LCs, including lamellar, hexagonal and cubic phases, consist of the self-assembly of surfactant species in an aqueous solvent into organized yet fluid matter. Lyotropic LCs have proved to be useful for controlling the structure and morphology of nanomaterials. Attard et al. successfully demonstrated that direct hexagonal LCs made by a ternary mixture (nonionic surfactant, metal salts, and water) can be used as templates for the synthesis of bulk porous materials and porous metal films by electro-deposition.25 Very recently, Abbott and co-workers provided deeper understanding on topological defects in LCs as templates for molecular self-assembly.26 Yamauchi and co-workers reviewed the recent progress on the synthesis of mesoporous metal nanoarchitectonics using hard templates as well as soft templates.27,28 Synthesis in soft templates presents the advantage that the synthesized nanostructures are readily extracted by washing, while it is not the case in hard templates as the extraction requires the dissolution of the template with harsh chemical agents, which can alter the synthesized nanostructures. Chromonic LCs, another kind of lyotropic LCs, have rigid, plank-shaped or blade-like aromatic systems, further need functionalization at the periphery with ionic or hydrophilic groups for solubility in aqueous media and are typically used for the fabrication of thin liquid-crystalline films with anisotropic properties.29,30 Similarly, discotic LCs are mesophases formed from disc-shaped molecules, typically composed of an aromatic core surrounded by flexible alkyl chains which are utilized in electronic devices.21,31 Kijima and co-workers also utilized mixed surfactant nematic phases as a reaction medium for the growth of various microstructured materials such as AgBr and SnO2 microwires.32 In contrast to chromonic or discotic LCs, amphiphilic surfactant based hexagonal lyotropic LCs are flexible, rod-shaped aliphatic chains with ionic groups at one end of the molecule and are suitable for the synthesis of porous nanostructures and zero-dimensional (0-D), one-dimensional (1-D) and two-dimensional (2-D) nanostructures with the possibility to achieve a very precise control over the nanostructure of the materials with a long range spatial and orientational periodic distribution. Soft templates provided by lyotropic LCs composed of surfactants (and eventually cosurfactants), a polar phase (water or brine) and an apolar phase allow the confinement of the synthesis precursors either in the polar phase or in the apolar phase, thus effectively influencing chemical reactions inside nanoreactors. This, in turn, allows a control of the structure of the as-synthesized materials.33,34 Mountziaris and coworkers synthesized 0D, 1D and 2D semiconducting nanostructures using cubic, hexagonal and lamellar lyotropic liquid crystalline phases as templates, respectively.35,36 In the last few years, Prouzet, Remita, Ramos and co-workers have developed a similar approach, but using highly swollen liquid crystals (SLCs) as templates.37–40 These templates are composed of surfactants and two non-miscible solvents and can exhibit hexagonal or lamellar symmetry. Oil-swollen hexagonal mesophases result from surfactant mediated self-assembly of a quaternary mixture of water, surfactant, cosurfactant, and oil. They consist of surfactant-stabilized oil tubes regularly arranged in a triangular lattice in an aqueous solvent. The present review mainly focuses on swollen hexagonal liquid crystals. They are versatile templates to synthesize anisotropic nanomaterials.41 Swollen hexagonal mesophases offer unique advantages compared to their micro- and macroporous counterparts. Very high concentrations (up to 0.5 M) of metal salts can be loaded in the SLCs by using them as the ionic medium in the aqueous phase during the formation of swollen liquid crystals. Moreover, oil soluble metal salts can be dissolved in the oil phase of SLCs. The metal salts loaded in the aqueous phase or organic domain of SLCs can then be reduced easily by exposing reducing vapours and gases to prepare the metal nanostructures. As SLCs are transparent to UV-visible light and as gamma-rays and electron beams are very penetrating, these types of radiation were frequently used for the reduction of metal salts. In SLCs, the diameter of the non-polar tubes, as well as the distance between the tubes, can be tuned over large ranges by the adjustment of the sample composition.37,38 A wide range of nanomaterials including mono- and bimetallic nanostructures, metal oxides (ZnO, ZrO2), conducting polymer nanostructures (including polydiphenyl butadyne, PDPB; poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), PEDOT; and poly(3-hexylthiophene), P3HT) and polymer-based nanocomposites of tunable size and shape such as dendritic and core–shell nanoparticles, with single or multicomponent nanowires, as well as porous nanoalloys, have been fabricated using swollen hexagonal mesophases as nanoreactors (Fig. 1).37,38
 Fig. 1  Swollen hexagonal mesophases as nanoreactors for the synthesis of various nanostructured materials for different applications. 
These materials have demonstrated impressive enhancements of their electrochemical properties as compared to their bulk counterparts and have been identified as promising for further implementation in energy harvesting applications. These nanomaterials offer novel classes of active catalysts and electrocatalysts for fuel cells, and new photocatalytic materials as potential substitutes of TiO2 for the most relevant photocatalytic applications such as detoxification, disinfection, water treatment, and hydrogen storage applications.
The present review first presents an overview of the structure of swollen hexagonal mesophases and discusses their roles as nanoreactors. This review, however, does not address the doping of swollen hexagonal mesophases with preformed species such as metallic clusters42,43 or inorganic nanoparticles.44,45 A broad overview on the synthesis of a wide range of advanced nanostructures using swollen hexagonal mesophases as soft templates and their possible applications in energy domains is then provided. By controlling the composition, size and shape, it is possible to tune the electronic and surface properties of materials for their application in energy domains. This review covers almost all aspects of SLC-directed synthesis of different kinds of metal, polymer or metal/polymer hybrid nanostructures. It also highlights the current status of the representative applications of advanced electrocatalysts or photocatalysts for energy conversion applications (such as fuel cells and photocatalysis) with strong emphasis on recent literature examples. Finally, this review ends with a summary and some perspectives on the challenges and opportunities in this emerging area of research.
2. Why are swollen hexagonal liquid crystals (SLCs) special?
Intensive efforts have been made for the development of high performance nanostructured catalysts using soft templates as nanoreactors. Surfactant- and polymer-assisted templating strategies are successful approaches for the synthesis of nanomaterials with applications in catalysis, electrocatalysis, optics, photonics etc.46,47 For example, surfactant-based micelles or self-assembled block copolymers have been used successfully for the production of polymers, hybrid materials, and ceramics, with hierarchical structures.48,49 Oil-in-water mini-emulsions constituted of oil droplets stabilized by the combined effect of surfactant and cosurfactant mixtures have also been developed.50 However, these mini-emulsions do not exhibit long range order and do not form spontaneously, but instead require highly energetic stirring by ultrasonication, microfluidization, or high-pressure homogenization as well as the addition of an emulsion stabilizer in order to prevent Ostwald ripening. Lyotropic LC templates, including hexagonal, cubic or lamellar phases, by contrast, are at thermodynamic equilibrium and form spontaneously. The phase diagram (Fig. 2) illustrates the relative compositions of the various lyotropic LC phases, and their structures.51 It is important to note that this phase diagram is for a specific system and each system is different, although the different lyotropic LC phases (cubic, hexagonal and lamellar) can be found in the large majority of systems. Direct, or inverted, cubic phases consist of oil-swollen, or water-swollen, droplets stabilized by a monolayer of surfactant and cosurfactant, and arranged on a cubic lattice in water, or in oil, respectively. Direct, or inverted, hexagonal phases consist of oil-swollen tubes stabilized by a monolayer of surfactant and cosurfactant and arranged on a triangular lattice in water, or in oil, respectively. Lamellar phases consist of a regular and alternated stacking of water and oil lamellae with a surfactant at the oil/water interface. The stability and phase transition of these different phases of swollen liquid crystals are determined by the composition of oil, water and surfactant but also by the ratio between a surfactant and a cosurfactant (typically a short-chain alcohol).52 Thanks to their anisotropic structure, lyotropic LCs have the potential advantage of directing the production of nanomaterials with anisotropic morphologies, as they allow the confinement of the reactants, which could be leveraged to control the synthesis of the nanostructures with the required porosity, morphology, size, and orientation.
 Fig. 2  A three component (water, oil and surfactant) phase diagram showing the formation of micelles and mesophases by the self-assembly of surfactants. Courtesy of Eremin Vadim V; for a glossary of nanotechnology and related terms, see http://eng.thesaurus.rusnano.com/wiki/article513. 
In this review, we essentially focus on the use of direct hexagonal mesophases as soft templates. Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) is a useful technique for the characterization of mesophases, and hexagonal phases can be clearly identified by the occurrence of several Bragg peaks in the scattered intensity measured at very low angles, whose positions are in the ratio of 1:√3:2:√7, corresponding to (10), (11), (20) and (21) diffraction planes, respectively.41 In addition, the characteristic sizes of the mesophases (see a scheme of a cross-section of a hexagonal phase in Fig. 3) can be determined by the peak positions and sample composition. The center-to-center distance between adjacent tubes, or the lattice parameter, is related to the positions of the peaks:  where q0 is the position of the first peak. Hence, the first peak position, q0, allows a direct determination of the hexagonal lattice parameter. One can further relate the lattice parameter to the diameter of the oil-swollen surfactant stabilized tubes, D, following:  where ϕp is the volume fraction of polar medium (including the polar heads of the molecules of the surfactant and cosurfactant) in the sample. The thickness of the water channel between two adjacent tubes reads simply e = dc − D.
 Fig. 3  A scheme of a swollen hexagonal phase (left), and a cross-section of a swollen hexagonal phase defining the characteristic sizes (right) and a surfactant molecule (right below). 
A new class of SLCs containing a large amount of a nonpolar solvent has been developed, greatly extending the possibility of nanomaterial synthesis using these SLCs as soft templates.38,41 The mesophases are constituted of infinite nonpolar tubes swollen by a non-polar solvent (typically cyclohexane or toluene) and stabilized by a monolayer of surfactant and cosurfactant (typically pentanol) arranged in a hexagonal array in salted water. Cationic surfactants, such as hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and cetylpyridinium chloride (CPCl), and anionic surfactants, such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), can be used.38,39 Interestingly, the diameter of the tubes, D, and the thickness of the water channel between adjacent tubes, e, can be controlled independently over very large ranges (Fig. 4). The self-assembly of surfactant molecules is driven by the morphology of the surfactant as well as by the repulsion interaction between charged polar heads. An increase of the ionic strength in the aqueous phase reduces the repulsive interaction between heads, thus leading to a larger curvature of the tubes, i.e. a larger tube diameter.41 Hence, by varying concomitantly the ionic strength of the aqueous medium and the oil content, D can be tuned from 3 to 55 nm. One defines the swelling ratio O/W as the ratio between the volume of oil and the volume of water in the mesophase, which varies between 0 (in the absence of oil) and 4 (at maximum swelling). In all these phases, the thickness of the water channel between adjacent tubes, e, is kept constant (around 2.5–3 nm). In addition, by decorating the oil/water interface with small amounts of copolymers, we have shown that e can be tuned over a relatively large range (from 2 to 15 nm).53 To the best of our knowledge, the water swelling has not yet been exploited in the soft-template assisted synthesis of nanomaterials.
 Fig. 4  Swelling of hexagonal mesophases. 
A detailed study on the stability of SLCs showed that the oil-swollen hexagonal mesophases could be obtained with different pH of the water phase from 1 to 11. They were also stable when the mainly used NaCl salt was partially or totally replaced by different inorganic salts such as NaF, KCl and Na2SO4 or by metallic salts or complexes, such as H2PtCl6, Pd(NH3)4Cl2 and Pt(NH3)4Cl2.38,39 More generally, a large quantity of precursor materials (monomers and/or metal salts or complexes) could be incorporated into the water and oil phase of the mesophases without any disturbance, which allowed the quantitative synthesis of metal, polymer or composite nanostructures. Because the swollen hexagonal mesophases were transparent to UV-visible light and they were very stable under high energy radiation (gamma or X-rays or electron beams), the metal precursor's dopants could be reduced and/or the monomer could be polymerized by photochemical, radiolytic or chemical methods. Hence, thanks to their versatility and high stability, swollen hexagonal mesophases have been successfully employed as nanoreactors to synthesize nanostructured materials both in the aqueous and in the oil phases (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the synthesis of metal nanostructures and metal/polymer composites using hexagonal soft templates. Orange color indicates the polymer and blue color indicates the metal salt. 
The next part is devoted to the description of the various nanostructures (metal, polymer and polymer/metal composites) that have been successfully synthesized using surfactant-based soft templates.
3. Synthesis and characterization of nanostructured materials using swollen hexagonal liquid crystals as soft-templates
This section covers the controlled synthesis of three main classes of nanostructures, metals, polymers, and composites, by chemical methods, photochemistry or radiolysis, from precursors dispersed in the water or organic phase of SLCs. Several parameters (kinetics of reduction, nature of the metal salt and of the surfactant and confinement provided by the soft templates) are crucial for the control of the size, shape and porosity of the metallic nanostructures. Among others, various Pt- and Pd-based nanostructures such as Pd and Pt nanowires of controlled length, Pd nanosheets and mono- and bimetallic nanoballs of 3D-porosity based on Pt and/or Pd are discussed. After the synthesis of nanomaterials, various characterization tools have been used for the characterization of the doped mesophases and the nanomaterials. Small- and wide-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS) techniques are used to probe the structures of the soft templates before and after the synthesis of nanomaterials (Fig. 6). For example, it was found that for SLCs doped with Pt salts, the hexagonal structure was preserved after irradiation.54
 Fig. 6  SAXS pattern of a Pt-doped swollen liquid crystal (SLC), before (black squares) and after (red circles) γ-irradiation. The diffraction patterns before and after irradiation are characteristics of a hexagonal phase as demonstrated by four Bragg peaks (black arrows) whose positions are in the ratio of 1:√3:2:√7. The broad peak (marked as *) observed after irradiation is due to the presence of Pt nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Polarizing optical microscopy (POM) is typically used to detect the existence of liquid crystal phases in a solution and provides a valuable diagnostic tool for the identification of a mesophase type. The hexagonal phases are birefringent and exhibit characteristic textures between crossed polarizing windows, when the surfactant cylinders are parallel to the walls of the observation cell. Fig. 7a and b show comparable POM images of a pure hexagonal mesophase and of a mesophase doped with 0.1 M EDOT and 0.1 M FeCl3 suggesting that the presence of EDOT and FeCl3 did not affect the structure of the hexagonal mesophase.55 However, dark spots were observed in the presence of both EDOT and FeCl3 presumably due to the presence of PEDOT polymer nanostructures produced in the hydrophobic domain of the mesophase.
 Fig. 7  Polarized light micrographs of (a) pure hexagonal mesophases and (b) mesophases doped with both 0.1 M EDOT and 0.1 M FeCl3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is widely used to study the size, the morphology and the structure of the nanomaterials. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) provides quantitative information on the chemical composition at a nanometric scale (<10 nm). Other complementary methods are used, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), high resolution TEM (HRTEM), cryo-TEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The nanostructures are also characterized by the combination of a nanoscale probe from an atomic force microscope with a tunable infrared (IR) source using a nanoIR instrument that can quickly survey the various regions of the nanomaterial via AFM topography imaging and acquire high-resolution local chemical spectra at selected regions on the sample. Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) is used to determine the molecular weights and polydispersity index of the as-synthesized polymers. Conductivity measurements are used to characterize the electronic conductivity of the polymer. UV-Visible and infrared spectroscopy, matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy are used to characterize the polymers. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) on the other hand is used to provide direct chemical information about the chemical composition and the different chemical environments present in the nanostructures, and also oxidation states in the case of metal nanostructures. Pore volume and size distribution, specific surface and fluid/substrate affinity, and capacity of H2 storage are determined by using adsorption techniques. Finally, cyclic voltammetry is used to probe the electrocatalytic properties of the metal nanomaterials and chronoamperometry to study the durability of the electrode materials.
3.1 Synthesis of metal nanostructures

3.1.1 Synthesis of Pt-based metal nanostructures. 
Global demand for noble metals such as platinum and palladium is growing at a fast pace because of their applications in various fields, mainly in catalysis.56,57 In particular, platinum-group metals can serve as superior catalysts due to their high stability and catalytic activity. In spite of the high catalytic and electrocatalytic properties of Pt-based nanoparticles, the high cost of Pt and its low abundance lead to search for nanomaterials with a lower amount of Pt (nanoalloys or composites for example) or alternative nanomaterials, with high activity and durability.57 In comparison with benchmark Pt catalysts, Pt-alloy electrocatalysts can achieve high catalytic activity per gram of Pt-group metal, but still contribute ∼35% to costs of equivalent power stacks in a fuel cell device. In addition, the long-term stability of current state-of-the-art catalysts is still not high enough for transportation applications.58 For example, Pt metal nanostructures were synthesized inside the aqueous phase of a SLC made of SDS, 1-pentanol, cyclohexane, and water. SAXS confirmed the stability of the hexagonal mesophase after doping the aqueous medium with hexachloroplatinic acid (H2PtCl6) at various concentrations (from 0.05 to 0.2 mol L−1). After a high irradiation dose of gamma rays (92 kGy for a SLC with 0.1 M H2PtCl6), assembled Pt nanostructures were obtained and diffusion-controlled aggregation of particles led to an isotropic fractal-like growth mechanism (Fig. 8a).37 With radiolytic reduction, Pt0 nuclei were produced homogeneously in the water phase. Along with radiolytic reduction, pentanol, used as a cosurfactant, also slowly reduced PtII on the radiolysis-induced seeds. The hydrated electrons and the reducing radicals produced during the radiolysis of the solvent induced homogeneous reduction in the water phase while the cosurfactant (pentanol) contributed to PtII reduction on the radiolysis-induced seeds.59 Mesophases could also be used to direct the self-assembly of NPs in the confined domains of SLCs and prevent their coalescence as shown by Surendran et al.60 Herein, the SLCs were made of a mixture of anionic surfactant (SDS), cosurfactant (1-pentanol), water, and cyclohexane as a swelling phase and doped with various Pt precursors (H2PtCl6, K2PtCl6, or K2PtCl4). A slow chemical reduction of PtIV (0.1–0.2 M) by carbon monoxide (the mesophase was kept under 1 atm of CO for few hours) induced the formation of rod-like aggregates made by the assembly of monodisperse (1.5 nm) well-crystallized Pt NPs (Fig. 8b). It was also shown that Pt reduction by CO in water at low PtIV or PtII concentration (<2 × 10−3 M) led to the 1D-assembly of small Pt NPs.60 A TEM image illustrated that the nanoparticles spontaneously self-assembled into fibers. Fig. 8c shows the self-assembly of 1.5–2 nm Pt particles into nanofibers (with diameters in the range of 5–20 nm) at low Pt concentration in water. However, when the concentration of Pt in water was higher than 2 × 10–3 M, larger NPs (diameter between 3 and 5 nm) aggregated into more disordered structures (Fig. 8d). In line with previous findings, a qualitative mechanism can be proposed for the formation of large nanofibers considering the structure of SLCs. The triangular space between three organic cylinders within the SLCs defines a less constrained region than the direct inter-cylinder space and the platinum NPs are presumably assembled here upon reduction of the platinum salt. This would lead to their 1D self-assembly into nanowires along a direction parallel to the cylinder main axis. After extraction from the soft template, several parallel nanowires aggregated laterally hence causing the formation of fibers with a larger diameter.
 Fig. 8  TEM images of platinum nanoparticles prepared from hexachloroplatinic acid in a hexagonal SLC (a) by high γ-ray irradiation (96 kGy) and (b) by CO reduction, leading to rodlike aggregation of the Pt pristine nanoparticles. TEM images of Pt self-assemblies and nanostructured materials obtained by CO reduction of platinum salts in swollen liquid crystals (c, d) at concentrations of 5 × 10–4 M and 2 × 10–3 M, respectively. Inset of (c): A HRTEM image showing the individual nanoparticles. (e, f) TEM images of porous platinum nanoballs by γ-ray irradiation at two different magnifications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, Surendran et al. developed a morphology-controlled synthesis of porous platinum nanoballs using a mesophase with CTAB as the surfactant, and tetraamine platinum(II), Pt(NH3)4Cl2 as the salt by radiolysis.54 TEM images showed that platinum forms nanorods with an average diameter of 2.8 nm that aggregated into ball-shaped domains with a typical size of 50–80 nm (Fig. 8e and f). The nanorods built a 3D interconnected network templated by the hexagonal structure of the mesophase. Hexagonal cells with a typical diameter of 15–20 nm were clearly observed (Fig. 7f). Notably, the diameter of the nanorods was comparable to the thickness of the water channels in between the cylinders (3 nm), and the characteristic distance of the cells was similar to the spacing between the oil-swollen cylinders in the host hexagonal phase.


3.1.2 Synthesis of Pd-based metal nanostructures. 
Pd-based nanostructures are promising for applications in fuel cells (especially for ethanol oxidation) as an alternative to Pt.61 Indeed, Pd is cheaper and 10 times more abundant than Pt. Various metal nanostructures have been synthesized using SLCs as templates by chemical or radiolytic reduction of metallic salts dispersed in the water phase or organic phase. The formation of palladium nanoballs in hexagonal mesophases was also reported.62 Three-dimensionally connected Pd nanowire forming porous nanoballs were synthesized by slow reduction of PdII in swollen hexagonal mesophases. The TEM images after 20 h irradiation of Pd-doped mesophases revealed that palladium nanostructures displayed ball-shaped domains of typical size (80–100 nm) (Fig. 9a), which consisted of a three-dimensionally interconnected network of Pd nanowires, of an average diameter of 3.5 nm. The fast radiolytic reduction conducted with electron beams of PdII in hexagonal mesophases led to small NPs (3 nm) and short rods (3 nm diameter and 9–12 nm length, Fig. 9b). In addition, when the PdII salt was slowly reduced in micellar solutions containing CTAB, Pd(NH3)4Cl2, and pentanol (with concentrations equivalent to those in the hexagonal phase but without cyclohexane), large particles heterogeneous in size were obtained (Fig. 9c). Hence, both slow reduction and confinement were demonstrated to be essential factors to obtain these porous nanostructures.
 Fig. 9  TEM images of palladium nanostructures: (a) Pd-nanoballs formed by γ-irradiation of Pd-doped (0.1 M) mesophases (20 h irradiation at a dose rate of 2.5 kGy h−1), (b) nanorods obtained by electron beam irradiation (48 kGy, mean dose rate 2200 Gy s−1 (7.9 MGy h−1)) of Pd doped (0.1 M) hexagonal mesophases, and (c) Pd nanoparticles obtained by γ-irradiation (20 h) of a micellar solution containing PdII (0.1 M), CTAB and pentanol, after 6 h irradiation (dose rate 2.5 kGy h−1). Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, Ksar et al. showed that mesophases (using a cationic surfactant, CTAB) could be doped by high concentrations of palladium salt (0.1 M of Pd(NH3)4Cl2) without any disturbance of the structure of the mesophases, which allowed the synthesis of 1D Pd nanostructures.63 The molar ratio of cosurfactant over surfactant, n* = ncosurf/nsurf, was varied between 0.78 and 0.91. Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments confirmed the hexagonal symmetry of the Pd-doped phases (Fig. 10a). The center-to-center distance between adjacent tubes, dc, was about 20 nm for all samples and the diameter of the oil-swollen tubes was about 17 nm. Palladium nanowires were synthesized via fast radiolytic reduction by irradiating the Pd-doped SLC for a few seconds with an electron beam.
 Fig. 10  (a) SAXS spectra of Pd-doped hexagonal mesophases at different molar ratios of cosurfactant over surfactant n* = ncosurf/nsurf. Top inset: A scheme of an oil-swollen hexagonal phase. Bottom inset: A two-dimensional diffraction pattern of a sample with n* = 0.91, where the hexagonal symmetry is clearly seen. TEM images of Pd nanowires formed in hexagonal mesophases with different values of n*: (b) 0.78, (c) 0.85, and (d) 0.91. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
TEM images illustrated the formation of Pd nanowires with a diameter of 4 nm, comparable to the thickness of the water channels in between the cylinders (∼3 nm) and a few tens of nanometers long (Fig. 10b–d). Notably, the average length (L) of the Pd nanowires slightly increased with the amount of pentanol that was added as a cosurfactant. L = 30–45 nm for n* = 0.78 (Fig. 10b), L = 35–60 nm for n* = 0.85 (Fig. 10c) and L = 60–200 nm for n* = 0.91 (Fig. 10d). Increasing the amount of alcohol would increase the reduction efficiency, resulting in a lengthening of the confined particles along the main axis of the mesophase.
In continuation to this work, Siril et al. reported a facile and highly selective synthesis of thin Pd nanowires of a few micrometers long and monodisperse in diameter, by decomposition of the metal precursor tris(dibenzylideneacetone)di-palladium(0) Pd2(DBA)3, which was confined in the oil tube of the SLCs made with CTAB as the surfactant, using a hydrazine vapor treatment.64 The mesophase was composed of toluene-swollen tubes, doped with the Pd precursor. Both the confinement and the nature of the surfactant were essential to obtain Pd nanowires. The decomposition of the DBA ligand led to unstable Pd complexes that collapsed into metal clusters, which might further aggregate on the CTAB interface forming Pd nanowires. CTAB absorbed probably preferentially to the (100) facets of Pd, inhibiting the metallic growth in the 〈100〉 direction and facilitating the growth of the nanowires along the 〈100〉 directions.65 Remita and co-workers also obtained ultrathin palladium hexagonal nanosheets (Fig. 11) using SLCs with CTAB as the surfactant via slow reduction and nucleation by CO and also suggested that adsorption of Pd complexes at the CTAB interface played a key role in the formation of Pd nanosheets.66 The high intensity beam used for HRTEM led to a modification of the single nanocrystal into small crystallized nanodomains (4–7 nm) (Fig. 11b). The fast Fourier transformation (FFT) (Fig. 11b, inset) exhibited one main diffraction ring and two discrete symmetric points, corresponding to the (111) and (200) plane lattices of cubic Pd. To explain the first nucleation steps leading formation of Pd nanosheets, it was proposed that CO could displace the DBA ligand, consistently with the calculated free enthalpy of the reaction by theoretical calculation using density functional theory (ΔG = −0.38 eV).67 The calculations showed that four CO could displace efficiently the three DBA ligands leading to the formation of an unstable Pd carbonyl complex, which further collapsed into metal clusters, which could then aggregate on the CTAB interface forming Pd nanosheets. Remarkably, the thin Pd nanosheets exhibited a broad absorption band from the visible to the near-infrared region which made them suitable for applications in optical sensing and photothermal therapy.
 Fig. 11  (a) A HRTEM image of single ultrathin hexagonal Pd nanosheets and (b) a magnified image of a selected area on the thin film shown in (a). Inset of (b): FFT allows one to measure the two expected reciprocal distances and confirms the structure of cubic Pd. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Finally, a facile and reproducible method was developed for the high-yield synthesis of assembled Pd nanostructures in hexagonal mesophases, by photoreduction of Pd complexes (Fig. 12).68 The as-prepared Pd nanostructures assembled together as ellipsoid-like structures produced from the self-assembly of almost monodisperse small Pd NPs (diameter 3–4 nm) (Fig. 12b and c). The confined geometry of mesophases was certainly involved to direct the NP growth leading to these assembled Pd nanostructures. After template removal, the NPs might come in close contact and their inter-particle interaction might contribute to their assembly.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation and (b–c) transmission electron micrographs of Pd nanostructures synthesized in a SLC under UV-irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Synthesis of bimetallic nanostructures. 
Great progress has been made in recent years with regard to the synthesis and application of bimetallic nanocrystals.69 The Pd-based bimetallic nanostructures (e.g. Pt–Pd, Au–Pt, Pd–Au, Pd–Cu) often exhibit enhanced catalytic performances in terms of activity, selectivity and durability, compared to the individual components.70,71 Using SLCs as soft templates and γ-ray irradiation, Ksar et al.72 prepared bimetallic Pd–Au core–shell nanostructures (a detailed description is provided in the next section) which were active toward the oxidation of ethanol in an alkaline medium. In mesophases, gold was presumably reduced first, leading to particles with large Au cores. Pd was then reduced on the Au core leading to a porous Pd shell formed by connected nanowires due to the templating effect provided by the mesophase. We mention that Au–Pt core–shell mesoporous nanoballs with a size of 75 ± 5 nm were also synthesized in mesophases following presumably an analogous mechanism.73 The radiolytic synthesis provided a high control on the size, morphology, and composition of the nanostructures. The high catalytic activity of the core–shell nanostructures toward organic electrooxidation is discussed in details in the application section.
Lehoux et al.74 developed a soft template-based radiolytic synthesis of three-dimensional porous bimetallic Pd–Pt nanostructures, with tunable porosity (pore size from 5 to 55 nm) and composition, made of interconnected nanowires forming hexagonal cells. The samples were exposed to γ-irradiation at a relatively low dose rate for a slow reduction. Fig. 13(a) shows the SAXS patterns of several samples with various swelling ratios (O/W) and doped with 0.1 M metallic salts (Pd/Pt = 1:1). All samples were hexagonal, as confirmed from the occurrence and the relative positions of the several Bragg diffraction peaks. Moreover, the peaks shifted towards lower wave vectors as O/W increased, indicating an increase of the characteristic sizes of the mesophases. From the peak positions and sample composition, the diameter of the oil-swollen tubes was calculated. TEM observations revealed that the materials synthesized in the hexagonal mesophases were porous nanoballs (diameters in the range of 100–280 nm) constituted of three-dimensionally interconnected nanowires forming the walls of hexagonal cells (Fig. 13b–e). The typical diameter of the nanowires was 2.5 nm, a numerical value in remarkable agreement with the thickness of the water channels between adjacent tubes in the template mesophase (between 1.3 and 2.8 nm). The pore size of the nanoballs was directly determined by the diameter of the oil tube of the doped mesophases, which was varied in a controlled fashion from 10 to 55 nm, demonstrating a direct templating effect.
 Fig. 13  (a) Scattered intensity as a function of wave vector of nanoballs with various pore diameters prepared in SLCs with various swelling ratios, O/W, as indicated in the legend. The arrows point to the peak positions. Inset: Scattering curve for nanoballs prepared in a mesophase with O/W = 1.5. The arrows point to the peak position (*) from which the pore diameter is derived and to the departure from the power law regime (**) which provides a characteristic size (4.5 nm) comparable to the thickness of the metallic nanowires. Representative TEM images of nanoballs (for Pd/Pt = 1:1) with increasing pore sizes corresponding to a ratio O/W equal to: (b) 2, (c) 1.5, (d) 3.25, and (e) 4.5 and with a concentration of metallic salts in the aqueous phase of 0.1 M. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2012 Wiley. 


3.1.4 Conclusion. 
Overall, the experimental results described above shows that the morphology, pore size and functionality of the resulted metal nanostructures can all be well adjusted by precisely tuning the synthesis parameters. It is interesting to note that the nature of the surfactants plays a significant role in the final morphology of the metal nanostructures. For example, Pd nanowires were formed with CTAB as surfactant, while Pd spherical nanoparticles were formed, when SDS or CPC was used instead of CTAB.62 The composition and characteristic size of the SLCs play a major role. In particular, it was shown that the swelling ratio (O/W) of a SLC, which controls the diameter of the oil tube, also determines the porosity of Pd, Pt and Pd–Pt nanostructures.61,62,74 In addition, it was observed that the length of Pd nanowires was controlled by the ratios of cosurfactant over surfactant of the SLCs. Moreover, the morphology of the synthesized nanostructures could be tuned by using a particular reducing agent. For instance, using SLCs made of toluene in which Pd salts such as Pd2(DBA)3 and palladium acetylacetonate (Pd(acac)2) were dissolved, Pd nanowires were formed using hydrazine vapors64 whereas two dimensional Pd nanosheets were obtained with CO.66 Remarkably, the CTAB-based mesophases doped with Pd(NH3)4Cl2 produced Pd-nanoballs when the mesophases were irradiated with gamma irradiation,61 while Pd nanowires were obtained using an electron beam62 and ellipsoid-like assembled nanostructures made of Pd nanoparticles (NPs) were obtained by photoreduction of the Pd salt.68 A similar trend has been followed for the morphology controlled synthesis of Pt nanostructures by varying the surfactant, the reducing agent, the metal precursors etc. using SLCs as soft templates. For example, rod-like aggregates of Pt NPs were obtained by CO reduction of hexachloroplatinic acid in a SDS-based hexagonal SLC,37 whereas assembled Pt nanostructures were prepared by high γ-ray irradiation.60 Porous platinum nanoballs were by contrast obtained replacing SDS with CTAB.54

3.2 Synthesis of conducting polymer nanostructures
The soft template approach has also been utilized for the synthesis of conjugated polymer nanostructures (CPNs) with tunable sizes, and electrochemical, photocatalytic and photoluminescence properties using different precursors as monomers. The main conjugated polymers altogether with their chemical formula, which were synthesized, are given in Fig. 14.
 Fig. 14  The molecular structure of representative conducting polymers synthesized in swollen hexagonal mesophases. 
Hard templates require a tedious and complicated separation process. In addition, it is rather difficult using such templates to control the morphology and size distribution of CPNs. Compared to hard template approaches, soft template routes have obvious advantages in adjusting the composition and physical properties of CPNs by the careful selection of not only diversified organic precursors, but also polymerization conditions. Hence, the development of soft template methods, which can provide an opportunity to fabricate CPNs with defined morphology, is vital for applications.
For example, Ghosh et al. developed a simple, cost effective, one pot synthesis of nanostructured poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), PEDOT, in the hydrophobic domains of cationic surfactant-based hexagonal mesophases via chemical oxidative polymerization of EDOT monomers using FeCl3 as the oxidizing agent.55 The mesophases were also observed by cryo-TEM microscopy before and after polymerization of EDOT monomers. Tube rod-like micelles were clearly observed in all cases, even in the presence of EDOT and FeCl3 (Fig. 15), as expected for mesophases. These observations in very good agreement with SAXS measurements demonstrated that the hexagonal structure was preserved after chemical oxidative polymerization in the oil phase of the SLC. The in situ polymerization occurred by stepwise RC–RC (radical cation, RC) coupling of oxidized EDOT monomers or oligomers in the presence of an oxidant (iron salt) (Fig. 16a). Moreover, the PEDOT polymers prepared in mesophases could be easily extracted from their confined media and were quite simply redispersed in alcohol solutions. Depending on the mesophase composition, PEDOT spindle like nanostructures of 40 nm thickness and several hundred nanometers long, or PEDOT spherical hollow capsules (or vesicles) with a diameter of around 1 μm and a wall thickness of around 40 nm, were obtained after extraction (Fig. 16b and c).
 Fig. 15  Cryo-TEM images of hexagonal mesophases in the absence (a) and in the presence (b) of 0.1 M EDOT and 0.1 M FeCl3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of the EDOT monomer by chemical oxidation. (b) A transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of PEDOT nanospindles synthesized in a SLC comprising 0.3 M NaCl. (c) A TEM image of PEDOT vesicles synthesized in a SLC comprising 0.1 M NaCl. (d) A typical AFM topographic image of PEDOT nanospindles extracted from mesophases and deposited onto ZnSe substrate and (e) the corresponding 3D AFM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 16d and e show an AFM topographic image and the corresponding 3D AFM image of well dispersed isolated spindle-like nanostructures. In contrast, aggregated network polymer structures (denoted as bulk PEDOT) were obtained in bulk solution (without using a surfactant) confirming the templating effect of the mesophases. The as-prepared PEDOT nanostructures were found to possess good thermal stability (up to 200 °C) and electrical conductivity. The average conductivity of PEDOT vesicles (7 × 10−2 S cm−1) and spindles (to 0.4 S cm−1) was higher than that of PEDOT nanostructures synthesized via oxidative polymerization in bulk solution.55
On the other hand, very thin polydiphenylbutadiyne (PDPB) polymer nanofibers were synthesized in hexagonal phases by UV or gamma radiation. The hydrophobic domain of the mesophases could accommodate high concentrations (up to 20wt%) of the 1,4-diphenylbutadiyne monomer (DPB), which could directly polymerize by photo-irradiation in the presence of a free-radical initiator (benzoin methyl ether, BME, 1%) via 1,4-addition reaction to form alternating ene–yne polymer chains (Fig. 17a). Catalyst-free polymerization reactions induced by radiolysis (gamma rays or electron beams) in mesophases were particularly interesting to obtain pure final products without using additional photoinitiators (which are necessary in the case of photopolymerization) with relatively high conductivity.75 In order to study the effect of the confinement of the polymer nanostructures within oil-swollen tubes during polymerization, the sizes of the oil-swollen tubes were varied. In all cases, connected polymer nanofibers were observed as shown in Fig. 17b–d. PDPB nanofibers with a uniform diameter of ∼19 nm and a few micrometers long were obtained in mesophases with O/W = 2.21, comprising oil tubes with a diameter of D = 18.4 nm (Table 1, Fig. 17b). Nanofibers with an average diameter of ∼12 nm were synthesized in mesophases with O/W = 0.98 (with D = 7.4 nm) (Table 1, Fig. 17c). Even thinner nanofibers (average diameter ∼5 nm) were obtained for mesophases with O/W = 0.72 (with D = 5.2 nm) (Table 1, Fig. 17d). Thus, the diameter of the nanofibers could be varied by ∼4-fold and was found to be directly determined by the diameter of the oil tube of the doped mesophases, thus proving a direct templating role of the SLCs. To the best of our knowledge, PDPB nanofibers (3 to 25 nm of diameter) have been the thinnest reported in the literature to date.37,38 The molar mass of the polymer was found by gel permeation chromatography to be 1625 g mol−1, which corresponded to oligomers with a degree of polymerization of 8. The conductivity of the PDPB nanostructures obtained by gamma irradiation was estimated to be 10–1 S cm−1, which is higher than the conductivity of PDPB nanostructures previously reported in the literature.76,77 The conductivity was found to slightly increase on decreasing the nanowire diameter (Table 1). In contrast, micron-sized spherical particles were obtained by photo-polymerization of DPB (in the presence of BME) in bulk cyclohexane (no mesophases) clearly demonstrating the templating effect of the mesophase for the generation of the 1D nanostructures (Fig. 17e). Hence, the soft template approach allows the size tunable synthesis of anisotropic PDPB structures with high conductivity, and thus appears as an attractive opportunity for electronic device applications or as a support in electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of diphenylbutadiyne by UV irradiation. Transmission electron micrographs of PDPB nanostructures prepared by UV-irradiation in mesophases with different swelling ratios, O/W, defined as the volume ratio of cyclohexane over water. (b) O/W = 2.21, (c) O/W = 0.98, and (d) O/W = 0.72. (e) Bulk polymerization of PDPB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 1 Composition of the hexagonal mesophases and PDPB nanostructures with various swelling ratios (O/W) and structural parameters, as determined from SAXS and TEM measurement, respectively. Cs is the salt concentration of the aqueous phase of the mesophase, O/W is the volume ratio of oil over water, dc is the lattice parameter of the triangular lattice and D is the diameter of the cyclohexane cylinders measured by SAXS75





C
s (mol L−1)
O/W

d
c (nm)

D (nm)
Diameter of PDPB fibers (nm)
Conductivity (S cm−1)


UV
Gamma
UV
Gamma




0
0.72
6.7
5.2
5 ± 1
10 ± 0.5
0.035 ± 0.003
0.130 ± 0.008


0.1
0.98
11.8
11.1
12 ± 1
14 ± 2
0.020 ± 0.006
0.100 ± 0.009


0.3
2.21
20.9
21.6
19 ± 2
25 ± 3
0.012 ± 0.005
0.092 ± 0.005




Another interesting conducting polymer is poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), a thiophene based organic semiconductor mainly used for the fabrication of transistors, photovoltaic cells, and light emitting devices.79,80 Recently, Floresyona et al. prepared P3HT nanostructures78 in SLCs. The hydrophobic (toluene) domains of the mesophases (diameter of the oil tubes ∼27 nm) could accommodate high concentrations (up to 0.1 M) of the 3HT monomer, which was subsequently polymerized by oxidation with FeCl3 (Fig. 18a). Hexagonal mesophases containing only monomers were colorless (Fig. 18b), transparent and birefringent, while the mesophases containing FeCl3 were also translucent and birefringent, but yellow, because of the absorption properties of FeCl3. The oxidant (FeCl3) and monomer (3HT) were dispersed in a separate volume of toluene, in order to avoid polymerization prior to mesophase formation. Once incorporated sequentially in the mesophase, the color of the mixture turned first into green-brown, and then to orange upon continuous vortex (Fig. 18c). After polymerization, the absorption peak at 329 nm due to the P3HT monomer disappeared, and a new peak at larger wavelength was detected indicating the complete polymerization of P3HT (Fig. 18d). The peak position was at around 428 nm for nano-P3HT (polymer prepared using SLCs as soft templates) and at 435 nm for bulk P3HT (Fig. 18d). The optical band gap (estimated from the absorption edge, at 550 nm) is 2.25 eV. TEM images showed that nano-P3HT consisted of connected nanowires of about 30 nm diameter (Fig. 18e), whereas bulk P3HT formed large aggregates of several hundred nanometers (Fig. 18f). A molecular weight of 4668 g mol−1 was measured by MALDI-TOF (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time of Flight) mass spectroscopy, which corresponded to oligomers with a degree of polymerization of 27. Because of their strong absorption in the visible region, these polymer nanostructures could be suitable for electronic devices or solar light harvesting applications.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of the 3HT monomer by chemical oxidation. Photographs of hexagonal mesophases doped with the (b) 3HT monomer and (c) P3HT polymer. (d) Normalized UV-Visible spectra of the 3HT monomer, nano-P3HT, and bulk P3HT in chloroform. TEM images for (e) nano- and (f) bulk P3HT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 
Finally, we mention that the other conducting polymer, polyaniline (PANI) was also produced using the same soft templating approach. Siril and co-workers reported the morphology-controlled synthesis of PANI nanostructures with sphere- and rod-like morphologies in the aqueous domains of SLCs.81,82 Polyaniline was synthesized by oxidative polymerization of aniline using a stoichiometric amount of APS, yielding the complete monomer-to-polymer conversion (Fig. 19a). PANI nanostructures were prepared either by thoroughly mixing a CTAB based SLC comprising ammonium persulfate (APS) with a SDS-based SLC comprising aniline (ANI, monomer) and another sample was prepared by the addition of APS and ANI onto the top of the two mesophases formed by CTAB and SDS called ‘products of diffusion’ as it was formed by the slow diffusion of APS through the mesophases. Electron microscopy images show that the materials produced via mixing exhibited a spherical morphology with a particle size in the range of 100–600 nm (Fig. 19b) whereas the materials produced through diffusion displayed rod-like morphology, with a rod diameter in the range of 100–200 nm (Fig. 19c). The authors proposed that under mixed conditions, 0-D PANI nanostructures were formed due to the fast rate of polymerization whereas under slow diffusion conditions, 1-D PANI nanostructures were formed due to the slow rate of polymerization.
 Fig. 19  (a) (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of the aniline monomer by chemical oxidation. Field emission scanning electron microscopy images of polyaniline nanostructures prepared under two different conditions, (b) mixing and (c) diffusion, using aniline hydrochloride monomers in the aqueous phase of SLCs. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier. 
3.3 Synthesis of composite nanostructures
The incorporation of metal nanoparticles into conducting polymers could provide enhanced performance for both components. This renders composite materials attractive for different applications such as in fuel cells, catalysis, photocatalysis, display devices, immunodiagnostic assays etc.83–87 In particular, Au or Pt/conducting polymer nanocomposites may find their application in catalysis, electrocatalysis and sensing. To this end, composites of polyaniline and platinum (PANI–Pt) were prepared using SLCs as soft and structure directing templates.86 Dutt et al. also prepared composite nanowires with a gold core and polyaniline shell by simply pouring a SLC doped with AuCl3 (transparent) over a SLC doped with aniline (yellow) (Fig. 20a).87 With time, a slow, but continuous change in the colour of the interface between the two mesophases occurred (Fig. 20b). The interface became greenish-black and thickened with time until invading the whole sample after nearly 72 hours (Fig. 20c). Core–shell nanocomposites composed of small spherical NPs or short nanorods of gold embedded in a PANI shell (Aucore–PANIshell) were produced (Fig. 20d and e). Confinement, slow diffusion and strong interaction between Au and PANI were presumably important to obtain this specific nanostructure. The composite nanowires demonstrated surface enhanced Raman scattering for organic dyes (methylene blue and rhodamine B) and showed high photocatalytic activity for organic dye degradation.
 Fig. 20  Photographs of two mesophases, one doped with the gold precursor and the other one doped with the aniline monomer deposited one on top of the other (a) just after deposition, (b) after 1 h reaction and (c) after 72 h. (d) TEM images of composite nanowires with a gold core and a polyaniline shell, and (e) a high resolution image of nanocomposites where the PANI shell is clearly visible. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Sharma and co-workers developed a one pot radiolytic technique for the synthesis of palladium NP doped polyaniline (Pd–PANI) nanocomposites synthesized in SLCs.88 The confinement of the liquid crystalline mesophase facilitates polymerization of aniline monomers and their 1D growth into polyaniline nanowires (average diameter of 30–40 nm) by using ammonium persulfate. The synthesized Pd–PANI nanocomposites showed PANI wire-like structures decorated by 10 nm Pd nanoparticles (NPs). The catalytic activity of Pd–PANI nanocomposites was investigated for the reduction of methylene blue and 4-nitro phenol by sodium borohydride. This study provides a novel approach for the directional synthesis of conducting polymer–metal nanocomposites and their possible application as nanocatalysts in environmental remediation. Besides noble metals, Ghosh and co-workers developed an efficient light harvesting heterostructure based on poly(diphenylbutadiyne) (PDPB) nanofibers (of uniform diameter ∼19 nm and a few micrometers long, Fig. 21a–c) and ZnO NPs via a solution phase synthetic route.89
 Fig. 21  Microscopic images of PDPB nanofibers and PDPB-ZnO light harvesting nanoheterojunction (LHNH). Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) PDPB nanofibers and (b) PDPB-ZnO LHNH. Transmission electron microscopy images of (c) PDPB nanofibers and (d) PDPB-ZnO LHNH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers. 
The ZnO NPs (∼20 nm) possessed a good degree of crystallinity and the interplanar distances of ∼0.26 nm corresponded to the spacing between two (002) planes of ZnO. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) (Fig. 21b and d) images showed ZnO NPs deposited on PDPB nanofibers. In addition, ZnO NPs (∼5 nm) were synthesized in situ on PDPB nanofibers to investigate the role of defect states of ZnO in the photoinduced charge transfer processes. The co-sensitization for multiple photon harvesting (with different energies) at the heterojunction was achieved via a systematic extension of conjugation from monomeric to polymeric diphenyl butadiyne moieties in the proximity of the ZnO NPs (Fig. 22). The dual-active-site mechanism originating from synergistic effects between each component was useful for the excellent performance of the hybrid material. This development offers attractive catalyst materials for large-scale catalysis, and solar light harvesting technologies.
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation of (a) the co-sensitization of different PDPB oligomers to ZnO NPs and the molecular structure of the PDPB polymer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers. 
4. Application of nanostructures synthesized using swollen liquid crystals as soft templates
The novel nanostructured materials described above displayed interesting and unanticipated properties. They have thus drawn attention across the scientific community for a wide range of applications in the field of fuel cells, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. This new direction for fabricating robust, high-performance catalytic materials and active electrode materials for energy conversion applications such as solar light harvesting and fuel cells using metal nanostructures and conducting polymer porous nanostructures with high electrical conductivity, large surface area, and structural tunability are discussed in this section.
4.1 Electrocatalysis
Low temperature fuel cells based on the direct alcohol fuel cell (DAFC) technology are promising energy conversion devices, especially for portable applications that convert chemical energy directly into electrical energy.90–92 Electrocatalysts are the key materials that determine the overall performances of fuel cells. Methanol and ethanol are the most widely used alcohols for DAFC applications, as they possess a high energy density and can be stored and transported easily.93,94 In comparison with methanol (6 electrons), ethanol can provide 12 electrons per molecule during oxidation in alkaline medium. Moreover, due to its low toxicity and simple mass production from biomass, ethanol is often favored over methanol. The commonly accepted mechanism of ethanol oxidation follows a dual-pathway mechanism on Pt- or Pd-based catalysts in either acidic or alkaline media (eqn(1)–(4)).92,94 The C1 pathway is the complete oxidation of ethanol to CO2 or carbonates via the adsorbed CO (COads) intermediate yielding 12 electrons. The C2 pathway, on the other hand, is the partial oxidation without the breaking of the C–C bond of ethanol to acetate by delivering 2 electrons or to acetaldehyde by delivering 2 electrons.94

C1 pathway: CH3–CH2OH + 12OH− → 2CO2 + 9H2O + 12e−(1) CH3–CH2OH + 16OH− → 2CO32− + 11H2O + 12e−(2)

C2 pathway:
 
CH3–CH2OH → CH3–CHO + 2H+ + 2e−
(3)
 
CH3CHO + 2OH− → CH3COO− + 2H2O + 2e−
(4)

At the anode, the fuel (e.g., ethanol) is oxidized to produce protons and electrons. In the current fuel cell technology, catalyst cost, performance and durability still remain big challenges that direct the choice and design of new materials.95 Noble metal/alloy nanostructures such as nanoclusters, nanowires and nanotubes are extensively used as anode materials for electro-oxidation of fuels.96,97 The catalysts currently used in fuel cells are based on platinum, which is one of the most expensive metals. Alternative to Pt-based catalysts, palladium and other transition metal-based nanostructures are also known as efficient, cheaper electrocatalysts for DAFC applications. Significant efforts have been made in order to develop new techniques intended for tailoring the size and the shape of nanostructures.

4.1.1 Catalytic activity of Pd-based nanostructures. 
Various shape- and composition-controlled Pd nanostructures such as Pd porous nanoballs, Pd nanowires, and Au–Pd core shell nanostructures have been explored for electro-catalysis.62,66,72–74 As a first example, we describe the Pd nanowires produced by Ksar et al. that displayed high electrocatalytic activity and stability for ethanol electrooxidation.63Fig. 23 shows the first voltammogram run measured at a scan rate of 50 mVs−1with a Pd nanowire-modified electrode in 1 M KOH containing 1 M EtOH. The forward peak current (If) was due to the oxidation of freshly chemisorbed species from alcohol adsorption. The reverse scan peak (Ib) represented the removal of carbonaceous species not completely oxidized in the forward scan. It is important to note that the ratio of the forward anodic peak current density to the reverse anodic peak current density quantifies the catalyst tolerance to carbonaceous species accumulation. For Pd nanowires, the values of If/Ib remained close to 1 indicating a relatively important electrocatalytic activity of the electrode material toward ethanol oxidation during the forward anodic scan with little accumulation of carbonaceous residues. The more negative onset potential value (Eonset −664 mV) compared with the value of −620 mV previously measured with Pd nanowire arrays obtained by the anodic aluminum oxide template electro-deposition method82 underscored the enhancement in the kinetics of ethanol oxidation using Pd nanowires synthesized in SLCs.
 Fig. 23  Superposition of the first (black solid line curve) and the 200th (red solid line curve) cyclic voltammetric runs associated with the electrocatalytic oxidation of 1 M EtOH in 1 M KOH with continuous cycling of the electrode potential. The working electrode was a glassy carbon disk modified with the Pd nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, porous palladium nanoballs synthesized in SLCs also display a remarkable high electrocatalytic activity for ethanol oxidation.62 A negative shift of the onset potential (Eonset = −550 mV) underscores the augmentation in the kinetics of ethanol oxidation and can be used as an anode material in direct ethanol fuel cells.
Moreover, the catalyst support plays a crucial role in the search for high electrochemical stability under critical fuel cell operating conditions. It also provides high surface area for better metal catalyst dispersion.98 Recently, conducting polymer nanostructures were utilized as supporting materials due to their unique π-conjugated structures, high conductivity and chemical stability.55,75,99 Ghosh et al. used PDPB polymer nanofibers as a support for effective dispersion of 2D Pd nanoplates for ethanol oxidation reaction (Fig. 24a and b).100 The cyclic voltammogram of Pd nanoplates embedded in PDPB on a glassy carbon electrode is shown by a blue solid line in Fig. 24c. In the potential range smaller than −0.5 V vs. Hg/HgO, oxidation of the absorbed and adsorbed hydrogen occurs (eqn (5)): Pd–(H)abs/ads + 2OH− ↔ Pd + H2O + e−(5)
 Fig. 24  (a) A transmission electron micrograph of Pd nanoplates. (b) Ethanol oxidation of Pd nanoplates deposited on conducting polymer nanofibers. Cyclic voltammograms (sweep rate of 50 mV s−1) of Pd nanoplates on PDPB nanofibers in (c) 1 M KOH (blue solid line), and in 1 M EtOH + 1 M KOH for the first (black solid line) and the 50th (red solid line) cycles, and (d) 1 M KOH containing 0.1 M EtOH (red solid line curve) and 0.1 M KCH3COO (black solid line curve). Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Formation of a palladium(II) oxide layer on the surface of the catalyst for a potential range above −150 mV follows the mechanism shown by eqn (6)–(8):101 Pd + 2OH− ↔ Pd–(OH)ads + e−(6) Pd–(OH)ads + 2OH− ↔ Pd–O + H2O + e−(7) Pd–(OH)ads + Pd–(OH)ads ↔ Pd–(O) + H2O(8)
Corresponding to the oxidation process, the sharp peak at the reverse sweep can be attributed to the reduction of the PdII oxide (eqn (9)): Pd–(O) + H2O + 2e− ↔ Pd + 2OH−(9)
In the presence of ethanol, the forward scan peak is related to the oxidation of freshly chemisorbed species issued from alcohol adsorption (eqn (10)–(12)), while the reverse scan peak represents the removal carbonaceous species not completely oxidized in the forward scan and the reactivation of the surface of the Pd nanoplates with the reduction of the Pd oxide (eqn (10)). Pd + CH3CH2OH + OH− → Pd–(CH3CHOH)ads + H2O + e−(10) Pd–OHads + Pd–(CH3CHOH)ads → 2Pd + CH3CHO + H2O(11) (12)

Fig. 24c shows that Eonset shifted to more negative potential (from −525 mV at the 1st cycle to −580 mV after 50 cycles) suggesting an enhancement of ethanol oxidation kinetics. Upon cycling, the peak current density was also modified: the forward anodic peak current density (If) increased from 1.67 mA cm−2 to 9.91 mA cm−2 whereas the backward anodic peak current density (Ib) decreased from 6.17 mA cm−2 to 5.04 mA cm−2, leading to an increase of the ratio If/Ib from 0.27 to 1.95. The enhancement in the current density indicates a relatively important change of electrocatalytic activity of the electrode material toward ethanol oxidation during cycling. The increase of If suggested no loss of catalytic activity with respect to time. The good dispersion of the Pd nanoplate-supported polymer nanofibers demonstrated higher catalytic activity for ethanol oxidation than the traditional Nafion support (current density of 9.9 mA cm−2 for Pd nanoplates vs. 3.1 mA cm−2 for Nafion). Ethanol oxidation in alkaline medium occurs via a complex mechanism involving many intermediate compounds. The cyclic voltammograms of the Pd electrode in 1.0 mol L−1 KOH solution containing ethanol and potassium acetate have been recorded to determine the main final product of ethanol oxidation reaction on the Pd nanoplate surface (Fig. 24d). It was found that there was no oxidation current for acetate, suggesting that most ethanol was incompletely oxidized to acetate in alkaline solution, in agreement with previous studies.102 The possible reactions (eqn (13) and (14)) are as follows: Pd + CH3CH2OH ↔ Pd–(CH3CHOH)ads(13) (14)
Hence, the electro-catalytic activity of Pd nanoplates for ethanol oxidation using conducting PDPB nanofibers could be used as an alternative support advantageously replacing expensive commercial Nafion®membranes.
Ghosh et al. have developed an alternative strategy for the rational design of catalysts based on Pd nanostructure synthesis in the SLC template. The Pd nanostructures demonstrated both an enhanced activity (current density of 14.2 mA cm−2) and durability for ethanol electro-oxidation using reduced graphene oxide nanosheets in combination with Nafion (a proton conducting phase) as a support.68 First, reduced graphene oxide (RGO) nanosheets were synthesized by a scalable, clean approach via radiolysis without using any chemical reducing agents. The oxygen desorption method was then used to evaluate the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of Pd electrodes. The ECSA of the Pd/RGO-Nafion electrode (192 m2 g−1) was found to be about 5 times greater than that of the Pd/Nafion electrode (40 m2 g−1), suggesting that the former electrode was more exposed and available in the solvent environment for undergoing the reactions and hence showed an increased surface area induced catalytic effect. The peak current and the onset potential of the faradaic current (Eonset) on the forward scan indicated an electrocatalytic activity of the catalyst for EOR. Fig. 25a and b depict the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of Pd–Nafion (the green solid line) and Pd/RGO–Nafion (the blue solid line) in pure 1 M NaOH and a voltammetric pattern associated with a characteristic feature of Pd electrodes consistent with earlier reports. The Pd nanostructures embedded in a proton conducting phase, Nafion and the RGO–Nafion matrix were used as catalysts for ethanol oxidation in an alkaline medium. The main quantitative parameters measured from CVs were tabulated (Table 2). The onset of ethanol oxidation occurred at −0.590 V for Pd/Nafion and at −0.622 V for Pd/RGO–Nafion, suggesting that the electrocatalytic activity towards ethanol oxidation occured more favorably in Pd/RGO–Nafion than in Pd/Nafion. The forward peak current for the Pd/RGO–Nafion catalyst was ∼1.7 times higher than that of the Pd/Nafion catalysts. Overall, the as-prepared electrocatalysts supported with RGO nanosheets exhibited dramatically enhanced activity for ethanol electrooxidation under alkaline conditions, making them effective electrocatalysts for direct ethanol fuel cells.
 Fig. 25  Superposition of the first cyclic voltammogram (black solid line curve) and the 100th cycle (red solid line curve) of Pd/Nafion (a) and Pd/RGO–Nafion (b) runs in 1 M NaOH containing 1 M EtOH at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 2 Comparison of the electrochemical performance of Pd nanostructure catalysts with Nafion and reduced graphene oxide nanosheet modified Nafion as supports for the oxidation of ethanol. The current density is referred to the geometric area of the glassy carbon support.68 Mass activity has been calculated considering the quantity of catalysts




Electrodes (after 100 cycles)
Forward current, If (mA cm−2)
Backward current, Ib (mA cm−2)

I
f/Ib

E
onset (mV)
Mass activity If (mA cm−2) mg−1
Mass activity Ib (mA cm−2) mg−1




Pd/Nafion
8.55
1.43
5.98
−590
1745
292


Pd/RGO-Nafion
14.22
17.08
0.83
−622
5925
7166




Moreover, very recently, nanocomposites of pristine graphene with palladium have been developed using SLCs as soft templates.103 The exceptionally high catalytic activity of pristine graphene supported Pd catalysts in the organic reactions showed exceptional stability as they could be recycled up to a minimum of 15 cycles for the C–C coupling reactions without any loss in activity.


4.1.2 Catalytic activity of Pt based nanostructures. 
Kalekar et al. studied the catalytic activity of the porous platinum nanostructures, with platinum nanonets (Pt NNs) and nanoballs (Pt NBs), synthesized by radiolysis in SLCs.104,105 The TEM images showed an influence of the amount of irradiation: at 40 kGy interconnected Pt nanowire forming Pt nanonets were produced (Fig. 26a), whereas at 80 kGy an interconnected network of Pt nanowires aggregating into ball-shaped structures of 60–100 nm formed porous Pt NBs (Fig. 26b). Both Pt NNs and Pt NBs were found to exhibit a significantly high catalytic activity for two model catalytic reactions, viz., electron transfer reaction between hexacyanoferrate(III) and sodium thiosulfate (eqn (15)) and reduction of p-nitrophenol (PNP) by sodium borohydride (NaBH4) to p-aminophenol (PAP) (eqn (16)). (15) (16)
 Fig. 26  TEM images of (a) platinum nanonets (dose = 40 kGy) and (b) platinum nanoballs (dose = 80 kGy) synthesized in SLCs. (c) UV–vis absorption spectra at different time intervals indicate the disappearance of the peak of the p-nitrophenolate anion at 400 nm due to the reduction of PNP to PAP by NaBH4 in the presence of Pt NNs. (d) Linear plots of ln(A0/At) versus time at 303 K in the presence of Pt NNs. Reaction conditions: [PNP] = 1 × 10−4 M; [NaBH4] = 5 × 10−2 M; [Pt NNs] = 50 mg L−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 

Fig. 26c shows the UV–vis spectra for the catalyzed reaction between PNP and NaBH4 with a decrease in absorbance at 400 nm, which suggests the disappearance of the p-nitrophenolate anion due to the reduction of PNP to PAP. In the kinetics for the Pt NN-catalyzed reactions, an induction time (t0) is observed and the reaction proceeds at a slower rate up to 25 min as shown in Fig. 26d. While no induction time (t0) was observed for the Pt NB catalyzed reaction due to the time required for the equilibration of the hydride ions on the Pt NN surface, the rate of the reaction slows down after 10 min, displaying a linear behaviour. The kinetic studies show that Pt NBs exhibit higher catalytic activity initially because of the larger initial accessible surface area as compared to Pt NNs. This suggests that the morphology of the nanostructures could be playing an important role in the induction time, since for Pt NBs, the porous nanowires are 3D-connected into a ball-shaped domain where reactants can easily access the surface and form an equilibrium which is not possible in the case of Pt NNs.


4.1.3 Catalytic activity of Pd- and Pt-based alloy nanostructures. 
Designing a cost effective, high efficient, stable electrocatalyst with a methanol tolerance on the anode side of the fuel cells is significantly challenged. To overcome these problems, three different types of catalyst such as alloys,106 core shells107 and heterostructures have been developed.108 Hence, intense research has been focused on the synthesis of Pd-based catalysts with other noble metal forming core shell or alloy structures such as PdPt or AuPdPt.109–112 Ksar et al. prepared bimetallic Pd–Au nanostructures in the soft templates provided by surfactant hexagonal mesophases.72 The Pd–Au nanostructures were constituted of a core rich in gold (typical size 60–100 nm) and a 15 nm thick Pd porous shell. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the core showed rings with interplanar distances corresponding to polycrystalline gold (Fig. 27a and b). For the shell, the indexation of the SAED pattern indicates spacings that corresponded to cubic Pd (Fig. 27a and b). These nanostructures demonstrated high electrocatalytic activity for ethanol oxidation compared to alloy Pd–Au NPs synthesized in solution (Fig. 27a). The bimetallic Pd–Au nanostructure-modified electrode showed a high negative onset potential (Fig. 24c). Pd–Au nanostructures with an Eonset of −680 mV and Pd nanoballs with an Eonset of −550 mV have been considered so far as one of the best catalysts reported in the literature.72 Moreover, on the basis of quantitative measurements at selected durations, the bimetallic Pd–Au nanostructure-modified electrode showed a larger durability compared to the Pd nanoball-modified electrode (Fig. 27d). Hence, the bimetallic Pd–Au nanostructures synthesized in mesophases are promising for application in direct ethanol fuel cells as they exhibited a very good electrocatalytic activity and a high stability. One should note that the electrochemical performance of Pd-based materials is strongly dependent on individual components and their interactions with each other.109
 Fig. 27  (a) A TEM image and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction pattern and (b) electron diffraction spectra of the core and the shell of palladium–gold nanostructures formed in SLC. (c) Superposition of the first (black solid line curve) and the 200th (red solid line curve) cyclic voltammetric runs associated with the electrocatalytic oxidation of 1 M EtOH in 1 M KOH with continuous cycling of the electrode potential. (d) Chronoamperometric curves for ethanol electrooxidation at −0.3 V vs. Hg/HgO on a glassy carbon electrode modified with bimetallic Pd–Au nanostructures (black curve) or Pd nanoballs (red curve). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Holade et al. reported high catalytic activity of Au–Pt core−shell mesoporous nanoballs toward organic electrooxidation of glucose and formic acid.73Fig. 28a shows that Au–Pt nanoballs (diameter about 70–80 nm) were formed by a core of gold (ca. 30 nm) surrounded by a porous shell of platinum (15 nm of thickness) made by 3D-connected nanowires (2 nm diameter). As for other porous nanoballs synthesized in SLCs, the thickness of the Pt nanowires corresponded to one of the water channels. Fig. 28b shows the glucose electro-oxidation without overpotential on Pt nanoball and Au–Pt nanoball electrodes. The glucose electro-oxidation reaction on platinum was firstly induced by the dehydrogenation process toward 0.3 V vs. RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode) followed by gluconate desorption at higher potentials during the forward scanning. The reverse oxidation peaks were associated with the freshly chemisorbed species or non-oxidized intermediates heaped on the surface during the forward scanning. The synergistic effect of gold and platinum in Au–Pt nanoballs (with different compositions, Au25Pt75 and Au50Pt50) toward glucose electro-oxidation was followed at 0.3 V vs. RHE. It was found that Au25Pt75 was at least twice more active than Pt. As these porous metallic nanoballs were very sensitive to glucose, they could be used in biosensors, and biofuel cells of glucose detection devices. The electroactivity of the as-prepared catalysts towards oxidation of formic acid (HCOOH) in acidic medium was also studied by cyclic voltammetry. Fig. 28c illustrates the electrochemical behavior of the Au50Pt50 electrode in 0.5 M H2SO4 without HCOOH (black curve) and with 0.1 M HCOOH (red curve) from 0.05 to 1.6 V vs. RHE. It was found that the addition of a core of Au in Pt porous nanoballs enhances the electroactivity of Pt catalysts (Fig. 28d). The binary catalyst Au50Pt50 was found to display the highest catalytic activity for the oxidation of HCOOH among the prepared catalysts. If the upper potential was set to 1.6 V vs. RHE, the CV profile showed three oxidative peaks in the forward scan which were marked as A (0.5–0.6 V vs. RHE), B (0.9 V vs. RHE) and C (1.42 V vs. RHE). Only one peak (D: 0.54 V vs. RHE) was observed in the negative scanning. According to Capon et al. the electro-oxidation of formic acid may follow an indirect dehydration conversion process.113 This indicates that the electro-oxidation can proceed through a dual path mechanism that involves a direct dehydrogenation pathway and an indirect dehydration pathway. Hence, the peak A (Fig. 28c) (located in the hydrogen region of Pt) could be attributed to the oxidation of adsorbed formate in indirect pathway on the active sites (eqn (17)) while peaks B and D might correspond to the continuous oxidation of intermediate and adsorbed formate on the active sites free from intermediate and adsorbed CO, respectively.114 The formation of hydroxyl species on the Pt surface occurs in the potential range of 0.8–0.9 V vs. RHE, and the oxidation of this adsorbed intermediate further proceeds via a Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism (eqn (18)). The increase of the current suggests that there is another non-bifunctional process which can be illustrated by eqn (19). Other mechanisms involving CO as the intermediate were also proposed. eqn (20) consists of the overall reaction with two exchange electrons. Pt + HCOOH → Pt (COOH)ad + H+ + e−(17) Pt (OH)ads + Pt (HCOOH)ads → 2Pt + CO2 + H2O(18) Pt (OH)ads + HCOOH → Pt + CO2 + H2O + H+ + e−(19) HCOOH → CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−(20)
 Fig. 28  (a) A HRTEM image of Au–Pt nanoballs formed by a large core made of gold and a porous Pt shell. The dashed circle shows the core. (b) A comparison of the catalytic activity of Pt nanoballs and Au–Pt nanoballs. Cyclic voltammograms recorded during the electrooxidation of 5 mM of D-(+)-glucose in 0.1 M NaOH electrolyte solution at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (c) Formic acid (0.1 M) electrooxidation in 0.1 M NaOH at 20 mV s−1 with the Au50Pt50 catalyst; (d) a comparison of the specific activity of Pt, Au25Pt75 and Au50Pt50 catalysts for formic acid oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 

4.2 Photocatalysis
The concept of visible light driven photocatalysis permits more efficient use of solar energy and continues to attract scientific community for sustainable strategies to many environmental issues. Specifically, the environmental pollution issues prompted the finding of potential solutions to clean up water and environmental detoxification through photocatalysis.115,116 For an optimized use of solar energy, efficient and stable photocatalysts that are capable of harvesting visible light are required. Over the past few decades, oxide-based semiconductors, in particular TiO2, have been recognized as efficient photocatalysts. However, the main limitation of these catalysts is due to a low quantum yield that results from the charge carrier (e−/h+) recombination and the necessity to use UV irradiation having a higher band gap. To overcome this limitation and produce visible light responsive photocatalysts, TiO2 doping with N, C or S, or its surface modification with metal NPs (Ag, Au, Pt), has extended its activity towards the visible region.117–120 However, the photocatalytic activity of the modified materials under visible light is still not sufficient for commercial applications. In the last few years, a considerable number of novel strategies including fabrication of novel catalysts, graphene-based composition and co-catalysts have been proposed to offer new photocatalytic materials as potential substitutes of TiO2 for the most relevant photocatalytic applications such as detoxification and disinfection, and water splitting.116 In this regard, the loading of co-catalysts or secondary semiconductors that can act as either electron or hole acceptors for improved charge separation is a promising strategy and heterojunction photocatalysts have developed very rapidly.
Finally, we mention the work of Markad et al. who utilized 3D urchin shaped porous palladium nanocatalysts which were prepared in SLCs for photoenhanced reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) (which is less toxic than Cr(VI)) at room temperature by formic acid.121 Kinetic analysis revealed that the detoxification of Cr(VI) in the presence of these nanocatalysts was more efficient in sunlight than commercially available Pd/C and radiolytically synthesized spherical Pd NPs. The synergistic effect of the high surface area and higher rate of photodecomposition of formic acid in the porous nanocatalyst was proposed for the photo-enhanced catalytic conversion of Cr(VI) to Cr(III). The three-dimensional, urchin-like palladium nanostructures show very interesting cycling sorption properties for hydrogen storage.122 These urchin-like nanostructures can thus be used in hydrogen storage since this specific structure enhances the diffusivity of hydrogen as well as for quantitative hydrogen detection due to the high and selective affinity of palladium for hydrogen.

4.2.1 Photocatalytic activity of conducting polymer nanostructures. 
The first experimental evidence of a high visible light responsive photocatalytic activity of conjugated polymer nanostructures, without the assistance of sacrificial reagents or precious metal co-catalysts, has been reported by Remita and co-workers using PDPB nanofibers.123 Notably, PDPB nanostructures (nano-PDPB) were found to exhibit a broad absorption in the visible range and to show a high photocatalytic activity under both UV-visible and visible light (wavelength λ > 450 nm) for the degradation of organic pollutants (phenol and methyl orange, MO, were used as model pollutants) without using any sacrificial agents or co-catalysts (Fig. 29a and b). A high photocatalytic activity with 75% photodegradation of MO and 68% photodegradation of phenol was obtained for nano-PDPB after 240 min visible light irradiation, which was much higher than the activity of plasmonic Ag-modified TiO2 (19%). The total mineralization of the organic pollutants monitored by total organic carbon (TOC) measurements indicated ∼50%, or ∼60%, of mineralization of MO, or phenol, after 270 min visible light irradiation, respectively. Moreover, nano-PDPB could be efficiently recycled and reused for repeated cycles without appreciable loss of activity, which is highly desirable for large scale applications. The nano-PDPB were very stable photocatalysts and no differences were found in the morphology or in the chemical structures of the nanostructures after photocatalytic degradation, as confirmed by a series of spectroscopy and microscopy characterization studies. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) suggested onsets of oxidation and reduction processes occurring at lower potentials for nano-PDPB than for bulk PDPB (polymerization in solution without using any templates). Nano-PDPB were found to have a low energy gap of around 1.81 eV and behave like organic semiconductors. Density functional theory calculation yielded a band gap that decreased when the number n of monomers in the polymer increased and reached 1.95 eV for n = 8, in good agreement with experiments (Fig. 29c). In contrast with nano-PDPB, bulk PDPB showed a very low photocatalytic activity under both UV and visible light. This demonstrates the important role of SLCs as templates to prepare catalytically active conducting polymer nanostructures.123
 Fig. 29  Photocatalytic degradation of (a) methyl orange (MO) and (b) phenol in the presence of commercial P25 TiO2 and Ag-TiO2, and of bulk PDPB and nano-PDPB, under visible light (λ > 450 nm). The concentrations of nano-PDPB, Ag-TiO2 and TiO2 in water were 1 mg mL−1. Initial concentrations C0 were 6 × 10−5 mol L−1 for MO and 3.7 × 10−3 mol L−1 for phenol. (c) An energy diagram representing the evaluated HOMO and LUMO levels of the PDPB polymer by density functional theory. (d) A possible photocatalysis mechanism with charge separation in nano-PDPB, with electron reducing oxygen and hole oxidizing water; the holes and generated oxidative radicals can oxidize organic pollutants (noted as M), V. B. and C. B. represent the valence band and the conduction band of the PDPB polymer, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers. 
Mechanistic processes were proposed. During photocatalysis, when illuminated with photons of energy exceeding or equal to the band gap (E ≥ 1.81 eV or λ ≤ 685 nm), excess electrons and holes are formed in the conjugated polymer chains. Such as in inorganic semiconductor photocatalysts, the electron and holes can migrate to the polymer surface and generate highly oxidative radicals (O2˙− superoxide radical, ˙OH radicals etc.) which can degrade and mineralize organic pollutants.124 Under solar irradiation, electrons are injected from the conducting polymer and react with oxygen to form the oxidizing O2˙− superoxide radical (eqn (21)). O2 + e− → O2˙−(21)
According to the valence band energy level, OH− cannot react with the holes to yield oxidative ˙OH, but a small amount of ˙OH radicals can be formed by the following reactions (eqn (22)–(25)): (22) (23) H2O2+O2˙− → ˙OH + O2 + OH−(24) H2O2 + hν → 2 ˙OH(25)
In parallel, the holes (h+) also diffuse on the surface and may also directly oxidize the pollutant molecules during catalytic degradation reaction. Fig. 29d displays the charge carrier generation under solar light irradiation and formation of oxidative radicals for the oxidation and mineralization of the pollutants.
More recently, another class of conducting polymer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) was shown to exhibit exceptional photocatalytic activity, when produced in soft templates via chemical oxidative polymerization. PEDOT nanostructures demonstrated an unprecedented photocatalytic activity for water treatment without the assistance of sacrificial reagents or noble metal co-catalysts. The activity was even better than that of nano-PDPB and TiO2 usually considered as the benchmark catalyst.125 PEDOT nanospindles on the other hand showed an efficient photocatalytic activity under visible light both for phenol and methyl orange degradation (Fig. 30a and b). A complete degradation of phenol has been observed for PEDOT nanospindles after 240 min irradiation under visible light (Fig. 30a). Similarly, the PEDOT nanospindles displayed a significant MO photodegradation achieving 100% degradation after 180 min under visible light irradiation (Fig. 30b), whereas no catalytic activity has been observed from PEDOT vesicles for both phenol and MO degradation under visible light irradiation. The photocatalytic activity of PEDOT nanospindles was retained at over 98% and 95% of its original activity for phenol and MO degradation, respectively, after six successive experimental runs. The morphology and structure of the polymer nanostructures remained unchanged after many photocatalytic cycles. These stable and cheap polymer nanostructures were easy to process and could be reused without appreciable loss of activity. The proposed photocatalytic mechanism (generation of charge carriers and radicals under light irradiation) was the same as for PDPB and other semiconductors. Moreover, this study demonstrated that PEDOT nanostructures possessed a much narrower band gap (E = 1.69 eV) than that of PDPB nanofibers, and hence displayed an excellent ability to absorb light in visible and near infrared region as calculated from the CV profile (Fig. 30c and d). The main p-doping (oxidation) and n-doping (reduction) were irreversible processes, and the values of the peak potentials vs. Ag/AgCl were +0.139 V (oxidation) and −1.552 V (reduction) for PEDOT nanospindles. When illuminated with photons of energy exceeding (or equal to) the band gap, excess electrons and holes are formed in the conjugated polymer chains (Fig. 30d). This effective separation of the photogenerated electron–hole thereby promotes superior photocatalytic activity. TOC measurements indicated that PEDOT nanostructures were able to mineralize organic pollutants with an efficiency of ∼90% under visible light (for comparison, for nano-PDPB nanofibers, the efficiency was ∼50%).
 Fig. 30  Photocatalytic degradation of (a) phenol and (b) methyl orange (MO) in the presence of commercial P25 TiO2 and Ag-TiO2, PDPB nanofibers and the synthesized PEDOT vesicles and PEDOT nanospindles under visible light (λ > 450 nm) irradiation. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of PEDOT nanospindles obtained at 20 mV s−1 in acetonitrile, 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium perchlorate. The ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc/Fc+) redox potential has been measured at the end of the experiment in order to calibrate the pseudo-reference electrode (0.63 V vs. Ag in the present study). (d) A photocatalysis mechanism with charge separation in PEDOT nanospindles, with electron reducing oxygen and hole oxidizing water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers. 
Remita et al. illustrated with another example, the superior catalytic activity of the conducting polymer nanostructures synthesized in SLCs. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) nanostructures (nano-P3HT) constituted of connected nanowires of about 30 nm diameter were found to exhibit high photocatalytic activity for degradation of phenol and rhodamine B under both UV and visible light.78 Moreover, the P3HT nanostructure photocatalysts could easily be deposited on flat supports such as quartz for photocatalytic applications avoiding a separation step by centrifugation (Fig. 31a and b). Most interestingly, the photocatalytic activity of the supported nano-P3HT was much enhanced as compared to the similar nanostructures dispersed in an aqueous solution due to hydrophobic nature of nano-P3HT which might lead to aggregation of the conjugated polymer in water and to lower the surface area. When nano-P3HT was deposited on a flat support, the nanostructures self-assembled upon chloroform (used as a solvent) evaporation because of the π–π stacking to form large plate forming flowers as shown in SEM images (Fig. 31d–e). Hence, this work highlighted new perspectives on photocatalytic reactors and self-cleaning surfaces, even though optimization of the deposition of the P3HT nanostructures on different supports such as quartz slides, glass, and fabric fibers would be needed for practical applications (Fig. 31c).
 Fig. 31  (a) A quartz slide coated with nano-P3HT inside a quartz cell containing a phenol solution irradiated with visible light. (b) Suspension of nano-P3HT in aqueous solution containing phenol. (c) Photocatalytic degradation of phenol using a nano-P3HT suspension and nano-P3HT deposited on a quartz slide; (d and e) SEM images of nano-P3HT deposited on a quartz slide (from a chloroform solution) at two different magnifications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 


4.2.2 Photocatalytic activity of conducting polymer based heterostructures. 
To further enhance the catalytic activity, hybrid materials consisting of π-conjugated polymers with semiconductor nanocrystals can match the visible light absorption and synergistic optoelectronic properties that allow the sensitization of the semiconductor nanocrystals for photocatalysis.126A series of semiconductor nanocrystals and bulk conjugated polymer-based heterojunctions such as TiO2–PANI, TiO2–P3HT, ZnO–PANI, TiO2–pyrrole have shown an improved efficiency under solar light which directly influenced the charge generation and separation of charge carriers.127–129 However, the photo-conversion efficiency was limited for conducting polymer-based heterojunctions.130 Moreover, very few direct experimental pieces of evidence have been explored to establish the charge transfer mechanism at the heterostructure interface. The integration of another potential semiconductor nanocrystal, e.g. ZnO, with a narrow band gap conducting polymer (PDPB) constituted a light harvesting nanoheterojunction (LHNH) that demonstrated an effective means of promoting charge carrier separation and improving the utilization of solar light.89 Interfacial electron or energy transfer pathways are shown in Fig. 32. The energy transfer from the surface defects of ZnO NPs (∼5 nm) to PDPB nanofibers through Förster resonance energy tTransfer suggested a close proximity to the molecular resolution (3.4 nm and 3.1 nm for defect state 1 and defect state 2, respectively). Due to the closer proximity between PDPB and ZnO, energy transfer from ZnO to PDPB nanofibers make PDPB–ZnO as an efficient light harvesting nanohybrid. The manifestation of efficient charge separation was recognized with ∼5 fold increase in photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange as a model pollutant in water in comparison with the polymer nanofiber counterpart under visible light irradiation. For PDPB–ZnO, the photocurrent response was 7.2 μA cm−2, hence about 2.5 times higher than that of pure ZnO NPs reflecting also higher separation and transfer efficiency of photo-excited electrons from the conjugated polymer to the conduction band of ZnO due to the formation of the heterostructure. The PDPB polymer being considered as a p-type organic semiconductor and ZnO as an n-type inorganic semiconductor, a donor–acceptor junction (heterojunction) was formed. When the PDPB–ZnO LHNH was illuminated under visible light, electrons were excited from the HOMO to the LUMO of PDPB, leaving holes behind in the HOMO of PDPB. The excited state electrons were readily injected into the conduction band of ZnO. Thus, enhanced photocatalytic activity and photo-response were due to the formation of the nanoheterojunction.
 Fig. 32  A scheme of the interfacial carrier dynamics at the heterojunction showing the photocatalytic degradation of MO in aqueous solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers. 

5. Conclusions and future prospects
In this review, we have summarized the synthesis and applications of functional nanostructures with controlled sizes, morphologies or porosities, with the possibility to tailor the surface properties using novel swollen liquid crystals (SLCs) as nanoreactors. These templates present several advantages over the traditional soft templates, including relatively simple synthesis procedures, low cost, high product uniformity, and the possibility to incorporate high concentrations of precursors (leading in turn to high quantity of synthesized materials) both in a water-based phase and in an oil-based phase and tune the characteristic size of the SLCs (leading to nanomaterials with tunable characteristic sizes). Because no rigorous conditions and multi-step synthesis are needed, the synthesis of nanomaterials in SLCs can be easily scaled up favoring practical applications. This methodology offers various advantages like simple processability, multifunctionalization, precise stoichiometry of the nanomaterials, and easy scaling-up for industrial applications. To conclude, the catalytic, electrocatalytic and photocatalytic properties of advanced catalysts synthesized in soft templates have been explored for energy conversion applications. We have described some recent developments on nanostructured catalysts prepared by using SLCs as templates with much improved performances for photocatalysis and fuel cell applications. The surface science in combination with the tunable synthetic approach using SLCs as templates has opened up opportunities to control the surface structure and composition, which are useful parameters in the field of catalysis. The mesoporous metal nanostructures possess a high electrocatalytic activity, because they provide large-surface areas for electrocatalytic ethanol oxidation and improve the mass transport properties. Moreover, the catalyst is self-supported, reducing the overpotential due to the presence of the catalyst/support interface. The strategy for the synthesis of conducting polymer nanostructures in SLCs may facilitate the development of active photocatalysts. The reviewed studies have demonstrated for the first time that nanostructuration of conjugated polymers is essential for photocatalytic applications.29,66,103,105 Nanoscale structures of conducting polymers have shown real efficiency gains in solar light harvesting, and further improved fabrication techniques are important in order to contribute to the widespread implementation of future generations of solar cells and devices. One of the unique features of organic polymer nanostructures is their immense potential for hybridization with other classes of nanostructures (e.g., inorganic semiconductors and metals) to create novel composite materials, enabling integration of functions and emergence of novel and multifunctional properties. For enhanced photocatalytic activity using nanocomposites, structural and band gap engineering are both necessary to further improve light absorption from the solar spectrum. The emerging understanding of the mechanism for visible light active photocatalysis as well as novel metal free material conducting polymer nanostructures as photocatalysts should bring the promise to fulfillment for real-life applications in the near future. These findings may open a door to the development of organic semi-conductor-based photocatalysts, which can also find applications in self-cleaning surfaces, water splitting, hydrogen generation, and in the fields of photovoltaics and solar cells. Hence, the studies reported in this review have validated this new approach by successfully encapsulating and synthesizing a wide range of nanomaterials such as metals, alloys, polymers, and composites by selecting a suitable aqueous as well as organic domain within the swollen liquid crystal and adding a new, improved nanoreactor in the resource of materials chemistry. Future progress will necessitate an intensive effort to make advancement both in experimental techniques and theoretical studies which may provide better understanding of catalysis at the atomic level as well as fundamental insight. For example, in situ liquid microscopy can be employed to detect the fundamental synthesis processes and understand the transport of reactants and products and their interaction with a liquid crystal template, at the nanoscale. Better mechanistic understanding on synthetic approaches can help to design materials with desired structures and properties that are suitable toward industrial applications. Continued development of other liquid crystal phases, synthetic approaches, rationalization of phase behaviour and control of the assembly environment would open the door to a new generation of functional materials and devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023–16033 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z.-R. Tang, Y. Sun, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5053–5075 RSC .

          E. R. Leite, Nanostructured Materials Electrochemical Energy Production and Storage, in Electrochemistry, Nanomaterials, and Nanostructures, ed. P. Ro. Bueno and C. Gabrielli, ISBN: 978-0-387-49322-0, Springer,  2009, ch. 3, pp. 81–150 Search PubMed .
S. P. S. Badwal, S. Giddey, A. Kulkarni, J. Goel and S. Basu, Appl. Energy, 2015, 145, 80–103 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, A. K. Mullick and R. N. Basu, Sol. Energy, 2018, 159, 548–560 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Heiligtag and M. Niederberger, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 262–271 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Boles, A. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 145–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, B. Y. W. Hsu, C. L. Ren, X. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 315–335 RSC .
D. Ajami, L. Liu and J. Rebek Jr., Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 490–499 RSC .
M. Björnmalm, J. Cui, N. B. Zieschang, D. Song, M. Faria, Md. A. Rahim and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 289–306 CrossRef .
D. M. Vriezema, M. C. Aragonès, J. A. A. W. Elemans, J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105(4), 1445–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Kim, S. A. Meeuwissen, J. M. Nolte and J. C. M. van Hest, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 844–858 RSC .
J. Gaitzsch, X. Huang and B. Voit, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 1053–1093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, Z. Zhang, G. Li and N. A. Rowson, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 2639–2645 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, F. Goettmann and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 738–755 CrossRef CAS .
S. Attard, J. C. Glyde and C. G. Göltner, Nature, 1995, 378, 366–368 CrossRef .

          P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The physics of liquid crystals, Oxford Scientific publication, New york, USA,  1993 Search PubMed .

          P. J. Collings and M. Hird, Introduction to Liquid Crystals Chemistry and Physics, Taylor & Francis, London, UK, Bristol, PA, USA,  1997 Search PubMed .
I. Dierking and S. Al-Zangana, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 305–333 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kumar and H. K. Bisoyi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1501–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-S. Li and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 408–411 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rožič, J. Fresnais, C. Molinaro, J. Calixte, S. Umadevi, S.-L. Truong, N. Felidj, T. Kraus, F. Charra, V. Dupuis, T. Hegmann, C.-F. Debuisschert, B. Gallas and E. Lacaze, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6728–6738 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Ok, Y. H. Kim, T. Y. Lee, H.-W. Yoo, K. Kwon, W.-B. Jung, S. H. Kim and H.-T. Jung, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 13418–13426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Attard, P. N. Bartlett, N. R. B. Coleman, J. M. Elliott, J. R. Owen and J. H. Wang, Science, 1997, 278, 838–840 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, D. S. Miller, E. Bukusoglu, J. J. de Pablo and N. L. Abbott, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Malgras, H.-A. Esfahani, H. Wang, B. Jiang, C. Li, K. C.-W. Wu, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 993–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, Chem. – Asian J., 2008, 3, 664–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. T. Chang and L. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1957–1967 RSC .
R. S. Kularatne, H. Kim, M. Ammanamanchi, H. N. Hayenga and T. H. Ware, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8489–8492 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wöhrle, I. Wurzbach, J. Kirres, A. Kostidou, N. Kapernaum, J. Litterscheidt, J. C. Haenle, P. Staffeld, A. Baro, F. Giesselmann and S. Laschat, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 1139–1241 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kijima, T. Ikeda, M. Yada and M. Machida, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6453–6457 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. Chen and X. Jiao, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2009, 10, 023001–023012 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dutt, P. F. Siril and S. Remita, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 5733–5733 RSC .

          P. Alexandridis, G. N. Karanikolos and T. J. Mountziaris, US Pat., 7608237,  2009 Search PubMed .

          T. Mountziaris, P. Alexandridis and G. Karanikolos, Controlled synthesis of nanowires, nanodiscs, and nanostructured materials using liquid crystalline templates, US Patent App11/270692,  2005 Search PubMed .
G. Surendran, M. S. Tokumoto, E. P. dos Santos, H. Remita, L. Ramos, P. J. Kooyman, C. V. Santilli, C. Bourgaux, P. Dieudonné and E. Prouzet, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1505–1514 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. dos Santos, M. S. Tokumoto, G. Surendran, H. Remita, C. Bourgaux, P. Dieudonné, E. Prouzet and L. Ramos, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4362–4369 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Prouzet, H. Remita, L. Ramos, M. Tokumoto, G. Surendran and E. Pena dos Santos, WO Pat., 071633,  2004 Search PubMed .

          E. Prouzet, H. Remita, L. Ramos, M. Tokumoto, G. Surendran and E. Pena dos Santos, WO Pat., 071632,  2004 Search PubMed .
L. Ramos and P. Fabre, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 682–686 CrossRef CAS .
E. Eiser, F. Bouchama, M. B. Thathagar and G. Rothenberg, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 526–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bouchama, M. B. Thathagar, G. Rothenberg, D. H. Turkenburg and E. Eiser, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 477–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ramos, P. Fabre and R. Ober, Eur. Phys. J. B, 1998, 1, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ramos, P. Fabre and L. Fruchter, Eur. Phys. J. B, 1999, 1, 67–72 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Goebla and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610–2653 RSC .
M. A. Boles, M. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2841–2850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Zhu and B. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3145–3187 RSC .
R. Pons, I. Carrera, J. Caelles, J. Rouch and P. Panizza, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 106, 129–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Lyophilic and lyophobic//Chemical encyclopedia. V. 2. (in Russian), The Great Soviet Encyclopedia, Moscow,  1990. pp. 595–596 Search PubMed .
N. Kinadjian, F. Nallet, I. Ly, A. Bentaleb, R. Backov and E. Prouzet, Liq. Cryst., 2016, 43, 615–622 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ramos and C. Ligoure, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5221–5224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Surendran, L. Ramos, B. Pansu, E. Prouzet, F. Audonnet, P. Beaunier and H. Remita, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5045–5048 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, H. Remita, L. Ramos, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, P. Beaunier, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert, F. Brisset and S. Remita, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 1106–1115 RSC .
C. Lamy, A. Lima, V. LeRhun, F. Delime, C. Coutanceau and J. M. Léger, J. Power Sources, 2002, 105, 283–296 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 915–931 CAS .
Z. Wen, J. Liu and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 743–747 CrossRef CAS .
J. Belloni, M. Mostafavi, H. Remita, J. L. Marignier and M. O. Delcourt, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1239–1255 RSC .
G. Surendran, G. Apostolescu, M. Tokumoto, E. Prouzet, L. Ramos, P. Beaunier, P. J. Kooyman, A. Etcheberry and H. Remita, Small, 2005, 1, 964–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, F. Ye, H. Liu and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Surendran, F. Ksar, L. Ramos, B. Keita, L. Nadjo, E. Prouzet, P. Beaunier, P. Dieudonné, F. Audonnet and H. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10740–10744 CAS .
F. Ksar, G. Surendran, L. Ramos, B. Keita, L. Nadjo, E. Prouzet, P. Beaunier, A. Hagege, F. Audonnet and H. Remita, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1612–1617 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Siril, A. Lehoux, L. Ramos, P. Beaunier and H. Remita, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2135–2139 RSC .
F. Favier, E. C. Walter, M. P. Zach, T. Benter and R. M. Penner, Science, 2001, 293, 2227–2231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Siril, L. Ramos, P. Beaunier, P. Archirel, A. Etcheberry and H. Remita, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5170–5175 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Bradley, E. W. Hill, S. Behal, C. Klein, B. Chaudret and A. Duteil, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 1234–1239 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, H. Remita, P. Kar, S. Choudhury, S. Sardar, P. Beaunier, P. S. Roy, S. K. Bhattacharya and S. K. Pal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9517–9527 CAS .
H.-L. Liu, F. Nosheena and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3056–3078 RSC .
S. R. Chowdhury, S. Ghosh and S. K. Bhattachrya, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 310–321 CrossRef .
M. D. Gilroy, A. Ruditskiy, H.-C. Peng, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10414–10472 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ksar, L. Ramos, B. Keita, L. Nadjo, P. Beaunier and H. Remita, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3677–3683 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Holade, A. Lehoux, H. Remita, K. B. Kokoh and T. W. Napporn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27529–27539 CAS .
A. Lehoux, L. Ramos, P. Beaunier, D. B. Uribe, P. Dieudonné, F. Audonnet, A. Etcheberry, M. José-Yacaman and H. Remita, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4900–4908 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, L. Ramos, A. Dazzi, A. D. Besseau, S. Remita, P. Beaunier and H. Remita, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8311–8320 RSC .
K. Takami, J. Mizuno, M. Akai-kasaya, A. Saito, M. Aono and Y. Kuwahara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16353–16356 CrossRef CAS .
K. Baba, H. Kasai, Y. Shinohara, S. Okada, H. Oikawa, H. Matsuda and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 3769–3780 CrossRef CAS .
D. Floresyona, F. Goubard, P. H. Aubert, I. Lampr, J. Mathurin, A. Dazzi, S. Ghosh, P. Beaunier, F. Brisset, S. Remita, L. Ramos and H. Remita, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 23–32 CrossRef CAS .
S. Günes, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1324–1338 CrossRef PubMed .

          K. Tremel and S. Ludwigs, in P3HT Revisited—From Molecular Scale to Solar Cell Devices, ed. S. Ludwigs, ch. 2, Springer,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. Dutt and P. F. Siril, Mater. Lett., 2014, 124, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutt and P. F. Siril, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 18 CrossRef .
R. Gangopadhyay and A. De, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 608–622 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, X. Han, B. Zhang, Y. Dua and H.-L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1349–1360 RSC .
C. Zhan, G. Yu, Y. Lu, L. Wang, E. Wujcik and S. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1569–1585 RSC .
S. Dutt and P. F. Siril, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutt, P. F. Siril, V. Sharma and S. Periasamy, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 902–908 RSC .
K. J. Kshirasagar, U. S. Markad, A. Saha, K. K. K. Sharma and G. K. Sharma, Mater. Res. Express, 2017, 4, 025015 CrossRef .
S. Sardar, P. Kar, H. Remita, B. Liu, P. Lemmens, S. K. Pal and S. Ghosh, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 17313–17327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Ghosh, M. Thandavarayan and R. N. Basu, Recent advances in nanostructured electrocatalysts for direct alcohol fuel cells, in Electrocatalysts for low temperature fuel cells–Fundamentals and Recent trends, ed. M. Thandavarayan and V. S. Saji, Wiley-VCH VerlagGmbh & Co. KGaA, Germany,  2017, ch. 11, pp. 47–372 Search PubMed .
F. Vigier, C. Coutanceau, A. Perrard, E. M. Belgsir and C. Lamy, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2004, 34, 439–446 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Holade, A. Lehoux, H. Remita, K. B. Kokoh and T. W. Napporn, Efficient Design and Fabrication of Porous Metallic Electrocatalysts, in Electrocatalysts for Low Temperature Fuel Cells, ed. M. Thandavarayan and V. S. Saji, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2017, ch. 18, pp. 511–531 Search PubMed .
S. R. Chowdhury, S. Ghosh and S. Bhattachrya, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 250, 124–134 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, S. Bera, S. Bysakh and R. N. Basu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33775–33790 CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, N. M. Markovic and V. R. Stamenkovic, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 891–898 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, H. Wang, P. K. Shen and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4256–4259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Shao, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 46–59 RSC .
S. Ghosh, M. Thandavarayan and R. N. Basu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6921–6947 RSC .
S. Ghosh, A.-L. Teillout, D. Floresyona, P. d. Oliveira, A. Hagège and H. Remita, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 4951–4959 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Liang, T. S. Zhao, J. B. Xu and L. D. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2203–2208 CrossRef CAS .
A. Santasalo-Aarnio, Y. Kwon, E. Ahlberg, K. Kontturi, T. Kallio and M. T. M. Koper, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 466–469 CrossRef CAS .
T. Vats, S. Dutt, R. Kumar and P. F. Siril, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 33053–33064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Kalekar, K. K. K. Sharma, A. Lehoux, F. Audonnet, H. Remita, A. Saha and G. K. Sharma, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11431–11439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Kalekar, K. K. K. Sharma, M. N. Luwang and G. K. Sharma, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 11911–11920 RSC .
Y. Wang, K. Yin, J. Zhang, C. Si, X. Chen, L. Lv, W. Ma, H. Gao and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14657–11466 CAS .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, T. Asefa, H. Guo, A. V. Biradar, D.-L. Peng, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7540–7590 RSC .
J. Wu, Y. Hou and S. Gao, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 836–848 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bianchini and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 4183–4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, Y. Holade, H. Remita, K. Servat, P. Beaunier, A. Hagège, B. Kokoh and T. W. Napporn, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 212, 864–875 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, N. Bhandary, S. Basu and R. N. Basu, Electrocatalysis, 2017, 8, 329–339 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, S. Bera, S. Bysakh and R. N. Basu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1148–1161 CAS .
A. Capon and R. Parsons, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1973, 44, 239–254 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Bai, W.-D. Zhang, C.-H. Chen and J.-Q. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 1029–1034 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Chong, B. Jin, C. W. K. Chow and C. Saint, Water Res., 2010, 44, 2997–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kowalska, H. Remita, C. Colbeau-Justin, J. Hupka and J. Belloni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1124–1131 CAS .
E. Grabowska, A. Zaleska, S. Sorgues, M. Kunst, A. Etcheberry, C. Colbeau-Justin and H. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1955–1962 CAS .
M. G. Méndez-Medrano, E. Kowalska, A. Lehoux, A. Herissan, B. Ohtani, S. Rau, C. Colbeau-Justin, J. L. Rodríguez-López and H. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 25010–25022 Search PubMed .
M. G. Méndez-Medrano, E. Kowalska, A. Lehoux, A. Herissan, B. Ohtani, D. Bahena, V. Briois, C. Colbeau-Justin, J. L. Rodríguez-López and H. Remita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5143–5154 Search PubMed .
U. S. Markad, A. M. Kalekar, D. B. Naik, K. K. K. Sharma, K. J. Kshirasagar and G. K. Sharma, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 338, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ksar, G. K. Sharma, F. Audonnet, P. Beaunier and H. Remita, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 305609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, N. A. Kouamé, L. Ramos, S. Remita, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau, P. Beaunier, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert and H. Remita, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 505–511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ohtani, Catalysts, 2013, 3, 942–953 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, N. A. Kouamé, S. Remita, L. Ramos, F. Goubard, P.-H. Aubert, A. Dazzi, A. Deniset-Besseau and H. Remita, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 18002–18011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Su, W. H. Lin, Y. J. Hsu and K. H. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 4427–4442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liao, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 3481–3485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pei, L. Ding, M. Lu, Z. Fan, S. Weng, J. Hu and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9570–9577 CAS .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, S. Tepavcevic, Y. Liu, T. Rajh, S. C. Silver and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15540–15544 CAS .
R. Liu, Materials, 2014, 7, 2747–2771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Present address: Fuel Cell and Battery Division, CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata-700032, India.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Swollen hexagonal mesophases as nanoreactors for the synthesis of various nanostructured materials for different applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  A three component (water, oil and surfactant) phase diagram showing the formation of micelles and mesophases by the self-assembly of surfactants. Courtesy of Eremin Vadim V; for a glossary of nanotechnology and related terms, see http://eng.thesaurus.rusnano.com/wiki/article513.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  A scheme of a swollen hexagonal phase (left), and a cross-section of a swollen hexagonal phase defining the characteristic sizes (right) and a surfactant molecule (right below).	 

 	Fig. 4  Swelling of hexagonal mesophases.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the synthesis of metal nanostructures and metal/polymer composites using hexagonal soft templates. Orange color indicates the polymer and blue color indicates the metal salt.	 

 	Fig. 6  SAXS pattern of a Pt-doped swollen liquid crystal (SLC), before (black squares) and after (red circles) γ-irradiation. The diffraction patterns before and after irradiation are characteristics of a hexagonal phase as demonstrated by four Bragg peaks (black arrows) whose positions are in the ratio of 1:√3:2:√7. The broad peak (marked as *) observed after irradiation is due to the presence of Pt nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Polarized light micrographs of (a) pure hexagonal mesophases and (b) mesophases doped with both 0.1 M EDOT and 0.1 M FeCl3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM images of platinum nanoparticles prepared from hexachloroplatinic acid in a hexagonal SLC (a) by high γ-ray irradiation (96 kGy) and (b) by CO reduction, leading to rodlike aggregation of the Pt pristine nanoparticles. TEM images of Pt self-assemblies and nanostructured materials obtained by CO reduction of platinum salts in swollen liquid crystals (c, d) at concentrations of 5 × 10–4 M and 2 × 10–3 M, respectively. Inset of (c): A HRTEM image showing the individual nanoparticles. (e, f) TEM images of porous platinum nanoballs by γ-ray irradiation at two different magnifications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM images of palladium nanostructures: (a) Pd-nanoballs formed by γ-irradiation of Pd-doped (0.1 M) mesophases (20 h irradiation at a dose rate of 2.5 kGy h−1), (b) nanorods obtained by electron beam irradiation (48 kGy, mean dose rate 2200 Gy s−1 (7.9 MGy h−1)) of Pd doped (0.1 M) hexagonal mesophases, and (c) Pd nanoparticles obtained by γ-irradiation (20 h) of a micellar solution containing PdII (0.1 M), CTAB and pentanol, after 6 h irradiation (dose rate 2.5 kGy h−1). Adapted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SAXS spectra of Pd-doped hexagonal mesophases at different molar ratios of cosurfactant over surfactant n* = ncosurf/nsurf. Top inset: A scheme of an oil-swollen hexagonal phase. Bottom inset: A two-dimensional diffraction pattern of a sample with n* = 0.91, where the hexagonal symmetry is clearly seen. TEM images of Pd nanowires formed in hexagonal mesophases with different values of n*: (b) 0.78, (c) 0.85, and (d) 0.91. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A HRTEM image of single ultrathin hexagonal Pd nanosheets and (b) a magnified image of a selected area on the thin film shown in (a). Inset of (b): FFT allows one to measure the two expected reciprocal distances and confirms the structure of cubic Pd. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation and (b–c) transmission electron micrographs of Pd nanostructures synthesized in a SLC under UV-irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Scattered intensity as a function of wave vector of nanoballs with various pore diameters prepared in SLCs with various swelling ratios, O/W, as indicated in the legend. The arrows point to the peak positions. Inset: Scattering curve for nanoballs prepared in a mesophase with O/W = 1.5. The arrows point to the peak position (*) from which the pore diameter is derived and to the departure from the power law regime (**) which provides a characteristic size (4.5 nm) comparable to the thickness of the metallic nanowires. Representative TEM images of nanoballs (for Pd/Pt = 1:1) with increasing pore sizes corresponding to a ratio O/W equal to: (b) 2, (c) 1.5, (d) 3.25, and (e) 4.5 and with a concentration of metallic salts in the aqueous phase of 0.1 M. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2012 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  The molecular structure of representative conducting polymers synthesized in swollen hexagonal mesophases.	 

 	Fig. 15  Cryo-TEM images of hexagonal mesophases in the absence (a) and in the presence (b) of 0.1 M EDOT and 0.1 M FeCl3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of the EDOT monomer by chemical oxidation. (b) A transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of PEDOT nanospindles synthesized in a SLC comprising 0.3 M NaCl. (c) A TEM image of PEDOT vesicles synthesized in a SLC comprising 0.1 M NaCl. (d) A typical AFM topographic image of PEDOT nanospindles extracted from mesophases and deposited onto ZnSe substrate and (e) the corresponding 3D AFM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of diphenylbutadiyne by UV irradiation. Transmission electron micrographs of PDPB nanostructures prepared by UV-irradiation in mesophases with different swelling ratios, O/W, defined as the volume ratio of cyclohexane over water. (b) O/W = 2.21, (c) O/W = 0.98, and (d) O/W = 0.72. (e) Bulk polymerization of PDPB. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


0	0.72	6.7	5.2	5 ± 1	10 ± 0.5	0.035 ± 0.003	0.130 ± 0.008
0.1	0.98	11.8	11.1	12 ± 1	14 ± 2	0.020 ± 0.006	0.100 ± 0.009
0.3	2.21	20.9	21.6	19 ± 2	25 ± 3	0.012 ± 0.005	0.092 ± 0.005

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of the 3HT monomer by chemical oxidation. Photographs of hexagonal mesophases doped with the (b) 3HT monomer and (c) P3HT polymer. (d) Normalized UV-Visible spectra of the 3HT monomer, nano-P3HT, and bulk P3HT in chloroform. TEM images for (e) nano- and (f) bulk P3HT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) (a) Schematic representation of polymerization of the aniline monomer by chemical oxidation. Field emission scanning electron microscopy images of polyaniline nanostructures prepared under two different conditions, (b) mixing and (c) diffusion, using aniline hydrochloride monomers in the aqueous phase of SLCs. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Photographs of two mesophases, one doped with the gold precursor and the other one doped with the aniline monomer deposited one on top of the other (a) just after deposition, (b) after 1 h reaction and (c) after 72 h. (d) TEM images of composite nanowires with a gold core and a polyaniline shell, and (e) a high resolution image of nanocomposites where the PANI shell is clearly visible. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Microscopic images of PDPB nanofibers and PDPB-ZnO light harvesting nanoheterojunction (LHNH). Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) PDPB nanofibers and (b) PDPB-ZnO LHNH. Transmission electron microscopy images of (c) PDPB nanofibers and (d) PDPB-ZnO LHNH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation of (a) the co-sensitization of different PDPB oligomers to ZnO NPs and the molecular structure of the PDPB polymer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers.	 
CH3–CH2OH + 12OH− → 2CO2 + 9H2O + 12e−	(1)
CH3–CH2OH + 16OH− → 2CO32− + 11H2O + 12e−	(2)

CH3–CH2OH → CH3–CHO + 2H+ + 2e−
	(3)

CH3CHO + 2OH− → CH3COO− + 2H2O + 2e−
	(4)

 	Fig. 23  Superposition of the first (black solid line curve) and the 200th (red solid line curve) cyclic voltammetric runs associated with the electrocatalytic oxidation of 1 M EtOH in 1 M KOH with continuous cycling of the electrode potential. The working electrode was a glassy carbon disk modified with the Pd nanowires. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
Pd–(H)abs/ads + 2OH− ↔ Pd + H2O + e−	(5)

 	Fig. 24  (a) A transmission electron micrograph of Pd nanoplates. (b) Ethanol oxidation of Pd nanoplates deposited on conducting polymer nanofibers. Cyclic voltammograms (sweep rate of 50 mV s−1) of Pd nanoplates on PDPB nanofibers in (c) 1 M KOH (blue solid line), and in 1 M EtOH + 1 M KOH for the first (black solid line) and the 50th (red solid line) cycles, and (d) 1 M KOH containing 0.1 M EtOH (red solid line curve) and 0.1 M KCH3COO (black solid line curve). Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 
Pd + 2OH− ↔ Pd–(OH)ads + e−	(6)
Pd–(OH)ads + 2OH− ↔ Pd–O + H2O + e−	(7)
Pd–(OH)ads + Pd–(OH)ads ↔ Pd–(O) + H2O	(8)
Pd–(O) + H2O + 2e− ↔ Pd + 2OH−	(9)
Pd + CH3CH2OH + OH− → Pd–(CH3CHOH)ads + H2O + e−	(10)
Pd–OHads + Pd–(CH3CHOH)ads → 2Pd + CH3CHO + H2O	(11)
	(12)
Pd + CH3CH2OH ↔ Pd–(CH3CHOH)ads	(13)
	(14)

 	Fig. 25  Superposition of the first cyclic voltammogram (black solid line curve) and the 100th cycle (red solid line curve) of Pd/Nafion (a) and Pd/RGO–Nafion (b) runs in 1 M NaOH containing 1 M EtOH at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Pd/Nafion	8.55	1.43	5.98	−590	1745	292
Pd/RGO-Nafion	14.22	17.08	0.83	−622	5925	7166
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 26  TEM images of (a) platinum nanonets (dose = 40 kGy) and (b) platinum nanoballs (dose = 80 kGy) synthesized in SLCs. (c) UV–vis absorption spectra at different time intervals indicate the disappearance of the peak of the p-nitrophenolate anion at 400 nm due to the reduction of PNP to PAP by NaBH4 in the presence of Pt NNs. (d) Linear plots of ln(A0/At) versus time at 303 K in the presence of Pt NNs. Reaction conditions: [PNP] = 1 × 10−4 M; [NaBH4] = 5 × 10−2 M; [Pt NNs] = 50 mg L−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) A TEM image and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction pattern and (b) electron diffraction spectra of the core and the shell of palladium–gold nanostructures formed in SLC. (c) Superposition of the first (black solid line curve) and the 200th (red solid line curve) cyclic voltammetric runs associated with the electrocatalytic oxidation of 1 M EtOH in 1 M KOH with continuous cycling of the electrode potential. (d) Chronoamperometric curves for ethanol electrooxidation at −0.3 V vs. Hg/HgO on a glassy carbon electrode modified with bimetallic Pd–Au nanostructures (black curve) or Pd nanoballs (red curve). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 
Pt + HCOOH → Pt (COOH)ad + H+ + e−	(17)
Pt (OH)ads + Pt (HCOOH)ads → 2Pt + CO2 + H2O	(18)
Pt (OH)ads + HCOOH → Pt + CO2 + H2O + H+ + e−	(19)
HCOOH → CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−	(20)

 	Fig. 28  (a) A HRTEM image of Au–Pt nanoballs formed by a large core made of gold and a porous Pt shell. The dashed circle shows the core. (b) A comparison of the catalytic activity of Pt nanoballs and Au–Pt nanoballs. Cyclic voltammograms recorded during the electrooxidation of 5 mM of D-(+)-glucose in 0.1 M NaOH electrolyte solution at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. (c) Formic acid (0.1 M) electrooxidation in 0.1 M NaOH at 20 mV s−1 with the Au50Pt50 catalyst; (d) a comparison of the specific activity of Pt, Au25Pt75 and Au50Pt50 catalysts for formic acid oxidation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  Photocatalytic degradation of (a) methyl orange (MO) and (b) phenol in the presence of commercial P25 TiO2 and Ag-TiO2, and of bulk PDPB and nano-PDPB, under visible light (λ > 450 nm). The concentrations of nano-PDPB, Ag-TiO2 and TiO2 in water were 1 mg mL−1. Initial concentrations C0 were 6 × 10−5 mol L−1 for MO and 3.7 × 10−3 mol L−1 for phenol. (c) An energy diagram representing the evaluated HOMO and LUMO levels of the PDPB polymer by density functional theory. (d) A possible photocatalysis mechanism with charge separation in nano-PDPB, with electron reducing oxygen and hole oxidizing water; the holes and generated oxidative radicals can oxidize organic pollutants (noted as M), V. B. and C. B. represent the valence band and the conduction band of the PDPB polymer, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers.	 
O2 + e− → O2˙−	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
H2O2+O2˙− → ˙OH + O2 + OH−	(24)
H2O2 + hν → 2 ˙OH	(25)

 	Fig. 30  Photocatalytic degradation of (a) phenol and (b) methyl orange (MO) in the presence of commercial P25 TiO2 and Ag-TiO2, PDPB nanofibers and the synthesized PEDOT vesicles and PEDOT nanospindles under visible light (λ > 450 nm) irradiation. (c) Cyclic voltammograms of PEDOT nanospindles obtained at 20 mV s−1 in acetonitrile, 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium perchlorate. The ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc/Fc+) redox potential has been measured at the end of the experiment in order to calibrate the pseudo-reference electrode (0.63 V vs. Ag in the present study). (d) A photocatalysis mechanism with charge separation in PEDOT nanospindles, with electron reducing oxygen and hole oxidizing water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) A quartz slide coated with nano-P3HT inside a quartz cell containing a phenol solution irradiated with visible light. (b) Suspension of nano-P3HT in aqueous solution containing phenol. (c) Photocatalytic degradation of phenol using a nano-P3HT suspension and nano-P3HT deposited on a quartz slide; (d and e) SEM images of nano-P3HT deposited on a quartz slide (from a chloroform solution) at two different magnifications. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 32  A scheme of the interfacial carrier dynamics at the heterojunction showing the photocatalytic degradation of MO in aqueous solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishers.	 
Footnote
† Present address: Fuel Cell and Battery Division, CSIR - Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata-700032, India.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
