Plasmon-induced photoelectrochemical water oxidation enabled by in situ layer-by-layer construction of cascade charge transfer channel in multilayered ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA08841A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA08841A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24686-24692Plasmon-induced photoelectrochemical water oxidation enabled by in situ layer-by-layer construction of cascade charge transfer channel in multilayered photoanode†

        
          
            Zhiping 
            Zeng‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Bing 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Cheng 
            Dai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ming-Hui 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunhui 
            He
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guangcan 
            Xiao
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Fang-Xing 
            Xiao
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350002, People's Republic of China. E-mail: fxxiao@fzu.edu.cn
bInstrumental Measurement and Analysis Center, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350002, People's Republic of China
Received 
      11th September 2018
    , Accepted 11th November 2018First published on 17th November 2018AbstractTunable and efficacious modulation of photo-induced charge carrier separation and transfer in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell for solar water splitting constitute a central challenge. Herein, high-efficiency plasmon-induced hot carriers transfer channel has been rationally and progressively constructed by judicious layer-by-layer assembly of graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and plasmonic metal nanocrystals (Ag NCs) on the one-dimensional semiconductor (TiO2 nanorods arrays, TiO2 NRs) framework, resulting in a well-defined spatially multilayered photoanode. The unique and alternate integration of GQDs with Ag NCs on the TiO2 NRs is closely associated with charge transfer behaviors. It was unveiled that Ag NCs in situ integrated in the multilayered film enable hot electron generation, and simultaneously play a crucial role in finely relaying electron transfer from GQDs to TiO2. This gives rise to significantly enhanced solar-powered PEC water splitting performances of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs ternary multilayered heterostructure, which far surpasses the corresponding binary and single counterparts. Consequently, intrinsic correlation of metal NCs with GQDs in terms of charge transport was for the first time clarified.
1. Introduction
In the past few years, graphene quantum dots (GQDs), as a rising star of a new category of carbon materials, have stimulated tremendous interest in a myriad of research fields including biofluorescence imaging, energy storage and solar energy conversion.1,2 Apart from possessing the analogous core-constituent unit (sp2 carbon) to the gorgeous two-dimensional (2D) graphene (GR), GQDs demonstrate various unique structure merits such as quantum confinement effect arising from ultra-small particle size, more number of active sites on the planar surface and peculiar semiconducting properties for subtle response to light absorption.3 In this regard, most recently, it is not surprising to see the entry of GQDs in the fields of photocatalysis for solar energy harvesting and conversion. Although a large variety of GQDs/semiconductor nanocomposites have been explored for photocatalytic applications,4–6 tunable modulation of photo-induced charge carrier separation/transfer and construction of highly efficient charge migration channel between GQDs and semiconductors still constitute a grand challenge, thereby retarding the developments and potential applications of GQDs-based devices.
Moreover, metal nanostructures have been deemed as a crucial sector of nanomaterials and recent years have witnessed their wide-spread applications in diverse catalytic fields such as thermal catalysis, electrocatalysis and photocatalysis.7–10 In particular, metal nanocrystals (NCs) have been determined to play two predominant roles as electron traps or plasmonic photosensitizer in heterogeneous photocatalysis,11–13 which benefits photo-induced charge carriers separation over semiconductors adhered to them or triggers hot carriers generation over metal NCs, originating from surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect. An overview of literatures suggests that although some endeavors have been devoted to simultaneously functionalizing semiconductor with GQDs and metal NCs, which in these systems were actually randomly integrated without exquisitely designed interface and architecture engineering, thus inevitably affecting the smooth and directional charge flow in photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) reactions. Moreover, thus far, there has been no investigation on unlocking the intrinsic correlation of GQDs with metal NCs in terms of charge transport characteristics in PEC reaction system for solar hydrogen generation.
Inspired by these motivations, herein, plasmon-induced hot charge carriers transfer channel was rationally constructed by a facile, green and easily accessible in situ layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly strategy at ambient conditions by judiciously combining positively charged Ag+ ion-coordinated polyethyleneimine (PEI–Ag+) complex with negatively charged GQDs on the TiO2 nanorod arrays (TiO2 NRs) framework based on the substantial electrostatic attractive interaction, based on which PEI–Ag+ and GQDs building blocks on the outer surface were alternately and intimately integrated. Combined with an in situ light irradiation, coordinated Ag+ ions anchored on the PEI were reduced to Ag NCs yielding a well-defined spatially multilayered ternary heterostructure. It was unveiled that such exquisitely designed plasmonic TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs multilayered heterostructures demonstrated considerably boosted PEC water splitting performances under simulated solar light irradiation owing to smooth and cascade electron transfer from GQDs to TiO2 NRs accelerated by Ag NPs as well as plasmonic excitation of Ag NPs for hot electrons generation.
2. Results and discussion

Scheme 1a vividly depicts the flowchart for in situ LbL assembly of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs spatially multilayered ternary heterostructure, for which highly ordered TiO2 NRs substrate was first treated with a positively charged PEI–Ag+ complex to afford a positively charged surface, and then it was dipped into negatively charged colloidal GOQDs precursor solution to initiate the spontaneous electrostatic self-assembly. Deposition amount of GQDs and Ag NPs building blocks on the TiO2 NRs matrix can be finely tuned by alternately dipping the TiO2 NRs substrate into PEI–Ag+ complex and GOQDs precursor solution for designated times. Finally, Ag+ ions alternately adsorbed in the multilayer were in situ reduced by UV irradiation, and GOQDs was thermally reduced to GQDs in an inert atmosphere, by which TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs multilayered heterostructures with Ag and GQDs alternately integrated on the outer surface were constructed. For comparison, TiO2 NRs@GQDs binary counterpart without Ag NPs deposition was prepared by the analogous LbL assembly strategy by utilizing PEI and GOQDs as the building blocks (Scheme 1b). The detailed synthetic procedures for fabricating different multilayered heterostructures were provided in the ESI.†
 Scheme 1  Schematic flowchart for LbL assembly of (a) TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs and (b) TiO2 NRs@GQDs multilayered heterostructures. 
The structures of building blocks used in our study for LbL assembly were first probed via a collection of characterizations. As displayed in Fig. S1 and S2,† GOQDs, as the precursor of GQDs, is featured by ultra-small size (ca. 5.5 nm) with intrinsic negatively charged surface in a wide pH profile (2–11, Fig. S1c†) owing to the deprotonation of carboxyl groups on the edge of the planar surface. It is worth noting that coordination reaction occurs between Ag+ ions and PEI molecules with one Ag+ ion coordinated with two amino groups in PEI, by which all Ag+ ions were changed into coordinating form (i.e., PEI–Ag+) and firmly anchored onto the PEI chain.14 Consistently, positively charged surface of PEI–Ag+ complex was reflected by its zeta potential result (Fig. S3†). Apparently, intrinsic oppositely charged surfaces of GOQDs and PEI–Ag+ complex makes them suitable building blocks for electrostatic LbL assembly on the semiconductor framework.
X-ray diffraction (XRD) results show that pristine TiO2 NRs is composed of single-crystalline rutile TiO2 (Fig. 1a), which agrees well with previous reports.15,16 Notably, no diffraction peaks corresponding to GQDs and Ag NPs were observed in the XRD pattern of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, which is mainly attributed to the relatively low loading amount of GQDs and Ag or probably their characteristic peaks were shielded by the substantial peaks of TiO2 and FTO substrate. Nevertheless, electrostatic immobilization of GQDs on the TiO2 NRs via LbL assembly was verified by Raman results (Fig. 1b), in which the peaks at 1358 and 1595 cm−1 corresponding to typical D and G bands of GQDs were clearly seen in the Raman spectra of TiO2 NRs@GQDs binary and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs ternary heterostructures.17 The strongly substantiating GQDs have been successfully self-assembled on the TiO2 NRs under pronounced electrostatic interaction. The peaks at 446 (Eg) and 608 (A1g) for all these three samples are attributable to the rutile TiO2, and this is in line with XRD results.18 Reduction of GOQDs to GQDs in the nanocomposites was confirmed by FTIR results (Fig. 1c), wherein the featured peaks at 1724 and 1241 cm−1 assignable to the CO and C–O–C functional groups of GOQDs disappear,19 whereas peak intensity at 1620 cm−1 attributable to sp2 hybridized CC group markedly increases in the FTIR spectra of TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, corroborating complete reduction of GOQDs to GQDs. In situ integration of Ag NPs in the TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs multilayered heterostructure is evidenced by the high-resolution Ag 3d spectrum (Fig. 1d), in which the peaks at 368.2 and 374.2 eV for Ag 3d5/2 and Ag 3d3/2 are accurately attributable to metallic Ag (Ag0).20 Moreover, it was found that elemental chemical states of TiO2 NRs scaffold were not altered with concurrent deposition of GQDs and Ag NPs (Fig. S4†). As displayed in Fig. 1e, DRS results indicate that TiO2 NRs@GQDs exhibits considerably improved light absorption as compared with pristine TiO2 NRs especially in the visible region (400–800 nm), reflecting the substantial photosensitization effect of GQDs. Note that light absorption of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs was further boosted with simultaneous deposition of Ag NPs and GQDs, which suggests the cooperative synergy of Ag NPs and GQDs for light harvesting. It is worth noting that SPR peak of Ag NPs at ca. 400 nm was not clearly seen in the DRS result of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, and it might be shielded by the band-gap-photoexcitation peak (ca. 400 nm) of TiO2 substrate. As displayed in Fig. 1f, band gaps of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs were roughly determined as 3.02, 2.73 and 2.62 eV, respectively. Apparently, modification of TiO2 NRs with GQDs and Ag NPs are beneficial for ameliorating the light absorption of TiO2 NRs in the visible region.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns (R: rutile, F: FTO substrate), (b) Raman and (c) FTIR spectra of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs heterostructures, (d) high-resolution Ag 3d spectrum of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, (e) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs with corresponding (f) transformed plots based on the Kubelka–Munk function vs. the energy of light. 
As apparently exhibited in Fig. S5,† panoramic FESEM images of TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs are similar to pristine TiO2 NRs, which is mainly ascribed to the small size of GQDs (ca. 5.5 nm, Fig. S1b†) and in situ formed Ag NPs, thereby making their direct differentiation very difficult. TEM images (Fig. S6†) indicate that single TiO2 NRs is beneficial for smooth surface with a mean size of ca. 100 nm, and HRTEM image (inset, Fig. S6†) shows that TiO2 NRs substrate consists of single-crystalline rutile phase with a [001] growth direction. As demonstrated in Fig. 2(a and b) and S7,† morphology of TiO2 NRs@GQDs is distinct to pristine TiO2 NRs, for which GQDs were uniformly and intimately encapsulated on the TiO2 NRs, and the lattice fringe of 0.35 nm in the HRTEM image is assigned to the (002) crystallographic plane of GQDs, once again verifying the successful assembly of GQDs on the TiO2 NRs via electrostatic interaction. Fig. 2c shows that more NPs with varying size were evenly tethered on the TiO2 NRs by virtue of concurrent in situ generation of Ag NPs and deposition of GQDs. More significantly, as marked by the white dotted lines in Fig. 2c, multilayered nanostructure was clearly seen on the outer surface of TiO2 NRs for TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, indicative of efficacious LbL assembly strategy developed in our study to alternately integrate Ag NPs and GQDs in a face-to-face integration fashion. Component of these NPs can be discerned by the HRTEM image (Fig. 2d) in which lattice fringes of 0.231 and 0.242 nm are accurately indexed to the (111) and (1102) crystal planes of Ag and GQDs, respectively.
 Fig. 2  TEM and HRTEM images of (a and b) TiO2 NRs@GQDs and (c and d) TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs with corresponding schematic models in the insets of (a and c). 
PEC water splitting performances of the samples under simulated solar light irradiation were probed to evaluate the fate of photo-induced charge carrier. Influence of assembly cycle, which dictates the deposition amount of GQDs and Ag NPs on the PEC water splitting performances of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs was first systematically explored. Fig. S8 and S9† show that PEC water splitting performance of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs is closely correlated with assembly cycle, and it increases with augmenting the assembly cycle from 1 to 4 and then decreases upon further boosting the assembly cycle. Based on this, optimal assembly cycle was determined to be 4. For comparison, PEC water splitting performances of TiO2 NRs@GQDs, TiO2 NRs@Ag and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs with the same optimal assembly cycle (n = 4) were additionally explored to disclose the synergistic interaction of GQDs and Ag NPs in affecting the charge transfer efficiency. As illustrated in the linear-sweep voltammograms (LSV) (Fig. 3a) results, photocurrents of all these samples increase with increasing the bias, indicative of typical n-type semiconductor behavior.21 As shown in Fig. 3a and S9,† TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs demonstrates the most enhanced photocurrent in comparison with other single and binary counterparts under the same conditions, and they generally follow the order of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs > TiO2 NRs@GQDs > TiO2 NRs, persuasively unraveling the cooperative synergy of GQDs and Ag NPs. It is worthwhile that TiO2 NRs-Ag exhibits much more improved photocurrent than pristine TiO2 NRs under both simulated solar (AM 1.5 G) and visible light (λ > 400 nm) irradiation (Fig. S10 and S11†), which suggests that the plasmonic effect of Ag NPs especially hot electron injection rather than plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer (PIRET) is responsible for the photocurrent enhancement.22,23 Analogously, enhanced photocurrent was also observed over TiO2 NRs@GQDs in comparison with pristine TiO2 NRs, and this highlights the pronounced influence exerted by GQDs on charge transfer efficiency. Hence, the photosensitization effect of GQDs and plasmonic effect of Ag NPs on improving the light absorption of nanocomposites in the visible region, and meanwhile, boosting the charge carrier separation were ascertained. This speculation can be further corroborated by the electron impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements, which have been extensively utilized to evaluate the charge transfer resistance in the interfacial region of photoelectrode and electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 3b, TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs exhibits the smallest semi-circular arc radius followed by TiO2 NRs@GQDs and pristine TiO2 NRs under simulated solar light irradiation, which implies that TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs possesses the lowest interfacial charge transfer resistance, therefore resulting in the most efficient separation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs owing to the synergy of plasmonic Ag NPs and GQDs in expediting the charge transport. Consistently, Mott–Schottky results in Fig. 3c disclose that TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs demonstrates the largest charge carrier density, which far surpasses TiO2 NRs@GQDs and pristine TiO2 NRs counterparts under the same conditions. Charge density of the samples was calculated to be 3.2 × 1019, 4.3 × 1019 and 6.1 × 1019 cm−3 for pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, respectively. Incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) was utilized to determine the active light response region that contributes to the significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performances of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs. Apparently, compared with IPCE result of pristine TiO2 NRs that exhibits no efficiency in the visible region ranging from 400 to 800 nm, both TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@GQDs exhibit substantial light absorption within the same wavelength profile, which is in line with the DRS results. Besides, it should be emphasized that IPCE value of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs is larger than TiO2 NRs@GQDs, once again verifying the crucial role of Ag NPs as well as cooperative synergy of Ag NPs and GQDs in reinforcing the light-harvesting and conversion of ternary heterostructure. Electron lifetime of different photoanodes was determined by monitoring the variation of open-circuit photovoltage with time upon turning off the light irradiation. As displayed in Fig. 3e and f, consistently, TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs demonstrates the longest electron lifetime in comparison with other counterparts, and this is in good agreement with other PEC results. Alternately, hydrogen generation amount over different photoanodes under continuously simulated solar light irradiation was probed (Fig. S12†), and the results agree with PEC water splitting performances.
 Fig. 3  (a) LSV, on–off transient photocurrent responses, (b) EIS, (c) Mott–Schottky (d) and IPCE results of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs under simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5 G, 0.5 M Na2SO4, pH = 7), (e) photovoltage decay of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs as a function of time by turning off the light irradiation with corresponding (f) electron lifetime profiles. 
Based on the above analysis and discussion, PEC water splitting mechanism of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs ternary heterostructure was tentatively presented. Fig. S13† shows the determination of energy levels and relative band positions of GQDs by a cyclic voltammetry (CV) scan method, by which Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) and Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) levels of GQDs were roughly determined to be 2.50 and −0.83 V vs. NHE, respectively. Based on this, relative energy levels of TiO2, GQDs, and Ag NPs can thus be illustrated, as depicted in Scheme S1.† Specifically, when TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs ternary heterostructure was irradiated by simulated solar light, TiO2 NRs and GQDs are simultaneously photo-excited, yielding electron–hole charge carriers, and meanwhile, Ag NPs can also be photoexcited to produce plasmon-induced hot carriers owing to intrinsic SPR effect.24 Subsequently, there are generally three electron transfer pathways for TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs to fulfill the charge separation over GQDs, i.e., (I) electrons photoexcited in the LUMO of GQDs are able to directly flow to the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 owing to their favorable band alignment,4,5 which was verified by the significantly enhanced photocurrent of TiO2 NRs@GQDs as compared with pristine TiO2 NRs; (II) plasmon-induced hot electrons originating from the plasmonic excitation of Ag NPs can also directly flow to the CB of TiO2, which was also corroborated by the substantially enhanced photocurrent of TiO2–Ag NRs relative to pristine TiO2 NRs; (III) large work function of metal NCs enables Ag NP to act as an effective electron transfer mediator to relay electrons from GQDs and then, they flow together with hot electrons from plasmonic Ag NPs to the CB of TiO2. Interestingly, the third charge transfer pathway plays the most predominant role in terms of the cooperative synergy of GQDs and plasmonic Ag NPs in such a rationally designed multilayered ternary system. Instantly, these three sources of electrons are concurrently transported to the external circuit to produce photocurrent along with the generation of hydrogen on the cathode. At the same time, holes retained in the valence band (VB) of TiO2 and HOMO level of GQDs oxidise water to oxygen on the anode or probably the former flows to the latter, thereby resulting in the efficacious separation of charge carriers and fulfilling the PEC water dissociation process.
3. Conclusions
In summary, cascade charge transfer channel was intelligently constructed by a facile, green, and easily accessible LbL assembly strategy combined with an in situ light irradiation to integrate plasmonic Ag NPs and GQDs in an alternate stacking fashion on the outer surface of TiO2 NRs based on the substantial electrostatic interaction. More significantly, cooperative synergy of Ag NPs and GQDs stemming from plasmonic effect of Ag NPs for hot charge carriers generation, and photosensitization effect of GQDs for light harvesting was judiciously harnessed. It was unraveled that in situ formed plasmonic Ag NPs are beneficial for engendering hot electrons, and meanwhile, serve as efficacious charge transfer mediators to trigger cascade and smooth electron transfer from GQDs to TiO2, which results in markedly prolonged lifetime of charge carriers and significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performances of plasmonic TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs ternary heterostructure. It is anticipated that our study could spur further interest in understanding the underlying charge transfer mechanism between carbon materials and plasmonic metal NCs for finely modulating photoinduced charge carriers separation/transfer toward high-efficiency solar energy harvesting and conversion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The award program for Minjiang Professorship is greatly acknowledged and the support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21703038) is also greatly acknowledged. Fuzhou University Testing Fund of Precious Apparatus (2018T003) is also acknowledged.
References
C. Gutiérrez, L. Brown, C.-J. Kim, J. Park and A. N. Pasupathy, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 1069 Search PubMed .
J. Lee, D. Wong, J. V. Jr, J. F. Rodriguez-Nieva, S. Kahn, H.-Z. Tsai, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Zettl, F. Wang, L. S. Levitov and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 1032 Search PubMed .
Z. Zeng, S. Chen, T. T. Y. Tan and F.-X. Xiao, Catal. Today, 2018, 315, 171–183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, F.-X. Xiao, X. Gui, R. Wang, B. Liu and T. T. Yang Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16383–16393 RSC .
Z. Zeng, F.-X. Xiao, H. Phan, S. Chen, Z. Yu, R. Wang, T.-Q. Nguyen and T. T. Yang Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1700–1713 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao and B. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701098 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6075–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10735–10744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17118–17132 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, S.-F. Hung, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11439–11446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, Y.-B. Li, S. Chen, P. Chen and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11154–11162 RSC .
Y. Zhou, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1235–1239 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and F.-X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23681–23693 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, J. Ma, Z. Zhao and L. Qi, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 663–671 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tetsuka, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya, K. Okamoto, I. Tajima, R. Ohta and A. Okamoto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5333–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16487–16498 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, P. Wang, J. Qian, J. Hou, Y. Ao and C. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 486–498 RSC .
S. K. Cushing and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 666–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601–607 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta08841a‡ These authors contributed equally to this workThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic flowchart for LbL assembly of (a) TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs and (b) TiO2 NRs@GQDs multilayered heterostructures.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns (R: rutile, F: FTO substrate), (b) Raman and (c) FTIR spectra of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs heterostructures, (d) high-resolution Ag 3d spectrum of TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs, (e) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs with corresponding (f) transformed plots based on the Kubelka–Munk function vs. the energy of light.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM and HRTEM images of (a and b) TiO2 NRs@GQDs and (c and d) TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs with corresponding schematic models in the insets of (a and c).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) LSV, on–off transient photocurrent responses, (b) EIS, (c) Mott–Schottky (d) and IPCE results of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs under simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5 G, 0.5 M Na2SO4, pH = 7), (e) photovoltage decay of pristine TiO2 NRs, TiO2 NRs@GQDs and TiO2 NRs@Ag@GQDs as a function of time by turning off the light irradiation with corresponding (f) electron lifetime profiles.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta08841a
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
