The chemistry of organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2DT11948J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2DT11948J
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 3599-3615Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThe chemistry of organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates

        
          
            Jin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fengping 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Hao
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yongge 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. E-mail: yonggewei@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 10 62797852;   Tel: +86 10 62797852
Received 
      16th October 2011
    , Accepted 27th January 2012First published on 22nd February 2012AbstractThe chemistry of organoimido derivatives of polyoxometalates (POMs) has received increasing interest. In recent decades, a great development of the synthetic chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs using different imido-releasing reagents has taken place, particularly the novel DCC-dehydrating protocol to prepare organoimido derivatives of POMs was developed recently by us and co-workers. Organoimido substituted POMs as valuable building blocks can construct novel nanostructured organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials in well-developed common organic synthesis methods, such as Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling and esterification. Therefore, the reactive chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs stands for the fascinating future of the chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs.Jin ZhangDr Jin Zhang studied chemistry at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China, where she obtained her B.S. (2003) and M.S. (2005) degrees. Then, she received her Ph.D. degree in 2008 from Beijing Institute of Technology under the direction of Professor Tonglai Zhang with a focus on coordination compounds for applications as functional materials. Since 2008 she has been a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Professor Yongge Wei at Tsinghua University, China. Her current research interests include the controlled assembly of polyoxometalates and polyoxometalate-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials.Fengping XiaoDr Fengping Xiao received her B.S. and M.S. degrees in Chemistry from Central China Normal University. She obtained her Ph.D. in 2008 under the supervision of Professor Zhenping Ji and Professor Gongzhen Cheng in Wuhan University. Then, from 2008 to 2010, she joined the research group of Professor Yongge Wei in Tsinghua University and her research interests focus on the synthesis of metallamacrocycles based on polyoxometalates now, especially chiral metallamacrocycles.Jian HaoDr Jian Hao received his B.S. degree in chemistry from Peking University in 1997, and completed his DEA and Ph.D. degrees under the direction of Professor Laurent Ruhlmann from University of Paris XI and Professor Yongge Wei from Tsinghua University in 2008. After his graduation, he has been working as a postdoc. in Tsinghua University. His current research interests concern the functionalization of POMs.Yongge WeiProfessor Yongge Wei received his B.S. from Central China Normal University in 1988, his M.S. from Wuhan University in 1991, and his Ph.D. in chemistry from Peking University in 1995. He became a faculty member of the Chemistry Department of Peking University in 1995, and was promoted to associate professor in 1999. During 2000–2001, he was a research associate at University of Missouri, Kansas City (USA), and joined Tsinghua University in 2005. His research interests are currently focused on the chemical modification of polyoxometalates, the reaction chemistry and controllable assembly of organically-derivatized polyoxometalates, and polyoxometalate catalyzed C–H bond functionalization.
1. Introduction
Polyoxometalates (POMs) are a unique class of well-defined inorganic nanocluster compounds consisting of the early transition metal ions such as vanadium, molybdenum and tungsten in their highest oxidization states bridged by oxide anions as ligand, which can be, in fact, considered as the “oligomeric” or molecular states and model compounds of the corresponding “polymeric” metal oxides with extended solid state structure.1 Since the first salt of a POM, ammonium 12-molybdophosphate, (NH4)3[PMo12O40], was reported by Berzelius in 1826,2 POMs have been the focus of intense research efforts owing to their diverse molecular structures and fascinating properties, which give rise to a lot of potential or practical applications in many fields including nano science, chirality, magnetism, catalysis, photochemical and medicine chemistry.3–6 Especially, during the last decades, a lot of nanoscale huge clusters of polyoxometalates and their assemblies, including tyre-like {Mo176}, ball-like {Mo132}, and chain-like {Mo38} self-assembled from {Mo36}, have been prepared and structurally characterized by our research team at Peking University,6–8 A. Müller's group at University of Bielefeld9–23 and others.24–27 These high nuclearity huge clusters are not only ideal theoretical models for mesoscopic physics but also provide us with an exciting research arena for nanochemistry and materials science. Furthermore, Liu et al. have observed and confirmed that such nanoclusters of POMs can self-assemble into almost monodisperse vesicle-like nanoaggregates with spherical structures in solution.28,29
Although POMs have been investigated for about two hundred years, there has been little success in gaining real, practical POM-based materials owing to their molecular characteristics, and the development of POM-based functional materials is a difficult and challenging subject. Functionalization of POMs using organic ligands or organometallic units provides a novel strategy to synthesize POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials. Since the pioneering work was published by the groups of Ho and Klemperer,30 Zonnevijlle and Pope31 and Knoth and Harlow,32 organically-functionalized POMs, i.e. species in which one or some oxo or {MoOx}n+ groups have been replaced with organic functional groups, have been extensively studied and now form the largest subclass of POM derivatives.33 Such organic derivatives of POMs promise a chance to develop novel POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials, formed by making POMs and organic compounds together through covalent bonds. As could be expected, the resulting novel hybrid materials not only combine the advantages of organic materials, such as good processability and fine-regulable structure and electronic properties,34 with those of inorganic POM clusters, such as good chemical stability and strong electron acceptability,1 but also may bring exciting synergistic effects. Therefore, these sorts of hybrid materials have received intense attention with their unique structures and potential novel properties. However, there has been little success in gaining such POM-based organic–inorganic hybrids due to the lack of reliable synthetic chemistry tools to functionalize POMs and prepare their organic derivatives in high throughput.35
Among various organically-derivatized POMs, their organoimido derivatives have gained increasing interest in recent years and a great number of arylimido derivatives including polymers of the Lindqvist hexamolybdate cluster, [Mo6O19]2−, have been synthesized continuously.36 The organic π electrons in arylimido derivatives of POMs may extend their conjugation to the inorganic framework, and thus could result in strong d–pπ interactions and dramatically modify the electronic structure and redox properties of the corresponding parent POMs. In addition, organoimido derivatives of POMs with a remote active functional group can be exploited as building blocks to conveniently and controllably fabricate the complicated covalently-linked POM-based organic–inorganic hybrids, including the nanodumbbells, polymeric chains and even networks of POMs.36 This modular building block approach brings rational design and structure regulation into the synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials and has been reviewed in an excellent journal paper by Peng.36
Various synthetic approaches to prepare organoimido derivatives of POMs using different organoimido-releasing reagents have been summarized in a previous book chapter by us.37 In this renewed review, organoimido derivatives of POMs by the DCC-dehydrating protocol are presented in detail. Particularly, the bridging oxo substituted organoimido POMs and chiral POMs formed from achiral compounds will be mainly introduced. In the rest of this paper, besides a brief introduction on the Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling and esterification reactions of the functionalized organoimido derivatives of POMs, the so-called doubly dehydrogenative coupling reaction will be highlighted where the C–H bond is activated by POMs to form a CC bond and POM-based nanodumbbells can be obtained in one step.
2. Synthetic chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs
As an important subclass of oxo–imido complexes of early transition metals, organoimido derivatives of POMs have only been synthesized and characterized for twenty years or so. They were mentioned first by Kang and Zubieta in an outstanding communication in 1988,38 however, there was the lack of a reliable and detailed structural characterization in this paper, probably due to the purification problem of their product. Three years later, using a different synthetic methodology, Maatta's group finished the synthesis and single crystal X-ray diffraction study of the first organoimido derivative of POMs, (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O18(NTol)].39 Since then, the organoimido derivatives of POMs have been extensively investigated and a lot of organoimido derivatives of the Lindqvist hexamolybdate ion, [Mo6O19]2−, have been reported.34 However, little work has been conducted on other POMs, such as the other Lindqvist POMs, the Keggin POMs, and the recently discovered nanoscale huge clusters of POMs,6–27 the synthesis of their organoimido derivatives is still a formidable challenge. Furthermore, although the bridging oxo groups of POMs can be replaced, in principle, with isoelectronic organoimido ligands, the substitution of terminal oxo groups features largely in the reported organoimido derivatives of POMs.
2.1. Organoimido derivatives of the Lindqvist hexamolybdate
The hexamolybdate ion, [Mo6O19]2−, which has the so-called Lindqvist structure, is one of the most well-known POM clusters for its thermal and chemical stability and ease to be prepared.40 The Lindqvist structure consists of a central oxide ion surrounded in an octahedral cage formed by six metal and eighteen oxygen atoms. All of the six metal atoms also have an octahedral environment. Besides the central oxygen atom, they each coordinate triply to one terminal oxygen atom, forming a terminal metal–oxo group (MO), and share an additional four doubly-bridging oxygen atoms (μ2-O atoms) with neighboring metal atoms. For the hexamolybdate, these molybdyl groups (MoO) are reactive enough for the terminal oxygen atoms to be directly replaced by various nitrogenous species, for example, diazenido,41 diazoalkyl,42 and imido groups.39 Because of the outstanding work of Maatta, Proust and Errington et al., three types of reactions have been developed to synthesize imido derivatives of the hexamolybdate. These include reactions with phosphinimines,39,43 isocyanates,44,45 and aromatic amines46–48 as imido-releasing reagents.
With these methods, the six terminal oxygen atoms (in certain cases, some bridging oxygen atoms) in the hexamolybdate cluster can be partially or completely substituted with organoimido ligands. Nowadays, a lot of monosubstituted,39,43–58 disubstituted43,45,46,51,56,59–63 and multisubstituted45,51,64,65 organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate have been synthesized and structurally characterized.

2.1.1. Monosubstituted derivatives. 
Monofunctionalized organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate were first reported in 1991 by Maatta, with phosphinimines as imido-releasing reagents after a two-day reflux reaction in anhydrous pyridine at 85 °C.39 Two years later, Proust and co-workers found that this type of reaction works well in refluxing anhydrous acetonitrile, instead of anhydrous pyridine, under dried nitrogen gas.43 Although these reactions involve the not-easily accessible phosphinimine reagents, a slow process, and difficult purification of the desired reaction products, they demonstrate that the direct functionalization can be carried out on the hexamolybdate salt itself in a straightforward manner. Moreover, phosphinimines are powerful reagents to introduce the CN bond into organic compounds from carbonyl substrates via the aza-Wittig reactions in classic organic syntheses.66 These reactions thus imply that the molybdyl in the hexamolybdate ion behaves like a carbonyl of aldehydes, ketones or esters in some extent and may have the chemical properties similar to that of a carbonyl. The phosphinimine approach is very useful for the synthesis of arylimido monosubstituents of the hexamolybdate cluster.52 However, attempts to make the alkylimido analogues using this approach are unsuccessful,44 since phosphinalkylimines are more reactive than the corresponding phosphinarylimines and result in the reduction and rearrangement of the hexamolybdate cluster.
In the meanwhile, Errington developed another approach to produce organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate by reactions of alkyl and aryl isocyanates with [Mo6O19]2− at elevated temperatures in acetonitrile or benzonitrile, and reported first the crystal structure of the alkylimido derivative of the hexamolybdate, (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O18(NBut)].44 Subsequently, Maatta and co-workers improved this approach successfully using dry pyridine as the solvent.45 They discovered that alkyl isocyanates are more reactive with the hexamolybdate clusters in dry pyridine and the reaction between them can occur at room temperature.49,51 Nevertheless, the reaction of aryl isocyanates with [Mo6O19]2− in dry pyridine still needs to be carried out at higher temperature (110 °C) in refluxed strictly anhydrous conditions for a prolonged time.49,51 It is worthwhile to point out here that this reaction is also analogous to that of isocyanates with aldehydes or ketones to form imines,67 which again suggests the comparability between molybdyl and carbonyl. Using this improved route, Maatta has further synthesized many monosubstituted organoimido derivatives,45,49–51 including the charge-transfer ferrocenylimido complex, (n-Bu4N)2[(FcN)Mo6O18]50 (FcN = (η5-C5H5)Fe(μ–η5:σ-C5H4N)) (Fig. 1) and the first organodiimido-bridged bis(hexamolybdate) derivative, (n-Bu4N)2[(Mo5O18)MoN–Z–NMo(O18Mo5)]49 (Z = 1,4-cyclo-C6H10) (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 1  Ball-and-stick model of the charge-transfer ferrocenylimido–hexamolybdate complex. 
 Fig. 2  Ball-and-stick model of the organodiimido-bridged bis(hexamolybdate) derivative. 
Subsequently, Errington discovered that organoimido derivatives can be prepared by the reaction of hexamolybdate ions directly with aromatic primary amines in the presence of triethylamine in benzonitrile at ca. 150 °C.46 Although this reaction needed rather harsh conditions and only obtained a mixture containing mono- and di-functionalized derivatives, and various oligomers, it indeed provided an alternative approach to synthesize organoimido derivatives with much cheaper and more accessible amines as the imido-releasing reagents. Additionally, this reaction confirmed further the similarity between molybdyl and carbonyl groups since it extremely resembled the Schiff base reaction between primary amines and aldehydes or ketones, which involves nucleophilic addition of an amine to the carbonyl followed by the elimination of water.68
Several years later, Roesner et al. advanced this approach with dry pyridine as solvent instead of benzonitrile. However, only aromatic amines with the strongly electron-donating substituents, for example, the alkoxy groups, can undertake this reaction under heating and dry N2 protecting conditions to form the corresponding mono organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate in moderate yields.47
We have paid special attention to the chemistry of derivatives of POMs for a long time,6,8,53–64 including new synthetic methodologies for the organoimido derivatives. In the light of the pioneering investigations of Maatta, Errington and Proust's groups on this field, we strongly feel that the molybdyl is, under certain cases, one of the inorganic analogues of the carbonyl in organic chemistry,68 and some organic synthetic techniques can be extended into the chemistry of derivatives of POMs. For Errington's aromatic-amine-route, if the resulting water can be removed from the reactive mixture successively, just like common dehydrating reactions in organic chemistry, this reaction will proceed rapidly and irreversibly, and complete thoroughly at the end.
Ten years ago, together with Peng at UMKC, Yongge Wei discovered that when carbodiimides, the most widely-used dehydrating reagents in common organic synthesis,69–71 including DPC (N,N′-diisopropylcarbodiimide) and DCC (N,N′-dicyclohexylcarbodiimide) were added, the reaction of [Mo6O19]2− with aromatic primary amines can be dramatically promoted, and developed a novel DCC-dehydrating synthetic protocol to afford arylimido derivatives of POMs.48 Not only do a variety of aromatic primary amines cause this reaction to occur, but also it is usually completed in less than 12 hours in hot acetonitrile, pyridine or N,N′-dimethylformamide without N2 protection. Moreover, pure crystalline products in excellent yield can be readily obtained with convenient bench manipulations. Best of all, the reaction can also tolerate additional remote functional groups on the aromatic ring, including iodo, ethynyl and terpyridyl groups,48,53 such products are useful building blocks to construct POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid molecular materials in the controllable molecule-module-assembly strategy.36
Instead of carbodiimides, other drying or dehydrating agents, including magnesium sulfate, calcium chloride, 4 Å zeolite, phosphorus pentoxide, N,N′-carbonyldiimidazole or even calcium hydride, have also been tested in our laboratory. However, they did not show a similar activation effect to that of DCC.48 This suggests that DCC does not just serve as a dehydrating agent to remove the water generated in the reaction. The possible role of DCC is presumedly to activate the terminal Mo–O bond and hence to increase the electrophilicity of the molybdenum atom, similar to its activating effect on the carboxyl group in amide or peptide synthesis.70 In addition, an extreme excess of DCC is harmful to this reaction because DCC can undergo side reactions directly with the molybdate ions and the initially formed products to obtain byproducts, such as (cyclo-C6H11NH3)4[β-Mo8O26].48
It should be pointed out, however, that for aromatic amines with electron-withdrawing substituents such as nitro, fluoro and chloro groups and aminopyridines, it is very difficult to make this reaction occur, due to the weak nucleophilicity or basicity and easy oxidization of these kinds of amines.55 We have also failed to prepare the alkylimido derivatives using this route with the corresponding aliphatic primary amines under refluxing, since they violently reduce the hexamolybdate ion, usually forming the single electron reduction product of the parent cluster, [Mo6O19]3−.48,55
Interestingly, in our attempts to functionalize the octamolybdates with organoimido groups, we discovered that a proton can obviously speed up the reaction of α-[Mo8O26]4− with aromatic primary amines in the presence of DCC under much milder conditions. In the meanwhile, mono organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate are selectively synthesized in high purity and good yield.55 This acid-assisting route has allowed the easy synthesis of a large number of mono-imido hexamolybdates with a wide spectrum of amines as the imido-releasing reagents, particularly, including aromatic primary amines containing fused rings (Fig. 3),54,72 easy oxidized aliphatic primary amines73 and those even bearing electron-withdrawing groups such as bromo, chloro, fluoro and nitro groups55–58,74–76 (Fig. 4 and 5).
 Fig. 3  Ball-and-stick structure of the 1-naphthylimido hexamolybdate. 
 Fig. 4  Ball-and-stick structure of the p-chlorophenylimido hexamolybdate. 
 Fig. 5  Ball-and-stick structure of the p-bromophenylimido hexamolybdate. 
In this acid-assisting route above, the proton offered by hydrochloride salts is crucial for the formation of monofunctionalized derivatives. Otherwise, active aromatic amines containing electron-donating substituents, such as alkyl, alkoxy and alkylamino groups, react with α-[Mo8O26]4− to yield only the bifunctionalized arylimido derivatives of hexamolybdate; and inert aromatic amines with electron-withdrawing substituents, such as chloro, fluoro and nitro groups, were oxidized by α-[Mo8O26]4−. Furthermore, the reaction can be expedited and even carried out at room temperature by increasing the amount of hydrochloride salts. While more work needs to be done to shed light on the detailed reaction mechanism, the possible role of the proton is to complex with DCC and hence to strengthen the electrophilic ability of DCC to attack the oxo group of molybdyl. Additionally, the proton can also promote the conversion from the α-octamolybdate to the hexamolybdate through the degradation and reassembly process, since the hexamolybdate ions and their derivatives are much more stable than the α-octamolybdate ions in an acidic organic solvent.
The crystal structures of all the mono-organoimido derivatives have some common features. They resemble that of their hexamolybdate parent, but one terminal oxo group has been replaced by an organoimido substituent. The short Mo–N bond lengths in the range of 1.68–1.75 Å and nearly linear linkages of Mo–N–C are consistent with the character of a triple bond, although the angles sometimes deviate from linearity more than expected due to the force of the crystal packing.55 The central oxygen atoms become more close to the imido-bearing molybdenum atoms since the trans influence of an imido group is weaker than that of a terminal oxo group.56 While the bond length involving the bridging-oxygen atoms shows considerable changes, there are no appreciable variations in the terminal Mo–O bond lengths within the range of 1.66–1.72 Å. The pattern of short–long trans bond alternation in the three mutually orthogonal Mo4O4 belts observed in the parent hexamolybdate cluster still exists in the Mo4O4 belts perpendicular to the Mo–N bonds. In addition, the supramolecular self-assembly of cluster anions through π–π stacking between parallel phenyl rings of two neighboring clusters has also been observed in some mono-arylimido derivatives,55–57 which results in the formation of dimers in their crystalline states.
There are some general spectra characteristics and trends of mono organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate. In the low wavenumber region of IR spectra, such derivatives display similar characteristic patterns of the parent hexamolybdate anion: there are two very strong peaks at ca. 955(±5) and 795(±5) cm−1, assigned to the Mo–Ot stretching and Mo–Ob–Mo asymmetric stretching vibrations, respectively. Being different from the parent cluster, there is one more shoulder peak near 975(±5) cm−1. This band may derive from the Mo–N stretching vibration77 and is a diagnostic character for mono-organoimido substitution. While the UV-vis spectra of monofunctionalized alkylimido derivatives resemble that of the hexamolybdate parent substantially, those of monofunctionalized arylimido derivatives show considerable variations due to their different molecular and electronic structures. The lowest energy electronic transition at 325 nm in the hexamolybdate parent, which was assigned to a charge-transfer transition from the terminal oxygen non-bonding π-type HOMO to the molybdenum π-type LUMO,77 is bathochromically shifted by more than 20 nm in the monofunctionalized arylimido derivatives and becomes significantly more intense. The obvious bathochromic shifts imply that the Mo–N π-bond is formed and its π electrons are delocalized over the organic conjugated π systems in such arylimido derivatives. In other words, strong electronic interactions exist between the hexamolybdate cluster and the conjugated organic ligand. In addition, the extent of the bathochromic shifts in the reported mono-arylimido derivatives is also consistent with the length of conjugated segments and the trend in the π-donor ability of arylimido ligands. Compared to the 1H NMR spectra of the corresponding free amine ligands, the hydrogens attached to the α-carbon atoms or on benzene rings in the corresponding alkylimido and arylimido derivatives all exhibit significant downfield chemical shifts, respectively, indicating that the shielding nature of [Mo5O18(MoN–)]2− is much weaker than that of the amino group and in agreement with the strong electron acceptability of POM clusters.


2.1.2. Disubstituted derivatives. 
A characteristic feature of the derivatization of the hexamolybdate with organoimido ligands is the capacity for polyfunctionalization. Among organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate, the bifunctionalized ones are the easiest and most common potential building blocks for constructing POM-based hybrids. Proust noticed that the cis-diimido derivative was formed even by reaction of only one equivalent of Ph3PNPh with [Mo6O19]2−.33 However, using two equivalents of Ph3PNPh, it still gave a mixture of unreacted hexamolybdate anions and mono- and cis-diimido derivatives. The isolation of the successive derivatives is also difficult because they usually cocrystallize in the crystalline state.43
Maatta reported the first example of well characterized di-organoimido derivatives.45,51 He found that the cis-disubstituted imido hexamolybdate, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-diisopropylphenyl) was formed in 67% yield by a reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O19] with two equivalents of 2,6-diisopropylphenyl isocyanate in refluxing pyridine for 8 days. It is obvious that this is a low efficiency route due to being a time-consuming process. Moreover, as mentioned by his group, the crude products contained a mixture of higher- and lower-substituted hexamolybdates, which makes the separation of large amounts of the desired difunctionalized products tedious and impractical.
In the past years, we also tried our best to prepare di-organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate using our DCC-dehydrating protocol. At first, attempts to use the same route as for the mono-substituted derivatives with a stoichiometric ratio of two equivalents of aromatic primary amines, failed to obtain the disubstituted derivatives in desired yields. Instead, a mixture of various polysubstituted hexamolybdates were generated since there are six equally reactive sites on a hexamolybdate ion, and thus repeated recrystallization is needed for purification of the anticipant product. However, an attempt to functionalize the α-isomer of the octamolybdate ion, α-[Mo8O26]4−, with this reaction routine resulted in the selective synthesis of difunctionalized arylimido derivatives of hexamolybdate with good yield and high purity.59 This novel route allows the efficient preparation of a number of di-organoimido hexamolybdates more conveniently with easy and simple bench operations.59–61 For example, the reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[α-Mo8O26] with DCC and 4-iodo-2,6-diisopropylaniline or 4-ethynyl-2,6-dimethylaniline at the ratio of 1:2:2 in refluxing dry acetonitrile for 6 to 12 hours affords the corresponding di-organoimido hexamolybdates, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 4-iodo-2,6-diisopropyl-C6H259 or 4-ethynyl-2,6-diisopropyl-C6H261) in good yields of 60–80% (Fig. 6 and 7). These compounds both have the cis-disubstituted structure with two active remote functional groups at the end, which make them important building blocks in the construction of novel organic–inorganic hybrids.
 Fig. 6  Ball-and-stick structure of the cis-disubstituted hexamolybdate imido derivative with two remote iodo groups. 
 Fig. 7  Ball-and-stick structure of the cis-disubstituted hexamolybdate imido derivative with two remote ethynyl groups. 
In principle, there are cis- and trans-isomers of the terminal substituted di-organoimido hexamolybdates. If the steric and electronic effects of the imido groups are ignored, both of them can be formed in the same reaction with a cis and trans ratio of 4:1 theoretically, since there are four cis and only one trans terminal oxo reactive sites in a mono-organoimido derivative. While the steric hindrance is considered, which is actually very common in organic substitution reactions, the trans-isomer will be more than 25% and becomes the principal product. But contrary to expectations, except for the cis-isomers, the trans-disubstituted hexamolybdates have hardly been detected in the above reaction route, which implies that a disubstituted hexamolybdate with arylimido ligands prefers to form the cis-isomeric derivative. Such a result is amazing, which suggests that the steric effect is less important here and the presence of an extant imido substituent induces an activating effect on the adjacent molybdyl groups. Indeed, a density functional theory study on hexamolybdate derivatives reveals that the cis-disubstituted derivatives are more stable in energy than the corresponding trans-isomers.78
However, Errington discovered that, using their aromatic primary amines route, a trans-disubstituted hexamolybdate, (n-Bu4N)2[trans-Mo6O17(NC6H4NH2)2],46 was formed predominantly by the reaction between (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O19] and 1,4-phenylenediamine with a ratio of 1:2. Moreover, 1H NMR also confirmed the formation of the corresponding cis-isomer in the resulting products. Their work implies that the trans-disubstituted hexamolybdate is a kinetic stable product under certain supported conditions and can be isolated indeed. It also intensively suggests that the mechanism of the direct functionalization of the hexamolybdate with aromatic primary amines is obviously different from those with phosphinimines or isocyanates and it is very possible to form trans-disubstituted hexamolybdate derivatives in the aromatic primary amines approach.
Under the stimulus of this above idea, we have retried recently our DCC-dehydrating protocol for the direct functionalization of the hexamolybdate with stoichiometric ratios of (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O19] and the corresponding aromatic primary amines.62,63 Indeed, the reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O19] with two equivalents of some active aromatic primary amines containing electron-donating substituents, such as 2,6-dimethylaniline and o-anisidine, and two equivalents of DCC in refluxed acetonitrile can obtain both the cis- and trans-disubstituted imido complexes in reasonable yields, respectively, by careful control of the refluxing time. In general, the cis-isomer can be obtained from a prolonged refluxing reaction, for example, the compound (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2-methoxy-C6H4) (Fig. 8), was isolated after 24 hours refluxing reaction;62 on the other hand, a relative short refluxing time promotes the formation of the trans-isomer, for example, the compound (n-Bu4N)2[trans-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3) (Fig. 9) was acquired from 6 hours refluxing reaction.63
 Fig. 8  Ball-and-stick structure of the cis-disubstituted imido hexamolybdate anion, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2-methoxy-C6H4). 
 Fig. 9  Ball-and-stick structure of the trans-disubstituted imido hexamolybdate anion, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3). 
Similarly to monosubstituted derivatives, all the reported diimido hexamolybdates have their own common features and some general trends in the structures and spectroscopies. The bond lengths of the [MoNAr] triple bond range from 1.71 to 1.75 Å and the angles of Mo–N–C are close to 180°. However, for the cis-isomers, one of the angles sometimes deviates from linearity due to the aggregation of the cluster anions through π–π stacking and the force of the crystal packing.60 The central oxygen atom inside the hexamolybdate cage is drawn closer to the imido-bearing Mo atoms, while the four bridging oxygen atoms are pushed away from the imido-bearing Mo atoms. The long–short bond alternation in the Mo4O4 belts of the hexamolybdate parent disappears in the cis-isomers. However, in the trans-isomers, this pattern is still kept in the belt perpendicular to the long axis of the cluster along the two Mo–N bonds. Moreover, various patterns of the supramolecular self-assembly due to π–π stacking or/and C–H⋯O hydrogen bonding are very popular. Compared to the corresponding mono-organoimido derivatives and the parent hexamolybdate, there are obvious low-wavenumber shifts of the characteristic peaks in the IR spectra of disubstituted imido derivatives: the Mo–N stretching vibrations at 968(±2) cm−1 as a shoulder peak, the strong Mo–O stretching vibrations at 945(±2) cm−1 are shifted to low wavenumber with ca. 5 and 10 cm−1, respectively. Correspondingly, the Mo–Ob–Mo asymmetric stretching vibration appears as a broad strong band at ca. 775 cm−1 and is significantly shifted to low wavenumber by more than 20 cm−1. Based on UV-vis spectra of the diorganoimido derivatives, the lowest energy electronic transition of L → M charge-transfer shows a further red-shift of ca. 5 nm in comparison with the corresponding mono-substituted derivatives due to the incorporation of the other arylimido ligand. In the meanwhile, 1H NMR of the aromatic protons in such disubstituted derivatives all show visible upfield shifts due to the increase of electron density in the cluster anions accompanying the incorporation of the second arylimido ligand, which also results in the cathodical shifts of their reduction potentials in CV curves.


2.1.3. Polysubstituted derivatives. 
The polysubstituted imido derivatives of hexamolybdate mean that three or more terminal and/or bridging oxo groups of the parent hexamolybdate are replaced by organoimido ligands. More than a dozen years ago, Maatta reported polysubstituted hexamolybdates, in which three to six terminal oxo groups were replaced by 2,6-diisopropylphenylimido ligands.45,51,64 They discovered that multi-functionalized hexamolybdates, [Mo6O(19−x)(NAr)x]2− (Ar = 2,6-diisopropylphenyl, x = 3,51 4,45,51 5,45,51 664) could be synthesized by carefully controlling the molar ratios of 2,6-diisopropylaniline isocyanate and the hexamolybdate cluster in refluxing pyridine after a prolonged reaction time of 13, 12, 11 and 21 days, respectively. The X-ray molecular structures of tri- and hexa-substituted derivatives are exemplified in Fig. 10 and 11, respectively. Although all these polysubstituted derivatives have been isolated and characterized, the nonselective nature of the reaction results in the formation of mixtures of various multi-functionalized products, which makes their separation process rather difficult. Apparently, the rational synthesis of polysubstituted imido hexamolybdates is a formidable challenge for chemists.
 Fig. 10  The X-ray molecular structure of the trisubstituted hexamolybdate. 
 Fig. 11  The X-ray molecular structure of the hexasubstituted hexamolybdate. 
The preparation of polysubstituted hexamolybdates has also attracted the interest of our group for extending the applicable range of the DCC protocol. When we attempted recently to obtain poly-2,6-dimethylanilido hexamolybdate by using the DCC-dehydrating approach with an increased molar ratio of aromatic primary amines and DCC, a tri-organoimido derivative, (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O16(μ2-NAr)(NAr)2] and a penta-organoimido one, (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O14(μ2-NAr)(NAr)4] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3),65 were synthesized in moderate yield. Unexpectedly, they are not exclusively terminal-oxo replaced complexes and one of bridging-oxo groups is substituted instead. As is illustrated in Fig. 12, these multi-functionalized imido derivatives have a common feature that the μ2-bridging oxygen atom shared by the two imido-bearing Mo atoms is substituted with a μ2-bridging organoimido ligand. It suggests that such bridging oxo groups between two terminal organoimido ligands have been doubly activated by the neighboring imido groups and become more negative (nucleophilic) than other oxygen atoms, resulting in the easy electrophilic attack by DCC. These polysubstituted hexamolybdates stand for the first example of a bridging oxygen atom in POMs being replaced by the bridging organoimido groups. It breaks the myth that only the terminal oxo groups can be directly replaced with organoimido ligands, hence extends the range of organoimido-POM coordination chemistry further and brings us a wonderful prospect in the chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs.
 Fig. 12  Ball-and-stick structure of the trisubstituted hexamolybdate (a) and pentasubstituted hexamolybdate (b). 

2.2. Organoimido derivatives of other POMs
While the synthetic chemistry of organoimido derivatives of the hexamolybdate has been developed well and obtained abundant results, related studies on other POMs have rarely been reported. So far, there only has been obtained quite limited success in extending the above approaches to other POMs, including other Lindqvist and Keggin POMs.
Attempts to directly functionalize the hexatungstate anion, [W6O19]2−, another important Lindqvist homopolyoxometalate besides the hexamolybdate, have failed when applying all the above-mentioned imido approaches, since [W6O19]2− does not react with phosphinimines, isocyanates or primary amines under the present developed conditions. It seems that the tungstyl groups in the hexatungstate are rather unreactive in comparison with the molybdyl groups in the hexamolybdate. The only example of an organoimido derivative of hexatungstate, (n-Bu4N)2[W6O18(NAr)] (Ar = 2,6-diisopropyl-C6H3) was obtained more than a decade ago by Maatta via the reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[WO4] with 2,6-diisopropylphenyl isocyanate in either 1,2-dichloroethane or pyridine, but the yield is very low (ca. 10% based on (n-Bu4N)2[WO4]).79 They thought that the mechanism might be to form the organoimido–tungstate complex, [WO3(NAr)], and then aggregate with additional [WO4]2− in a self-assembly manner to yield the target product. In addition, it is likely that the proton in an acidic contaminant, not water mentioned by Maatta, is involved in the assembly of the hexanuclear cluster, just like the above-mentioned acid-assisting route developed by us for the mono-organoimido hexamolybdates.55 The deliberate addition of a suitable acid will perhaps bring us an improvement of this approach.
Although the hexatungstate cluster is stable, the replacement of tungstyl groups with reactive molybdyl groups will increase the reactive activity of the cluster. We discovered, for the first time, that the reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[MoW5O19] with 2,6-dimethylaniline or 4-iodo-2,6-dimethylaniline and DCC in the ratio of 1:1:1.5 in refluxing acetonitrile under nitrogen afforded the mono-imido derivatives, (n-Bu4N)2[W5O18(MoNAr)] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3 or 4-iodo-2,6-dimethyl-C6H2) with yields of ca. 60%.80 It is proved to be reliable and feasible that a Lindqvist heteropolyoxometalate, [MoW5O19]2−, is directly functionalized with aromatic primary amines using the DCC-dehydrating protocol. As is shown in Fig. 13, the terminal oxygen atom bonded to the molybdenum atom is selectively replaced by an imido substituent as expected. This result opens a general road for the synthesis of organoimido derivatives of less reactive POM clusters, namely, by replacing one of the inert terminal metal–oxo groups with a functionalizable Mo–O group.
 Fig. 13  Ball-and-stick structure of the imido pentatungstenmolybdate. 
Keggin-type POMs have a general formula of [XMO40]n− and feature a central tetrahedral oxyanion [XO4]m− encapsulated in a cage consisting of twelve MO6 octahedra sharing corners. They represent the most popular and largest subclass of POMs with diverse structure and composition of the incorporated hetero-atom in the interior or metal atoms on the surface.1 Although the surface oxygen atoms of the α-phosphomolybdate ion, [α-PMo12O34]3−, and the α-phosphotungstate ion, [α-PW12O34]3−, are easily alkylated with alkylation agents including methyl sulfate and trimethyloxonium tetrafluoborate,33,81 they could not be replaced directly by any imido-releasing reagent up to now. For example, the reaction between [α-PMo12O34]3− and p-methyphenyl isocyanate in hot pyridine failed to afford the expected organoimido substituted α-phosphotungstate, but produced a decanuclear imido complex instead.82 We also tried the reaction of several Keggin-structure POMs containing molybdyl groups, such as the α-phosphomolybdate, with aromatic primary amines in the presence of DCC. However, in most cases, the aromatic amines were oxidized instead of acting as imido-releasing reagents due to the strong oxidation nature of the Keggin POMs.
The only successful two cases in the synthesis of Keggin-type imido derivatives were reported by Proust and Duncan in 2004 and 2007, respectively.83,84 They obtained the imido complexes, (n-Bu4N)4[PW11O39(ReNC6H5)] and (n-Bu4N)3[PW12O39(ReNC6H5)] by the substitution reaction of the monovacant Keggin compound (n-Bu4N)4[H3PW11O39] as a penta-dentate ligand, with the mononuclear complexes [Re(NPh)Cl3(PPh3)2] and [W(NPh)Cl4] containing a metal–imido functional group in acetonitrile, respectively. These two Keggin-type organoimido substituted POMs have been clearly demonstrated by various techniques including 1H and 14N NMR, electrochemistry, and especially ESI mass spectrometry. However, their X-ray structures have not yet been confirmed. In a word, the functionalization of Keggin-type POMs with imido groups is still a tremendous challenge and much more attention should be drawn to this interesting field in the future since the potential of Keggin POM-based molecular materials is expected to be greater than that of derivatives of Lindqvist POMs.
2.3. Some important POM-based molecular architecture from the DCC protocol

2.3.1. Nanoscale POM–organic hybrid molecular dumbbells. 
Nowadays, nanosized materials, including nanoparticles, nanowires and nanotubes, have attracted considerable research interests, due to their particular size-dependent properties and resulting applications including acting as building blocks to construct various functional materials.85–91 Most of these materials consist of quantum dots or nanocrystals, which are assemblies of small molecules or simple ions, and individual nanoscale macromolecules as building blocks are seldom reported, especially nanoscale molecular dumbbells with two active centers connected by a medium whose length and properties can be controlled on purpose. POM-terminal molecular rods or nanodumbbells with conjugated rigid rods consisting of p-phenylene monomer units as connecting units might have interesting potentials in the design of new materials with respect to their unique electro-chemical, magnetic, catalytic, antimicrobial, and antitumor properties. This is because besides the fine-tuned properties of POMs and the conjugated rigid rod, possible novel synergistic effects between the two parts must also be brought about, resulting from the strong interplay between the POM cluster and the organic delocalized segment.92–95 Therefore, we designed and synthesized three dumbbell-shaped molecules, (n-Bu4N)4[O18Mo6NArNMo6O18] (Ar = p-phenylene, biphenylene or 2,2′-dimethylphenylene), with hexamolybdates as terminals, bridged by p-phenylene and p-biphenylene units via MoN triple bonds using well-established acid-assisting DCC protocol (Fig. 14).96 Studies on the UV-vis and CV of these molecular nanodumbbells indicated that there exist strong electronic interactions between the terminal POM clusters and bridging organic conjugated rigid rod, and the conjugated length has a great effect on the electronic communication between two POM terminals.
 Fig. 14  Crystal structures of the molecular nanodumbbells. 


2.3.2. Controlled assembly of POM-based chiral compounds from achiral building blocks. 
Chiral POMs, or chiral compounds containing POMs, have always been the hotspots of intense research effort,97 due to their enchanting structures, remarkable properties and vast application potentials in nonlinear optical devices, random data access memory, stereoselective catalysis, enzyme biological simulation and medicinal chemistry.98–102 Thanks to the outstanding work of Pope, Hill, Yamase, Kortz, Wang and other groups,103–115 several synthetic protocols have now been developed to obtain chiral POM compounds.97 However, the designed synthesis of enantiomerically pure chiral POM crystals by the assembly of achiral building blocks is still rarely reported in the literature. On the basis of previous work, we have developed two new methods to build enantiopure chiral POMs by assembling an achiral Lindqvist hexamolybdate with an organically-derivatized Anderson-type heteropolymolybdate containing two remote amino groups or flexible diamines via covalent bonds.
In the light of the prominent work of Hasenknopf, Gouzerh and Cronin et al.,116–121 we combined TRIS (tromethamine, (HOCH2)3NH2) as a bifunctional ligand with an Anderson-type heteropolymolybdate to make POM building blocks with remote amino groups, which are easily bonded onto Lindqvist hexamolybdate anions to form imido derivatives. Thus, we synthesized two chiral molecular nanorods with the reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O19], (n-Bu4N)3[MMo6O18{(OCH2)3CNH2}2] (M = MnIII, FeIII), and DCC at the molar ratio of 2:1:2 in refluxing dry acetonitrile, in which Anderson heteropolymolybdates containing two remote amino groups, (n-Bu4N)3[MMo6O18{(OCH2)3CNH2}2] (M = MnIII, FeIII), act as the imido-releasing reagent.122 As is shown in Fig. 15, two types of POMs were linked together by bifunctional organic ligands with strong covalent bonds. Single-crystal X-ray diffraction and solid state CD spectroscopy studies show that both enantiopure molecular nanorods are isolated by spontaneous resolution on crystallization in the absence of any outside chiral influence. The cause of the chirality generation of such nanorods is possibly that the free rotation of the C–N bond is hindered by the bulky and heavy POMs, which is similar to that of the binaphthalene systems.123,124 This work provides a new approach to obtain chiral nano-architectures from achiral POMs in a controllable way.
 Fig. 15  Ball-and-stick representation of cluster anions of chiral molecular nanorods. (a) Mn-containing and (b) Fe-containing. 
As mentioned above, two or more oxo groups on the surface of POMs can be replaced by organic ligands. If suitable bidentate organic ligands are available, we can get polyoxometalatocyclophanes, a class of POM-based metallamacrocycles, by the replacement of two neighboring oxo groups. As can be expected, such monocyclic polyoxometalatocyclophanes should be chiral if the incorporated organic ligand is nonplanar. Based on this idea, we synthesized the first polyoxometalatocyclophanes via the refluxing reactions of (n-Bu4N)4[α-Mo8O26] with bisarylamine (1,4-bis(o-aminophenoxy)butane, 1,6-bis(o-aminophenoxy)hexane, or 1,8-bis(o-aminophenoxy)octane) and its hydrochloride salt, and DCC in a molar ratio of 6:5:3:20 in dry acetonitrile (Fig. 16).125 They are composed of the covalent linkage of the hexamolybdate cluster and bis-arylimido ligands containing flexible chains, which are long enough to end the cycle by the POM anion. Just because of the fixing by the Mo–N on both sides, the alkyl chain cannot rotate freely, whereas the loss of freedom of rotation destroys the mirror symmetry of the mother Lindqvist anion, resulting in the formation of chiral metallamacrocycles. Interestingly, some metallamacrocycles can spontaneously resolve on crystallization without any outside chiral influence. This work provides a new protocol to prepare chiral POMs and chiral metallamacrocycles from achiral building blocks by fastening both ends of a flexible chain on an achiral POM to remove the symmetric center and mirror.
 Fig. 16  ORTEP drawings of the macrocyclic anions of polyoxometalatocyclophanes. 

3. Reactive chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs
While organoimido derivatives of POMs have been known for nearly 20 years39 and several kinds of synthetic approaches have been developed as mentioned above, the reactive chemistry of them has just been investigated recently and only the organoimido derivatives of hexamolybdate have been involved.52,53,60,126–129 Both the inorganic cluster skeleton and the incorporated organic ligand in an organoimido POM can act as the reactive sites for their own enjoyed reactions. Although the Mo–N bond is also a possible reaction site for the correlative reactions such as hydrolysis, it is senseless due to breaking the Mo–N bond and losing the organic ligand from the cluster in most cases. So far, the reaction chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs has focused mainly on the incorporated organic ligands because they provide great potential in the controllable synthesis of organic–inorganic hybrids by using well-developed common organic synthetic methods. Especially, for the organoimido substituted hexamolybdates, several important inorganic and organic reactions, which do not cleave the Mo–N bond, have been developed. These include coordination,53,126 addition polymerization,52 carbon–carbon couplings127,128,130 and esterification reactions,131 and so on. In particular, the carbon–carbon coupling reactions have been proved to be a powerful tool for the molecule-module-assembly strategy in constructing POM-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials.37 Moreover, we have discovered a novel protocol for the formation of a CC double bond via the so-called doubly dehydrogenative coupling of two saturated sp3 C–H bonds activated with POMs,132 which is significant progress of POM chemistry.
3.1. Coordination
The surface oxygen atoms on the cluster skeleton of an organo substituted POM should be more reactive to coordination with a metal ion, due to the activation effect of incorporated organic ligands, in comparison with the corresponding cluster parent.34 However, such reactions have not been realized in the organoimido substituted hexamolybdates. On the other hand, if the incorporated organoimido segment bears coordination reactive groups such as hydroxyl, carboxyl and pyridyl, such derivatives can in principle behave as POM-functionalized organic ligands. In the light of this idea, the organoimido derivative of hexamolybdate containing a remote terpyridyl group at the end was synthesized by a reaction of (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O19] with the terpyridine ligand and DCC in hot acetonitrile based on the convenient DCC protocol.53 The coordination reaction of this hexamolybdate-functionalized terpyridyl ligand with some bivalent transitional metal ions such as Zn2+ and Ru2+ has been researched preliminarily by UV-vis spectra. For example, while adding an excess of Ru(tPy)Cl3 to a DMSO solution of the functionalized terpyridyl ligand, the intense characteristic absorption peak at 392 nm of this ligand diminishes significantly, in the meanwhile, a new absorption band at 504 nm appears gradually. The new absorption is a characteristic M → L charge-transfer (MLCT) transition of the Ru–bisterpyridine complexes, which implies definitely that the new hexamolybdate-functionalized bisterpyridine–Ru complex has formed by the coordination reaction shown in Scheme 1. Isolation, purification and crystal structure determination of this complex are currently in progress. Subsequently, the coordination of a bifunctionalized organoimido hexamolybdate with two terpyridyl groups with Fe2+ were carried out in acetonitrile or DMSO at room temperature and the so-resulted coordination polymer was demonstrated by 1H NMR, UV-vis and ESI-MS. However, efforts to get single crystals of this complex have not been successful.126
 Scheme 1  Coordination reaction of the hexamolybdate-functionalized terpyridyl ligand with Ru(tPy)Cl3. 
3.2. Addition polymerization
The addition polymerization of organoimido derivatives of POMs bearing an unsaturated functional group such as the CC double bond was just reported by Maatta at the beginning of this new century.52 They discovered that the p-styrenylimido hexamolybdate and 4-methylstyrene could undergo conventional free radical-induced copolymerization initiated by AIBN (2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionitrile)) in 1,2-dichloroethane and this afforded a copolymer with organoimido substituted POMs as pendants (Scheme 2). The formation of this copolymer was confirmed by its IR spectrum, in which the band of the CC stretching vibration disappeared and the characteristic peaks of the terminal Mo–O and Mo–N vibrations in a monoimido hexamolybdate still existed. By comparison of the relative intensities of the 1H NMR of the aryl groups, the α-CH2 groups of (n-Bu4N)+ cations and the styrenic CH3 group, this copolymer was suggested to have a composition of nearly three 4-methyl styrene units per unit of p-styrenylimido hexamolybdate. This work demonstrates that the chemical reactivity of the hexamolybdate-functionalized styrenylimido ligand is similar to the corresponding free styrene and can be employed as a reactive site to introduce a metal complex into a conventional polymeric environment. Such a methodology should have wide application prospects in the synthesis of novel inorganic–organic hybrid polymeric materials that incorporate covalently organoimido–POM complexes.
 Scheme 2  Free radical-induced copolymerization between p-styrenylimido hexamolybdate and 4-methylstyrene. 
3.3. Carbon–carbon coupling and its application in POM-based organic–inorganic hybrids
It is well known that aryl halides and terminal acetylenes or ethylenes can carry out carbon–carbon coupling reactions by using Pd as a catalyzer.133–135 The arylimido derivatives of POMs with a remote iodo, ethynyl or vinyl group are actually POM-functionalized aryl halides, terminal acetylenes and ethylenes. If the iodo, ethynyl or vinyl group on the functionalized POM clusters can undergo common Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions, and the POM skeletons survive and the imido linkages don't break under the coupling reaction conditions, such organic-functionalized clusters would be invaluable building blocks for the rational synthesis of novel molecular POM–organic hybrids.

3.3.1. Sonogashira coupling. 
The Sonogashira coupling reaction of an arylimido derivative of hexamolybdate with a remote iodo, (n-Bu4N)2[Mo6O18(NAr)] (Ar = 4-iodo-2,6-dimethyl-C6H2), with 4-methyl-1-ethynylbenzene or 3,5-ditertbutyl-1-ethynylbenzene has been carried out in acetonitrile at room temperature under the protection of N2 (Scheme 3).127 Pure products can be usually obtained in more than 80% excellent yields. Compared to classic coupling reactions in organic synthesis,133–135 this reaction is extremely fast and finishes within only 20 minutes as monitored by thin-layer chromatography. As is shown in Fig. 17, the hexamolybdate clusters were not destroyed under the reaction conditions and survived in the coupling product. Moreover, it obviously activates the coupling reaction. The reactivity of the iodo group in the organoimido substituted hexamolybdates is likely increased due to the electron-withdrawing nature of the hexamolybdate cluster. Prolonged reaction time and excess base were found to be harmful to the desired coupling products, as they lead to the breaking of the Mo–N bond and the slow decomposition of the parent hexamolybdate cluster under the reaction conditions.
 Scheme 3  Sonogashira coupling of iodo-functionalized hexamolybdate with 4-methyl-1-ethynylbenzene in acetonitrile at room temperature. 
 Fig. 17  Ball-and-stick structure of the coupling product. 
With our success in proving that iodo- or ethynyl-phenylimido functionalized POM clusters can undergo Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling reactions, a great number of POM-based hybrids with various linking geometries, including covalently linked POM networks, can be rationally designed and easily prepared. For example, hybrid molecular dumbbells with two hexamolybdate clusters linked by a rigid conjugated organic rod with different lengths have been synthesized by the Sonogashira coupling reaction in high yields (Scheme 4 and Fig. 18).128
 Scheme 4  Controllable assembly of hybrid nanodumbbells. 
 Fig. 18  Ball-and-stick structure of the hybrid nanodumbbell. 
Cyclic-voltammetry studies reveal a reversible one-electron reduction wave at −891 mV (vs. Ag/Ag+) for both nanodumbbells, which is very close to the reduction potential of other monosubstituted imido derivatives.37 As confirmed by UV-vis spectroscopic studies, the lowest energy electronic transition is significantly bathochromically shifted from iodo- and ethynyl-phenylimido substituted hexamolybdates (362 and 368 nm), to hybrid dumbbells (426 and 438 nm), which indicate that the MoN π bond is delocalized within the organic conjugated π system. Compared to the original oligo (phenylene ethynylene) ligands, as a type of strongly fluorescent molecule,136 the two hybrid dumbbells show no fluorescence under excitation from 200 to 500 nm, implying clearly that the conjugatedly-attached hexamolybdate cluster acts as an efficient fluorescence quencher in the dumbbells. These results suggest that there are strong electronic interactions between the two clusters through the conjugated organic bridge in a nanodumbbell.
Charge-transfer hybrids based on organic donors and inorganic acceptors have attracted particular attention in recent years due to their potential applications in solar energy conversion and storage such as photovoltaic cells, conducting materials including novel molecular conductors and superconductors, and nonlinear optical devices.129,137,138 As one of the most important electron acceptors,139,140 POMs have been widely exploited in preparing charge-transfer salts with organic cation donors, or charge-transfer supramolecular aggregates with neutral organic π donors through cocrystallization. Efforts have recently been made to develop intramolecular charge-transfer hybrids based on POMs.129 The charge-transfer ferrocenylimido substituted hexamolybdate, (n-Bu4N)2[(FcN)Mo6O18] (FcN = (η5-C5H5)Fe(μ–η5:σ-C5H4N)) is one such example, in which a ferrocenyl donor is bound covalently to a hexamolybdate acceptor and a charge-transfer transition from the Fe2+ center to the hexamolybdate cluster is observed at 536 nm.50 However, this hybrid was obtained in only 19% yield through a direct functionalization reaction of the hexamolybdate cluster. Additionally, the short separation distance between the ferrocenyl donor and the cluster acceptor also causes the charge recombination easily due to coherent superexchange mechanism,141 resulting in the decrease of charge-transfer efficiency. However, these problems are easy to solve with the construction of POMs-based organic hybrids through the Pd-catalyzed carbon–carbon coupling reactions of iodophenylimido-functionalized POM cluster building blocks.
For example, two novel charge-transfer hybrids were synthesized by the Sonogashira coupling reactions of mono- and di-iodophenylimido substituted hexamolybdate clusters with ethynylferrocene (a and b) in over 65% good yields (Scheme 5).129 Ferrocenyl groups in these charge-transfer hybrids are bonded indirectly to a hexamolybdate cluster through an extended π-conjugated bridge (Fig. 19). The electronic spectra of these hybrids show a broad absorption band beyond 550 nm, indicating the existence of charge-transfer transition from the ferrocenyl donor to the cluster acceptor. The observation of the clear charge-transfer transition demonstrates that the organic π-conjugated bridge between the hexamolybdate cluster acceptor and the ferrocenyl donor is conducive to charge-transfer resonance to the ground state in both charge-transfer hybrids, even though the donor–acceptor separation distance of 11.29 Å is rather long. Based on cyclic voltammetry studies, there is a single-electron oxidation wave at 0.328 V and a single electron reduction wave at −0.831 V for the hybrid with one ferrocenyl unit. For the hybrid with two ferrocenyl units, a lower single electron reduction potential at −1.055 V and a two-electron oxidation wave at 0.331 V are observed. The reduction wave in these hybrids is attributed to the cluster skeleton. The observed cathodical shift of reduction potential from a to b is in agreement with the increasing number of the electron-donating imido ligands in b. The oxidation process in these two hybrids is associated with the ferrocenyl unit. The almost same oxidation potential of them indicates negligible electronic interactions between the two ferrocenyls in b.
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of two novel charge-transfer hybrids based on hexamolybdate cluster. 
 Fig. 19  Ball-and-stick structure of the charge-transfer hybrid. 
Hybrid polymers containing POMs have been intensively studied for seeking new conducting materials. Conjugated polymeric hybrids, containing covalently linked POM clusters in the main or side chain, now can be synthesized conveniently with the Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions. Main-chain POM-containing polymers have been prepared by using difunctionalized clusters, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 4-iodo-2,6-diisopropyl-C6H259 or 4-ethynyl-2,6-diisopropyl-C6H261), and 2,5-bis(2,2-dimethylpropoxy)-1,4-diethynylbenzene or 2,5-bis(2,2-dimethylpropoxy)-1,4-diiodobenzene as original materials (Scheme 6). These polymers have an average molecular weight of about 160000. Their electronic spectra are similar to that of a hybrid dumbbell,128 indicating that the π electrons delocalize only within the two imido-bearing Mo atoms through the organic-conjugated bridge and the electronic interaction between the two orthogonally jointed organic π systems is limited. Cyclic voltammetry studies reveal a reversible single-electron reduction wave at −1.2 V (vs. Ag/Ag+), which is consistent with diarylimido-functionalized hexamolybdates. These polymers also show intense absorption in the visible range but with little fluorescence emission, suggesting the efficient fluorescence quenching of the embedded POM cluster on the organic phenylene acetylene units. Peng has studied their applications in a photovoltaic cell and a power conversion efficiency of 0.15% was obtained, which is significantly higher than that of photovoltaic cells fabricated with other conjugated polymers in the same device configuration. Recently, Peng's groups incorporated the hexamolybdate cluster into poly(phenylene ethynylene) as conjugated side-chain pendants through Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions to obtain novel polymeric hybrids, which have much more potential application in photovoltaic cells owing to the efficient fluorescence quenching in such materials to make free charge carriers reside in different structural units.142
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of polymeric hybrids based on hexamolybdate cluster. 


3.3.2. Heck reaction. 
The Heck reaction is one of the simplest ways to synthesize substituted olefins, dienes and other unsaturated compounds and has become one of the basic, available and indispensable synthetic methods to organic chemists. Recently, attempts to prepare vinyl-functionalized POMs by using hexamolybdate-functionalized aryl iodides and bromides as original materials through well-developed literature protocols on the Heck reaction143–146 were unsuccessful, owing to the low solubility of the organoimido derivatives in common organic solvents including dioxane, an effective solvent in Heck reactions,144 and especially the limited stability of the organoimido derivatives under the reaction conditions. After repeated experiments, we discovered that hexamolybdate-functionalized aryl iodides and bromides can undergo a ligand-free, Pd-catalyzed Heck coupling reaction in the presence of bromomagnesium of aromatic amine, which provides a convenient routine to introduce a vinyl group into POM clusters through a variety of olefins, including styrene, 4-bromostyrene, ethyl acrylate and acrylonitrile (Scheme 7).130 As vinyl units are easily accessible and reactive building blocks including for polymerization, this methodology supplies a route to construct POMs-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials in which POM clusters are covalently bonded with organic conjugated segments. Compared to classical Heck reactions, this protocol chooses bromomagnesium of aromatic amine as a base to avoid the decomposition of organoimido substituted hexamolybdate, and omits phosphine ligands as the stabilizer of the palladium catalyst because POM anions and quaternary ammonium cations can play a similar role in this reaction system. The proper amount of the Pd catalyst is also the key factor for this coupling reaction.
 Scheme 7  Pd-catalyzed Heck reaction of bromo/iodo-functionalized organic derivatives of hexamolybdate with alkenes. 

3.4. Esterification reaction
Although the reaction chemistry of organic derivatives of POMs has obtained a certain development,147–151 study on the side-chain reactivity of organoimido substituted POMs needs to be further strengthened. Not long ago, we discovered that the esterification reaction of a phenolic hydroxyl functionalized organoimido substituted hexamolybdate, with carboxylic acids in the presence of DCC can occur in common conditions (Scheme 8).131 For instance, the reaction of aminophenol-substituted hexamolybdate with a carboxylic acid such as acetic acid, p-methylbenzoic acid, p-chlorobenzoic acid, propanoic acid or acrylic acid, and DCC at the ratio of 1:1:1 in refluxing dry acetonitrile for 10 h affords the corresponding esterified products in good yields. In the reaction, the organoimido derivative behaved as a functionalized phenol and DCC served as a dehydration agent and promoted the esterification. Compared to common esterification, DCC is necessary here because the esterification of organoimido derivatives is hard to make take place, even after refluxing for a prolonged time without DCC, and the decomposition of the organoimido derivatives is detected, probably due to the reduced thermal stability at elevated temperatures during the reaction and the remarkably different electronic and structural nature of the POM cluster from other classical functional groups in organic chemistry. The esterification reaction not only takes place between monofunctionalized imido derivatives and common acids, but also can extend to polyfunctionalized organoimido derivatives and other functionalized carboxylic acids, including cinnamic acids, dicarboxylic acids and long chain acids, which are considered for constructing novel POM-based polymer hybrids and supramolecular building blocks. Therefore, this reaction opens a novel door to make hybrid materials, which contain covalently bonded POM clusters and organic conjugated segments, in more controllable and rational manner.
 Scheme 8  Esterification of phenolic hydroxyl functionalized derivatives of hexamolybdate with carboxylic acids. 
3.5. C–H bonds activated with a polymolybdate and doubly dehydrogenative coupling
The activation and functionalization of C–H bonds have drawn increasing research attention in recent years.152–156 Although a lot of excellent results have been achieved, the direct coupling reactions between two sp3 C–H bonds are still an enormous challenge.157–160 The formation of CC double bonds is one of the most useful and fundamental reactions in organic chemistry.161,162 A lot of useful approaches to build up CC double bonds have been developed in organic chemistry.161,162 Generally speaking, there are four important strategies to produce a CC double bond as shown in Scheme 9, in which the dehydrogenation reactions of C–H groups, including intramolecular dehydrogenative olefination (IDO) and intermolecular doubly dehydrogenative coupling (IDDC), are the most exciting and attractive approaches, owing to their simplicity, atomic economy, and high efficiency. Nowadays, the IDDC protocol has never been developed well because the simultaneous activation of two sp3 C–H groups on one carbon center is rather difficult, with the result that the direct formation of CC double bonds according to such a strategy is still a tremendous challenge, though considerable progress has been made in the construction of CC double bonds via IDO reaction of two neighboring sp3 C–H groups.163–166
 Scheme 9  Four important strategies for the synthesis of alkenes (LG = leaving group). 
Since MoO3 can effectively activate the sp3 C–H bond based on Lunsford's work,167 and POMs, as a unique class of molecular metal oxides, can be used as analogues of metal oxides to catalyze organic reactions,167–175 we felt that POMs might have the same role on the C–H bond activation as that of MoO3. In an attempt to prepare alkylimido-substituted derivatives of the hexamolybdate by the reaction of the octamolybdate with aliphatic primary amines using the well-developed DCC protocol, we discovered, unexpectedly, that two C–H groups adjoining to the N atom were activated and subsequently coupled dehydrogenatively to form a dimeric, organoimido-substituted hexamolybdate containing a CC double bond, (n-Bu4N)4(Mo6O18NCRCRNMo6O18) (R = ethyl, n-propyl, n-butyl, n-hexyl, and other chain-like alkyl).132 The single crystal X-ray diffraction, 1H NMR, IR, UV-vis and ESI-MS of these alkylimido substitutes all proved the formation of CC bond. Compared to the previous methods to activate the sp3 C–H bond, this novel strategy has many advantages, such as the absence of noble metals, being easy to operate, under milder conditions, and, what is more, activating two sp3 C–H bonds at one carbon atom to form the CC double bond. A primary mechanism study implied the reaction firstly formed alkylimido-substituted hexamolybdate with the activated α C–H bond, and then proceeded by a radical coupling, or possibly formed a biradical/carbene intermediate to get doubly dehydrogenative coupling products (Scheme 10).
 Scheme 10  Plausible mechanism of C–H bonds activated with polymolybdate and doubly dehydrogenative coupling. 
In a word, a novel strategy to create CC double bonds was developed via the dehydrogenative coupling of two sp3 C–H bonds from aliphatic primary amines with POMs as an activating reagent of the C–H bond, resulting in the development of an IDDC protocol. The scope, mechanism, and potential applications of this protocol in organic chemistry are under study in our lab. The present work also implies that the novel POM-based organic–inorganic hybrids can be constructed by the side-chain modification of POM derivatives based on the formation of CC double bonds.
4. Conclusion and outlook
The chemistry of organoimido derivatives of POMs, especially their reactive chemistry, is still in its infancy. Although classically organic synthetic techniques have given a fascinating promise in this field up to now, only a limited number of methods have been developed for the preparation of covalently bonded organoimido derivatives of POMs and their reactions have just developed mainly on common and simple organic reactions including the Pd-catalyzed coupling reactions and esterification. Nonetheless, this new chemistry really opens a wide road to make novel molecular and polymeric hybrids based on POMs in a much more controlled manner. With the development of this chemistry, a large number of covalently bonded POM–organic hybrids, particularly including dendritic and netlike polymeric systems with organic π-conjugated units, are sure to be prepared in the near future. In addition, efforts on exploring the electrical, optical and photophysical properties of this new class of hybrids are expected.
Acknowledgements
This work is sponsored by NFSC Nos. 91022010, 20921001 and 20871073, Tsinghua University Initiative Foundation Research Program No. 20101081771, and THSJZ.
Notes and references

          M. T. Pope, Heteropoly and Isopoly Oxometalates, Springer, Berlin,  1983 Search PubMed .
J. J. Berzelius, Ann. Phys. Chem., 1826, 6, 369 Search PubMed .

Polyoxometalates: From Platonic Solids to Anti-Retroviral Activity, ed. M. T. Pope and A. Müller, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1994 Search PubMed .
Guest ed.   
          C. L. Hill, Chem. Rev.,  1998, 98, 1 Search PubMed .

Polyoxometalate Chemistry: From Topology via Self-Assembly to Application, ed. M. T. Pope and A. Müller, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  2001 Search PubMed .
S. W. Zhang, Y. G. Wei, Q. Yu, M. C. Shao and Y. Q. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6440 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Jiang, Y. G. Wei, Q. Liu, S. W. Zhang, M. C. Shao and Y. Q. Tang, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1937 RSC .
G. Liu, Y. G. Wei, Q. Yu, Q. Liu and S. W. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 1999, 2, 434 CrossRef CAS .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, J. Meyer, H. Bögge, F. Peters, W. Plass, E. Diemann, S. Dillinger, F. Nonnenbruch, M. Randerath and C. Menke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2122 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, F. Peters, C. Menke and J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 484 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, C. Beugholt, P. Kögerler and C. Z. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1220 CrossRef .
A. Müller, S. Q. N. Shah, H. Bögge and M. Schmidtmann, Nature, 1999, 397, 48 CrossRef .
A. Müller and C. Serain, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 2 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann and F. Peters, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3359 CrossRef .
A. Müller, S. Sarkar, S. Q. N. Shah, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, S. Sarkar, P. Kögerler, B. Hauptfleisch, A. X. Trautwein and V. Schünemann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3238 CrossRef .
A. Müller, S. Polarz, S. K. Das, E. Krickemeyer, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann and B. Hauptfleisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3241 CrossRef .
A. Müller, M. Koop, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, F. Peters and P. Kogerler, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1885 RSC .
A. Müller, S. Q. N. Shah, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, P. Kogerler, B. Hauptfleisch, S. Leiding and K. Wittler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1614 CrossRef .
A. Müller, S. K. Das, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, A. Botar and A. Patrut, Chem. Commun., 2001, 657 RSC .
A. Müller, P. Kogerler and A. W. M. Dress, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2001, 222, 193 CrossRef .
A. Müller, E. Beckmann, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann and A. Dress, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1162 CrossRef .
A. Müller and S. Roy, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2003, 245, 153 CrossRef .
A. Müller, C. Kuhlmann, H. Bögge, M. Schmidtmann, M. Baumann and E. Krickemeyer, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 2271 CrossRef .
T. Yamase and P. V. Prokop, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 466 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Yan, C. Z. Lu, X. Lin and H. H. Zhuang, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1623 Search PubMed .
W. B. Yan, C. Z. Lu, X. Lin and H. H. Zhuang, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 452 CrossRef .
K. Wassermann, M. H. Dickman and M. T. Pope, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 1445 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10942 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Liu, E. Diemann, H. L. Li, A. W. M. Dress and A. Müller, Nature, 2003, 426, 59 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ho and W. Klemperer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 6772 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zonnevijlle and M. Pope, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 2731 CrossRef CAS .
W. Knoth and R. Harlow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 4265 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gouzerh and A. Proust, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 77 CrossRef CAS .

Handbook of Organic Conductive Molecules and Polymers I–IV, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Wiley, Chichester,  1997 Search PubMed .
C. Sanchez, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C. R. Mayer and V. Cabuil, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3061 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 930 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. G. Wei, P. F. Wu and Y. Wang, in Advances in Organometallic Chemistry Research, ed. K. Yamamoto, Nova Science Publishers, New York,  2007, pp. 97–138 Search PubMed .
H. Kang and J. Zubieta, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1988, 1192 RSC .
Y. Du, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 345 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Hur, W. G. Klemperer and R. C. Wang, Inorg. Synth., 1990, 27, 77 Search PubMed .
T. C. Hsieh and J. A. Zubieta, Polyhedron, 1986, 5, 1655 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kwen, V. G. Young Jr. and E. A. Maatta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Proust, R. Thouvenot, M. Chaussade, F. Robert and P. Gouzerh, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1994, 224, 81 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Errington, C. Lax, D. G. Richards, W. Clegg and K. A. Fraser, New Aspects of Non-Aqueous Polyoxometalate Chemistry: 3. Surface Oxide Reactivity, in Polyoxometalates: From Platonic Solids to Anti-Retroviral Activity, ed. M. T. Pope and A. Müller, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1994, p. 112 Search PubMed .
J. B. Strong, R. Ostrander, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 3601 CrossRef CAS .
W. Clegg, R. J. Errington, K. A. Fraser, S. A. Holmes and A. Schäfer, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 455 RSC .
R. A. Roesner, S. C. McGrath, J. T. Brockman, J. D. Moll, D. X. West, J. K. Swearingen and A. Castineiras, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2003, 342, 37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wei, B. B. Xu, C. L. Barnes and Z. H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4083 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Stark, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 1165 RSC .
J. L. Stark, V. G. Young Jr. and E. A. Maatta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2547 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Strong, G. P. A. Yap, R. Ostrander, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. Thouvenot, P. Gouzerh and E. A. Maatta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 639 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Moore, H. Kwen, A. M. Beatty and E. A. Maatta, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1793 RSC .
B. B. Xu, Z. H. Peng, Y. G. Wei and D. R. Powell, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2562 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Z. C. Xiao, N. Ge, N. Wang, Y. G. Wei and Y. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 1620 CAS .
P. F. Wu, Q. Li, N. Ge, Y. G. Wei, Y. Wang, P. Wang and H. Y. Guo, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 2819 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. F. Wu, Y. G. Wei, Y. Xia, Y. Wang and H. Y. Guo, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2005, 631, 773 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. F. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. G. Wei and H. Y. Guo, J. Organomet. Chem., 2006, 691, 1223 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Xue, C. S. Xiang, Y. G. Wei, Z. W. Tao, A. Chai, W. D. Bian and Z. Xu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2437 CAS .
L. Xu, M. Lu, B. B. Xu, Y. G. Wei, Z. H. Peng and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4129 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. F. Wu, Y. G. Wei, Y. Wang, P. Wang and H. Y. Guo, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2004, 7, 524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, B. Xie, J. Kang, F. C. Chen, Y. Yang and Z. H. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. F. Wu, Y. G. Wei, Y. Wang and H. Y. Guo, Cryst. Growth Des., 2006, 6, 253 CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. G. Wei, Y. Wang and H. Y. Guo, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 9823 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Strong, B. S. Haggerty, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1137 RSC .
J. Hao, Y. Xia, L. Wang, L. Ruhlmann, Y. Zhu, Q. Li, P. Yin, Y. Wei and H. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2626 CrossRef CAS .

          A. W. Johnson, Ylides and Imines of Phosphorus, Wiley, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .
J. H. Saunders and R. J. Slocombe, Chem. Rev., 1948, 43, 203 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Patrick, Instant Notes in Organic Chemistry, Reprint Edition, BIOS Scientific Publishers Limited, Beijing,  2002, pp. 183–184 Search PubMed .
A. William and I. T. Ibrahim, Chem. Rev., 1981, 81, 589 CrossRef .
F. Kurzer and K. Douraghi-Zadeh, Chem. Rev., 1967, 67, 107 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Khorana, Chem. Rev., 1953, 53, 145 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, L. Ruhlmann, Y. L. Zhu, Q. Li and Y. G. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4960 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, L. S. Wang, P. C. Yin, Y. G. Wei, J. Hao, Y. L. Zhu, L. Zhu and G. Yuan, Dalton Trans., 2009, 1172 RSC .
S. J. Xue, A. Chai, Z. J. Cai, Y. G. Wei, C. S. Xiang, W. D. Bian and J. Shen, J. Mol. Struct., 2008, 888, 300 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Xue, A. Chai, Z. J. Cai, Y. G. Wei, C. S. Xiang, W. D. Bian and J. Shen, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4770 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. G. Wei, H. Y. Guo and C. G. Zhan, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 2305 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Nugent and J. E. Mayer, Metal-Ligand Multiple Bonds, Wiley, New York,  1988, p. 122 Search PubMed .
L. K. Yan, Z. M. Su, W. Guan, M. Zhang, G. H. Chen, L. Xu and E. B. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17337 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Mohs, G. P. Yap, A. L. Rheingold and E. A. Maatta, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 9 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wei, M. Lu, C. F. C. Cheung, C. L. Barnes and Z. H. Peng, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 5489 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Knoth and R. D. Farlee, Inorg. Chem., 1984, 23, 4765 CrossRef CAS .
A. Proust, S. Taunier, V. Artero, F. Robert, R. Thouvenot and P. Gouzerh, Chem. Commun., 1996, 2195 RSC .
C. Dablemont, A. Proust, R. Thouvenot, C. Afonso, F. Fournier and J. C. Tabet, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 3514 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Duhacek and D. C. Duncan, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Goldberger, R. R. He, Y. F. Zhang, S. Lee, H. Q. Yan, H. J. Choi and P. D. Yang, Nature, 2003, 422, 599 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Q. Yan, Y. Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kim, S. Connor, H. Song, T. Kuykendall and P. D. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 3673 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bierman, Y. K. Albert Lau, A. V. Kvit, A. L. Schmitt and S. Jin, Science, 2008, 320, 1060 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 3497 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2880 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Stark, V. G. Young Jr. and E. A. Maatta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 2547 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Katsoulis, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, G. J. de A. A. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C. R. Mayer and V. Cabuil, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3061 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, B. Julián, P. Belleville and M. J. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559 RSC .
Y. Zhu, L. S. Wang, J. Hao, Z. C. Xiao, Y. G. Wei and Y. Wang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 3509 CAS .
B. Hasenknopf, K. Micoine, E. Lacôte, S. Thorimbert, M. Malacria and R. Thouvenot, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 5001 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. J. Judd, C. L. Hill, D. A. Judd and R. F. Schinazi, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 327 CrossRef .
A. Müller, F. Peters, M. T. Pope and D. Gatteschi, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 239 CrossRef .
D. L. Long, E. Burkholder and L. Cronin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 105 RSC .
C. L. Hill, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 262, 2 CrossRef CAS .
Topical issue on polyoxometalates, guest ed.   
          C. L. Hill, Chem. Rev,  1998, 98, 1 Search PubMed .
J. F. Garvey and M. T. Pope, Inorg. Chem., 1978, 17, 1115 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Xin and M. T. Pope, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 7731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, X. K. Fang and C. L. Hill, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 9442 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Tan, Y. G. Li, Z. M. Zhang, C. Qin, X. L. Wang, E. B. Wang and Z. M. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10066 CrossRef CAS .
V. Soghomonian, Q. Chen, R. C. Haushalter, J. Zubieta and C. J. O'Connor, Science, 1993, 259, 1596 CAS .
X. K. Fang, T. M. Anderson, Y. Hou and C. L. Hill, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5044 RSC .
X. K. Fang, T. M. Anderson and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inoue and T. Yamase, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1995, 68, 3055 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. An, E. B. Wang, D. R. Xiao, Y. G. Li, Z. M. Su and L. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 904 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kortz, S. S. Hamzeh and N. A. Nasser, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 2945 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kortz, M. G. Savelieff, F. Y. A. Ghali, L. M. Khalil, S. A. Maalouf and D. I. Sinno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4070 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carraro, A. Sartorel, G. Scorrano, C. Maccato, M. H. Dickman, U. Kortz and M. Bonchio, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7275 CrossRef CAS .
C. Streb, D. L. Long and L. Cronin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 471 RSC .
P. R. Marcoux, B. Hasenknopf, J. Vaissermann and P. Gouzerh, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2003, 2406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Favette, B. Hasenknopf, J. Vaissermann, P. Gouzerh and C. Roux, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2664 RSC .
C. Allain, S. Favette, L. M. Chamoreau, J. Vaissermann, L. Ruhlmann and B. Hasenknopf, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Song, D. L. Long and L. Cronin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. F. Song, L. Cronin and T. B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Song, N. McMillan, D. L. Long, S. Kane, J. Malm, M. O. Riehle, C. P. Pradeep, N. Gadegaard and L. Cronin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Hao, Y. G. Wei, F. P. Xiao, P. C. Yin and L. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pu, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 2405 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Wilson and R. E. Pincock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 1474 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiao, J. Hao, J. Zhang, C. L. Lv, P. C. Yin, L. S. Wang and Y. G. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5956 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kang, B. B. Xu, Z. H. Peng, X. D. Zhu, Y. G. Wei and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6902 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Xu, Y. G. Wei, C. L. Barnes and Z. H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lu, Y. G. Wei, B. B. Xu, C. F. C. Cheung, Z. H. Peng and D. R. Powell, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, J. A. Nelson, M. Lu, B. Xie, Z. H. Peng and D. R. Powell, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 6408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhu, L. S. Wang, J. Hao, P. C. Yin, J. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Zhu and Y. G. Wei, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 3076 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Y. Zhu, X. Meng, J. Hao, Q. Li, Y. Wei and Y. Lin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 10923 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. G. Wei, J. Hao, Y. L. Zhu and L. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5810 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sonogashira, Y. Tohda and N. Hagihara, Tetrahedron Lett., 1975, 50, 4467 CrossRef .
P. T. DeSousa, Quim. Nova, 1996, 19, 377 CAS .
Y. F. Wang, W. Deng, L. Liu and Q. X. Guo, Chin. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 25, 8 Search PubMed .
U. Ziener and A. Godt, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 6137 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 1993, 26, 198 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamase, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 307 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadakane and E. Steckhan, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 219 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Weiss, M. J. Ahrens, L. E. Sinks, A. V. Gusev, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5577 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Xu, M. Lu, J. Kang, D. G. Wang, J. Brown and Z. H. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2841 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6989 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Shaughnessy, P. Kim and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 2123 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Reetz and E. Westermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 165 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bareyt, S. Piligkos, B. Hasenknopf, P. Gouzerh, E. Lacôte, S. Thorimbert and M. Malacria, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6788 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bar-Nahum, H. Cohen and R. Neumann, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 3677 CrossRef CAS .
S. Favette, B. Hasenknopf, J. Vaissermann, P. Gouzerh and C. Roux, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2664 RSC .
X. Wei, M. H. Dickman and M. T. Pope, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 10254 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. W. Keana, M. D. Ogan, Y. Lu, M. Beer and J. Varkey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 7957 CrossRef CAS .
K. Godula and D. Sames, Science, 2006, 312, 67 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Crabtree, J. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 689, 4083 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kakiuchi and S. Murai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 826 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ritleng, C. Sirlin and M. Pfeffer, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 1731 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Labinger and J. E. Bercaw, Nature, 2002, 417, 507 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Goldman, A. H. Roy, Z. Huang, R. Ahuja, W. Schinski and M. Brookhart, Science, 2006, 312, 257 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and C. J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4242 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, S. Schlecht, T. C. Semple and J. F. Hartwig, Science, 2000, 287, 1995 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Brown and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 2935 CrossRef CAS .

Modern Carbonyl Olefination, ed. T. Takeda, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Metathesis, ed. R. H. Grubbs, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1993, vol. 1–3 Search PubMed .
R. H. Crabtree, J. M. Mihelcic and J. M. Quirk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 7738 CrossRef CAS .
I. Göttker-Schnetmann, P. White and M. Brookhart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1804 CrossRef .
F. C. Liu, E. B. Pak, B. Singh, C. M. Jensen and A. S. Goldman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 4086 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Burk and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 8025 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Liu, R. S. Liu, K. Y. Liew, R. E. Johnson and J. H. Lunsford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 4117 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Weinstock, E. M. G. Barbuzzi, M. W. Wemple, J.
J. Cowan, R. S. Reiner, D. M. Sonnen, R. A. Heintz, J. S. Bond and C. L. Hill, Nature, 2001, 414, 191 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, K. Sasaki and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 4809 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Hill and X. Zhang, Nature, 1995, 373, 324 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haimov and R. Neumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15697 CrossRef CAS .
R. Neumann and M. Dahan, Nature, 1997, 388, 353 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Yin and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13988 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Yin and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9003 CrossRef CAS .
H. Weiner and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9831 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Jin Zhang	Dr Jin Zhang studied chemistry at the Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China, where she obtained her B.S. (2003) and M.S. (2005) degrees. Then, she received her Ph.D. degree in 2008 from Beijing Institute of Technology under the direction of Professor Tonglai Zhang with a focus on coordination compounds for applications as functional materials. Since 2008 she has been a postdoctoral fellow in the group of Professor Yongge Wei at Tsinghua University, China. Her current research interests include the controlled assembly of polyoxometalates and polyoxometalate-based organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
Fengping Xiao	Dr Fengping Xiao received her B.S. and M.S. degrees in Chemistry from Central China Normal University. She obtained her Ph.D. in 2008 under the supervision of Professor Zhenping Ji and Professor Gongzhen Cheng in Wuhan University. Then, from 2008 to 2010, she joined the research group of Professor Yongge Wei in Tsinghua University and her research interests focus on the synthesis of metallamacrocycles based on polyoxometalates now, especially chiral metallamacrocycles.
Jian Hao	Dr Jian Hao received his B.S. degree in chemistry from Peking University in 1997, and completed his DEA and Ph.D. degrees under the direction of Professor Laurent Ruhlmann from University of Paris XI and Professor Yongge Wei from Tsinghua University in 2008. After his graduation, he has been working as a postdoc. in Tsinghua University. His current research interests concern the functionalization of POMs.
Yongge Wei	Professor Yongge Wei received his B.S. from Central China Normal University in 1988, his M.S. from Wuhan University in 1991, and his Ph.D. in chemistry from Peking University in 1995. He became a faculty member of the Chemistry Department of Peking University in 1995, and was promoted to associate professor in 1999. During 2000–2001, he was a research associate at University of Missouri, Kansas City (USA), and joined Tsinghua University in 2005. His research interests are currently focused on the chemical modification of polyoxometalates, the reaction chemistry and controllable assembly of organically-derivatized polyoxometalates, and polyoxometalate catalyzed C–H bond functionalization.

 	Fig. 1  Ball-and-stick model of the charge-transfer ferrocenylimido–hexamolybdate complex.	 

 	Fig. 2  Ball-and-stick model of the organodiimido-bridged bis(hexamolybdate) derivative.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ball-and-stick structure of the 1-naphthylimido hexamolybdate.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ball-and-stick structure of the p-chlorophenylimido hexamolybdate.	 

 	Fig. 5  Ball-and-stick structure of the p-bromophenylimido hexamolybdate.	 

 	Fig. 6  Ball-and-stick structure of the cis-disubstituted hexamolybdate imido derivative with two remote iodo groups.	 

 	Fig. 7  Ball-and-stick structure of the cis-disubstituted hexamolybdate imido derivative with two remote ethynyl groups.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ball-and-stick structure of the cis-disubstituted imido hexamolybdate anion, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2-methoxy-C6H4).	 

 	Fig. 9  Ball-and-stick structure of the trans-disubstituted imido hexamolybdate anion, (n-Bu4N)2[cis-Mo6O17(NAr)2] (Ar = 2,6-dimethyl-C6H3).	 

 	Fig. 10  The X-ray molecular structure of the trisubstituted hexamolybdate.	 

 	Fig. 11  The X-ray molecular structure of the hexasubstituted hexamolybdate.	 

 	Fig. 12  Ball-and-stick structure of the trisubstituted hexamolybdate (a) and pentasubstituted hexamolybdate (b).	 

 	Fig. 13  Ball-and-stick structure of the imido pentatungstenmolybdate.	 

 	Fig. 14  Crystal structures of the molecular nanodumbbells.	 

 	Fig. 15  Ball-and-stick representation of cluster anions of chiral molecular nanorods. (a) Mn-containing and (b) Fe-containing.	 

 	Fig. 16  ORTEP drawings of the macrocyclic anions of polyoxometalatocyclophanes.	 

 	Scheme 1  Coordination reaction of the hexamolybdate-functionalized terpyridyl ligand with Ru(tPy)Cl3.	 

 	Scheme 2  Free radical-induced copolymerization between p-styrenylimido hexamolybdate and 4-methylstyrene.	 

 	Scheme 3  Sonogashira coupling of iodo-functionalized hexamolybdate with 4-methyl-1-ethynylbenzene in acetonitrile at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 17  Ball-and-stick structure of the coupling product.	 

 	Scheme 4  Controllable assembly of hybrid nanodumbbells.	 

 	Fig. 18  Ball-and-stick structure of the hybrid nanodumbbell.	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of two novel charge-transfer hybrids based on hexamolybdate cluster.	 

 	Fig. 19  Ball-and-stick structure of the charge-transfer hybrid.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of polymeric hybrids based on hexamolybdate cluster.	 

 	Scheme 7  Pd-catalyzed Heck reaction of bromo/iodo-functionalized organic derivatives of hexamolybdate with alkenes.	 

 	Scheme 8  Esterification of phenolic hydroxyl functionalized derivatives of hexamolybdate with carboxylic acids.	 

 	Scheme 9  Four important strategies for the synthesis of alkenes (LG = leaving group).	 

 	Scheme 10  Plausible mechanism of C–H bonds activated with polymolybdate and doubly dehydrogenative coupling.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
