 E / Z Photochemical switches: syntheses, properties and applications  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2RA22363E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2RA22363E
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6241-6266Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
E/Z Photochemical switches: syntheses, properties and applications

        
          
            Cristina 
            García-Iriepa
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Marco 
            Marazzi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luis Manuel 
            Frutos
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Diego 
            Sampedro
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartamento de Química Física, Universidad de Alcalá, E-28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: luisma.frutos@uah.es;  Fax: +34 91 885 4639;   Tel: +34 91 885 2512
bDepartamento de Química, Centro de Investigación en Síntesis Química (CISQ), Madre de Dios, 51, E-26006, Logroño, Spain. E-mail: diego.sampedro@unirioja.es;  Fax: +34 941 299 621;   Tel: +34 941 299 647
Received 
      1st October 2012
    , Accepted 17th December 2012First published on 18th December 2012AbstractMolecular switches based on E/Z photoisomerization have been used in different contexts in order to control a variety of processes in different systems, from peptide conformation control to molecular data storage devices, from catalysis to smart materials. The syntheses, properties and applications of several types of E/Z photochemical switches are presented with special attention paid to azobenzenes, overcrowded alkenes and switches based on the protonated Schiff base chromophore of rhodopsins.Cristina García-IriepaCristina García-Iriepa received her BSc in chemistry (Bachelor excellence award) in 2011 from the University of Alcalá (Spain). Here she also obtained her MSc in Fine Chemistry in 2012. She is currently a PhD student in the University of Alcalá and the University of La Rioja (Spain) under the supervision of Professor Luis Manuel Frutos and Professor Diego Sampedro, respectively, investigating the design, synthesis and computational study of photoactive molecular devices. She earned the Futura award 2012, given by the Spanish division of SusChem (European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry).Marco MarazziMarco Marazzi received his BSc in chemistry in 2007 from Sapienza University of Rome (Italy). In 2009 he earned his MSc in polymer science from a joint program of the Free University of Berlin, Humboldt University of Berlin, the Technical University of Berlin and the University of Potsdam (Germany). Since 2009 he is a PhD student in the University of Alcalá (Spain) under the supervision of Professor Luis Manuel Frutos. His current research focuses on the application and development of theoretical and computational methods to study photophysics and photochemistry of chemical and biologically relevant systems.Luis Manuel FrutosLuis Manuel Frutos studied Chemistry in the University of Alcalá (Madrid), and received his PhD degree in 2004 under the supervision of Prof. Obis Castaño. He then spent postdoctoral periods with Prof. Massimo Olivucci (University of Siena) and Prof. Wolfgang Domcke (Technical University of Munich) in the theoretical study of photoinduced processes in chemical and biological systems. In 2008 he joined University of Alcalá as "Ramón y Cajal" program researcher, getting in 2012 an Associate Professor position in Physical Chemistry. His research interests are mainly focused on theoretical photochemistry, photobiology and photoinduced energy and charge transfer processes in molecular systems.Diego SampedroDiego Sampedro received his PhD degree (2001) from the Universidad de La Rioja under the supervision of Prof. Pedro Campos and Prof. Miguel Á. Rodríguez. After a post-doctoral stay in the Università degli Studi di Siena working with Prof. Olivucci, he returned to Spain as Assistant Professor. In 2004 he obtained a “Ramón y Cajal” research contract in the Universidad de La Rioja and since 2009 he is Associate Professor. His research focuses on organic photochemistry both theoretical and experimental and he is also active in the field of popularization of science.
Introduction
The study of synthetic molecular devices has appeared in the last years as one of the most exciting scientific areas at the intersection of chemistry, material science, physics and molecular biology. Some of these molecular devices have been inspired by the discovery of a steadily growing number of fascinating biomolecular machines which are crucial for the functioning of living cells. Recently, thanks to the convergence of different scientific disciplines, including chemistry, biology, mathematics, computer science and physics, the development of new and increasingly complex molecular machines and devices is taking place. In some of these human designs, the clear influence of natural systems modeled by slow evolution can be found. Besides, mankind has also tried to further advance these designs or modify their properties to match specific targets.
Among the different molecular devices and machines developed, probably molecular switches have been the most widely studied. As we will see below, a molecular-level switch can be described as a molecular system that can be reversibly interconverted between two states by the effect of an external action.1 Many different types of molecular switches have been reported in the literature. The main differences between these types of devices correspond to the stimulus responsible for the interconversion between states and the movement caused. The topic of molecular switches, although relatively new, is too wide to be entirely covered here. However, excellent books can be found on the theme.2
Instead, here we review the design, synthesis, characterizations and applications of E/Z photochemical switches. In this specific type of molecular switch, the stimulus corresponds with light and the movement caused is the isomerization of a double bond. Several families of E/Z photochemical switches have been developed. Azobenzenes have been employed as photoswitches in both biological and industrial applications. A very different structures and properties can be obtained by the use of chiral diarylidenes. Also, the retinal protonated Schiff base chromophore of rhodopsins constitutes an excellent reference for the design and synthesis of artificial biomimetic molecules. All these types of photoswitches have been used in different applications to photocontrol structure and properties.
After introducing some concepts and reviewing various features that turn these molecular systems into excellent tools for the control of molecular properties, we will present some of the synthetic routes currently available to generate this kind of compounds. Then, the main properties of each class of systems will be discussed. Special attention will be paid to the mechanistic features of the photoisomerization that allows us to understand the specific characteristics of the system and to anticipate the adequacy of every switch to different uses. Finally, some selected applications of the photoswitches will be shown to demonstrate the capacity of these devices to influence and control complex systems.
General concepts
A molecular machine can be defined as a number of molecular components or devices that produce an output (usually a mechanical movement) in response to an input (stimulus) by consuming energy.1 Also, this term is often applied to molecular systems that bear some resemblance to the aspect or functions that occur at the macroscopic level. Two main types of molecular machines can be found: synthetic and biological. Guided by the evolution, nature has developed striking examples of molecular machines. The natural ion pump found in the light-activated bacteriorhodopsin to transport protons through the cell membrane,3,4 the natural rotary motor of ATP-synthase5 and linear motors like kinesin6 are excellent biomechanical machines that can be used as models for the design and construction of synthetic prototypes. Among the different types of molecular devices that take part in machines, molecular switches are probably the simplest example, but also the most extensively studied and used in complex applications. A molecular switch is a molecular device that can be reversibly interchanged between two different states, on and off, by means of an external stimulus (Fig. 1). In general terms, a molecular switch is a bistable system in which each state can be converted into the other. Also, if each state can be read non-destructively, the molecule can function, in principle, as a memory element in a digital system like a molecular computer.
 Fig. 1  A molecular switch has two different states (A and B) which can be interchanged trough external stimuli (S1 and S2). 
In turn, a molecular rotor is defined as a device capable of rotating in several directions through a continuous movement. In this case, not only the position of the device is relevant, but also the movement connecting the different states. Finally, if this continuous rotational movement is controlled in a manner that involves unidirectional rotation, that particular molecular device is denominated a molecular motor.
There are many types of chemical compounds presenting an external stimulus modifiable molecular structure. However, the term molecular-level machine is used only for systems that undergo movements with relatively large amplitudes.7
Just as macroscopic machines require macroscopic energy sources, natural and artificial molecular devices need nanoscale power supplies to undergo direct molecular motions.8 Three different types of stimuli have been used to induce the mechanical movements required for a molecular device: chemical, electrochemical and photochemical inputs. Besides, it is convenient to select the adequate input to make a molecular machine work whilst the amount of waste products is kept to a minimum. Doing so, side-products won′t accumulate in the reaction medium.9 With this in mind, probably the best energy inputs to make molecular machines work are photons or electrons which do not generate waste products. In the case of an electrical input, it could come from a chemical redox reagent or from an electrochemical reaction, being the latter preferred as it does not generate waste products. Interestingly, compared to chemical and electrical energy inputs, photochemical energy shows several advantages over the previous ones, apart from not generating waste products:
1. Light can be switched on/off easily and rapidly.
2. Lasers present high spatial and temporal resolution.
3. Photons can also be used to monitor the state of the system.
4. When using solar light, it constitutes a renewable and clean kind of energy.
Photonic energy is able to produce very different photochemical reactions relevant for the design of photochemical switches, but most of them fall in two main categories: isomerization and cyclization. Fulgides,10 diarylethenes,11 spiropyran12 compounds and dihydroazulenes have been extensively used as molecular photoswitches involving photocyclization and photoreversion processes and excellent reviews are available in the field.2 Instead, we will focus on photoswitches based on isomerization reactions.
Light can effectively carry out –CC–, –CN– and –NN– double bonds photoisomerization. These reactions have been used as basic principles for the design of multiple examples of molecular devices. Three main types of photoswitches based on E/Z isomerization reactions have been developed to date, namely azobenzenes, overcrowded alkenes and retinal-based switches. These compounds have been extensively studied from a mechanistic point of view and also used in a manifold of practical applications. In the next sections, we will describe the syntheses, properties and a selection of applications of different photoswitches, with special attention to these three types of compounds.
Syntheses
Azobenzenes
Among photoswitches, azobenzenes are the most used class of compounds. Some of the reasons behind this fact are the efficient light absorption, the efficient photoisomerization process and the relative great molecular shape change between Z and E isomers. But also, probably the main reason for their extended application is the ease of synthesis and functionalization. Since the discovery of azo derivatives more than 150 years ago,13 a huge quantity of this type of compounds have been prepared, mainly due to their interest in the preparation of dyes. During this period, several synthetic routes have been used to get azo derivatives with different solubility, substitution, color and photochemical properties. We will show here just some of the available procedures as this topic has been reviewed lately.14 Instead, several routes will be presented together with their relevance to the preparation of photoswitches.
Oxidative coupling of aromatic amines
A vast number of oxidizing agents and reaction conditions have been used to generate azo derivatives from aromatic amines. Metal oxides, hypervalent iodide, H2O2 have been used to oxidise aromatic primary amines and generate azobenzenes. The oxidising agent and the reaction conditions are usually chosen in dependence of substituents present in the amine 1 (Scheme 1).15
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by oxidative coupling of aromatic amines. 
The product yields vary greatly between the different reaction conditions and are in general affected by the ease of oxidation of the amine 1 (electronic effects) and the stability of the azo compound 2 (steric effects). More recently,16 the use of KMnO4 adsorbed onto a copper salt combined better yields with an oxidising agent cheap and easy to use. The main drawback of this synthetic route is the formation of symmetric azo compounds (with the two aromatic groups equivalent). As an exception, the formation of an asymmetric compound has also been reported.17
Reduction of aromatic nitro compounds
The reaction of aromatic nitro derivatives 3 with different reducing agents leads to the formation of azo compounds. Zinc in basic medium, catalytic hydrogenations and glucose, among others have been used as reducing agents (Scheme 2).18
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by reduction of aromatic nitro compounds. 
Very recently, ruthenium nanoparticle-catalyzed reduction of nitroarenes giving azoarenes in excellent yields using ethanol as a hydrogen source has been also reported.19 As in the previous synthetic route, the reduction of aromatic compounds yields only symmetric azobenzenes.
Coupling of amines with nitroso compounds
To avoid the drawback of the precedent routes, the coupling reaction of amines 1 and nitroso compounds 3 (the Mills reaction) can be used. Doing so, asymmetric azo derivatives 5 can be easily obtained with good yields. Interestingly, both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups can be used in the amine and nitroso precursors (Scheme 3).20
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by coupling of amines with nitroso compounds. 
Azo coupling
The synthesis of asymmetric azo derivatives can also be achieved via the coupling between a diazonium compound 7 and another aromatic compound. In this reaction, the aryldiazonium cation acts as the electrophile and an activated arene is the nucleophile. Due to steric reasons, the substitution usually takes place in the para position, while ortho attack only takes place when the para position is blocked (Scheme 4).21
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by reaction of a diazonium compound with another aromatic compound. 
The nucleophilic arene usually bears a hydroxy or amino group in order to activate the arene towards the substitution reaction. Accordingly, this reaction is very sensitive to pH. Thus, the medium acidity has to be under control for good results.
Other methods
A few other synthetic routes have been also used for the generation of azobenzenes, although most of them are quite specific or require indirect approximations to the azo group. For instance, azo compounds have been prepared through oxidation of hydrazo derivatives 9 with a variety of oxidizing agents. For instance, the catalytic oxidation of hydrazo derivatives using H2O2 and TiCl3/HBr has been reported (Scheme 5).22
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of azobenzene by oxidation of hydrazo derivatives. 
The N-oxides 11 deoxygenation can also lead to the formation of azobenzenes. The use of phosphines with a Mo-based catalyst yields azo derivatives under mild conditions (Scheme 6).23
 Scheme 6  Mo-based catalyzed synthesis of azobenzene derivatives. 
More exotic examples involve the reaction of diazonium salts with Grignard reagents24 or the coupling of hydrazine with benzoquinone derivatives.25
Overcrowded alkenes
Chiroptical switches and motors based in sterically hindered CC double bonds have been extensively studied in the last years. Their basic structure consists of two asymmetric aromatic parts connected via a double bond (Scheme 7). For steric reasons, both parts have to lose planarity adopting a helical structure as it happens in helicenes.
 Scheme 7  Basic structure and photoisomerization of overcrowded alkenes. 
These types of compounds have been previously reviewed,26,27 so we will be presenting here a brief overview of the synthetic strategies used, emphasizing the most recent ones.
In the synthesis of overcrowded alkenes, the critical step is the building of the central CC bond. The steric hindrance, which is the key feature in the functioning of these compounds, makes difficult the creation of such a double bond. The first efforts to build overcrowded alkenes useful as photoswitches involved the generation of the CC double bond by using the McMurry reaction.28 A low-valent titanium reagent allows for the preparation of this type of compound from the corresponding ketone (Scheme 8).29
 Scheme 8  Synthesis of overcrowded alkenes by McMurry reaction. 
The same protocol has been used since then for the synthesis of different molecular switches30 and, using an asymmetric synthetic route, several molecular motors.31–33 Although the McMurry reaction is an easy entry to overcrowded alkenes and it has been used in several examples,34 the limitations of the protocol make it difficult to expand the scope of the route. Specifically, low yields are usually obtained and the reaction is limited to symmetric alkenes. Better yields can be obtained with less steric demand.35 Besides, this protocol usually requires long reaction times as the product formation is very slow due to the steric hindrance. In some cases, the reaction could take two weeks and even in these conditions some starting material is recovered.36
Other, more versatile olefination methods were also tried without success due to the high steric congestion. This was later overcome by introducing the hindrance in a three-step sequence by using the diazo-thioketone coupling.37 In this protocol, 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition is followed by nitrogen elimination with final sulfur extrusion to yield the alkene (Scheme 9).38 Using this synthetic route, better reaction yields are obtained and, more importantly, upper and lower halves can be prepared independently so the properties of the switch can be fine-tuned.39 Subsequent control of the reaction conditions allowed the preparation of more examples of molecular motors using the same protocol but with increased yields.40–42
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of overcrowded alkenes by dipolar cycloaddition, nitrogen elimination and sulfur extrusion. 
Interestingly, the use of the diazo-thioketone reactions introduces certain versatility to the synthetic route, as the upper and lower halves can be coupled through two different approaches corresponding with the presence of the diazo or the thioketone in each of the arene moieties.43 Also, a degree of functionalization is permitted within this strategy which in turn allows to further modify the motors by attaching different species.44 For instance, the presence of Br atoms in the structure permits further derivatization through lithiated intermediates, Suzuki or Sonogashira couplings.34 Alternatively, methoxy groups have been used as anchoring points to metal surfaces45 or quartz.46
Overcrowded alkenes have been also prepared enantiomerically pure by using a chiral template. Within this approach, both parts of the alkenes are first linked to a chiral template. Stereocontrolled coupling of both parts followed by removal of the chiral templates allows the preparation of stable enantiomers as a 4:1 mixture (Scheme 10).47
 Scheme 10  Synthesis of overcrowded alkenes using a chiral template. 
Retinal-based switches
A more recent type of molecular photoswitch is based on the protonated Schiff base (PSB) of the retinal, the rhodopsin chromophore. This is one of the most remarkable examples in Nature of a molecular motor that undergoes a Z–E photoisomerization (Fig. 2).48
 Fig. 2  Rhodopsin (left) and its PSB11 retinal chromophore within the opsin pocket (right). 
It is known that the Z–E isomerization of the retinal chromophore is the primary reaction in the process of vision, and it is followed by a conformational change in the rhodopsin protein, that activates transducin in order to initiate the process of vision.49 Interestingly, it is known that the Z–E isomerization is highly efficient in rhodopsin, presenting an in vivo isomerization quantum yield (Φisom) of 0.6750 that is essential to make twilight vision highly sensitive. Due to the high efficiency of the isomerization process of retinal in vivo, this process has been widely studied and used as a pattern for the design of new molecular switches and motor prototypes activated by light. Since the protein environment facilitates the retinal isomerization process, the aim of these studies has been the design of synthetic compounds that reproduce in solution the features of the chromophore inside the protein.
The first retinal-based molecular switches were synthesized by condensation of 1-pyrroline 24 with different aldehydes (Scheme 11). This type of compound has the general structure of N-alkylated benzylidene-pyrroline Schiff bases 26 (NABPs) which try to replicate in solution the excellent photochemical properties of the rhodopsin chromophore inside the protein. In these compounds, a –CC–CC–CN– substructure similar to the one found in the PSB-retinal is modified by blocking the double bonds in both extremes. Doing so, competitive photoisomerization processes could be eliminated.
 Scheme 11  Synthesis of NABP switches. 
The synthetic route allows the preparation of the E isomer of several switches 25 as the main product. Subsequent methylation of these compounds with methyl triflate was enough to reach the retinal-analog cationic compounds 26. However, the main drawback of this synthetic path is that it is limited to the synthesis of only the three compounds represented in Scheme 11, and does not allow major changes in the molecule structure to be performed.
An alternative synthetic route51 allowed for the preparation of new NABPs with a much wider scope (Scheme 12).
 Scheme 12  Alternative synthetic route to NABP switches. 
The corresponding synthetic route implies the synthesis of the phosphonates in the first place. The phosphonate 28 with the adequate R1 group may be synthesized from the corresponding 2-bromoketone 27. Then, an ethyl azide side chain is introduced in 28 with 2-iodoethylazide 29 in 30–40% yield. Afterwards, a Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons reaction between the azido-phosphonate and the aldehyde with the corresponding R2 leads to the formation of the azido enone 30 in 70% yield. Finally, only the E isomer is found as the final product 31 in 80% yield after carrying out the intramolecular aza-Wittig reaction with triphenylphosphine.
Soon after NABPs were synthesized and photochemically characterized, the synthesis of a new family of compounds based on the chromophore of the PSB retinal was accomplished.52 In these compounds, there is a decrease of the number of torsional degrees of freedom regarding NABPs backbone and, especially, the potential competitive rotation around the benzylic single bond that might be the responsible for the low isomerization quantum yields obtained in NABPs is eliminated. These kind of molecular switches are called N-alkylated indanylidene-pyrroline Schiff bases (NAIPs, Scheme 13). The synthetic route implies the Grignard addition followed by the action of HBr in acetic acid to promote the rearrangement. The final step consists of dehydration of the secondary amide function to generate a nitrilium ion that yielded the final product.
 Scheme 13  Synthesis of NAIP switches. 
A subsequent modification of the synthetic route shown in Scheme 13 was also developed (Scheme 14).53 From the cyclopropylcarbinol 33, an alternative route using acetonitrile in presence of Tf2O yielded the desired switch. Thus, NAIP switches 37 were built using shorter routes with better yields (three steps from 32 with a 62% overall yield). The relief of the cyclopropyl ring strain associated with the installation of an extended π-system on the backbone of the final compound provides the driving force for this transformation.
 Scheme 14  Alternative synthetic route to NAIP switches. 
A similar protocol has been also used to generate dipole moment switches. The homoallylic transposition followed by a cationic cyclization lead to the formation of new NAIP switches54 with different substitution. Interestingly, the presence of amino and acids groups, turn these species into unnatural α-amino acids than can be used to create semi-synthetic peptides and proteins that can be photomodulated.55
Finally, a different family of molecular switches based on PSB-retinal was developed by replacing the indanylidene unit by a fluorenylidene unit (Scheme 15). The resulting compounds are named fluorenylidene-pyrrolines 40 (FPs) and N-alkylated fluorenylidene-pyrrolines 41 (NAFPs).56
 Scheme 15  Synthesis of FPs and NAFPs. 
Different substituents could be introduced with ease in almost every point of the molecule. This allows for the tuning of the system properties. The synthesis of these compounds was carried out thanks to the reaction between alkynyl Fischer carbene complexes 38 with fluorenone imines 39 to yield the corresponding fluorenylidene-pyrrolines (FPs).57
Other switches
Although most of the photoswitches and applications based on E/Z isomerizations belong to one of the three main categories already discussed, some other examples of related compounds have also been described. For instance, the hemithioindigo chromophore (Fig. 3) has been also used as a photoswitch and several synthetic routes have been reported.58–60
 Fig. 3  The hemithioindigo chromophore structure. 
The green fluorescent protein (GFP) chromophore and different analogues have been also used as photoswitches (Fig. 4). Based on the natural chromophore, several modifications have been reported to modify or tune the photophysics and photochemistry of these molecules.61,62
 Fig. 4  Structure of the chromophore within the green fluorescent protein. 
In all cases the synthesis implies two steps. First, the classical synthesis of azalactones is used to provide the oxazolones which subsequently react with an amine to provide the GFP chromophore derivatives. It has been recently reported63 that the oxazolones 45 can act as efficient molecular switches without the need of the second step (Scheme 16).
 Scheme 16  Synthetic route to obtain oxazolones. 
Properties
Azobenzenes
One of the first reported Z–E photoactive switches are those based on azobenzene. These systems are composed by two phenyl groups connected by a NN bond. Due to this structure, azobenzene can exist in either Z or E isomeric form (Fig. 5).65 In particular, the E form is more stable (0.6 eV) and is basically planar compared with the Z isomer structure, characterized by a benzene ring twisted around the C–N bond to relieve steric hindrance. These two forms can be photochemically interconverted once the system is irradiated with visible or ultraviolet radiation.
 Fig. 5  Structure of the two (E and Z) azobenzene isomers. 
In the last decades, the photophysics of these systems has been studied finding that both isomers exhibit different physical properties. Regarding the absorption spectra, a weak band in the visible region (432 nm for the E and 440 nm for the Z-isomer) and a strong band in the near-UV spectral region (318 nm for the E and 290 nm for the Z isomer) is found for the Z and E forms.66–68 The former band is attributed to the symmetry-forbidden n → π* transition (S0 → S1), whereas the second band corresponds to a symmetry-allowed π → π* transition (S0 → S2). An essential attribute of photoactive switches is the switching time scale, as they have to perform an ultrafast photoisomerization to be useful devices. Computational simulations of the photoisomerization time-scale are available; for the Z-isomer, the photoisomerization takes places in 170 fs,69 whereas photoreaction of the E-isomer is slower, proceeding in 320 fs.70 Furthermore, azobenzene exhibits a singular and remarkable property: photoisomerization quantum yield is dependent on the excitation wavelength.64,71,72 For instance, in n-hexane the E → Z (Z → E) photoisomerization quantum yield measured upon exciting to the n → π* state is 0.40 (0.53) whereas, exciting to the π → π* state a value of 0.12 (0.25) was measured.73,74 Therefore, quantum yields more than two times higher are achieved by vertical excitation to the n → π* state instead of π → π*, violating Kasha's rule. In order to explain this evidence it was proposed that photoisomerization mechanisms in either n → π* or π → π* electronic states have to be different. Thereby, various computational and experimental (femtosecond time-resolved absorption and fluorescence, picosecond time-resolved Raman scattering spectra, etc) studies have been carried out to clarify the real photoisomerization relaxation mechanism along both states.69,75–78 Previous to the mechanistic discussion, it should be known that there are two possible photoreaction paths: torsion around the double NN bond and in-plane inversion (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Proposed reaction paths for E-to-Z photoisomerization of azobenzene. 
In this sense, the first theoretical study was carried out by Monti et al. performing small configuration interaction calculations using the STO-3G basis set.79 In this study they reported that the S1 potential energy surface (PES) showed an energy barrier for the rotation path whereas the inversion path was barrierless. Due to this finding, they concluded that the photoisomerization upon excitation to the first excited state undergoes along the inversion path, while higher energy irradiation determines the rotation as the preferred path. However, subsequent high level theoretical calculations (semi-empirical and multiconfigurational) together with experimental data indicate a barrierless path on S1 and on S2 following the torsion, while an energy barrier is found for the inversion.70,80–86 Thus, it seems clear that a deep understanding of the different photoisomerization mechanisms, including vertical excitation to the first singlet and higher energy excited states of E and Z structures, is needed to fully exploit these compounds as efficient switches.
In this direction, multiconfigurational quantum chemistry approach (CASPT2//CASSCF methodology) was applied to elucidate azobenzene photochemistry.80,81 Upon excitation of the E-isomer (ϕ = 180°) to the S1 state, the system evolves minimizing the energy along the CNNC torsion coordinate finding a transition state at ϕ = 120° (1.8 kcal mol−1 above the minimum on S1 PES). Along the torsion, the system reaches a hyperline of S1/S0 conical intersections (CIs). Among them, the most stable (2.2 kcal mol−1 above the S1 minimum) is found at ϕ = 94°, after which the system decays to the ground state completing the isomerization. Indeed, it is reported a 20 kcal mol−1 energy barrier on S1 PES for the inversion path.
Whereas, excitation of the Z structure to the first singlet excited state leads to a barrierless torsion path, resulting in a faster decay and higher photoisomerization quantum yields compared to the E isomer. Then the system completes the photoisomerization process decaying along the torsion coordinate to the ground state through a hyperline of S1/S0 conical intersections as was described for the E-isomer (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Photoisomerization mechanism of E and Z isomers upon excitation to the lowest-energy singlet excited state (S1). Adapted with permission from A. Cembran, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, L. Gagliardi and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3234. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
The photoisomerization upon excitation to the π → π* transition is quite different. After excitation, the E-isomer (Fig. 8) minimizes its energy by NN and CN stretching relaxation to an equilibrium planar geometry. It follows a crossing with a doubly excited state of πN=NπN=N → π*N=Nπ*N=N character. After population of the doubly excited state, the system reaches a seam of energetically degenerated S2/S1 CIs, characterized by a ϕ value within the range 180° to 123° and easily accessible by CNN bending vibrations. After radiationless decay to the S1 state, vibrational redistribution takes place rapidly reaching a S1/S0 crossing subspace (from ϕ = 180° to ϕ = 94°). This seam comprises different molecular structures: lower energy fully-twisted C–NN–C geometries; symmetric C–NN bent structures and asymmetric C–NN structures (inversion path). Hence, only the molecules that intercept the fully twisted S1/S0 crossing structures are responsible for the photoisomerization process in the ground state. This finding supports the higher photoisomerization quantum yields for the S1 state with respect to the ones experimentally measured for the S2 state.
 Fig. 8  Photoisomerization mechanism for the E-isomer upon excitation to the lowest-energy optically bright 1(π,π*) excited state (S2). Adapted with permission from I. Conti, M. Garavelli and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5216. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
The photoisomerization of the S2 state starting from the Z structure is similar to the one described for the E-isomer (Fig. 9). Although, as was reported for isomerization upon excitation to S1, the quantum yield of the Z-isomer photoisomerization is higher than the one observed for the E-isomer, as the slope along the MEP for the isomerization of the Z-isomer is steeper along the torsion coordinate.
 Fig. 9  Photoisomerization mechanism for the Z-isomer upon excitation to the lowest-energy optically bright 1(π,π*) excited state (S2). Adapted with permission from I. Conti, M. Garavelli and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5216. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Numerous azobenzene derivatives have been proposed in order to make them suitable for particular applications. For instance, the modification of ring substituents entails significant changes in the photochemical and photophysical properties of azobenzene such as absorption, emission and stability of the Z- and E-isomers.87,88 These derivatives can be classified into three families: azobenzenes (ABn), aminoazobenzenes (aAB) and pseudostilbenes (pSB) (Fig. 10).88,89
 Fig. 10  Structure of azobenzene derivatives (ABn, aAB and pSB). 
ABn derivatives exhibit a photophysical behaviour similar to unsubstituted azobenzene (AB).90–95 The absorption spectrum is characterized by two separate bands attributed to the n → π* transition (weak band) and to the π → π* transition (strong band). Indeed, for a wide range of ABn derivatives photoisomerization quantum yields are comparable to those measured for AB.
In contrast, the introduction of an amino or hydroxyl group in the 2 or 4 position (aAB derivatives) causes the π → π* transition to decrease in energy and consequently, to overlap with the n → π* transition. It has been reported that the degree of amination, amine alkylation,96,97 and solvent polarity98 dominates such overlap. Furthermore, photoisomerization quantum yields are higher than the ones exhibited by ABn derivatives.
The third family of azobenzene derivatives, pSB, is constituted by protonated-azobenzenes (pAB) and push-pull azobenzenes (ppAB), being characterized by n → π* and π → π* transitions degeneracy. In these molecules a donor group (D, Fig. 10) and an electron-acceptor group (A, Fig. 10) are present. In particular, pABs show no influence on photoisomerization quantum yields but raises n → π* state energy above π → π* state energy. For ppABs, it is reported that the energy of the π → π* state is lowered and exhibits intermolecular charge transfer bands.99
Overcrowded alkenes
Diarylidenes and its switching process has been the subject of deep and relevant studies during the last decades. These systems based on photochromic molecules, so-called overcrowded alkenes, present a helical-shaped structure.100,101 The whole structure can be divided into three parts: the upper part (the rotor); the lower part (the stator) and the axis of rotation, a central CC double bond that connects the two parts previously mentioned (Scheme 17). These photochromic switches undergo Z–E photoisomerization causing a reversible interconversion between two helical forms, denoted as P and M, with quantum yields between 0.07 and 0.55.102 Indeed, the isomerization is an ultrafast process (time scale lower than 300 ps) mediated by a so-called phantom state in several overcrowded alkenes.103
 Scheme 17  Structure (rotor, stator and axis) of the first successful diarylidene switch. 
As data-storage elements, the main advantage offered by these chiral optical switches is their feasible non-destructive read-out, due to the fact that the optical rotation can be monitored at wavelengths remote from the ones used in the switching process.104
The first successful overcrowded alkene switch (Scheme 17) was reported in 1992.105 Upon photoexcitation, its stereospecific interconversion was detected. Despite its great photophysical and photochemical properties, around a 10% racemization is observed after 20 switching cycles. After this finding, novel modifications were proposed in order to tune the photoisomerization wavelength, to improve their stereoselectivity and their stability toward racemization. Therefore, it was concluded that the racemization barrier can be tuned by substituents modification (R1–R3) and bridging units (X and Y) electronic nature (Fig. 11).105
 Fig. 11  In diarylidenes, the racemization barrier depends on the bridging units' nature (X, Y) and on different substituents (R1–R3). 
Next, it was reported that the introduction of a nitro-acceptor in the R2 position, a dimethylamine-donor unit in the R3 position and placing Y = X = S (49, Scheme 18) produces a great improvement regarding to the properties of the first successful chiral switch 48 (Scheme 17): the stability toward racemization and reversibility were enhanced and a bathochromic shift in the absorption spectrum was achieved.106 Indeed, it was concluded that the removal of these substituents, or their replacing by weaker electron-donating substituents, decreases their switching selectivity.
 Scheme 18  Photoisomerization of donor–acceptor diarylidene derivatives. 
In 2004 it was reported a novel successful chiroptical switch (50, Scheme 19) that shows a high stereoselectivity in both directions (>99%), although it does not present electron-donating/-withdrawing substituents in its structure.107
 Scheme 19  Stereoselective photoswitch lacking donor–acceptor substituents. 
The photoisomerization mechanism of these overcrowded alkenes has been computationally studied through model derivatives.108–110 Upon vertical excitation to the lowest-energy singlet excited state (S1), the central CC double bond is weakened as an electron is excited from a π bonding to a π* antibonding orbital of this CC bond. Thus, the electronic structure of 50 in S1 can be understood in terms of two 1-methylnaphthyl radicals connected by a single C–C bond. Along the relaxation path the system reaches a nearly planar minimum in the S1 excited state, for both Z → E and E → Z photoisomerizations, where the π system is conjugated. The geometries of these stationary points display 56° (Z → E) and 129° (E → Z) CC double bond twist and are displaced toward the photoproducts. Also, it has been found that these S1 minima are originated as a consequence of the stabilization of the radical units. Then, the system decays to the ground state by a radiationless path mediated by non-adiabatic coupling of the vibrational modes, finally reaching a peaked S1/S0 conical intersection. This cross is driven by a twist around the CC double bond simultaneously coupled to carbon (stator bridging C) pyramidalization, by which the molecule loses planarity and therefore π-conjugation (Fig. 12).108
 Fig. 12  Photoisomerization pathways (ground (S0) and lowest-energy excited (S1) states) of overcrowded alkenes (E-isomer, left and Z-isomer, right). Adapted with permission from A. Kazaryan and M. Filatov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11630. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
A further remarkable property of these chiroptical switches is their ability to be interconverted between P and M enantiomers or between P and M′ diastereoisomers, depending if the light applied for the vertical excitation is circular polarized light (CPL) or not, respectively. Hence, it can be distinguished between two types of photoisomerization: single wavelength switching for enantiomers111,112 or dual switching mode for diastereoisomers.106 Regarding to single wavelength switching mode, it is known that irradiation of a racemate (P, M-51) with CPL (r-CPL or l-CPL) leads to an enantiomer excess (P-51 and M-51 respectively) (Scheme 20). Furthermore, the racemate can be restored by irradiation with linear polarized light (LPL). Hence, enantioselective switching process is achieved by applying a single wavelength of different chirality.112 Indeed, in order to undergo the single wavelength mode the molecules have to meet certain requirements: lack of competing photochemical processes; thermally stable enantiomers exhibiting a high anisotropy factor g and high racemization quantum efficiency.113 Whereas, the dual switching mode needs light of two different wavelengths to perform the photoisomerization reaching higher stereoselectivities compared to single wavelength switching.106 The dual switching mode is the one displayed by the model systems 48, 49 and 50 described above.
 Scheme 20  Photoisomerization mechanism applying circular polarized light, corresponding to single wavelength switching mode. 
Retinal-based switches
The retinal chromophore of rhodopsin (Rh) proteins is an efficient type of E/Z switch found in nature which undergoes a Z–E photoisomerization of the native 11-Z-retinal (PSB11) chromophore to all-E (Fig. 2). More in detail, Rh photoisomerization is responsible for vision in mammalians, being Z–E photoisomerization the first chemical event of the whole vision process.48,114,115
Although the wild-type chromophore of Rh exhibits a high photoisomerization efficiency (quantum yield: 0.67),50 the isolated chromophore (i.e. when removed from the opsin protein), shows complex photochemistry being possible the photoisomerization at any of their double bonds.116 Therefore, different chemical modifications of the Rh chromophore have been proposed, with the aim of ensuring the selective photoisomerization of a specific double bond as the main photoreaction. This led to a variety of artificial molecular switches based on protonated Schiff bases (PSBs) of polyenals, characterized by different length of the conjugated backbone.52,54,56,117–119
The photoisomerization mechanism of these retinal PSB models is well-known through computational studies.52,118,119 After photoexcitation to the first optically bright 1(π,π*) state of charge transfer character120,121 (corresponding to S1), the molecule relaxes following two sequential molecular modes (Fig. 13). The first mode, a double-bond-expansion/single-bond-contraction (i.e. implying a stretching mode), leads to a planar intermediate involving a C–C bond order inversion. From this intermediate, the second mode is activated, being responsible of the Z–E isomerization (torsional mode) along a formal double C–C bond, leading to decay to the ground state mediated by a S1/S0 conical intersection, where rotation reaches almost 90 degrees.
 Fig. 13  Photoisomerization mechanism of retinal PSB models. Adapted from P. Altoe, F. Bernardi, I. Conti, M. Garavelli, F. Negri and G. Orlandi, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 1041. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media. 
As mentioned above, the most outstanding property of the native 11-Z-retinal chromophore is its high efficiency, being needed only around 200 fs122,123 to complete the photoisomerization. In contrast, the photochemistry of their solvated analogues is two orders of magnitude slower.48,114 This is mainly due to the non-planar ground state structure of PSB11 in Rh, caused by steric and electronic effects due to the opsin pocket surrounding the chromophore. PSB11 is therefore constrained to a geometry characterized by partial torsion around certain C–C bonds, determining the optimal structure to fit within the opsin pocket. On the contrary, solvated PSB11 can adopt different possible conformations on the ground state, without any steric requirement, being planar the optimized structure of the backbone in the gas phase. More in general, we should notice that stretching and torsion modes are coupled, as highlighted by potential energy surface studies of PSB11 minimal models, e.g. the penta-2,4-dieniminium moiety, one of the most suitable frameworks for the design of Rh based molecular switches.124,125
Novel locked polyenal PSBs including the penta-2,4-dieniminium structure have been proposed. Among them, N-alkylated indanylidene-pyrroline switches (NAIPs) were firstly reported in 2007 (Scheme 21).126 Their photoinduced dynamical properties reproduce the mechanistic behavior shown by PSB11 in Rh, being also the time scale of the same order (0.3 ps).119 The absorption spectra126 of the Z-isomer sets the absorption maximum around 392 nm attributed to the S0 → S1 transition and a weaker band at 264 nm assigned to the S0 → S3 transition. Photoisomerization is an efficient process due to the relatively high quantum yields displayed (0.20 and 0.34 for Z → E and E → Z processes, respectively), lower than that observed for Rh but larger than the ones for the chromophore in solution. Despite its remarkable properties, these switches display absorption maxima in the near-UV region, constituting a problem for eventual applications in biological and medical fields, where absorption in the visible region would be preferred.
 Scheme 21  Photoisomerization of a NAIP switch. 
In order to obtain visible light photoactive devices, a novel set of molecular switches were proposed, the N-alkylated fluorenylidene-pyrroline switches (NAFPs, Scheme 22), where the indanylidene unit is replaced by a fluorenylidene unit, resulting in a more expanded π-conjugated system.56,117 This structural modification is enough to ensure a bathochromic shift of the absorption maxima of more than 50 nm with respect to NAIPs. This constitutes a clear improvement, since visible light is applied to activate the switches instead of UV irradiation. Moreover, these derivatives show high quantum yields of 0.5 (±0.1)117 and excited state properties comparable to those found for PSB11 in vivo.
 Scheme 22  Photoisomerization of a NAFP switch. 
In addition, biomimetic switches based on a less restricted structure than NAIPs and NAFPs have been proposed: the N-alkylated benzylidene-pyrroline switches (NABPs, Scheme 23).118,127 Their distinctive feature, when comparing with NAIPs and NAFPs, is their higher conformational freedom as they possess a single unlocked bond holding the phenyl ring. Furthermore, the photoisomerization is activated by visible or near UV irradiation, and occurs with a high quantum yield (0.64 when isolated in acetonitrile and 0.24 when attached to a peptide127 in water). Noteworthy, NABPs are the first biomimetic switches that have been experimentally proven to be efficient photoswitches when introduced within peptide chains (i.e. photoactivation and deactivation of NABPs results in switching between two different peptide conformations).127
 Scheme 23  Photoisomerization of a NABP switch. 
Other switches
Hemithioindigo (HTI) derivatives behave as E/Z photochemical switches on a picosecond timescale. Z and E-isomer minima are found in the ground state as planar structures, with the first the thermodynamically more stable. The Z-isomer absorption maximum is measured at 430 nm whereas, for the E-isomer is observed a bathochromic shift (around 20 nm) and an intensity decrease.128 Furthermore, while the Z → E photoisomerization quantum yield is 0.230 ± 0.035, the one found for the E → Z photoisomerization is 0.053 ± 0.016. Indeed, this system shows a small fluorescence quantum yield of 0.0003.129 In order to understand the experimental data and the photoisomerization mechanism, high level quantum chemical calculations have been performed, being the results schematically shown in Fig. 14.129,130
 Fig. 14  PES for the photoisomerization of the Z-isomer (left) and the E-isomer (right) at CASSCF level. Adapted with permission from A. Nenov, T. Cordes, T. T. Herzog, W. Zinth and R. D. Vivie-Riedle, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 13016. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
After vertical excitation of the Z-isomer (at its Franck Condon structure) to the lowest-energy optically bright excited state (S1, corresponding to a 1(π,π*) state) the system relaxes by bond length alternation and subsequently by torsion and pyramidalization reaching a local minimum (MinS1Z), responsible for the weak fluorescence experimentally measured. Afterwards, the system overcomes a low energy barrier (0.36 kcal mol−1 at CASPT2 level) along the torsion coordinate and reaches an accessible S1/S0 intersection seam, from which decay to the ground state is possible by two competitive pathways: either by a reactive channel (CoInAC, allowing photoisomerization) or by a photostabilizing channel (CoInS, allowing recovery of the initial Z-isomer). When studying the E-isomer, the E → Z photoisomerization mechanism is found to be similar to the one described for the Z-isomer, with a difference in photoisomerization quantum yield (lower for the E-isomer) due to the fact that the unreactive channel (CoInCHD) is expected to contribute more than the reactive one (CoInAC). Indeed, it has been reported that the isomerization rate can be tuned by molecular substitution.128,131,132
The chromophore of the wild-type green fluorescent protein (GFP),133p-hydroxybenzylideneimidazolinone (p-HBDI, Scheme 24),134,135 is a feasible source of inspiration for the design of Z–E photoactive molecular switches. In vivo, the GFP absorbs blue light and emits green light, that is, acts as a wavelength converter and is widely applied as a fluorescent marker.136,137 However, it is noteworthy that its fluorescence activity depends on the molecular environment: the fluorescence quantum yield (Φf) is high in the protein environment (0.8), but lowers dramatically in solution (10−3).135 Several studies have revealed that such decrease of fluorescence is due to non-radiative processes such as Z–E photoisomerization.138 This opens a potential scenario for the design of photoactive molecular switches based on GFP and its derivatives.
 Scheme 24  Photoisomerization of the p-HBDI chromophore. 
In the last years, a wide variety of studies have been reported in order to clarify the photophysical and photochemical properties of p-HBDI and its derivatives.139–143 Among them, the ones focused on explaining the different mechanistic behavior of these models (in solution143 and in the protein environment142,144) after excitation are of special interest to realize the ideal requirements for the Z–E photoisomerization of novel molecular switches. For this purpose computational studies of p-HBDI and its model compounds (anion and neutral forms) have been reported.138,143,145–148 As a starting point, it is known that such compounds are remarkably affected by the solvent on S0 and S1 relaxed structures (i.e. ground state and excited state PES minima, respectively), as on the curvature of the excited-state potential energy surface.138,149 The mechanism of the photoreaction can be simply defined as a two-state/two-mode mechanism: the first step is the relaxation from the Franck Condon (FC) to the fluorescent state (FS) structure, that can be dominated by an out-of-phase (in solution) or by an in-phase (in gas-phase) change of the exocyclic C–C bond lengths. From FS the system can evolve determining several different pathways (second step) depending on the environment: (i) radiative deactivation (fluorescence), (ii) rotation around the formal double exocyclic C–C bond, (iii) rotation around the formal single exocyclic C–C bond or (iv) simultaneous rotation around both exocyclic bonds to produce a hula-twist intermediate (HT).140,150 The last process can be excluded as a deactivation path, due to the high energy of the HT structure both in solution, gas-phase and embedded in the protein.
As aforementioned, GFP chromophore derivatives in solution and at room temperature show a complete quenching of the fluorescence that is, the radiationless decay is increased.135 Upon vertical excitation, the system evolves by a first relaxation step from FC to FS, dominated by an out-of-phase change of the exocyclic C–C bond lengths. From the FS region, the system shows two barrierless pathways: rotation around the formal single bond leading to the TW1 intermediate, and rotation around the formal double bond producing the TW2 intermediate (Fig. 14). Both intermediates, TW1 and TW2, exhibit lower energy than the FS structure (5 kcal mol−1 and 13 kcal mol−1 respectively at CASPT2 level). Furthermore, it is predicted that the S0–S1 energy gap is remarkably reduced at the TW2 structure (by 6 kcal mol−1 at CASPT2 level) due to the fact that rotation around the exocyclic double bond destabilizes the ground state and stabilizes the excited state more than rotation around the exocyclic single bond. Experimentally, it is reported that these models in solution undergo a fast internal conversion quenching the fluorescence, being these data in favor of a radiationless decay path described by rotation around the exocyclic double bond (TW2). Hence, it is concluded that, for the anionic chromophore in solution, the TW1 channel is not responsible for the fluorescence quenching (due to the large S0–S1 energy gap), being the TW2 channel the main radiationless decay path.143
In contrast, in gas phase the system relaxes after vertical excitation from FC to FS by an in-phase geometry change.138 From the FS region the system evolves preferably towards the TW1 intermediate by rotation of the formal exocyclic single C–C bond, as an energy barrier of 2 kcal mol−1 (at CASPT2 level) was found for the rotation of the exocyclic double C–C bond, which would eventually lead to the TW2 intermediate (Fig. 15). This explains why in solution the fluorescence is quenched, whereas in gas phase and within the protein the chromophore exhibits fluorescence (Fig. 16)..
 Fig. 15  Relaxation mechanism upon excitation of GFP derivatives in solution. Adapted with permission P. Altoe, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, G. Orlandi and F. Negri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3952. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 16  Relaxation mechanism upon excitation of GFP derivatives in gas phase. Adapted with permission M. E. Martin, F. Negri and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5452. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from the general environment effect described above, it is worth noting that in protic and aprotic solvents these systems can exhibit two possible ultrafast radiationless decay channels: in aprotic solvents torsion around the formal C–C double bond is the only decay path whereas, in protic solvents the decay is described by a solute–solvent H-bond-mediated internal conversion, and by torsion around the formal C–C double bond as a minor event. This is in accordance with the lower Z–E photoisomerization quantum yields experimentally measured in protic solvents.
In the last decade it has been studied the photophysical and photochemical properties of a variety of synthetic models of the GFP chromophore which remain unchanged the imidazolinone unit and is changed in the 4-hydroxybenzilidene moiety, as HBDI (R1 = R2 = CH3),143,149,152–156 HBMIA (R1 = CH3; R2 = CO2C2H5),157–160 BFPF,146 CFP, m-ABDI,151 and p-ABDI derivatives (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Structure of GFP derivatives: (a) HBDI (R1 = R2 = CH3) and HBMIA (R1 = CH3; R2 = CO2C2H5); (b) synthetic analogues of the cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) and Y66F GFP (BFPF); (c) amino derivatives of HBDI (m-ABDI and p-ABDI). 
From these studies it can be concluded that the Z-isomer is the most stable, characterized by an absorption spectrum with one intense band in the 340–400 nm region and a less intense band between 260 and 300 nm. In contrast, the E-isomer absorption spectrum shows a bathochromic shift of the low-energy band and a decrease in intensity.146,151 Furthermore, the Z–E photoisomerization of these models is a very effective process with quantum yields between 0.1 and 0.3 in protic solvents and up to 0.5 in aprotic,146,151 in contrast to the low values measured for photochromic proteins (10−6–10−3).161,162
Later, it was proposed a novel family of derivatives where the imidazoline unit is replaced by a butenolide (B1 and B2)  or a pyrrolinone (P1 and P2) moiety (Fig. 18).61 Indeed, these derivatives contain an additional phenyl ring linked to the five-membered heteroaromatic ring, with the benzylidene moiety left unchanged. Their photophysical and photochemical properties are very similar to the ones reported for p-HBDI.135,146,151 The UV-visible absorption spectra of Z chromophores exhibit a broad band between 350 and 500 nm and a band below 300 nm. Whereas, the E-isomers show a bathochromic shift of the broad band and a decrease in intensity. Analyzing these data, it is concluded that the presence of an additional phenyl ring provides a bathochromic shift effect in the absorbance spectrum compared with the GFP chromophore derivatives. Regarding to the efficiency of the Z–E photoisomerization, this path is the main decay channel for them with quantum yields between 0.1 and 0.4.
 Fig. 18  Structure of butenolide (B1 and B2) and pyrrolinone (P1 and P2) derivatives. 
Recently, it has been reported the photochemical study of a novel family of photoactive switches based on the GFP chromophore. These oxazolone analogs present an ester function instead of an amide one in the five-membered ring (Scheme 16).63 Their most remarkable characteristics are: high Z–E photoisomerization efficiency with quantum yields of 0.25 ± 0.01 for the Z → E process and 0.11 ± 0.02 for the E → Z isomerization, their visible absorption around 350 nm and the feasible control of switching by means of heat or light of different wavelengths.
As a summary, some of the photophysical properties of representative examples of the switches discussed are reported in Table 1.
Table 1 Absorption band maxima (λ) and isomerization quantum yields (Φ) for representative examples of the different photoswitches discussed in the text




Switch type

λ (nm)

Φ






Z-azobenzene (S0 → S1)
44066–68
0.5369,70



Z-azobenzene (S0 → S2)
29066–68
0.2569,70



E-azobenzene (S0 → S1)
43266–68
0.4069,70



E-azobenzene (S0 → S2)
31866–68
0.1269,70


Overcrowded alkenes163
300–430
0.07–0.55


NAIPs52 (S0 → S1)
392
0.34


NAIPs52 (S0 → S3)
264




NAFPs56,117
401
0.5 ± 0.1


NABPs118,127
290–310
0.64



Z-hemithioindigo128,129
430
0.230 ± 0.035



E-hemithioindigo128,129
450
0.053 ± 0.016



Z-GFP146,151 (protic)
340–400
0.1–0.3



Z-GFP146,151 (aprotic)
260–300
0.5



Z-B1,B2,P1,P261
350–500
0.1–0.4



Z-oxazolones63
330–400
0.25 ± 0.01



E-oxazolones63
330–400
0.11 ± 0.02




Applications
Azobenzenes
Thanks to the variety of possible synthetic routes and to its distinctive properties, azobenzene has been one of the most studied photoswitches ever, therefore leading to a considerable number of possible applications in different areas. Here, we will limit to discuss the ones we consider most useful and ingenious.
In biology, the introduction of azobenzene and its derivatives in peptides and proteins has led to photocontrol of folding and unfolding mechanisms. Especially, once azobenzene is attached to two different residues of an amino acid sequence (i.e. the folded structure) through its phenyl groups, UV-irradiation can trigger E-to-Z isomerization, resulting in a conformational change of the peptide (i.e. the unfolded structure). Blue light or thermal activation can be applied as a second pulse to initiate Z-to-E isomerization, switching back to the folded conformation.164,165 When applied to proteins, the folding/unfolding mechanism can result in successful non-invasive control of enzymatic activity and cell signaling, as is the case of restriction enzyme scPvuII (Fig. 19a).166 In some other cases, attachment of azobenzene to only one residue of a ligand is enough to change the overall ligand shape, limiting its capability to dock to its binding site in a target protein (Fig. 19b).167 Examples are the azobenzene modified nicotinic acetylcholine receptors168 and ionotropic glutamate receptors.169 Improvements of the azobenzene chemical properties for biological applications point towards derivatives with longer absorption wavelengths, photostable Z-isomers and high photochemical yields.170
 Fig. 19  Biological applications: (a) scheme of Z–E photoisomerization of an azobenzene switch attached to cysteine residues of the enzyme scPvuII. (b) UV irradiation of a ligand side-attached to E-azobenzene (left) generates bending of the resulting Z-azobenzene around the ligand, interfering with docking to its binding site in a target protein (right). Adapted with permission from B. Schierling, A.-J. Noël, W. Wende, L. T. Hien, E. Volkov, E. Kubareva, T. Oretskaya, M. Kokkinidis, A. Roempp, B. Spengler and A. Pingoud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2010, 107, 1361. 
Apart from biology, azobenzene can well accomplish folding/unfolding processes when introduced into oligomers (i.e. the so called foldamers).171–173 In this case, the aim is to design photoswitching molecular building blocks with a defined sensitivity for its applications in actuation and data storage, among others.174 One distinctive example is the achieved photocontrol over helix-coil transition in oligo(meta-phenylene ethynylene)s (Fig. 20).175
 Fig. 20  Working principle of a photoswitching foldamer: an azobenzene unit (magenta) is incorporated into a helical foldamer (blue), permitting helix-coil photocontrol. Adapted from A. Khan and S. Hecht, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4764. With kind permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
In materials science, considerable attention has been focused on preparation of self assembled monolayers of azobenzene ligands on noble metals and silicon surfaces. Especially, different approaches have been developed to covalently anchor the azobenzene ligands to gold176 and silicon.177–179
As potential industrial (especially nanotechnological) applications of azobenzene-derived self assembled monolayers, we should mention the improvements obtained in surface wetting and adsorption capabilities, being of special interest for selecting and modulating nanoparticle surface properties. Indeed, a liquid droplet was shown to rest on a E-azobenzene covered surface (where E-azobenzene was previously immobilized onto the solid surface), whereas UV-irradiation of the surface determines spreading of the liquid (i.e. increased wettability), as a result of the higher dipole moment of the Z-isomer.180,181 Therefore, selected UV-illumination of a droplet portion generates macroscopic directional motion of liquids on surfaces, as monitored by the increase in the contact angle of the droplet on the Z-azobenzene covered surface (θtransrec> θcisadv in Fig. 21a).182,183 Such modified surfaces were also considered for binding and releasing of selected molecules: when E-azobenzene is immobilized onto the surface it exposes a phenyl group to binding with molecules in solution, whereas after UV irradiation the resulting Z-azobenzene provokes masking of the surface, releasing the previously bound molecules (Fig. 21b).184Ad hoc substitution of the exposed azobenzene termination can determine selected binding to the desired entity in solution, including axial ligation of metallated porphyrins,185 single-and double-stranded DNA.186 The aforementioned wetting and adsorption capabilities can be transferred to nanoparticle surfaces, moreover ensuring reversible or irreversible nanoparticles aggregation: it was proposed that UV irradiation of E-azobenzene dithiol functionalized nanoparticles induces aggregation by physical interaction of the resulting Z-azobenzene dithiol functionalized nanoparticles, as photoaggregation is a reversible process unless covalent crosslinking between facing nanoparticles takes place (Fig. 21c).184,187
 Fig. 21  (a) Macroscopic directional motion of a liquid droplet on an azobenzene functionalized surface when UV illuminated. (b) Binding (by E-azobenzene) and releasing (by Z-azobenzene) of selected molecules via UV and visible light irradiation. (c) UV illumination of E-azobenzene dithiol functionalized nanoparticles in solution generates nanoparticles aggregates by Z–Z physical interactions. The equilibrium created between aggregates and nanoparticles in solution can be displaced towards formation of irreversible aggregates, possible by covalent crosslinking. Adapted with permission from R. Klajn Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 82, 2247. 
Polymers containing azo derivatives as side chains and azobenzene-functionalized self assembled monolayers (and multilayers) were successfully applied for optical generation of anisotropy: after absorption with polarized light, azobenzene tends to align in a direction perpendicular to the polarization. A solid matrix is required, since in liquids the obtained anisotropy would relax in a fast time scale. In order to switch back to isotropic absorption conditions, illumination of the solid sample with unpolarized or circularly polarized light at normal incidence is needed.188,189
The photoisomerization of azobenzene and its derivatives, especially when included in polymer networks, can be applied also to liquid crystal systems with different possible aims: (i) reversible color changes in cholesteric liquid crystals; (ii) mesophase change between nematic and isotropic phases, being in practice applied to optical switching and information storage;191,192 (iii) photoswitching of ferroelectric liquid crystals.193
Azobenzene derivatives have been used for decades in the LC photoaligning field, contributing to the development of interesting and advanced applications in photoaddressing, photorecording and, more in general, design of display materials.194,195 In 1988, it was reported the first evidence of reversible photochemical control of LC orientation by photochromic azobenzene monolayers on quartz substrates.196 It was observed a LC phase switch, from homeotropic to the azimuthally random planar orientation, by reversible E–Z isomerization of azobenzene monolayers attached to a solid surface (so-called ‘command surface'). Furthermore in 1991 it was shown that, irradiating a dye-doped polymer alignment layer with polarized light, a nematic to twisted-nematic LC phase switch can be achieved, affecting only the LC molecules in contact with the illuminated area.197 This is a well established case of LC alignment control at the micrometer spatial resolution, which served as first example for the development of novel display devices: it was reported that modification of the writing laser polarization leads to a bistable photoswitchable reflective liquid crystal display (PRLCD) based on azo-dye doped liquid crystals (DDLC), resulting in a writable, erasable and rewritable material.198 Indeed, azobenzene derivatives can act as mesogens of LC which reversible E–Z photoisomerization leads to the control of the LC domains orientation. The photoalignment of azo chromophores is transferred to the LC host, inducing a phase transition from a nematic to an isotropic phase. This nanoscale phase separation has been used to trigger a decrease199 or increase200 in LC ordering, or to modify the pitch (reversible color change) of a cholesteric LC.201
Overcrowded alkenes
These photoactive molecular switches exhibit prominent applications as molecular data storage systems and assembled as smart materials. Feringa et al. reported that overcrowded alkenes are suitable as photoactive chiral dopant to control the organization of liquid crystal (LC) phases by light. Control of organization, modulation of the pitch and the screw sense of doped LC is due to the change in the molecular orientation of the anisotropic host molecules. To achieve this aim, a nematic phase is needed, as well as a chiral dopant and a molecular photoactive switch included in a three component or two component system (depending if the chiral dopant and the photoactive switch is the same molecule, as is the case for diarylidene compounds,202 or if they are two different molecules).203
Photochemical switching of LC phases doped with overcrowded alkenes can be achieved applying light of a single wavelength (circular polarized light, CPL)101,112,204 or different wavelengths,205 resulting in single wavelength mode or two wavelengths mode of the diarylidene switching process.
Regarding to the two wavelengths mode (Fig. 22), it has been described that after addition to a nematic phase of the enantiomerically pure P-E-49 (1% wt), conversion to a cholesteric phase (twisted nematic) is recorded, which handedness depends on the enantiomer used as dopant.163,205,206 Irradiation of this material at 365 nm causes handedness switch and pitch (p) modification of the cholesteric phase due to Z–E photoisomerization of the chromophore. The reversibility of this process is proved as excitation with 435 nm light recovers the original handedness and pitch values of the cholesteric LC phase. Indeed, the type of LC phase can be switched by light from a cholesteric to a nematic phase applying 313 nm light. This fact is caused by the formation of a compensated nematic phase as a pseudoracemate of the guest molecule is produced. This process is also reversible: by applying a 435 nm light the original cholesteric phase is restored.
 Fig. 22  Two wavelengths photoswitching mode of LC phases with diarylidene 49 ((M)-Z-49 or (P)-E-49) as chiral dopant. Adapted from B. L. Feringa, N. Koumura, D. R. A. Van and M. K. J. ter Wiel, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2002, 75, 301. 
As aforementioned, properties and organization of LC phases can be switched by applying CPL of a single wavelength (i.e. by changing light chirality). It is reported the photo-resolution of a racemic diarylidene as chiral dopant in a nematic LC phase, inducing a cholesteric phase.111,112 Irradiation of racemic P, M-51 as dopant in a nematic phase with left circular polarized light (l-CPL) at 313 nm converts this phase into a cholesteric phase as an excess of M-51 enantiomer is formed. Whereas, irradiation of the same nematic phase with right circular polarized light (r-CPL) produces a cholesteric phase with opposite screw sense by the formation of an excess of P-51 isomer. Both cholesteric phases can be interconverted applying CPL of opposite handedness. Furthermore, irradiation of any of those cholesteric phases with linearly polarized light (LPL) at 313 nm causes photoracemization of the dopant and as a consequence, production of a compensated nematic phase. This process allows chiral amplification from the chirality of CPL that forms an enantiomeric excess of the photoactive diarylidene, determining a specific helical organization of the cholesteric LC phase.111
This photoactive switching process can be used as a method to address display materials.112,207 For instance, the writing process can be based on the formation of P- or M-enriched regions by irradiation of a racemate (P, M) with r-CPL or l-CPL, respectively. Reading-out the information is achieved applying LPL to this material (i.e. measuring circular dichroism). Indeed, the information can be erased by LPL at the original wavelength as the racemate (P, M) is restored. Furthermore, by changing the chirality of the light at a particular wavelength we can perform an Erasable Direct Read After Write (EDRAW) process.112
Overcrowded alkenes are also used to control by light rotational rates at the molecular level. It has been proposed a novel compound which comprises two coupled rotary units in its structure, a photoisomerizable C–C double bond and a rotor (as o-xylyl unit) (Scheme 17).208,209Z–E photoisomerization of the middle formal C–C double bond leads to the modification of aryl–aryl single bond rotation speed. As is reported, rotation rates for the Z-isomers are higher than the ones exhibited by E-isomers. This fact is due to the more assisted rotor movement in the o-xylyl rotation transition state for the Z-isomer as the naphthalene moiety bends away effectively. Whereas, this transition state for the E-isomer is characterized by a steric hindrance between the methyl protons of the rotor and the ring protons of the upper half of the molecule, leading to a higher rotation energy barrier. This finding allows control of rotational rate by light.
Information processing and memory devices can be also based on photomodulation of radicals magnetic interaction.210,211 The proposed systems are photoswitchable magnetic systems composed of an overcrowded alkene as the switching unit, to which a pair of stable radicals (TEMPO) is connected in a non π-conjugated manner (Fig. 23). The Z–E photoisomerization of the chromophore switches reversibly (on and off) the intramolecular through-space spin–spin coupling.212
 Fig. 23  Photoswitching of intramolecular through-space magnetic interaction of a magnetic model system. Spin magnetic moments are schematically indicated by blue arrows. 
Retinal-based switches
The Rh chromophore and related compounds have been extensively studied using experimental and theoretical tools due to the relevance of the biological processes in which they take part. Also, we have seen in precedent sections that this structure has been used as inspiration for the design of efficient photoswitches, albeit their practical applications are still scarce compared to azobenzenes or overcrowded alkenes.
The potential use of a synthetic PSB to photocontrol the specific conformation of peptides was first proposed at a theoretical level.213 Although the system provides efficient control on the conformation of an octapeptide, the proposed PSB switch is not experimentally accessible.
Further theoretical work214 explores the use of NAIP switches to photocontrol cyclic oligopeptides. Molecular dynamics simulations demonstrated the possibility of controlling the different conformations of the peptide changing the state of the switch.
A modification of the same NAIP structure allowed for the preparation of electrostatic photoswitches (Fig. 24).54
 Fig. 24  Dipole moment (μ) switch driven by Z/E photoisomerization. Adapted with permission from A. Melloni, R. R. Paccani, D. Donati, V. Zanirato, A. Sinicropi, M. L. Parisi, E. Martin, M. Ryazantsev, W. J. Ding, L. M. Frutos, R. Basosi, S. Fusi, L. Latterini, N. Ferré and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9310. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In these compounds, a permanent zwitterionic head induces a large dipole moment change upon photoisomerization. Such a change can, in turn, affect the properties of a peptide chain. This was demonstrated by computing the modulation of the fluorescence of a tryptophan included in a peptide.
The versatile route that allowed the preparation of NABPs (see Scheme 23) also permitted the inclusion of amino groups at both ends of the switch unit. After functionalization, this switch was suitable for site-specific introduction into a Cys-containing peptide as an intramolecular cross-link.127 Peptides characterized by α-helical structure can be then photocontrolled by matching the end-to-end distance of the photoswitch in one isomeric state with the distance between cross-linker attachment points in the peptide. In this case, the end-to-end distance of the E-isomer allows folding into a peptide α-helix, whereas the Z-isomer is too short to permit normal helix formation. In the cross-linked peptide with the E form of the switch, the α-helical conformation is stabilized. Irradiation with 400 nm light leads to a marked decrease in helicity in the region of the peptide close to the switch, with the rest of the peptide remaining helical (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Reversible photocontrol of peptide conformation with a rhodopsin-like photoswitch. Adapted with permission from M. Blanco-Lomas, S. Samanta, P. J. Campos, G. A. Woolley and D. Sampedro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6960. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, the observed conformational change was fully reversible. Thus, this switch functions effectively for the photocontrol of peptide conformations in aqueous environments using visible wavelengths (400 and 446 nm). Also, the different conformational isomers are stable on time scales of biological interest. The large conformational change and the efficiency of the photoswitching make this rhodopsin-like photoswitch an excellent candidate that can be applied to a wide variety of targets.
Other switches
The photoisomerization mechanism of the HTI family has been recently stated and therefore their applications are not yet widely developed. Among them, it is noteworthy the role of this molecular switch model as ω-amino acid:132,215,216 it acts as a peptide-switch after incorporation into the backbone of small peptides leading to chromopeptides. HTI and its derivatives are suitable candidates for this purpose as they exhibit, among other properties, high photostability and a switching process activated with visible light. HTI derivatives have been incorporated to the amino acid sequence of linear and cyclic peptide structures (Fig. 26).217,218 These studies are the starting point of further protein folding applications. Among other applications of HTI derivatives it was reported the HTI shuttle model based on a repeatable movement of the molecule between two kinds of porphyrins controlled by light.219,220
 Fig. 26  HTI switches incorporated into linear and cyclic peptides. 
Certain GFP-like proteins act as Reversibly Switchable Fluorescent Proteins (RSFPs). These photochromic proteins can be interconverted by light between two reversible states: on (fluorescent) and off (non-fluorescent) states. Their structure is characterized by a β-barrel which encloses a α-helix that contains the chromophore. It has been reported that the fluorescence switch is due to Z–E photoisomerization of the chromophore differently coupled with charge transfer mechanisms. RSFPs have aroused interest for promising applications such as protein tracking of biological processes and subdiffraction microscopy.221–225
Among RSFPs, we should highlight the role of Dronpa due to its clear advantages: (i) its monomeric form, easier to handle than polymeric proteins, (ii) it shows high fluorescence quantum yield (Φfl = 0.85) and (iii) an energetically feasible switching process.226,227 In equilibrium, the chromophore [2-(1-amino-2-mercaptho-ethyl)-4-[1-(4-hydroxy-phenyl)meth-(E)-ylidene]-5-oxo-4,5-dihydro-imidazol-1-yl]-acetaldehyde adopts the Z conformation which, due to the local environment, is predominantly deprotonated and fluorescent. Irradiation with blue light promotes the Z–E isomerization of the chromophore leading to a non-fluorescent state, the E-isomer. This isomer is mainly protonated and, due to its non-planar backbone geometry, it results in lowering the π-conjugation and in a more disordered structure when compared to the Z-isomer, finally leading to suppression of fluorescence.228 Furthermore, fluorescence can be reversibly restored by irradiation of the E-isomer with UV light (Fig. 27). The essential properties of this protein to undergo the reversible switching process are: different local cavity environments which determine the protonation state of the chromophore (deprotonated for the Z-isomer and protonated for the E-isomer) and hence, the fluorescence properties of each configuration (the Z-isomer is fluorescent, while the E-isomer is non-fluorescent).226,227,229 Thanks to these characteristics, Dronpa is a suitable system for ultrahigh-density optical data storage and far-field optical writing at the nanoscale level.230,231
 Fig. 27  Fluorescence switching by Z–E photoisomerization of Dronpa's chromophore: the Z-isomer corresponds to a green-emitting state while the E-isomer is a dim state. 

Z–E isomerization of GFP type chromophores controlled by light can also be applied to control protein–protein interactions. As aforementioned, these proteins are constituted by a α-helix that contains the chromophore and a β-barrel which encloses it. It has been reported that most GFP structures exhibit a stable Z configuration of their chromophore when at thermal equilibrium. Whereas, when the protein is refolded after removing a specific sequence of amino acids, the so called strand 11,232 different absorption and fluorescence properties are found compared to the native form. This fact is due to the more stable E configuration of the chromophore in the refolded GFP protein. Indeed, it was observed that the refolded GFP protein is not able to reassemble a synthetic strand 11 unless irradiated with light. Light exposure activates the refolded protein to bind the synthetic strand 11 as a photostationary state, by which the Z chromophore is generated (Fig. 28).233
 Fig. 28  Mechanism and light control of protein–protein interactions: at thermal equilibrium Dronpa chromophore exhibits a Z configuration (fluorescent). Whereas, after removing the strand 11, the chromophore adopts a E configuration in the refolded protein. Combination between the refolded protein and strand 11 is possible only after irradiation of the protein as the Z chromophore is generated (PDB 2z1o). 
This reassembly mechanism can be applied for imaging, protein interaction control and novel potential applications.234,235
Conclusions
We have shown in this review the more recent developments in the syntheses, properties and applications of E/Z molecular photoswitches. These types of molecular devices have been used in a wide variety of contexts to modulate diverse properties. The specific applications to photocontrol the features of complex systems are clearly dependent on the photophysical and photochemical behaviour of the switch. This, in turn, comes determined by the switch's chemical structure. Three main types of E/Z switches have been developed to date, namely, azobenzenes, overcrowded alkenes and retinal-based switches, but some other families are also available.
Although this is still a relatively new research field, some outstanding advances have been already achieved. However, there are excellent opportunities from many different disciplines to contribute to further develop the field. From a synthetic point of view, the discovery of new photoswitch types is required to expand the applicability of the switch concept. Also, different functionalization of known structures will increase the applicability of these compounds. It is also relevant to obtain additional information on the photophysical and photochemical properties of the switches. Only after the functioning of these compounds is fully understood, could we completely control and tune the different properties. Thus, further computational and experimental studies are necessary to provide the required information. Also, the applicability of these systems should be expanded to different and increasingly complex molecular environments. Material science, biology, chemistry and physics could make good use of molecular photoswitches and turn promising candidates into useful tools. However, some problems have still to be solved or at least minimized, in order to get useful applications. For instance, most molecular photoswitches work as a mixture of isomers. Although the photostationary state can be controlled by the use of light of different wavelengths, this photostationary state is a mixture of isomers with the subsequent decrease in the performance of the system. Thus, a switch which could be completely turned on and off in a general fashion would constitute a remarkable advance. In the context of biological applications, solubility and stability also constitute major challenges for the switch functioning. The use of photoswitches stable under physiological conditions and activated by low-energy light would increase the number of in vivo applications.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Spanish MICINN grants (CTQ2011-24800 and CTQ2009-07120), Spanish MINECO grant CTQ2012-36966, and UAH2011/EXP-041 of the University of Alcalá (UAH) is gratefully acknowledged. C.G.-I. and M.M. are grateful to the UAH. L.M.F. acknowledges receipt of a ‘‘Ramón y Cajal’’ contract from MEC.
Notes and references

          V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Molecular Devices and Machines, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .

          B. L. Feringa and W. R. Browneed, Molecular Switches, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. Neutze, E. Pebay-Peyroula, K. Edman, A. Royant, J. Navarro and E. M. Landau, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 2002, 1565, 144–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lanyi, Annu. Rev. Physiol., 2004, 66, 665–688 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stock, A. G. W. Leslie and J. E. Walker, Science, 1999, 286, 1700–1705 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shao and Y. Q. Gao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 8072–8077 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Pure Appl. Chem., 2003, 75, 541 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 77 RSC .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 18 CrossRef .
Y. Yokoyama, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1717–1740 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yun, J. You, J. Kim, J. Huh and E. Kim, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2009, 10, 111–129 CrossRef CAS .
G. Berkovic, V. Krongauz and V. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1741–1754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Noble, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1856, 98, 253 CrossRef .
F. Hamon, F. Djedaini-Pilard, F. Barbot and C. Len, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 10105–10123 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirano, S. Yakabe, H. Chikamori, J. H. Clark and T. Morimoto, J. Chem. Soc., 1998, 770 Search PubMed .
N. A. Noureldin and J. W. Bellegarde, Synthesis, 1999, 939 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Schuster, K. Li, D. M. Guldi, A. Palkar, L. Echegoyen, C. Stanisky, R. J. Cross, M. Niemi, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetynen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15973 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan and S. Hecht, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4764 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, J. H. Park, Y. K. Chung and K. H. Park, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354, 2412–2418 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zarwell and K. Ruck-Braun, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 4020 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Lee, B. K. Cho, J. Yoon and J. S. Kim, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 4515 CrossRef CAS .
E. Drug and M. Gozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13784 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sanz, J. Escribano, Y. Fernandez, R. Aguado, M. R. Pedrosa and F. J. Arnaiz, Synlett, 2005, 1389 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barbero, I. Degani, S. Dughera, R. Fochi and P. Perracino, Synthesis, 1988, 1235 Search PubMed .
M. C. Carreño, G. F. Mudarra, E. Merino and M. Ribagorda, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 3413–3416 CrossRef .
B. L. Feringa, R. A. van Delden, N. Koumura and E. M. Geertsema, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 504 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. McMurry, Acc. Chem. Res., 1983, 16, 405 CrossRef CAS .
N. Harada, A. Saito, N. Koumura, H. Uda, B. de Lange, W. F. Jager, H. Wynberg and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7241 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Pollard, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2008, 6, 507 CAS .
M. K. J. ter Wiel, R. A. van Delden, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15076–15086 CrossRef CAS .
M. ter Wiel, R. A. van Delden, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14280 CrossRef .
A. S. Lubbe, N. Ruangsupapichat, G. Caroli and B. L. Feringa, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 8599 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimasaki, S.-I Kato, K. Ideta, K. Goto and T. Shinmyozu, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 1073 CrossRef CAS .
G. Caroli, M. G. Kwit and B. L. Feringa, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 5956 CrossRef CAS .
M. ter Wiel, M. G. Kwit, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 87 CAS .
R. M. Kellogg, J. Buter and S. Wassenaar, J. Org. Chem., 1972, 37, 4045 CrossRef .
B. de Lange, B. L. Feringa and W. F. Jager, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1992, 217, 129 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pijper, R. A. van Delden, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17612–17613 CrossRef CAS .
M. ter Wiel, R. A. van Delden, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2005, 3, 4071 CAS .
A. A. Kulago, E. M. Mes, M. Klok, A. Meetsma, A. M. Brouwer and B. L. Feringa, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 666 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fernandez Landaluce, G. B London, M. M. Pollard, P. Rudolf and B. L. Feringa, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 5323 CrossRef .
J. Vicario, M. Walko, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pijper and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3693 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Pollard, M. K. J. ter Wiel, R. A. van Delden, J. Vicario, N. Koumura, C. R. van den Brom, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 11610 CrossRef CAS .
G. London, G. T. Carroll, T. F. Landaluce, M. M. Pollard, P. Rudolf and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1712 RSC .
E. M. Geertsema, R. Hoen, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 3596 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kandori, Y. Shichida and T. Yoshizawa, Biochemistry, 2001, 66, 1197 CAS .
J. K. McBee, K. Palczewski, W. Baehr and D. R. Pepperberg, Prog. Retinal Eye Res., 2001, 20, 469 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. A. Dartnall, Vision Res., 1967, 8, 339 CrossRef .
M. Blanco-Lomas, P. J. Campos and D. Sampedro, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2012, 6328 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lumento, V. Zanirato, S. Fusi, E. Busi, L. Latterini, F. Elisei, A. Sinicropi, T. Andruniów, N. Ferré, R. Basosi and M. Olivucci, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 414 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zanirato, G. P. Pollini, C. De Risi, F. Valente, A. Melloni, S. Fusi, J. Barbetti and M. Olivucci, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 4975 CrossRef CAS .
A. Melloni, R. R. Paccani, D. Donati, V. Zanirato, A. Sinicropi, M. L. Parisi, E. Martin, M. Ryazantsev, W. J. Ding, L. M. Frutos, R. Basosi, S. Fusi, L. Latterini, N. Ferré and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9310 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Paccani, D. Donati, S. Fusi, L. Latterini, G. Farina, V. Zanirato and M. Olivucci, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 1738 CrossRef .
L. Rivado-Casas, D. Sampedro, P. J. Campos, S. Fusi, V. Zanirato and M. Olivucci, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 4666 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rivado-Casas, P. J. Campos and D. Sampedro, Organometallics, 2010, 29, 3117 CrossRef CAS .
W. Steinle and K. Rück-Braun, Org. Lett., 2002, 5, 141–144 CrossRef .
S. Herre, W. Steinle and K. Rück-Braun, Synthesis, 2005, 2005, 3297–3300 Search PubMed .
T. Schadendorf, C. Hoppmann and K. Rück-Braun, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 9044–9047 CrossRef CAS .
G. Abbandonato, G. Signore, R. Nifosí, V. Voliani, R. Bizzarri and F. Beltram, Eur. Biophys. J., 2011, 40, 1205 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Katritzky, M. Yoshioka-Tarver, B. E.-D. M. El-Gendy and D. Hall, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 2224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blanco-Lomas, P. J. Campos and D. Sampedro, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 4334–4337 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zimmerman, L.-Y. Chow and U.-J. Paik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 3528–3531 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Brown and G. R. Granneman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1975, 97, 621–627 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Lednev, T. Q. Ye, P. Matousek, M. Towrie, P. Foggi, F. V. R. Neuwahl, S. Umapathy, R. E. Hester and J. N. Moore, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 290, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hamm, S. M. Ohline and W. Zinth, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 519–529 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Lednev, T.-Q. Ye, R. E. Hester and J. N. Moore, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13338–13341 CrossRef CAS .
T. Naegele, R. Hoche, W. Zinth and J. Wachtveitl, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 272, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishikawa, T. Noro and T. Shoda, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 7503–7512 CrossRef CAS .
S. Malkin and E. Fischer, J. Phys. Chem., 1962, 66, 2482–2486 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rau and E. Lueddecke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 1616–1620 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bortolus and S. Monti, J. Phys. Chem., 1979, 83, 648–652 CrossRef CAS .
N. Siampiringue, G. Guyot, S. Monti and P. Bortolus, J. Photochem., 1987, 37, 185–188 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujino and T. Tahara, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 4203–4210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Satzger, C. Root and M. Braun, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 6265–6271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujino, S. Y. Arzhantsev and T. Tahara, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 8123–8129 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Chang, Y.-C. Lu, T.-T. Wang and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10109–10118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Monti, G. Orlandi and P. Palmieri, Chem. Phys., 1982, 71, 87–99 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cembran, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, L. Gagliardi and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3234–3243 CrossRef CAS .
I. Conti, M. Garavelli and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5216–5230 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gagliardi, G. Orlandi, F. Bernardi, A. Cembran and M. Garavelli, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2004, 111, 363–372 CrossRef CAS .
E. W.-G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 950–956 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ciminelli, G. Granucci and M. Persico, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 2327–2341 CrossRef CAS .
A. Toniolo, C. Ciminelli, M. Persico and T. J. Martinez, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 234308–234310 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pederzoli, J. Pittner, M. Barbatti and H. Lischka, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 11136–11143 CrossRef CAS .
R. Siewertsen, H. Neumann, B. Buchheim-Stehn, R. Herges, C. Nather, F. Renth and F. Temps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15594–15595 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. D. Bandara and S. C. Burdette, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1809–1825 RSC .

          H. Duerr andH. Bouas-Laurent, Photochromism: Molecules and Systems: Revised Edition, Elsevier Science B, V 2003 Search PubMed .
N. Tamai and H. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1875–1890 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Brode, J. H. Gould and G. M. Wyman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 4641–4646 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, M. S. Johal, P. Scudder, N. Caculitan, R. J. Magyar, S. Tretiak and H.-L. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 516, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Lednev, T.-Q. Ye, L. C. Abbott, R. E. Hester and J. N. Moore, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 9161–9166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Airinei, E. Rusu and V. Barboiu, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2010, 21, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ohtani, T. Furukawa, R. Sasai, E. Hayashi, T. Shichi, T. Yui and K. Takagi, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 196–200 RSC .
A. A. Blevins and G. J. Blanchard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4962–4968 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cilento, E. C. Miller and J. A. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1956, 78, 1718–1722 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Andersson, J. Photochem., 1983, 22, 255–261 CrossRef CAS .
C. Toro, A. Thibert, B. L. De, A. E. Masunov and F. E. Hernandez, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 929–937 CrossRef CAS .
B. Feringa and H. Wynberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 602–603 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, N. P. M. Huck and A. M. Schoevaars, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 681–684 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Jager, PhD Thesis, University of Groningen, The Netherlands,  1994 Search PubMed .
W. Schuddeboom, S. A. Jonker, J. M. Warman, H. M. P. de, M. J. W. Vermeulen, W. F. Jager, L. B. de, B. L. Feringa and R. W. Fessenden, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 3286–3290 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, R. A. van Delden, N. Koumura and E. M. Geertsema, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1789–1816 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, W. F. Jager and L. B. De, Tetrahedron Lett., 1992, 33, 2887–2890 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Jager, J. J. C. de, L. B. de, N. P. M. Huck, A. Meetsma and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1995, 34, 348–350 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. van Delden, M. K. J. ter Wiel and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Commun., 2004, 200–201 RSC .
A. Kazaryan and M. Filatov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11630–11634 CrossRef CAS .
J. Torras, F. Rodriguez-Ropero, O. Bertran and C. Aleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3574–3580 CAS .
S. Grimm, C. Braeuchle and I. Frank, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1943–1947 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa and R. A. van Delden, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 3418–3438 CrossRef .
N. P. M. Huck, W. F. Jager, B. de Lange and B. L. Feringa, Science, 1996, 273, 1686–1688 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 504–513 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Mathies and J. Lugtenburg, Handb. Biol. Phys., 2000, 3, 55–90 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Teller, T. Okada, C. A. Behnke, K. Palczewski and R. E. Stenkamp, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 7761–7772 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Brown and G. Wald, J. Biol. Chem., 1956, 222, 865–877 CAS .
L. Rivado-Casas, M. Blanco-Lomas, P. J. Campos and D. Sampedro, Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 7570–7574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sampedro, A. Migani, A. Pepi, E. Busi, R. Basosi, L. Latterini, F. Elisei, S. Fusi, F. Ponticelli, V. Zanirato and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9349–9359 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinicropi, E. Martin, M. Ryazantsev, J. Helbing, J. Briand, D. Sharma, J. Leonard, S. Haacke, A. Cannizzo, M. Chergui, V. Zanirato, S. Fusi, F. Santoro, R. Basosi, N. Ferre and M. Olivucci, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17642–17647 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bonacic-Koutecky, J. Koutecky and J. Michl, Angew. Chem., 1987, 99, 216–236 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bonacic-Koutecky, J. Koehler and J. Michl, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1984, 104, 440–443 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Schoenlein, L. A. Peteanu, R. A. Mathies and C. V. Shank, Science, 1991, 254, 412–415 CAS .
Q. Wang, R. W. Schoenlein, L. A. Penteanu, R. A. Mathies and C. V. Shank, Science, 1994, 266, 422–424 CAS .
M. Garavelli, P. Celani, F. Bernardi, M. A. Robb and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 6891–6901 CrossRef CAS .
M. Garavelli, F. Bernardi, M. Olivucci, T. Vreven, S. Klein, P. Celani and M. A. Robb, Faraday Discuss., 1998, 110, 51–70 RSC .
F. Lumento, V. Zanirato, S. Fusi, E. Busi, L. Latterini, F. Elisei, A. Sinicropi, T. Andruniow, N. Ferre, R. Basosi and M. Olivucci, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 414–420 CrossRef CAS .
M. Blanco-Lomas, S. Samanta, P. J. Campos, G. A. Woolley and D. Sampedro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6960–6963 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cordes, T. Schadendorf, K. Rueck-Braun and W. Zinth, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 455, 197–201 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nenov, T. Cordes, T. T. Herzog, W. Zinth and R. d. Vivie-Riedle, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 13016–13030 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ploetner and A. Dreuw, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11882–11887 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cordes, T. Schadendorf, B. Priewisch, K. Rueck-Braun and W. Zinth, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 581–588 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cordes, C. Elsner, T. T. Herzog, C. Hoppmann, T. Schadendorf, W. Summerer, K. Rueck-Braun and W. Zinth, Chem. Phys., 2009, 358, 103–110 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ormo, B. Cubitt, K. Kallio, L. A. Gross, R. Y. Tsien and S. J. Remington, Science, 1996, 273, 1392–1395 CAS .
M. Chattoraj, B. A. King, G. U. Bublitz and S. G. Boxer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 8362–8367 CrossRef CAS .
H. Niwa, S. Inouye, T. Hirano, T. Matsuno, S. Kojima, M. Kubota, M. Ohashi and F. I. Tsuji, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 13617–13622 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Tsien, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 1998, 67, 509–544 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Prendergast, Methods Cell Biol., 1999, 58, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Martin, F. Negri and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5452–5464 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Chen, C. R. Lambert, J. D. Urgitis and M. Zimmer, Chem. Phys., 2001, 270, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weber, V. Helms, J. A. McCammon and P. W. Langhoff, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 6177–6182 CrossRef CAS .
C. Seebacher, F. W. Deeg, C. Braeuchle, J. Wiehler and B. Steipe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7728–7732 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brejc, T. K. Sixma, P. A. Kitts, S. R. Kain, R. Y. Tsien, M. Ormo and S. J. Remington, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1997, 94, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS .
P. Altoe, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, G. Orlandi and F. Negri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3952–3963 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinicropi, T. Andruniow, N. Ferre, R. Basosi and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11534–11535 CrossRef CAS .
T. Laino, R. Nifosi and V. Tozzini, Chem. Phys., 2004, 298, 17–28 CrossRef CAS .
V. Voliani, R. Bizzarri, R. Nifosi, S. Abbruzzetti, E. Grandi, C. Viappiani and F. Beltram, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 10714–10722 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Bravaya, B. L. Grigorenko, A. V. Nemukhin and A. I. Krylov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Meech, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2922–2934 RSC .
D. Mandal, T. Tahara and S. R. Meech, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 1102–1108 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. H. Liu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2002, 74, 1391–1396 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yang, G.-J. Huang, Y.-H. Liu and S.-M. Peng, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1344–1346 RSC .
X. He, A. F. Bell and P. J. Tonge, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6056–6066 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schellenberg, E. Johnson, A. P. Esposito, P. J. Reid and W. W. Parson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5316–5322 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stuebner and P. Schellenberg, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 1246–1252 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Webber, K. L. Litvinenko and S. R. Meech, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8036–8039 CrossRef CAS .
K. Addison, J. Conyard, T. Dixon, P. P. C. Bulman, K. M. Solntsev and S. R. Meech, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2298–2302 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kojima, H. Ohkawa, T. Hirano, S. Maki, H. Niwa, M. Ohashi, S. Inouye and F. I. Tsuji, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 5239–5242 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mandal, T. Tahara, N. M. Webber and S. R. Meech, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 358, 495–501 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Kummer, C. Kompa, H. Niwa, T. Hirano, S. Kojima and M. E. Michel-Beyerle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7554–7559 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Bell, X. He, R. M. Wachter and P. J. Tonge, Biochemistry, 2000, 39, 4423–4431 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nifosi, A. Ferrari, C. Arcangeli, V. Tozzini, V. Pellegrini and F. Beltram, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1679–1684 CrossRef CAS .
S. Habuchi, R. Ando, P. Dedecker, W. Verheijen, H. Mizuno, A. Miyawaki and J. Hofkens, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 9511–9516 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 6635–6652 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Beharry, L. Wong, V. Tropepe and G. A. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1325–1327 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Schrader, W. J. Schreier, T. Cordes, F. O. Koller, G. Babitzki, R. Denschlag, C. Renner, M. Loweneck, S.-L. Dong, L. Moroder, P. Tavan and W. Zinth, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 15729–15734 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schierling, A.-J. Noël, W. Wende, L. T. Hien, E. Volkov, E. Kubareva, T. Oretskaya, M. Kokkinidis, A. Roempp, B. Spengler and A. Pingoud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 1361–1366 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gorostiza and E. Y. Isacoff, Science, 2008, 322, 395–399 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bartels, N. H. Wassermann and B. F. Erlanger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1971, 68, 1820–1823 CrossRef CAS .
M. Volgraf, P. Gorostiza, S. Szobota, M. R. Helix, E. Y. Isacoff and D. Trauner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 260–261 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sadovski, A. A. Beharry, F. Zhang and G. A. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1484–1486 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu and S. Hecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1640–1643 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu and S. Hecht, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 10519–10524 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan, C. Kaiser and S. Hecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1878–1881 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Russew and S. Hecht, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3348–3360 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khan and S. Hecht, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4764–4774 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, D. Ishikawa, T. Honda, E. Ito and M. Hara, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3598–3600 RSC .
L. M. Siewierski, W. J. Brittain, S. Petrash and M. D. Foster, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 5838–5844 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dietrich, F. Michalik, R. Schmidt, C. Gahl, G. Mao, M. Breusing, M. B. Raschke, B. Priewisch, T. Elsaesser, R. Mendelsohn, M. Weinelt and K. Rueck-Braun, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 93, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Min, G. S. Bang, H. Lee and B.-C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5232–5234 RSC .
G. Möller, M. Harke, H. Motschmann and D. Prescher, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 4955–4957 CrossRef .
H. Akiyama, K. Tamada, J. Nagasawa, K. Abe and T. Tamaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 130–135 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Oh, M. Nakagawa and K. Ichimura, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2262–2269 RSC .
K. Ichimura, S.-K. Oh and M. Nakagawa, Science, 2000, 288, 1624–1626 CrossRef CAS .
R. Klajn, Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 82, 2247–2279 CrossRef .
F. L. Callari and S. Sortino, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4184–4188 RSC .
F. L. Callari, S. Petralia, S. Conoci and S. Sortino, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 1899–1903 RSC .
R. Klajn, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10305–10309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Eickmans, T. Bieringer, S. Kostromine, H. Berneth and R. Thoma, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, 1835–1836 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Delaire and K. Nakatani, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1817–1845 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. Li, T. White, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3463–3465 RSC .
T. Ikeda and O. Tsutsumi, Science, 1995, 268, 1873–1875 CAS .
H. Kurihara, A. Shishido, T. Ikeda, O. Tsutsumi and T. Shiono, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2005, 441, 173–184 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ichimura, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1847–1873 CrossRef CAS .

Photoalignment of Liquid Crystalline Materials: Physics and Applications, ed. V. G. Chirgrinov, V. M. Kozenkov and H.-S. Kwok, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .

Smart light-responsive materials: Azobenzene-containing polymers and liquid crystals, ed. Y. Zhao and T. Ikeda, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
K. Ichimura, Y. Suzuki, T. Seki, A. Hosoki and K. Aoki, Langmuir, 1988, 4, 1214 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Gibbons, P. J. Shannon, S. T. Sun and B. J. Swetlin, Nature, 1991, 351, 49 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Lin, H.-C. Jau, S.-Y. Hung, H.-R. Fuh and A. Y. G. Fuh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 021111–021116 Search PubMed .
T. Ikeda and O. Tsutsumi, Science, 1995, 268, 1873 CAS .
S. K. Prasad and G. G. Nair, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13 Search PubMed .
E. Sackmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 7088 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, N. P. M. Huck and H. A. van Doren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 9929–9930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Janicki and G. B. Schuster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 8524–8527 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Burnham and G. B. Schuster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 12619–12625 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. van Delden, M. B. van Gelder, N. P. M. Huck and B. L. Feringa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 319–324 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Feringa, N. Koumura, R. A. van Delden and M. K. J. ter Wiel, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2002, 75, 301–308 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Singh, Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 1996, I–III, 64 Search PubMed .
M. K. J. ter Wiel and B. L. Feringa, Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 4332–4339 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Schoevaars, W. Kruizinga, R. W. J. Zijlstra, N. Veldman, A. L. Spek and B. L. Feringa, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 4943–4948 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sato, J. Tao and Y.-Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2152–2187 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Nakatsuji, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 348–353 RSC .
J. Wang, L. Hou, W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8162–8164 CrossRef CAS .
T. Andruniów, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, N. Ferré and M. Olivucci, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6077 CrossRef .
A. Sinicropi, C. Bernini, R. Basosi and M. Olivucci, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 1639 CAS .
S. Herre, W. Steinle and K. Rueck-Braun, Synthesis, 2005, 3297–3300 CAS .
T. Schadendorf, C. Hoppmann and K. Rueck-Braun, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 9044–9047 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cordes, D. Weinrich, S. Kempa, K. Riesselmann, S. Herre, C. Hoppmann, K. Rueck-Braun and W. Zinth, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 167–173 CrossRef CAS .
N. Regner, T. T. Herzog, K. Haiser, C. Hoppmann, M. Beyermann, J. Sauermann, M. Engelhard, T. Cordes, K. Rueck-Braun and W. Zinth, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 4181–4191 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Kohayakawa, S. Iwata and T. Irie, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 3768–3774 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, K. Taguchi, S. Iwata and T. Irie, Supramol. Chem., 2005, 17, 637–642 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Verkhusha and K. A. Lukyanov, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 289–296 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Chudakov, V. V. Verkhusha, D. B. Staroverov, E. A. Souslova, S. Lukyanov and K. A. Lukyanov, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 1435–1439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jakobs, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Res., 2006, 1763, 561–575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miyawaki, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 1374–1376 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aramaki and K. Hatta, Dev. Dyn., 2006, 235, 2192–2199 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Stiel, S. Trowitzsch, G. Weber, M. Andresen, C. Eggeling, S. W. Hell, S. Jakobs and M. C. Wahl, Biochem. J., 2007, 402, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ando, H. Mizuno and A. Miyawaki, Science, 2004, 306, 1370–1373 CrossRef CAS .
M. Andresen, A. C. Stiel, S. Trowitzsch, G. Weber, C. Eggeling, M. C. Wahl, S. W. Hell and S. Jakobs, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 13005 CrossRef CAS .
S. Habuchi, P. Dedecker, J.-I. Hotta, C. Flors, R. Ando, H. Mizuno, A. Miyawaki and J. Hofkens, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2006, 5, 567–576 CAS .
S. W. Hell, Phys. Lett. A, 2004, 326, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sauer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 9433–9434 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kent, L. M. Oltrogge and S. G. Boxer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15988–15989 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kent and S. G. Boxer, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4046–4052 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yazawa, A. M. Sadaghiani, B. Hsueh and R. E. Dolmetsch, Nat. Biotechnol., 2009, 27, 941–945 CrossRef CAS .
A. Levskaya, O. D. Weiner, W. A. Lim and C. A. Voigt, Nature, 2009, 461, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Cristina García-Iriepa	Cristina García-Iriepa received her BSc in chemistry (Bachelor excellence award) in 2011 from the University of Alcalá (Spain). Here she also obtained her MSc in Fine Chemistry in 2012. She is currently a PhD student in the University of Alcalá and the University of La Rioja (Spain) under the supervision of Professor Luis Manuel Frutos and Professor Diego Sampedro, respectively, investigating the design, synthesis and computational study of photoactive molecular devices. She earned the Futura award 2012, given by the Spanish division of SusChem (European Technology Platform for Sustainable Chemistry).
Marco Marazzi	Marco Marazzi received his BSc in chemistry in 2007 from Sapienza University of Rome (Italy). In 2009 he earned his MSc in polymer science from a joint program of the Free University of Berlin, Humboldt University of Berlin, the Technical University of Berlin and the University of Potsdam (Germany). Since 2009 he is a PhD student in the University of Alcalá (Spain) under the supervision of Professor Luis Manuel Frutos. His current research focuses on the application and development of theoretical and computational methods to study photophysics and photochemistry of chemical and biologically relevant systems.
Luis Manuel Frutos	Luis Manuel Frutos studied Chemistry in the University of Alcalá (Madrid), and received his PhD degree in 2004 under the supervision of Prof. Obis Castaño. He then spent postdoctoral periods with Prof. Massimo Olivucci (University of Siena) and Prof. Wolfgang Domcke (Technical University of Munich) in the theoretical study of photoinduced processes in chemical and biological systems. In 2008 he joined University of Alcalá as "Ramón y Cajal" program researcher, getting in 2012 an Associate Professor position in Physical Chemistry. His research interests are mainly focused on theoretical photochemistry, photobiology and photoinduced energy and charge transfer processes in molecular systems.
Diego Sampedro	Diego Sampedro received his PhD degree (2001) from the Universidad de La Rioja under the supervision of Prof. Pedro Campos and Prof. Miguel Á. Rodríguez. After a post-doctoral stay in the Università degli Studi di Siena working with Prof. Olivucci, he returned to Spain as Assistant Professor. In 2004 he obtained a “Ramón y Cajal” research contract in the Universidad de La Rioja and since 2009 he is Associate Professor. His research focuses on organic photochemistry both theoretical and experimental and he is also active in the field of popularization of science.

 	Fig. 1  A molecular switch has two different states (A and B) which can be interchanged trough external stimuli (S1 and S2).	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by oxidative coupling of aromatic amines.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by reduction of aromatic nitro compounds.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by coupling of amines with nitroso compounds.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of azobenzene derivatives by reaction of a diazonium compound with another aromatic compound.	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of azobenzene by oxidation of hydrazo derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 6  Mo-based catalyzed synthesis of azobenzene derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 7  Basic structure and photoisomerization of overcrowded alkenes.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthesis of overcrowded alkenes by McMurry reaction.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of overcrowded alkenes by dipolar cycloaddition, nitrogen elimination and sulfur extrusion.	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthesis of overcrowded alkenes using a chiral template.	 

 	Fig. 2  Rhodopsin (left) and its PSB11 retinal chromophore within the opsin pocket (right).	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthesis of NABP switches.	 

 	Scheme 12  Alternative synthetic route to NABP switches.	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthesis of NAIP switches.	 

 	Scheme 14  Alternative synthetic route to NAIP switches.	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthesis of FPs and NAFPs.	 

 	Fig. 3  The hemithioindigo chromophore structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of the chromophore within the green fluorescent protein.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthetic route to obtain oxazolones.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of the two (E and Z) azobenzene isomers.	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed reaction paths for E-to-Z photoisomerization of azobenzene.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoisomerization mechanism of E and Z isomers upon excitation to the lowest-energy singlet excited state (S1). Adapted with permission from A. Cembran, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, L. Gagliardi and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3234. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photoisomerization mechanism for the E-isomer upon excitation to the lowest-energy optically bright 1(π,π*) excited state (S2). Adapted with permission from I. Conti, M. Garavelli and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5216. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photoisomerization mechanism for the Z-isomer upon excitation to the lowest-energy optically bright 1(π,π*) excited state (S2). Adapted with permission from I. Conti, M. Garavelli and G. Orlandi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5216. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structure of azobenzene derivatives (ABn, aAB and pSB).	 

 	Scheme 17  Structure (rotor, stator and axis) of the first successful diarylidene switch.	 

 	Fig. 11  In diarylidenes, the racemization barrier depends on the bridging units' nature (X, Y) and on different substituents (R1–R3).	 

 	Scheme 18  Photoisomerization of donor–acceptor diarylidene derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 19  Stereoselective photoswitch lacking donor–acceptor substituents.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photoisomerization pathways (ground (S0) and lowest-energy excited (S1) states) of overcrowded alkenes (E-isomer, left and Z-isomer, right). Adapted with permission from A. Kazaryan and M. Filatov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 11630. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 20  Photoisomerization mechanism applying circular polarized light, corresponding to single wavelength switching mode.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photoisomerization mechanism of retinal PSB models. Adapted from P. Altoe, F. Bernardi, I. Conti, M. Garavelli, F. Negri and G. Orlandi, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 117, 1041. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.	 

 	Scheme 21  Photoisomerization of a NAIP switch.	 

 	Scheme 22  Photoisomerization of a NAFP switch.	 

 	Scheme 23  Photoisomerization of a NABP switch.	 

 	Fig. 14  PES for the photoisomerization of the Z-isomer (left) and the E-isomer (right) at CASSCF level. Adapted with permission from A. Nenov, T. Cordes, T. T. Herzog, W. Zinth and R. D. Vivie-Riedle, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 13016. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 24  Photoisomerization of the p-HBDI chromophore.	 

 	Fig. 15  Relaxation mechanism upon excitation of GFP derivatives in solution. Adapted with permission P. Altoe, F. Bernardi, M. Garavelli, G. Orlandi and F. Negri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3952. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Relaxation mechanism upon excitation of GFP derivatives in gas phase. Adapted with permission M. E. Martin, F. Negri and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5452. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structure of GFP derivatives: (a) HBDI (R1 = R2 = CH3) and HBMIA (R1 = CH3; R2 = CO2C2H5); (b) synthetic analogues of the cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) and Y66F GFP (BFPF); (c) amino derivatives of HBDI (m-ABDI and p-ABDI).	 

 	Fig. 18  Structure of butenolide (B1 and B2) and pyrrolinone (P1 and P2) derivatives.	 


Z-azobenzene (S0 → S1)	44066–68	0.5369,70

Z-azobenzene (S0 → S2)	29066–68	0.2569,70

E-azobenzene (S0 → S1)	43266–68	0.4069,70

E-azobenzene (S0 → S2)	31866–68	0.1269,70
Overcrowded alkenes163	300–430	0.07–0.55
NAIPs52 (S0 → S1)	392	0.34
NAIPs52 (S0 → S3)	264	

NAFPs56,117	401	0.5 ± 0.1
NABPs118,127	290–310	0.64

Z-hemithioindigo128,129	430	0.230 ± 0.035

E-hemithioindigo128,129	450	0.053 ± 0.016

Z-GFP146,151 (protic)	340–400	0.1–0.3

Z-GFP146,151 (aprotic)	260–300	0.5

Z-B1,B2,P1,P261	350–500	0.1–0.4

Z-oxazolones63	330–400	0.25 ± 0.01

E-oxazolones63	330–400	0.11 ± 0.02

 	Fig. 19  Biological applications: (a) scheme of Z–E photoisomerization of an azobenzene switch attached to cysteine residues of the enzyme scPvuII. (b) UV irradiation of a ligand side-attached to E-azobenzene (left) generates bending of the resulting Z-azobenzene around the ligand, interfering with docking to its binding site in a target protein (right). Adapted with permission from B. Schierling, A.-J. Noël, W. Wende, L. T. Hien, E. Volkov, E. Kubareva, T. Oretskaya, M. Kokkinidis, A. Roempp, B. Spengler and A. Pingoud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2010, 107, 1361.	 

 	Fig. 20  Working principle of a photoswitching foldamer: an azobenzene unit (magenta) is incorporated into a helical foldamer (blue), permitting helix-coil photocontrol. Adapted from A. Khan and S. Hecht, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4764. With kind permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Macroscopic directional motion of a liquid droplet on an azobenzene functionalized surface when UV illuminated. (b) Binding (by E-azobenzene) and releasing (by Z-azobenzene) of selected molecules via UV and visible light irradiation. (c) UV illumination of E-azobenzene dithiol functionalized nanoparticles in solution generates nanoparticles aggregates by Z–Z physical interactions. The equilibrium created between aggregates and nanoparticles in solution can be displaced towards formation of irreversible aggregates, possible by covalent crosslinking. Adapted with permission from R. Klajn Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 82, 2247.	 

 	Fig. 22  Two wavelengths photoswitching mode of LC phases with diarylidene 49 ((M)-Z-49 or (P)-E-49) as chiral dopant. Adapted from B. L. Feringa, N. Koumura, D. R. A. Van and M. K. J. ter Wiel, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2002, 75, 301.	 

 	Fig. 23  Photoswitching of intramolecular through-space magnetic interaction of a magnetic model system. Spin magnetic moments are schematically indicated by blue arrows.	 

 	Fig. 24  Dipole moment (μ) switch driven by Z/E photoisomerization. Adapted with permission from A. Melloni, R. R. Paccani, D. Donati, V. Zanirato, A. Sinicropi, M. L. Parisi, E. Martin, M. Ryazantsev, W. J. Ding, L. M. Frutos, R. Basosi, S. Fusi, L. Latterini, N. Ferré and M. Olivucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9310. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Reversible photocontrol of peptide conformation with a rhodopsin-like photoswitch. Adapted with permission from M. Blanco-Lomas, S. Samanta, P. J. Campos, G. A. Woolley and D. Sampedro, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6960. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  HTI switches incorporated into linear and cyclic peptides.	 

 	Fig. 27  Fluorescence switching by Z–E photoisomerization of Dronpa's chromophore: the Z-isomer corresponds to a green-emitting state while the E-isomer is a dim state.	 

 	Fig. 28  Mechanism and light control of protein–protein interactions: at thermal equilibrium Dronpa chromophore exhibits a Z configuration (fluorescent). Whereas, after removing the strand 11, the chromophore adopts a E configuration in the refolded protein. Combination between the refolded protein and strand 11 is possible only after irradiation of the protein as the Z chromophore is generated (PDB 2z1o).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
