 Operando characterization techniques for electrocatalysis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE01706J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE01706J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748-3779
Operando characterization techniques for electrocatalysis

        
          
            Jingkun 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Gong
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: jlgong@tju.edu.cn
bJoint School of National University of Singapore and Tianjin University, International Campus of Tianjin University, Binhai New City, Fuzhou 350207, China
Received 
      28th May 2020
    , Accepted 21st August 2020First published on 21st August 2020AbstractThe energy crisis and climate change are growing threats to human society. Fuel cells and electrolyzers using solar and wind as energy sources provide a promising carbon-free and sustainable energy future as an alternative to the present fossil fuels. Robust and efficient electrocatalysts constitute the cornerstone for practical applications of fuel cells and electrolyzers. However, their rational design is hindered by the lack of knowledge of the active site structures, the reaction pathways, and the degradation mechanisms. This calls for the operando characterization of the electrode–electrolyte–gas interface of electrocatalytic processes under working conditions. This review describes the understanding of various operando techniques for diverse nano-, molecular and single atom electrocatalysts. We highlight the progress achieved via operando techniques toward the elucidation of the structure–activity relationships of electrocatalysts.

Broader context
Electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems provide a promising carbon-free energy future. However, the major obstacle for their wide-spread implementation arises from the lack of efficient and robust electrocatalysts. Thanks to the impressive advancements of operando techniques summarized in this review, the understanding of the structure–activity relationship brings fuel cells and electrolyzers closer to commercialization.

1. Introduction
The energy crisis and climate change represent the most urgent threats to human society nowadays. To mitigate the global warming triggered by human activities, it is imperative to replace the present fossil fuels with alternative clean renewable energy sources (solar, wind, etc.) to realize a carbon-free or low-carbon energy economy. The low-carbon hydrogen economy using hydrogen as the energy carrier is among the most promising candidates.1,2 Electrochemical water splitting and hydrogen fuel cells constitute the cornerstone of the hydrogen economy.1,2 Another effective approach to alleviate climate change and to realize a sustainable energy economy is direct electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction (CO2RR) to value-added chemicals and fuels.3 Moreover, electrochemical synthesis offers alternative low-carbon or carbon-neutral approaches for industrial chemical manufacturing (hydrogenation, H2O2 production, nitrogen fixation, and chlorine evolution).4–6 Thus, electrochemical processes play a critical role in the carbon-free or low-carbon and sustainable energy future to overcome the energy and climate challenges.
Lowering the energy barrier and accelerating the reaction kinetics via the rational design of electrocatalysts is the key to enhance the energy efficiency of the above-mentioned electrochemical processes, which generally involve multiple elementary steps with electron and/or proton transfer.7 The intrinsic activity, selectivity and stability are determined by the nature of active sites, while the apparent activity also depends on the accessibility of active sites and the mass transportation of reactive species. The latter is correlated to the porous structures of the catalysts/electrodes. In the past decades, extensive efforts have been devoted to the precise tuning of the physical and chemical properties of active sites,8–15 as well as electrode engineering and cell/electrolyzer design,16–18 and both are extensively discussed in various reviews.19–37
The ex situ characterization of electrocatalysts utilizes multiple analytical tools to gain insight into their structural, morphological, compositional, chemical and physical properties, while in situ/operando characterization probes similar properties, but under conditions similar to operation in the presence of electrolytes, reactants and potential bias. Recently, the structural changes and/or reconstructions of active sites during electrochemical processes have been extensively observed via advanced in situ/operando techniques.38–45 The discrepancies between ex situ and in situ/operando results unambiguously demonstrate that only in situ/operando characterizations are capable of capturing the real picture of active sites, thus leading to more accurate structure–activity relationships. Moreover, in situ/operando techniques are able to detect the reaction intermediates and the three-phase boundary interfaces, piecing together comprehensive reaction mechanisms.46 It should be noted here that the differences between in situ and operando are not clearly defined yet; thus, we will use operando hereafter in this review.
Recently, several reviews on operando characterization of electrocatalysts have been published, mainly focusing on either a few particular reaction(s) or technique(s).39–48 In this review, we summarize a variety of operando characterizations for diverse nano-, molecular and single atom electrocatalysts, and the capabilities and limitations of each operando technique are discussed as well. The advancements in these operando techniques are expected to build a coherent picture of the structure–activity relationship of electrocatalysts, providing guidelines for their rational design and synthesis.
2. 
        Operando characterizations during electrochemical processes
There are three major categories of electrocatalysts according to the nature of the active sites, namely nano-catalysts (metals, alloys, oxides, chalcogenides, etc.),49–54 molecular catalysts7,55–58 and recently emerging single atom catalysts.59–65 Regarding nano-catalysts including metals, alloys, oxides and chalcogenides, it is widely accepted that the surface metal atoms with unsaturated coordination environments at apices, edges, steps, and corners act as the active sites for electrochemical reactions.66 Two strategies are widely employed to enhance the catalytic activity/selectivity of nanoparticles: (1) increase the turnover frequency (TOF) and selectivity of active sites via rationally controlling the shapes, structures, crystal phases and compositions of nanocatalysts;15,36,67–69 and (2) enhance the atom utilization efficiency and mass activity by downsizing the particles, even down to single atoms.70–72 However, these finely-tuned nanostructures tend to agglomerate and/or deform during the electrochemical process, leading to their unfavorable deactivation during long-term operation. Moreover, the surface reconstruction of nanocatalysts under working conditions also obscures their structure–activity/selectivity relationship.
In parallel to nano-catalysts, molecularly defined compounds are also extensively studied due to their accurately tunable chemical and electronic structures,19,73,74 leading to near-unity selectivity.75,76 Recently, industrial scale current densities (>150 mA cm−2) have been achieved by immobilizing high concentrations of molecular catalysts on conductive electrodes (e.g., highly porous carbon),77,78 making them promising for practical applications. The emerging single and poly atom catalysts (SACs and PACs) are analogous to molecular catalysts, with isolated single or poly atoms embedded in a support (e.g., nitrogen doped carbon) as active sites. For instance, transition metal–nitrogen–carbon (M–N–C) materials with atomically dispersed M–Nx sites recently have emerged as promising electrocatalysts for various electrochemical reactions, e.g. CO2 reduction (CO2RR),79,80 oxygen reduction (ORR),81,82 hydrogen evolution (HER),83–85 oxygen evolution (OER)86–89 and nitrogen reduction (NRR).90–93 In contrast to the mononuclear sites in molecular catalysts, the active sites in SACs are not necessarily the same due to the non-uniform nature of the supports, the locations of defects, etc.94 Moreover, the isolated atoms in SAC/PACs and molecular catalysts possibly rearrange under potential bias, forming new metal oxide phases during electrochemical reactions. Thus, it is imperative to develop various operando techniques to identify the active phases, and to investigate the atom rearrangement process of nano-, molecular and single/poly atom catalysts under working conditions.
Various operando characterization techniques, including microscopies, X-ray based spectroscopies, Mössbauer spectroscopy, and optical spectroscopies, started to flourish in the past decades. Each of the above techniques has its own capabilities and limitations for different structures of active sites. For example, operando X-ray diffraction (XRD) is powerful for phase transitions in crystallized nano-catalysts, but not applicable to amorphous structures and SAC/PACs. On the other hand, operando X-ray absorption (XAS) is sensitive to the local structure, and suitable for both nano-catalysts and SAC/PACs, while the long-range ordered structure (e.g., the phase transition from metal oxide to metal hydroxide) in the former is beyond the scope of operando XAS. In this section, we summarize the application of various operando characterization techniques, focusing on their capabilities and limitations for characterizing specific attributes of different catalysts.
2.1 XAS
Hard and soft XAS using synchrotron radiation sources probes the atom-specific structural information of complex catalysts that governs their activity and selectivity. The characteristic features of XANES arise from the electron transitions from occupied to unoccupied states, thus providing information on the oxidation states and the electronic structures. The interference between ejected and back-scattered photoelectrons surrounding the absorbing atom leads to the oscillation in EXAFS, which is sensitive to the coordination environments, including the coordination number and the bond distance. The larger penetration depth of hard X-rays makes the real-time operando measurement of working electrocatalysts viable. Thus, operando hard XAS is extensively utilized to probe the dynamic site structures and their stabilities under working conditions. One of the major difficulties for operando hard XAS is that X-ray beam induced structural changes occur for some electrocatalysis systems; thus, particular care needs to be taken to distinguish between those changes arising from the X-ray beam and applied potential/adsorbates.

2.1.1 Hard XAS. 
2.1.1.1 Activity descriptor identification. 
J. McBreen, S. Mukerjee and coworkers systematically studied the local structure of a series of Pt–M (M = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Ru, Mo, Sn, etc.) alloys supported on high surface area carbon for fuel cell applications (HOR, ORR, methanol and CO oxidation) starting from the 1990s.95–102 These studies reveal that alloying Pt with other transition metals generally leads to an increased number of Pt d-band vacancies induced by the convoluted geometry/strain (a contracted Pt–Pt bond distance) and ligand effects. The Pt d-band vacancy was proposed by Nørskov and coworkers103,104 based on theoretical simulations to govern the Pt–O binding energy, and thus directly correlates to the catalytic activity of Pt-based catalysts. Thus, the Pt–Pt bond distance detected by opeando XAS acts as a valid strain descriptor that bridges the activity and atomic composition of Pt–M alloys.105–107 The degradation of their ORR activity in fuel cells mainly arises from the dissolution of the alloyed metal (M).106,108
2.1.1.2 Surface structure analysis – Δμ-XANES. 
The bulk-sensitive XAS measures the average oxidation state and coordination environment of the studied metal, while electrochemical reactions occur on the surface of active sites. To overcome this major drawback of operando XAS techniques for electrochemical applications, D. E. Ramaker and coworkers developed a surface-sensitive Δμ-XANES method, a difference procedure utilizing the XANES spectra at different applied potentials to isolate the effects of adsorbed reactants and reaction intermediates in the XANES spectra.109 The adsorption site can be identified by comparing the experimental Δμ results with theoretical calculations on model clusters.109–113 The specific anion adsorption on different Pt facets is elucidated by Δμ-XANES (Fig. 1a–c),114 providing insights into the competitive and site-specific anion poisoning effect on Pt for fuel cell applications. The Δμ-XANES analysis also allows the identification of the relative oxygen coverage at different potentials (Fig. 1d–f),115,116 thus revealing the key for the structure-induced accelerated kinetics of the ORR.
 Fig. 1  (a) Theoretical Δμ (μPt6–Cl–μPt6) for atop (solid curve), bridged (dashed curve) and 3-fold fcc (dotted curve) chloride on Pt6 clusters. (b) Theoretical Δμ of 3-fold O (solid curve), Cl (dotted curve) and their sums (dash-dot curve). (c) Experimental Δμ in 10−2 M Cl− at 0.54 V (solid curve) and 1.00 V (dashed curve) compared with the theoretical Δμ for 3-fold Cl. (d) Operando Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of Pt alloys supported on carbon at 0.54 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4, and (e) the corresponding potential dependent changes in their absorption peaks (Δμ = μ(V) − μ(0.54 V)). (f) The illustration of O*/HO* adsorption on a Pt surface. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.1.1.3 Reaction mechanism. 

Operando XAS studies also contribute to elucidating the reaction mechanisms. Regarding methanol oxidation over Pt–M (M = Ru, Mo and Sn) alloy,96,100,101,117 a bifunctional mechanism is validated: hydrogen dissociation and oxidation occurs on Pt sites, while the M promotes the oxidation of the residual CO through the absorption of OH from water. Thus, the methanol oxidation activity over Pt–M alloys not only depends on the d-band vacancies of Pt, but also relies heavily on the affinity of M-oxide to CO.101 Moreover, the increased number of Pt d-band vacancies reduces the Pt–CO binding energy, inhibiting the catalyst poisoning effect.96
For the HOR/HER, several theories have been proposed to explain the HOR/HER kinetics over Pt-based catalysts: (1) hydrogen binding energy (HBE) theory,118–120 wherein the metal–hydrogen binding energy (EM–H) determines the intrinsic HER/HOR kinetics; (2) the bifunctional mechanism over Pt–M alloys,121,122 wherein the OHad on surface M species promotes H2O dissociation for the HER and the Had oxidation for the HOR; and (3) potential of zero free charge (PZFC) theory,123,124 wherein the energy barrier of the Volmer step (H2O + e− ↔ Hads + OH−) increases due to the large reorganization energy of interfacial water to shuffle OH− through the double layer when the pH-dependent PZFC is higher than the HER/HOR potential. Recently, Q. Jia and coworkers systematically investigated the double layer interfaces of Pt–M nanocatalysts during the HER/HOR via operando XAS,125–127 and directly observed OHads and H2Oads with the H-up configuration (↑H2Oads) on surface M sites. The ↑H2Oads species anchored on Ru and Ni facilitates the removal of Hads on Pt via the bifunctional mechanism during the HOR,125 while the OHads anchored on M (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Ru) promotes the HER via the hard–soft acid–base (HSAB) mechanism (OHads–[AM(H2O)x]+ + e− → OH−–[AM(H2O)x]+, AM represents an alkali metal).125,126
2.1.1.4 Oxidation state and phase transition of nano-catalysts. 
As another critical factor that governs the catalytic activity, the oxidation states during operation are well-characterized with operando XAS. Y. Xiong et al.128 studied a Mn-doped cobalt ferrite spinel nanocrystal, Mn0.8(CoFe2)0.73O4, for the ORR in alkali media. The operando XAS results show a reversible Mn2+/3+ and Co2+/3+ redox transition between 0.2 and 1.2 V vs. RHE, while the oxidation state of Fe remains a constant in the whole potential range. This indicates that Mn and Co serve as synergistic coactive sites responsible for the high activity, while Fe stabilizes the spinel structure, leading to the remarkable durability of the catalyst. The oxidation of metal sites is widely observed in metal oxides and (oxy)hydroxides for the OER under reaction conditions by operando XAS and X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES, will be discussed later in Section 2.2).45,129–131 The highly active (Ni,Fe)oxyhydroxides for the OER developed by D. Friebel et al.132 exhibit strong potential induced changes in the oxidation states of both Fe and Ni with an anodic bias (1.12–1.72 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 2a and b). The key for the enhanced OER activity lies in the Fe3+ sites with an unusually short Fe–O bond distance due to phase contraction under anodic bias as revealed by FT-EXAFS (Fig. 2c and d). A similar phase contraction in both the in-plane lattice constant and the interlayer distance was demonstrated with operando wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) recently.133 M. K. Bates et al.130 observed via operando XAS that, for mixed Ni–Fe–Co oxides, Fe stabilizes Ni in the 2+ oxidation state, while Co facilitates the oxidation of Ni to 3+. The ternary oxide catalyst promotes the OER via the formation of a conductive Ni3+OOH phase to accelerate the electron transfer, and the strain effect that optimizes the Fe–O bond distance and Fe–OH/OOH binding energy. The iron impurities in the electrolyte significantly boost the OER activity of nickel (oxy)hydroxide, demonstrating that iron, even with a low amount, directly participates in the OER.134
 Fig. 2  The operando XANES spectra at the (a) Ni and (b) Fe K-edge of the FeNi-based OER catalyst, and (c) the corresponding FT-EXAFS spectra showing the potential-induced bond contraction. (d) The structure model for Fe-doped γ-NiOOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Regarding the HER, NRR and CO2RR with a cathodic potential bias, full or partial reduction of metal sites generally happens, with some residual surface or sublayer oxygen still existing in some cases.135–139 There has been a long-standing debate on the role of (sub)surface oxygen species in electrochemical reactions. Particularly, Cuδ+ species are proposed as the key for C–C coupling during the CO2RR to C2+ products,140,141 while the stability of (sub)surface oxygen over the Cu surface at working potentials needs further verification. Various research groups detected the presence of Cu1+ (or Cuδ+) in Cu-based nanocatalysts with a cathodic bias via operando hard and soft XAS (Fig. 3a and b).142–147 A direct correlation between the C2 faradaic efficiency and Cu oxidation state (detected by operando Cu K-edge XAS) in B-doped Cu is reported by E. H. Sargent's group.146 On the other hand, there are other reports showing that both Cu1+ and Cu2+ oxides reduce to Cu0 at working potentials, and the initial oxidation state of Cu does not affect the selectivity toward the C2 product (ethylene).148–150 C.-J. Chang et al.151 observed that the formation of hydrocarbons is highly correlated to Cu0 rather than Cu2O (Fig. 3c). Moreover, it is found that the amount of Cu1+ decreases with time at working potentials (Fig. 3a and b),142,145–147 probably due to the slow Cu1+ → Cu0 reduction process. Similar reduction of surface-oxidized copper to its metallic form is observed in Cu-based alloys.152–154 H. S. Jeon et al.153 investigated the behavior of a CuZn mixture during the CO2RR, and found that Cu is quickly reduced to Cu0 within minutes, while the full reduction of Zn to Zn0 needs several hours. The latter process is accompanied by the formation of CuZn alloy, and is responsible for the change in selectivity from CH4 over Cu–ZnO to CO over CuZn alloy. Similarly, Y. Wang et al.154 explored the activity of Cu50Ni50 alloy for the electrochemical conversion of nitrate to ammonia at cathodic potentials, and revealed pure metallic features in both Ni and Cu K-edge spectra without any Cu–O interaction by operando XAS.
 Fig. 3  (a) Operando Cu K-edge XANES spectra of the Cu-based electrocatalyst toward the CO2RR measured in 0.1 M KHCO3 after 15 min and 1 h of potential hold at −1.2 V vs. RHE. (b) Operando Cu K-edge XANES spectra (top) and the corresponding first derivatives (bottom) of the Cu-on-Cu3N catalyst as a function of reaction time at −0.95 V vs. RHE. (c) Quantification of the chemical state extracted from operando XANES of Cu (top), and the FEs toward hydrocarbon and alcohol products (bottom) as a function of applied potential for the CuAg-based catalysts. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The operando XAS studies performed by different groups worldwide demonstrate that the majority of copper oxides are reduced to metallic Cu during the CO2RR, while the presence of minor Cu1+ is also possible, depending on the structure of the Cu-based catalyst. It should be noted here that even if less than 1% Cu1+ remains at low potentials, it can serve as the main active sites for the CO2RR. The detection of trace amounts of Cu1+ on the surface only with bulk techniques is a challenge, especially for nano-catalysts with large particle sizes. Nevertheless, no consensus on the role of Cu1+ species has been achieved, even with the assistance of other operando techniques (e.g., operando Raman spectroscopy, will be discussed later in Section 2.7.1). Further advancements in operando techniques with higher resolutions (e.g., STEM coupled with EELS mapping at the atomic scale) are required to elucidate the role of (sub)surface oxygen species in electrocatalysis.
2.1.1.5 Oxidation state and structural reconstruction of molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs. 
For molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs, the lack of long-range order and the low metal loading make it a challenge to characterize their structures using operando techniques. Operando XAS is the most powerful tool to study the oxidation states and structural changes or reconstructions of molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs upon electrode polarization. C. Genovese et al.155 developed a single/poly-atomic Fe3+ oxyhydroxide on nitrogen-doped carbon with high selectivity toward acetic acid (>60%) at low overpotential (−0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl), which is one of the few reports to date on the generation of C2 products over a Cu-free catalyst. Operando XAS revealed a structural transformation from Fh–FeOOH to a mixture of ferrihydrite and wüstite (Fe2+) between OCV and −0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl. The Fe2+ species act as active sites toward formic acid, while the N species in the carbon support concertedly enable C–C coupling to form acetic acid. When the potential further reduces to −1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl, iron is fully reduced to Fe0, leading to increased selectivity toward H2.155

Operando XAS has been utilized to monitor electronic and structural changes of molecular catalysts (e.g., FePc/C for the ORR). The absorption edge position shifts toward higher energy when the applied potential increases from 0.2 V to 0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl due to the oxidation of iron, indicating that Fe2+Pc is oxidized to [Fe3+Pc]+.156 In the meanwhile, the pre-edge peak ∼7112 eV attributed to the 1s → 3d transition became more pronounced due to the reduced structural symmetry upon oxidation. This suggests that there is binding of one or two axial H2O/OH− ligands for [Fe3+Pc]+. I. C. Stefan et al.157 also revealed via operando EXAFS that the FePc(NO) adduct is present in a square pyramidal five-coordinate arrangement with the axial NO ligand, with the Fe center shifted away from the Pc plane toward the axial NO, probably due to the strong Fe–NO binding energy.
Fe(Co)–N–C SACs with M–N4 sites analogous to those in Fe(Co)Pc are the most promising platinum group metal (PGM)-free candidates for the ORR.81,158,159 Similar to FePc, Fe–N–C catalysts exhibit a reversible Fe3+/2+ redox transition in both O2 and N2-saturated electrolytes according to the extensive operando XAS study over a variety of Fe–N–C catalysts by Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee's group (Fig. 4a).116,159–163 The operando FT-EXAFS shows a concurrent decrease in the Fe–N peak intensity with decreasing applied potential (Fig. 4b), accompanied by an elongated Fe–N bond distance (Fig. 4c).159,160 The desorption of OH axial ligands at low potential is proposed to be responsible for the above phenomena. Similar behaviors of Fe–N–C catalysts have been observed by other groups as well (Fig. 4d).82,164–166 In contrast, negligible changes of operando XANES in the whole potential range (0.2–1.0 V vs. RHE) over Co–N–C are reported (Fig. 4e).82,116,167 The different behaviors of Fe–N–C and Co–N–C SACs are ascribed to the M2+/3+–N4 redox potential,82,116 which is directly correlated to the M–O binding energy: the higher the redox potential, the lower the M–O binding energy.58 The Co2+/3+–N4 redox potential is above 1.2 V vs. RHE, and the rate determining step (RDS) over Co–N–C is the adsorption of O2 due to the too weak Co–O binding energy. Regarding Fe–N4 sites, the redox potential is 0.7–0.8 V vs. RHE, and both the Fe–O binding energy and the site-blocking effect (the potential-dependent availability of active sites, θ) determine the ORR rate. Recently, L. Osmieri et al.166 proposed a kinetic model for Fe–N–C according to the θ values determined by the Δμ technique based on operando XAS, and this model predicts well the ORR kinetics at the membrane electrode assembly (MEA) level. These studies indicate that the redox potential is an effective descriptor for the ORR activity over M–N–C catalysts, and is closely related to the M–Nx structures (e.g., coordination number, M–N bond distance, pyridinic/pyrrolic nitrogen).
 Fig. 4  
Operando Fe K-edge (a) XANES with concomitant first derivatives (insets), and (b) the corresponding FT-EXAFS of FeTPP-300-C, FeTPP-800-C, and PANI-Fe-C as a function of applied potential. The spectra of FeTPP-800-C and PANI-Fe-C were collected in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte, while the spectra of FeTPP-300-C were collected in N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (c) The Fe-N/O bond distances of FeTPP-300-C, FeTPP-800-C, and PANI-Fe-C obtained by fitting their FT-EXAFS spectra at 0.1 and 0.9 V. Operando XANES spectra of (d) Fe0.5 and (e) Co0.5 as a function of applied potential measured in N2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4. Fe0.5 and Co0.5 catalysts are obtained via the pyrolysis of well-mixed ZIF-8, phenanthroline and iron or cobalt acetate at 1050 °C in Ar, and comprise exclusively single metal-atom Fe(Co)–Nx sites. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
The M2+/3+–N4 redox potential is also found to be critical for the CO2RR. N. Leonard et al.168 identified an Fe2+/1+–N4 redox transition for Fe–N–C at −1.1 V vs. RHE during the CO2RR, and this redox potential coincidences with the onset potential for CO2 reduction to CH4 (Fig. 5a). On the other hand, when the applied potential is above −1.1 V vs. RHE, CO is the only product detected. Thus, Fe1+–N4 is inferred to be responsible for the CO2 reduction to CH4. Moreover, the oxidation state of iron in Fe–N–C is also critical for its activity of the CO2RR toward CO. J. Li et al.79 observed a reversible Fe3+/2+–N4 redox transition before the onset of CO2 reduction to CO (Fig. 5b), and thus Fe2+–N4 is the active site responsible for the catalytic behavior of Fe–N–C. On the other hand, J. Gu et al.169 proposed that maintaining an Fe3+ oxidation state during the CO2RR (−0.37 V vs. RHE) significantly promotes the CO producing rate. The Fe3+–N4 to Fe2+–N3 redox transition is lowered from −0.1 V to −0.5 V vs. RHE by changing the coordinated N from pyridinic N to pyrrolic N (Fig. 5c and d), and this redox transition is accompanied by the loss of one coordinated nitrogen atom, which significantly changes the local structure around Fe ions. However, the reversibility of such a redox transition is not discussed in that report,169 further rendering questions about the stability of this system.
 Fig. 5  (a) Operando Fe K-edge XANES (left) and FT-EXAFS (right) spectra in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3. (b) Change in the absorption edge (ΔE = E0 − E0,metal) of metal K-edge XANES spectra of M–N–C catalysts with the applied potential (green: Mn; red: Fe; blue: Co; pink: Ni; dark green: Cu). The electrolyte was CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3, and the OCP was around 0.7 V vs. RHE. Operando Fe K-edge XANES spectra (left) and the first derivative of the spectra (right) of (c) Fe3+–N–C and (d) Fe2+–N–C in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. Operando Co K-edge (e) XANES and (f) FT-EXAFS spectra in KOH electrolyte during the HER. Operando Cu-K edge XANES (g) and FT-EXAFS (h) spectra of Cu–N–C in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 169, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 170, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
J. Li et al.79 investigated a series of M–N–C (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) catalysts, and found that the oxidation state of Mn remains unchanged, while a clear reduction and/or structural reconstruction is observed for all other metals (Fig. 5b). However, B. Zhang et al.171 reported a slight change in oxidation state for a single atom Mn–N–C catalyst induced by the applied potential or CO2 in the electrolyte. Regarding Co–N–C with atomically dispersed Co–N4 sites, even though the oxidation state of Co remains almost unchanged in the CO2RR potential range, drastic structural reconstruction is observed.79 Similarly, L. Cao et al.83 reported the structural transformation from Co–N4 to HO–Co–N2 at −0.1 V vs. RHE during the HER (Fig. 5e and f). In the same study, slight oxidation of Co is observed under cathodic bias from the operando XANES, and the reason needs more investigation.83 For Ni–N–C, which is the most promising SAC for the CO2RR to CO with near unity selectivity at an industrial level current density,172 the oxidation state of Ni under working conditions is reduced to 1+.79 This agrees with some reports,173 but contradicts others.174 To further explain these controversial results, a systematic study needs to be performed in order to clarify the similarities and differences in those M–N–C catalysts reported. By carefully deciphering the local structures of M–Nx sites under working conditions (including the coordination number, geometric structure, N species as a ligand, etc.), we are expecting to further elucidate the structure–activity relationship for M–N–C catalysts. The structural change of Cu–N–C (Fig. 5g and h) will be discussed in detail later.
Molecular catalysts with M–N4 sites are also highly active and selective toward the CO2RR as well. E. H. Sargent et al.175 studied the oxidation state and geometric structure of a molecular catalyst in the FeTPP[Cl]/Cu hybrid system for the CO2RR via operando XAS (Fig. 6a and b): (1) the average oxidation state of Fe was ∼1.7–1.8 under operating conditions, suggesting that porphyrin-coordinated Fe2+, Fe1+ and/or Fe0 are intermediate species during the CO2RR; (2) a higher pre-edge feature from the XANES spectra in the electrolyte indicated a more distorted structure by coordination of the metal center with CO2RR intermediates; and (3) no Fe–Fe bond is observed in the FT-EXAFS spectra over the CO2RR relevant potential range, confirming that FeTPP[Cl] maintained its complex status instead of being reduced to iron nanoparticles under the operating conditions. A slight reduction in the oxidation state and minimal structural change (no nanoparticle formation) are also observed for other molecular catalysts (e.g., CoTPyP (tetra(4-pyridyl)porphyrin) and NiTAPc (2,9,16,23-tetra(amino)phthalocyanine)) by operando XAS (Fig. 6c and d).176,177 Others observed a constant 2+ oxidation state of cobalt in CoPc within the whole CO2RR potential range via operando Co L3- and K-edge XAS (Fig. 6e).178,179 These results suggest the high stability of molecular catalysts, and point to the key role of metal oxidation states for their catalytic activity.
 Fig. 6  
Operando Fe K-edge (a) XANES and (b) EXAFS spectra of the FeTPP[Cl]/Cu catalyst in 1 M KHCO3. Operando XANES spectra of (c) NiTAPc, (d) CoTPyP and CoPc in CO2-saturated aqueous electrolytes. Operando Cu K-edge (f) XANES and (g) EXAFS spectra of CuPc in 0.5 M CO2-saturated KHCO3. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 176, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f and g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 180, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
On the other hand, some molecular catalysts experience radical structural changes under operation conditions. Z. Weng et al.180 revealed a reversible change from CuPc with a well-defined square planar Cu–N4 structure to copper nanoparticles as evidenced by operando XANES and EXAFS (Fig. 6f and g). The Cu particle size formed in situ at −1.06 V vs. RHE is estimated to be 2 ± 1 nm. Since Cu–N4 sites and Cu nanoparticles coexist under the working conditions, a variety of products (CO, C2H4, HCOOH, CH4, etc.) are detected over CuPc,180 while CO is identified as the major product over other MPcs (M = Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni).179 Moreover, there is no clue whether there is a synergy between Cu–N4 sites and Cu nanoparticles or not. The irreversible formation of Cu nanoparticles, with relatively larger particle sizes compared to those formed from CuPc, with a cathodic potential bias is observed over a Cu-based MOF (HKUST-1), a Cu-based COF (covalent organic framework) and [Cu(cyclam)]Cl2.180–182 The presence of the leftover demetallated ligand (H2Pc) is proposed to provide a spatial configuration to control the growth of Cu nanoparticles, acting as the key to the reversible restructuring behavior of CuPc.180
Similarly, the atomically dispersed Cu–N4 sites in Cu–N–C reversibly form Cu0 nanoparticles during the CO2RR as confirmed with operando XAS (Fig. 5g and h).170 The formation of Cu0 has been suggested by ex situ XPS as well,80 and the metallic Cu nanoparticles are responsible for CO2 reduction to C2 products (e.g., ethanol).170 This reversible atom rearrangement involves the breaking of a Cu–N bond, and the migration of adjacent Cu atoms to form nanoparticles at a low potential; then the reverse process happens when stopping the potential bias. The reformation of the Cu–N4 structure is unexpected, and renders questions about the role of demetallated macrocycles in the reversibility of this structural reconstruction. Advanced operando STEM-HAADF with atomic resolution would probably be able to monitor the pathway of a single Cu atom during the CO2RR, and thus contribute to elucidating the Cu reconstruction process in Cu–N–C.
In addition to the reversible formation of Cu nanoparticles over CuPc and single atom Cu–N–C, irreversible demetallation of FePc,183 elongated Fe–N bonds in single atom Fe–N–C,159,160 and weakened Ni–N bonds in Ni-TAPc177 are observed at low potentials via operando spectroscopy. All these in situ structural changes detected suggest the weakening of M–N bonds of M–N4 structures with decreased applied potential. Similar weakened Pt–N bonds are also observed by S. Fang et al.184 over a single atom Pt–N–C catalyst for the HER via operando XAS. The white-line intensity of the XANES spectra decreases with decreasing applied potential, demonstrating a reduced oxidation state of Pt toward the metallic state. In the meanwhile, the intensity of the oscillation hump (HP) in the XANES post-edge plateau also decreases, accompanied by a decreased Pt–N(C) peak intensity in the FT-EXAFS spectra. These reversible changes imply dynamic structural disorder of Pt sites, where the single Pt atoms are less coordinated to the N–C substrate during the HER. Theoretical simulations support that the Pt sites with weakened Pt–N(C) interaction are responsible for the superior activity of Pt–N–C toward the HER.
Moreover, the reversible rearrangements of transition metal atoms in SACs deliver critical implications: are all the delicate efforts devoted to fabricating SACs necessary, if they anyway form agglomerated nanoparticles/clusters during operation? This question is more prominent for the electrochemical reactions that require large overpotentials (e.g., the CO2RR and NRR), since the applied potential serves as the driving force for the structural reconstruction. Recently, SACs for the NRR are emerging as a hot research topic;90–93,185,186 however, operando characterizations are required to confirm that the active sites under working conditions are really single atoms.


2.1.2 Soft XAS. 
In contrast to hard XAS, which measures the excitation of inner shell electrons, soft XAS directly probes the reacting orbitals with valence electrons (3d orbitals for first-row transition metal cations and C, N and O orbitals for anions/adsorbed species). This offers the opportunity to directly observe the metal–reactant/intermediate interactions. Another advantage of soft X-rays over hard X-rays is the considerably shorter attenuation lengths of the former, making soft X-ray techniques more surface sensitive.43 However, soft X-ray spectroscopy must be performed under an ultrahigh vacuum since water and air absorb photons in the soft X-ray energy range, rendering grand challenges to perform operando soft XAS with liquid cells due to the safety risks induced by the presence of liquid and gas.

Operando M L-edge and O K-edge XAS have been applied on metal oxides for the OER/ORR. P. Jiang et al.187 firstly developed a liquid flow cell with working, reference and counter electrodes for soft XAS studies during electrochemical cycling. J. Zhou et al.188 reported, according to the operando O K-edge XAS results, that part of the cobalt in Li2Co2O4 increases from 3+ to 4+ during the OER, accompanied by delithiation. The Co4+ is responsible for the high activity of Li2Co2O4. X. Zheng et al.189 show with operando soft M L-edge XAS that the addition of Fe and Co lowers the potential for forming Ni4+ sites in nickel (oxy)hydroxides, which act as active sites for the OER. Operando O K-edge XAS identified a direct correlation between the formation of edge-sharing NiO6 octahedral sites and the OER onset in a Ni–Bi nanocatalyst (Fig. 7a and b).190 M. Risch et al.191 revealed quasi-reversible redox for manganese oxide from mixed Mn2+/3+ at 0.5 V vs. RHE (ORR region) to mixed Mn3+/4+ at 1.65 V vs. RHE (OER region) (Fig. 7c and d), and a maximum degree of Mn–O hybridization for Mn3+ (Fig. 7e and f). M. F. Tesch et al.192 also detected Mn4+ species above 1.45 V vs. RHE (Fig. 7g), while the degree of Mn–O hybridization increases with the applied potential, even with an unchanged Mn oxidation state (Fig. 7h). This agrees with another report on increased Ni–O hybridization in Ni–Fe(OxHy) at high potentials during the OER.193 The M–O hybridization promotes the charge transfer from O to M, which is the key step for the OER.
 Fig. 7  (a) Operando O K-edge XAS spectra of the Ni–Bi electrocatalyst in 0.1 M K–Bi aqueous solution from 0.3 to 1.0 V, and (b) the correlation between the XAS peak area and the OER current vs. applied potential. Operando (c and d) Mn L2,3-edge and (e and f) O K-edge XAS spectra of an electrodeposited MnOx film in O2-saturated KOH. Operando (g) Mn L2,3-edge and (h) O K-edge XAS spectra of MnOx in buffer electrolyte at the specified potentials reported vs. RHE. The inset of (h) shows the peak intensities at 529 and 532 eV as a function of potential. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 190, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 191, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 192, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Regarding SAC/PACs, there is an intrinsic limitation for operando hard XAS: EXAFS cannot distinguish between C, N and O atoms, which are the most commonly used ligands to stabilize single atoms. As a good complement, C, N, O K-edge soft XAS provides information about the coordinated atoms. Unfortunately, no operando soft N, C, O K-edge XAS study on SAC/PACs has been reported so far to the best of our knowledge, probably due to the fact that only a small portion of N (or C and O) is coordinated with transition metals. As mentioned earlier, XAS measures the average of all N species present in SAC/PACs, making it a challenge to deconvolute the metal-coordinated vs. uncoordinated light atoms.
In summary, operando hard XAS elucidates the oxidation states, the geometric structures and the reconstructions of active sites under operating conditions, thus contributing to the identification of activity descriptors and reaction mechanisms, while operando soft XAS detects the oxidation states of the metal and the metal–ligand interaction. However, due to the larger penetration depth of hard X-rays compared to that of soft X-rays, hard XAS measures the average structural information for the bulk of the sample. On the other hand, the electrochemical process occurs on the electrode/electrolyte interface, which is sensitive to the surface structures of catalysts. As a result, operando hard XAS is perfect for investigating molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs with only one or a few metal atoms as active sites. The surface-sensitive Δμ-XANES method and other operando spectroscopy techniques (e.g. Raman and IR, discussed later) are more suitable for studying the surface changes of nano-catalyts. The discrepancy between the bulk and surface information obtained from operando XAS and Raman/IR, respectively, is particularly prominent for nano-catalysts with large particle sizes. The different particle sizes of nano-catalysts also explain the contradictory results on the oxidation state of Cu for the CO2RR: some operando XAS studies see Cu0 only, while other operando XAS and Raman studies detect Cu1+ as well. Thus, special care should be taken when applying bulk techniques in operando studies of nano-catalysts.

2.2 XES
Complimentary to XAS, X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) measures the fluorescence photons emitted during de-excitation, where the electron from an outer-shell transfers to the electron hole in the inner-shell created in XAS. XAS and XES detect the lowest energy unoccupied state and the highest energy occupied state, respectively, and both techniques probe the local electronic structure and bonding configuration of the absorbing atom. In some cases, XES provides structural information complimentary to XANES. For example, the shifts of the Kβ1,3 peak are more linearly correlated with the oxidation state and depend less on the structure compared to XANES,194 suitable to monitor small changes in oxidation state. The Kα1,2 and Kβ1,3 emission lines are sensitive to the total spin in the valence shell, and thus are capable of detecting spin-crossover during electrochemical reactions.194
Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS)-based XES has recently been proved to be feasible for operando studies owing to the development of third-generation synchrotron facilities.131 S. Gul et al.131 measured the Kβ1,3 emission lines of MnNiOx during the ORR and OER, where the oxidation states of Ni and Mn increased from 2+ and 3.6+ (for the ORR) to 3.7+ and 4+ (for the OER), respectively. The role of Ni mainly lies in promoting the oxidation of Mn. This study opens up an avenue for other operando XES studies, particularly operando Kβ2,5 and Kβ′′ XES. The Kβ2,5 and Kβ′′ lines are related to valence-to-core transitions, and directly reflect the configurations of electron orbitals that participate in the chemical bond,194 making it possible to investigate with hard X-rays the electronic structure that is conventionally accessed in L- and M-edge soft XAS. As mentioned earlier, the difficulties of operando soft X-ray experiments mainly lie in handling liquid cells under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions, which is naturally solved with operando hard XES. In addition, Kβ′′ XES is capable of probing the ligand–metal interactions, and, more importantly, the preferred adsorption geometry of adsorbates,194,195 which generally govern the catalytic activity. These new technologies will unambiguously provide unique perspectives on the design of electrocatalysts.
2.3 Mössbauer spectroscopy
The Mössbauer effect involves the recoil-free nuclear resonance emission and absorption of γ-rays by atomic nuclei in a solid, and constitutes the cornerstone of Mössbauer spectroscopy. There are three main parameters in a Mössbauer spectrum: (1) the isomer shift (IS) arising from the electric monopole interaction between the nucleus and s-electrons, (2) the quadrupole splitting (QS) caused by the electric quadrupole interaction between the nuclear quadrupole moment and an electric field gradient at the nucleus, and (3) the magnetic hyperfine field (B) attributed to the magnetic dipole interaction between the nuclear magnetic dipole moment and a magnetic field at the nucleus.196,197 Thus, the combination of IS, QS and B provides unique information about the electronic structure (spin and oxidation states), the geometric symmetry and the magnetic property of the element of interest, and the electronegativity of ligands. Although the information obtained from Mössbauer spectroscopy is critical for the catalytic activity and/or selectivity of electrocatalysts, the fittings and assignments of Mössbauer lines on the basis of a series of reference spectra are nevertheless a challenge.
The intensity of the Mössbauer spectrum is governed by the Lamb–Mössbauer factor, in other words, the recoil-free fraction, which depends on the free atom recoil energy, the lattice rigidity and the temperature. In principle, Mössbauer spectroscopy is only applicable to limited elements with a relatively low nuclear transition energy (corresponding to a high Lamb–Mössbauer factor) and convenient lifetime of the excited state, in order to obtain a spectrum with sufficient quality and a reasonable acquisition time. As a result, Mössbauer spectroscopy is now primarily performed with the nuclei 57Fe and 119Sn. Fortunately, Fe and Sn are widely used in the field of electrocatalysis. CuSn alloy and Sn-based catalysts are highly efficient toward the CO2RR,198,199 while Fe-based catalysts have been reported for various electrochemical reactions, e.g., Fe–N–C and Fe-based macrocycles for the ORR81,158,159,162 and CO2RR,79,80,200 NiFe-based materials for the OER,201,202 and spinel oxides for the ORR/OER.203 However, only a few studies on operando Mössbauer spectroscopy have been published so far.
E. B. Yeager and coworkers firstly developed an electrochemical cell for Mössbauer spectroscopy in the 1980s, and applied it for an FePc/C catalyst toward the ORR in 1 M KOH.204 Two doublets assigned to FePc absorbed on carbon (D2) and bulk crystallized FePc (D1) are detected by ex situ Mössbauer spectroscopy.204 The quadrupole splitting (QS) of D2 decreases upon contact with an alkaline solution, ascribed to the formation of an FePc–OH species with hydroxyl in the axial positions. The ratio of the absorption areas of D2 and D1, A2/A1, increases from ∼5 at low potentials (−0.65, −0.4, and −0.2 V vs. Hg/HgO) to ∼11 at open circuit (∼0 V vs. Hg/HgO), and then to ∼21 at 0.2 V vs. Hg/HgO. This can be explained by a reversible Fe2+/3+ redox transition of bulk FePc, in line with operando XANES results.
Then the development of operando Mössbauer spectroscopy experienced a period of stagnation, probably due to the significant amount of acquisition time required caused by the strong absorption of γ-rays by the liquid electrolyte in operando liquid cells. Thanks to the advancement of third-generation synchrotron light sources, synchrotron-based Mössbauer spectroscopy is able to reach higher local resolution with shorter measurement time in contrast to the lab-based one. In 2015, J. Y. C. Chen et al.205 used the synchrotron-based Mössbauer spectroscopy at the Argonne National Laboratory, and explored the chemical states of NiFe- and Fe-oxyhydroxide electrocatalysts for the OER in a liquid operando cell. Operando Mössbauer spectroscopy detected Fe4+ species in the NiFe-hydroxide catalyst during steady-state water oxidation, comprising ∼21% of the total Fe, while no Fe4+ species are present in the Fe-hydroxide (Fig. 8). The presence of Fe4+ species in the NiFe(OH)x catalyst during the OER is also observed by operando XAS.129 The stabilizing effect of NiOOH is proposed to be responsible for Fe4+ existing in NiFe-based catalysts under working conditions.205 The Fe4+ species at edge, corner or defect sites within the Fe-doped NiOOH lattice are proposed as possible active sites for the OER.
 Fig. 8  (a) CVs of NiFe layered oxyhydroxide electrocatalysts collected in the Mössbauer-electrochemical cell with a scan rate of 25 mV s−1, and the operando Mössbauer spectra measured at (b) open circuit, (c) 1.49 V, (d) 1.62 V, (e) 1.76 V with the applied potential sweeping positively, and (f) 1.62 V, and (g) open circuit with the applied potential sweeping negatively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, D. J. Myers at Argonne National Laboratory studied the behavior of atomically dispersed Fe–N4 sites in an Fe–N–C SAC catalyst for the ORR in a three-electrode liquid cell.206 Unlike the mononuclear sites in molecular catalysts, multiplicity of active species is common for SACs, in particular M–N–C catalysts obtained by heat treatment.94 Thus, it is of great significance but a challenge to identify the structure, activity and stability of each active species under working conditions. For Fe based SACs, operando57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy is a powerful tool, and probably the only one, to achieve this target. However, there is only limited access to synchrotron-based Mössbauer spectroscopy, impeding the differentiation of various Fe–N4 sites under working conditions.
Mostly recently, F. Jaouen's group designed a liquid-free fuel cell to study Fe–N–C catalysts for the ORR using lab-based Mössbauer spectroscopy.207 D1 and D2 are extensively identified as active sites in Fe–N–C catalysts by 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy.81,159,208 Under operating conditions, D2 is found to be unchanged, while part of D1 irreversibly transforms to a new species, D3 (Fig. 9). The rest of D1 reversibly converts from high spin O–Fe3+–N4 to high spin Fe2+–N4 (Fig. 9),207 agreeing well with operando XAS results. In combination with DFT simulations, D1 and D2 are assigned to high spin Fe3+N4C12 (pyrrolic N) and low/medium spin Fe2+N4C10 (pyridinic N). Both D1 and D2 are found to be active, while only D2 is stable under ORR conditions (Fig. 9). The demetallation of D1 due to its high binding energy with O2 is responsible for the fast degradation of Fe–N–C in PEMFCs. Operando inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is also implemented to investigate the demetallation of SACs during electrochemical reactions;209 however, this technique only detects the detached metal ions dissolved in the electrolyte, while those remaining in the catalyst layer as oxides cannot be detected.
 Fig. 9  The spectral doublet components D1 (a), D2 (c) and D3 (e) resulting from the fittings of operando Mössbauer spectra, and the corresponding IS and QS values of D1 (b), D2 (d) and D3 (f) at 0.8 V (2), 0.2 V (2), 0.8 V (4) and 0.2 V (4). The number in parentheses represents the cycle number. In (a, c and e), solid curve: 0.8 V (2); dashed curve: 0.2 V (2); ×: 0.8 V (4); ·: 0.2 V (4). In (b, d and f), □: QS; ●: IS. D1H is the Mössbauer signature of S1 sites at high potential while D1L is their signature at low potential. (g) Coordination or structural changes of D1 and D2 under operando conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207, Copyright 2020, ChemRxiv. 
2.4 XPS
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measures the kinetic energy and the number of escaped electrons by irradiating the sample of interest with photons, providing element-specific chemical and electronic state information. The natural advantage of XPS for catalysis studies is that it is a surface-sensitive technique; however, the implementation of operando XPS on the electrode–electrolyte interface is hindered by the requirement of an ultra-high vacuum. Even with the most advanced synchrotron-based ambient pressure XPS (APXPS), the liquid layer still needs to be thinner than 20 nm for operando measurements.39
Nevertheless, quasi-operando studies have been conducted by carefully transferring the catalyst after electrocatalysis to an adjacent XPS chamber without exposing the sample to air. B. R. Cuenya's group did an extensive quasi-operando XPS study on a variety of catalysts for the CO2RR. A full reduction of surface AgO to its metallic form is observed after cathodic bias for 3 minutes.210 Regarding Cu, in some cases it is fully reduced to Cu0 at −1.0 V vs. RHE, and Cu0 re-oxidizes to Cu1+ only after a potential pulse higher than 0 V,211,212 while in other cases Cu1+ is still observed after 1 hour of electrocatalysis,213 suggesting the possible presence of (sub)surface oxygen over Cu during the CO2RR. A. Nisslon's group developed a dip-and-pull strategy for quasi-operando XPS.140 Similarly, they detected the presence of residual subsurface oxygen in Cu reduced at a low potential, which is proposed to change the electronic structure of surface Cu0. These controversial results further blur the role of Cu1+ for C–C coupling. Moreover, the proposed (sub)surface oxygen should be taken with care, since a rapid interaction between Cu and H2O might occur during sample transfer.
The major disadvantage of the quasi-operando technique is the absence of a potential bias, where the potential-induced change in the chemical and electronic state of a catalyst may not be maintained. Other approaches toward real operando XPS measurements mainly focus on the cell design,39 and, in our view, are still work-in-progress.
2.5 Optical spectroscopy: Raman and IR
Optical Raman and IR spectroscopy are powerful techniques for fingerprinting of molecules based on their vibration modes. IR spectroscopy detects the light absorption due to changes in the dipole moment, while Raman spectroscopy measures the inelastic scattering caused by changes in the polarizability. According to the rule of mutual exclusion, Raman active centrosymmetric molecules are IR inactive, and vice versa. Thus, Raman and IR spectroscopy are complementary techniques in most cases. Operando measurements typically involve electrode surfaces immersed in liquid electrolytes; as a result, Raman spectroscopy is more viable for operando characterizations due to the low Raman scattering of water. To enhance the weak scattering signal, the surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) effect is widely exploited. Regarding IR, the attenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (ATR-SEIRAS) operating mode is frequently used in operando studies due to the minimized electrolyte layer interference and enhanced absorption signal.

2.5.1 Phase transition and active site identification. 

Operando Raman has been proved to be capable of detecting the potential-driven phase transition and chemical states of active sites.214–216 C. Xie et al.215 reported the electrochemically driven phase transition from WO3 to HxWO3 by operando Raman spectroscopy on a Pt/WO3 nanocatalyst for the HER. The HxWO3 phase promotes the electron and proton transfer to Pt active sites, and thus accelerates the HER kinetics. Z. Qiu et al.216 investigated the interfacial active phases of FeNi and Ni oxide for the HER/OER via operando Raman. During the OER, the presence of Fe promotes the transformation from the NixFe1−xO to the more active γ-NixFe1−xOOH phase with Ni4+ when the potential is above 0.4 V vs. RHE, while the pure NiO transforms to less active β-Ni3+OOH. In the HER potential region, a synergy between Ni and Fe sites is observed with water molecules dissociatively adsorbed on adjacent Ni and Fe sites, forming Had–Ni and OHad–Fe intermediates.

Operando Raman is capable of identifying the demetallation of molecular catalysts as well. According to the study on FePc/Au(111) by Z. Chen et al.,183 an attenuation of the intensity of the characteristics peaks for FePc at 593, 682 and 751 cm−1 is evident when the applied potential switches from 0.7 to 0.4 V vs. RHE (Fig. 10a and b). This is due to a non-planar geometry caused by an Fe displacement above the molecular plane of the macrocycle at low potentials. This intensity attenuation is reversibly recovered only if the applied potential is switched back to 0.7 V within several minutes (Fig. 10c). After an extended polarization at 0.4 V (>15 min), irreversible changes occur: the peaks at 682 and 751 cm−1 from FePc disappear, while new peaks assigned to H2Pc form at 682 and 751 cm−1 (Fig. 10d). This provides direct evidence for iron demetallation for FePc during the ORR, which is responsible for its deactivation during operation. Similar reversible and irreversible changes are also found in Fe–N–C catalysts with atomically dispersed Fe–N4 sites, probably due to a weakened Fe–N bond at low potentials. Moreover, S. Liu et al.177 also revealed by operando Raman spectroscopy a weakened Ni–N bond at low potentials over carbon-supported nickel(II) 2,9,16,23-tetra(amino)phthalocyanine (Ni-TAPc/C) induced by Ni2+/1+ reduction.
 Fig. 10  (a and b) Operando Raman spectra of FePc/Au(111) at 0.4 and 0.7 V in aerated 0.1 M HClO4. The 0.4 V spectrum in (c) was obtained immediately after the applied potential was set at 0.4 V, and that in (d) was obtained after 15 minutes of potential hold at 0.4 V. The corresponding tip-retracted spectrum is plotted in a grey color. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, operando Raman contributes to identifying the active species for electrochemical reactions. B. S. Yeo's group217 and J.-F. Li's group218 observed the formation of S–H bonds on the MoS2 surface in the HER potential range, unambiguously proving that S atoms in MoS2 serve as active species. A. M. Ismail et al.219 identified a sub-stoichiometric Pb oxide on the Au–Pb cathode responsible for the CH4 formation over this Cu-free catalyst. X. Hu and coworkers combined operando Raman spectroscopy with 18O-labeling experiments,220 and directly observed the critical role of Fe in Fe-doped Ni oxides for the OER. For Fe-free Ni or NiCo oxides, lattice oxygen atoms in Ni sites promote the OER through redox-active oxygen intermediates that form NiOO− (Fig. 11a). For FeNi and FeNiCo oxides, Fe species act as the major active sites, where the lattice oxygen atoms no longer participate in the fast OER (Fig. 11b). The same group also found a volcano trend between the TOF of Fe sites and the lattice disordering of NiOOH induced by the addition of Fe (Fig. 11c).221
 Fig. 11  
Operando Raman spectra of 18O-labeled (a) Ni and (b) NiFe hydroxides measured at 1.65 V in 0.1 M KOH in H216O. (c) The volcano trend of the TOF of Fe sites over the lattice disordering of NiOOH induced by the addition of Fe. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 220, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 221, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 

Operando Raman also detects the oxidation states of active sites during electrochemical reactions. For example, SnO2 and ZnO reduce to their metallic forms under cathodic bias during the CO2RR, which is the key for their high selectivity toward formic acid and CO, respectively.222,223 Recently, P.-P. Yang et al.224 detected the presence of Cu1+ species in Cu-based electrocatalysts at −0.61 V vs. RHE during the CO2RR via operando Raman and XAS. According to this report, the amount of Cu1+ species is significantly enhanced via tailoring the shape of Cu-based catalysts. T.-C. Chou et al.225 revealed the critical role of the oxidation state of Cu for its selectivity toward C2 products via operando SEIRAS studies: the atop-adsorbed CO (COatop) intermediate is formed on the Cu1+ surface, while bridge-adsorbed CO (CObridge) is formed on the Cu0 surface. The co-existence of COatop and CObridge ensures the formation of C2 products; only COatop leads to C1 products, and CObridge itself is inert. The inert nature of CObridge and the conversion from COatop to CObridge at low CO coverage is also observed by C. M. Gunathunge et al.226 On the other hand, Y. Zhao et al.227 recently identified CuOx/(OH)y phases over various Cu surfaces via operando Raman spectroscopy, but no clear correlation between these surface oxygen groups and the activity/selectivity toward C2 products is found. This indicates the spectator role of (sub)surface oxygen for C2 production. Despite the extensive study on Cu with various operando techniques, the debate on the stability and the role of Cu1+ during the CO2RR is not solved yet.


2.5.2 Local pH calculation. 
The local pH affects the kinetics and reaction pathway of various electrochemical reactions, especially for those involving proton/hydroxide transfers. However, the precise quantification of proton concentrations on the electrode/electrolyte interface has been a long-standing challenge. Recently, K. Yang et al.228 adopted operando SEIRAS to study the pH gradient at the interface between the electrode (polycrystalline Cu film) and electrolyte (phosphate buffer) during the CO2RR. The interfacial pH is calculated according to the relative intensity of peaks arising from H2PO4−, HPO42− and PO43− obtained from operando SEIRAS spectra. The pH near the electrode surface is as much as 5 pH units higher compared to the bulk solution (0.2 M phosphate buffer) at −1 V vs. RHE, even with relatively low current densities (<10 mA cm−2). Recently, X. Lu et al.229 measured the electrolyte pH at various distances from the electrode surface in a more practical flow cell with a gas diffusion electrode via operando Raman. The authors found that the alkali electrolyte (1 M KOH) at the electrode/electrolyte interface is neutralized by reacting with the CO2 gas, and the resulting pH gradient still persists at high current densities up to 150 mA cm−2. For electrochemical reactions involving proton transfer, surface H+ (or OH−) species play a critical role. With operando ATR-SEIRAS, W. Deng et al.230 revealed that during the CO2RR, the surface hydroxyls promote CO2 adsorption in the form of H2CO3via hydrogen bonds, which is further reduced to HCOO* species. However, a higher coverage of surface hydroxyls limits the reaction rate due to the lower amount of available active sites.


2.5.3 Interfacial water structures. 
The detailed structure of interfacial water, in other words, the orientation and hydrogen-bonding network in the inner Helmholtz plane of the double layer, under bias potentials affects the reaction pathways and the catalytic activity/selectivity of electrochemical reactions. J.-F Li and coworkers investigated the water structures of electric double layers at Au single-crystal surfaces via the combination of operando Raman spectroscopy and ab initio molecular dynamics.231 Unambiguous potential-dependent water re-orientation occurs when the applied potential is swept negatively, where the interfacial water molecules evolve from the ‘parallel’ configuration above the PZFC to ‘one-H-down’ and then to ‘two-H-down’ configurations below the PZFC. This ‘H-down’ water configuration is proposed as the key barrier for the HER/HOR in alkali media, impeding the rate-determining Volmer step.123


2.5.4 Reaction intermediate identification. 
Identifying the reaction intermediates in operando studies is critical to unveil the reaction pathways. *H is an important intermediate for various electrochemical reactions including the HOR/HER, CO2RR and NRR. However, the H atom is invisible in operando XAS (and Δμ-XANES) sensitive to local coordination environments due to its light weight. Fortunately, operando IR is capable of probing absorbed hydrogen atoms, the *H coverage, and the HBE, providing the opportunity to investigate the role of *H during electrochemical catalysis.232,233 S. Zhu et al.232 applied operando IR to monitor the interfacial water molecules and *H over Pt surfaces, and, for the first time, calculated the pH-dependent changes of the hydrogen and water binding strength. The weakened HBE and water interaction with Pt surfaces are proposed to be responsible for the sluggish kinetics of the HER/HOR in alkali media.
Other reaction intermediates for the ORR, CO2RR, and NRR are also widely investigated via operando IR and Raman spectroscopy. Regarding the ORR, J.-F. Li's group conducted an extensive study on the reaction intermediates on Pt(hkl) surfaces with operando Raman.234,235 O2− is the general intermediate for the ORR under alkaline conditions at all Pt low index facets (Fig. 12a–c).234 On the other hand, in acidic media (Fig. 12d–f), the ORR at Pt(111) occurs through an associative reaction pathway via the formation of HO2*, whereas at Pt(110) and Pt(100) the dissociative reaction pathway happens with HO* as an intermediate.234 For high-index Pt(hkl) surfaces (Pt(211) and Pt(311)), both HO* and HO2* intermediates are observed (Fig. 12g and h), and a higher adsorption energy for the HO2* intermediate at the Pt(311) surface is detected via operando Raman, accounting for its lower ORR activity.235 J.-F. Li et al.236 also developed a shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS) technique to track the heterogeneous catalytic process on practical nanocatalysts. The bridge adsorbed oxygen (b-O2*) and HO2* reactant intermediates on Pt sites were both observed in acidic and basic solutions (Fig. 12i and j), demonstrating that the ORR process over Pt3Co undergoes the associative mechanism.237Operando IR studies also detect superoxide and/or hydroperoxide species as intermediates over the Pt surface during the ORR.238–240 In contrast to the 4e− transfer over Pt, the (sequential) 2e− transfer reaction pathway over Au evidenced by the presence of the H2O2* intermediate is proved via operando Raman by R. Yang et al.241
 Fig. 12  
Operando Raman spectra during the ORR of (a) Pt(110), (b) Pt(111) and (c) Pt(100) surfaces in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH ≈ 10.3). SHINERS spectra during the ORR of (d) Pt(111), (e) Pt(100), (f) Pt(110), (g) Pt(211), (h) Pt(311) and (i) dealloyed Pt3Co nanocatalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (j) Adsorption configurations of the b-O2* and HO2* intermediate species of the ORR over the Pt3Co surfaces (gray: Pt; grape: Co; red: O; white: H). (a–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 234, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 235, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i and j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 236, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to Pt-based ORR catalysts, S. Baranton et al.242 investigated the reaction mechanism of the ORR over α-FePc/C by detecting the reaction products and adsorbed intermediates via operando IR reflectance spectroscopy. The absorption band at 880 cm−1 assigned to the vibration of the O–O bond of H2O2 confirms that O2 electrochemical reduction to H2O over FePc occurs via a 2 + 2 or 2 × 2 electron transfer mechanism with H2O2 as a major byproduct. A very marked band at 1130 cm−1 and another band with lower intensity at 1050 cm−1 are assigned to the vibration of the O–O bond in adsorbed O2− and O2H species, respectively. The higher absorption intensity of adsorbed O2− compared to that of adsorbed O2H suggests that the coupled proton and electron transfer to Fe3+Pc–O2− forming Fe2+Pc–O2H is the rate determining step (RDS) for the ORR, consistent with the electrochemical Tafel analysis. Similarly, I. Kendrick et al.243 performed operando Raman spectroscopy over an Fe–N–C cathode with Fe–N4 moieties as active sites using an in-house-designed fuel cell. By optimizing the depth of the microscope focal point, they observed the Fe–O2 stretching over the whole potential range (0–1.1 V) at 564 cm−1. This supports the asymmetric volcano trend proposed by J. Li et al.,116 where Fe–N4 sites are located at the strong M–O binding branch, and the site blocking effect limits the ORR kinetics over Fe–N–C catalysts.
As an emerging field of interest in electrocatalysis, unveiling the reaction pathway is critical but rather a challenge for the NRR. Only a few reports on capturing the NRR reaction intermediates have been reported so far. Operando SEIRAS recently identified N2Hx (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) with a NN stretching mode at ∼2020 cm−1 over Rh surfaces as the reaction intermediate during nitrate reduction and the NRR.244 Accordingly, Y. Yao et al.244 proposed a two-step reaction pathway for the NRR, with two-electron transfer to form N2H2 as the first step, followed by a chemical decomposition step forming NH3.
In contrast, the reaction intermediates during the CO2RR have been extensively studied via operando Raman and IR spectroscopy recently, and *CO, *CHO, *COOH, bidentate COO−, etc. are widely observed as reaction intermediates.46,133,143,144,175,226,245–257 For example, Z. Pan et al.258 adopted operando Raman spectroscopy on a Cu-based catalyst, and found that the adsorbed CO2− intermediate is dominated by OC*O*− over S-doped Cu, while O*CO and OC*O*− co-exist on the pure Cu surface. This explains the better activity and selectivity toward formate over S-doped Cu compared to Cu.
It is well known that Cu is the only metal that enables C–C coupling, the key step for the CO2RR to C2 products. M. T. M. Koper and coworkers observed a *OCCOH hydrogenated CO dimer over Cu(100) surfaces, demonstrating their capability of promoting the C–C coupling step.259 Nevertheless, the reaction pathway of the CO2RR to C2 products over copper is still under debate. Z.-C. Huang-Fu et al.260 compared the surface features of Au and Cu electrodes obtained with operando sum frequency generation (SFG) spectroscopy. Only linearly adsorbed CO, but no hydrocarbon species, is detected on Au. In contrast, no CO vibrations, but only C–H stretching vibrations corresponding to adsorbed ethoxy species, are observed on Cu. This suggests that the CO is disorderly adsorbed on the Cu surface, and the key for C–C coupling over Cu might be the multiple orientations of adsorbed CO.260 However, many groups have detected *CO intermediates over Cu using operando SEIRAS as well (Fig. 13a).149,245,261 Moreover, *CO is detected even in Ar-saturated KHCO3 solutions (Fig. 13b), indicating that bicarbonate anions may directly participate in the CO2RR process.261 Similarly, F. Li et al.175 also observed absorbed CO on Cu when investigating an FeTPP[Cl]/Cu catalyst using operando Raman (Fig. 13c and d). The FeTPP[Cl] sites active for the CO2RR toward CO increase the local CO coverage, which spills over to Cu sites due to the low Fe–CO binding energy compared to that of Cu–CO. Similar CO spillover has been observed by operando Raman on Ag-covered Cu nanowires performed by J. Gao et al.,262 where the CO intermediates adsorb at Ag sites, and undergo subsequent spillover and hydrogenation on the Cu nanowires. Most recently, A. Wuttig et al.263 demonstrated the critical role of the solvent and electrolyte ions in reversible CO binding over Au and Cu films via operando SEIRAS in CO-saturated NaHCO3 (Fig. 13e–g). The CO desorption over the Au surface is promoted by the adsorption and reorientation of water, impeding the further reduction of CO. In contrast, carbonate desorption accelerates CO accumulation over Cu, allowing for the further reduction of CO to C2 products. This divergent CO ads/desorption behavior over Au and Cu explains their different product distributions, indicating the critical role of electrolyte design for tuning the CO2-to-fuel activity and selectivity.
 Fig. 13  
Operando ATR-SEIRAS spectra over the Cu thin film electrode recorded during the cathodic scan in a (a) CO2- and (b) Ar-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 solution. Operando Raman spectra of the (c) Cu and (d) FeTPP[Cl]/Cu catalysts in 1 M KHCO3 under different applied potentials. Operando SEIRAS spectra over the (e) Au and (f) Cu film in CO-saturated 0.1 M NaHCO3 electrolyte. (g) Illustration of potential-dependent CO binding on Au and Cu. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 261, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 263, Copyright 2019, ChemRxiv. 
Despite considerable studies on Cu-based catalysts for the CO2RR, the key for the C–C coupling step is still elusive. This might be due to the fact that the operando IR and Raman techniques are sensitive to the testing conditions, including the configuration of the electrochemical cell, the nature of the metal surface (film vs. powders), the mass transport limitations (with/without convection),264etc. Moreover, the limited time response of operando IR and Raman (tens of seconds in general) prevents the detection of intermediates with short lifetimes, further prohibiting the unveiling of reaction mechanisms.
Although operando IR and Raman are powerful to detect the reaction intermediates, few operando IR and Raman studies on SACs have been reported so far. The difficulty mainly arises from the highly porous nature of SACs, which creates empty spaces full of fluid consisting of reactant(s), product(s), and solvent during operando experiments. As a result, it is difficult to enhance the signal/noise ratio.265 Recently, X. Qin et al.200 conducted operando infrared absorption spectroscopy over Fe–N–C during the CO2RR in a liquid cell, and found the strong adsorption of CO over Fe–N4 sites (Fig. 14a–c). Further DFT simulations suggest that the Fe–N4 sites embedded within graphitic layers are strongly poisoned by adsorbed CO, while Fe–N4 moieties located on the edges of graphitic layers possess an optimized Fe–CO binding energy (Fig. 14d).200 Thus, only the Fe–N4 edge sites are responsible for the high activity and selectivity of Fe–N–C catalysts. These results also demonstrate the critical role of the M–CO binding energy for the CO2RR activity/selectivity, which can be tuned by changing the local coordination environment of SACs.
 Fig. 14  
Operando ATR-IR spectra of the Fe–N–C powder catalyst loaded on a Au/Si prism in (a) CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3, (b) Ar-saturated PBS solution, and (c) CO-saturated PBS. (d) The illustration of the active vs. inactive Fe–N4 sites toward the CO2RR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

2.6 Microscopy

2.6.1 (S)TEM. 
Microscopies, particularly (scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM), are widely exploited to investigate the structural, morphological and compositional properties of electrocatalysts with nanoscale and even atomic resolution. Recently developed identical location TEM (IL TEM) allows one to track the changes of identical particles before and after electrochemical treatment;266–268 however, it still lacks the time-resolved evaluation of active sites at the solid–liquid–gas interfaces. Operando (S)TEM integrates the electrochemical liquid cell in conventional (S)TEM with SiNx windows encapsulating a thin liquid layer on specially designed chips comprising working (glassy carbon), reference (Pt wire) and counter (Pt wire) electrodes (Fig. 15a and b).44 This powerful tool offers the opportunity to image the surface reconstructions and atom rearrangements of catalysts in real time.44,48
 Fig. 15  Illustration of the operando electrochemical liquid cell TEM holder, and the typical TEM images captured during electrochemical cycling. (a) Schematic representation of the liquid cell featuring two silicon chips. (b) Schematic representation of the top electrochemical silicon chip. The inset is the glassy carbon working electrode with platinum nanoparticles on top. (c–e) are TEM images of disordered Pt–Fe nanocatalysts (some are identified with red arrows) before cycling (c), after 50 cycles (d), and after 100 cycles (e) under a 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
G.-Z. Zhu et al.269 studied the degradation of Pt–Fe alloy nanocatalysts for the ORR under potential bias in 0.1 M HClO4 using operando TEM. The Pt–Fe particles tend to agglomerate during electrochemical cycling (Fig. 15c–e), and the site- and potential-dependent particle growth are not uniform, both in space and in time. The authors also detected the corrosion of carbon supports by operando TEM, which is accelerated at higher catalyst loadings. Similar carbon corrosion during anodic stepping, and agglomeration of Pt–Ni alloy particles along octahedral (111) facets as a result of lined up particles during potential cycling are also reported by V. Beermann et al.270 Moreover, they also found that the octahedral Pt–Ni alloy is morphologically stable till 1.0 V vs. RHE, while severe coarsening occurs between 1.2 and 1.4 V vs. RHE. These results pave the way for developing highly durable Pt–M alloys in fuel cell applications.
In contrast to the ORR, the CO2RR occurs at more negative potentials (e.g., below −0.4 V vs. RHE), and thus more drastic structural reconstruction is expected. Y. Li et al.271 recently applied operando STEM coupled with high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) in the CO2RR over Cu, and observed an “electrochemical scrambling” phenomenon induced by cathodic bias, where the Cu nanocrystals (∼7 nm) fuse within seconds into a disordered Cu phase of 15–20 nm. These disordered Cu nanoparticles quickly oxidize and crystalize to Cu2O nanocubes when exposed to an ambient atmosphere. Thus, it is highly possible that the active phases toward the CO2RR are structurally unstable, and their identification requires the combination of multiple operando techniques to unveil the oxidation states, coordination environments, morphologies, etc.
Regarding molecular catalysts and SACs, STEM-HAADF imaging is one of the most powerful techniques to study the catalytic sites at the atomic scale, enabling the direct visualization of the geometric structure of single/poly atom sites.158 Unfortunately, the SiNx window (20–50 nm), the liquid layer (∼1500 nm) and bubbled gases in the operando liquid cell (sample holder) limit the resolution of operando liquid (S)TEM to several nanometers, and no atomic scale operando observation has been achieved yet to the best of our knowledge. Advancements in operando STEM to improve its resolution require one to further reduce the thickness of the SiNx window and liquid layer, or change to other electron-transparent windows with good sealing (e.g., a graphene liquid cell272). We are expecting to follow the physical movements of one particular atom of interest during structural rearrangements at working potentials via operando STEM-HAADF with atomic resolution.
Moreover, electron beam-induced radiolysis, specimen damage and atom movements have also been observed during operando (S)TEM measurements, making it a challenge to capture the “real” surface reconstructions induced by electrochemical environments with high resolution. Thus, particular attention should be addressed to the balance between a good resolution and a minimized effect of the electron beam. Another difficulty of operando (S)TEM study for electrocatalysis in aqueous electrolytes lies in the proper calibration for the reference potential. Pt is used as a reference in the present commercial liquid cell in the same chamber as the working electrode; however, it can only act as a non-polarizable electrode in the presence of H2. Thus, the Pt reference is only ideal for the HER/HOR, and probably the CO2RR and NRR with H2 as a byproduct, while a large overpotential exists in the reference for other reactions (ORR, OER, etc.). Even though operando STEM measurements are still premature, we see great potential of this technique to monitor each atom of interest to follow the structural reconstruction during electrocatalysis at the atomic scale.


2.6.2 STM. 
Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is also capable of imaging surfaces at the atomic scale, not only in an ultra-high vacuum, but also in gaseous and liquid surroundings. This allows for STM to be applied in operando studies, and attempts were initiated from the 1980s.273Operando STM provides molecular level insights into electrochemical reactions at solid–liquid interfaces.274–276 For instance, the evolution of the polycrystalline Cu surface first to Cu(111), and then to Cu(100) during the CO2RR was demonstrated by operando STM.277 Nevertheless, operando STM has been challenging as it requires extremely clean and stable surfaces, limiting its applications in practical electrocatalysis systems, particularly for nano-catalysts and PAC/SACs with irregular surfaces and/or amorphous structures.
Recently, J.-Y. Gu et al.274 fabricated an ordered FePc monolayer film on Au(111), and investigated the ORR interface at the molecular level using operando STM. Reversible switching between bright and dim features in the STM images of FePc/Au(111) is clearly observed in O2 saturated electrolyte when the applied potential changes between 350 and 50 mV vs. SCE (Fig. 16a–d). In contrast, only dim features are detected in the whole potential range in N2 saturated electrolyte. The authors attribute the bright and dim features to FePc–O2 (above the on-set potential of the ORR) and FePc without O2 adsorbates (below the on-set potential), respectively. The existence of FePc–O2 species above the on-set potential of the ORR suggests that the initial adsorption and binding of O2 over FePc is a quick step for the ORR, probably due to the high Fe–O binding energy as suggested by Q. Jia and coauthors based on operando XAS.116 Another study by Z. Chen et al.183 also reported similar bright and dim features in the operando STM images of FePc/Au(111) at high and low potentials (Fig. 16e and f). However, they ascribe this change to the demetallation of FePc to form metal free H2Pc based on their operando Raman spectroscopy results (will be discussed later in Section 2.7.1). These controversial conclusions drawn from similar behaviors of FePc under potential bias indicate that the challenge of operando STM not only lies in the technology itself (e.g., how to bridge the gap between the perfect surface required by STM and the heterogeneous nature of practical nano-catalysts), but also in the interpretation of the results. The latter requires cooperation with other operando techniques.
 Fig. 16  
Operando STM images of FePc/Au(111) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at (a) 350 mV; (b) upper region: 350 mV, lower region: 50 mV, with yellow dotted lines as the potential boundary; (c) 50 mV; and (d) 350 mV. Data scale: 360.0 pm; small white squares (scan size: 9 × 9 nm2): high-resolution STM images of the FePc moleclues. Operando STM images of FePc/Au(111) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at (e) 0.7 V and (f) 0.4 V. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 274, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 

2.7 XRD
Similar to operando microscopies, operando XRD is also able to track the evolution of the crystal structure, composition and crystallite particle size, and thus contributes to the identification of active sites, as well as their degradation and reaction mechanisms.278–282 It should be noted here that operando XRD is only applicable to nano-catalysts with well-defined crystal structures, but not to amorphous nano-catalysts, molecular catalysts or PAC/SACs with structures lacking long-range order.
With operando XRD, Y. Liu et al.278 identified the insertion of H into palladium nanoparticles during the CO2RR, forming a new PdH phase as the active species. The weak CO binding energy over PdH facilitates CO production, and suppresses the site-blocking effect. P. Strasser's group investigated the degradation mechanism in PEMFCs of Pt/ITO (indium tin oxide)280 and Pt/RTO (ruthenium and titanium oxide)281 by operando XRD and STEM. No obvious particle growth, agglomeration, dissolution or detachment of Pt nanoparticles are observed during electrochemical cycling, suggesting the high stability of Pt nanoparticles themselves. The activity losses of oxide-supported Pt catalysts are mainly due to Pt surface poisoning by the deposition of sub-monolayers of support metal oxides due to the strong metal–support interaction. Moreover, C. Yang et al.279 observed the insertion of hydrated potassium ions into the lattice structure of α-Li2IrO3 during the OER (Fig. 17), forming a hydrated birnessite phase. This process points out the key role of electrolytes during electrochemical processes.
 Fig. 17  (a) Operando XRD of α-Li2IrO3 during the OER in 0.1 M KOH from OCV (0.8 V vs. RHE) to 1.55 V vs. RHE, and then holding for 10 h. (b) Rietveld analysis of the in situ formed hydrated α-LixK0.3IrO3 phase, and (c) the corresponding structural model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Since XRD is a bulk technique, operando XRD lacks surface sensitivity, and only detects the bulk changes in the crystal structure of studied catalysts. Thus, operando XRD is not perfect for investigating electrochemical reactions, but can be utilized to infer the appearance of new active sites, or be used as a supplementary technique for other operando techniques.
2.8 X-ray computed tomography
Despite the intrinsic activity and selectivity determined by the active site structures, the mass transport property of the electrode is also critical for accelerating the electrochemical reaction rates, especially at high current densities. The practical application of fuel cells and electrolyzers at industrial current/power densities requires the fast mass transportation of electrons, protons, reactants and products toward/away from the catalytic sites. This solid–liquid–gas interface is highly dependent on the porous structure and morphology of the electrode. Operando X-ray computed tomography (XCT) analyzes the interfacial structure within the gas diffusion electrode (GDL) and the catalyst layer in fuel cells and electrolyzers, providing guidelines for optimizing the electrode morphology.
A variety of groups exploited operando XCT to investigate the water distribution during fuel cell operation, providing valuable insights for water management to optimize the fuel cell operation conditions, particularly at high current densities.283–291 An inhomogeneous distribution of water saturation, wherein the channels exhibit less water than lands, is observed via operando synchrotron phase contrast XCT (Fig. 18).287–289 I. V. Zenyuk's group identified multiple factors (e.g., micro/macro-porous voids,292,293 the hydrophobic/hydrophilic nature of catalysts,293,294 connectivity between catalyst particles and the membrane,295etc.) to be critical for the mass transportation and water management. According to these insights into the electrode morphology, the authors provide several effective strategies for optimal electrode design: (1) incorporating hydrophilic additives into microporous layers; (2) using a catalyst-coated membrane (CCM) instead of a porous transport electrode (PTE) structure; and (3) increasing the amount of macro-porous voids for hydrophilic catalysts, while reducing the catalyst layer thickness for hydrophobic catalysts.
 Fig. 18  (a) Operando XCT raw absorption (top) and processed water thickness (bottom) images of the MEA in a running fuel cell. (b) Operando XCT images showing the completely dry MPL (left), areas with wet MPL (middle), and the local water density distribution in the MPL (right). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 288, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 287, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The degradation mechanism of fuel cells has been investigated with operando XCT as well. R. T. White et al.296 reveal that the cathode catalyst layer experiences a gradual thinning up to 40% during cycling (Fig. 19a), accompanied by a ∼25% decrease in the solid phase area and expansion in the void region, together with the formation and growth of cracks (Fig. 19b). These morphological changes in the cathode catalyst layer are primarily due to the corrosion and collapse of carbon supports related to water flooding, and are responsible for the reduced double layer capacitance and mass transportation of protons/electrons, and thus their degraded performances in fuel cells. Moreover, the inhomogeneous distribution of water induces a higher rate of degradation in the cathode catalyst layer under the channels compared to that under the lands, according to the changes of their relative attenuation of incident X-ray spectra from the beginning-of-life (BOL) to the end-of-life (EOL) (Fig. 19b). Operando XCT also demonstrates the non-uniform membrane crack development (Fig. 19c), which is more severe under channels, and strongly correlated with BOL electrode cracks and delamination.297 H. Matsui et al.298 employed operando XCT imaging coupled with XANES (XCT-XANES) at the Pt L3-edge to investigate the degradation process of the Pt cathode layer during fuel cell operation. Before the accelerated degradation test (ADT), the majority of Pt spreads in the entire cathode catalyst layer with minor heterogeneous aggregation and an average Pt oxidation state of +1.1 (Fig. 19d). After 20000 cycles of ADT, the detection of Pt in the Nafion membrane layer unambiguously demonstrates the migration from the cathode layer to the Nafion membrane, accompanied by a reduced Pt valence state at all depths (Fig. 18e). This indicates that the irreversible migration and aggregation of the Pt cathode proceeds across the whole MEA.
 Fig. 19  (a) Operando XCT based local thickness measurement of MEA components during fuel cell operation. (b) Segmented and flattened view of the cathode catalyst layer at the BOL and EOL at channels and lands. (c) Crack development within the MEA: cross-sectional views of a cathode catalyst layer crack (left) and delamination between the membrane and anode catalyst layer (right). The pie chart shows the distribution of through-thickness membrane cracks at the EOL (A: anode catalyst layer; M: membrane layer; C: cathode catalyst layer). The cross-section images of the Pt distribution and Pt valence state (d) before and (e) after the ADT. A: relative Pt density of 0.80–1.00, and B: relative Pt density of 0.05–0.80; 1: before the ADT, 2: after 20000 ADT cycles at the center of the cathode catalyst layer, and 3: after 20000 ADT cycles at the Nafion membrane. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 296, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 297, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 298, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
3. Conclusions and outlook
In the past decades, operando techniques, including microscopies ((S)TEM and STM), optical spectroscopies (Raman and IR), X-ray-based characterizations (XRD, hard and soft XAS, XES, XCT) and Mössbauer spectroscopy, have been successfully implemented in various electrochemical processes. Table 1 summarizes the capabilities, advantages and limitations of the operando techniques discussed above. Their possible applications for the type(s) of catalysts (nano-, molecular and SAC/PAC catalysts) are also listed as well. Most of these techniques are capable of investigating nano-catalysts, except for operando STM, which only applies for clean and perfect surfaces. It should be noted here that for nano-catalysts, the bulk techniques (XRD, XAS, XES and Mössbauer spectroscopy) probe average structural information. On the other hand, Δμ-XANES, IR and Raman provide a good way to study the surface structures of nano-catalysts where the electrochemical reaction occurs. Moreover, operando XRD is suitable for crystalline nano-catalysts only, but not for those with amorphous structures. The operando studies on molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs are limited to hard XAS, Mössbauer spectroscopy, Raman and IR so far. The major challenge for the application of soft XAS, XES, and STEM on molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs is their low metal loadings and/or the isolated nature of metal sites.
Table 1 Comparison of various operando techniques






Capability
Advantage
Limitation
Catalyst type applicable





a Δμ-XANES is required to get the surface information for nano-catalysts.
b The technique is applicable in this particular type of catalyst in theory; however, in practice, no or few reports have been published due to the limited resolution and/or signal-to-noise ratio.





Hard XAS
1. Oxidation state
1. No long-range-order structure required
1. Bulk technique
1. Nano-catalystsa


2. Electronic/geometric structure
2. Large penetration depth (suitable for operando tests with liquid cells)
2. Possible beam damage
2. Molecular catalysts


3. Coordination environment




3. SAC/PACs


4. Structural reconstruction








Soft XAS
1. Oxidation state
1. No long-range-order structure required
Challenge for liquid cells due to UHV conditions required for testing
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Metal–ligand interaction
2. Surface sensitive technique due to shorter attenuation length


2. Molecular catalystsb


3. Metal-reactant/intermediate interaction




3. SAC/PACsb


XES
1. Small changes in oxidation state
1. Structural information complimentary to XANES
1. Weak signal compared to XAS
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Electronic structure (spin state)
2. Probing metal–ligand interaction with hard X-rays
2. Bulk technique
2. Molecular catalystsb


3. Metal–ligand interaction
3. No long-range-order structure required


3. SAC/PACsb


4. Preferred adsorption geometry








Mössbauer spectroscopy
1. Oxidation state
Differentiation between various Fe or Sn species
1. Fe or Sn specific technique
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Electronic structure (spin state)
2. Long acquisition time due to attenuated signal by liquid
2. Molecular catalysts


3. Geometric symmetry
3. Bulk technique
3. SAC/PACs


4. Magnetic properties






Raman
1. Chemical state and phase transition
1. Surface sensitive technique
1. Au substrate required for surface enhancement
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Surface adsorbates
2. Low Raman scattering of water (suitable for operando tests)
2. Molecular catalysts


3. Reaction intermediates


3. SAC/PACs


4. Electrode/water interface






IR
1. Surface adsorbates
1. Surface sensitive technique
1. Au substrate required for surface enhancement
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Reaction intermediates
2. Complementary to Raman
2. Intense infrared absorption of water
2. Molecular catalysts


3. Electrode/water interface




3. SAC/PACs


STEM
1. Morphology and structure
Direct observation of structural reconstruction
1. Low resolution due to liquid electrolyte
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Chemical composition
2. Challenge for liquid cells due to UHV conditions required for testing
2. Molecular catalystsb




3. Possible beam damage
3. SAC/PACsb


STM
Surface structure
Direct observation of structural reconstruction and adsorption/desorption of reactants
Clean and stable surface required (not suitable for heterogeneous or amorphous materials)
1. Single/poly crystal surfaces


2. Ordered molecular catalysts


XRD
1. Crystal structure
—
1. Structure with long-range-order required
Crystallized nano-catalysts


2. Crystalline particle size
2. Bulk technique


3. Chemical composition




XPS
1. Oxidation state
Surface sensitive technique
1. Absence of potential bias for now (quasi-operando only)
1. Nano-catalysts


2. Chemical composition
2. Challenge for liquid cells due to UHV conditions required
2. Molecular catalystsb






3. SAC/PACsb


X-CT
1. 3D porous structure
Reasons for MEA failure other than catalyst degradation
Compromise between spatial resolution and acquisition time
—


2. Water distribution




The structural properties governing the activity and selectivity of electrocatalysts include the oxidation state, the geometric and electronic structure, the electrode/electrolyte interface, etc. Among various operando techniques widely used, XAS, XES, Mössbauer spectroscopy, Raman and XPS are able to probe the oxidation state. As a bulk technique, XAS is suitable to detect the change in oxidation state of molecular catalysts and SAC/PACs. For nano-catalysts, particularly with relatively large particle sizes, the change in oxidation state on the surface is averaged by the bulk, making it a challenge to analyze with XAS. On the other hand, the oxidation state detected by XES depends less on the structure compared to XAS, and thus XES is suitable to monitor small changes in oxidation state. To obtain the oxidation state with Mössbauer spectroscopy, it requires one to compare the Mössbauer parameters with those of standards, and sometimes requires one to refer to other techniques to get unambiguous conclusions. Similarly, the oxidation state is not directly probed by Raman spectroscopy, but is inferred from the chemical phases detected. Regarding the surface-sensitive XPS, only quasi-operando study is possible. XAS, XES and Mössbauer spectroscopy are also capable of detecting the geometric and electronic structures, while XRD and microscopies (STM and (S)TEM) track the geometric structures only. Particularly, XRD and (S)TEM trace the bulk-average of the crystalline particle size and the local morphology (both crystalline and amorphous structures), respectively. Thus, (S)TEM generally gains more structural information compared to XRD. Raman, IR and XES are capable of detecting the reaction intermediates and the electrode/electrolyte interfaces, and STM is also reported to capture the surface absorbates as well.
In short, the operando XPS, STM and (S)TEM techniques are quite promising but still pre-mature at present, while operando XRD is well-developed, but with limited applications in electrochemical systems. Operando XAS, Raman and IR are the most extensively used and well-developed techniques, with the capability to investigate the oxidation states, the geometric and electronic structures and the electrode/electrolyte interfaces for a wide variety of electrocatalysts under operating conditions. The emerging operando Mössbauer spectroscopy and XES provide complementary and valuable structural information to well-developed XAS. One favorable fact of these techniques is that they can take advantage of the well-developed operando cell designed for XAS, and further advancements in the signal-to-noise ratio will promote their application in various electrochemical systems. Last, operando XCT is the only technique that investigates the behavior of a MEA instead of the catalyst itself. With the help of the above mentioned operando techniques, impressive advancements have been achieved in elucidating the following key aspects for electrocatalysis: (1) the active site structures, (2) the key intermediates and reaction pathways, (3) the degradation mechanisms of electrocatalysts under reaction conditions, (4) the role of electrolytes (solvents, anions and cations) in electrocatalysis, and (5) the mass transport of reactants/products during operation. The above aspects contribute to understanding the correlations between the structure and the activity/selectivity/stability of electrocatalysts, which constitutes the cornerstone for the rational design of proficient electrocatalysts practical for industrial applications. The in situ identification of active site structures (oxidation states, crystal facets, coordination environments, etc.) and the role of electrolytes is also crucial for choosing effective models for theoretical simulations.
Despite the impressive progress achieved in light of operando studies, there are nevertheless multiple factors hindering the full understanding of electrocatalytic processes. We are expecting to gain a coherent picture of the structure–activity/selectivity/stability relationship for electrocatalysts in the near future by addressing the following issues:
(1) The gap between real devices (fuel cells and electrolyzers) and operando cells specially designed for a particular technique. Generally, most of the electrochemical cells used in operando studies cannot fully mimic the operating conditions (temperature, pressure, membrane, gas diffusion electrode, flow of gas/electrolyte, etc.) of real devices. Particularly, the role of electrolytes is generally overlooked for operando studies on electrocatalysis. For instance, most of the studies on ORR/HOR catalysts for fuel cell applications are performed in a three-electrode liquid cell with aqueous electrolytes, while the real operating fuel cell is electrolyte-free. The presence of liquid electrolytes might make a big difference for the identified reaction pathway and degradation mechanism for active sites. Thus, developing/optimizing real fuel cells and electrolyzers suitable for operando studies is one of the directions for next generation operando techniques. Some groups have designed fuel cells for operando XAS and optical spectroscopy studies;166,243,299–301 however, in some cases the signal of inactive phases formed in situ interferes with that of active phases.302 This issue is prominent for the bulk techniques. Further advancements in operando cell designs are required to solve the above problems.
(2) The lack of model catalysts. A variety of active phases present in the catalysts behave differently during operation, making the already complicated system even more puzzling. Differentiating their activity, selectivity and stability based on operando and electrochemical characterizations remains a challenge. The heterogeneity of electrocatalysts, not only for nano-catalysts but also for SACs, renders grand difficulties to unveil the active site structures and their degradation mechanisms by operando techniques. This calls for developing a series of model catalysts with controllable structures, and a systematic operando study on these model catalysts.
(3) The lack of a real time-resolved technique to capture the dynamic change of active sites induced by absorbed species and/or potential bias within the lifetime of reaction intermediates, and to detect them. For Mössbauer spectroscopy, hours are required to get one spectrum even with 57Fe (only 57Fe is Mössbauer-active, and natural iron contains only a fraction of 2% of Fe as 57Fe). Regarding IR and Raman, one spectrum generally takes tens of seconds, while the time varies from minutes to hours to obtain one XRD/XAS/XES spectrum. This means that most of the above operando techniques only capture the (quasi)stable states of active sites at each potential bias. With the most advanced quick-EXAFS technique in synchrotron facilities (e.g., ROCK beamline at SOLEIL, France, and SuperXAS bending-magnet beamline at the Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland), one is able to take one spectrum on a time scale of milliseconds. However, the reaction intermediates generally have a lifetime of picoseconds, making it a challenge to capture the dynamic changes of active sites in their structures and oxidation states induced by reaction intermediates. Moreover, operando Raman and IR are widely utilized to detect the reaction intermediates during electrochemical reactions; however, only the stable absorbates, which are not the RDS in most cases, have been observed. For example, only *CO (or other C1 intermediates) is observed during the CO2RR over Cu-based catalysts, while the RDS for C2+ products is C–C coupling, and the detection of reaction intermediates after C–C coupling is rarely reported to the best of our knowledge. Thus, time-resolved operando study on electrochemical processes calls for the further advancement of characterization techniques to improve their time-scale resolution.
(4) The fact that multiple structural factors govern the catalytic activity, selectivity and stability. The key aspects include the oxidation state, the geometric and electronic structure, the electrode/electrolyte interface, etc. As a result, no single method provides a comprehensive picture of the detailed structures of active sites. The combination of diverse operando techniques is expected to build a coherent picture of the structure–activity relationship of electrocatalysts, bringing fuel cells and electrolyzers closer to practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0600901), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21525626), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006) for financial support.
References
G. Wu, A. Santandreu, W. Kellogg, S. Gupta, O. Ogoke, H. Zhang and L. Dai, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 83 Search PubMed .
T. Asefa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1873 Search PubMed .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 Search PubMed .
M. J. Orella, Y. Román-Leshkov and F. R. Brushett, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2018, 20, 159 Search PubMed .
A. J. Martín, T. Shinagawa and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem, 2019, 5, 263 Search PubMed .
I. Moussallem, J. Jörissen, U. Kunz, S. Pinnow and T. Turek, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38, 1177 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, W. Lai and R. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3717 Search PubMed .
F. Yu, P. Wei, Y. Yang, Y. Chen, L. Guo and Z. Peng, Nano Mater. Sci., 2019, 1, 60 Search PubMed .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, N. Austin, M. Li, Y. Song, S. D. House, S. Bernhard, J. C. Yang, G. Mpourmpakis and R. Jin, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4996 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, F. Zhang, X. Kang and S. Chen, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 13, 40 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Guo, X. Du, Y. Zeng, J. Chu, C. Gong, J. Huang, C. Fan, X. Wang and J. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903172 Search PubMed .
W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Tao, T. Wang, Y. Zou, Y. Wang, R. Chen and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907879 Search PubMed .
T. Asset and P. Atanassov, Joule, 2020, 4, 33 Search PubMed .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, S. Dou, X. Li, J. Wang and X. Wang, Matter, 2019, 1, 1494 Search PubMed .
R. B. Song, W. Zhu, J. Fu, Y. Chen, L. Liu, J.-R. Zhang, Y. Lin and J.-J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1903796,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201903796 .
L. Fan, C. Xia, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Wang and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay3111 Search PubMed .
Z. Geng, X. Kong, Q. Li, J. Ke and J. Zeng, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2019, 17, 7 Search PubMed .
R. Francke, B. Schille and M. Roemelt, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4631 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Zhang and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910534 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Hu, X. Chai, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Small Methods, 2020, 1900826,  DOI:10.1002/smtd.201900826 .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, R. Xia and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 255 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorova, M. W. Schreiber and M. Fontecave, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1754 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1730 Search PubMed .
M. B. Ross, P. De Luna, Y. Li, C. T. Dinh, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 648 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, G. Zhang, J. Prakash, Y. Zheng and S. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900889 Search PubMed .
Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff, X. Zhou, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7646 Search PubMed .
T. Zheng, K. Jian and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802066 Search PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977 Search PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347 Search PubMed .
X. Tian, P. Zhao and W. Sheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808066 Search PubMed .
C. L. Bentley, M. Kang and P. R. Unwin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2179 Search PubMed .
X. X. Wang, M. T. Swihart and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 578 Search PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nøskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 Search PubMed .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. DiAscro, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2313 Search PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594 Search PubMed .
H.-F. Wang, L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1414 Search PubMed .
S. Popović, M. Smilijanić, P. Jovanovič, J. Vavra, R. Buonsanti and N. Hodnik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132(35), 14844–14854,  DOI:10.1002/ange.202000617 .
A. D. Handoko, F. Wei, Jenndy, B. S. Yeo and Z. W. Seh, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 922 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Wang, H. Chu, Y.-C. Chu and H. M. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1281 Search PubMed .
X. Li, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang, W. Cai, S. Liu and B. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700395 Search PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and B. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2521 Search PubMed .
S.-F. Hung, Pure Appl. Chem., 2019, 92(5), 733–749,  DOI:10.1515/pac-2019-1006 .
N. Hodnik, G. Dehm and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2015 Search PubMed .
C. H. M. van Oversteeg, H. Q. Doan, F. M. F. de Groot and T. Cuk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 102 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, T. Li, W.-B. Cai and M. Shao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 682 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, K. L. Firestein, J. F. S. Fernando, D. Siriwardena, J. E. von Treifeldt and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904094 Search PubMed .
Z. Fan, L. Zhang, D. Baumann, L. Mei, Y. Yao, X. Duan, Y. Shi, J. Huang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900608 Search PubMed .
C. Kim, F. Dionigi, V. Beermann, X. Wang, T. Möller and P. Strasser, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805617 Search PubMed .
J. Huang and R. Buonsanti, Chem. Mater., 2018, 31, 13 Search PubMed .
G. Liu, T. Tran-Phu, H. Chen and A. Tricoli, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1800028 Search PubMed .
J.-H. Zhou and Y.-W. Zhang, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3, 591 Search PubMed .
X. Cheng, Y. Li, L. Zheng, Y. Yan, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, S. Sun and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2450 Search PubMed .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404 Search PubMed .
L. Sun, V. Reddu, A. C. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 374 Search PubMed .
J.-W. Wang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 377, 225 Search PubMed .
A. S. Varela, W. Ju and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703614 Search PubMed .
J. H. Zagal and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14510 Search PubMed .
T. Wang, Q. Zhao, Y. Fu, C. Lei, B. Yang, Z. Li, L. Lei, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900210 Search PubMed .
K. C. Kwon, J. M. Suh, R. S. Varma, M. Shokouhimehr and H. W. Jang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800492 Search PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 Search PubMed .
Y. Pan, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Matter, 2020, 2, 78 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903815 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 119, 1806 Search PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215 Search PubMed .
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141 Search PubMed .
K. D. Gilroy, A. Ruditskiy, H.-C. Peng, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10414 Search PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, F.-X. Felpin, T. Asefa, X. Huang, R. Silva, X. Zou, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3722 Search PubMed .
Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 63 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, D. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 673 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Huang and B. Liu, Chem, 2019, 5, 2733 Search PubMed .
D. J. Wasylenko, C. Ganesamoorthy, M. A. Henderson, B. D. Koivisto, H. D. Osthoff and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16094 Search PubMed .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89 Search PubMed .
Z. Weng, J. Jiang, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Guo, K. L. Materna, W. Liu, V. S. Batista, G. W. Brudvig and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8076 Search PubMed .
C. Costentin, M. Robert, J.-M. Savéant and A. Tatin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 6882 Search PubMed .
M. Wang, K. Torbensen, D. Salvatore, S. Ren, D. Joulié, F. Dumoulin, D. Mendoza, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, U. Işci, C. P. Berlinguette and M. Robert, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3602 Search PubMed .
S. Ren, D. Joulié, D. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2019, 365, 367 Search PubMed .
J. Li, P. Pršlja, T. Shinagawa, A. J. M. Fernández, F. Krumeich, K. Artyushkova, P. Atanassov, A. Zitolo, Y. Zhou, R. García-Muelas, N. López, J. Pérez-Ramírez and F. Jaouen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10426 Search PubMed .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, G.-P. Hao, A. S. Varela, I. Sinev, V. Bon, B. R. Cuenya, S. Kaskel, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 994 Search PubMed .
A. Zitolo, V. Goellner, V. Armel, M.-T. Sougrati, T. Mineva, L. Stievano, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 937 Search PubMed .
A. Zitolo, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, T. Mineva, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Stamatin, G. F. Harrington, S. M. Lyth, P. Krtil, S. Mukerjee, E. Fonda and F. Jaouen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 957 Search PubMed .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, W. Liu, Y. Lin, X. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Yang, T. Yao and S. Wei, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 134 Search PubMed .
B. Lu, L. Guo, F. Wu, Y. Peng, J. E. Lu, T. J. Smart, N. Wang, Y. Z. Finfrock, D. Morris, P. Zhang, N. Li, P. Gao, Y. Ping and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 613 Search PubMed .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arelleano-Jiménez, G. Ye, N. D. Kim., E. L. G. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8688 Search PubMed .
Y. Hou, M. Qiu, M. G. Kim, P. Liu, G. Nam, T. Zhang, X. Zhuang, B. Yang, J. Cho, M. Chen, C. Yuan, L. Lei and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1392 Search PubMed .
S. Sun, G. Shen, J. Jiang, W. Mi, X. Liu, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J.-J. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901505 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z.-S. Wu, P. Lu, X. Wang, W. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Ma, W. Ren, Z. Jiang and X. Bao, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903089 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, J. Zhang and X. W. (David) Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904548 Search PubMed .
C. He, Z.-Y. Wu, L. Zhao, M. Ming, Y. Zhang, Y. Yi and J.-S. Hu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7311 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Cui, J. Zhao, G. Jia, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, L. Meng, Z. Shi, L. Zheng, C. Wang, Z. Zhang and W. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 336 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Han, S. Hong, T. Wu, X. Li, J. Qiu and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6071 Search PubMed .
W. Zang, T. Yang, H. Zou, S. Xi, H. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Kou, Y. Du, Y. P. Feng, L. Shen, L. Duan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10166 Search PubMed .
P. Christopher, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2249 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee, S. Srinivasan, M. P. Soriaga and J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 1409 Search PubMed .
J. McBreen and S. Mukerjee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3399 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee and J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2285 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee and J. McBreen, Proc. – Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 97, 36 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee and J. McBreen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 448, 163 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee and J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 600 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee and R. C. Urian, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3219 Search PubMed .
S. Mukerjee, ChemInform, 2003, 34, 507 Search PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligarrd, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37 Search PubMed .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Nørskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 156801 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, W. Liang, M. K. Bates, P. Mani, W. Lee and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 387 Search PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443 Search PubMed .
T. Kaito, H. Tanaka, H. Mitsumoto, S. Sugawara, K. Shinohara, H. Ariga, H. Uehara, S. Takakusagi and K. Asakura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11519 Search PubMed .
F. Jiang, F. Zhu, F. Yang, X. Yan, A. Wu, L. Luo, X. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 604 Search PubMed .
M. Teliska, W. E. O'Grady and D. E. Ramaker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8076 Search PubMed .
K. M. Caldwell, D. E. Ramaker, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, J. M. Ziegelbauer, R. S. Kukreja and A. Kongland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 757 Search PubMed .
T. M. Arruda, B. Shyam, J. S. Lawton, N. Ramaswamy, D. E. Budil, D. E. Ramaker and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1028 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, K. Caldwell, D. E. Ramaker, J. M. Ziegelbauer, Z. Liu, Z. Yu, M. Trahan and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20496 Search PubMed .
N. Ramaswamy, R. J. Allen and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12650 Search PubMed .
T. M. Arruda, B. Shyam, J. M. Ziegelbauer, S. Mukerjee and D. E. Ramaker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18087 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, Z. Zhao, L. Cao, J. Li, S. Ghoshal, V. Davies, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, Z. Liu, M. Li, X. Duan, S. Mukerjee, T. Mueller and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 798 Search PubMed .
J. Li, A. Alsudairi, Z.-F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1384 Search PubMed .
F. J. Scott, S. Mukerjee and D. E. Ramaker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 442 Search PubMed .
J. N. Schwämmlein, B. M. Stühmeier, K. Wagenbauer, H. Dietz, V. Tileli, H. A. Gasteiger and H. A. El-Sayed, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H229 Search PubMed .
J. Zheng, W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, B. Xu and Y. Yan, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501602 Search PubMed .
W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, M. Gao, J. Zheng, J. G. Chen and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5848 Search PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovoc, K.-C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550 Search PubMed .
D. Strmcnik, M. Uchimura, C. Wang, R. Subbaraman, N. Danilovic, D. van der Vliet, A. P. Paulikas, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 300 Search PubMed .
I. Ledezma-Yanez, W. D. Z. Wallace, P. Sebastián-Pascual, V. Climent, J. M. Feliu and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17031 Search PubMed .
M. J. T. C. Van Der Niet, N. Garcia-Araez, J. Hernández, J. M. Feliu and M. T. M. Koper, Catal. Today, 2013, 202, 105 Search PubMed .
E. Liu, L. Jiao, J. Li, T. Stracensky, L. K. LaRochelle Richard, Q. Sun, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, ChemRxiv, 2019 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.9904781.v1 .
E. Liu, J. Li, L. Jiao, H. T. T. Doan, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Huang, K. M. Abraham, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3232 Search PubMed .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, M. K. Bates, T. E. Miller, V. Davies, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, S. Mukerjee, Z.-F. Ma and Q. Jia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15594 Search PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Y. Yang, X. Feng, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4412 Search PubMed .
D. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Hu, J. Yang, N. Han, Y. Li and T.-K. Sham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19573 Search PubMed .
M. K. Bates, Q. Jia, H. Doan, W. Liang and S. Mukerjee, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 155 Search PubMed .
S. Gul, J. W. D. Ng, R. Alonso-Mori, J. Kern, D. Sokaras, E. Anzenberg, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, Y. Gorlin, T.-C. Weng, P. H. Zwart, J. Z. Zhang, U. Bergmann, V. K. Yachandra, T. F. Jaramillo and J. Yano, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 8901 Search PubMed .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Nøskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305 Search PubMed .
H. Zhong, M. Ghorbani-Asl, K. H. Ly, J. Zhang, J. Ge, M. Wang, Z. Liao, D. Makarov, E. Zschech, E. Brunner, I. M. Weidinger, J. Zhang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, S. Kaskel, R. Dong and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1409 Search PubMed .
M. B. Stevens, C. D. M. Trang, L. J. Enman, J. Deng and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11361 Search PubMed .
Q. Gong, P. Ding, M. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. Feng, Y. Li, W. Zhou and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2809 Search PubMed .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitski, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776 Search PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, I. Sinev, F. Scholten, N. J. Divins, I. Zegkinoglou, L. Pielsticker and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9383 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Feng, Y. L. Liang, C.-Q. Cheng, C.-K. Dong, H. Liu and X.-W. Du, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(25), 1908521,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201908521 .
M. Zhong, K. Tran, Y. Min, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, P. De Luna, Z. Yu, A. S. Rasouli, P. Brodersen, S. Sun, O. Voznyy, C.-S. Tan, M. Askerka, F. Che, M. Liu, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Pang, S.-C. Lo, A. Ip, Z. Ulissi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 581, 178 Search PubMed .
A. Eilert, F. Cavalca, F. S. Roberts, J. Osterwalder, C. Liu, M. Favaro, E. J. Crumlin, H. Ogasawara, D. Friebel, L. G. M. Pettersson and A. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 285 Search PubMed .
H. Xiao, W. A. Goddard III, T. Cheng and Y. Liu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6685 Search PubMed .
H. Mistry, A. S. Varela, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Zegkinoglou, I. Sinev, Y.-W. Choi, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12123 Search PubMed .
A. Vasileff, Y. Zhu, X. Zhi, Y. Zhao, L. Ge, H. M. Chen, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202004846 .
W. Ma, S. Jie, T. Liu, Q. Fan, J. Ye, F. Sun, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Cheng and Y. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 478–487,  DOI:10.1038/s41929-020-0450-0 .
P. De Luna, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C.-T. Dinh, M. B. Ross, O. S. Bushuyev, P. Todorović, T. Regier, S. O. Kelley, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 103 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, F. Che, M. Liu, C. Zou, Z. Liang, P. De Luna, H. Yuan, J. Li, Z. Wang, H. Xie, H. Li, P. Chen, E. Bladt, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T.-K. Sham, S. Bals, J. Hofkens, D. Sinton, G. Chen and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 974 Search PubMed .
Z.-Q. Liang, T.-T. Zhuang, A. Seifitokaldani, J. Li, C.-W. Huang, C.-S. Tan, Y. Li, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, Y. Hu, Q. Xiao, P.-L. Hsieh, Y. Wang, F. Li, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Zhou, P. Chen, Y. Pang, S.-C. Lo, L.-J. Chen, H. Tan, Z. Xu, S. Zhao, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3828 Search PubMed .
A. Eilert, F. S. Robert, D. Friebel and A. Nilsson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1466 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, F. P. G. de Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, Y. C. Li, D.-H. Nam, J. Li, Y.-S. Liu, J. Wicks, Z. Chen, M. Chi, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tam, J. Y. Howe, A. Proppe, P. Todorović, F. Li, T.-T. Zhuang, C. M. Gabardo, A. R. Kirmani, C. McCallum, S.-F. Hung, Y. Lum, M. Luo, Y. Min, A. Xu, C. P. O’Brien, B. Stephen, B. Sun, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 478–486,  DOI:10.1038/s41560-020-0607-8 .
P. Grosse, D. Gao, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, H. Mistry and B. R. Cuenya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6192 Search PubMed .
C.-J. Chang, S.-F. Hung, C.-S. Hsu, H.-C. Chen, S.-C. Lin, Y.-F. Liao and H. M. Chen, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 1998 Search PubMed .
J. Timoshenko, H. S. Jeon, I. Sinev, F. T. Haase, A. Herzog and B. R. Cuenya, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3727 Search PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, J. Timoshenko, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, A. Herzog, F. T. Haase and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19879 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Xu, Z. Wang, L. Huang, J. Li, F. Li, J. Wicks, M. Luo, D.-H. Nam, C.-S. Tan, Y. Ding, J. Wu, Y. Lum, C.-T. Dinh, D. Sinton, G. Zheng and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 5702 Search PubMed .
C. Genovese, M. E. Schuster, E. K. Gibson, D. Gianolio, V. Posligua, R. Grau-Crespo, G. Cibin, P. P. Wells, D. Garai, V. Solokha, S. K. Calderon, J. J. Velasco-Velez, C. Ampelli, S. Perathoner, G. Held, G. Centi and R. Arrigo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 935 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Ha, J. Park, T. Ohta, G. Kwag and S. Kima, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 461 Search PubMed .
I. C. Stefan, Y. Mo, S. Y. Ha, S. Kim and D. A. Scherson, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 4316 Search PubMed .
H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, D. Higgins, B. T. Sneed, E. F. Holby, K. L. More and P. Zelenary,, Science, 2017, 357, 479 Search PubMed .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi, S. McKinney, G. McCool, C. Ma, X. Yuan, Z.-F. Ma, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2418 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, H. Hafiz, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, G. Wu, B. Barbiellini, A. Bansil, E. F. Holby, P. Zelenay and S. Mukerjee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12496 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, K. Strickland, J. Li, A. Serov, K. Artyushkova, P. Atanassov, J. Anibal, C. Gumeci, S. C. Barton, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi and S. Mukerjee, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 65 Search PubMed .
U. Tylus, Q. Jia, K. Strickland, N. Ramaswamy, A. Serov, P. Atanassov and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8999 Search PubMed .
M. Xiao, J. Zhu, L. Ma, Z. Jin, J. Ge, X. Deng, Y. Hou, Q. He, J. Li, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, D. Su, C. Liu and W. Xing, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2824 Search PubMed .
P. G. Santori, F. D. Speck, J. Li, A. Zitolo, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, S. Cherevko and F. Jaouen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F3311 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, S. Zhao, W. Chen, J. Dong, W.-C. Cheong, R. Shen, X. Wen, L. Zheng, A. I. Rykov, S. Cai, H. Tang, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5422 Search PubMed .
L. Osmieri, R. K. Ahluwalia, X. Wang, H. T. Chung, X. Yin, A. J. Kropf, J. Park, D. A. Cullen, K. L. More, P. Zelenay, D. J. Myers and K. C. Neyerlin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117929 Search PubMed .
J. Gao, H. B. Yang, X. Huang, S.-F. Hung, W. Cai, C. Jia, S. Miao, H. M. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Chem, 2020, 6, 658 Search PubMed .
N. Leonard, W. Ju, I. Sinev, J. Steinberg, F. Luo, A. S. Varela, B. R. Cuenya and P. Strasser, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5064 Search PubMed .
J. Gu, C.-S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091 Search PubMed .
D. Karapinar, N. T. Huan, N. R. Sahraie, J. Li, D. Wakerley, N. Touati, S. Zanna, D. Traverna, L. H. G. Tizei, A. Zitolo, F. Jaouen, V. Mougel and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15098 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Shi, D. Tan, L. Liu, F. Zhang, C. Lu, Z. Su, X. Tan, X. Cheng, B. Han, L. Zheng and J. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2980 Search PubMed .
T. Möller, W. Ju, A. Bagger, X. Wang, F. Luo, T. N. Thanh, A. S. Varela, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 640 Search PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140 Search PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. Zheng, Y. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893 Search PubMed .
F. Li, Y. C. Li, Z. Wang, J. Li, D.-H. Nam, Y. Lum, M. Luo, X. Wang, X. Wang, A. Ozden, S.-F. Hung, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wicks, Y. Xu, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, C.-T. Dinh, Y. Wang, T.-T. Zhuang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 75 Search PubMed .
J. Han, P. An, S. Liu, X. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Yuan, J. Guo, X. Qiu, K. Hou, L. Shi, Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, C. Long and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12711 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, J. Ding, W. Cai, L. Liu, J. Cao, X. Li, X. Ren, Z. Kuang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 798 Search PubMed .
Y. Xia, S. Kashtanov, P. Yu, L.-Y. Chang, K. Feng, J. Zhong, J. Guo and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104163 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Xiao, X.-J. Chen, S. Yu, L. Yu, R. Si, Y. Wang, S. Wang, X. Meng, Y. Wang, Z.-Q. Tian and D. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16339 Search PubMed .
Z. Weng, Y. Wu, M. Wang, J. Jiang, K. Yang, S. Huo, X.-F. Wang, Q. Ma, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista, Y. Liang, Z. Feng and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 415 Search PubMed .
D.-H. Nam, O. S. Bushuyev, J. Li, P. De Luna, A. Seifitokaldani, C.-T. Dinh, F. P. G. de Arquer, Y. Wang, Z. Liang, A. H. Proppe, C. S. Tan, P. Todorović, O. Shekhah, C. M. Gabardo, J. W. Jo, J. Choi, M.-J. Choi, S.-W. Baek, J. Kim, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11378 Search PubMed .
L. Ma, W. Hu, B. Mei, H. Liu, B. Yuan, J. Zang, T. Chen, L. Zou, Z. Zou, B. Yang, Y. Yu, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, K. Wen and H. Yang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4534 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Jiang, G. Kang, D. Nguyen, G. C. Schatz and R. P. V. Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15684 Search PubMed .
S. Fang, X. Zhu, X. Liu, J. Gu, W. Liu, D. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Lin, J. Lu, S. Wei, Y. Li and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1029 Search PubMed .
H. Tao, C. Choi, L.-X. Ding, Z. Jiang, Z. Han, M. Jia, Q. Fan, Y. Gao, H. Wang, A. W. Robertson, S. Hong, Y. Jung, S. Liu and Z. Sun, Chem, 2019, 5, 204 Search PubMed .
J. Li, S. Chen, F. Quan, G. Zhan, F. Jia, Z. Ai and L. Zhang, Chem, 2020, 6, 885 Search PubMed .
P. Jiang, J.-L. Chen, F. Borondics, P.-A. Glans, M. W. West, C.-L. Chang, M. Salmeron and J. Guo, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 820 Search PubMed .
J. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, L. H. Tjeng and Z. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1984 Search PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, Y. Liang, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, L. Han, F. P. G. de Arquer, M. Liu, C. T. Dinh, T. Regier, J. J. Dynes, S. He, H. L. Xin, H. Peng, D. Prendergast, X. Du and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 149 Search PubMed .
M. Yoshida, Y. Mitsutomi, T. Mineo, M. Nagasaka, H. Yuzawa, N. Kosugi and H. Kondoh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19279 Search PubMed .
M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, B. Han, T. Z. Regier, D. Peak, S. Y. Sayed, C. Wei, Z. Xu and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 17682 Search PubMed .
M. F. Tesch, S. A. Bonke, T. E. Jones, M. N. Shaker, J. Xiao, K. Skorupska, R. Mom, J. Melder, P. Kurz, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlögl, R. K. Hocking and A. N. Simonov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3426 Search PubMed .
D. Drevon, M. Görlin, P. Chernev, L. Xi, H. Dau and K. M. Lange, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1532 Search PubMed .
U. Bergmann and P. Glatzel, Photosynth. Res., 2009, 102, 255 Search PubMed .
F. De Groot, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1779 Search PubMed .
X. Li, K. Zhu, J. Pang, M. Tian, J. Liu, A. I. Rykov, M. Zheng, X. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Huang, B. Liu, J. Wang, W. Yang and T. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 518 Search PubMed .
U. I. Kramm, L. Ni and S. Wagner, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805623 Search PubMed .
X. Zheng, Y. Ji, J. Tang, J. Wang, B. Liu, H.-G. Steinrück, K. Lim, Y. Li, M. F. Toney, K. Chan and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 55 Search PubMed .
X. Zheng, P. De Luna, F. P. G. de Arquer, B. Zhang, N. Becknell, M. B. Ross, Y. Li, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, M. Liu, O. Voznyy, C. T. Dinh, T. Zhuang, P. Stadler, Y. Cui, X. Du, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2017, 1, 794 Search PubMed .
X. Qin, S. Zhu, F. Xiao, L. Zhang and M. Shao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1778 Search PubMed .
E. Detsi, J. B. Cook, B. K. Lesel, C. L. Turner, Y.-L. Liang, S. Robbennolt and S. H. Tolbert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 540 Search PubMed .
X. Cui, P. Ren, D. Deng, J. Deng and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 123 Search PubMed .
S. G. Mohamed, Y.-Q. Tsai, C.-J. Chen, Y.-T. Tsai, T.-F. Hung, W.-S. Chang and R.-S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12038 Search PubMed .
D. A. Scherson, S. B. Yao, E. B. Yeager, J. Eldridge, M. E. Kordesch and R. W. Hoffman, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 932 Search PubMed .
J. Y. C. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090 Search PubMed .

          D. J. Myers and P. Zelenay, ElectroCat (Electrocatalysis Consortium), in U.S. Department of Energy-Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program-2019 Annual Merit Review and Peer Evaluation Meeting, https://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/review19/fc160_myers_zelenay_2019_o.pdf.
J. Li, M.-T. Sougrati, A. Zitolo, J. Ablett, I. C. Oguz, T. Mineva, I. Matanovic, P. Atanassov, A. Di Cicco, K. Kumar, L. Duban, F. Maillard and F. Jaouen, ChemRxiv, 2020 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.11842431.v1 .
J. Li, L. Jiao, E. Wegener, L. L. Richard, E. Liu, A. Zitolo, M. T. Sougrati, S. Mukerjee, Z. Zhao, Y. Huang, F. Yang, S. Zhong, H. Xu, A. J. Kropf, F. Jaouen, D. J. Myers and Q. Jia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1417 Search PubMed .
C. H. Choi, C. Baldizzone, G. Polymeros, E. Pizzutilo, O. Kasian, A. K. Schuppert, N. R. Sahraie, M.-T. Sougrati, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and F. Jaouen, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3136 Search PubMed .
H. Mistry, Y.-W. Choi, A. Bagger, F. Scholten, C. S. Bonifacio, I. Sinev, N. J. Divins, I. Zegkinoglou, H. S. Jeon, K. Kisslinger, E. A. Stach, J. C. Yang, J. Rossmeisl and B. R. Cuenya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11394 Search PubMed .
R. M. Arán-Ais, F. Scholten, S. Kunze, R. Rizo and B. R. Cyenya, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 317 Search PubMed .
F. Scholten, I. Sinev, M. Bernal and B. R. Cyenya, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5496 Search PubMed .
D. Gao, I. Zegkinoglou, N. J. Divins, F. Scholten, I. Sinev, P. Grosse and B. R. Cyenya,, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4825 Search PubMed .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. Revenga-Parra, J. Pastore, F. Pariente, F. Zamora, O. Castillo, E. Lorenzo and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12377 Search PubMed .
C. Xie, W. Chen, S. Du, D. Yan, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, B. Liu and S. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104653 Search PubMed .
Z. Qiu, Y. Ma and T. Edvinsson, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104118 Search PubMed .
Y. Deng, L. R. L. Ting, P. H. L. Neo, Y.-J. Zhang, A. A. Peterson and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7790 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, G. Liu, Y.-Z. Zhu, M. Su, P. Yin, X.-J. Wu, Q. Lu, C. Tan, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, W. Yang, H. Li, G.-H. Nam, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Huang, P. M. Radjenovic, W. Huang, Z.-Q. Tian, J.-F. Li and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7161 Search PubMed .
A. M. Ismail, G. F. Samu, H. C. Nguyën, E. Csapó, N. López and C. Janáky, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5681 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, K. Banjac, M. Lingenfelder and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10295 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, L. Bai and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8072 Search PubMed .
A. Dutta, A. Kuzume, M. Rahaman, S. Vesztergom and P. Broekmann, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7498 Search PubMed .
W. Luo, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, E. Moioli, K. Zhao and A. Züttel, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 273, 119060 Search PubMed .
P.-P. Yang, X.-L. Zhang, F.-Y. Gao, Y.-R. Zheng, Z.-Z. Niu, X. Yu, R. Liu, Z.-Z. Wu, S. Qin, L.-P. Chi, Y. Duan, T. Ma, X.-S. Zheng, J.-F. Zhu, H.-J. Wang, M.-R. Gao and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6400 Search PubMed .
T.-C. Chou, C.-C. Chang, H.-L. Yu, W.-Y. Yu, C.-L. Dong, J.-J. Velasco-Vélez, C.-H. Chuang, L.-C. Chen, J.-F. Lee, J.-M. Chen and H.-L. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2857 Search PubMed .
C. M. Gunathunge, V. J. Ovalle, Y. Li, M. J. Janik and M. M. Waegele, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7507 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Chang, A. S. Malkani, X. Yang, L. Thompson, F. Jiao and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(21), 9735–9743,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.0c02354 .
K. Yang, R. Kas and W. A. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15891 Search PubMed .
X. Lu, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, J. S. Francisco and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(36), 15438–15444,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.0c06779 .
W. Deng, L. Zhang, L. Li, S. Chen, C. Hu, Z.-J. Zhao, T. Wang and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2911 Search PubMed .
C.-Y. Li, J.-B. Le, Y.-H. Wang, S. Chen, Z.-L. Yang, J.-F. Li, J. Chen and Z.-Q. Tian, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 697 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, X. Qin, Y. Yao and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8748 Search PubMed .
H. Coskun, A. Aljabour, P. de Luna, H. Sun, N. Nishiumi, T. Yoshida, G. Koller, M. G. Ramsey, T. Greunz, D. Stifter, M. Strobel, S. Hild, A. W. Hassel, N. S. Sariciftci, E. H. Sargent and P. Stadler, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(25), 1902177,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201902177 .
J.-C. Dong, X.-G. Zhang, V. Briega-Martos, X. Jin, J. Yang, S. Chen, Z.-L. Yang, D.-Y. Wu, J. M. Feliu, C. T. Williams, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 60 Search PubMed .
J.-C. Dong, M. Su, V. Briega-Martos, L. Li, J.-B. Le, P. M. Radjenovic, X.-S. Zhou, J. M. Feliu, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 142, 715 Search PubMed .
J. F. Li, Y. F. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Yang, S. B. Li, X. S. Zhou, F. R. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nature, 2010, 464, 392 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. Wang, J.-B. Le, W.-Q. Li, J. Wei, P. M. Radjenovic, H. Zhang, X.-S. Zhou, J. Cheng, Z.-Q. Tian and J.-F. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16062 Search PubMed .
S. Kukunuri and H. Noguchi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 7267 Search PubMed .
S. Nayak, I. J. McPherson and K. A. Vincent, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12855 Search PubMed .
M. Nesselberger and M. Arenz, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1125 Search PubMed .
H.-Y. Yu, X.-F. Li, T.-H. Zhang, J. Liu, J.-H. Tian and R. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2702 Search PubMed .
S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau, E. Garnier and J.-M. Léger, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 590, 100 Search PubMed .
I. Kendrick, J. Fore, J. Doan, N. Loupe, A. Vong, N. Dimakis, M. Diem and E. S. Smotkin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H3152 Search PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Zhu, H. Wang, H. Li and M. Shao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(26), 10479,  DOI:10.1002/anie.202003071 .
Y. Hori, O. Koga, H. Yamazaki and T. Mastsuo, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2617 Search PubMed .
M. Dunwell, Y. Yan and B. Xu, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5410 Search PubMed .
W. Sheng, S. Kattel, S. Yao, B. Yan, Z. Liang, C. J. Hawxhurst, Q. Wu and J. G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1180 Search PubMed .
N. J. Firet and W. A. Smith, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 606 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, Q. Wang, X. Qin, M. Gu, R. Tao, B. P. Lee, L. Zhang, Y. Yao, T. Li and M. Shao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802238 Search PubMed .
M. Dunwell, Q. Lu, J. M. Heyes, J. Rosen, J. G. Chen, Y. Yan, F. Jiao and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3774 Search PubMed .
I. Oda, H. Ogasawara and M. Ito, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1094 Search PubMed .
Y. Ichinohe, T. Wadayama and A. Hatta, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1995, 26, 335 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. Wang, B. Liu, D. Cheng, C. Hu, G. Zhang, W. Zhu, H. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6878 Search PubMed .
X. Wei, Z. Yin, K. Lyu, Z. Li, J. Gong, G. Wang, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4103 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, W. Shi, H. Yang, Q. He, Z. Zeng, J.-Y. Ye, X. He, R. Huang, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17875 Search PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Ma, W.-B. Cai, P. Song and W. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 20451 Search PubMed .
H. Li, X. Qin, T. Jiang, X.-Y. Ma, K. Jiang and W.-B. Cai, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6139 Search PubMed .
Z. Pan, K. Wang, K. Ye, Y. Wang, H.-Y. Su, B. Hu, J. Xiao, T. Yu, Y. Wang and S. Song, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3871 Search PubMed .
E. Pérez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3621 Search PubMed .
Z.-C. Huang-Fu, Q.-T. Song, Y.-H. He, J.-J. Wang, J.-Y. Ye, Z.-Y. Zhou, S.-G. Sun and Z.-H. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 25047 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, B. Jiang, W.-B. Cai and M. Shao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15664 Search PubMed .
J. Gao, H. Zhang, X. Guo, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Ren and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18704 Search PubMed .
A. Wuttig, J. Ryu and Y. Surendranath, ChemRxiv, 2019 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.7929038.v1 .
A. S. Malkani, J. Li, J. Anibal, Q. Lu and B. Xu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 941 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Andanson and A. Baiker, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4571 Search PubMed .
J. C. Meier, I. Katsounaros, C. Galeano, H. J. Bongard, A. A. Topalov, A. Kostka, A. Karschin, F. Schüth and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9319 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, D. Wang, E. D. Rus, J. A. Mundy, D. A. Muller and H. D. Abruña, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4417 Search PubMed .
R. M. Aran-Ais, Y. Yu, R. Hovden, J. Solla-Gullón, E. Herrero, J. M. Feliu and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14992 Search PubMed .
G.-Z. Zhu, S. Prabhudev, J. Yang, C. M. Gabardo, G. A. Botton and L. Soleymani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22111 Search PubMed .
V. Beermann, M. E. Holtz, E. Padgett, J. F. de Araujo, D. A. Muller and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2476 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Kim, S. Louisia, C. Xie, Q. Kong, S. Yu, T. Lin, S. Aloni, S. C. Fakra and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 9194 Search PubMed .
J. M. Yuk, J. Park, P. Ercius, K. Kim, D. J. Hellebusch, M. F. Crommie, J. Y. Lee, A. Zettl and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2012, 336, 61 Search PubMed .
K. Itaya and E. Tomita, Surf. Sci., 1988, 201, L507 Search PubMed .
J.-Y. Gu, Z.-F. Cai, D. Wang and L.-J. Wan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8746 Search PubMed .
T. Ye, Y. He and E. Borguet, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6141 Search PubMed .
S. Yoshimoto, A. Tada and K. Itaya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5171 Search PubMed .
Y.-G. Kim, J. H. Baricuatro, A. Javier, J. M. Gregoire and M. P. Soriaga, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 15053 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Tian, A. N. Biswas, Z. Xie, S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, H. Meng and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59(28), 11345–11348,  DOI:10.1002/anie.202003625 .
C. Yang, G. Rousse, K. L. Svane, P. E. Pearce, A. M. Abakumov, M. Deschamps, G. Cibin, A. V. Chadwick, D. A. D. Corte, H. A. Hansen, T. Vegge, J.-M. Tarascon and A. Grimaud, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1378 Search PubMed .
H. Schmies, A. Bergmann, J. Drnec, G. Wang, D. Teschner, S. Kühl, D. J. S. Sandbeck, S. Cherevko, M. Gocyla, M. Shviro, M. Heggen, V. Ramani, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701663 Search PubMed .
E. Hornberger, A. Bergmann, H. Schmies, S. Kühl, G. Wang, J. Drnec, D. J. S. Sandbeck, V. Ramani, S. Cherevko, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9675 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, C. Tsounis, P. V. Kumar, Z. Han, R. J. Wong, C. Y. Toe, S. Zhou, N. M. Bedford, L. Thomsen, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(24), 1910118,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201910118 .
Q. Meyer, Y. Zeng and C. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901900 Search PubMed .
T. Arlt, M. Klages, M. Messerschmidt, J. Scholta and I. Manke, Energy, 2017, 118, 502 Search PubMed .
S. Chevalier, N. Ge, J. Lee, M. G. George, H. Liu, P. Shrestha, D. Muirhead, N. Lavielle, B. D. Hatton and A. Bazylak, J. Power Sources, 2017, 352, 281 Search PubMed .
J. Eller, T. Rosén, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, A. Wokaun and F. N. Büchi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, B963 Search PubMed .
S. S. Alrwashdeh, I. Manke, H. Markötter, M. Klages, M. Göbel, J. Haußmann, J. Scholta and J. Banhart, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5944 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, M. G. George, N. Ge, R. Banerjee, S. Chevalier, J. Lee, P. Shrestha, D. Muirhead, J. Hinebaugh, R. Zeis, M. Messerschmidt, J. Scholta and A. Bazylak, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F704 Search PubMed .
M. G. George, H. Liu, R. Banerjee, N. Ge, P. Shrestha, D. Muirhead, J. Lee, S. Chevalier, J. Hinebaugh, M. Messerschmidt, R. Zeis, J. Scholta and A. Bazylak, ECS Trans., 2016, 75, 89 Search PubMed .
E. F. Medici, I. V. Zenyuk, D. Y. Parkinson, A. Z. Weber and J. S. Allen, Fuel Cells, 2016, 16, 725 Search PubMed .
R. T. White, F. P. Orfino, M. E. Hannach, O. Luo, M. Dutta, A. P. Young and E. Kjeang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1337 Search PubMed .
J. Li, S. Brüller, D. C. Sabarirajan, N. Ranjbar-Sahraie, M. T. Sougrati, S. Cavaliere, D. Jones, I. V. Zenyuk, A. Zitolo and F. Jaouen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7211 Search PubMed .
S. J. Normile, D. C. Sabarirajan, O. Calzada, V. De Andrade, X. Xiao, P. Mandal, D. Y. Parkinson, A. Serov, P. Atanssov and I. V. Zenyuk, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 187 Search PubMed .
D. Spernjak, R. Mukundan, R. L. Borup, L. G. Connolly, B. I. Zackin, V. De Andrade, M. Wojcik, D. Y. Parkinson, D. L. Jacobson, D. S. Hussey, K. L. More, T. Chan, A. Z. Weber and I. V. Zenyuk, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6006 Search PubMed .
E. Leonard, A. D. Shum, N. Danilovic, C. Capuano, K. E. Ayers, L. M. Pant, A. Z. Weber, X. Xiao, D. Y. Parkinson and I. V. Zenyuk, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 921 Search PubMed .
R. T. White, A. Wu, M. Najm, F. P. Orfino, M. Dutta and E. Kjeang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 350, 94 Search PubMed .
Y. Singh, R. T. White, M. Najm, T. Haddow, V. Pan, F. P. Orfino, M. Dutta and E. Kjeang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 224 Search PubMed .
H. Matsui, N. Ishiguro, T. Uruga, O. Sekizawa, K. Higashi, N. Maejima and M. Tada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9371 Search PubMed .
E. Principi, A. Di Cicco, A. Witkowska and R. Marassi, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2007, 14, 276 Search PubMed .
Q. Jia, E. A. Lewis, C. Grice, E. S. Smotkin and C. U. Segre., J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2009, 190, 012157 Search PubMed .
E. A. Lewis, I. Kendrick, Q. Jia, C. Grice, C. U. Segre and E. S. Smotkin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8827 Search PubMed .
T. E. Miller, V. Davies, J. Li, S. Ghoshal, E. Stavitski, K. Attenkofer, S. Mukerjee and Q. Jia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F597 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
Electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems provide a promising carbon-free energy future. However, the major obstacle for their wide-spread implementation arises from the lack of efficient and robust electrocatalysts. Thanks to the impressive advancements of operando techniques summarized in this review, the understanding of the structure–activity relationship brings fuel cells and electrolyzers closer to commercialization.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Theoretical Δμ (μPt6–Cl–μPt6) for atop (solid curve), bridged (dashed curve) and 3-fold fcc (dotted curve) chloride on Pt6 clusters. (b) Theoretical Δμ of 3-fold O (solid curve), Cl (dotted curve) and their sums (dash-dot curve). (c) Experimental Δμ in 10−2 M Cl− at 0.54 V (solid curve) and 1.00 V (dashed curve) compared with the theoretical Δμ for 3-fold Cl. (d) Operando Pt L3-edge XANES spectra of Pt alloys supported on carbon at 0.54 V in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4, and (e) the corresponding potential dependent changes in their absorption peaks (Δμ = μ(V) − μ(0.54 V)). (f) The illustration of O*/HO* adsorption on a Pt surface. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 115, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The operando XANES spectra at the (a) Ni and (b) Fe K-edge of the FeNi-based OER catalyst, and (c) the corresponding FT-EXAFS spectra showing the potential-induced bond contraction. (d) The structure model for Fe-doped γ-NiOOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Operando Cu K-edge XANES spectra of the Cu-based electrocatalyst toward the CO2RR measured in 0.1 M KHCO3 after 15 min and 1 h of potential hold at −1.2 V vs. RHE. (b) Operando Cu K-edge XANES spectra (top) and the corresponding first derivatives (bottom) of the Cu-on-Cu3N catalyst as a function of reaction time at −0.95 V vs. RHE. (c) Quantification of the chemical state extracted from operando XANES of Cu (top), and the FEs toward hydrocarbon and alcohol products (bottom) as a function of applied potential for the CuAg-based catalysts. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 142, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 151, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  
Operando Fe K-edge (a) XANES with concomitant first derivatives (insets), and (b) the corresponding FT-EXAFS of FeTPP-300-C, FeTPP-800-C, and PANI-Fe-C as a function of applied potential. The spectra of FeTPP-800-C and PANI-Fe-C were collected in N2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte, while the spectra of FeTPP-300-C were collected in N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. (c) The Fe-N/O bond distances of FeTPP-300-C, FeTPP-800-C, and PANI-Fe-C obtained by fitting their FT-EXAFS spectra at 0.1 and 0.9 V. Operando XANES spectra of (d) Fe0.5 and (e) Co0.5 as a function of applied potential measured in N2 saturated 0.5 M H2SO4. Fe0.5 and Co0.5 catalysts are obtained via the pyrolysis of well-mixed ZIF-8, phenanthroline and iron or cobalt acetate at 1050 °C in Ar, and comprise exclusively single metal-atom Fe(Co)–Nx sites. (a–c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 82, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Operando Fe K-edge XANES (left) and FT-EXAFS (right) spectra in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3. (b) Change in the absorption edge (ΔE = E0 − E0,metal) of metal K-edge XANES spectra of M–N–C catalysts with the applied potential (green: Mn; red: Fe; blue: Co; pink: Ni; dark green: Cu). The electrolyte was CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3, and the OCP was around 0.7 V vs. RHE. Operando Fe K-edge XANES spectra (left) and the first derivative of the spectra (right) of (c) Fe3+–N–C and (d) Fe2+–N–C in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. Operando Co K-edge (e) XANES and (f) FT-EXAFS spectra in KOH electrolyte during the HER. Operando Cu-K edge XANES (g) and FT-EXAFS (h) spectra of Cu–N–C in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 79, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 169, Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 170, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  
Operando Fe K-edge (a) XANES and (b) EXAFS spectra of the FeTPP[Cl]/Cu catalyst in 1 M KHCO3. Operando XANES spectra of (c) NiTAPc, (d) CoTPyP and CoPc in CO2-saturated aqueous electrolytes. Operando Cu K-edge (f) XANES and (g) EXAFS spectra of CuPc in 0.5 M CO2-saturated KHCO3. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 177, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 176, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f and g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 180, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Operando O K-edge XAS spectra of the Ni–Bi electrocatalyst in 0.1 M K–Bi aqueous solution from 0.3 to 1.0 V, and (b) the correlation between the XAS peak area and the OER current vs. applied potential. Operando (c and d) Mn L2,3-edge and (e and f) O K-edge XAS spectra of an electrodeposited MnOx film in O2-saturated KOH. Operando (g) Mn L2,3-edge and (h) O K-edge XAS spectra of MnOx in buffer electrolyte at the specified potentials reported vs. RHE. The inset of (h) shows the peak intensities at 529 and 532 eV as a function of potential. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 190, Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 191, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 192, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) CVs of NiFe layered oxyhydroxide electrocatalysts collected in the Mössbauer-electrochemical cell with a scan rate of 25 mV s−1, and the operando Mössbauer spectra measured at (b) open circuit, (c) 1.49 V, (d) 1.62 V, (e) 1.76 V with the applied potential sweeping positively, and (f) 1.62 V, and (g) open circuit with the applied potential sweeping negatively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  The spectral doublet components D1 (a), D2 (c) and D3 (e) resulting from the fittings of operando Mössbauer spectra, and the corresponding IS and QS values of D1 (b), D2 (d) and D3 (f) at 0.8 V (2), 0.2 V (2), 0.8 V (4) and 0.2 V (4). The number in parentheses represents the cycle number. In (a, c and e), solid curve: 0.8 V (2); dashed curve: 0.2 V (2); ×: 0.8 V (4); ·: 0.2 V (4). In (b, d and f), □: QS; ●: IS. D1H is the Mössbauer signature of S1 sites at high potential while D1L is their signature at low potential. (g) Coordination or structural changes of D1 and D2 under operando conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 207, Copyright 2020, ChemRxiv.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) Operando Raman spectra of FePc/Au(111) at 0.4 and 0.7 V in aerated 0.1 M HClO4. The 0.4 V spectrum in (c) was obtained immediately after the applied potential was set at 0.4 V, and that in (d) was obtained after 15 minutes of potential hold at 0.4 V. The corresponding tip-retracted spectrum is plotted in a grey color. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  
Operando Raman spectra of 18O-labeled (a) Ni and (b) NiFe hydroxides measured at 1.65 V in 0.1 M KOH in H216O. (c) The volcano trend of the TOF of Fe sites over the lattice disordering of NiOOH induced by the addition of Fe. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 220, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 221, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  
Operando Raman spectra during the ORR of (a) Pt(110), (b) Pt(111) and (c) Pt(100) surfaces in O2-saturated 0.1 M NaClO4 (pH ≈ 10.3). SHINERS spectra during the ORR of (d) Pt(111), (e) Pt(100), (f) Pt(110), (g) Pt(211), (h) Pt(311) and (i) dealloyed Pt3Co nanocatalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4. (j) Adsorption configurations of the b-O2* and HO2* intermediate species of the ORR over the Pt3Co surfaces (gray: Pt; grape: Co; red: O; white: H). (a–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 234, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (g and h) Reproduced with permission from ref. 235, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i and j) Reproduced with permission from ref. 236, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  
Operando ATR-SEIRAS spectra over the Cu thin film electrode recorded during the cathodic scan in a (a) CO2- and (b) Ar-saturated 0.1 M KHCO3 solution. Operando Raman spectra of the (c) Cu and (d) FeTPP[Cl]/Cu catalysts in 1 M KHCO3 under different applied potentials. Operando SEIRAS spectra over the (e) Au and (f) Cu film in CO-saturated 0.1 M NaHCO3 electrolyte. (g) Illustration of potential-dependent CO binding on Au and Cu. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 261, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (e–g) Reproduced with permission from ref. 263, Copyright 2019, ChemRxiv.	 

 	Fig. 14  
Operando ATR-IR spectra of the Fe–N–C powder catalyst loaded on a Au/Si prism in (a) CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3, (b) Ar-saturated PBS solution, and (c) CO-saturated PBS. (d) The illustration of the active vs. inactive Fe–N4 sites toward the CO2RR. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of the operando electrochemical liquid cell TEM holder, and the typical TEM images captured during electrochemical cycling. (a) Schematic representation of the liquid cell featuring two silicon chips. (b) Schematic representation of the top electrochemical silicon chip. The inset is the glassy carbon working electrode with platinum nanoparticles on top. (c–e) are TEM images of disordered Pt–Fe nanocatalysts (some are identified with red arrows) before cycling (c), after 50 cycles (d), and after 100 cycles (e) under a 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 269, Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  
Operando STM images of FePc/Au(111) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at (a) 350 mV; (b) upper region: 350 mV, lower region: 50 mV, with yellow dotted lines as the potential boundary; (c) 50 mV; and (d) 350 mV. Data scale: 360.0 pm; small white squares (scan size: 9 × 9 nm2): high-resolution STM images of the FePc moleclues. Operando STM images of FePc/Au(111) in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 at (e) 0.7 V and (f) 0.4 V. (a–d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 274, Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Operando XRD of α-Li2IrO3 during the OER in 0.1 M KOH from OCV (0.8 V vs. RHE) to 1.55 V vs. RHE, and then holding for 10 h. (b) Rietveld analysis of the in situ formed hydrated α-LixK0.3IrO3 phase, and (c) the corresponding structural model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 279, Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Operando XCT raw absorption (top) and processed water thickness (bottom) images of the MEA in a running fuel cell. (b) Operando XCT images showing the completely dry MPL (left), areas with wet MPL (middle), and the local water density distribution in the MPL (right). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 288, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 287, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Operando XCT based local thickness measurement of MEA components during fuel cell operation. (b) Segmented and flattened view of the cathode catalyst layer at the BOL and EOL at channels and lands. (c) Crack development within the MEA: cross-sectional views of a cathode catalyst layer crack (left) and delamination between the membrane and anode catalyst layer (right). The pie chart shows the distribution of through-thickness membrane cracks at the EOL (A: anode catalyst layer; M: membrane layer; C: cathode catalyst layer). The cross-section images of the Pt distribution and Pt valence state (d) before and (e) after the ADT. A: relative Pt density of 0.80–1.00, and B: relative Pt density of 0.05–0.80; 1: before the ADT, 2: after 20000 ADT cycles at the center of the cathode catalyst layer, and 3: after 20000 ADT cycles at the Nafion membrane. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 296, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 297, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d and e) Reproduced with permission from ref. 298, Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 


Hard XAS	1. Oxidation state	1. No long-range-order structure required	1. Bulk technique	1. Nano-catalystsa
2. Electronic/geometric structure	2. Large penetration depth (suitable for operando tests with liquid cells)	2. Possible beam damage	2. Molecular catalysts
3. Coordination environment	
	
	3. SAC/PACs
4. Structural reconstruction	
	
	

Soft XAS	1. Oxidation state	1. No long-range-order structure required	Challenge for liquid cells due to UHV conditions required for testing	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Metal–ligand interaction	2. Surface sensitive technique due to shorter attenuation length	
	2. Molecular catalystsb
3. Metal-reactant/intermediate interaction	
	
	3. SAC/PACsb
XES	1. Small changes in oxidation state	1. Structural information complimentary to XANES	1. Weak signal compared to XAS	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Electronic structure (spin state)	2. Probing metal–ligand interaction with hard X-rays	2. Bulk technique	2. Molecular catalystsb
3. Metal–ligand interaction	3. No long-range-order structure required	
	3. SAC/PACsb
4. Preferred adsorption geometry	
	
	

Mössbauer spectroscopy	1. Oxidation state	Differentiation between various Fe or Sn species	1. Fe or Sn specific technique	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Electronic structure (spin state)	2. Long acquisition time due to attenuated signal by liquid	2. Molecular catalysts
3. Geometric symmetry	3. Bulk technique	3. SAC/PACs
4. Magnetic properties	
	

Raman	1. Chemical state and phase transition	1. Surface sensitive technique	1. Au substrate required for surface enhancement	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Surface adsorbates	2. Low Raman scattering of water (suitable for operando tests)	2. Molecular catalysts
3. Reaction intermediates	
	3. SAC/PACs
4. Electrode/water interface	
	

IR	1. Surface adsorbates	1. Surface sensitive technique	1. Au substrate required for surface enhancement	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Reaction intermediates	2. Complementary to Raman	2. Intense infrared absorption of water	2. Molecular catalysts
3. Electrode/water interface	
	
	3. SAC/PACs
STEM	1. Morphology and structure	Direct observation of structural reconstruction	1. Low resolution due to liquid electrolyte	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Chemical composition	2. Challenge for liquid cells due to UHV conditions required for testing	2. Molecular catalystsb

	3. Possible beam damage	3. SAC/PACsb
STM	Surface structure	Direct observation of structural reconstruction and adsorption/desorption of reactants	Clean and stable surface required (not suitable for heterogeneous or amorphous materials)	1. Single/poly crystal surfaces
2. Ordered molecular catalysts
XRD	1. Crystal structure	—	1. Structure with long-range-order required	Crystallized nano-catalysts
2. Crystalline particle size	2. Bulk technique
3. Chemical composition	

XPS	1. Oxidation state	Surface sensitive technique	1. Absence of potential bias for now (quasi-operando only)	1. Nano-catalysts
2. Chemical composition	2. Challenge for liquid cells due to UHV conditions required	2. Molecular catalystsb

	
	3. SAC/PACsb
X-CT	1. 3D porous structure	Reasons for MEA failure other than catalyst degradation	Compromise between spatial resolution and acquisition time	—
2. Water distribution

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
