Highlights  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B510730J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B510730J
(Highlight)
Green Chem., 2005, 7, 636-637HighlightsFirst published on 29th July 2005AbstractMarkus Hölscher reviews some of the recent literature in green chemistryMolecular oxygen oxidizes nitrobenzene selectively in the presence of polyoxometalate catalystSelective liquid phase oxidations of arenes to the corresponding phenols is a challenging though important task. Even more problematic is the oxidation of deactivated arenes such as nitrobenzene. Neumann et al. from the Weizman Institute investigated the use of polyoxometalate H5PV2Mo10O40 as a catalyst in oxidations of nitrobenzene with molecular oxygen.1 The authors found nitrobenzene to be oxidized selectively (>99%) to 2-nitrophenol unter a pressure of 2 bar of O2. Isostructural catalysts H3PW12O40 and H3PMo12O40 were inactive and also the corresponding n-butyl salt of the parent catalyst showed no activity indicating both vanadium and a proton source to be necessary for catalytic activity. Isotope experiments showed 18O to be incorporated in the nitrophenol, proving the oxygen source is indeed O2. The reaction mechanism is by far not understood presently, however, spectroscopic and other experiments indicate the formation of a nitrobenzene–catalyst–H3O+ complex to be the starting point of a radical process, which was supported by the observation of a spin-trapped radical intermediate by EPR spectroscopy during the reaction.Drastic enhancement of enantioselectivity and conversion by combining chiral and achiral ligands in Rh-catalyzed hydrogenationsEnantioselective hydrogenation of dihydrocinnamic acid derivatives is an interesting synthetic target, as the products are key intermediates in the synthesis of bioactive compounds such as opioid antagonists, endothelin receptor antagonists, enkephalinase inhibitors and renin inhibitors, to name a few. Monodentate phosphorous ligands have served as versatile and highly selective ligands in rhodium catalyzed hydrogenations. As it was shown very recently that mixtures of chiral monodentate ligands can improve enantioselectivity, the question occured what would happen if chiral and achiral monodentate ligands were mixed. The groups of Feringa at the University of Groningen and de Vries from DSM Pharma Chemicals-Advanced Synthesis came up with a fascinating answer: The combination of achiral and chiral ligands can improve the enantioselectivity and the rate of enantioselective Rh-catalyzed hydrogenations drastically.2 In screening experiments, it was demonstrated that the combination of achiral PPh3 with different phosphoramidite ligands very efficiently increases ee-values and conversions in the hydrogenation of α-methylcinnamic acid.  In the next step the influence of substitutents at the parent achiral ligand PPh3 was investigated leading to the result, that among many different substituents and substituent positions the best result is achieved when a tolyl group is present in the ortho-position. The concept can also be applied successfully to the asymmetric hydrogenation of substituted acrylic acids, which were hydrogenated with the appropriate ligand combinations with very high ee's and full conversion.Rhodium catalyzed hydroformylation using encapsulated phosphane ligandsHomogeneously catalyzed hydroformylation is one of the important carbon–carbon bond forming reactions with simultaneous introduction of a new reactive functional group (aldehyde), useful for subsequent reactions. As high catalyst selectivity and activity adds significantly to the development of clean and simple processes, this topic has been under intense investigation with no end in sight. Van Leeuwen et al. from the university of Amsterdam introduced ligands encapsulated by porphyrin moieties and have very recently extended the encapsulation approach towards tripyridylphosphane ligands encapsulated by Zn-salphen complexes to form active and selective phosphane ligands for the rhodium catalyzed hydroformylation of 1-octene.3  One of the most important results of this work is the electronic and steric tunability of the phosphane ligand through the Zn-salphen unit. As an example, phosphane ligand P1 forms an aggregate with Zn-complex 1 which can be used as a ligand for the Rh-catalyzed hydroformylation of 1-octene yielding linear to branched product ratios of 69 ∶ 31, while the conversion is 27%. In contrast, phosphane P2 when encapsulated with the same Zn-complex 1 is a ligand which results in a catalyst system yielding the hydroformylation products with conversions of 97% whereas the linear/branched ratio decreases to 59 ∶ 41. This approach provides interesting new alternatives for ligand tuning.Chemical industry in the UK performs much greenerAccording to the Chemical Industries Association (CIA) which has a membership of 150 companies operating from 270 chemical sites (200 of which are located in the UK) british chemical industry has outperformed its own criteria for the 2004 Climate Change Agreement (CCA) target. Since 1998 the energy efficiency has improved by 19.5%, which equals a saving of ca. 3.5 million tons of carbon dioxide emissions. Under the agreement, companies commit to challenging energy targets up to 2010 in exchange for an 80% reduction on the Climate Change Levy (CCL), a tax on the business use of energy. Companies can purchase emmissions allowances from the UK Emmisions Trading Scheme and also generate allowances for sale or banking if they overachieve their targets. The chemical sector is the UK manufacturing's largest consumer of energy—with an annual combined energy and feedstock bill amounting to ca.
				£2.5 billion.Kyoto in the US after all—hybrid electric shuttle buses for the Bronx173 mayors, representing ca. 36 million inhabitants in US cities have signed in July 2005 the Climate Protection Agreement to meet or beat Kyoto Protocol emissions reductions goals. As one of the first actions Canadian-based internationally active company Azure Dynamic Corporation has launched a shuttle bus program in which five hybrid-electric, 20-passenger shuttle buses will be delivered to the Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation (BOEDC). The BOEDC, established in 1981, is a community-based non-profit organization that has been a central figure in the revitalization of the borough. The Bronx contains two overlapping zones, the New York State Economic Development Zone and the federally-designated Bronx Empowerment Zone. The hybridized buses will operate approximately two to three shifts daily and are expected to drive between 160–240 miles per day. The shuttles buses will operate in areas severely underserved by public transit.Solar power for manchester's CIS towerMore than seven thousand panels of solar cells will cover three sides of the landmark Co-operative Insurance Society (CIS) tower in Manchester and generate 180 MW h of electricity each year. This is enough energy to illuminate eight floors of the building or power 1000 desktop computers. The challenging project has been managed by EC Harris, which played a pivotal role in the planning and delivery of this technically innovative environmental initiative. Sharp electronics, the global leader in solar cell production, manufacturing a quarter of solar modules used worldwide, produces the panels for the CIS tower. This is the largest european vertical photovoltaic project to date.ReferencesA. M. Khenkin, L. Weiner and R. Neumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9988–9989 CrossRef CAS .R. Hoen, J. A. F. Boogers, H. Bernsmann, A. J. Minnaard, A. Meetsma, T. D. Tiemersma-Wegman, A. H. M. de Vries, J. G. de Vries and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 4281–4284 CrossRef .A. W. Kleij, M. Lutz, A. L. Spek, P. W. N. M. van Leeuwen and J. N. H. Reek, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3661–3663 RSC .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:

 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
