Exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit in solar energy conversion  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42098A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42098A
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3508-3519Exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit in solar energy conversion

        
          
            Cory A. 
            Nelson
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nicholas R. 
            Monahan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            X.-Y. 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. E-mail: xyzhu@columbia.edu
Received 
      22nd June 2013
    , Accepted 9th September 2013First published on 11th September 2013AbstractWe summarize our recent explorations of photophysical mechanisms that may be utilized in solar cells with power conversion efficiency theoretically exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit. The dominant losses responsible for the Shockley–Queisser limit are below band-gap and thermalization (hot carrier) losses; together, they account for >55% of the total absorbed solar energy. This perspective focuses on two photophysical mechanisms, hot carrier equilibration and carrier multiplication, which may be used to reduce these losses through their utilization in novel solar cell designs. For the implementation of a hot carrier solar cell, we discuss the necessity of hot carrier scattering as well as the photon flux challenge. Although recent experiments have demonstrated the feasibility of hot-electron extraction from photo-excited semiconductor nano-crystals, the photon flux challenge cannot be met in these materials. We propose graphene and related materials as potentially ideal chromophores for hot carrier solar cells. For the multi-exciton solar cell, we focus on the molecular analog called singlet fission. Recent experiments in our lab revealed a quantum coherent mechanism in which photo-excitation of the organic semiconductor pentacene or tetracene creates a quantum superposition of singlet exciton and multi-exciton states. This quantum superposition and the corresponding decoherence time (i.e., singlet fission time) are critical to the competing dynamics of charge or energy harvesting. We discuss design principles for solar cells based on singlet fission materials.Cory A. NelsonCory A. Nelson received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2008. He is currently a graduate student at Columbia University under the supervision of Professor Xiaoyang Zhu. Cory's research interests include interfacial charge transfer and time resolved nonlinear optical spectroscopies.Nicholas R. MonahanNicholas Monahan received a B.S. (2009) and a M.S. (2010) with first class honors from Victoria University in New Zealand. He is pursuing his PhD in the Zhu group at Columbia University on a Fulbright-New Zealand Ministry of Science and Innovation Graduate Award. Nick's research interests include exciton dynamics in organic semiconductors and femtosecond time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy.X.-Y. ZhuXiaoyang Zhu is a Professor of Chemistry at Columbia University. He received a BS degree in Chemistry from Fudan University in 1984 and a PhD in Chemistry from University of Texas at Austin in 1989. His research interests include solar energy conversion, photophysics in molecular and nano materials, femtosecond nonlinear spectroscopies, and interfacial science.

Broader context
We discuss two photophysical mechanisms, hot carrier equilibration and carrier multiplication, in molecular and nano materials and the feasibility for their implementation in solar cells with power conversion efficiency theoretically exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit. We point out the necessity of hot carrier scattering in realizing a hot carrier solar cell. The low photon flux from solar radiation puts stringent requirements on potential hot carrier chromophores. These requirements include sufficient carrier delocalization to length scales approaching μm, efficient carrier–carrier scattering, and inefficient carrier–phonon scattering. We explore the potential of nano-materials, particularly graphene and related materials, as potentially ideal chromophores for hot carrier solar cells. For the carrier multiplication solar cell, we discuss multi-exciton generation in semiconductor nanocrystals and the molecular analog called singlet fission. The latter is particularly promising because of the high multiplication yield and the potential for designing and synthesizing new singlet fission molecules. Recent experiments in our lab revealed a quantum superposition mechanism for singlet exciton fission and the feasibility of extracting two electron–hole pairs from the quantum superposition or the resulting two triplet excitons. We discuss design principles for solar cells based on singlet fission materials.

Introduction
Ever increasing energy demand and deleterious environmental effects of fossil fuels has led to a search for alternative energy sources.1,2 Solar energy has been argued as a viable alternative in part because of the abundance of solar radiation reaching the earth's surface.3 This perspective focuses on solar energy conversion through the use of photovoltaics (PVs) with emphasis on third generation PVs. These generations were characterized by Green based on the cost per peak watt of the solar cell.4 First generation PVs, comprising mainly of single p–n junction crystalline materials such as gallium arsenide or silicon, are highly efficient but their cost may be too high to compete with fossil fuel, but recent manufacturing advances are reducing the gap and approaching grid parity.5 The use of thin film amorphous or polycrystalline materials in second generation PVs dramatically reduces cost at the expense of efficiency. Third generation PVs aim to maintain or lower the cost of second generation cells while dramatically improving efficiency by introducing novel cell designs and materials to reach a target price per peak watt of approximately $0.20.4,6
Before discussing concepts for third generation PV design, it is necessary to understand fundamental loss mechanisms in single junction solar cells. These losses are typically separated into two types: extrinsic and intrinsic. Unwanted recombination as a result of impurities, series resistance, and absorption from an inactive window layer are examples of extrinsic losses and can, in principle, be eliminated. Intrinsic losses, however, represent fundamental limitations of energy conversion with a given operating principle. Examples of intrinsic losses in single junction solar cells and a brief description of their origin are presented in the subsequent paragraph.
Detailed derivations of the thermodynamic origin of intrinsic losses in solar cells have been described in a number of articles6–9 and their results are summarized here. In its most basic form, the solar cell is a heat engine. If no new entropy is generated in doing work, then the power conversion efficiency is that of a Carnot engine operating with the sun as a heat source (∼6000 K) and the earth's surface (∼300 K) as a heat sink, or 95%.10 The solar cell is both an absorber and an emitter. Recombination of electron–hole pairs decreases the total number of carriers that can be collected, reducing the overall cell efficiency by ∼1%. Further losses are introduced by the angular inequality of incident and emitted radiation. The sun's rays are essentially parallel when they reach the earth, whereas the absorber reemits light isotropically. This mismatch in angle, called angular entropy or Boltzmann loss, lowers cell efficiency by another ∼9%. The two largest loss channels are: (1) transparency of the solar cell absorber to photon energies below the band gap (EG) (∼25% loss for EG ∼ 1.3 eV); and (2) thermalization losses (∼30%) where photons with energy greater than EG create hot electrons and holes that thermalize with the lattice before they are extracted at the band edges. Taking into account all of these losses has led us to the Shockley–Queisser limit for solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency,11 which is ∼32% at the optimal EG = 1.3 eV, and ∼30% at EG = 1.1 eV for silicon. The result of this analysis as a function of band gap is summarized in Fig. 1. The current record for single crystal silicon solar cell is ∼25% and that of gallium arsenide (EG = 1.4 eV) is ∼28%.12
 Fig. 1  Intrinsic losses of a single junction solar cell with respect to band gap. The numerical power out is integrated from the solar spectrum while solid curves are analytical solutions. From ref. 8. Reproduced with permission from Wiley and Sons. 
Among the intrinsic channels listed above, the Carnot and emission losses are limited by fundamental physics; Boltzmann, thermalization, and bandgap losses, however, may be reduced with device/material designs and new photophysical mechanisms. Solar concentration, for example, increases the solid angle of the incident light, effectively reducing angular entropy and the Boltzmann loss. The largest gains in efficiency, however, can be made by reducing thermalization and band gap losses. Tandem cells have proven to be an effective method for reducing thermalization and band gap losses by sequentially absorbing photons with decreasing energy in multiple p–n junctions. Record efficiencies as high as 44% have been demonstrated for crystalline semiconductor tandem cells with solar concentration,12 but manufacturing costs are prohibitively high for large-scale applications.
A number of novel concepts have been proposed for third generation solar cells.6,13,14 In this perspective, we focus on the hot carrier solar cell (HCSC) and the multiple exciton generation (MEG) concepts that aim to reduce thermalization and band gap losses (Fig. 2B and C). These concepts are particularly attractive as they may be implemented with nano or molecular materials to meet the cost requirement of third-generation PVs. We focus on fundamental physical principles obtained from mechanistic studies in model systems. We also discuss challenges and opportunities in implementing these novel concepts. Another proposal for exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit is the intermediate band solar cell (Fig. 2D).15 In this approach, a narrow band of electronic states is introduced into the fundamental gap of the semiconductor material to allow below gap optical excitations. Attempts at introducing the intermediate bands include the use of discrete impurity levels,16 mini-bands from quantum dots,13,17 and highly mismatched alloys.18 This active research area will not be discussed here.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the mechanisms of PVs based on (A) conventional single junction; (B) hot carriers; (C) multiexciton generation; and (D) intermediate band. 
While this perspective focuses on the feasibility of hot carrier and multi-exciton concepts to exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit, there are formidable challenges in implementing these concepts. Molecular and nano materials are intrinsically disordered. The presence of structural and energetic disorder (both static and dynamic) results in not only charge carrier trapping, space charge accumulation, and electron–hole recombination, but also fundamental limits in photovoltaic efficiency.19 In addition, the presence of multiple interfaces for charge carrier separation and collection adds to the complexity and challenge.20–23 These materials and engineering issues are of critical importance, but will not be covered within the limited scope of the present perspective.
Hot carrier solar cells
The necessity of carrier–carrier scattering
In a conventional PV cell, hot electrons and holes are generated by photons with energy above the band gap. These hot carriers lose their excess energies to phonons and quickly cool to the band edges before they are captured (Fig. 2A). A hot carrier PV cell captures the carriers with excess energy.24–26 As illustrated in Fig. 2B, the central concept of HCSCs is the partial separation of the hot carrier energy from the thermal bath. At a sufficient density of hot carriers within a scattering volume and if hot carrier cooling by phonon scattering is slower than carrier–carrier scattering, the hot electrons (holes) may reach a quasi-equilibrium in the electronic degrees of freedom described by an electron (hole) temperature, Te (Th), which is higher than that of the lattice or the surrounding environment. For an HCSC, a lower band gap absorbs more of the solar spectrum and gives a higher power conversion efficiency. In the limit of zero band gap and maximum solar concentration, a theoretical efficiency as high as 85% has been predicted.6,25 In essence, the HCSC attempts to recover all the energy from bandgap and thermalization losses.
In the implementation of an HCSC, electrons with energy in excess of the Fermi level of the electron conductor will be lost after electron transfer. The same argument applies to the hot hole. To minimize energy loss within the electron (hole) conductor, the hot electrons (holes) should ideally be extracted in a narrow energy window near the Fermi level of each. This requires the presence of an interfacial electronic energy level, which serves as a resonant channel, similar to a narrow “band-pass” filter, for hot carrier transfer. While an HCSC may appear to be equivalent to a conventional cell with an effectively wider band gap defined by the energy differences of the hot electron and hot hole extraction levels, this is a misconception. Consider a photoexcited electron above the conduction band minimum but below the hot electron extraction level. In the conventional picture, this conduction band electron cannot be extracted. However, in the presence of electron–electron scattering, the electron with energy above the hot electron extraction level can scatter with one below to bring both into resonance with the extraction level and increase photo-current.
These arguments illustrate the central importance of carrier–carrier scattering in achieving the high efficiency of an HCSC. Extracting hot carriers before their excess energy is lost, e.g., in a conventional p–n junction with ultrathin carrier transport layers,27 does not by itself qualify as an HCSC. To realize the separation of electron (hole) “temperatures” from that of the phonon bath, one must ensure that elastic electron–electron (hole–hole) scattering, including impact ionization addressed below, is more efficient than the inelastic electron– or hole–phonon scattering. However, electron–phonon scattering is highly efficient in most semiconductor materials, with hot electron lifetimes typically in the picosecond range. Ensuring sufficient electron–electron scattering within the inelastic lifetime of hot electrons puts stringent requirement on the excitation density and the photon flux reaching the light absorbing material.
The photon flux limitation
While the transient separation of electronic “temperatures” from that of the phonon bath can be easily achieved with pulsed laser irradiation, this is not the case for solar radiation. The power density of solar radiation incident on the surface of the earth is ∼1 kW m−2, corresponding to a spectrally integrated photon flux of ∼106 photons cm−2 ps−1 in the broad range from near-IR to UV. For an absorption coefficient (α) of 104 cm−1 and a long hot electron lifetime (τhot) of 100 ps, the solar photon flux creates an upper limit of hot carrier density on the order of 1012 cm−3. Therefore, the mean-free-path of hot carriers (λh) must be >1 μm to ensure their mutual scattering.
Extensive efforts are underway to explore molecular and nano materials for solar energy conversion because they may be compatible with low-cost PV production. However, it is extremely difficult for these material systems to meet the requirements on electronic delocalization and high carrier velocity. Consider a typical molecular or nano material, with a photo-absorption cross-section of σ < 1 nm2 and τhot < 100 ps. A solar concentration of >106 is needed to obtain more than one excitation within the hot electron lifetime. In order to reduce the required solar concentration to obtain more than one excitation within the hot electron lifetime, molecular or nano materials with sufficient electronic delocalization and high carrier velocity must be found.
Hot electron dynamics in bulk semiconductors
It is an exceptional challenge to find appropriate materials with attributes for the HCSC: low band gap to absorb a broad solar spectrum, high carrier mobility and delocalization to allow efficient carrier–carrier scattering, as well as slow electron–phonon scattering to enable long hot carrier lifetimes.
There are a number of low bandgap materials that may meet the first requirement. Examples include Ge, InN, and GaSb with Eg ∼ 0.7 eV, or PbS, PbSe, and PbTe with Eg ∼ 0.2–0.4 eV. In the limit, zero bandgap materials are theoretically the most efficient absorbers for HCSCs.
The second requirement may be met in materials with very high carrier mobility, e.g., crystalline GaAs. As an example, a photo-excited electron at ∼0.35 eV above the conduction band minimum in single crystal GaAs has a diffusion constant of D ∼ 500 cm2 s−1 and a lifetime of τ ∼ 10 ps, corresponding to a mean-free-path of ∼1 μm.28,29 With realistic solar concentration (102 to 103), it is possible to achieve hot carrier scattering and transient equilibration necessary for HCSCs. While the estimation presented above predicts that hot electron (hole) equilibration is possible under realistic solar concentration in semiconductor materials with high carrier mobility, this prediction still needs experimental verification. Previous studies on hot carrier scattering in semiconductors have all been carried out with laser excitation, at excitation densities many orders of magnitude higher than that achievable with solar radiation. Under such high intensity laser excitation, hot carriers are known to scatter with each other efficiently to yield a hot electron (hole) equilibrium on time scale scales as short as 100 fs, which is at least one order of magnitude faster than the time scale of electron–phonon scattering.28
The requirement for long hot electron lifetimes is difficult to achieve because efficient electron–phonon scattering is intrinsic to most semiconductor materials. This is particularly true for polar semiconductors where the Fröhlich interaction results in intra-band cooling of hot carriers by the emission of longitudinal optical (LO) phonons, for both energy and momentum conservation, on time scales of picoseconds or less. Decay into optical phonons, however, does not preclude the possibility of using bulk semiconductors as hot carrier absorbers. This is because further cooling of the excitation requires the decay of optical phonons into acoustic phonons through the anharmonic or Klemens mechanism30 in which one optical phonon decays into two acoustic phonons with nearly the same energy but opposite wave vector to satisfy energy and momentum conservation. This phonon scattering channel may be suppressed if there is a phonon band gap with the acoustic phonon energy less than half of the optical phonon energy. These phonon band gaps exist in some binary semiconductors with a large difference in atomic mass, such as in InN, BiN or SnO,31 or in carbon nanomaterials.32 Suppression of the Klemens mechanism not only slows carrier cooling but would also allow energy scattered into optical phonons to be regained when optical phonons scatter with electrons again.33
Hot electron extraction from semiconductor nanomaterials
Semiconductor quantum dots (QDs), particularly colloidal QDs, are being actively explored for applications in solar energy conversion thanks to their compatibility with low-cost processing and tunable electronic and optical properties.34–37 One argument for the use of QDs in HCSCs is the possibility of slow hot carrier cooling due to the “phonon bottleneck”. This refers to the effect caused by the discretization of electronic bands from quantum confinement which leads to the requirement of multiple phonon emission for intra-band electronic transitions.38,39 Experimental evidence for the phonon bottleneck in colloidal QDs, however, has been scarce due to various hot carrier cooling mechanisms other than multi-phonon emission, such as e–h energy transfer, surface state assisted cooling or recombination.40–50 Only when these cooling channels are minimized through careful engineering of core–shell structures can much longer hot electron lifetimes be observed.51 Nevertheless, this kind of phonon bottleneck likely exists only near the band-bottom (e.g., 1p) where quantum confinement is effective.
To investigate hot electron relaxation and possibility of a phonon bottleneck, we recently applied femtosecond time-resolved two-photon photoemission (TR-2PPE) spectroscopy to directly determine hot electron relaxation dynamics in thin solid films of PbSe QDs capped with ethanedithiol molecules.52 In a TR-2PPE experiment, an intermediate state is resonantly excited by a pump photon and after a controlled time delay photoionized for detection by a probe photon. Fig. 3 shows a TR-2PPE spectrum from 5.4 ± 0.3 nm PbSe QDs (optical gap Eg = 0.70 eV) excited with a photon energy of 2.20 eV. The data directly shows the ultrafast cooling on the sub-ps time scale of initially excited hot electron at ∼0.8 eV above the conduction band minimum. The absence of a phonon bottleneck is not surprising because the dynamics of highly excited carriers are essentially bulk-like, as shown by Jonas and coworkers based on a detailed analysis of photon energy dependent oscillator strength of PbS QDs.53 These authors argued that hot carriers excited with photon energy ∼3EG are localized on the 1–2 nm length scale, which is shorter than or on the order of the diameter of the QDs. These hot carriers move like independent carriers in the bulk and scatter with the QD surface less frequently than they do with optical phonons.
 Fig. 3  Pseudo-color representation of time-resolved two photon photoemission (TR-2PPE) spectra with excitation photon energy hν1 = 2.20 eV and probe photon energy hν2 = 4.28 eV. The electron energy is referenced to the bottom of the conduction band. The right shows schematically the principle of the TR-2PPE experiment. From ref. 52. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In order to harvest hot electrons from PbSe QDs, one must ensure that the rate of hot electron extraction (to an electron acceptor) is competitive with the sub-ps hot electron cooling rate. We have demonstrated this at the PbSe QDs/TiO2 interface using femtosecond time-resolved second harmonic generation, which monitors the transient electric field generated by ultrafast electron injection from photo-excited QDs to the TiO2 conduction band.34 The sample consists of one and a half monolayers of PbSe QDs capped with ethanedithiol or hydrazine molecules on the single crystal TiO2 (110) surface. Energy level characterization puts the 1s electron level of PbSe QDs at ∼0.2 eV below the conduction band minimum of TiO2 (inset in Fig. 4), thus requiring the injected electrons to be hot. Hot electron injection is evidenced by the ultrafast rise (<50 fs) in interfacial electric field upon photo-excitation of QDs. The electron injection rate in Fig. 4 is much faster than the electron cooling rate in Fig. 3, thus establishing the high efficiency of hot electron injection. Note that the recombination rate (decrease in SHG intensity) depends inversely on temperature. This is because hot electrons injected into TiO2 drift back as polarons to the interface for recombination with holes on QDs; at a lower temperature the polaron mobility is higher due to less scattering with phonons.
 Fig. 4  Time-resolved second harmonic generation profiles obtained from 1.5 monolayers of 3.3 nm PbSe QDs (with hydrazine capping) on TiO2 (110) surface at different sample temperatures (25–200 K). All profiles have been normalized to the peak intensity. Inset: cartoon showing a boomerang mechanism involving the ballistic injection of hot electrons, followed by phonon scattering and polaronic transport back to the interface. Both pump and probe photon energies are 1.53 eV, with the second harmonic signal detected at 3.06 eV. From ref. 34. Reproduced with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The major obstacle to using QDs as hot carrier absorbers is the photon flux limitation. To achieve hot carrier scattering within their limited lifetimes and under solar radiation, one would need delocalization on the μm length scale. In principle, strong inter-QD coupling may lead to the formation of hot carrier minibands in QD solids, but the inevitable presence of intrinsic disorder makes this unlikely. Sources of disorder in semiconductor QDs may include variations in size, shape, surface termination, capping molecule distribution, and inter-QD arrangement. Any or all of these factors can disrupt the formation of hot carrier minibands. Interestingly, band-like transport has been reported in QD thin films with strong inter-QD coupling resulting from surface chemical control.54,55 It remains to be seen if minibands for hot carrier equilibration and transport may be achieved in such strongly coupled QD thin films.
Graphene as the hot carrier chromophore
A single layer of graphene absorbs 2.3% of incident light, nearly independent of light wavelength in the IR-visible range (deviation only in the far-IR or UV range). Given the high absorption cross section near complete absorption is possible with a small amount of material (a few tens to hundred monolayers). The very high carrier velocities (≥106 m s−1) give rise to a large scattering volume (area) as well as long hot electron (hole) mean free path on the order of hundreds of nanometers.56,57
Of particular importance to hot carrier thermalization in graphene is its unique band structure. The linear dispersion at the k-point means that energy and momentum are conserved simultaneously in carrier–carrier scattering events, including scattering between a hot electron and a valence band electron below the Fermi level which yields two hot electrons or the elastic scattering between two hot electrons (Fig. 5). The former is often called carrier multiplication. Indeed, a number of theoretical studies have predicted efficient carrier multiplication in graphene.58–60 The dynamic competition between carrier multiplication and the Auger process leads to rapid thermalization of hot electrons (holes) in a few tens of femtoseconds in optically excited graphene.61–64 In electrically biased graphene, light emission characteristic of black-body radiation at the electronic temperatures as high as 1000 K have been reported,65 and hot carriers responsible for photo-thermoelectric effects are believed to dominate the response of graphene photodetectors.66–68
In contrast to the ultrafast equilibration of hot electrons (holes), electron–phonon scattering in graphene is much slower, giving rise to a mean free path of ∼1 μm for hot electrons.56 While hot carrier equilibration with optical phonons occurs in ∼1 ps, further cooling by acoustic phonon emission can take as long as 100 ps, particularly as the hot electron (hole) energy approaches the charge neutral point on the Dirac cone and further cooling becomes inhibited by the phonon band gap.58–60 Thus, we can identify two time windows for the efficient extraction of hot carriers: (1) 10 fs < t < 1 ps, in which hot electrons (holes) equilibrate among themselves but are not equilibrated with optical phonons; (2) 1 ps < t < 100 ps, in which hot carrier–optical phonon equilibrium is not cooled down further by acoustic phonon emission.
 Fig. 5  Left: a photo-excited hot electron scatters with an electron in the valence band (carrier multiplication); right: two hot electrons scatter elastically to redistribute energy. Similar mechanisms also operate for the holes. 
Hot carrier equilibration may be possible under solar radiation as illustrated with the following parameters. With a realistic solar concentration of 104, the photon flux is 10−4 photons nm−2 ps−1 in the IR-UV range. For a graphene nanostructure of 1 μm2, the optical absorption cross-section and carrier scattering area are of the same order. There are >100 hot carriers in this scattering volume (area) within the hot carrier lifetime of ∼1 ps. Based on this analysis, we predict that hot carrier scattering and equilibrium is possible; this prediction requires experimental verification.
Despite the potential of graphene as a hot carrier chromophore, its implementation into a working solar cell remains difficult. From a practical point of view, methods for the manufacturing of monolayer graphene on an industrial scale have not emerged. There is also a physical limitation of using monolayer graphene adsorbed to another bulk semiconductor surface. Hot electrons (holes) in graphene are near the K point in momentum space, while the conduction band minima of common semiconductor electron acceptors, such as TiO2 or ZnO, are at the Γ point. Transferring a hot electron from adsorbed monolayer graphene to the conduction band of the acceptor may be accompanied by scattering with phonons to compensate for the momentum change. Consequently, there may exist a momentum barrier for hot electron transfer.
Both obstacles discussed above may be overcome with graphene nanomaterials, such as chemically synthesized or processed graphene quantum dots (G-QDs) or ribbons. Chemical methods for the synthesis of graphene nano structures can potentially be scaled up to industrial scale69 and the nano size relaxes the momentum requirement in interfacial charge transfer. In preliminary experiments, we demonstrated hot electron injection from chemically synthesized G-QDs, each containing 48 fused benzene rings, anchored to the TiO2 (110) surface via carboxyl linkers.70 These G-QDs,71 also called large polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons,72 have been shown to possess hot electron lifetimes as long as 100 ps.73 Such a long hot electron lifetime is comparable to the phonon bottleneck. Their ability as a light absorber has been recently demonstrated in dye-sensitized solar cells.71

Fig. 6 shows time-resolved second harmonic generation (TR-SHG) time traces for a half monolayer of G-QDs chemically anchored to a single crystal TiO2 (110) surface via the carboxyl group with excitation photon energies of (A) 2.41 eV and (B) 2.00 eV. The spectra reveal ultrafast electron injection from photoexcited G-QDs to the TiO2 conduction band with time constant <15 fs. The charge recombination dynamics (decay in SHG signal) can be characterized by a fast channel (τr1 = 80–130 fs) and a slow one (τr2 = 0.5–2 ps). The fast channel is attributed to the prompt recombination of the bound electron–hole pair across the interface. The rate of the slow channel depends inversely on excitation photon energy and can be explained by a boomerang mechanism: hotter electrons created at higher photon energy are injected deeper into bulk TiO2 and take more time to drift back to the interface under the transient electric field to recombine with the hole on G-QDs. An inverse dependence of the recombination rate on sample temperature, similar to Fig. 4, has also been observed for G-QDs/TiO2. Which, when compared to the measured polaron mobility,74 confirms hot electron transfer to the TiO2.
 Fig. 6  Time-resolved second harmonic generation spectra (dots) from the interface of graphene QDs chemically anchored to TiO2 (110). The spectra were recorded at 300 K at pump photon energies of hν = 2.41 eV (left) and 2.00 eV (right). The probe photon energy for SHG is at 1.53 eV, with second harmonic detected at 3.06 eV. The lower right shows the molecular structure of the graphene QD and the lower left the boomerang mechanism of hot electron injection, followed by cold polaron recombination. From ref. 70. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
While the demonstration from the GQD/TiO2 interface established the feasibility of ultrafast hot-electron extraction, the molecular size is too small to allow for multiple excitations in each molecule under solar radiation and the extraction of the carriers is not energy selective (i.e., lack of a bandpass filter). To develop realistic HCSC absorbers, we need to increase the size of graphene structures and incorporate energy-selective states for charge extraction. These challenges must be met.
Multi-exciton solar cells
Carrier multiplication in bulk semiconductors
Carrier multiplication (also called impact ionization) was originally predicted and discovered in crystalline inorganic semiconductors.75–77 A carrier multiplication solar cell aims to capture part of the loss from solar radiation by converting the excess energy of hot carriers into additional electron–hole pairs, increasing photo-current (Fig. 2C).
Carrier multiplication is the inverse of the Auger process. It involves the scattering of a hot electron in the conduction band with an electron in the valence band to create an additional electron–hole pair (a similar process exists for a hot hole). The scattering process requires both energy and momentum conservation and occurs most efficiently in particular regions of the band structure. Queisser and coworkers studied the carrier multiplication problem in detail and proposed optimal conditions, including the lowest band gap being indirect while the next gap being direct, strongly absorbing, and asymmetric.78 The last condition, i.e., asymmetry in electron and hole mass, ensures that one carrier of the e–h pair receives most of the excess energy from a high-energy photon. While optimal materials have not been found, crystalline silicon meets part of these requirements and has been the subject of research on carrier multiplication solar cells. Internal quantum efficiencies exceeding 100% at photon energies ≥4 eV have been demonstrated for crystalline silicon solar cells.79 However, the high photon energy threshold (∼4Eg) means that there is minimal gain in power conversion efficiency with carrier multiplication. As pointed out by Queisser in 2010, “efficiency enhancement is found to be present but disappointingly small”.78
Carrier multiplication in semiconductor QDs
Nozik proposed that semiconductor quantum dots might exhibit higher carrier multiplication or, as it is often called in quantum dots, MEG, than corresponding processes in the bulk.13 Theoretically, a higher carrier multiplication efficiency in quantum confined materials may be attributed to the relaxed requirement on momentum conservation and the enhanced Coulomb interaction between excitons and multiexcitons.80–83
Experimental measurements of high carrier multiplication efficiencies have been reported for a number of QD systems.84–94 While the exceptionally high quantum efficiencies in early reports have been revised on the discovery of experimental artifacts,95,96 various experimental measurements have now converged to show modest MEG yields in several QD systems, with threshold photon energy ∼2.5Eg.97,98 Contrasting the above reports, several research groups also reported the absence of enhanced carrier multiplication in QDs;52,99–105 these studies pointed to bulk-like properties of hot carriers in semiconductor QDs.
Solar cells with external quantum efficiency exceeding 100% at high photon energies have been reported by two research groups106,107 but the actual effects of multiexciton generations on the power conversion efficiency in QD solar cells are small. One potential way of increasing the carrier multiplication efficiency is to use anisotropic nanostructures such as nano-rods108,109 or platelets,81 where the enhanced Coulomb potential may increase the exciton–multiexciton coupling and, as a result, carrier multiplication yield. A recent experimental report92 and computational prediction94 of high carrier multiplication yields in coupled silicon QDs, with threshold energy near 2Eg, also suggest a promising direction. Whether the application of carrier multiplications in QDs to solar cells can substantially increase the power conversion efficiency97,98 or not110,111 remains an issue of discussion. It is not covered further here; interested readers are referred to the above publications for details. In the following, we focus on the molecular analogue of carrier multiplication called singlet fission (SF). The high quantum yield (∼200%) of singlet fission in a few molecules under visible light excitation offers exciting potentials for implementation in solar cells.112,113
Singlet fission in organic semiconductors
Singlet fission, the conversion of a singlet into two triplet excitons, was discovered nearly 50 years ago.114,115 One of the main reasons for the high quantum yield is that singlet fission can be both energy and spin allowed. Due to the large exchange energy in molecules, the excitation energy of a triplet can be half or less than that of a singlet. Two coupled triplets can have total singlet spin and singlet fission is spin-allowed. The commonly accepted theoretical framework for singlet fission comes from that for the inverse process of triplet–triplet annihilation116–118 and is illustrated in Fig. 7. Here, the electronic coupling of two adjacent chromaphores produces what is known as a correlated triplet pair 1(TT) or a multiexciton (ME) state with overall singlet spin. Subsequent loss of spin coherence within the ME state results in two independent triplet excitons (2T1).
We have recently applied TR-2PPE spectroscopy to probe how the photoexcited S1 state becomes the ME state on ultrafast time scales (first step Fig. 7).119,120 For the ME state (triplet pair), photoionization leaves behind one triplet and a hole; the electron kinetic energy is similar to that from an individual T1. Fig. 8 shows pseudo-color plots of TR-2PPE spectra for (A) tetracene and (B) pentacene thin films. In each spectrum, we see the formation of S1 upon photoexcitation and T1 at larger pump-probe delay times. The most surprising finding is a state at nearly the same energy as T1 but rises concurrently with S1. This T1-like state at early times is assigned to the ME state. The nearly simultaneous formation of the S1 and ME can be explained by a quantum coherent mechanism modified from Fig. 7: [S1 ⇔ ME] ⇌ ME′ ⇌ T1 + T1,(1)where the initial optical excitation leads to the formation of a quantum superposition state [S1 ⇔ ME] on an ultrafast time scale. When the ME loses electronic coupling to S1, we call the resulting multiexciton state ME′, which may diffuse apart evolving into two T1 states.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the singlet fission process. 
 Fig. 8  Pseudo color plots of TR-2PPE spectra of (A) tetracene and (B) pentacene thin films (≥15 nm) excited at hν1 = 2.32 and 2.15 eV, respectively. In both experiments, the excitonic states are probed with an ionization photon energy of hν2 = 4.65 eV. The energetic positions of the singlet (S1), multiexciton (ME), and two triplets (2T1) are indicated. The arrow in the lower panel points to the energetic relaxation of the ME state in pentacene. From ref. 119 and 120. 
The two molecular systems show clear differences in dynamics. In pentacene, singlet fission is exoergic as evidenced by the ∼0.1 eV relaxation of the ME state (arrow in Fig. 8B), resulting in ultrafast singlet fission (τSF = 100 ± 20 fs). In tetracene, singlet fission is endoergic by ∼0.2 eV and the [S1 ⇔ ME] superposition state is much longer-lived (τSF = 7 ps). The drastically different singlet fission time scales in these two model systems have important consequences in solar energy conversion, as we address below.
Strategies for harvesting singlet fission
Despite an initial suggestion that singlet fission could be exploited in photovoltaic systems,121 there has been little research activity in implementing the idea. This may be partly attributed to observation of high singlet fission yields in only a small number of systems, namely crystalline tetracene, pentacene, and more recently, 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran.112,113 Enthusiasm for singlet fission grew again following reminders122,123 of the phenomenon's relevance to photovoltaic systems and a quantitative analysis by Hanna and Nozik124 showing that the Shockley–Queisser limit of a conventional single junction solar cell could be increased from 33% to 44% if a sensitizer capable of quantitative singlet fission was incorporated into the device.
To achieve the high theoretical limit, one must use at least two chromophores: a singlet fission chromophore which absorbs high photon energies and produces two lower energy triplet excitons and a conventional chromophore absorbing lower energy photons to produce one exciton (singlet or triplet), as shown in Fig. 9. Note that for carrier multiplication or MEG in inorganic materials discussed above, the two chromophores can be the same material. For singlet fission, the two chromophores can be in contact with a common electron acceptor, such as C60 in a molecular solar cell or TiO2 in a dye-sensitized solar cell, for the harvesting of three e–h pairs from two photons. Chromophore 2 can also be the electron acceptor as demonstrated recently for pentecene/inorganic QD bilayer solar cells.125,126 Alternatively, one can use a trilayer structure containing a singlet fission material as a top layer, complimented with a conventional chromophore for the middle layer that absorbs lower energy photons and also transports triplet excitons generated in the singlet fission process to the bottom layer which consists of a common electron acceptor.127,128 The long-lived triplet excitons transfer via the Dexter mechanism involving direct electronic coupling.129
 Fig. 9  The combination of two chromophores in a singlet fission solar cell: (1) a singlet fission chromophore and (2) a conventional chromophore. 
Insight into the competing loss mechanisms can be gained by looking at the interfacial electronic energy level alignment in each of the strategies outlined above. We first consider the interface between a singlet fission donor and an electron acceptor for electron transfer from the ME or T1 state. Creating an energetic driving force for electron transfer from ME or T1 also results in a favourable situation for electron transfer from S1. Consequently, single electron transfer can compete with singlet fission and multielectron transfer130 and is considered a loss channel in a photovoltaic device as it reduces the total photocurrent and therefore power conversion efficiency. These competitions depend critically on the dynamic time scales involved, as is evident in comparative studies on pentacene and tetracene.119,120

Fig. 10 summarizes the time constants for singlet fission and electron transfer processes at pentacene/C60 and tetracene/C60 interfaces, as determined from our recent TR-2PPE experiments.119,130 These kinetic parameters were obtained for pentacene or tetracene in direct contact with C60. For pentacene, the exoergic singlet fission process is ultrafast (0.1 ps), faster than electron transfer to C60 (0.4 ps) and independent of whether the pentacene layer is in direct contact with or away from C60. Two-electron transfer from the triplet pair (ME′ or 2T1) dominates interfacial dynamics and this is a favourable scenario for solar cells. Note that, electron transfer from the nascent triplet pair (ME′) is 0.4 ps, faster than that from individual triplets on longer time scales (5 ps).
 Fig. 10  Kinetics of singlet fission (blue arrows) and electron transfer (green arrows) processes at pentacene/C60 (left) and tetracene/C60 (right) interfaces. 
In contrast to pentacene, singlet fission in tetracene is much slower (7 ps) and is not competitive with interfacial electron transfer (0.5 ps). As a result, direct electron transfer from the [S1 ⇔ ME] quantum superposition state dominates. Only a small percentage of the exciton population can complete the fission process, followed by two-electron transfer to C60. Because electron transfer occurs from the quantum superposition state, both one-electron transfer from S1 and two-electron transfer from ME are possible. From the directly monitoring of charge transfer states,130 we conclude that 40% of the quantum superposition state is responsible for two-electron transfer to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of C60 while 60% undergoes one-electron transfer (from S1) to the C60 LUMO + 1.
A similar dynamic competition is also expected in the trilayer strategy discussed above. For the efficient transfer of triplet excitons from the blue-absorbing singlet fission layer (donor 1) through the red-absorbing conventional chromophore layer (donor 2) to a common electron acceptor, the electronic energy alignment at the donor/donor interface must be such that S1 in donor 1 should be substantially higher than that of donor 2. As a result, electron transfer or singlet energy transfer from donor 1 to donor 2 should compete with triplet energy transfer.
To minimize the loss channels of one-electron transfer or singlet energy transfer (in the case of the tri-layer approach) when singlet fission is slow, one needs to minimize the interface between the singlet fission chromophore and the electron acceptor or the second conventional chromophore by increasing the thickness of the former. In a relatively thick layer of singlet fission chromophore, a higher proportion of excitations would be created away from the interface and would have an increased probability of undergoing fission, followed by triplet diffusion to the interface and electron or triplet energy transfer. While increasing the singlet fission layer thickness would benefit two-electron transfer from triplet pairs, it must be balanced against the diffusion length of the triplet states and triplet–triplet annihilation.
A slow singlet fission process is generally undesirable as it leads to the competition between one- and two-electron harvesting. However, we may also take advantage of a long-lived [S1 ⇔ ME] quantum superposition state. If we design an ideal electron acceptor which allows two electron transfer from the triplet pair (e.g., T1 in resonance with LUMO) while keeping one-electron transfer slow (e.g., S1 off resonance with LUMO + 1), the effective singlet fission yield can actually be enhanced in the presence of such an electron acceptor. This is because the effective singlet fission yield is proportional to the ratio between the decay rate of the ME state and that of the S1 state.80
Singlet fission solar cells
How can we build solar cells that incorporate singlet fission to (theoretically) exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit? We do not have a definitive answer yet, but the mechanistic studies presented above suggest a few design principles. At the present time, high singlet fission yields (approaching 200% quantum efficiency) that may be of value to solar cells have been discovered in only three materials, pentacene, tetracene, and the newly designed 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran. These are clearly not sufficient as engineers designing such a solar cell must consider not only singlet fission yield, but also a host of other chemical/physical properties, such as strong light absorption, long-term chemical (and photochemical) stability, sufficient charge-carrier mobility, and appropriate interface formation. We need to greatly expand the toolbox of molecules with high singlet fission efficiency. Some of the principles may include:

Energetics. 
For efficient singlet fission, the energetic requirement of E(S1) ≥ 2E(T1) is usually necessary. A slightly exoergic singlet fission process ensures that the reverse process of triplet–triplet annihilation is less efficient. This is particularly important when we use a relatively thick singlet fission layer and long distance triplet diffusion is required. In addition, the energetics of other spin states must also be considered, as pointed out by Michl and coworkers.112,113


Electronic coupling. 
What gives rise to strong Coulomb coupling between a singlet exciton and a multi-exciton state in a neighboring molecular pair is not transparent from chemical intuition. Michl and coworkers have addressed in detail this critical issue.112,113 However, the involvement of charge transfer states as a potentially dominant channel for singlet fission, as well as the role of excitonic or electronic delocalization in crystalline materials, complicates theoretical analysis.131


Dynamics. 
The results presented in the previous section emphasize the critical importance of competing time scales. In principle, ultrafast singlet fission exemplified by the exoergic process in pentacene is desirable. However, a slower singlet fission process, such as that in tetracene, offers the enticing possibility for us to control or enhance the effective yield of singlet fission by directly extracting two electrons (holes) from the ME state in the quantum superposition.


Electron acceptors. 
Most studies on organic photovoltaics use fullerenes as electron acceptors. There are obvious limitations with this molecule, among them, the low optical absorption cross section. The tetracene/C60 example also shows the undesirable presence of higher lying electron acceptor levels (e.g., LUMO + 1) responsible for one-electron transfer from the S1 state. Recent experiments demonstrated charge separation and model solar cells using pentacene/QD interfaces.125,126 Here the QDs are not only tunable electron acceptors but also strong light absorbers at long wavelengths.


Solar cell structure. 
The presence of charge and energy transfer from the S1 state can compete with singlet fission. Thus, the interfacial area between a singlet fission chromophore and an electron acceptor or a second chromophore needs to be minimized. This argues against the use of distributed interfaces, such as that in bulk heterojunction solar cells. Indeed, recent successful demonstrations of singlet fission based solar cells all employ bilayer or multilayer structures.125–127 The thickness of the singlet fission layer should be chosen based on a balanced consideration of light absorption, singlet fission, triplet diffusion, triplet–triplet annihilation, and charge/energy transfer at interfaces.

Conclusions
This perspective offers our views on exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit with novel photophysics. We discuss two approaches based on the harvesting of hot carriers or multiple excitons in molecular or nano-materials. The HCSC concept offers the highest gain in power conversion efficiency but is exceedingly difficult to implement due to a number of challenges, in particular the photon flux challenge. We propose graphene and related two-dimensional materials as potential means to meet these challenging. The multi-exciton solar cell concept offers more modest gains, but is also more promising in actual implementation. Recent developments in solar cells based on both MEG in semiconductor nanocrystals106 or singlet fission in organic semiconductors132 have shown external quantum efficiency exceeding 100% in limited spectral ranges. We believe singlet fission is most promising in this regard, because of the known high quantum efficiency (200%) in three molecular systems112,113 and the potential of designing/synthesizing new molecules. Based on recent mechanistic studies, we discuss design principles for the implementation of singlet fission in solar cells. Much lies ahead in the quest to exceed the Shockley–Queisser limit.133
Acknowledgements
The experimental results in Fig. 3, 4, & 6 were supported by the Department of Energy under grant no. ER46673 DE-SC0001928 and those in Fig. 8 by the US National Science Foundation, grants DMR 1207254 & 1321405. XYZ acknowledges support, during the writing of this perspective, by the “Center for Re-Defining Photovoltaic Efficiency Through Molecule Scale Control”, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001085. CAN acknowledges support from the Department of Energy Office of Science Graduate Fellowship Program (DOE SCGF, made possible in part by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009) administered by ORISE-ORAU under contract number DE-AC05-06OR23100. NRM acknowledges support by a Fulbright-New Zealand Ministry of Science and Innovation Graduate Award.
Notes and references
M. Hoffert, K. Caldeira and A. Jain, Nature, 1998, 395, 881–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
M. A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2001, 9, 123–135 CAS .
C. Breyer and A. Gerlach, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 21, 121–136 Search PubMed .

          M. A. Green, Third Generation Photovoltaics, Springer-Verlag,  2006 Search PubMed .
M. A. Alam and M. R. Khan, Am. J. Phys., 2013, 81, 655 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Hirst and N. J. Ekins-Daukes, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 286–293 Search PubMed .

          P. Würfel and U. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells, Wiley-VCH Verlag,  1998 Search PubMed .
P. T. Landsberg and T. Markvart, Solid-State Electron., 1998, 42, 657–659 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1–11 Search PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, Phys. E, 2002, 14, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Brown and J. Wu, Laser Photonics Rev., 2009, 3, 394–405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Luque and A. Marti, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 5014–5017 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Keevers and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 4022–4031 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martí, E. Antolín, C. R. Stanley, C. D. Farmer, N. López, P. Díaz, E. Cánovas, P. G. Linares and A. Luque, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 247701 CrossRef .
K. M. Yu, W. Walukiewicz, J. W. Ager, III, D. Bour, R. Farshchi, O. D. Dubon, S. X. Li, I. D. Sharp and E. E. Haller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 092110 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Kahn, J. Bisquert and D. Cahen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6022–6039 CAS .
L. Kronik and N. Koch, MRS Bull., 2010, 35, 417–421 CrossRef .
B. Zacher, J. L. Gantz, R. E. Richards and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1949–1952 CrossRef CAS .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499–2512 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
R. T. Ross and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 3813–3818 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wurfel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 46, 43–52 CrossRef .
D. König, K. Casalenuovo, Y. Takeda, G. Conibeer, J. F. Guillemoles, R. Patterson, L. M. Huang and M. A. Green, Phys. E, 2010, 42, 2862–2866 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kempa, M. J. Naughton, Z. F. Ren, A. Herczynski, T. Kirkpatrick, J. Rybczynski and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 233121 CrossRef .
R. Haight, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1995, 21, 275–325 CrossRef CAS .
B. Brill and M. Heiblum, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, R17280–R17283 CrossRef .
P. Klemens, Phys. Rev., 1966, 148, 845–848 CrossRef CAS .
G. Conibeer, D. König, M. Green and J. Guillemoles, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6948–6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Gabor, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1348–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Conibeer, D. König, M. Green and J. Guillemoles, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6948–6953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bockelmann and G. Bastard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 8947–8951 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bockelmann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 637–640 CrossRef .
U. Woggon, H. Giessen, F. Gindele, O. Wind, B. Fluegel and N. Peyghambarian, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 17681–17690 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 13740–13749 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, S. Link, M. Mohamed and M. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12286–12292 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Harbold, H. Du, T. D. Krauss, K.-S. Cho, C. B. Murray and F. W. Wise, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 195312 CrossRef .
R. D. Schaller, J. M. Pietryga, S. V. Goupalov, M. A. Petruska, S. A. Ivanov and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 196401 CrossRef .
C. Bonati, A. Cannizzo, D. Tonti, A. Tortschanoff, F. van Mourik and M. Chergui, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 33304 CrossRef .
K. Hyeon-Deuk and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1845–1850 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Efros, V. A. Kharchenko and M. Rosen, Solid State Commun., 1995, 93, 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hendry, M. Koeberg, F. Wang, H. Zhang, C. de Mello Donegá, D. Vanmaekelbergh and M. Bonn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 57408 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. An, A. Franceschetti, S. V. Dudiy and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2728–2735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bao, B. F. Habenicht, O. V. Prezhdo and X. Ruan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235306 CrossRef .
A. Pandey and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Science, 2008, 322, 929–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Miaja-Avila, J. R. Tritsch, A. Wolcott, W.-L. Chan, C. A. Nelson and X.-Y. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1588–1591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cho, W. K. Peters, R. J. Hill, T. L. Courtney and D. M. Jonas, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2498–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Huang, D. S. Chung and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 348–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Choi, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2631–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4285–4294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
T. Winzer and E. Malić, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 241404 CrossRef .
T. Winzer, A. Knorr and E. Malic, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4839–4843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kim, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 75449 CrossRef .
W.-T. Liu, S. W. Wu, P. J. Schuck, M. Salmeron, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 081408 CrossRef .
C. H. Lui, K. F. Mak, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 127404 CrossRef .
D. Sun, Z.-K. Wu, C. Divin, X. Li, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer, P. N. First and T. B. Norris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 157402 CrossRef .
H. Wang, J. H. Strait, P. A. George, S. Shivaraman, V. B. Shields, M. Chandrashekhar, J. Hwang, F. Rana, M. G. Spencer, C. S. Ruiz-Vargas and J. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 081917 CrossRef .
S. Berciaud, M. Y. Han, K. F. Mak, L. E. Brus, P. Kim and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 227401 CrossRef .
N. M. Gabor, J. C. W. Song, Q. Ma, N. L. Nair, T. Taychatanapat, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. S. Levitov and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2011, 334, 648–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. W. Song, M. S. Rudner, C. M. Marcus and L. S. Levitov, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4688–4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Freitag, T. Low and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1644–1648 CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640–7654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Williams, C. A. Nelson, X. Yan, L.-S. Li and X.-Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1388–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 2203–2224 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mueller, X. Yan, B. Dragnea and L.-S. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 56–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hendry, F. Wang, J. Shan, T. Heinz and M. Bonn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 081101 CrossRef .
S. Koc, Cechoslovackij fiziceskij zurnal, 1957, 7, 91–95 CAS .
J. Tauc, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1959, 8, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Vavilov, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1959, 8, 223–226 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Queisser, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1927–1930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kolodinski, J. H. Werner, T. Wittchen and H. J. Queisser, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 2405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shabaev, A. L. Efros and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2856–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shabaev, C. S. Hellberg and A. L. Efros, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1242–1251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Franceschetti, J. An and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2191–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hyeon-Deuk and O. V. Prezhdo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1239–1250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, V. M. Agranovich and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Phys., 2005, 1, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2506–2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 836–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Schaller, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3469–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sevik and C. Bulutay, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125414 CrossRef .
M. T. Trinh, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1713–1718 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Trinh, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1623–1629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Trinh, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 316–321 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Stubbs, 
            et al.
          , Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 081303-R CrossRef .
M. Govoni, I. Marri and S. Ossicini, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 672–679 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Midgett, H. W. Hillhouse, B. K. Huges, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17486–17500 CAS .
J. A. McGuire, M. Sykora, J. Joo, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2049–2057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, O. E. Semonin and A. J. Nozik, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1252–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Padilha, J. T. Stewart, R. L. Sandberg, W. K. Bae, W.-K. Koh, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1261–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nair and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 081304 CrossRef .
G. Nair, S. M. Geyer, L. Y. Chang and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 125325 CrossRef .
J. Pijpers, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 811–814 CrossRef CAS .
G. Allan and C. Delerue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205423 CrossRef .
J. Pijpers, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4146 CAS .
M. Ben-Lulu, D. Mocatta, M. Bonn, U. Banin and S. Ruhman, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1207–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Gdor, H. Sachs, A. Roitblat, D. B. Strasfeld, M. G. Bawendi and S. Ruhman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3269–3277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Semonin, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Padilha, J. T. Stewart, R. L. Sandberg, W.-K. Bae, W.-K. Koh, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1092–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cunningham, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3476–3481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Delerue, G. Allan, J. J. H. Pijpers and M. Bonn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 125306 CrossRef .
G. Nair, L.-Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1290–1299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Singh, W. J. Jones, W. Siebrand, B. P. Stoicheff and W. G. Schneider, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 42, 330 CrossRef CAS .
N. Geacintov, M. Pope and F. Vogel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1969, 22, 593–596 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Merrifield, J. Chem. Phys., 1968, 48, 4318 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Johnson and R. E. Merrifield, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 896–902 CrossRef .
A. Suna, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 1, 1716–1739 CrossRef .
W.-L. Chan, M. Ligges, A. Jailaubekov, L. Kaake, L. Miaja-Avila and X.-Y. Zhu, Science, 2011, 334, 1541–1545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Chan, M. Ligges and X.-Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 840–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Dexter, J. Lumin., 1979, 18/19, 779–784 CrossRef .

          A. J. Nozik, R. J. Ellington, O. I. Micic, J. L. Blackburn, P. Yu, J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard and G. Rumbles, Proceedings of the 27th DOE Solar Photochemistry Research Conference, Warrenton, Virginia,  2004 Search PubMed .

          B. T. King, J. Michl, A. J. Nozik, M. A. Ratner and M. Winokur, DOE Solar Program Review Meeting 2004, Denver, Colorado,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ehrler, B. J. Walker, M. L. Böhm, M. W. B. Wilson, Y. Vaynzof, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1019 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. Jadhav, A. Mohanty, J. Sussman, J. Lee and M. A. Baldo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1495–1498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Hong, R. Lessmann, B. Maennig, Q. Huang, K. Harada, M. Riede and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 064511 CrossRef .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Chan, J. R. Tritsch and X.-Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18295–18302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Chan, T. C. Berkelbach, M. R. Provorse, N. R. Monahan, J. R. Tritsch, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, J. Gao and X.-Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Congreve, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2013, 340, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1239–1241 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Cory A. Nelson	Cory A. Nelson received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2008. He is currently a graduate student at Columbia University under the supervision of Professor Xiaoyang Zhu. Cory's research interests include interfacial charge transfer and time resolved nonlinear optical spectroscopies.
Nicholas R. Monahan	Nicholas Monahan received a B.S. (2009) and a M.S. (2010) with first class honors from Victoria University in New Zealand. He is pursuing his PhD in the Zhu group at Columbia University on a Fulbright-New Zealand Ministry of Science and Innovation Graduate Award. Nick's research interests include exciton dynamics in organic semiconductors and femtosecond time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy.
X.-Y. Zhu	Xiaoyang Zhu is a Professor of Chemistry at Columbia University. He received a BS degree in Chemistry from Fudan University in 1984 and a PhD in Chemistry from University of Texas at Austin in 1989. His research interests include solar energy conversion, photophysics in molecular and nano materials, femtosecond nonlinear spectroscopies, and interfacial science.

Broader context
We discuss two photophysical mechanisms, hot carrier equilibration and carrier multiplication, in molecular and nano materials and the feasibility for their implementation in solar cells with power conversion efficiency theoretically exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit. We point out the necessity of hot carrier scattering in realizing a hot carrier solar cell. The low photon flux from solar radiation puts stringent requirements on potential hot carrier chromophores. These requirements include sufficient carrier delocalization to length scales approaching μm, efficient carrier–carrier scattering, and inefficient carrier–phonon scattering. We explore the potential of nano-materials, particularly graphene and related materials, as potentially ideal chromophores for hot carrier solar cells. For the carrier multiplication solar cell, we discuss multi-exciton generation in semiconductor nanocrystals and the molecular analog called singlet fission. The latter is particularly promising because of the high multiplication yield and the potential for designing and synthesizing new singlet fission molecules. Recent experiments in our lab revealed a quantum superposition mechanism for singlet exciton fission and the feasibility of extracting two electron–hole pairs from the quantum superposition or the resulting two triplet excitons. We discuss design principles for solar cells based on singlet fission materials.


 	Fig. 1  Intrinsic losses of a single junction solar cell with respect to band gap. The numerical power out is integrated from the solar spectrum while solid curves are analytical solutions. From ref. 8. Reproduced with permission from Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the mechanisms of PVs based on (A) conventional single junction; (B) hot carriers; (C) multiexciton generation; and (D) intermediate band.	 

 	Fig. 3  Pseudo-color representation of time-resolved two photon photoemission (TR-2PPE) spectra with excitation photon energy hν1 = 2.20 eV and probe photon energy hν2 = 4.28 eV. The electron energy is referenced to the bottom of the conduction band. The right shows schematically the principle of the TR-2PPE experiment. From ref. 52. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Time-resolved second harmonic generation profiles obtained from 1.5 monolayers of 3.3 nm PbSe QDs (with hydrazine capping) on TiO2 (110) surface at different sample temperatures (25–200 K). All profiles have been normalized to the peak intensity. Inset: cartoon showing a boomerang mechanism involving the ballistic injection of hot electrons, followed by phonon scattering and polaronic transport back to the interface. Both pump and probe photon energies are 1.53 eV, with the second harmonic signal detected at 3.06 eV. From ref. 34. Reproduced with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  Left: a photo-excited hot electron scatters with an electron in the valence band (carrier multiplication); right: two hot electrons scatter elastically to redistribute energy. Similar mechanisms also operate for the holes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Time-resolved second harmonic generation spectra (dots) from the interface of graphene QDs chemically anchored to TiO2 (110). The spectra were recorded at 300 K at pump photon energies of hν = 2.41 eV (left) and 2.00 eV (right). The probe photon energy for SHG is at 1.53 eV, with second harmonic detected at 3.06 eV. The lower right shows the molecular structure of the graphene QD and the lower left the boomerang mechanism of hot electron injection, followed by cold polaron recombination. From ref. 70. Reproduced with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 
[S1 ⇔ ME] ⇌ ME′ ⇌ T1 + T1,	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the singlet fission process.	 

 	Fig. 8  Pseudo color plots of TR-2PPE spectra of (A) tetracene and (B) pentacene thin films (≥15 nm) excited at hν1 = 2.32 and 2.15 eV, respectively. In both experiments, the excitonic states are probed with an ionization photon energy of hν2 = 4.65 eV. The energetic positions of the singlet (S1), multiexciton (ME), and two triplets (2T1) are indicated. The arrow in the lower panel points to the energetic relaxation of the ME state in pentacene. From ref. 119 and 120.	 

 	Fig. 9  The combination of two chromophores in a singlet fission solar cell: (1) a singlet fission chromophore and (2) a conventional chromophore.	 

 	Fig. 10  Kinetics of singlet fission (blue arrows) and electron transfer (green arrows) processes at pentacene/C60 (left) and tetracene/C60 (right) interfaces.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
