Recent advances in the synthesis and applications of graphene–polymer nanocomposites  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5PY00777A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5PY00777A
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 6107-6124Recent advances in the synthesis and applications of graphene–polymer nanocomposites

        
          
            Mingfa 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Su
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Gang 
            Wei
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, 100029, Beijing, China. E-mail: suzq@mail.buct.edu.cn
bHybrid Materials Interface Group, Faculty of Production Engineering, University of Bremen, D-28359 Bremen, Germany. E-mail: wei@uni-bremen.de;  Fax: (+) 49 421 218 64599
Received 
      22nd May 2015
    , Accepted 18th July 2015First published on 21st July 2015AbstractGraphene (G)-based nanocomposites have received much attention in various disciplines due to their high specific surface area, good compatibility, low mass density, elegant flexibility as well as the excellent synergistic effect of G with other nanomaterials. Numerous studies have been carried out to fabricate G-based polymer composites with novel and improved properties. However, the dispersion behavior of G in a polymer matrix and the interfacial bonding between G and polymers still restrict the better performances and broader applications of the fabricated G–polymer nanocomposites. In this review, we have summarized the most recent studies on the modification of G with polymers and the subsequent synthesis and applications of high quality G–polymer nanocomposites. The strategies for surface modification of G with polymers, including various covalent and non-covalent techniques, are introduced in detail. In addition, a series of effective processing routes for producing high quality G–polymer nanocomposites, such as melt compounding, solution blending, in situ polymerization, latex mixing, and electropolymerization, are introduced and discussed. Finally, the potential applications of the synthesized G–polymer nanocomposites in electrocatalysts, drug delivery, high performance materials, biosensors, and biomedical materials are presented.Mingfa ZhangMingfa Zhang is currently a master's student under the supervision of Prof. Su at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His scientific interests focus on the synthesis and applications of functional graphene-based polymer nanomaterials and organic–inorganic hybrid materials.Yang LiYang Li is currently a master's student under the supervision of Prof. Su at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research interests focus on the synthesis of graphene/metal nanomaterials for applications in electrochemical biosensors and SERS, as well as the fabrication of electrospun functional polymer materials for catalysis applications.Zhiqiang SuZhiqiang Su is a Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research is focused on nanohybrids, biomedical materials, polymer materials, biosensors, and bioelectronics. So far, he has published more than 60 papers in international peer reviewed journals. The papers have been cited more than 600 times with an h-index of 16.Gang WeiGang Wei is currently a senior researcher and group leader in the Hybrid Materials Interfaces Group at University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include carbon-based nanomaterials, nanofibrous biomaterials, biosensors, and single molecule force spectroscopy. He has published more than 70 papers in international peer reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 1100 times with an h-index of 24.
1. Introduction
Graphene (G) is the basic unit of graphite-like materials with an sp2 hybridized structure and a two-dimensional single atomic layer, and it has attracted more and more attention due to its excellent electronic, thermal, mechanical, and bio-related properties.1–5 Compared to other carbon additives, such as carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, and activated carbon, G has a huge price advantage owing to its wide range of sources.6 Since its discovery in 2004 by Geim et al.,7 G has been widely used for physical, chemical, analytical, and biomedical applications.8–11
G and its derivatives have always been employed as additives to incorporate with other polymers for a significant enhancement of the targeted properties. The fabricated G–polymer nanocomposites have shown great potential for various applications, such as electrocatalysts, drug delivery carriers, high performance energy materials, biosensors, and biomedical materials.12–14 To fabricate high quality G–polymer nanocomposites, two main challenges, the dispersion behaviour and the interfacial interactions between G and polymers, should be overcome. These can directly influence the properties and the final qualities of a G–polymer nanocomposite.15,16 Firstly, the perfect long-range π-conjugation of G endows its wonderful properties, but it can also generate surface inertia, which may lead to a horrible interfacial adhesion.17 Secondly, the huge gap in surface energy between G and polymers restricts their uniform dispersion, which leads to the aggregation of unmodified G sheets in the final products.18–20 To reduce the potential effects caused by these factors, modification of G is necessary. Graphene oxide (GO), as the most important derivative of G, plays an important role in the modification of G.21–24 Lots of oxygen functional groups such as hydroxyl, epoxy, carbonyl, and carboxyl are present in the GO that is obtained with the oxidation process.25,26 Moreover, GO can be easily reduced to reduced graphene oxide (RGO) by thermal and chemical approaches, which makes GO a promising precursor for G-based nanocomposites.27,28 In addition, the surface groups of GO can mediate the combination of GO with polymers, ceramics, and metal matrices, which can mediate the fabrication of single layer GO with a uniform surface modification. At a micro level, covalent and non-covalent methodologies have been widely used to modify G and GO.

Fig. 1 shows the potential strategies for the modification of G and the fabrication of G–polymer nanocomposites. Typically, both covalent (including “grafting to” and “grafting from”) and non-covalent (including π–π stacking, electrostatic interaction, and hydrogen bonding) modification strategies have been utilized to modify G previously.29–31 For the fabrication of G–polymer nanocomposites, appropriate mixing methods like melt compounding, solution mixing, latex blending, in situ polymerization and electropolymerization have been widely used.32–35
 Fig. 1  Typical strategies for the modification of G and the fabrication of G–polymer nanocomposites. 
It has been noticed that the modification of G with polymers and the fabrication and applications of G–polymer nanocomposites attracted more and more interest recently. Taking this situation into consideration, the techniques for the modification of G should be studied more deeply and presented more clearly. Lots of related articles have been published annually, and a survey of open publications related with “graphene” and “polymer” in the past 10 years with SciFinder Scholar was performed and the result is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of the annual number of scientific publications using the keywords “graphene” and “polymer”, as searched using SciFinder Scholar (until 17 February). 
Previously, a few review papers on the modification of G and the synthesis and applications of G-based materials have been reported. For example, Gooding et al. introduced the chemical modification of G and further presented the potential applications of G-based materials.36 In another paper, Sahoo et al. summarized the modification of G and the routes for the preparation of G-based polymer nanocomposites.37 In this review, we summarize the recent advances in the methodologies to modify G with polymers and the further synthesis and applications of G–polymer nanocomposites. Strategies for synthesizing G–polymer nanocomposites with high quality and grafting efficiency are introduced in detail. Meanwhile, the advantages and shortcomings of each method are discussed in detail. The potential applications of the fabricated G–polymer nanocomposites are introduced. Finally, we point out and outlook a few key issues in the modification of G, the synthesis of functional G–polymer nanocomposites, and the novel material-related technical applications.
2. Surface modification of G with polymers
The modification of G and its derivative has been proved to be a feasible and effective way to enhance the compatibility of G with the polymer matrix.29 Physical adsorption and grafting protocols are two common strategies for the modification. According to the perspective of forming chemical bonding, the techniques can be categorized into covalent and non-covalent modifications.
2.1. Covalent modification
The covalent modification of G is a direct way to form covalent bonds between G and other polymers or organics, which can strengthen their interfacial interactions and contribute to the dispersion of G in a polymer matrix. However, from another point of view, the covalent bonding can also cause an inevitable rehybridization of some sp2 carbon atoms of the carbon network into the sp3 configuration, which will disrupt the conjugated structure of G and affect its electronic and optical properties.36 For the modification of G with polymers by covalent modification, two promising approaches, “grafting to” and “grafting from”, have been widely utilized.30,38

2.1.1. “Grafting to” method. 
GO possesses abundant oxygen containing functional groups, such as hydroxyl and epoxide groups in the basal plane, and carboxyl groups at the plane edges, which are very helpful to achieve the modification of G.24 Small molecules or the polymer chains can be easily grafted onto the basal planes of GO via some corresponding reactions, such as the amidation38,39 and esterification15,40–42 reactions of the carboxylic acid group, as well as the nucleophilic ring-opening reaction of the epoxy group.43,44
Amidation reaction. 
Many of the organics can react with GO, and aliphatic amines and isocyanates are the most commonly used ones for this purpose. For example, Zhang et al. grafted octadecylamine (ODA) onto GO by using the covalent reaction between carboxylic acid groups and epoxy groups.39 It was found that introduction of ODA can greatly improve the exfoliation and dispersion behavior of GO in chloroform, which contributed to the synthesis of uniform G–ODA nanocomposites. In another case, Zhao et al. reported the modification of GO by isocyanate treatment.45 They found that isocyanate can be grafted onto GO effectively to form amide and ester bonds by reacting with the carboxyl and hydroxyl groups on GO, respectively. Furthermore, isocyanate-treated GO displayed a good ability to disperse in organic solution and excellent compatibility with polymeric components.
When grafted onto the G surface, polymers have superiority to organic compounds for their better interfacial compatibility. Xu et al. used the 6-armed poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)-NH2 to covalently modify the surface of GO sheets via a facile amidation process under mild conditions, and then used the synthesized GO–PEG nanocomposite as a novel nanocarrier to deliver the water-insoluble anticancer drug paclitaxel.38Via the π–π stacking and hydrophobic interactions, paclitaxel was conjugated onto a GO–PEG nanocomposite. After the combination of GO with the grafted PEG polymeric chains, the physiological stability and biocompatibility of GO sheets were significantly improved. A similar experiment was also carried out by Roy et al.46 They modified GO with polyethylenimine (PEI) by amidation to fabricate functionalized GO–nylon 12 composites (Fig. 3a). By introducing the long chain PEI to graft RGO, they gained a wonderful composite with good interfacial bonding and excellent dispersion of RGO. The storage modulus and Young's modulus were significantly improved, as shown in Fig. 3b and c.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of RGO–PEI; (b) storage modulus and (c) comparison between experimental Young's modulus data and theoretical values predicted by the Halpin–Tsai model for nylon 12/RGO–PEI nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Esterification reaction. 
In addition to amidation, esterification is another common approach to modify GO via carboxylic acid groups. Among most polymers, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) always gets more attention due to its large number of hydroxyls, which can react with carboxylic acid groups on GO.15,40–42 For instance, Cheng and co-workers proposed the modification of GO with PVA by using the esterification reaction.15 They synthesized a high quality GO–PVA nanocomposite that contains both strong interfacial adhesion and uniform GO dispersion.
Nucleophilic ring-open reaction. 
Nucleophilic ring-opening reaction of the epoxy group can also be used for the covalent modification of GO. For example, Zarrin et al. functionalized GO nanosheets with stable hydroxide conductive groups to fabricate a surface modified GO–polybenzimidazole (GO–PBI) nanocomposite, which can be employed as a reliable hydroxide conductor for electrochemical systems working under alkaline conditions (Fig. 4).44
 Fig. 4  Schematic of the fabrication of a GO-pPBI nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Nucleophilic substitution reaction. 
Nucleophilic substitution reaction towards G is an effective method to increase the interfacial adhesion and solubility of G in non-polar polymers. Yun and co-workers obtained alkylated GO via a bimolecular nucleophilic substitution reaction between the oxygen groups of GO and dodecyl iodide.47
Ryu et al. modified RGO by chemically grafting long chain alkylamines.43 Two types of reactions, amidation reactions between amine groups and carboxylic acid sites of GO and nucleophilic substitution reactions between amine and epoxy groups on the surface, were confirmed by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). After that, they incorporated the modified GO into a polypropylene (PP) matrix through a melt processing technique. As a result, a significant enhancement of the mechanical and electrical properties of the synthesized GO–PP nanocomposite was observed due to the strong interfacial interactions between alkylamine-grafted GO and PP. In another case, Tessonnier et al. achieved an alkyl-chain-functionalized RGO sheet, which dispersed well in non-polar solvents.48
Recently, we reported a covalent interaction mediated assembly of thermo-sensitive polymer nanoparticles on functionalized GO nanosheets to create novel GO–PNP hybrids for drug delivery.49 A bifunctional linker, 1-pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (PNHS), was grafted onto GO nanosheets via π–π interaction, and the other end group of PNHS, N-hydroxysuccinimide ester, provides the binding site for the secondary amine (N–H) group in polymer nanoparticles (PNPs) by a nucleophilic substitution reaction; PNPs can be grafted onto GO nanosheets, as shown in Fig. 5. We used an assembly technique to bind the PNPs onto GO–PNHS nanosheets based on the covalent interaction between –NH-groups on the PNPs and the NHS groups on GO–PNHS nanosheets. The typical transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of the created GO–PNP nanocomposites with different ratios indicated the successful modification of GO with PNPs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic model for the synthesis of GO–PNP nanocomposites and the subsequently loading and release of drug molecules; (b–e) TEM images of GO–PNP nanocomposites prepared with the mass ratio (GO–PNHS/PNPs) of (b) 1:2, (c) 1:5, (d) 1:10, and (e) 1:20, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 49 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.2. “Grafting from” method. 
The “grafting from” method is another method to synthesize GO–polymer nanocomposites. This approach needs a prior step to introduce the initiating groups onto GO sheets before polymerization.50 With this method, polymer chains can be grafted from the G surface directly. There are many strategies that have been implemented for the “grafting from” methods, for example, atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP),50–53 reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization,54,55 ring opening polymerization (ROP),56,57 and condensation polymerization.38,58–61
ATRP is currently one of the most widely used polymerization methods to prepare surface-modified G with the “grafting from” method.50 By this technique, functional grafting arms with well-defined architectures, controlled molecular weights, and tunable sequences can be obtained.62 For example, Chen and co-workers previously prepared N-(2-hydroxyphenyl)methacrylamide (o-HPMAA) grafted GO by a surface-initiated ATRP.30 The well-defined morphologies were probed by using an atomic force microscope (AFM), a scanning electron microscope (SEM), and a TEM, and the fraction of the grafted polymer was 44 wt% as determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The uniform dispersion of RGO–P(o-HPMAA), together with the compatible interfacial interaction between the G nanosheets and the matrix, resulted in a high dielectric constant of RGO–P(o-HPMAA) composite, as shown in Fig. 6. By a similar strategy, Roghani-Mamaqani et al. prepared polystyrene (PS)-grafted G nanoplatelets with various graft densities by ATRP.52 In their study, GO was functionalized with 4-hydroxybutyl 2-bromopropionate (CBr) from the edge carboxyl groups by an esterification reaction to yield initiator-anchored G nanoplatelets (GCBr). Then, GCBr was used as the precursor for ATRP of styrene.
 Fig. 6  Schematic synthesis of RGO–P(o-HPMAA) nanocomposites with ATRP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
RAFT polymerization is another controllable “grafting from” polymerization strategy. The procedure in RAFT polymerization is similar to that of ATRP to some extent. For example, Liu et al. presented a novel method to fabricate hydrophilic ion-imprinted polymer grafted GO by RAFT polymerization with the surface imprinting technique.54 In their study, methylacrylic acid (MAA) was used as the hydrophilic functional monomer. Owing to the intrinsic advantages of controlling polymerization and surface imprinting technology, the obtained RAFT surface ion imprinted polymer exhibits excellent imprinting efficiency and adsorption capacity. In addition to the existing polymerization methods such as ATRP and RAFT, conventional free radical polymerization has also been used for the “graft from” strategy. For instance, Kundu et al. synthesized GO modified with poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) via a facile and eco-friendly free radical polymerization procedure by using the ammonium persulfate initiator.63 The polymer chains furnish high dispersibility and stability to G sheets in aqueous and cell media. As a consequence, the synthesized GO–PNIPAM nanocomposite exhibits enhanced thermal stability and improved dispersibility in both aqueous and cell media. In another case, Seifert et al. adopted the self-initiated photografting and photopolymerization method to synthesize functional polymer brushes on hydrogenated G.56
ROP is another polymerization strategy for the “grafting from” method. For example, Zhang et al. prepared polynorbornene (PNB) grafted GO (GO–PNB nanocomposites) by surface-initiated ring-opening metathesis polymerization.57 Norbornenyl initiator ligands were covalently attached onto the GO surface by the esterification firstly. Then, Grubbs catalysts were immobilized onto the GO surface to form reactive sites, followed by ROP from the effective catalyst sites on GO with norbornene monomers, resulting in the formation of GO–PNB nanocomposites. Their results indicated that the grafting of PNB onto GO can significantly improve the interface conditions of GO.

In situ polycondensation is also an effective “grafting from” method for the synthesis of G–polymer nanocomposites. Lots of polymer/copolymers were successfully grafted from the surface of G, such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET),59 poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA),60 epoxy,61 polyaniline (PANI),64 and so on. For instance, Li et al. created GO-g-PLLA via one step in situ polycondensation of the L-lactic acid monomers initiated by the lyophilized GO (Fig. 7).60 The obvious advantage of this approach is that it can achieve the surface functionalization of GO and at the same time enhance the dispersion of GO. The grafted arms acted as a polymer matrix, and the GO core for grafting became reinforcement during the polymerization. Another advantage of this method is that the operation is easy and the functional groups of GO can serve as reactive sites for the polymerization. Because this strategy is very similar to the dispersion method, some discussion on this part will be illustrated in section 3.3.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation and functionalization of GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. 
The “grafting from” method is an effective method to create GO–polymer nanocomposites. However, it has been restricted by a few factors, such as how to identify what polymerization can be used and how to make it happen. Therefore, the “grafting from” method is not like the “grafting to” method, which shows wider application for the synthesis of G–polymer nanocomposites.48 Compared to the “grafting to” method, the advantage of this “grafting from” technique is that higher molecular weight polymer chains can be grafted onto the G surface and a better coverage ratio of polymers on the G surface can be achieved.42 However, the grafting efficiency of every method is quite different. For the “grafting from” method, the grafting density depends on the initiating groups on G because the initiating groups can provide more reaction sites. In addition, the reaction time is also important for the grafting efficiency. For example, Ye et al. found that the grafting efficiency could increase from 49.3 to 64.4 wt% with increasing polymerization time.29 In contrast, by using the “grafting to” method, long polymer chains generally result in a low grafting density owing to the decreased reactivity of the chain-end functionality. In contrast, short polymer chains allow more enhancement to the grafting reaction but are unfavourable to carbon materials dispersed in the solvent owing to a reduction in the solubilizing strength of the polymer at lower molecular weights. For instance, Yang et al. found that the contents of alkyl groups incorporated on RGO–OTA, RGO–DDA and RGO–ODA are about 14.2%, 23.27% and 33.7%, respectively.42

2.2. Non-covalent modification
The non-covalent modification of G is based on the weak interactions between the used stabilizers and G. Its main modes of action are π–π interaction,65–69 electrostatic force70–73 and hydrogen bonding.74,75 Since this method contains no bonding cooperation, it is easy to achieve the modification of the entire G surface and it is reversible in some cases.36 Most importantly, the perfect conjugated structure of G sheets will not be destroyed, and as a result, its excellent electronic and optical properties can be preserved.73,74

2.2.1. π–π interaction. 
Non-covalent modification of G via π–π interaction is a very convenient and effective method. In general, this kind of interaction occurs between two relatively large non-polar aromatic rings that have overlapping π orbitals. Its adsorption strength is stronger than that of any other non-covalent modifications, making the surface stacking quite stable against rinsing or other solution processing methods.64 The non-covalent π–π interaction has been widely used for the synthesis of G–polymer nanocomposites. For instance, Shen et al. prepared G–PS composites by melt mixing, and found that the PS chains on PS-functional G could effectively prevent the G sheets from aggregating and enhance the interaction attributed to the formation of π–π stacking during melt mixing.65 With the same method, Teng et al. synthesized G-epoxy composites using non-covalent functionalized G.68 In their study, pyrene was adsorbed onto the G surface by π–π stacking in the first step. Then, poly(glycidyl methacrylate) (PGMA) was grafted from pyrene groups (Py) by ATRP. Their study demonstrates that Py–PGMA on the G surface not only plays an important role to facilitate a homogeneous dispersion in the polymer matrix but also improves the G–polymer interaction, which results in a high contact area. Consequently, the thermal conductivity of the integrated G–Py–PGMA composites exhibited a remarkable improvement.
In our recent work, self-assembled peptide nanofibers (PNFs) were created with a specially designed peptide molecule and then used to fabricate a new type of GO–PNF nanohybrid, which was further utilized as a template for biomimetic mineralization.69 In this study, we designed a novel peptide molecule with multifunctions (the amino acid sequence and the structural model are shown in Fig. 8). The head and tail motifs (AEAKAEAK) are responsible for the self-assembly and formation of uniform PNFs. The center motif (YWYAF) has the ability to bind with the G surface by π–π stacking interaction. An AFM image showed that PNFs are uniformly bound onto the surface of GO nanosheets, and the coverage of PNFs on one side of the GO nanosheet was measured to be approximately 12 ± 5 PNFs per μm2. Therefore, we concluded that the GO–PNF nanohybrid was successfully created and could be utilized as a reaction template for biomimetic mineralization due to the numerous nucleation sites on the surface of PNFs via π–π stacking interaction.
 Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the synthesis of the GO–PNF nanohybrid and biomineralization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. 


2.2.2. Electrostatic interaction. 
Electrostatic attraction between modified G and a polymer matrix is also a common approach to create G–polymer nanocomposites. In this method, G is decorated by cationic surfactant in some certain ways, such as conjugation70,72,73 and adsorption.71 Repulsion effect of the same charges prevents G from aggregation and restacking. In addition, the attraction with a negative charged polymer matrix can form a favourable interfacial interaction. For instance, Zhang et al. prepared poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) RGO–PEDOT/PSS composites as the electrocatalyst for an oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).70 Due to the synergistic effect of strong π–π stacking interactions between PEDOT/PSS chains and RGO nanosheets as well as electrostatic attraction between the positively charged PEDOT backbones and GO, they gained a strong interfacial interaction between GO and PEDOT/PSS. And the resultant RGO–PEDOT/PSS composite exhibits enhanced ORR electrocatalytic activity with a quasi-four-electron pathway. Hsiao et al. prepared G nanosheets modified with water-borne polyurethane (G–WPU) composites by a similar strategy.71 By adsorbing the cationic surfactant (stearyl trimethyl ammonium chloride) on the surface of the G, the restacking and aggregation of the G have been efficiently suppressed, which also attracted sulfonate groups from the WPU matrix. Because of the favorable interfacial interactions arising from electrostatic attraction, the sulfonate-modified G exhibited good compatibility with the WPU matrix.
Recently, we reported the synthesis of RGO–PNF nanocomposites by the electrostatic interaction between positive-charged modified RGO and negative-charged PNFs.73 In this study, we used a positive-charged polymer, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA), to modify RGO and thus obtain RGO–PDDA with a zeta potential of +35.87 mV (Fig. 9). Then, PNFs were created by controlling the self-assembly of the specifically designed peptide molecules, and the synthesized artificial PNFs inspired the formation of PNF–AgNW nanohybrids with a zeta potential of −16.39 mV. Through the electrostatic interaction of the big gap of their zeta potentials (−16.39 vs. +35.87 mV), PNF–AgNW nanohybrids were bound onto the surface of RGO. By this method, we manufactured the RGO–PNF–AgNW nanocomposites and applied them to fabricate a non-enzymatic electrochemical biosensor with enhanced performances.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the formation of PNF bioinspired AgNWs on GNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 


2.2.3. Hydrogen bonding. 
As a weak interaction, hydrogen bonding is ubiquitous in the world. Non-covalent modification of G with hydrogen bonding has been reported occasionally.74–76 A recent study suggests that the formation of a hydrogen-bonding network is important for the formation of multipoint interactions with the surfaces of G, which can be used for the exfoliation of graphite and the stabilization of G in different solvents.31 Most often, this interaction occurs between the residual oxygen containing groups of G sheets and polar groups on other polymers. Liu et al. fabricated the highly stretchable GO–polyacrylamide (PAM) nanocomposite hydrogels by in situ polymerization of acrylamide in the aqueous suspension of GO without adding any organic cross-linkers.75 In their work, GO was dispersed homogeneously with the aid of hydrogen bonding interaction between GO (–COOH) and PAM chains (–CONH2). Through hydrogen bonding, a unique organic/inorganic network structure was formed with PAM chains and GO nanosheets. More importantly, the homogeneously dispersed GO nanosheets also act as cross-linkers, which can improve the mechanical properties of the nanocomposite hydrogels effectively. A similar study has also been reported by Das et al.76
Among those three non-covalent modification methods, the π–π interaction method is an efficient method because of its high grafting density and the modified process is quite simple. Previously, Shen et al. fabricated polystyrene-functional graphene (PS/PSFG) composites that exhibited a homogeneous dispersion and improved electrical properties and the functionalized PS content can reach 44.5%.65

2.3. Summary of the modifications of G
According to the introductions given above, it is clear that there are many strategies that can be utilized to modify G or RGO with covalent or non-covalent modification. Each strategy has its own advantages and shortcomings. Generally speaking, covalent modification has stronger interfacial adhesion and load transfer,22 but this method could cause disruption of the conjugated structure of G and affect its electronic and optical properties.17 Conversely, non-covalent modification can protect the perfect conjugated structure of G sheets.73 However, reversible adsorption and the resulting weak interfacial interaction restrict its wider applications. The advantages and disadvantages of each method are presented in Table 1. To the best of our knowledge, the interface between graphene and polymers is the key factor in the synthesis of graphene–polymer nanocomposites. To put it in another way, the dispersion of modified graphene is dependent on the grafting efficiency of the graphene modification methods. High grafting efficiency can lead to the formation of a more uniform dispersion system and two phases tend to form a phase. In contrast, a low grafting efficiency leads to a low degree of graphene dispersion, which leads to phase separation and compromised mechanical and transport properties.
Table 1 Comparison of modification methods for G and GO




Methods
Advantages
Disadvantages




Grafting to38–44
Easy to operate, extensive applications, low-cost and convenient
Steric hindrance, low grafting coverage rate


Grafting from50–61
High molecular weight polymer chains, better coverage ratio
Few available polymerization methods, harsh operating conditions


π–π Interaction65–69
Stronger binding force
Limited range of applications


Electrostatic attraction70–73
Wide applications, stronger binding force
Complex process


Hydrogen bonding74–76
Ubiquitous
Unstable weak intensity, cannot be used alone generally




What's more, among those various methods, each method can be used in a different situation, and also the grafting density is different greatly. Covalent modification can lead to the formation of covalent bonds between G and polymers or organics, and the interfacial interactions are so high that the composite exhibits excellent performance. Besides, the grafting efficiency can be very high using a suitable reaction; for example, Ye et al. reported a grafting ratio of PMMA-g/f-FG as high as 64.4 wt% by using the RAFT polymerization.29 But the process of covalent modification methods is always complex and the use of a catalyst is not eco-friendly. By contrast, although the grafting ratio of non-covalent modification methods is weaker than that of covalent modification methods because the non-covalent bond is really weak, non-covalent modification methods are commonly used because the process is simple and gentle, especially the π–π interaction and the electrostatic interaction. In addition, as a weak interaction, hydrogen bonding is very suitable for the fabrication of hydrogels.
3. Fabrication of G–polymer nanocomposites
Apart from the interfacial interactions between G and a polymer matrix, the dispersion behavior of G in polymers is also a key issue towards the quality of the composites. The intrinsic dispersibility of G impedes its broader application. To gain a homogeneously dispersed G in a polymer matrix, numerous strategies have been carried out. From the perspectives of application and proficiency, five typical processing techniques, melt compounding, solution mixing, in situ polymerization, latex mixing and electropolymerization, have been widely used for the fabrication of G–polymer nanocomposites.
3.1. Melt compounding
Melt mixing is a common processing method to fabricate G-based composites. The main advantages of this method are its versatility, cost-effectiveness, and environmentally friendliness.32,77 Although the dispersion level of G in a polymer matrix cannot be compared to solution blending or in situ polymerization, it can still achieve the commercial standards.78 Overall, it is more compatible with many current industrial productions, and its application is more extensive. As for the operating conditions of the melt blending process, high temperature and strong shear forces are indispensable. With these methods, it is possible to fracture the nanoparticle aggregates and endow polymer chains with the ability to diffuse into the gaps of the nanoparticle interlayer.65 Previously, several equipment like twin-roller mill,32,79 tri-roll mill,80,81 internal mixer,82 and extruder77,83 were used. However, significant size reduction and structural distortion caused by a strong shearing force may reduce the reinforcement efficiency of G for polymers.78 In addition, due to the thermal instability of most chemically modified G, the melt blending method can only be used for the fabrication of G in a dried powder form, such as thermally reduced GO (TRGO).

3.1.1. Compounding with TRGO. 
Istrate et al. prepared PET reinforced with exfoliated G layers via melt blending using an internal mixer.82 TEM and SEM results revealed that the G flakes were randomly orientated and well dispersed inside the polymer matrix via melt blending. They found that with a nanofiller load as low as 0.07 wt%, the novel materials presented an increase in the elastic modulus higher than 10% and an enhancement in the tensile strength of more than 40% compared to pristine PET. Analogously, Araby et al. developed electrically and thermally conductive, high-mechanical performance styrene butadiene rubber (SBR) by introducing G platelets (GNs) via a twin roller mill.79Via the high shear of melt compounding, GNs could be able to uniformly disperse in elastomer. As a result, they gained a high-quality composite with tensile strength, Young's modulus and tear strength improved 230%, 506% and 445%, respectively. Yan et al. prepared electrically conductive G–polyamide 12 (G–PA12) binary nanocomposites by melt compounding.83 Polyethylene octene rubber grafted with maleic anhydride was introduced as the second polymer phase to improve the electrical conductivity and toughness of G–PA12 nanocomposites. Vigorous mixing was implemented by a twin-screw extruder at 220 °C under N2 purging. Eventually, they obtained a G nanocomposite with a low percolation threshold of 0.3 vol%.
Melt compounding can not only disperse G in a polymer matrix homogeneously, but also enhance the interfacial interaction in certain ways. For this purpose, Shen et al. fabricated TRGO–polycarbonate (TRGO–PC) composites by the melt-blending, and investigated the interfacial interaction between TRGO and PC.77 The results showed two kinds of interactions formed during melt blending. The first one is chemical bonding between the carbonate groups in PC chains and the carboxyl groups on TRGO through transesterification, and another is the non-covalent π–π interaction between PC and TRGO. As a result, they achieved an enhanced interfacial interaction between polymer chains and G directly during melt blending (Fig. 10). Vasileiou et al. synthesized G–polyethylene (G–PE) composites with a comparative experiment.84 In their study, the TRGO was added to maleated linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE) and to its derivatives with pyridine aromatic groups by melt compounding. The results showed that large aggregates formed when maleated matrices were used, while a reduction in the size of the aggregates with the pyridine grafted matrix was found due to the π–π stacking formed between the aromatic moieties with the TRGO during melt mixing.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of the transesterification between the carbonate groups in PC chains and the carboxyl groups on TRGO sheets at high temperature during melt blending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. 


3.1.2. Compounding with functionalized GO (fGO). 
The interfacial interactions formed during melt blending have some shortcomings, such as their uncontrollability and selectivity. Hence, some groups used modified G as the raw material during melt mixing. Previously, Yuan et al. modified GO by maleic anhydride grafted PP with a “grafting to” method.32 Then, PP and fGO were melt compounded by a twin roller mill. The results showed that the fGO achieves a good dispersion and strong interfacial adhesion in PP. To achieve the same target, a good dispersion and strong interfacial adhesion, Bao et al. adopted a master batch-based melt mixing.85 They prepared a G–poly(lactic acid) (PLA) master batch by solution blending, vacuum drying as well as a grinding process; then, G–PLA nanocomposites were prepared by melt blending using the master batch and PLA on a twin roller mill. By these procedures, a molecular dispersion of G was gained, and the obtained nanocomposites present markedly improved crystallinity, rate of crystallization, mechanical properties, electrical conductivity and fire resistance. Similarly, melt compounding by master batch processing was also adopted by You et al. to fabricate G–PP nanocomposites.86

3.2. Solution blending
For the solution blending method, the general procedures can be summarized as follows. Firstly, the polymer and nanofillers (G or its derivatives) are dissolved in the same or miscible solvent respectively. After that, these solutions are mixed together assisted by agitation, ultrasonication or shear mixing to disperse G homogeneously.87 Finally, the G-based nanocomposites are obtained by certain procedures, such as evaporation,88,89 precipitation,40 lyophilization,33 filtration,90 and so on. This solution blending method can lead to better particle dispersion than melt compounding. However, the extensive use of organic solvents for dissolving polymers is needed. For this reason, solution blending gets less attention for industrial applications than melt compounding.78

3.2.1. Blending polymers with RGO. 
Bora et al. reported a method to prepare RGO–PE composites by a simple solution mixing.91 They dispersed RGO as well as polyester resin in THF sequentially, and then cross-linked them by using methyl ethyl ketone peroxide (MEKP) catalyst. Finally, the mixture was casted onto Teflon plates and dried under vacuum in desiccators. The corresponding SEM results revealed that a good dispersion of RGO in a PE matrix was obtained. Similarly, Ling et al. prepared light weight microcellular G–PEI nanocomposite foams with a density of about 0.3 g cm−3 by a solution process.92 They dispersed G in DMF at room temperature with the aid of ultrasonication for 30 min. Then, a certain quantity of PEI particles was dissolved into the G suspension with vigorous stirring for 24 h at 70 °C. After that, the resultant solution was added into an excess of ethanol, and the produced precipitate was filtered and dried at 80 °C. Finally, they obtained a high quality G–PEI composite with electromagnetic interference shielding.
The dispersion level of G determines the final quality of the G–polymer composites. Apparently, ultrasonic and stirring treatments have been proved to be effective strategies to gain a homogeneous dispersion.91,93 However, there is another auxiliary operation to disperse G. For example, Tang et al. fabricated G-epoxy composites via solution blending.94 In contrast to the procedures we mentioned before, they introduced a ball mill procedure using a planetary ball mill to exert shear force. As a consequence, a better dispersion of G in polymers was obtained.


3.2.2. Blending polymers with functionalized G. 
Compared to using RGO, covalent or non-covalent modified G can result in a more homogeneous dispersion of G nanosheets (GN) in a polymer matrix.95,96 For example, Hsiao et al. prepared G–WPU composites by blending WPU with functionalized GNs.88 In their approach (Fig. 11), G sheets were covalently modified by aminoethyl methacrylate (AEMA) through free radical polymerization. The –NH3+ functional groups grafted on the GN–AEMA can effectively inhibit the restacking and aggregation of the GNs. More important, the created GN–AEMA exhibited high compatibility with WPU matrix grafted sulfonated functional groups because of the electrostatic attraction, which promotes the homogeneous dispersion of GNs in the WPU matrix. In another case, Zhang et al. prepared an ODA-functionalized G–PLA nanocomposite by solution blending.87 Because of the good hydrophobic compatibility between ODAG and PLA, a homogeneous dispersion of ODAG into the PLA matrix and improved interfacial adhesion between them were achieved. Similarly, Yang et al. prepared G–polyurethane (G–PU) nanocomposites by incorporating PU with polydopamine-coated G sheets (D-G) by the solution blending route.89 In their study, polydopamine (PDA) was attached onto the surface of GO followed by hydrazine reduction to prepare D-G in the first place. Then, PU and D-G were dissolved in DMF in sequence and stirred continuously. They found that PDA coating could not only enhance the dispersibility of the PDA-coated GO sheets in organic solvents, but also facilitate partial chemical reduction of GO. As a consequence, they gained a high quality G–PU nanocomposite. Recently, He et al. fabricated functionalized GNs (fGNs) by the 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition reaction of azomethine ylides.90 As a result, fGNs could be suspended in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone after ultrasonic treatment nicely. After that, Gong et al. used poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) as a surface modifier to covalently functionalize GO via the esterification reaction between the carboxylic acid moieties on G and hydroxyl groups on PVA.97
 Fig. 11  (a) Scheme of the procedure for preparing GN–P and GN–AEMA. (b) The GN–AEMA attached to the sulfonated functional groups of WPU through electrostatic attraction for better compatibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 

3.3. 
          In situ polymerization

In situ polymerization is a typical and highly effective method to fabricate nanocomposites,98 and its dispersion ability is better than other mixing methods. In this method, fillers (G or its derivatives) are dispersed in monomer (or multiple monomers), and then the polymerization is performed in the presence of fillers by some means. As for the defect of this method, in most instances, monomers have only been polymerized in solvents, or at least under GO in the processing of solution treatment.99 At this point, the high viscosity of even dilute dispersions of GN becomes a major constraint to bulk-phase polymerization. Besides, the loss of polymerization rate at the later stages is another drawback.100

3.3.1. 
            In situ polycondensation without interaction between the filler and the matrix. 
In our previous work, RGO–phenol formaldehyde (RGO–PF) composites were synthesized by in situ polymerization, as shown in Fig. 12(a).34 GO and monomers (phenol and formaldehyde) were mixed together. Phenol, as a reducing agent, was non-covalently adsorbed on the RGO surface via π–π stacking, and then, it reduced GO to G. Simultaneously, PF was being polymerized on G sheets. RGO–PF composites with different RGO contents were prepared successfully. Typical TEM images in Fig. 12(b–e) indicated the formation of RGO–phenol before polymerization and the RGO–PF composites after in situ polymerization. Due to the homogeneous dispersion and in situ polymerization of RGO sheets, the thermal conductivity of RGO–PF composites was enhanced from 0.1477 to 0.3769 W m−1 K−1. Besides, the electrical conductivity, mechanical properties and heat resistance of the composites were improved. In another case, Paszkiewicz et al. prepared poly(trimethylene terephthalate-block-tetramethylene oxide) (PTT-PTMO) copolymer modified GO (GO–PPT-PTMO) nanocomposites by a similar way.98 In their work, the oxygen functional groups on GO provide reactive sites for modification and polymerization. As a result, they obtained a reinforced composite with a strong interphase interaction between the dispersed phase (reinforcement) and the polymer matrix as well as a homogeneous distribution of G in the polymer host. By a similar method, Wan et al. synthesized water-soluble G–PANI nanocomposites successfully.101
 Fig. 12  (a) Scheme of the procedure for preparing G–PF composites. (b and c) Typical TEM images of a RGO–phenol hybrid before polymerization and (d and e) RGO–PF extracted from composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
For the in situ polymerization, the surface-modified G has more advantages over GO due to its better dispersion and interfacial bonding. Qian et al. functionalized GO with cyclohexyl isocyanate (CI), and then fabricated polyimide (PI)-based nanocomposites containing functionalized GO (fGO) nanosheets by in situ polymerization.16 Due to the excellent dispersibility and compatibility of CI in the polyamic acid (precursor of PI) matrix, a high-performance GO–PI composite material was gained. Das et al. prepared G-PAM hydrogels via in situ polymerization.76 As a stabilizer, prepolymerized PAM was used to non-covalently modify G by hydrogen bonding before polymerization. Then, acrylamide monomers were polymerized in the presence of modified G. They found that G permits gelation in the absence of any chemical cross-linker. The polymer chains adhered to the G sheet surface not only make G disperse uniformly in the created composite, but also lead to an enhancement of the compressive and self-healing properties of the hydrogel relative to the PAM analogue.


3.3.2. 
            In situ polycondensation with interaction between the filler and the matrix. 
As we discussed in section 3.3.1, G or its surface-modified derivatives are dispersed into polymers only by the effect of wrapping, in which there are no interactions between the polymers and G. However, if we want to obtain high quality interfacial adhesion, this kind of interaction is necessary.
Wang et al. prepared biodegradable GO–poly(butylene succinate) (GO–PBS) nanocomposites via in situ polymerization.102 The existence of oxygen functional groups located on the edges and the basal plane of GO makes it possible to covalently interact with the PBS matrix by esterification. Therefore, the GO nanosheets interact strongly with the PBS matrix and GO nanosheets were homogeneously dispersed in nanocomposites. Zhang et al. developed a route for preparing GO reinforced polyamide 6 composites via in situ anionic ring-opening polymerization.103 In their experiment, ε-caprolactam (CL) was firstly fixed onto the GO sheets coupling by 4,4′-methylenebis(phenylisocyanate), and then PA6 was grafted from the GO surface by in situ anionic ring-opening polymerization. Their test results showed that PA6 grafted GO sheets contain about 74 wt% polymers, which makes the GO sheets homogeneously dispersed in a matrix and gain good interfacial adhesion. As a result, the tensile strength and Young's modulus of this nanocomposite were enhanced significantly.
Besides the covalent bonding, the non-covalent adsorption is also an effective route for enhanced interfacial interaction. For example, Wang et al. prepared GO-PANI composites by in situ polymerization.104 The UV-vis absorption results, together with the Raman spectra and XPS analysis, indicated that the PANI chain in the composite is in the doped state. The possible combining modes of GO-PANI composites include π–π stacking, electrostatic interactions, and hydrogen bonding. Hence, the introduction of less amount of GO into PANI enhances the electrochemical performance of PANI greatly.


3.3.3. 
            In situ Ziegler–Natta polymerization. 

In situ Ziegler–Natta polymerization is another potential method for the polymerization of polymers with G. Huang et al. reported a method for preparing GO-PP nanocomposites via in situ Ziegler–Natta polymerization.105 They incorporated a Mg/Ti catalyst species into GO via surface functional groups including –OH and –COOH. Subsequent PP polymerization led to the formation of a PP matrix, which was accompanied by the nanoscale exfoliation of GO, as well as its gradual dispersion. A schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of GO–PP nanocomposites by in situ Ziegler–Natta polymerization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, Zhao et al. prepared G-iPP composites by the in situ Ziegler–Natta slurry polymerization.106 Firstly, layered GO was reduced to RGO by a Grignard reagent (n-BuMgCl), and then RGO was complexed with TiCl4 to form a G-supported catalyst. Finally, an iPP polymer matrix was in situ formed. Milani et al. have also reported the synthesis of GN-iPP composites with the in situ Ziegler–Natta polymerization.107 TEM and XRD results showed that G nanosheet dispersion was homogeneous within the polymeric matrix. As for the enhancing effect of G toward composite material, thermal and mechanical properties are significantly improved. Especially the electrical conductivity increased by a factor of 108 compared to that of neat iPP. Also, Stürzel et al. adopted a dual-site catalyst system supported on functionalized G to control nanostructure formation of self-reinforced G–PE composites with ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) reactor blends.108
Other in situ polymerization methods, for example in situ melt polycondensation,99in situ emulsion polymerization,109 and in situ miniemulsion polymerization,110 have also been reported previously, but their practical value is limited by many factors, such as cumbersome processes and unsatisfactory yield. Therefore, they are not described in detail in this review.

3.4. Latex mixing
Due to the large surface energy and strong interaction, G is difficult to be uniformly dispersed in a polymer matrix. Unlike other dispersion strategies, the latex mixing method makes G distribute along specific paths and form a segregated structure.111 Its operating procedures are simple. First, G is coated onto the surface of polymer particles, and then corresponding techniques (hot-pressing is the most popular one) are used to fabricate the final composites. The main drawback of this method is its narrow range of applications (limited to the conductive materials).112

3.4.1. G–plastic composites. 
Hu et al. prepared RGO–UHMWPE composites by latex mixing.35 They dispersed GO sheets and UHMWPE powders in a water/ethanol (water:ethanol = 50:1, w/w) solution sequentially to form GO-coated UHMWPE powders. After that, hydrazine solutions were added into this solution system to reduce GO to RGO. Finally, all coated powders were compressively molded to form RGO–UHMWPE composites. A similar study on the preparation of RGO–UHMWPE composites was also reported by Pang et al.113 In addition, a highly conductive RGO–poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) composite prepared by self-assembly was also reported, as shown in Fig. 14.114 Pham and co-workers prepared PMMA latex by surfactant-free emulsion polymerization using a cationic free radical initiator, which created the positive charges on the surface of the PMMA particle. After that, they mixed PMMA latex with a GO solution together. As a result, positively charged PMMA particles easily assembled with negatively charged GO sheets through electrostatic interaction. After the reduction with hydrazine, they obtained RGO–PMMA composites with excellent electrical properties.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the self-assembly of PMMA latex and GO, followed by hydrazine reduction of GO for the formation of GO–PMMA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 


3.4.2. G–rubber composites. 
G–rubber composites can also be created by latex mixing. Latex mixing, as a method that does not require a uniform dispersion of G, has been applied for the preparation of G–rubber composites widely.
For example, Zhan et al. developed G–natural rubber (G–NR) composites with a conductive segregated network by latex mixing, static hot pressing, and vulcanization processing.115 Firstly, GO powders were dispersed into NR latex by ultrasonic irradiation and then in situ reduced using hydrazine hydrate to obtain black RGO–NR latex. During this procedure, RGO was self-assembled to form an encapsulated layer on the surface of the latex particles under the strong van der Waals interaction between the rubber particles and RGO. Subsequently, the RGO–rubber latex was coagulated, filtered, dried, hot pressed under static pressure and in situ vulcanized. Finally, the cross-linked composites with a conductive segregated network were obtained. Similarly, Tian et al. prepared G encapsulated rubber latex composites with high dielectric constant, low dielectric loss and low percolation threshold by an ultrasonically assisted latex mixing.116 In their study, the encapsulation of GO on the surface of carboxylated nitrile rubber (XNBR) rubber particles was implemented by the hydrogen bonding between –COOH groups on XNBR and oxygen groups on GO (Fig. 15). After a series of operations, a spin flash drying process, hot pressing, vulcanization, and in situ thermal reduction, the RGO–XNBR composites were formed eventually.
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the preparation of GO–XNBR composites with segregated network structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd. 

3.5. Electropolymerization
Electropolymerization is a novel and convenient method to fabricate G–polymer composites. This method has many advantages, such as short process, easy to control, and eco-friendly.117 In this method, two-electrode118 and three-electrode119 electrolyte systems have been widely used. The G–polymer nanocomposites synthesized with this method can be used as electrochemical biosensors and in energy storage devices like electrochemical supercapacitors and batteries.120,121
Hu et al. fabricated a G–PANI nanorod (G–PANINR) composite in a reverse micelle electrolyte via in situ electrochemical polymerization, and the schematic representation is shown in Fig. 16.118 Firstly, they prepared the reverse micelle by mixing an oil phase and a water phase in a certain proportion. After that, an ITO substrate was adopted as a working electrode, while graphite acts as a counter electrode. When pulse current was given, the water pool moves towards the working electrode through electromigration. Once the water pool collides with the electrode, the aniline monomer was oxidized and deposited. At the same time, G was embedded in the PANINRs, suggesting the interconnection of G with the polymer network. It should be noted that part of the aniline monomer can be adsorbed onto the surface of G through hydrogen bonding by magnetic stirring and ultrasonication, which makes G dispersed in the PAIN matrix more homogeneously. In another case, Liu et al. prepared RGO–PPy composites as an efficient Pt-free counter electrode for plastic dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) by electrochemical synthesis.119 In their study, the RGO–PPy composites were obtained by cyclic voltammetry (CV) in N2-saturated Na2SO4 aqueous solution (0.5 M) at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 between 0 and −1 V for 10 cycles. The electrochemical polymerization of pyrrole was conducted with a rigid fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) or indium tin oxide (ITO) as the working electrode, a Pt wire as the counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode. All the electrochemical experiments were performed at room temperature in GO aqueous solution which was saturated with nitrogen gas prior to polymerization. As a result, a high-performance RGO–PPy composite for DSCs was fabricated. CV and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results demonstrated that the created RGO–PPy composite had a superior catalytic activity toward triiodide reduction. In addition, RGO–PPy CE exhibited excellent power conversion efficiency as well as energy conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the in situ electrochemical polymerization for the preparation of G–PANINR composites. Reprinted from ref. 118 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Among the above introduced fabrication methods, the solution blending method is much better for producing quite homogeneous graphene–polymer composites than melt compounding because the polymer and G are dissolved in the same or miscible solvent respectively, but it is difficult to remove residual solvents and the loss of hydrophilicity can lead to irreversible aggregation induced by a re-stacking process during the creation process. By contrast, the in situ polymerization can be a good alternative method for generating homogeneous composites with much stronger interaction present between graphene and the polymer matrix. Latex mixing can achieve a more homogeneous dispersion of graphene in polymer matrices. By this method a uniform dispersion of graphene is created in the first stage, and then the polymer powders are added into the suspensions and the powders are homogeneously covered by the graphene, which can lead to the formation of a segregated network. For the electropolymerization method, the homogeneous dispersion of G in a polymer matrix depends on the interface between graphene and polymers. It is difficult to confirm that a very homogeneous dispersion of graphene in the polymer matrices can be created.
What's more, the production scales of different fabrication methods are different. Melt compounding, solution blending, and latex mixing are suitable for mass production. By contrast, both in situ polymerization and electropolymerization can be only employed in a laboratory. To make it more clear, the advantages and disadvantages of each method are summarized and presented in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of different fabrication methods




Fabrication methods
Production scale
Advantages
Disadvantages




Melt compounding
Mass production82
Cost-effective and environmentally friendly32,77
Unsatisfactory dispersion


Solution blending
Bulk90
Versatile and a good dispersion
Extensive use of organic solvents78



In situ polymerization
Bulk34
Highly effective and a high level dispersion98
The loss of polymerization rate at the later stages100


Latex mixing
Bulk114
Does not require a uniform dispersion of G in polymer111
Narrow range of applications112 and using a large amount of surfactant114


Electropolymerization
Laboratory119
Short process, easy to control, and eco-friendly117
Available monomers are less




4. Applications of G–polymer nanocomposites
G–polymer nanocomposites have excellent properties. The potential applications of G–polymer materials include electrocatalysts, drug delivery, high performance materials, sensors, biomedical materials, and energy storage, as shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Potential applications of G–polymer nanocomposites. 
4.1. Electrocatalyst
Electrocatalysis is one of the most important fields for the application of G/GO-based materials. Our group studied the electrocatalytic activity of ferritin-mediated biomimetic synthesis of FePt nanoparticles on GNs.122 GNs were noncovalently modified with 1-pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester to provide binding sites for Fr molecules. Experimental results showed that the synthesized GN–FePt nanohybrids have pretty good electrocatalytic activity. Recently, metal-free ORR electrocatalysts have been widely used in the cathodes of fuel cells or metal–air batteries.
Zhang et al. developed metal-free ORR catalysts based on the solution assembly of conducting polymers PEDOT/PSS and RGO.70 They found that the blending of RGO induces the conformational change of PEDOT chains from benzoid to quinoid structure and charge transfer from RGO to PEDOT; as a result, the created RGO–PEDOT/PSS composite exhibits synergistically enhanced ORR electrocatalytic activity with a quasi-four electron pathway and improved durability over that of the Pt/C electrode. A similar study on preparing a high-performance electrocatalyst for ORR was also reported by Chen et al.123 Different from Zhang's work, they constructed a three-dimensional nitrogen-doped G nanostructure with MnO loading by the synergistic effect of three-dimensional nitrogen-doped graphene (3D-NRGO) and MnO, which brings an enhanced catalytic current and more positive potential.
4.2. Sensors
Exhibiting a combination of exceptional structural and electronic properties, G has great potential for the development of highly sensitive sensors.124 The presence of a conjugated π bond makes G generate charge-transfer interactions with adsorbents such as glucose, organophosphates, H2O2, antibodies, DNA, proteins etc. In this regard, we have carried out some studies.69,125–127 For example, we have used the electrostatic assembly of PNF–biomimetic silver nanowires onto G for electrochemical sensors to detect H2O2.67 Due to the excellent electrochemical properties for the reduction of H2O2 as well as the high aspect ratio and electrical performances of silver, the prepared GN–PNF–AgNW nanohybrid-based electrochemical sensor shows enhanced performance for the determination of H2O2. Similarly, Hess et al. presented a versatile platform for biosensing applications based on polymer-modified G transistors.128 The functional groups of the polymer brushes allowed both the covalent grafting of the sensing enzyme and the detection of the enzyme's activity. Taking advantage of the transducing capability of G transistors and the enzyme biochemistry, they obtained a highly sensitive biosensor.
4.3. Energy storage materials
In terms of energy storage materials, G-based materials possess huge advantages, such as high specific active surface areas, excellent electron transport capability and good capacitance. For this, they are widely utilized as electrode materials, fuel cells, lithium ion batteries and so on. For example, Liu et al. prepared RGO–polypyrrole (RGO–PPy) composites for plastic DSCs by electrochemical synthesis.119 They found that under the optimal conditions an energy conversion efficiency of 6.45% was obtained for a rigid RGO–PPy-based dye-sensitized solar cell, which is 90% of that for a thermally deposited Pt-based device (7.14%), and an energy conversion efficiency of 4.25%, comparable to that of the counterpart using a sputtered-Pt CE (4.83%) on a plastic substrate. In another case, Xue et al. fabricated highly ordered PANI nanorods on RGO patterns for a supercapacitor by in situ electrodeposition.129 They controlled the morphologies of PANI nanorods by adjusting the concentration of aniline and the growth time in the electrodeposition process. The test results showed that this supercapacitor possesses a electrochemical capacitance as high as 970 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 2.5 A g−1, as well as good stability, retaining 90% of its initial capacitance after 1700 consecutive cycles for the synergistic effect of these new RGO–PANI nanostructures.
4.4. High performance materials
G possesses excellent microstructure and the resulting physical properties. Hence, doping G into polymers is an effective way of gaining high performance materials. Previously, we presented the work to fabricate RGO–PF composites by in situ polymerization.34 With a doping amount of 0.5 wt% of RGO content, the composite was endowed with perfect thermal conductivity, electrical conductivity, mechanical properties and heat resistance. Ling et al. prepared G-PEI nanocomposites for electromagnetic interference shielding.92 They found that, by introducing G into PEI, the specific electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness rose from 17 to 44 dB g−1 cm−3. In addition, the created G-PEI nanocomposite foams possessed a low thermal conductivity of 0.065–0.037 W m−1 K−1 even at 200 °C and a high Young's modulus of 180–290 MPa. In another case, Wu et al. prepared G-PLA composites by solution mixing for a crystallization study.130 They found that the G nanosheets are well distributed in the PLA matrix, leading to an evident viscosity increase despite their dispersion as multilayered structures in stack form. As a result, both the cold and melt crystallization behaviors of PLA were found to depend strongly on the presence of GNs.
4.5. Drug delivery
The abundant hydrophilic oxygenated functional groups as well as the high specific surface area of GO allow it to chemically conjugate or physically adsorb a large amount of anticancer drugs and antibodies. Many research studies are implemented from this point of view. Our group has reported the covalent interaction mediated assembly of thermo-sensitive PNPs on functionalized GO nanosheets for drug delivery.49 In that work, the thermo-sensitive PNPs were first synthesized with the free radical polymerization reaction and GO nanosheets were non-covalently modified with a bifunctional linker to provide reactive sites for the binding of PNPs. A classic aromatic anticancer drug, adriamycin, was used as the loaded drug molecules. Test results showed that the GO–PNP hybrid has a drug loading efficiency of about 87% and a release efficiency of 13–22%, depending on the surface coverage of PNPs on GO nanosheets, and as a drug carrier it obviously has better performance than both GO and PNPs. In another case, Kim et al. prepared a photothermally triggered drug delivery system based on a functionalized RGO nanotemplate.131 They obtained a nanosized RGO–PEG–bPEI composite consisting of RGO sheets by covalently conjugating with branched PEI and PEG, and this RGO–PEG–bPEI showed high water stability and a significantly enhanced doxorubicin loading efficiency in comparison with unreduced RGO–PEG–bPEI due to the recovery of aromatic structures of GO. It was found that the RGO–PEG–bPEI nanocarrier could escape the endosome by photothermally induced endosomal disruption of GO as well as the proton sponge effect of bPEI, finally killing more cancer cells with NIR irradiation than without irradiation.
4.6. Biomedical materials
Recently, we fabricated a GO–PNF nanohybrid with self-assembly of a specially designed peptide molecule.69 Then this nanohybrid was used as a template for biomimetic mineralization of hydroxyapatite. The cell culture result indicated that the produced GO–PNF–HA minerals have good biocompatibility and can enhance the proliferation ability of the studied cells. Besides, a study on the antibacterial ability and biocompatibility of G was also reported by our group.132 In other groups, Ahadian et al. prepared hydrogel-graphene biomedical materials via producing stable aqueous G dispersions in aqueous bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution.124 Then, ab initio calculations were used to reveal the molecular interactions between G and BSA. As a result, they gained a mechanically robust and tunable hydrogel-graphene material, which is of great interest for cell-based studies. Also, a study on neurite sprouting and outgrowth using G composites was implemented by Tu et al.133
5. Conclusions and outlooks
As a novel and promising material, G has gained widespread attention for several years. In practice, massive efforts are still needed to turn this promising material into practical applications. In this review, we have summarized this effort by introducing and discussing the modification and dispersion methods to fabricate G–polymer composites. The specific applications of the fabricated composites were presented. Besides, the advantages and disadvantages of all the methods were also commented on. Based on our experience in fabricating G-based materials, it can be concluded that the modification methods as well as fabrication strategies are indispensable for every G-based composite. To put it in another way, the quality of modification and fabrication directly influences the quality of composites.
For the development of G–polymer composites in the future, there are several points to be noted. Firstly, combined modifications of G should be valued. A single approach cannot meet higher levels of interfacial interaction. Secondly, there is an increasing tendency and need to fabricate G–polymer composites in an eco-friendly way, such as by melt compounding, electrochemical methods, and self-assembly. Improving the production process with regard to environmental friendliness, low energy consumption, and high efficiency is necessary. Thirdly, further studies on the large-scale synthesis of G–polymer nanocomposites should be explored. Finally, theoretical studies on the modification of G with polymers should be performed. Especially, the design and synthesis of new nanostructures, the architectures based on G, and the expected properties of novel materials will be the trends in the future.
Abbreviations

GGraphene
GOGraphene oxide
RGOReduced graphene oxide
ODAOctadecylamine
PEGPoly(ethylene glycol)
PEIPolyethylenimine
PVAPoly(vinyl alcohol)
PBIPolybenzimidazole
FTIRFourier transform infrared spectroscopy
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
PPPolypropylene
PNHS1-Pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester
TEMTransmission electron microscope
PNPsPolymer nanoparticles
ATRPAtom transfer radical polymerization
RAFTReversible addition fragmentation chain transfer
ROPRing opening polymerization

o-HPMAA
N-(2-Hydroxyphenyl) methacrylamide
AFMAtomic force microscope
SEMScanning electron microscope
TGAThermogravimetric analysis
PSPolystyrene
CBr4-Hydroxybutyl 2-bromopropionate
MMAMethylacrylic acid
PNIPAMPoly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PNBPolynorbornene
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PLLAPoly(L-lactic acid)
PANIPolyaniline
PGMAPoly(glycidyl methacrylate)
PNFsPeptide nanofibers
PEDOT/PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)
WPUWaterborne polyurethane
PDDAPoly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride)
PAMPolyacrylamide
SBRStyrene butadiene rubber
PA12Polyamide 12
PCPolycarbonate
PEPolyethylene
LLDPELinear low-density polyethylene
PLAPoly(lactic acid)
AEMAAminoethyl methacrylate
PDAPolydopamine
fGOFunctionalized graphene oxide
TRGOThermally reduced graphene oxide
GNsGraphene nanosheets
GnPsGraphene platelets
PFPhenol formaldehyde
PTT-PTMOPoly(trimethylene terephthalate-block-tetramethylene oxide)
CICyclohexyl isocyanate
PIPolyimide
PBSPoly(butylene succinate)
UHMWPEUltrahigh molecular weight polyethylene
NRNatural rubber
XNBRCarboxylated nitrile rubber
PPyPolypyrrole
DSCsDye-sensitized solar cells
CVCyclic voltammetry
EISElectrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ORROxygen reduction reaction
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide
ITOIndium tin oxide
BSABovine serum albumin

Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (project no. ZZ1307).
Notes and references
P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Q. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Lv, Y. Wen, P. X. Hou, M. Wang and H. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, Y. Huang, X. Lu, S. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 8980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Deng, Y. Hou and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, P. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Su and G. Wei, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5080 RSC .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4541 RSC .
H. Kim, A. A. Abdala and C. W. Macosko, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6515 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang and F. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3394 RSC .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, N. Sahoo, Y. Tan, Y. Pan, H. Bao, L. Li, S. H. Chan and J. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2387 CAS .
Y. Qian, Y. Lan, J. Xu, F. Ye and S. Dai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 314, 991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, D. Joung, L. Zhai, S. Das, S. I. Khondaker and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, J. Kim, S. Jeong, J. Hwang, D. Lee, D. Shin, S. Choi and S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ayán-Varela, J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, R. Rozada, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Carbon, 2014, 75, 390 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Niyogi, E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, J. L. McWilliams, M. A. Hamon and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lerf, H. Heb, T. Riedl, M. Forster and J. Klinowskib, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 101–103, 857 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Dimiev and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers, Jr. and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Zhao, P. Zhang, J. Ning, J. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4126 RSC .
M. Li, C. Liu, Y. Xie, H. Cao, H. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Carbon, 2014, 66, 302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Paredes, S. Villar-Rodil, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. D. Tascón, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Díez-Betriu, F. J. Mompeán, C. Munuera, J. Rubio-Zuazo, R. Menéndez, G. R. Castro and A. Andrés, Carbon, 2014, 80, 40 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, M. D. Stoller, W. Cai, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner, D. Chen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ye, Y. Chen, J. Wang, J. Rick, Y. Huang, F. Chang and B. Hwang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2987 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Zhang, X. Liu, Q. Pei, J. Qian, Q. Zhuang and Z. Han, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 365 CrossRef CAS .
V. León, A. M. Rodriguez, P. Prieto, M. Prato and E. Vázquez, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 563 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yuan, C. Bao, L. Song, N. Hong, K. Liew and Y. Hu, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2014, 237, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Han, L. Ren, L. Gong, X. Qi, Y. Liu, L. Yang, X. Wei and J. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 741 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Wang, Z. Ouyang, J. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4254 CAS .
H. Hu, G. Zhang, L. Xiao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Z. Zhao, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Tang and J. J. Gooding, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12435 RSC .
N. Saravanan, R. Rajasekar, S. Mahalakshmi, T. P. Sathishkumar, K. S. K. Sasikumar and S. Sahoo, J. Reinf. Plast. Compos., 2014, 33, 1158 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, S. Wang, Y. Li, M. Wang, P. Shi and X. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17268 CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. E. Mark, Y. Zhu, R. S. Ruoff and D. W. Schaefer, Polymer, 2014, 55, 5389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cano, U. Khan, T. Sainsbury, A. O'Neill, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, W. K. Maser, A. M. Benito and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2013, 52, 363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Salavagione, M. A. Gómez and G. Martínez, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6331 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, T. Meia, J. Yang, C. Zhang, M. Lv and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu and A. M. Shanmugharaj, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 244, 552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zarrin, J. Fu, G. Jiang, S. Yoo, J. Lenos, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, L. Wu, Z. Zhou, L. Zhang and H. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 9084 RSC .
S. Roy, X. Tang, T. Das, L. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Ting, X. Hu and C. Y. Yue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3142 CAS .
Y. Yun, Y. Bae, D. Kim, J. Lee, I. Chin and H. Jin, Carbon, 2013, 49, 3553 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tessonnier and M. A. Barteau, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, D. Sun, N. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Shi, J. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1362 RSC .
Z. Fang, A. Ito, A. C. Stuart, H. Luo, Z. Chen, K. Vinodgopal, W. You, T. J. Meyer and D. K. Taylor, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Król and P. Chmielarz, Prog. Org. Coat., 2014, 77, 9113 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Roghani-Mamaqani, V. Haddadi-Asl, K. Khezri and M. Salami-Kalajahi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 24439 RSC .
R. K. Layek, S. Samanta, D. P. Chatterjee and A. K. Nandi, Polymer, 2010, 51, 5846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Meng, M. Luo, M. Meng, L. Ni, J. Qiu, Z. Hu, F. Liu, G. Zhong, Z. Liu and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1287 CAS .
K. Jiang, C. Ye, P. Zhang, X. Wang and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1346 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seifert, A. H. R. Koch, F. Deubel, T. Simmet, L. H. Hess, M. Stutzmann, R. Jordan, J. A. Garrido and I. D. Sharp, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 466 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Q. Li, S. Xiang, Y. Wang, C. Wang, W. Jiang, H. Zhou, Y. Yang and J. Tang, Polymer, 2014, 55, 6044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Chen, J. Wu, W. Zhang, F. Chen and Q. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8612 RSC .
R. Feng, G. Guan, W. Zhou, C. Li, D. Zhang and Y. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3931 RSC .
W. Li, Z. Xu, L. Chen, M. Shan, X. Tian, C. Yang, H. Lv and X. Qian, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 237, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Tang, G. Ma, L. Zhang and G. Chen, J. Chromatogr., A, 2013, 1316, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Banerjee, T. K. Paira and T. K. Mandal, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4153 RSC .
A. Kundu, S. Nandi, P. Das and A. K. Nandi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3512 CAS .
M. Kumar, K. Singh, S. K. Dhawan, K. Tharanikkarasu, J. Chung, B. Kong, E. Kim and S. Hur, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 231, 397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shen, W. Zhai, C. Chen, D. Lu, J. Wang and W. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3103 CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. Huang, X. Yang and L. Zang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2897 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, Y. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667 RSC .
C. Teng, C. M. Ma, C. Lu, S. Yang, S. Lee, M. Hsiao, M. Yen, K. Chiou and T. Lee, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Ouyang, J. Li, P. Zhang, G. Wei and Z. Su, Carbon, 2015, 89, 20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, W. Yuan, B. Yao, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3587 CAS .
S. Hsiao, C. M. Ma, H. Tien, W. Liao, Y. Wang, S. Li and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2013, 60, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jo, T. Lee, H. Choi, J. Park, D. Lee, D. Lee and B. Kim, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Li, X. Kuang, Y. Fan, G. Wei and Z. Su, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 529 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Medhekar, A. Ramasubramaniam, R. S. Ruoff and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, S. Liang, X. Tang, D. Yan, X. Li and Z. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14160 RSC .
S. Das, F. Irin, L. Ma, S. K. Bhattacharia, R. C. Hedden and M. J. Green, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8633 CAS .
B. Shen, W. Zhai, M. Tao, D. Lu and W. Zheng, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 86, 109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, Y. Miura and C. W. Macosko, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3441 CrossRef CAS .
S. Araby, L. Zhang, H. Kuan, J. Dai, P. Majewski and J. Ma, Polymer, 2013, 54, 3663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandrasekaran, C. Seidel and K. Schulte, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 3878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Raza, A. V. K. Westwood, A. P. Brown and C. Stirling, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Istrate, K. R. Paton, U. Khan, A. O'Neill, A. P. Bell and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2014, 78, 243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan, H. Zhang, Y. Jia, J. Hu, X. Qi, Z. Zhang and Z. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4740 CAS .
A. A. Vasileiou, M. Kontopoulou and A. Docoslis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1916 CAS .
C. Bao, L. Song, W. Xing, B. Yuan, C. A. Wilkie, J. Huang, Y. Guo and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6088 RSC .
F. You, D. Wang, X. Li, M. Liu, G. Hu and Z. Dang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 8799 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Qiao, J. Chen and S. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hsiao, C. M. Ma, H. Tien, W. Liao, Y. Wang, S. Li, C. Yang, S. Lin and R. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2817 CAS .
L. Yang, S. Phua, C. Toh, L. Zhang, H. Ling, M. Chang, D. Zhou, Y. Donga and X. Lu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6377 RSC .
F. He, K. Lam, J. Fan and L. Chan, Carbon, 2014, 80, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bora, P. Bharali, S. Baglari, S. K. Dolui and B. K. Konwar, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2013, 87, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ling, W. Zhai, W. Feng, B. Shen, J. Zhang and W. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 2677 CAS .
S. Araby, Q. Meng, L. Zhang, H. Kang, P. Majewski, Y. Tang and J. Ma, Carbon, 2014, 55, 201 CAS .
L. Tang, Y. Wan, D. Yan, Y. Pei, L. Zhao, Y. Li, L. Wu, J. Jiang and G. Lai, Carbon, 2013, 60, 16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sayyar, E. Murray, B. C. Thompson, S. Gambhir, D. L. Officer and G. G. Wallace, Carbon, 2013, 52, 296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Shi, G. Shi and S. Cao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 142, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gong, B. Yin, L. Li and M. Yang, Composites, Part B, 2015, 73, 49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paszkiewicz, A. Szymczyk, Z. Špitalský, J. Mosnáček, K. Kwiatkowski and Z. Rosłaniec, Eur. Polym. J., 2014, 50, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan, B. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Wang and Z. Zhou, Composites, Part B, 2013, 55, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Verdejo, F. J. Tapiador, L. Helfen, M. Bernal, N. Bitinis and M. A. Lopez-Manchado, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10860 RSC .
L. Wan, B. Wang, S. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Guo, H. Xiong, B. Dong, L. Zhao, H. Lu, Z. Xu, X. Zhang, T. Li and W. Zhou, React. Funct. Polym., 2014, 79, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Zhang, P. Wang, J. Zhao, W. Zhang, J. Ji, K. Hua, J. Zhou and X. Yang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Fan, H. Li and C. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24081 RSC .
H. Wang, Q. Hao, X. Yang, L. Lu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 821 CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Qin, Y. Zhou, H. Niu, Z. Yu and J. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4096 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, F. Chen, C. Zhao, Y. Huang, J. Dong and C. Han, Polymer, 2013, 54, 3680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Milani, D. González, R. Quijada, N. R. S. Basso, M. L. Cerrada, D. S. Azambuja and G. B. Galland, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 84, 1 CAS .
M. Stürzel, Y. Thomann, M. Enders and R. Mülhaupt, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 4979 CrossRef .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, N. Kim, K. Rhee and J. Lee, Composites, Part A, 2011, 42, 1856 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, Y. Lin, C. Lin, C. Chan and Y. Huang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 535 RSC .
J. Du, L. Zhao, Y. Zeng, L. Zhang, F. Li, P. Liu and C. Liu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, C. Gao, H. Hu and Z. Zhao, Carbon, 2013, 65, 371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pang, T. Chen, G. Zhang, B. Zeng and Z. Li, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pham, T. Dang, S. Hur, E. Kim and J. Chung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2630 CAS .
Y. Zhan, M. Lavorgna, G. Buonocore and H. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10464 RSC .
M. Tian, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zan, T. Nishi and N. Ning, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 430, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chavez-Valdez, M. S. P. Shaffer and A. R. Boccaccini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, J. Tu, S. Jiao, J. Hou, H. Zhu and D. J. Fray, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15652 RSC .
W. Liu, Y. Fang, P. Xu, Y. Lin, X. Yin, G. Tang and M. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16249 CAS .
J. Liu, X. Wang, T. Wang, D. Li, F. Xi, J. Wang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19997 CAS .
X. Feng, R. Li, Y. Ma, R. Chen, N. Shi, Q. Fan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wei, Y. Zhang, S. Steckbeck, Z. Su and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17190 RSC .
R. Chen, J. Yan, Y. Liu and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8032 CAS .
S. Ahadian, M. Estili, V. Surya, J. Ramón-Azcón, X. Liang, H. Shiku, M. Ramalingam, T. Matsue, Y. Sakka, H. Bae, K. Nakajima, Y. Kawazoe and A. Khademhosseini, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6436 RSC .
P. Zhang, X. Zhao, Y. Ji, Z. Ouyang, X. Wen, J. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2487 RSC .
J. Ding, S. Zhu, T. Zhu, W. Sun, Q. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 22935 RSC .
P. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Liu, Q. Li, Z. Su and G. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 6525 RSC .
L. H. Hess, A. Lyuleeva, B. M. Blaschke, M. Sachsenhauser, M. Seifert and J. A. Garrido, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9705 CAS .
M. Xue, F. Li, J. Zhu, H. Song, M. Zhang and T. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, Y. Cheng, S. Feng, Z. Yao and M. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 6731 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, D. Lee, J. Kim, T. Kim and W. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Xu, Q. Li, G. Wei and Z. Su, Biomater. Sci., 2015, 3, 852 RSC .
Q. Tu, L. Pang, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Zhang and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13188 CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Mingfa Zhang	Mingfa Zhang is currently a master's student under the supervision of Prof. Su at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His scientific interests focus on the synthesis and applications of functional graphene-based polymer nanomaterials and organic–inorganic hybrid materials.
Yang Li	Yang Li is currently a master's student under the supervision of Prof. Su at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research interests focus on the synthesis of graphene/metal nanomaterials for applications in electrochemical biosensors and SERS, as well as the fabrication of electrospun functional polymer materials for catalysis applications.
Zhiqiang Su	Zhiqiang Su is a Professor at Beijing University of Chemical Technology, China. His research is focused on nanohybrids, biomedical materials, polymer materials, biosensors, and bioelectronics. So far, he has published more than 60 papers in international peer reviewed journals. The papers have been cited more than 600 times with an h-index of 16.
Gang Wei	Gang Wei is currently a senior researcher and group leader in the Hybrid Materials Interfaces Group at University of Bremen, Germany. His research interests include carbon-based nanomaterials, nanofibrous biomaterials, biosensors, and single molecule force spectroscopy. He has published more than 70 papers in international peer reviewed journals and the published papers have been cited more than 1100 times with an h-index of 24.

 	Fig. 1  Typical strategies for the modification of G and the fabrication of G–polymer nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of the annual number of scientific publications using the keywords “graphene” and “polymer”, as searched using SciFinder Scholar (until 17 February).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of RGO–PEI; (b) storage modulus and (c) comparison between experimental Young's modulus data and theoretical values predicted by the Halpin–Tsai model for nylon 12/RGO–PEI nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic of the fabrication of a GO-pPBI nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic model for the synthesis of GO–PNP nanocomposites and the subsequently loading and release of drug molecules; (b–e) TEM images of GO–PNP nanocomposites prepared with the mass ratio (GO–PNHS/PNPs) of (b) 1:2, (c) 1:5, (d) 1:10, and (e) 1:20, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 49 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic synthesis of RGO–P(o-HPMAA) nanocomposites with ATRP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation and functionalization of GO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of the synthesis of the GO–PNF nanohybrid and biomineralization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the formation of PNF bioinspired AgNWs on GNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

Grafting to38–44	Easy to operate, extensive applications, low-cost and convenient	Steric hindrance, low grafting coverage rate
Grafting from50–61	High molecular weight polymer chains, better coverage ratio	Few available polymerization methods, harsh operating conditions
π–π Interaction65–69	Stronger binding force	Limited range of applications
Electrostatic attraction70–73	Wide applications, stronger binding force	Complex process
Hydrogen bonding74–76	Ubiquitous	Unstable weak intensity, cannot be used alone generally

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of the transesterification between the carbonate groups in PC chains and the carboxyl groups on TRGO sheets at high temperature during melt blending. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Scheme of the procedure for preparing GN–P and GN–AEMA. (b) The GN–AEMA attached to the sulfonated functional groups of WPU through electrostatic attraction for better compatibility. Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Scheme of the procedure for preparing G–PF composites. (b and c) Typical TEM images of a RGO–phenol hybrid before polymerization and (d and e) RGO–PF extracted from composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of GO–PP nanocomposites by in situ Ziegler–Natta polymerization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of the self-assembly of PMMA latex and GO, followed by hydrazine reduction of GO for the formation of GO–PMMA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the preparation of GO–XNBR composites with segregated network structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2015 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the in situ electrochemical polymerization for the preparation of G–PANINR composites. Reprinted from ref. 118 with the permission of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Melt compounding	Mass production82	Cost-effective and environmentally friendly32,77	Unsatisfactory dispersion
Solution blending	Bulk90	Versatile and a good dispersion	Extensive use of organic solvents78

In situ polymerization	Bulk34	Highly effective and a high level dispersion98	The loss of polymerization rate at the later stages100
Latex mixing	Bulk114	Does not require a uniform dispersion of G in polymer111	Narrow range of applications112 and using a large amount of surfactant114
Electropolymerization	Laboratory119	Short process, easy to control, and eco-friendly117	Available monomers are less

 	Fig. 17  Potential applications of G–polymer nanocomposites.	 
G	Graphene
GO	Graphene oxide
RGO	Reduced graphene oxide
ODA	Octadecylamine
PEG	Poly(ethylene glycol)
PEI	Polyethylenimine
PVA	Poly(vinyl alcohol)
PBI	Polybenzimidazole
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
XPS	X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
PP	Polypropylene
PNHS	1-Pyrenebutyric acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester
TEM	Transmission electron microscope
PNPs	Polymer nanoparticles
ATRP	Atom transfer radical polymerization
RAFT	Reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer
ROP	Ring opening polymerization

o-HPMAA	
N-(2-Hydroxyphenyl) methacrylamide
AFM	Atomic force microscope
SEM	Scanning electron microscope
TGA	Thermogravimetric analysis
PS	Polystyrene
CBr	4-Hydroxybutyl 2-bromopropionate
MMA	Methylacrylic acid
PNIPAM	Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PNB	Polynorbornene
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PLLA	Poly(L-lactic acid)
PANI	Polyaniline
PGMA	Poly(glycidyl methacrylate)
PNFs	Peptide nanofibers
PEDOT/PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate)
WPU	Waterborne polyurethane
PDDA	Poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride)
PAM	Polyacrylamide
SBR	Styrene butadiene rubber
PA12	Polyamide 12
PC	Polycarbonate
PE	Polyethylene
LLDPE	Linear low-density polyethylene
PLA	Poly(lactic acid)
AEMA	Aminoethyl methacrylate
PDA	Polydopamine
fGO	Functionalized graphene oxide
TRGO	Thermally reduced graphene oxide
GNs	Graphene nanosheets
GnPs	Graphene platelets
PF	Phenol formaldehyde
PTT-PTMO	Poly(trimethylene terephthalate-block-tetramethylene oxide)
CI	Cyclohexyl isocyanate
PI	Polyimide
PBS	Poly(butylene succinate)
UHMWPE	Ultrahigh molecular weight polyethylene
NR	Natural rubber
XNBR	Carboxylated nitrile rubber
PPy	Polypyrrole
DSCs	Dye-sensitized solar cells
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
EIS	Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide
ITO	Indium tin oxide
BSA	Bovine serum albumin
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
