Controlling the morphology of a hybrid polymer/nanoparticle active layer of solar cells: mesoscopic simulation   - Molecular Systems Design & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8ME00118A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8ME00118A
(Communication)
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4, 390-395Controlling the morphology of a hybrid polymer/nanoparticle active layer of solar cells: mesoscopic simulation†

        
          
            Pavel 
            Komarov
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Pavel 
            Baburkin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Viktor 
            Ivanov
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Show-An 
            Chen
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Alexei 
            Khokhlov
          
        
      ac
aInstitute of Organoelement Compounds RAS, Moscow 119991, Russia
bTver State University, Tver 170100, Russia. E-mail: pv_komarov@mail.ru
cM.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow 119991, Russia
dNational Tsing Hua University/Chemical Engineering, Hsin-Chu 300, Taiwan
Received 
      31st December 2018
    , Accepted 18th February 2019First published on 18th February 2019AbstractIn this study, we present a concept of how to obtain well-organized current-conducting paths within the active layer of a bulk heterojunction polymer solar cell based on conjugated polymer/semiconducting nanoparticle (CP/NP) mixtures. To achieve this goal, we can use the fact that depending on the chemical structure of an AB diblock copolymer, the thermodynamically stable domains with cubic symmetry of the double gyroid type, having three-dimensional periodicity in space, may be formed during the microphase separation of A and B blocks in the active layer. Therefore, the solar cell devices, in which these structures are formed, will have well-organized separate paths for the transport of electrons and holes; as a result, high power conversion efficiency will be achieved. We checked this idea in the framework of mesoscale simulations and demonstrated that by the choice of the type of ligands of NPs (that controls the dispersion of NPs in a polymer matrix), the chemical structure (including the type and the length of the conjugated block and the composition of the copolymer chain) of copolymers and the CP/NP ratio, we can control the morphology of the photoactive layer of solar cell devices.

Design, System, Application
Polymer based solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great interest as a prospective replacement for inorganic solar cells due to their light weight, low-cost and easy manufacturing. Single layer PSCs are made by sandwiching a layer of organic optoelectronic materials between two conductors. The mixtures of conjugated copolymers (CP) and inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) are considered promising materials for a photoactive layer which can be prepared by spin casting a solvent-based dispersion of CP and NPs. The forming morphology of the active layer is crucial for performance of PSCs. Therefore, it is important to carry out a preliminary study of such materials for subsequent design of an active layer with high energy conversion efficiency. It is believed that a bicontinuous, interconnected, well phase-separated morphology of electron donor and acceptor phases would be optimal for transport of holes and electrons, respectively. In this study, we developed a coarse-grained model of the photoactive layer based on CP/NPs mixture. We use diblock copolymer as the active agent to produce the desired morphology of the photoactive layer during preparation. Due to incompatibility of the blocks, they can segregate into domains on the nanometer length scale. We consider that one of the blocks has affinity to NPs covered with ligands. This model (using dissipative dynamic simulations) allows us to study the material in a large range of parameters. We observe that proper choices of type of ligands of NPs and the chemical structure, length, and ratio of the copolymer blocks allow us to govern the morphology of the photoactive layer of solar cell devices. The ideal morphology with cubic symmetry of domains of the double gyroid type, having three-dimensional periodicity in space, can be formed under certain conditions. Therefore, the active layer will have a well-organized percolation network of conductive paths, which should improve power conversion efficiency of PSCs.

Introduction
At present, hybrid nanocomposites based on organic conjugated copolymers (CP) and inorganic nanoparticles (NPs), prepared as a mixture or layered heterojunction, are considered promising materials for the production of the active layer of optoelectronic devices such as solar cells (SCs) and LEDs.1–6 Inorganic NPs (acceptors) are introduced into the polymer matrix (polymer donor) to facilitate the dissociation of excitons generated in the CP phase in an SC.
The NPs used are nanocrystals of controlled composition, size and shape, which allow control of the width of the band gap, energy levels, photo-luminescence quantum yield (PLQY), extinction coefficient, and absorption spectrum of the substance in the regions of ultraviolet, visible and infrared light.3,6,7 The NPs possess the advantages of high PLQY and low production cost and are therefore of interest for practical application. A number of studies have been on organic–inorganic hybrid materials for optoelectronic applications.2,4,6,8 However, the low efficiencies of the SC devices based on hybrid materials limit the wide usage of these materials.1–4,9 This is explained by uncontrolled aggregation of NPs.1–3 The polymer domains and NPs are expected to provide efficient transport pathways for holes and electrons, respectively, if they form well-separated percolating phases. It is assumed that a photoactive layer with well-separated continuous channels for electron and hole transport can be obtained.1,3,4,6 The practical implementation of this idea involves a search for conditions that allow controlled phase separation in a mixture of CP/NPs.
The main goal of this paper is to find conditions that form well-separated bicontinuous paths for electrons and holes simultaneously in the entire layer of CP/NPs mixture.6 To achieve this, we propose to use the fact that in AB diblock copolymer systems, depending on the chemical structures of A and B blocks and their ratio, thermodynamically stable domains with cubic symmetry of primitive or double gyroid type and three-dimensional periodicity in space may be formed during microphase separation in the material volume.10–13 By proper choice of the chemical structures of blocks, we can affect NPs distribution, forcing NPs to follow this morphology as well. Therefore, the SC cell in which these structures are formed will have well-organized percolation networks of conductive paths, which should improve their power conversion efficiency.
Model and simulation technique
Based on the considerations described above, we built a theoretical model of the CP/NP photoactive layer of an SC device. It is assumed that the active layer consists of a linear AB diblock copolymer and colloidal nanoparticles, as seen in Fig. 1. Simulation of the phase behaviour of the blend is performed using the mesoscale simulation technique based on the dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) method,14,15 which we have successfully used for other molecular systems.16,17 In DPD, a real system is mapped onto a simplified coarse-grained (CG) model, replacing the chemical structure of all substances with sets of spherical particles having diameter σ and mass m. These particles are called beads and their diameter and mass are chosen to be the units of length (σ = 1) and mass (m = 1), respectively. This assumes that beads correspond to fragments of macromolecules (i.e., a polymer chain usually consists of many connected beads) or sets of small molecules or species (i.e., a single bead includes several small molecules), depending on the selected degree of coarsening and the sizes of molecules; there are beads of several different types. The evolution of a CG system is described by Newton's equations of motion. The characteristic time unit is τ = σ(m/kBT)1/2 (kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature; in the DPD method kBT = 1). The beads i and j interact by means of short-range soft repulsive conservative forces, whose amplitude aij is proportional to the Flory–Huggins interaction parameters χαβ, (ref. 14 and 15) where α and β are the types of beads i and j. There are also dissipative and stochastic forces acting on the beads and these forces ensure system thermostation and take into account the hydrodynamic interactions. The soft conservative force makes it possible to use larger steps of integration of Newton's equations as compared with fully atomistic molecular dynamics. In the case of polymers or other complex molecular objects, covalent bonds between beads are introduced and Hooke's law with spring stiffness coefficient 4kBT/σ describes their deformation.
 Fig. 1  The coarse-grained models of components of CP/NPs mixtures – AB copolymer and the functionalized nanoparticle. Herein, P3HT is an example of the S block and PbS is an example of NP. 
The characteristic scales of NPs used in SC devices determine the choice of DPD method. To ensure high efficiency of conversion of photon energy into electrical energy (dissociation of exciton), NPs of diameters of ∼2.8–7.5 nm are used.1,3,18 The middle value of this range of NPs diameters is approximately equal to one Kuhn segment in the case of poly-(3-hexylthiophen-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), which can be chosen as the unit of length σ. This means that one bead corresponds either to a single NP or to a chain fragment of about eight P3HT monomer units (Fig. 1).
The coarse-grained model of a blend of CP/NP includes beads of three types—C, S, and P—which correspond to both components of the diblock-copolymer and to NP, respectively. In our model, we assume that one of the blocks of the copolymer chain (formed by C beads) is well compatible with NPs (beads P), while the other one (formed by S beads) is incompatible with NPs. Copolymer chains have the composition CN−nSn, where N is the chain length, n is the length of the block incompatible with NPs and N − n is the length of the block compatible with NPs. To determine the interaction in the system, we chose monomers of P3HT as a real prototype for beads of type S. It is also assumed that we can change polymer backbone and side chains for beads of type C. By varying the parameter n, it is possible to choose a model of the photoactive layer in which the NPs and copolymer blocks form domains with cubic symmetry. Since the morphology of the material may depend on the concentration of NPs, we chose the ratio of weight fractions wpol:wnp of the polymer blocks and NPs as the second parameter of the model.
The values of the Flory–Huggins parameters for parametrization of conservative forces were chosen based on their relation to the Hildebrand solubility parameters δ (ref. 14, 15 and 19) by the formula χαβ = v(δα − δβ)2/RT, where R is the universal gas constant and v is the average molecular volume assigned to the beads.17 The NPs used in polymer photoactive layers are coated with ligands to facilitate their solubility in solution during the preparation of the photoactive layer.20 Hence, proper choice of the type of ligand strongly influences the interaction of NPs with a polymer matrix. For example, the following ligands have been used to modify NPs of PbS: oleic acid, hexane-1-thiol, 2-ethylhexane-1-thiol, 6-phenylhexan-1-thiol, etc.20,21 Using the Askadskii method,22 we obtain for these ligands the following range of solubility parameter values: δ = 15.8–18.2 (J cm−3)1/2. The solubility parameter value of 17.3 (J cm−3)1/2, calculated for P3HT, falls into this range, i.e., beads S and P seem to be compatible. However, it should be noted that although the above mentioned ligands have solubility parameters close to that of P3HT, this polymer does not mix well with NPs, as it is semi-crystalline.23 Therefore, we have used χC,P = 0 for compatible beads C and P, and χC,S = χS,P = 1 for the other two pairs of components to ensure incompatibility between the copolymer blocks and between the S-blocks and nanoparticles.
Results and discussion
The photoactive layer model was built of the chains of diblock copolymer (CN−nSn) and the NPs (beads P). The selected designations for the model components (C, S and P) are dictated by the convenience of visualization. In the simulations, the total copolymer chain length was fixed at N = 20 and the value of n was changed from 3 to 10. For the ratio of weight fractions of the copolymer and NPs (wpol:wnp), the following values were selected: 1:0, 1:10, 1:25, and 1:30. Initial configurations of the CP/NPs blend were randomly generated in a cubic box with edge length values L = 24σ and 30σ to check the dependence of the types of arising structures on the volume of the system (i.e., finite size effects). The total number density of all beads in the simulation box was ρσ3 = 3. The total equilibration time of each system was chosen to be 106 steps (Δt = 0.05τ) of integrating the equations of motion, which is sufficient for the emergence and stabilization of volume-ordered phases; the next 2 × 106 DPD steps were used to calculate the characteristics of the obtained samples. To avoid the influence of the initial configuration, we performed three series of independent calculations for each set of the selected parameters. Transition of prepared systems from initial disordered into ordered states was controlled by the order parameter Λ, which mirrors the trend toward microphase separation:15 (1)
Here, ρα(r) and fα are the local density and the volume fraction of the component α = C, S, P and r is the position vector of a given bead. Also, in order to additionally control and characterize the internal structure of the system, we calculated the partial structure factors Sα(q), which are computed as the averaged Fourier transforms of the local density fluctuations: (2)where Ntot is the total number of particles in the simulation cell, q is the wave vector, the angle brackets <…> denote averaging over the instantaneous states of the system, and dω denotes integration over the solid angle of the wave vector q while keeping its length constant.
For 4 < n < 10 when wpol:wnp is equal to 1:0 and 1:1 and for 5 < n < 10 when wpol:wnp is equal to 1:25 and 1:30, a rather rapid microphase separation of the polymer chain blocks occurs in the simulation cell. Such behaviour can be explained by the large value of the product NχC,S = 20, which corresponds to the strong segregation of C and S blocks.10–13 NPs form clusters within the phase formed by blocks of C-beads. This observation is illustrated in Fig. 2, where two examples of inhomogeneous bead distribution are shown. The smaller value of the order parameter (compare Λ = 0.3 in Fig. 2b with Λ = 0.4 in Fig. 2a) is due to the presence of nanoparticles. For identification of the arising morphologies, the partial structure factors (eqn (2)) were calculated. They are compared with the reflexes characteristic to gyroid structures24–26 (Fig. 3a) in a similar way as our previous work.16 Such a comparison demonstrates that, in the simulation cell shown in Fig. 2a, beads are arranged in a gyroid-type morphology. From Fig. 3b, it can be seen that the reflexes for the three components (C, S and P) have similar behaviour, which indicates the same type of ordering in all three components. Examples of different morphologies and the partial structure factors SS(q) for HEX and BCC structures are given in the ESI.†
 Fig. 2  Images of the final states of CP/NPs blend after 106 DPD steps obtained at the following parameters: a) L = 24σ, wpol:wnp = 1:0 (C13S7); b) L = 24σ, wpol:wnp = 1:30 (C12S8). Bead sizes in this figure are not scaled. Bead colouring corresponds to Fig. 1. 
 Fig. 3  a) The dependence of the averaged SS(q) on q/q*, where q* is the position of the first, most intense maximum, for C13S7 system with wpol:wnp = 1:0 (see snapshot in Fig. 2a). Vertical lines are shown for q = (h2 + k2 + l2)1/2/L where h, k and l are Miller indices. The results of the DPD calculations (shown as black lines) are compared with the harmonics of the gyroid phase (red lines of equal height). b) Partial structure factors Sα(q) for components C, S and P in C12S8 system with wpol:wnp = 1:30 (see snapshot in Fig. 2b). 
The results of our analysis of morphologies are shown in Fig. 4, where a state diagram is built on the coordinates of parameters n and wpol:wnp. This figure shows snapshots of the distribution of S-type beads, which are incompatible with NPs. For the case of wpol:wnp = 1:0, the emerging types of structures and their location on the phase diagram correspond to the phase diagram of the diblock copolymers.10,15Fig. 4 also shows that for the considered range of parameters, our calculations did not reveal any dependence of the final structures on the size of the simulation cell. As can be seen from Fig. 4, for n = 7 and wpol:wnp = 1:0, blocks C and S form an interpenetrating mesh structure with double gyroid morphology. With an increase in the fraction of NPs in the system, to wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30, the position of the gyroid phase shifts to larger values of n. This shift can be explained by an effective increase of the length of the C-block as a result of addition of NPs into the phase formed by these blocks.
 Fig. 4  State diagram for a mixture of conjugated C20−nSn diblock-copolymer with NPs with simulation boxes of size L = 24σ (a) and L = 30σ (b). The figure demonstrates the spatial distribution of S-type blocks (yellow colour); NPs (P) are represented as purple spheres between the areas filled with S-blocks; the C-type beads are not shown. The abbreviations correspond to the following identified morphologies for the polymer matrix: body-centered cubic (BCC), hexagonally packed cylinders (HEX), gyroid (G), lamellar (LAM), disordered cylinders (Cyl), and randomly distributed spherical domains (Sph). The value of the order parameter in the ordered states is Λ > 0.17. 
As already noted above, the presence of percolating phases for copolymer and nanoparticles is the most favorable factor to obtain a polymer photoactive layer with good charge carrier conductivity. In our model, such structures arise in C12S8 from the merging of clusters of nanoparticles when wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30. In this case, S-blocks and, separately, NPs together with C-blocks form percolating structures, which have gyroid morphology (both of them have gyroid morphology, so the system as a whole has double gyroid morphology). This is confirmed by the calculation of the structure factor Sα(q) shown in Fig. 3b, which demonstrates that all components (C, S and P) have similar morphologies. At the same time, nanoparticles form one large cluster, which is confirmed by cluster analysis using an algorithm from the literature.17 In Fig. 5a, the snapshots of simulation boxes for several systems are shown for S (gyroid in all cases), S + P, and S + P + C components. In Fig. 5b, the volume fraction of P-beads in clusters of different size (i.e., different total aggregation numbers) is presented as a result of cluster analysis. It is apparent that the large percolating clusters of P-beads formed at large NPs fractions. Based on the results of cluster analysis, we can conclude that S and C + P phases form a bicontinual morphology of the double gyroid type when n = 8 and wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30.
 Fig. 5  a) Internal structure of systems with gyroid-type morphology. b) The volume fraction of P-beads in the clusters with a certain total aggregation number for three systems having gyroid morphology: C13S7 (wpol:wnp = 1:10) and C12S8 (wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30). 
We also checked the stability of gyroid morphologies against incompatibility of nanoparticles with polymeric chains. For this, we varied the Flory–Huggins parameters χC,P and χS,P in the following way: χC,P = γ, χS,P = 1 + γ, χC,S = 1, while the parameter γ was varied from 0 to 2. The value of γ = 0 corresponds to the results described above (see Fig. 4). In Fig. 6, we show how the gyroid morphologies for all C, S and P phases changed upon varying parameter γ. Upon increasing γ, the NPs start to form a separate phase. These results demonstrate that the values of solubility parameters for ligands should not necessarily be close to those values for one of the two blocks.
 Fig. 6  Examples of morphological changes for mixtures of conjugated C20−nSn diblock copolymer (n = 7, 8) with NPs upon varying the parameter γ. The final states for three systems with gyroid morphology are shown: C13S7 (wpol:wnp = 1:10) and C12S8 (wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30). The size of simulation cell is L = 24σ. The figure demonstrates the spatial distribution of S- (yellow) and P-beads (red), while the beads of C-type are not shown. The abbreviation G corresponds to parameters when all phases (C, S and P) form percolating structures of the gyroid type. 
Conclusions
Using the technique of mesoscale modelling, we demonstrated that by the choices of the type of surface modifier of NPs (which controls the compatibility of NPs with the polymer matrix) and the chemical structure of the conjugated copolymer blocks and their lengths, we can control the morphology of the photoactive layer of SC devices. The values of parameters n and wpol:wnp at which the domains with cubic symmetry and percolation for all components occur can serve as reference data for optimizing the experimental search for materials and methods to produce a photoactive layer with the optimal mesh of electrically conductive paths needed to create highly efficient SC devices. This is one possible practical implementation of the theoretical concept suggested and tested for a model system in this paper.
In our ongoing experimental study, we consider two multiblock-copolymers, poly-(3HT-b-styrene) and poly-(3HT-b-TB7-Th),27 separately blended with the NP and PbS with oleic acid as the ligand, as two examples of promising active layers for polymer solar cells. In case of poly-(3HT-b-TB7-Th), the second block PTB7-Th is an efficient low bandgap polymer for polymer solar cells.27 We plan to perform computer simulations of these systems (which are much more complex than the model system studied here) and use the results to choose the optimal composition of copolymers in experimental synthesis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was performed using the resources of the Supercomputer Center of the M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University28 with the financial support of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Project No. 17-53-52009) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan (Project MOST 106-2923-E007-001-MY3).
Notes and references
K. M. Coakley and M. D. Mc Gehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Saunders, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 369, 1–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wright and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 87–111 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Materials, 2014, 7, 2747–2771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Mir, L. A. Nagahara, T. Thundat, P. Mokarian-Tabari, H. Furukawa and A. Khosla, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, B3137–B3156 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tvrdy, P. A. Frantsuzov and P. V. Kamat, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 29–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, L.-Y. Chang, S.-K. Lim, J. Zhao, M. Smith, N. Zhao, V. Bulovi, M. Bawendi and S. Gradecak, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3998–4002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lee, C. H. Chou, J. H. Huang, C. S. Hsu and T. P. Nguyen, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 147, 307–311 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Matsen, G. H. Griffiths, R. A. Wickham and O. N. Vassiliev, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 024904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lecover, N. Williams, N. Markovic, D. H. Reich, D. Q. Naiman and H. E. Katz, ASC Nano, 2012, 6, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Kamperman, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, U. Wiesner, D.-M. Smilgies, G. E. S. Toombes, M. A. Hillmyer, S. Ludwigs, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2807–2812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Topham, A. J. Parnell and R. C. Hiorns, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 1131–1156 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Groot and P. B. Warren, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 4423–4435 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Groot, T. J. Madden and D. J. Tildesley, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 9739–9749 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Komarov, I. N. Veselov and P. G. Khalatur, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 605–606, 22–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Markina, V. A. Ivanov, P. V. Komarov, A. R. Khokhlov and S.-H. Tung, J. Phys. Chem. B., 2017, 121, 7878–7888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Giansante, L. Carbone, C. Giannini, D. Altamura, Z. Ameer, G. Maruccio, A. Loiudice, M. R. Belviso, P. D. Cozzoli, A. Rizzo and G. Gigli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13305–13317 CrossRef CAS .

          J. J. H. Hildebrand and R. L. Scott, The Solubility of Non-Electrolytes, Reinhold, New York,  1949 Search PubMed .
A. J. Moule, L. Chang, C. Thambidurai, R. Vidu and P. Stroeve, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2351–2368 RSC .
M. J. Greaney and R. L. Brutchey, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .

          A. A. Askadskii, Computational Materials Science of Polymers, Cambridge International Science Publishing,  2001 Search PubMed .
S.-A. Chen and J.-M. Ni, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 6082–6089 Search PubMed .
K. I. Whey, E. L. Thomas and L. J. Fetters, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 422–428 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Huang, H.-L. Chen and T. Hashimoto, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Mykhaylyk, O. O. Mykhaylyk, S. Collins and W. Hamley, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3369–3377 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Liao, H.-J. Jhuo, Y.-S. Cheng and S.-A. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4766–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Sadovnichy, A. Tikhonravov, V. Voevodin and V. Opanasenko, in Contemporary High Performance Computing: From Petascale toward Exascale, L: Chapman & Hall/CRC,  2013, pp. 283–307 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8me00118aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Design, System, Application
Polymer based solar cells (PSCs) have attracted great interest as a prospective replacement for inorganic solar cells due to their light weight, low-cost and easy manufacturing. Single layer PSCs are made by sandwiching a layer of organic optoelectronic materials between two conductors. The mixtures of conjugated copolymers (CP) and inorganic nanoparticles (NPs) are considered promising materials for a photoactive layer which can be prepared by spin casting a solvent-based dispersion of CP and NPs. The forming morphology of the active layer is crucial for performance of PSCs. Therefore, it is important to carry out a preliminary study of such materials for subsequent design of an active layer with high energy conversion efficiency. It is believed that a bicontinuous, interconnected, well phase-separated morphology of electron donor and acceptor phases would be optimal for transport of holes and electrons, respectively. In this study, we developed a coarse-grained model of the photoactive layer based on CP/NPs mixture. We use diblock copolymer as the active agent to produce the desired morphology of the photoactive layer during preparation. Due to incompatibility of the blocks, they can segregate into domains on the nanometer length scale. We consider that one of the blocks has affinity to NPs covered with ligands. This model (using dissipative dynamic simulations) allows us to study the material in a large range of parameters. We observe that proper choices of type of ligands of NPs and the chemical structure, length, and ratio of the copolymer blocks allow us to govern the morphology of the photoactive layer of solar cell devices. The ideal morphology with cubic symmetry of domains of the double gyroid type, having three-dimensional periodicity in space, can be formed under certain conditions. Therefore, the active layer will have a well-organized percolation network of conductive paths, which should improve power conversion efficiency of PSCs.


 	Fig. 1  The coarse-grained models of components of CP/NPs mixtures – AB copolymer and the functionalized nanoparticle. Herein, P3HT is an example of the S block and PbS is an example of NP.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Images of the final states of CP/NPs blend after 106 DPD steps obtained at the following parameters: a) L = 24σ, wpol:wnp = 1:0 (C13S7); b) L = 24σ, wpol:wnp = 1:30 (C12S8). Bead sizes in this figure are not scaled. Bead colouring corresponds to Fig. 1.	 

 	Fig. 3  a) The dependence of the averaged SS(q) on q/q*, where q* is the position of the first, most intense maximum, for C13S7 system with wpol:wnp = 1:0 (see snapshot in Fig. 2a). Vertical lines are shown for q = (h2 + k2 + l2)1/2/L where h, k and l are Miller indices. The results of the DPD calculations (shown as black lines) are compared with the harmonics of the gyroid phase (red lines of equal height). b) Partial structure factors Sα(q) for components C, S and P in C12S8 system with wpol:wnp = 1:30 (see snapshot in Fig. 2b).	 

 	Fig. 4  State diagram for a mixture of conjugated C20−nSn diblock-copolymer with NPs with simulation boxes of size L = 24σ (a) and L = 30σ (b). The figure demonstrates the spatial distribution of S-type blocks (yellow colour); NPs (P) are represented as purple spheres between the areas filled with S-blocks; the C-type beads are not shown. The abbreviations correspond to the following identified morphologies for the polymer matrix: body-centered cubic (BCC), hexagonally packed cylinders (HEX), gyroid (G), lamellar (LAM), disordered cylinders (Cyl), and randomly distributed spherical domains (Sph). The value of the order parameter in the ordered states is Λ > 0.17.	 

 	Fig. 5  a) Internal structure of systems with gyroid-type morphology. b) The volume fraction of P-beads in the clusters with a certain total aggregation number for three systems having gyroid morphology: C13S7 (wpol:wnp = 1:10) and C12S8 (wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30).	 

 	Fig. 6  Examples of morphological changes for mixtures of conjugated C20−nSn diblock copolymer (n = 7, 8) with NPs upon varying the parameter γ. The final states for three systems with gyroid morphology are shown: C13S7 (wpol:wnp = 1:10) and C12S8 (wpol:wnp = 1:25 and 1:30). The size of simulation cell is L = 24σ. The figure demonstrates the spatial distribution of S- (yellow) and P-beads (red), while the beads of C-type are not shown. The abbreviation G corresponds to parameters when all phases (C, S and P) form percolating structures of the gyroid type.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8me00118a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
