A self-rotating solar evaporator for continuous and efficient desalination of hypersaline brine   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA04677A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA04677A
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16212-16217A self-rotating solar evaporator for continuous and efficient desalination of hypersaline brine†

        
          
            Yun 
            Xia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Kang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meipeng 
            Jian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qinfu 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Gao
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Huanting 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiwang 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. E-mail: xiwang.zhang@monash.edu
bSouth East Water Corporation, Seaford, VIC 3198, Australia. E-mail: li.gao@sew.com.au
Received 
      5th May 2020
    , Accepted 16th July 2020First published on 16th July 2020AbstractBenefiting from wide solar energy access and high energy conversion efficiency, solar-driven interfacial water evaporation has shown great potential in critical separation processes such as desalination and waste brine treatment. However, salt accumulation on the evaporation surfaces of these evaporators still greatly limits their continuous and efficient operation, particularly in hypersaline brine desalination. Current methods suffer from either low salt tolerance or low energy efficiency. Here we show a novel self-rotating solar evaporator, which achieves ultrahigh salt tolerance (300 g L−1) and energy efficiency (around 90%) simultaneously by periodic self-regeneration. This study advances the development of solar-thermal desalination technologies for practical applications.
Introduction
Water scarcity persists as one of the most severe problems threatening about four billion people around the world.1,2 As a reliable solution to such crisis, saline water desalination is globally practised to increase fresh water supply. Unfortunately, current desalination technologies are still highly energy-intensive, consuming large amounts of either electricity or high-temperature heat, which are often from burning fossil fuels. Considering the depletion of fossil fuels and the associated climate change, solar-driven interfacial water evaporation,3 which is powered by widely accessible and inexhaustible sunlight, has drawn increasing attention for low-cost and sustainable freshwater production from saline water.4–7 With substantial progress over the last five years on the development of broadband photothermal materials and effective thermal management in system design,8–17 an outstanding solar energy utilization efficiency of over 90% has been achieved. However, non-volatile salts in saline water gradually accumulate and precipitate on the surface of photothermal materials in solar-driven interfacial water evaporation systems while water evaporates under sunlight. The precipitated salts not only block light absorption but also impede vapour escape, thus leading to a significant drop in water evaporation performance. Although post-treatment ranging from mechanical management18–20 to water flushing14,17,21 could be employed to remove the accumulate salts, it significantly increases the operational complexity and consequently the cost.
To address the salt scaling problem, two strategies have been proposed to achieve in situ self-regeneration or self-cleaning. The first one is to reduce salt accumulation on the evaporation surface or more specifically, to increase salt back-diffusion from the evaporator to the bulk solution. However, high back-diffusion requires an enlarged water transport pathway, which would inevitably increase the heat loss to bulk water, causing a reduction in overall solar energy utilization efficiency. For low salinity water (concentration < 35 g L−1), the heat loss is acceptable.10,11,22–24 However, the heat loss becomes significant for hypersaline brines (salt concentration > 70 g L−1) and dramatically compromises overall performance.25–29 The other method aims to minimize the influence of salt accumulation by spatially isolating salt crystallization from the water evaporation and light-absorbing surface.19,30,31 This method is based on controlled solution transport to form a preferable salt concentration gradient. Unfortunately, it is not suitable for desalinating hypersaline brines, because the containing salt would easily precipitate on the material during the solution transport. Therefore, how to overcome the salt accumulation when treating hypersaline brine remains unsolved, which is critical for continuous and efficient desalination in practical applications.
In this manuscript, we demonstrate a novel approach to manage salt accumulation and precipitation. As a proof-of-concept, a self-rotating solar evaporator was assembled and was able to self-regenerate to achieve continuous and efficient desalination of hypersaline brine. As illustrated in Fig. 1a, continuous operation is achieved by repeating an “evaporation-crystallization-self-regeneration” cycle. In the first step, water vaporizes rapidly from the evaporator because of the minimized heat loss by the confined water supply while salts start crystallizing on the top surface. Once a certain amount of salts is crystalized, the self-rotation of the cylindrical evaporator is triggered due to the unbalance between the gravity and buoyancy (step II). The rotation leads to a self-regeneration step in which solid salts dissolve back to the bulk solution while a new evaporation surface is exposed to sunlight (step III). In this design, excellent salt accumulation control and thermal insulation management are achieved simultaneously. The self-rotating evaporator breaks the current trade-off between salt tolerance and energy utilization efficiency, which commonly exists in fixed evaporators, providing new insights into the development of high-performance solar-thermal desalination systems for long-term stable desalination.
 Fig. 1  Working cycle and configuration of the self-rotating evaporator. (a) Schematic illustration of the continuous working cycle of the self-rotating evaporator. Three main procedures are included in the process. (I) Water evaporation from the evaporator; (II) salt crystallization on the top surface of the evaporator after accumulation; and (III) upside-down self-rotation of the evaporator and salt crystal dissolution in the brine. (b) Schematic of the self-rotating solar evaporator with EPE foam as the central floater and CNT coated PVA cloth for water transport and light absorption. (c) Photograph of the cylindrical EPE foam. The inset shows the water contact angle (136°) of the EPE foam, representing its good hydrophobicity. (d) SEM image of the CNT coated PVA (CPVA) cloth. The inset shows the water contact angle (0°) of the CNT coated PVA cloth. (e) SEM image of the CNT coating on the PVA cloth. 
Results and discussion
Device configuration

Fig. 1b shows the wrapped structure of the self-rotating evaporator. An expanded polyethene (EPE) foam cylinder was employed as the central floater because of its low density (0.027 g cm−3) and hydrophobicity (136°, Fig. 1c inset). The foam contains a large number of close-cell pores with diameters of around 0.5 mm (Fig. 1c). Due to the trapped air in these pores, the thermal conductivity of the EPE foam is as low as 0.05 W m−1 K−1,32 providing excellent heat-insulating properties. Commercial polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) cloth was used as a water transport layer to wick up water from the bulk solution. The cloth is composed of PVA impregnated microfiber fabric (fibre diameter of approximately 16 μm, Fig. 1d and S1†) forming enormous hierarchical capillaries with a high porosity of 90.14% (for details see ESI Experimental procedures†).
The PVA cloth turns extremely black after the dip-coating process (Fig. S2†). As shown in Fig. 2d and S3,† the CNTs are uniformly attached on both the microfibers and PVA polymer. The coated PVA (CPVA) cloth shows excellent light absorption of over 94% across the testing light wavelengths from 250 nm to 1200 nm (Fig. S4†). By contrast, the pristine PVA cloth shows a much lower light absorbance. It is worth mentioning that, when wetted using water, its light absorption further increases to 97% (Fig. S4†), which is ascribed to decreased light scattering at the air–water interface.21,33 The CPVA cloth also shows excellent hydrophilicity (contact angle ∼ 0°, Fig. 1d inset) which allows rapid aqueous solution transport, and can be evidenced using the wicking height of 70 mm within one minute (Fig. S5†). Notably, no CNT leakage was detected after repeated immersion in water, squeezing and even ultrasonication (Fig. S6†). These results demonstrate the firm attachment between CNTs and PVA cloth, a highly desirable feature for the layer to work under harsh conditions with long-term stability.
 Fig. 2  Solar evaporation and desalination performance. (a) Temperature variation of the dry evaporator, wet evaporator and bulk water with time under one sun irradiation. (b) Infrared thermal image of the dry evaporator. The white square is the area for measuring the average temperature of the dry evaporator. (c) Infrared thermal image of the wet evaporator and the underlying bulk water. The squares are the area for measuring the average temperature of the wet evaporator (up) and bulk solution (down). (d) Photograph of the testing vessel. (e) Water evaporation rate at different solar densities. (f) Water evaporation rate at different salt concentrations. (g) The salinity in the hypersaline brine and the produced water. (h) Salt durability performance of the rotating evaporator immersed in 150 g L−1 NaCl solution. The insets are the typical weight loss profiles on the 1st day and 30th day. 
Solar desalination performance
Generally, the ability to convert solar light into heat determines the potential of a solar evaporator. The photothermal performance of the proposed self-rotating evaporator was evaluated by monitoring the temperature using an infrared camera under one sun irradiation. An uneven temperature distribution on the evaporator is observed, which is caused by the varied light incident angles at different spots (Fig. S7†). Upon irradiation, the temperature of the top surface increased rapidly from 24 °C to 50 °C within 60 s and then stabilized at around 55 °C after 120 s with slight fluctuation, demonstrating a fast photothermal response (Fig. 2a and b). A lower equilibrium temperature (around 28 °C) was observed when the evaporator was floated on the water surface (Fig. 2c) because of rapid water evaporation.
To evaluate the solar steam generation performance, water evaporation tests were conducted under one sun irradiation. The evaporator with a diameter of 20 mm was employed and its weight loss profile was recorded. A specially designed vessel, which fits the shape of the evaporator (Fig. 2d), was employed to minimise the inaccuracy from the uncovered water surface. Therefore, the projection area of the evaporator can be used for calculation.34 As shown in Fig. S8,† the dark evaporation rate of the evaporator was measured to be 0.33 kg m−2 h−1, 2.4 times higher than that of an open surface system. This indicates that the structure of the PVA cloth, i.e., enlarged evaporating surface due to the porous microstructures,35 is beneficial for water evaporation. Under one sun irradiation the water evaporation rate of the evaporator is as high as 1.41 kg m−2 h−1 while that of the open water surface is only 0.35 kg m−2 h−1, demonstrating an enhancement factor over 4 (ṁe/ṁw, where ṁe and ṁw are evaporation rates with and without the evaporator, respectively). Based on the evaporation result, solar energy utilization efficiency was calculated to be as high as 88.5%.
In principle, higher evaporation performance is achievable by reducing heat loss, which commonly results from thermal radiation, convection and heat conduction. Although heat losses via thermal radiation and convection are negligible because of the low temperature at equilibrium, conduction heat loss could be further reduced, for example, by optimising the diameter of the evaporator. As illustrated in Fig. S9,† the thickness of insulating foam (δ) increases with the diameter of the evaporator, and thus the conduction heat loss decreases with increasing diameter. Therefore, the water evaporation rate increases from 1.26 kg m−2 h−1 to 1.41 kg m−2 h−1 with the evaporator diameter increasing from 13.0 mm to 20.0 mm, and slightly increases to 1.44 kg m−2 h−1 at a diameter of 25.4 mm.
The performance of the self-rotating evaporator under different operating conditions (light density and salt concentration) was further evaluated. At low light density, the evaporator still performed a several-fold higher evaporation rate over the open water surface (Fig. 2e and S10†), indicating its satisfactory performance during light-deficient times such as mornings, dusks and overcast weather. Even though the water evaporation rate of the self-rotating evaporator slightly decreases with the salt concentration (Fig. 2f), it still maintains a high enhancement factor (4.09–4.38, see Fig. S11†) even at an extreme salt concentration of up to 300 g L−1, which is highly desired for desalination of hypersaline brine. Meanwhile, the salinity of the product water during the test is found to be reduced by 5–6 orders of magnitude versus that of original brines (Fig. 2g), far above the drinking water standards defined by the World Health Organization (0.1%) and US Environmental Protection Agency (0.05%). The salt durability of the self-rotating evaporator is further examined by immersing it in 150 g L−1 NaCl solution before the performance test. The results reveal that the evaporator holds a stable evaporation rate for over 30 days (Fig. 2h), again proving its stability in the prolonged desalination process.
Performance and mechanism of self-rotation
Besides generating steam with great efficiency, the unique self-rotating design allows the evaporator to regulate solution transport and salt crystallization on its surface, and thus to possess self-cleaning properties. To demonstrate the self-regeneration process, the evaporator with a 20 mm diameter was tested using brine with 300 g L−1 NaCl. The brine is first wicked up by the PVA cloth from the side towards the top surface of the evaporator (Fig. S12†). While water evaporates from the hypersaline brine, the salt concentration increases accordingly,30 eventually leading to crystallization on the top of the evaporator (Fig. 3a). Once enough salt crystals are formed, the evaporator turns upside-down, making the salt-blocked surface submerge in the bulk solution (Fig. 3b). The salt crystals are then dissolved in the solution, achieving self-cleaning (regeneration) of the salt-blocked surface (Fig. 3c). Thanks to the repeated self-regeneration cycles, the evaporation rate with 300 g L−1 NaCl solution remained stable throughout the testing period (Fig. 3d), demonstrating the excellent capability for brine desalination.
 Fig. 3  Self-rotation performance and mechanism. (a–c) Photographs of the self-rotating evaporator with salts crystallized on the top of the evaporator, the evaporator during rotation and the evaporator after completing self-cleaning, respectively. (d) Evaporation profile of the self-rotating evaporator with 300 g L−1 NaCl solution. (e) Schematic illustration of the self-rotating evaporator in the initial state (I) and equilibrium state (II) and at the critical point of rotation (III). (f) Evaporation rate variations of the rotatable configuration and the fixed configuration tested with hypersaline brine containing 300 g L−1 NaCl + 12 g L−1 CaCl2. 
The self-rotation of the evaporator is directly caused by its changing equilibrium state as a result of accumulated salts. To better illustrate this mechanism, the external forces acting on the evaporator were analysed, including the gravity of evaporator (G0) and crystals (Gc), the buoyancy (Fb) and the resistance from water (Fw), as shown in Fig. 3e. Initially, the evaporator was stable (Fig. 3e, step I) because of the balance between gravity (G0) and buoyancy (Fb) due to the equal density distribution around the cylinder. As salt crystalizes unevenly on the evaporation surface, crystals gradually pile up and the gravity of salts (Gc) deviates the centre line with a certain angle (θ). Meanwhile, a counterpart force from water (Fw) would form to resist the evaporator from moving (Fig. 3e, step II). The system is still in the equilibrium state due to the balance of both force (G0 + Gc = Fb + Fw) and moment of force (G1·rsinθ = Fw·r). With the accumulation of salt crystals (increasing Gc), the bulk water cannot provide adequate counterpart resistance (Fw) and thus the system tends to lose the equilibrium. At this critical point (Fig. 3e, step III), the resultant torque would rotate the evaporator upside down. The evaporator then regains its stable position when the crystals reach the bottom. While the salt dissolves in the solution, the fresh surface is exposed to sunlight for a new cycle.
To further demonstrate the self-cleaning ability of the evaporator in practical applications, hypersaline brine containing mixed salts, NaCl (300 g L−1) and CaCl2 (12 g L−1, a common impurity in brine sources36), was used. As expected, salts started crystallizing and accumulating on the top surface after around 18 min (Fig. S13a and ESI Video†). Similar to pure NaCl, these mixed crystals first covered the evaporation surface and caused a drop in the water evaporation rate, as shown in Fig. 3e. The evaporator then showed an upside-down turning shortly, and the evaporation rate restored to 1.34 kg m−2 h−1 once the fresh top surface was exposed to light. The “evaporation-crystallization-self-regeneration” cycle was then well repeated periodically around every 100 min, proving its potential long-term stability for treating mixed salt hypersaline brine (Fig. 3e). For comparison, a conventional 2D path evaporator in a flat configuration was tested under the same conditions (Fig. S14†). Due to the lack of the self-regeneration (Fig. S13b†), the evaporation rate of the 2D path evaporator suffered a 67% drop within one hour and decreased to 0.3 kg m−2 h−1after 12 h, as shown in Fig. 3e. It is worth mentioning that similar self-regeneration performance was also observed when treating brine containing 150 g L−1 NaCl and 2 g L−1 CaCl2, while the period of self-rotation increased to about 4 hours (Fig. S15†). This phenomenon is attributed to the longer time for salt accumulation in lower concentration brine. Note that no salt precipitation and thus self-rotation were observed when treating 35 g L−1 NaCl solution (Fig. S16†) because the accumulated salts can diffuse back easily to the bulk solution before getting saturated.
Heat management
Besides being resistant to salt fouling, the self-rotating evaporator possesses superior heat management to its flat-type counterparts. For flat-type evaporators working under hypersaline conditions, much heat inevitably dissipates from the photothermal material to the bulk solution in the form of conduction. By contrast, such heat loss can be saved in self-rotating evaporators due to the uneven temperature distribution (Fig. 4a and b). While the top surface showed the highest temperature (∼27.8 °C), the side surfaces had the lowest temperature (∼22.1 °C), even below that of bulk water (∼23.5 °C). This indicates the intake of heat from the bulk solution to the evaporator instead of the opposite, which promotes the water evaporation rate to reach a higher level than that in other studies on continuous operation on brines (salt concentration > 50 g L−1, Fig. 4c and Table S1†).
 Fig. 4  Heat management and universality of the self-rotating design. (a) Thermal image of the evaporator setup taken by using an infrared camera. The inset is the digital photograph of the setup. (b) Temperature profile along the line A–A′ in (a). The top surface, side surface and bulk water temperature is around 27.8 °C, 22.1 °C and 23.5 °C. (c) Water evaporation performance of the self-rotating evaporator compared with that reported in the literature which achieved long-term stability in treating brines (>50 g L−1). (d) and (e) the self-cleaning performance of a cylindrical wood evaporator and a spherical evaporator. 
Universality of the self-rotating concept
It is worth noting that the proposed self-rotating evaporator can be applied with other materials and morphologies. As a brief demonstration, we prepared two different rotating evaporators for testing in 300 g L−1 NaCl solution under one sun irradiation. The first evaporator was made from cylindrical balsa wood with a carbonized surface. Its low density and hydrophilicity provided heat localization and water supply, while the carbonized surface was used for light absorption.26 The other evaporator has a spherical morphology and is composed of an expanded polystyrene bead as the central floater, a CNT layer in the middle for light absorption and an outermost hydrophilic polydopamine layer for water transport (for details see ESI Experimental procedures†). As expected, self-cleaning of the salt-blocked evaporation surface by self-rotation was achieved in the two evaporators as well (Fig. 4d and e).
Conclusion
With self-rotation, we present a novel self-cleaning solar evaporator for continuous and efficient water evaporation from hypersaline brines. Contributed by the confined water supply and minimized heat loss, the self-rotating evaporator achieves better solar energy utilization efficiency than conventional solar evaporators in desalting hypersaline brines. Notably, the concept of the rotating evaporator provides a universal method to withstand the salt fouling problem. Given the effectivity and universality of the self-rotating design, this work advances solar water evaporation-based technologies towards practical applications in brine desalination, wastewater reduction and zero-liquid-discharge.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Australian Research Council (IH170100009). Yun Xia would like to thank Monash University and the Monash Centre for Atomically Thin Materials for his scholarships.
References
A. F. Van Loon, T. Gleeson, J. Clark, A. I. J. M. Van Dijk, K. Stahl, J. Hannaford, G. Di Baldassarre, A. J. Teuling, L. M. Tallaksen, R. Uijlenhoet, D. M. Hannah, J. Sheffield, M. Svoboda, B. Verbeiren, T. Wagener, S. Rangecroft, N. Wanders and H. A. J. Van Lanen, Nat. Geosci., 2016, 9, 89–91 CrossRef .
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
M. Chandrashekara and A. Yadav, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 1308–1330 CrossRef .
H. M. Qiblawey and F. Banat, Desalination, 2008, 220, 633–644 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ghaffour, T. M. Missimer and G. L. Amy, Desalination, 2013, 309, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, T. Horseman, A. P. Straub, N. Y. Yip, D. Li, M. Elimelech and S. Lin, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax0763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
T. Wu, H. Li, M. Xie, S. Shen, W. Wang, M. Zhao, X. Mo and Y. Xia, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 129–135 CrossRef .
Q. Ma, P. Yin, M. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Huang, Q. He, Y. Yu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808249 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu, H. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Gao, L. Qu, T. Ma and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1512 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706805 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Chiavazzo, M. Morciano, F. Viglino, M. Fasano and P. Asinari, Nat. Sustain., 2018, 1, 763–772 CrossRef .
C. Finnerty, L. Zhang, D. L. Sedlak, K. L. Nelson and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11701–11709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, J. Chang, Y. Shi, L. Shi, S. Hong and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7942–7949 RSC .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, S. Hong, L. Shi, J. Chang, R. Li, Y. Jin, C. Ong, S. Zhuo and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3012 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef PubMed .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
N. Xu, J. Li, Y. Wang, C. Fang, X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, Z. Wu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kashyap, A. Al-Bayati, S. M. Sajadi, P. Irajizad, S. H. Wang and H. Ghasemi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15227–15234 RSC .
R. Hu, J. Zhang, Y. Kuang, K. Wang, X. Cai, Z. Fang, W. Huang, G. Chen and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15333–15340 RSC .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
T. A. Cooper, S. H. Zandavi, G. W. Ni, Y. Tsurimaki, Y. Huang, S. V. Boriskina and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Almanza, M. A. Rodríguez-Pérez and J. A. De Saja, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 1226–1234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, R. Li, L. Shi, E. Ahmed, Y. Jin and P. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1870026 CrossRef .
X. Li, G. Ni, T. Cooper, N. Xu, J. Li, L. Zhou, X. Hu, B. Zhu, P. Yao and J. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1798–1803 CrossRef .
X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Pramanik, L. Shu and V. Jegatheesan, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2017, 3, 625–658 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta04677aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Working cycle and configuration of the self-rotating evaporator. (a) Schematic illustration of the continuous working cycle of the self-rotating evaporator. Three main procedures are included in the process. (I) Water evaporation from the evaporator; (II) salt crystallization on the top surface of the evaporator after accumulation; and (III) upside-down self-rotation of the evaporator and salt crystal dissolution in the brine. (b) Schematic of the self-rotating solar evaporator with EPE foam as the central floater and CNT coated PVA cloth for water transport and light absorption. (c) Photograph of the cylindrical EPE foam. The inset shows the water contact angle (136°) of the EPE foam, representing its good hydrophobicity. (d) SEM image of the CNT coated PVA (CPVA) cloth. The inset shows the water contact angle (0°) of the CNT coated PVA cloth. (e) SEM image of the CNT coating on the PVA cloth.	 

 	Fig. 2  Solar evaporation and desalination performance. (a) Temperature variation of the dry evaporator, wet evaporator and bulk water with time under one sun irradiation. (b) Infrared thermal image of the dry evaporator. The white square is the area for measuring the average temperature of the dry evaporator. (c) Infrared thermal image of the wet evaporator and the underlying bulk water. The squares are the area for measuring the average temperature of the wet evaporator (up) and bulk solution (down). (d) Photograph of the testing vessel. (e) Water evaporation rate at different solar densities. (f) Water evaporation rate at different salt concentrations. (g) The salinity in the hypersaline brine and the produced water. (h) Salt durability performance of the rotating evaporator immersed in 150 g L−1 NaCl solution. The insets are the typical weight loss profiles on the 1st day and 30th day.	 

 	Fig. 3  Self-rotation performance and mechanism. (a–c) Photographs of the self-rotating evaporator with salts crystallized on the top of the evaporator, the evaporator during rotation and the evaporator after completing self-cleaning, respectively. (d) Evaporation profile of the self-rotating evaporator with 300 g L−1 NaCl solution. (e) Schematic illustration of the self-rotating evaporator in the initial state (I) and equilibrium state (II) and at the critical point of rotation (III). (f) Evaporation rate variations of the rotatable configuration and the fixed configuration tested with hypersaline brine containing 300 g L−1 NaCl + 12 g L−1 CaCl2.	 

 	Fig. 4  Heat management and universality of the self-rotating design. (a) Thermal image of the evaporator setup taken by using an infrared camera. The inset is the digital photograph of the setup. (b) Temperature profile along the line A–A′ in (a). The top surface, side surface and bulk water temperature is around 27.8 °C, 22.1 °C and 23.5 °C. (c) Water evaporation performance of the self-rotating evaporator compared with that reported in the literature which achieved long-term stability in treating brines (>50 g L−1). (d) and (e) the self-cleaning performance of a cylindrical wood evaporator and a spherical evaporator.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta04677a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
