Developments in and practical guidelines for tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1NR11143D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1NR11143D
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1856-1870Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDevelopments in and practical guidelines for tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy

        
          
            Johannes 
            Stadler
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Schmid
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Renato 
            Zenobi
          
          
        
      *
      ETH Zurich, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 10, HCI E 329, 8093, Zurich, Switzerland. E-mail: zenobi@org.chem.ethz.ch;  Fax: +41 44 632 12 92;   Tel: +41 44 632 43 76
Received 
      21st August 2011
    , Accepted 13th October 2011First published on 21st November 2011AbstractThis feature review provides an overview of the state-of the art and recent developments in tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS), in-depth information about the different available types of instruments including their (dis-)advantages and capabilities as well as a short glance at a number of samples that have recently been investigated using TERS. Issues concerning the progression of TERS from point spectroscopy to an imaging technique are discussed, as well as problems arising from background and contamination signals. This review is concluded with a short TERS ‘user guideline’, trying to aid researchers new in the field to properly align and test their own TERS setups. Finally, a short outlook is given and some critical issues are raised that need to be solved by the community sooner or later, in order to promote TERS towards a ‘push-button’ operation.Johannes StadlerJohannes Stadler was born 1982 in Germany. He received his Diploma of Chemistry in 2006 from the Univ. of Tübingen and currently is a doctoral candidate in the Group of Prof. Zenobi, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich. He received a Roche Research Foundation Fellowship for his Ph.D. in 2008. His main research focuses on tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and imaging of opaque samples using a top illumination TERS System. Additionally, confocal Raman spectroscopy, AFM, and STM analysis are part of his active projects.Thomas SchmidThomas Schmid is a senior research associate and lecturer at ETH Zurich (Switzerland). Born and grown up in Bolzano (Italy), he received his Diploma (MSc) in Chemistry in 1999 and his Ph.D. in 2003 from Technische Universität München (Germany). In 2005, he joined ETH as a fellow of the German Research Foundation (DFG) and got appointed as a senior research associate/lecturer in 2007. His current research interests include nanoscale chemical analysis and chemical imaging using tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) and generally, combinations of AFM/STM and Raman microscopy, emphasizing methods development as well as applications in biology and materials science.Renato ZenobiRenato Zenobi is Professor of Analytical Chemistry at the ETH Zurich. After receiving a M.Sc. degree (ETH Zurich, 1986), a Ph.D. (Stanford University, 1990), and two postdoctoral appointments (Univ. of Pittsburgh and Michigan, 1990–1991), he returned to Switzerland as a Werner Fellow at the EPFL (1992). He became assistant professor at the ETH (1995), was promoted to associate professor in 1997, and to full professor in 2000. Zenobi's research areas include laser-based analytical chemistry, electrospray and laser-assisted mass spectrometry, laser-surface interactions, and near-field optical microscopy and spectroscopy. He is a pioneer of tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, a powerful emerging tool for nanoscale analytics.
1 Introduction
The lateral resolution of an optical microscope is limited due to optical diffraction. According to the Rayleigh criterion, i.e. the smallest distance between two discernible microscopic objects, is given by eqn (1).1,2 Δx = 0.61λ/NA(1)
The lateral resolution Δx depends on the wavelength λ of the light employed for excitation and the numerical aperture NA of the objective lens. The simplified expression of Δx ≈ λ/2 usually gives a good estimate for the resolution that can be theoretically achieved, resulting in 200–400 nm as the highest resolutions of microscopes working in the range of visible light.
In 1928 Synge3 proposed the idea to employ a small aperture for imaging surfaces with sub-wavelength resolution using visible light. An opaque metal screen with an aperture smaller than the wavelength of light (e.g. 100 nm) is illuminated from the back and scanned over the sample surface (see Fig. 1a). If the distance between aperture and surface is within the near-field regime (a few nanometres), the resolution of such a microscope is not limited by optical diffraction but rather defined by the size of the aperture. The first experimental evidence for this idea was achieved with 3 cm microwaves in 1972,4 and it took 12 more years until the realization of scanning near-field microscopes (SNOM) for the visible optical range became possible.5,6 In illumination mode SNOM, light is coupled into a fiber, which ends in a sharp tip that is scanned in close distance over the sample surface, most often using shear-force (SF) feedback (see Fig. 1b).7 Light can leave the SNOM probe only through a small aperture at the tip end, whose dimensions define the spatial resolution.
 Fig. 1  Synge's idea of scanning a backside-illuminated opaque metal screen with a small aperture in close distance over a sample for imaging with sub-wavelength resolution (a) compared to the principle of an aperture SNOM probe consisting of a glass fiber tip coated with an opaque metal film having a small aperture at the tip end (b). 
In the first years after its invention, SNOM was mainly applied to luminescence and fluorescence experiments, reaching lateral resolutions of a few tens of nanometres.7 The exceedingly low Raman cross-sections of many samples as well as the small light transmission and low damage thresholds of optical fiber probes hampered the development of SNOM-Raman for about 10 years. Tsai et al. demonstrated the collection of near-field Raman spectra for the first time in 1994,8 and in the following years mainly the groups of Batchelder9,10 and Hallen11,12 performed pioneering work in SNOM-Raman imaging. Later on, improvements in fiber probe fabrication and studies on combinations of SNOM-Raman with surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and resonance Raman scattering allowed applications of these techniques in chemistry and biology, but still the low throughput of fiber probes hampered the use of aperture-based near-field Raman imaging in many fields of application.13–15 Limitations caused by aperture fiber probes can be overcome by using apertureless near-field methods. After the invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) in 1982,16 Wessel proposed the combination of surface-enhanced spectroscopy (Raman or second-harmonics generation) with STM in 198517 (compare Fig. 2). In contrast to SERS, where the sample is coated onto a rough metal surface that provides enhancement of the electromagnetic (EM) field and of the Raman signals, in tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) the enhancing metal structure is brought into close contact with the sample from outside by a sharp full-metal or metal-coated tip. Surface plasmons excited at the apex of the tip act as an apertureless optical probe. When the tip is scanned over the surface, Raman microscopy below the diffraction limit becomes possible.
 Fig. 2  Wessel's idea of using a resonantly enhanced metal particle mounted on a transparent probe holder as a nanometre-sized light source (a) compared to bottom and side-illumination configurations used in TERS experiments (b). The red field lines represent the enhanced electromagnetic field at the tip end. 
Interestingly, Synge had a very similar idea already in 1928. He proposed to use the light scattered by a small particle that is illuminated under total internal reflection from the back and scanned in close distance over the sample as an excitation source for microscopy. Before publishing, Synge sent his ideas to Einstein, who in a short reply told him that the basic concept seems to be reasonable but the method Synge proposes for its implementation, Einstein found ‘fundamentally unusable’ (‘prinzipiell unbrauchbar’).18 In a second letter, Synge came up with his original idea of using a small aperture in a metal screen or at the end of a quartz tip (that is very similar to aperture SNOM probes used nowadays) as a light source, and Einstein encouraged him to publish his ideas in a scientific journal, which ended up in Synge's publication mentioned above.3 Wessel's idea was to resonantly enhance the particle and to generate a locally enhanced EM field, an effect known from SERS. The particle that is, for example, mounted at the end of a tip is scanned over the sample surface and allows collection of images with nanometre-scale resolution. Wessel did not know about Synge's idea, but was rather inspired by the invention of the STM and discovery of SERS. In 1989 Fischer and Pohl demonstrated a first proof of principle of this idea by imaging a metal film with 320 nm holes at a resolution of 50 nm using a laser-illuminated gold-coated polystyrene nanoparticle as apertureless SNOM probe.19 It took 10 more years until the first spectroscopic applications of this idea were published. In 1999, Sanchez, Novotny, and Xie published experimental results of tip-enhanced two-photon fluorescence measurements20 and in 2000, the groups of Zenobi,21 Anderson,22 and Kawata23 independently have shown tip-enhanced Raman scattering for the first time.
2 The TERS process
TERS signals are generated by sample molecules located within the optical near field of a strongly confined and enhanced EM field at the apex of a metallic or metal-coated tip that is excited by a focused laser beam (for review articles on TERS, see for example ref. 24–27). Most often Ag or Au are employed as enhancing metals, and tip–sample distances in the range of <1–10 nm are controlled by a feedback mechanism. TERS enables the collection of enhanced Raman spectra with the advantage over SERS that the substrate material is not limited to nano-rough metal surfaces or metal nanoparticles but the sample molecules can be at every metallic or non-metallic surface. The tip can be laterally moved relative to the sample surface. This allows bringing the enhancing tip to selected places on the sample, and finally raster-scanning of the tip or sample enables TERS imaging with a lateral resolution that is only limited by the size of the EM field. The EM field is approximated by the size of the tip apex, typically ranging from approx. 10–50 nm. The lightning rod effect, an excitation of localized surface plasmon polaritons in the metal, or antenna resonances as well as combinations of these effects24 can be used to rationalize the enhancement effect. The lightning rod effect is a purely shape-induced effect. Geometric singularities of an irradiated metallic structure, such as a very sharp tip apex, lead to highly localized surface-charge densities that can be the source of a highly enhanced EM field. The lightning rod effect is almost independent of the excitation wavelength. If the laser wavelength coincides with a localized surface plasmon resonance of the tip, the metal absorbs a part of the laser energy and surface plasmon polaritons are excited. These are collective vibrations of electrons, which can be the source of a localized and enhanced evanescent field around the tip apex. The surface plasmon resonance wavelength depends on shape and material properties of the tip. The third enhancement effect is also wavelength-dependent. Antenna resonances are enhanced if the tip dimension is equal to multiples of half the wavelength of radiation. Also in this case, an enhanced and highly localized electromagnetic field is observed at the tip apex. In practice, a combination of these effects occurs and the enhancement factor of a tip depends on material properties of the tip and surrounding medium, tip size and shape, as well as the laser wavelength employed for excitation. The enhanced EM field around the tip apex drops dramatically with increasing distance and extends only 10–30 nm in the direction of the sample.28 Thus TERS can be considered as a technique that is sensitive to the surface and a small sub-surface region of a sample. Additional enhancement can be achieved by taking advantage of the near-field coupling between the tip and a metallic substrate, which is often referred to as ‘gap-mode’ TERS. Raman signals from molecules located between the dipole induced in the tip and a mirror dipole induced in the substrate are further increased by a factor of up to 100 compared to normal TERS, allowing even for single-molecule detection of resonantly excited dye molecules.29–32 The enhanced EM field leads to enhanced Raman scattering of the sample, and Raman scattered photons from the evanescent near field are again enhanced by the tip and scattered into the far field where they are collected by conventional optics.24 The collected light consists of two parts: the enhanced near-field spectrum that has been generated in the small sample region below the tip, and the far-field background that was generated in the whole illuminated sample volume, i.e. in the laser focus. For thin-film samples, opaque materials or weakly Raman scattering molecules, the far-field background is often not an issue, but it can blur TERS images of bulk samples with considerable optical penetration depth or consisting of moderate to strong Raman scatterers. The main components of a TERS system are described in more detail in section 3. Most often continuous wave lasers with wavelengths in the visible range and laser powers at the sample from the microwatt to milliwatt range, focused onto <1–5 μm2, are employed for excitation. The tip is held in close proximity to the sample by a scanning probe microscopy (SPM) feedback, such as STM, atomic force microscopy (AFM), or SF feedback. Such systems also allow scanning of the tip and/or sample laterally and thus enable precise positioning of the enhancing tip to selected locations on the sample or TERS imaging. A convenient way to realize such a TERS system is to combine a SPM with a confocal Raman microscope. Depending on the properties of the sample, there are different tip-illumination schemes possible: transparent samples allow the excitation of the tip by focusing light through the sample (bottom illumination), whereas in the case of opaque samples side- or top-illumination schemes have to be employed. The performance of a TERS setup and tip can be compared based on the value of the contrast and enhancement factor. The following section explains their calculation and comparability.
2.1 Contrast and enhancement factor
The enhancement factor g of the EM field is defined as the ratio between the EM field strength at the tip, Etip, and the EM field strength at the sample without a tip in contact, E024 (eqn (2)). (2)
Since light intensity depends on the square of the EM field strength, the enhancement factor of the excitation light intensity at the laser wavelength λlaser is . A TERS experiment relies on the enhancement of both, excitation light (at λlaser) and Raman scattered light (at λRaman). Thus, the enhancement factor of TERS signals EFTERS can be given in eqn (3). (3)
The EM field enhancement factor is wavelength-dependent, mainly following the plasmon resonance spectrum of the tip. As long as the Raman shifts are small, we can assume λlaser ≈ λRaman. In such cases, the TERS enhancement factor can be approximated with g4. It should be pointed out that for an exact determination of the enhancement factor, for example to compare with numerical simulation data, differences between the field enhancements at λlaser and λRaman definitively have to be considered.33 In order to calculate TERS enhancement factors based on experimental data, two factors have to be determined. Firstly, the contrast between the near-field and far-field signals is derived from enhanced and non-enhanced Raman signal intensities. Secondly, a geometry factor is calculated taking into account that the sources of far-field and near-field signals are of different size, i.e. a different number of molecules contribute to the two signals. There are two different definitions of the contrast used in the literature: (4) (5)where S0 is the background signal without the tip present. Definition 4 is of more practical relevance, because it is a direct measure for the signal increase by the tip and the image quality that can be obtained in a TERS experiment (used for example in ref. 21, 34–37). Especially in the case of relatively weak enhancement, the signal Stip measured with the tip engaged is superimposed on a relatively large non-enhanced background S0 that is also present without a tip in close proximity to the sample. The background signal S0 is generated in the whole sample area or volume that is irradiated by the laser focus, and therefore a strong background signal also blurs the resolution of the obtained image. Definition 5 is more precise when enhancement factors are calculated that are compared to numerical simulations or SERS measurements (used for example in ref. 23, 28, 38–41). This definition gives the ratio of near-field (Snearfield) and far-field signal intensities (Sfarfield). As can be seen, both definitions differ only by a value of 1. Thus, the difference between definitions 4 and 5 is only significant in the case of weak enhancement. The contrast can only be calculated when both, enhanced and non-enhanced signals can be determined at the exactly same place on a homogeneous sample. In cases where the far-field signal cannot be determined (e.g. monolayers of weakly scattering molecules) sometimes the upper limit for the signal intensity is calculated based on the noise level, which we consider only as a very rough estimate which strongly depends on the calculation method for the noise level (e.g. standard deviation vs. peak-to-peak difference of the noise). For calculating the enhancement factor, the difference in source volume of far-field and near-field signals has to be considered.21,23 In the case of thin-film or opaque samples, the geometry factor can be approximated with the source areas. The far-field signal is generated in the whole laser focus, thus Afarfield = r2laser·π with rlaser being the radius of the laser focus is most often used to calculate the far-field source area. The area from which the near-field signal arises is more difficult to estimate but is often approximated with r2tip·π, where the tip radius rtip can be determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), even though there is experimental evidence that the enhancing region is, at least in some cases, smaller than the tip apex.28 A more precise, but tedious way for the determination of the diameters of both areas would be to determine the lateral resolution of both, confocal Raman and TERS images. The TERS enhancement factor can be calculated according to eqn (6). (6)
In the case of bulky samples with a considerable optical penetration depth, the far-field signal is generated in a volume, and thus the ratio between far-field and near-field volumes has to be calculated. For this, the height of the focus or the optical penetration depth (the smaller value of both has to be considered) as well as the extent of the enhanced field around the tip in the z direction have to be estimated. Generally, the calculation of the conversion factor between contrast and EFTERS is often based on many estimations, and thus comparisons between different studies and between experiment and theory are difficult. For a better comparability, enhancement factors should only be given together with an explanation of the calculation method and the estimated numbers. We propose to mainly use contrast factors for comparisons between different tips or studies, because they can be experimentally determined and they are of more practical relevance giving direct information about the TERS image quality. Pettinger et al. proposed an alternate way to determine the enhancement factor that has the advantage of being based only on experimentally determined values.37,42 They studied the temporal behavior of TERS signals of dye molecules and found an exponential decay of the form e(−t/τ) due to bleaching. The ratio of the time constants τ of confocal and tip-enhanced bleaching gives the enhancement factor of the excitation light  (considered no differences in the lifetime due to heating or two photon-processes present in either of the two cases). The enhancement of the Raman scattered light cannot be determined with this method, but with the approximation that both enhancements are approximately the same, the TERS enhancement factor can be approximated by . A more detailed description of methods for calculating the enhancement factor and their comparison can be found in ref. 43.
3 Key components of a TERS setup
A combination of small numbers of different components are necessary to build a TERS setup. The first necessity is focused laser light. A part of the light energy has to be localized by a TERS active SPM tip which is in sufficiently close proximity to the sample to excite the sample molecules. The emitted light has then to be collected and analyzed. In this section, the different optical geometries, SPM techniques and according tips with their different combinations are critically evaluated upon advantages and disadvantages and possible areas of application.
3.1 Optical geometries
Challenges posed by a variety of samples can be met by using an appropriate optical geometry. Three different major types, bottom-, side- and top-illumination depicted in Fig. 3 have been used until now.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of the different possible illumination and detection geometries for tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Standard bottom and side illuminations are displayed in the upper part, and top illumination with parabolic mirror or lens based focusing in the bottom row. 
The choice of the illumination scheme determines the properties of the objective lens that can be used.44 In the case of bottom illumination, very high NAs of up to 1.4–1.6 using oil immersion objectives can be employed, whereas objectives with considerable working distance often have to be used in side or top-illumination schemes, leading to NAs typically ranging from 0.28 to 0.55, with a maximum value of 0.7 that has been used in a top-illumination scheme.45 As an alternative, parabolic mirrors (PM) as focusing element enable an NA of approx. 1 in top-illumination TERS. The laser wavelength and NA determine the size of the focus spot. A high NA allows focusing the laser more tightly around the tip, which reduces the far-field background contribution. For light collection from the sample, most often the same optics as employed for excitation are used. Here, the NA of the objective lens determines the collection efficiency, which is significantly higher in bottom illumination as compared to side and top-illumination schemes. The additional gap-mode enhancement that can be realized in side- and top-illumination setups outweighs this drawback, and the achievable signal in ‘gap-mode’ TERS (detailed explanation see 3.4.2) is at least 5 times higher as in bottom-illumination setups, even when using oil-immersion objective lenses.44Table 1 summarizes some of the best enhancements and resolutions achieved with different combinations of feedback and illumination.
Table 1 Enhancement factors and spatial resolution in different TERS geometries




 
 
Enhancement
Ref.
Resolution
Ref.




AFM
Bottom ill.
102–104

46–48

4, 14–20 nm

46, 49, 50, 51



Top ill.
contr. <2

52, 53

20–50 nm

53



Side ill.
104, contr. 40

54, 55

20 nm

56



STM
Side ill.
104–107

29, 57–59

20–50 nm

57, 60



Top ill. (lens)
105–107

45, 61

12–15 nm

45, 62



Top ill. (PM)
104–106

32, 63, 64

10–15 nm

32, 65



Shear Force
 
103–105

66–70

18–70 nm

66, 69–71






3.1.1 Bottom illumination. 
The earliest versions of TERS in 200021–23 all used a bottom-illumination geometry. In this geometry light is focused from below through a transparent support onto the tip and the sample. The tip rests on top of the sample and interacts either directly with the laser focus or with its evanescent field. Often glass substrates are used as a sample support, but other sophisticated support layers like gold nanoplatelets72 can offer special properties. A glass support allows for the use of refractive index matching oil between the substrate and a high numerical aperture objective with an NA ≥ 1.4. As discussed, the higher NA allows a tighter focusing, thus more confined laser energy and a smaller illuminated background area. To gather a maximum amount of Raman signal from the sample, the same objective is usually used to collect signals emitted into the glass slide with a high solid angle of slightly above 135° at NA 1.4, but a different collection direction would in theory also be possible. As feedback in this configuration, AFM and shear force feedback systems are ideally suited. Optically transparent, conducting substrates like indium tin oxide (ITO) or thin gold films were already used in 2002 to allow STM feedback.73 Due to the large variety and flexibility in AFM instruments and confocal microscopes, bottom-illumination instruments are ideally suited to investigate biological samples. With the exception of a proof of concept74 all experiments have been performed in a dry state, but it is possible to extend research towards biological specimen in native conditions. For these samples, the high NA helps to reduce thermal strain on the sample as well as confocal background signals.


3.1.2 Side illumination. 
To overcome the limitation to transparent samples of the bottom illumination approach, in 2001 the first TERS instrument using AFM tips under side illumination has been presented34 still with collection from the bottom. Several different approaches using AFM and STM with collection through the side-illumination optics followed shortly after.30,37,41,54,59,75 In these setups, the laser beam is focused using long working distance objectives onto the tip end, at angles usually between 45–70°, but partly up to grazing angles of 87°75 relative to the tip axis. A long working distance is necessary to reach tip and sample, thus the NA of the objectives is in a range between 0.28 and 0.55. Due to the angle between the focal plane and the sample surface the laser focus is non-symmetric and further enlarged to approx. 2–3 μm. To compensate for the increased spot size, the energies used for side illumination often range between 5 and 10 mW. The collection potential of these systems is limited by the small angle of collection of the low NA lenses. The advantage is of course no limitation in the choice of sample support and the ability to work on opaque samples. Despite the low NA, these systems can benefit from the strong enhancement in the gap between two dipoles formed by the metal or metallized TERS tip and a mirror dipole in the metal surface when working on a metal substrate. The additional enhancement is in the order of 102 even overcompensating the losses due to the small NA.


3.1.3 Top illumination. 
The second option to work on non-transparent samples is an illumination directly perpendicular to the sample surface (epi-illumination), along the direction of the tip. It combines the advantages of side and bottom illumination. The NA is between that of the other two techniques and can be as large as 1, and the focusing is achieved in a symmetric fashion leading to a more predictable and tighter focus than side illumination. Top illumination combines this with a reflecting geometry allowing work on opaque as well as transparent samples. In this orientation, one of the biggest problems is the location of the tip between the objective and the laser focus. Depending on the position and size, the tip will block a certain amount of light during excitation as well as in the signal detection. To minimize this, the numeric aperture of the focusing element is the key to see ‘around the tip’ and also collect the created signal more efficiently. Two different focusing elements have been used for this purpose the parabolic mirror and microscope objectives. As the tip is aligned in the propagation direction of the laser, an excitation of the tip is most efficiently achieved by a longitudinal wave.76,77 The use of higher order laser modes such as the so-called ‘doughnut modes’ has been shown for parts of the epi-top-illumination systems,32,78 but would most likely be beneficial for all of them. Top-illumination TERS is ideally suited to investigate opaque samples such as silicon based or crystalline samples as well as thick samples, where the losses in transmission would be too high. Thus these instruments could have increased impact in inorganic chemistry to investigate small crystalline phases at a nanoscale level or in the semiconductor industry for quality control.
Parabolic mirror based focusing. 
The parabolic mirror as a final focusing element was presented in 2003 for near-field measurements by probing the near-field with a scattering tip,79 and several TERS experiments were shown from 2007 on64,78,80 with resolutions down to 15 nm and few molecule sensitivity.32 For a PM setup, a small hole is drilled in the center of a PM to insert a shear-force tuning fork attached to a piezo tube for distance control and approach to a sample. The sample is located on a scanning stage tripod that can move the sample around the focal point of the PM. Practical issues such as the strong susceptibility to coma aberrations81 pose high constraints on the alignment of the system before reasonable results can be obtained. Once these requirements are met, purely considering the NA, the PM outperforms any lens based system in an air environment82 with its superior NA of 1. A second issue with the PM is the sample size. As the light has to pass around the sample to reach the PM, the sample has to be transparent or kept rather small (<5 mm). A production of larger PMs may be possible, but could be difficult due to the high precision necessary to keep the NA close to 1 and would also require similar sized glass lenses to expand the laser beam for illumination. The longer distance to the focal point would also require a longer piezo tube to bring the shear-force tuning fork to the focal point, making it more susceptible to external vibrations.
Objective lens based focusing. 
The more standard way of focusing the laser beam in top illumination is a microscope objective. These objectives sacrifice a little of the NA (0.7 compared to 1) in respect to the PM, but they are commercially easily available, and are much easier to handle. The first experiments were all conducted with objectives in the range of NA 0.4552,83,84 and mainly showed quite weak enhancements on silicon, most likely due to the major part of light blocked by the cantilever and the strong confocal background. The use of 0.7 NA objectives yielded far higher enhancements, >106 in gap mode and resolutions of 15 nm,45 allowing high pixel number TERS imaging. Recently, a proof of concept using AFM feedback with top illumination, also able to perform TERS imaging was presented.53 Blocking a part of the excitation laser path on the side from which the AFM tip is inserted, an illumination under a small angle is realized to excite the metal coated AFM tip. Maybe due to blocking of the created Raman signal by the bulkier AFM cantilever, the contrast was close to the noise level and considerably lower than results presented on other state of the art instruments. An AFM feedback, once the optical performance can match other instruments, would eliminate the limitation to conductive surfaces, at the cost of the additional gap-mode enhancement.

3.2 Field polarization
The polarization of the incident laser field is an important factor in each TERS experiment. The simplest case is focusing of a standard Gaussian mode as produced by most lasers. Using Gaussian mode lasers, the linear excitation can be filtered in front of the detector, yielding additional information on the depolarization by the tip85,86 as well as physical properties of tip87,88 and sample.89 A linear polarizer in front of the detection also reduces the background from far-field illumination of the substrate.41,84,90 More complicated laser modes like the so-called doughnut-modes are mainly in use to further confine the fields,82 and to more efficiently excite tips aligned along the propagation direction of the laser.64,78
3.3 SPM feedback
The signal enhancement in TERS is strongly confined to the end of the tip. The dimension of the EM field is in the range of several to tens of nanometres. A very fast decay of the signal upon a tip sample distance increase was shown theoretically91,92 as well as experimentally.29,60,93 Thus the control of the tip position is crucial for TERS experiments. The precise distance control of SPM methods renders them ideal for this purpose. In TERS three SPM methods, AFM, STM and shear force have mainly been employed, each of them impacting the measurement in different ways.

3.3.1 AFM. 
The atomic force microscope relies on either the changed reflection of a laser beam of the cantilever backside due to a tip sample interaction (contact mode), or a change in resonance frequency of the tip due to the proximity of the sample (semi-contact mode). AFM has no specific sample requirements and can work on virtually any surface with a roughness of up to several microns. In TERS, the AFM contact mode has been used very successfully,53,94,95 with the advantage of a constant distance to the surface and thus a constant enhancement. In semi-contact mode, the tip oscillates and continuously changes the distance to the surface but has less sample interaction and causes less sample strain.51,96–98 Depending on the oscillation amplitude, the effective time within the enhancing near-field region is diminished remarkably. One option is to synchronize the laser excitation with the time of the tip in the near-field region99 with a shutter, but still the amount of signal per time is reduced with this technique. A second option would be a very fast detector, coupled to a lock-in amplifier to only detect during times when tip and surface are in close proximity, or to directly split up the detection in a near-field and a far-field contribution. Very low amplitude tapping (<4 nm) can be used for TERS increasing the amount of time in near-field region.100 Due to the lower tip-surface interactions, measurements in semi-contact mode are preferential for delicate samples and likely to prevent pickup processes contaminating the tip. One limitation of both AFM modes is the cross-talk between the feedback laser of the AFM and the Raman excitation laser. Most commonly, 650 nm laser diodes are used for AFM feedback, and only recently 785 nm and 850 nm feedback systems have become available from AFM producers. The laser diodes still limit the usable range of excitation lasers for the Raman to the UV-Vis range.


3.3.2 STM. 
The second major distance control method in TERS is scanning tunneling microscopy where a conductive tip is kept in tunneling distance to the surface. To enable tunneling, both tip and sample surface need to be sufficiently conductive, thus mostly metals are used as substrates as well as for the tips. The tunneling distance between tip and sample is usually considered to be in the region of a nanometre or less101 which positions the sample closer to the EM field than in average AFM distance control. One advantage is good and cheap availability of tips, etched from metal wires for STM. The need for conductivity is most commonly solved by using opaque conductive substrates and thus limiting the remaining optical geometries as well as the choice of substrate.


3.3.3 Shear force. 
In shear force distance control, a metal tip attached to a high frequency tuning fork (e.g. quartz crystal, 32.768 kHz, beneficial for the high quality factor) is used to detect the proximity of the surface by damping of the free oscillation, similar to semi-contact mode AFM. The major difference is the oscillation direction of the tuning fork laterally to the sample surface, which keeps the distance more or less constant. Shear force feedback is applicable to virtually any surface with low roughness and does not limit the excitation to the UV-Vis range like AFM. Drawbacks are the cumbersome tip-gluing procedures, a less stable feedback than AFM and the lateral displacement of a tuning fork during the oscillation, which strongly depends on the excitation energy and can be in the range of 5–30 nm.102 Far smaller oscillation amplitudes can be reached by using higher frequency oscillations.103 The excitation thus has to be carefully controlled to gather high-resolution images. Due to the lateral movement of the tip, SF is more prone to render to horizontal features on the surface.

3.4 TERS tips
The most crucial element to tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy is the one that distinguishes it from confocal as well as surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy: the tip. A full metal or metal coated tip is necessary to confine the laser energy into the EM field at its apex, excite the molecule and transform near-field information into a propagating far-field radiation by scattering. The chemical properties of this tip determine the long term stability and the mechanical stability of the tip. The lifetime of a tip is limiting the possible duration of a measurement and the mechanical properties are crucial for wear resistance and scanning quality. The material of the tip together with the shape determines the optimal frequency to excite the tip and thus the suitability of different laser wavelengths. The size of the EM field is usually estimated to be similar to the size of the apex, thus the tip also determines the TERS resolution and usually also relates to the SPM resolution.

3.4.1 AFM TERS tips. 
For AFM feedback, different kinds of standard AFM tips are the basis for the TERS tips. Depending on the selected AFM mode (contact/semi-contact mode) silicon based tips with different resonance frequencies in the range of 10–400 kHz are employed. These tips are vapor-coated with a film of a pure metal or a more complicated layer system of auxiliaries and a metal film for the enhancement, usually silver104–106 or gold41,69 (see Fig. 4(a)). Auxiliary layers can help tune the resonance frequency of the tip to the desired wavelength.47 The choice of metal not only influences the frequency by which it is efficiently excited, but also the chemical stability of the coating layer. According to their physical properties, silver tips should offer higher enhancements than gold tips, due to their lower imaginary part of the dielectric function over the entire UV-Vis range,107 at the expense of chemical stability. Silver tips are only active during a limited time frame in the hour range and degrade by oxidation as well as contaminations from the ambient air or the sample.108 Gold tips have lower signal enhancement, but can be used for prolonged durations, up to weeks, with reasonable signal enhancement.
 Fig. 4  Selection of available TERS tips. (a) Silver coated AFM TERS tip. (b) Etched full metal STM TERS tip. (c) Bow tie antenna on an AFM cantilever. Reprinted with permission from 125. (d) Photonic crystal cavity on a Si3N4 cantilever with attached tapered waveguide. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.129 


3.4.2 STM TERS tips. 
The tunneling process of STM requires a high conductivity of the tip. As metal coated tips with dielectric cores are not conductive enough, mainly etched full metal tips are produced out of silver29,109,110 and gold111–114 (see Fig. 4(b)). Depending on the etching parameters (voltage, etchant, temperature,…) different tip shapes can be produced, strongly influencing the mechanical stability and the optical properties of the tip. The usually quick, simple and cheap etching process makes tip production far easier and less cumbersome, and, once a working protocol is established, allows the quick production of larger numbers of tips to select from upon their TERS capabilities. Metal tips have a high aspect ratio at the tip apex, crucial for the focusing in top and side illumination. Reports show that the crystallinity of the bulk wire used for etching also seems to influence the properties and performance of the etched wire.115 Another option is the use of preformed nanowires,116 yet both the involved selection and attachment processes are cumbersome and delicate. In simulations, resonances of TERS tips are often reduced to a contribution of the spherical tip apex, and according to the resonances of gold and silver nanoparticles, gold tips should be more suitable for wavelengths in the red an near IR range.
Gap-mode TERS. 
When using STM tips, a further factor to keep in mind is the sample substrate. Metal surfaces have their own plasmon resonances which, due to the small distances of tip and surface, can form a plasmonically coupled system with the TERS tip. This coupled system is usually referred to as a gap mode and can change the plasmon resonances in respect to a solitary tip (due to changed energy states117). The temporally existent partial charge in the tip apex induces a mirror charge in the metal substrate.91 This can be considered as a system of very close-by dipoles which are known to strongly localize and enhance an EM field in between the two. The sample itself is located in between these dipoles, making ideal use of the EM field for excitation of the Raman signals.


3.4.3 Shear force TERS tips. 
Etched full metal gold tips, cut to an appropriate length, are commonly glued onto a quartz crystal tuning fork and used in shear force feedback. The additional weight of the etched tip reduces the frequency and the quality factor of the tuning fork and thus has to be kept to a minimum. A second option is to pull or etch glass fibers and coat them with a metal film or embed metal particles in the end of a glass fiber tip.


3.4.4 Tip tuning. 
For AFM-TERS, most often commercially available silicon tips are coated with silver. Silicon tips are cost efficient and widely available in various shapes and with cantilevers covering a wide range of force constants. The surface plasmon resonances of silver nanoparticles have been shown to red shift, when they are attached to materials with high refractive indices.118 Silicon has a relatively high refractive index of n = 4.4 causing the surface plasmon resonance of the enhancing silver layer to shift to higher wavelengths. This is unfavorable since in AFM-TERS often lasers with low wavelengths in the visible range (blue to green) are employed for excitation and thus, there is often very weak overlap between laser excitation and surface plasmon resonance of AFM-TERS tips. When tip materials with lower refractive index, such as silicon nitride (Si3N4, n = 2.05) or silicon dioxide (SiO2, n = 1.5) were used with 488 nm excitation, significantly higher enhancement factors were obtained.106 The same effect can be obtained by applying a two-layer coating onto commercially available Si or Si3N4 tips.47,119 Here, a dielectric material with low refractive index, such as SiOx (n = 1.5–2.05, depending on x) or AlF3 (n = 1.4), is coated onto the tip followed by a Ag layer. With such two-layer coatings, contrasts as high as 70–80 on brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) thin films as test samples and high yields of enhancing tips were obtained with 488 nm excitation.47 The stronger enhancement can be explained by a shift of the plasmon resonance frequency towards the laser wavelength, which was confirmed by numerical simulations by a finite element method for silver tips120 and using a dielectric coating layer.121 The lifetime of TERS tips, especially when silver-based, is limited due to oxidation and contamination and the accompanied change of the optical and plasmonical properties. Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) could be used to protect TERS tips from oxygen in the air and additionally prevent other chemical reactions. A thiol SAM was successfully used to protect a cantilever from contamination during measurements in aqueous environments.74 In special cases SAMs may increase adsorption of specific compounds such as proteins or lipids,122 in which cases specifically selected SAMs or other protection methods like atomic layer deposition should be used. Increased mechanical stability of metal-coated structures is known from silicon AFM tips, but can be further enhanced using a tungsten core with a metal coating.123,124 Possibly, other coatings could be used to tune tip properties. These coatings could be applied by means of atomic layer deposition, electrochemical processes, chemical vapor coating or even chemical reactions on the surface as seen by the self-assembly of thiol monolayers. A way to influence both, enhancement and stability at once would be the use of alloys with special properties instead of standard metals for the enhancing layer. The main difficulty is to not only obtain superior mechanical and chemical properties but simultaneously keep the losses of energy in the desired excitation wavelength at a minimum to allow high enhancement factors.


3.4.5 Specialized tips. 
Over time a number of non-standard tips have emerged which in part contain considerable efforts for production and make use of small metallic structures on the tip itself to localize and enhance the field at the tip apex. In 2005 Farahani et al. demonstrated a tailored nanostructure to enhance the EM field, forming a bow tie antenna at the end of an AFM cantilever125 (shown in Fig. 4(c)). This enabled them to move an entire antenna structure around and locate it anywhere on the sample. The highest field enhancement is in this case located between the two arms of the antenna, where the sample cannot be located, yet the extending field, albeit weaker, can be used for near-field optical measurements. Several other methods to attach micro- or nanoparticles to SPM tips have since then been presented:126,127 for example by combining electron beam deposition, etch masks and Ar-ion milling, the attachment process can be avoided and reproducible metallic nanostructures can be created directly on a cantilever.128 A different approach is presented by Berwerger et al.44 using focused ion beam (FIB) milling. They created a grating coupler on the shaft of the tip, enabling them to launch a surface plasmon polariton towards the apex of the tip by illuminating only the shaft part but not the apex and the sample. The detection then selectively detects light emitted from the apex itself or molecules interacting with the created EM near field. A similar idea with different geometry has been presented by De Angelis et al.129,130 where they designed a photonic crystal cavity on the back of an AFM cantilever with a tapered waveguide attached in the center (see Fig. 4(d)). This waveguide transfers the illumination light focused on the back of the cantilever to the sample, thus also excluding any confocal background signals. Weber-Bergioni et al.131 used coaxial optical antenna scan probes in a bottom-illumination approach to create a plasmonically coupled antenna with the resolution of a sharp metallic tip by creating a circular gap around a central metallic pin protruding from the surrounding metal. It has yet to be noted that for efficient coupling, all structured or plasmonic tips have to be designed and tailored differently for every laser wavelength and do require a substantial amount of production infrastructure.

3.5 Optical signal detection
The direction of detection is, for convenience reasons, in most cases chosen to start equal to the excitation direction and is then separated using either notch filters or edge filters to discard the reflected laser and Rayleigh scattered light which is far stronger than the Raman shifted signals by several orders of magnitude. Nonetheless, separate detection optics were already successfully employed amongst the first instruments34 but may bear further potential of an altered signal collection taking a directional emission distribution into account for a far larger variety of instruments. After discarding the reflected as well as the Rayleigh scattered light, the final detection was traditionally realized by an avalanche photo diode (APD). They offer a high detection efficiency and single photon counting ability, with a rather limited rate of photons per second. They were combined with wavelength filters to select certain areas from the Raman spectrum. Nowadays, the remaining Raman photons are spread out by wavelength using a spectrometer with turrets hosting single or multiple optical gratings. Ruled diffraction gratings disperse the incoming beam by wavelength onto the detector with an increasing resolution depending on the number of grooves mm−1 but decreasing transmission efficiency. Besides line gratings, holographic gratings can be used, being especially useful for high resolution and high signal-to-noise applications. The dispersed photons are detected by a charge coupled device (CCD or an electron multiplying CCD (EMCCD)) with close to single photon counting capabilities and high efficiency in the visible range able to detect an entire Raman spectrum with 1024–1600 pixels at once.
3.6 Samples used in TERS experiments
Due to length restrictions, we refrain from reviewing the entire literature here, but want to offer a collection of references about different samples that have been investigated using TERS. This list also shows persisting application gaps in TERS that are waiting to be filled.

Organic and biological samples. 
Dye molecules have been studied from the beginning onwards, as important samples for system characterization.30,132 Molecular monolayers,61,133 thiols in air61,133–135 and in liquid,74 polymer blends,66,136 azobenzene,137 alginate films,138 biotin-streptavidin,139 DNA or single DNA bases,63,140–143 amino acids,144 cytochrome C,145 collagen,146 different virus strains,95,147 bacteria,148supported lipid layers,149 cell walls,26,51,150 organic semiconductors151 and solar cell blends65 have been investigated by TERS.


Inorganic samples. 
Inorganic systems that have been studied lately comprise silicon and strained silicon,57,152–155 amorphous carbon,58 graphite,156 graphene,62,114,157–159 carbon nanotubes,50,53,67,94,115,157,160 GaN and GaAs species,48,90,96,161 BaTiO)3,89 NiO surfaces,162 V2O5 nanoribbons,163 TiO2 nanoparticles164,165 and Ge/Si quantum dots.98
The resolution of TERS compared to confocal Raman is increased by more than an order of magnitude, with reports of spatial resolutions down to 10–12 nm62,65 and even 4 nm49 when measuring pressure-induced band shifts. Simultaneously, due to the enhancement of the Raman signals, several orders of magnitude in signal strength are gained.32,45

4 Imaging
The information content of Raman spectroscopy is very high, especially for smaller molecules. A single point spectrum can deliver information on the presence of several substances at once (as long as they can be distinguished spectroscopically and the signal level is sufficient). To extend the information one can gather from a sample, imaging of the surface can deliver information on the concentration and distribution of all detected molecules over the entire surface. This is usually achieved by scanning the surface and acquiring entire Raman spectra at each location.
4.1 Point spectroscopy
Most TERS experiments are single point measurements. After selection of an area of interest on the sample (either from the optical image or from a previous SPM scan) the pre-aligned tip in the laser focus is located above this sample spot, and a spectrum is acquired over a certain period of time. Depending on the scattering cross section of the sample, integration times can range from split seconds over usual times of several seconds up to minutes for very Raman-inactive substances. The yielded spectrum combines the enhanced spectral fingerprint information from the near field area as well as the confocal background signal from the area of the entire laser focus.
4.2 TERS imaging
After single point spectroscopy, TERS imaging (each point in the image contains an entire Raman spectrum) is the logical next step. As the setups already include a scanning element to position the sample or tip, the main factors that formerly limited full spectroscopic imaging were the positioning accuracy and time constraints connected to the system stability. The inability to remain on a certain sample spot without movement due to thermal drift or mechanical instabilities, long time only allowed point spectroscopy or point-by-point line scans.29,49,78,159,166 Several factors lead to the feasibility of full spectral imaging. On the one hand, the stability of the SPM systems increased continually, leading to a smaller drift of the tip in respect to the sample. Concurrently, the progress in tip design lead to stronger enhancing tips and thus more Raman-scattered photons. As a third reason, the progress from avalanche photo detectors (APD) to electron multiplying CCD detectors with close to single photon counting abilities allowed simultaneous detection of entire Raman spectra under low signal conditions. All this lead to a reduction of the necessary integration time per acquired Raman spectrum. Full spectral TERS imaging has been reported in literature in the past years with an increasing number of pixels,50,52,65,133,159,167,168 for up to 200×200 – 256×256 pixels45,66,131 and increasing resolution of down to 12–20 nm45,51,61,65,160 (4 nm were achieved in a special tip-pressure assisted procedure49 limited to pressure sensitive bands). TERS imaging offers several obvious advantages, more information on the sample clear detection of shapes and borders but also includes a determination of the resolution in every image (when looking at edges or when examining small features of a sample). By imaging of known shapes (compare Fig. 5) or surface structures, and comparison of the AFM/STM feedback during imaging to a reference scan, artifacts and drift can be detected and if necessary, a compensation for these artifacts may be possible.
 Fig. 5  TERS image from a patterned self assembled monolayer of two isomeric thiols evaluated for (a) the specific marker bands of pyridine-2-thiol (deposited in the circles) at 1000 cm−1 and (b) the pyridine-4-thiol marker band (located in the gaps) at 1100 cm−1 respectively. (c) Shows the quotient of both thiol bands exhibiting no enhancement fluctuations any more. In (d) tip-enhanced Raman spectra (1 s integration time) from the SAM in (a)–(c) are visible and (e) shows confocal and SERS reference spectra (10–120 s integration time) of a thiol SAM. Adapted from ref. 61. 
5 Data processing
Detection and acquisition of data from a sample are only one side of a medal and, by itself, are not meaningful. Only the correct interpretation and assignment of peaks and substances from the spectra render mere data into meaningful information about a sample. It has to be addressed where signals originate from, the sample, the background or a contaminant. Once a spectral feature is considered as a relevant signal, it has to be determined what substance the spectrum originates from and what additional information can be deduced. The simplest but often sufficient approach is to pick peaks by hand and compare them to a set of reference data (ideally acquired on the same instrument and under the same conditions). At this point it has to be mentioned that it is not known yet how big the differences between confocal Raman, SERS and TERS spectra exactly are. They seem to differ in band intensities and sometimes even in band positions (albeit not for all vibrations and it is unclear by how many cm−1). Thus the use of SERS or confocal Raman as reference has to be critically investigated, and whenever possible TERS references should be used. The manual peak picking approach can be used most efficiently for simple sample systems with limited numbers of components, where the background noise is low and the number of spectra is quite limited. As soon as the sample complexity is increasing, or contribution of a large background has to be considered, this approach is quite difficult. Also for large data sets as created during TERS imaging (already an image of 64 × 64 pixels would mean an evaluation of >4000 spectra), this approach is not feasible anymore.
Another approach, used to analyze data is principal component analysis (PCA) to reduce the complexity of the problem and to visualize the major differences in the spectra of a dataset, or multivariate curve resolution (MCR), where a piece of software calculates a set of spectra, sufficient to represent all the spectra in the data set by linear combination. Both methods are a priori methods that do not require additional information from the user, are used in connection with Raman spectroscopy,169–172 and are nowadays feasible within a day on standard PC hardware even for image sets with 128 × 128 pixels. For TERS imaging, these methods—as well as other similar mathematical techniques, such as vertex component analysis or determination of end-member within a data set—can be used.51,173 They deliver comparable information on distribution of substances within an image or concentrations of different substances. Yet, even with sophisticated mathematical methods, at some point, all the simplified or reduced spectra have to be compared against reference spectra again to gain meaning. Some question marks arise with the use of these complex methods as they produce different results depending on the choice of certain initial parameters. This clearly shows the high importance of these reference spectra. Currently there is no commercially available or even publicly accessible database for Raman spectra (except for a limited set of organic (AIST) and inorganic substances (AIST, RRUFF), which could be used to assign or classify unknown samples. The setup of such a database, comparable to the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) for crystallographic information or NIST and KnowItAll AnyWare database used in mass spectrometry, will be a major requirement within the TERS community to allow better interpretation of data, assignment of unknown samples and increase the usefulness of TERS as well as its impact in ‘end-user’ laboratories.
For interpretation, a lot of care has to be taken. The existence of false positive signals, especially from amorphous carbon is a big issue174 and a matter of discussion in the community.29–31,175–177 High laser powers and short acquisition times are more likely to yield strong, sharp signals between 1000–1800 cm−1 and 2500–3000 cm−1 from carbonaceous materials on the tip, the surface, or even the region between the two as known from SERS studies.178–182 This material can form the carbon D- and G-bands when using longer integration times. These erroneous signals need to be conclusively ruled out by either reproducing all results; e.g. by repeated line scans or by recognition of spectral patterns from substances, in which case all peaks should fit to the substance or an identified background signal and none should be unaccounted for. If not, given a large enough reference data set and a tolerance of spectral shifts of ±5 cm−1, any number of possible peaks can be assigned. The second way would be to conclusively rule out the production or detection of carbon altogether (maybe by suitable tip protection).
6 Practical TERS guidelines
This section is aimed at researchers who are in the progress of setting up their own first TERS instrument. It should be used to check the functionality of the different components step-by-step and help to finally detect TERS spectra or TERS images. For simplicity, a system with a moving sample stage, fixed tip position and scanning laser spot is considered here. This is typical for AFM systems coupled to inverted confocal microscopes, which are the most common systems at the moment.
6.1 Alignment
After a preliminary setup of the instrument, the alignment of excitation laser, tip and the detection optics have to be checked. The easiest part to check is the alignment of the detection optics and the spectrometer. For the initial alignment, a small volume (10 μL, 5 × 10−5 mol L−1 dissolved in MeOH/EtOH) of a resonant or well detectable laser dye (e.g. BCB or Nile blue (NB) for excitation at 488, 532 and 632.8 nm) is spin coated on a glass slide and placed on the sample stage, and the detection system is aligned to achieve optimal performance and correct Raman band positions. The concentration should be sufficient to detect a confocal signal within 1 s at a medium laser power (10–100 μW). For fine tuning, a SAM of more stable thiols can be used afterwards. The next alignment that has to be taken care of is focusing of the laser and positioning of the tip. As a first step, small particles spread thinly over a surface (e.g. fluorescent beads with 50 nm diameter, with a coverage of around 1 μm−2) can be used to determine the size of the confocal laser focus. Then the AFM tip is brought into contact with a clean surface, the confocal laser is scanned over the tip to determine the contact point with the glass slide, and the laser focus is placed at the proper location. A Raman map can additionally be used to check the co-allocation of the confocal and Raman image. Therefore, the tip can be dipped into a solution of BCB, approached to a clean surface and the intensity of the dye from the tip apex can be imaged, showing a convolution of the tip with the confocal laser focus.
6.2 Tip production
A suitable tip production should be established starting with recipes from the literature for the metal employed, laser wavelength and feedback type. Several working protocols have been given in the literature for AFM47,106,114 and STM tips29,115 suitable for wavelengths from the visible47,112 to the UV range.183,184 If no signal can be detected from a batch of tips, dipping a tip directly into a solution of a resonant dye and collecting the signal from the tip apex can help to determine if the tips are enhancing or not.
6.3 Test samples
A number of properties should be met for a good TERS test sample:
• far-field signal without the tip should be detectable and homogeneous over the sample surface
• SPM topography is desirable to deduce the tip size from the lateral resolution
• a set of defined nanostructures would be ideal to determine the TERS resolution when imaging is performed
⇒ contrast and enhancement factors can be deduced from the above values combined with the TERS intensity
• stable Raman signal even for long laser illumination times (low laser energy necessary for resonant organic dyes to prevent bleaching)
• thin film or monolayer would be desirable for a smaller confocal background
• the sample would ideally be cheap and easily available
• production should be reproducible
Some reasonable test samples that fulfill a subset of these criteria are dye molecules with a strong Raman signal, spin-coated onto metal or glass substrates. Albeit not perfectly homogeneously distributed over surfaces, these samples allow cheap, quick and easy performance tests with low laser powers. Embedding in polymer could help to keep the dye more stable and distribute it better, but increase the sample thickness preventing STM measurements. A second option is a SAM of thiols, which is especially suitable for STM TERS. On flat gold films they offer very homogeneous, stable signal, but are not detectable in confocal Raman. Graphene monolayers also offer a homogeneous signal with an internal control of the layer by the Raman signal (due to changes in the Raman signal upon layer stacking) and reasonable far-field signal.
6.4 Performance tests
To judge the overall system performance, a comparison between confocal Raman and TERS signals is a good indicator. A simple ‘tip on–tip off’ experiment, with one spectrum taken with the tip in contact and another spectrum taken with retracted tip at the same location, directly yields the spectroscopic contrast when comparing the intensity of the same Raman band in both spectra (compare eqn (4) and (5) in the introduction). The ‘tip-on’ measurement should be repeated several times at different sample locations within a single confocal diameter to average over an area similar to the confocal Raman focus. It would be ideal to perform imaging over the same area. As a rough guideline, a well performing tip on a thin film sample can yield contrasts of up to 100 when correctly aligned, and in gap mode, a contrast of 10,000 can be reached.
7 Conclusions and outlook
With an increasing number of commercial ‘TERS ready’ systems (implying that all the necessary components are in the system or that the producer even demonstrates TERS after the installation) the availability of TERS is better than ever. Yet, in contrast to very established techniques, such as confocal Raman, IR or UV-Vis, the production of suitable TERS tips still remains an ‘end user’ problem and thus this method is not yet applicable in a standard lab environment. The second open point that needs additional research is data reproducibility and interpretation; the latter will become easier after setup of a database. Apart from these key issues, tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and imaging are very versatile with a large information content that awaits exploitation in many different areas of application, ranging from small organic molecules over larger supramolecular assemblies and biological specimens to inorganic crystals. These samples can be investigated with the information content of a spectroscopic technique but will benefit greatly from the increased resolution and the signal enhancement in TERS which makes it possible to detect very small amounts of molecules on or just beneath the surfaces.
A few open questions, partially already mentioned within the review should serve here as an outlook and hopefully stimulate further research and discussions on possible solutions:
• Local heating
In a TERS experiment, a laser beam is focused onto a very small area, thus a very confined, high energy EM field is created and a temperature raise can be expected. Several experiments185–190 and calculations191,192 have been presented, although these efforts have not yet provided a conclusive picture on the temporal, spatial and thermal extent of heating effects. Measurements of the anti-Stokes/Stokes ratio may prove difficult if the enhancement is not equal in the Stokes and anti-Stokes regions and thus lead to a poor estimate of the heating effect. Experiments with temperature sensitive molecules could show the real temperature in a focus (as long as the detection is as localized as the temperature).
• Carbon production and reproducibility
Amorphous carbon is a very strong Raman scatterer and can appear in the entire fingerprint region between 1000–1800 cm−1. The best solutions would be to prevent the formation of carbon altogether by using low laser powers, protected tips and an immaculately clean tip and sample preparation, as well as controlled ambient air or liquid to exclude false signals. When measuring samples of unknown or very complex composition (as is the case for most biological samples), this is best achieved by collecting spectra repeatedly, for example by scanning the same line twice after a few seconds; sometimes carbon species with a distinct spectrum can be stable in the close tip region for several seconds. Assignments from selected bands within a fingerprint spectrum or assignment due to confocal or SERS reference spectra can prove very difficult. Often, a band shift of several cm−1 is tolerated during band assignment to account for the use of a different method (confocal Raman or SERS) or a different calibration of the reference spectra. Thus if a library consisting of hundreds of bands is coupled with a several wavenumber flexibility, every appearing band (no matter if the origin is carbon or a part of the sample) in the fingerprint region can easily be assigned to some signal that can be reasonably expected in the sample. Thus ideally not only single bands, but only complete sets of fingerprints should be detected to rule out false carbon contributions.
• Tip lifetime
For widespread use of TERS, stable, reliable and mass producible tips are required. The lifetime of silver based TERS tips (most commonly used) is in the range of hours to a day after production. A deposition of a thin protective layer has shown promising results193 to extend the lifetime of these tips. The delicate balance between better protection with a thicker layer and loss of signal due to a larger distance between tip and sample needs to be better understood. The use of new enhancing materials to optimize both, lifetime and enhancement of tips at once should be explored as well.
• Tailored tips - wavelength and stability
Furthermore, it would be highly desirable to have a collection of tip recipes with the geometry and metal composition that is suitable for a given excitation wavelength. This could be combined with an approach to increase the mechanical and chemical stability of TERS tips. A higher number of developed and evaluated tip recipes will allow users to prepare a tip suitable to the exact task at hand with the best suited compromise between enhancement and stability to work efficiently on a specific sample.
• Test samples
As discussed, development of a standard test sample for comparing the achieved spatial resolution and enhancement is very important, but until now no commercial product or simple production method has appeared.
• Imaging
Enhancement fluctuations due to changes in tip–sample distance or laser coupling can introduce errors in a TERS image. Using the ratio of two bands originating from two different compounds present in the sample cancels this error as both substances will exhibit identical fluctuations in enhancement. This effect can be seen in Fig. 5(c) compared to the pure signals (a) and (b). Artifacts due to the sample topography are still difficult to distinguish from real concentration differences: at steps and edges for example, not only molecules exactly underneath the tip apex, but maybe also to the side of the apex (where no molecules are located on flat areas of the ample surface) may contribute to the signal. Furthermore, the change in orientation of molecules in respect to the tip can lead to signal changes during imaging. Experiments on atomically flat substrates with regions of defined coverage could help to show that TERS indeed is capable of quantitative analysis.
• Quantitative measurements
Last but not least, a very desirable feature for TERS would be full quantitative information from the spectra. The unknown enhancement in an experiment renders this quite difficult, but an internal standard at the position of the tip or on the sample could help to characterize the enhancement during every TERS experiment. This would allow calculation of the real signal contribution of the sample, and given a calibration, real concentrations on the surface could be calculated.
References
E. Abbe, Arch. Mikrosk. Anat., 1873, 9, 413–468 Search PubMed .
L. Rayleigh, Philos. Mag., 1879, 8, 261–274 .
E. H. Synge, Philos. Mag., 1928, 6, 356–362 CAS .
E. A. Ash and G. Nicholls, Nature, 1972, 237, 510–512 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Pohl, W. Denk and M. Lanz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 651–653 CrossRef .
A. Lewis, M. Isaacson, A. Hrootunian and A. Muray, Ultramicroscopy, 1984, 13, 227–231 CrossRef .
R. C. Dunn, Chem. Rev. (Washington, DC, U.S.), 1999, 99, 2891–2927 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Tsai, A. Othonos, M. Moskovits and D. Uttamchandani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 1768–1770 Search PubMed .
D. A. Smith, S. Webster, M. Ayad, S. D. Evands, D. Fogherty and D. Batchelder, Ultramicroscopy, 1995, 61, 247–252 Search PubMed .
S. Webster, D. N. Batchelder and D. A. Smith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 1478–1480 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Jahncke, M. A. Paesler and H. D. Hallen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 2483–2485 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Jahncke, H. D. Hallen and M. A. Paesler, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1996, 27, 579–586 Search PubMed .
R. Stockle, C. Fokas, V. Deckert, R. Zenobi, B. Sick, B. Hecht and U. P. Wild, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 160–162 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zeisel, V. Deckert, R. Zenobi and T. Vo-Dinh, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 283, 381–385 CrossRef .
R. Zenobi and V. Deckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1746–1756 CrossRef .
G. Binnig, H. Rohrer, C. Gerber and E. Weibel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 49, 57–61 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wessel, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1985, 2, 1538–1541 CrossRef CAS .
L. Novotny, Prog. Opt., 2007, 50, 137–184 Search PubMed .
U. C. Fischer and D. W. Pohl, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 458–461 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Sanchez, L. Novotny and X. S. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 4014–4017 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Stoeckle, Y. D. Suh, V. Deckert and R. Zenobi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 318, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Anderson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3130–3132 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hayazawa, Y. Inouye, Z. Sekkat and S. Kawata, Opt. Commun., 2000, 183, 333–336 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartschuh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8178–8191 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bailo and V. Deckert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 921–930 RSC .
B. S. Yeo, J. Stadler, T. Schmid, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 472, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1365–1373 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartschuh, E. J. Sanchez, X. S. Xie and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 95503 .
W. H. Zhang, B. S. Yeo, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1733–1738 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Neacsu, J. Dreyer, N. Behr and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 4 .
C. C. Neacsu, J. Dreyer, N. Behr and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 236402 CrossRef .
J. Steidtner and B. Pettinger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 236101 CrossRef .
W. H. Zhang, H. Fischer, T. Schmid, R. Zenobi and O. J. F. Martin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14672–14675 Search PubMed .
L. T. Nieman, G. M. Krampert and R. E. Martinez, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2001, 72, 1691–1699 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Bulgarevich and M. Futamata, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58, 757–761 CrossRef .
D. L. Stokes, Z. Chi and T. Vo-Dinh, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pettinger, B. Ren, G. Picardi, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 4 .
W. X. Sun and Z. X. Shen, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2003, 34, 668–676 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang, D. A. Smith, D. N. Batchelder, Y. Saito, J. Kirkham, C. Robinson, K. Baldwin, G. Li and B. Bennett, J. Microsc., 2003, 210, 330–333 CrossRef CAS .
S. Patane, P. G. Gucciardi, M. Labardi and M. Allegrini, Riv. Nuovo Cimento Soc. Ital. Fis., 2004, 27, 1–46 Search PubMed .
D. Mehtani, N. Lee, R. D. Hartschuh, A. Kisliuk, M. D. Foster, A. P. Sokolov and J. F. Maguire, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 1068–1075 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pettinger, B. Ren, G. Picardi, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 541–550 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Schmid, B. S. Yeo, W. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Tip Enhancement, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2007, pp. 115–155 Search PubMed .
S. Berweger, J. M. Atkin, R. L. Olmon and M. B. Raschke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3427–3432 Search PubMed .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4514–4520 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. A. Chan and S. G. Kazarian, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 445704 CrossRef .
B. S. Yeo, T. Schmid, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2007, 387, 2655–2662 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsui, P. Verma, T. Ichimura, Y. Inouye and S. Kawata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 61906 Search PubMed .
T. Yano, P. Verma, Y. Saito, T. Ichimura and S. Kawata, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
C. Georgi and A. Hartschuh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143117 Search PubMed .
B. R. Wood, E. Bailo, M. A. Khiavi, L. Tilley, S. Deed, T. Deckert-Gaudig, D. McNaughton and V. Deckert, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1868–1873 Search PubMed .
Z. D. Schultz, S. J. Stranick and I. W. Levin, Appl. Spectrosc., 2008, 62, 1173–1179 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. A. Chan and S. G. Kazarian, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 175701 Search PubMed .
Y. Saito, M. Motohashi, N. Hayazawa, M. Iyoki and S. Kawata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 143109 CrossRef .
Q. Nguyen, R. Ossikovski and J. Schreiber, Opt. Commun., 2007, 274, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lee, R. D. Hartschuh, D. Mehtani, A. Kisliuk, J. F. Maguire, M. Green, M. D. Foster and A. P. Sokolov, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2007, 38, 789–796 Search PubMed .
A. Tarun, N. Hayazawa and S. Kawata, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394, 1775–1785 Search PubMed .
M. Chaigneau, G. Picardi and R. Ossikovski, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Roth, N. C. Panoiu, M. M. Adams, R. M. Osgood, C. C. Neacsu and M. B. Raschke, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 2921–2931 CrossRef .
B. Pettinger, K. F. Domke, D. Zhang, G. Picardi and R. Schuster, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1335–1341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid, L. Opilik, P. Kuhn, P. S. Dittrich and R. Zenobi, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2011, 2, 509–515 Search PubMed .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8442–8448 Search PubMed .
E. Hennemann, D. Zhang and A. J. Meixner, Spectroscopy-an International Journal, 2010, 24, 119–124 Search PubMed .
J. Steidtner and B. Pettinger, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78, 103104 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, D. Zhang, K. Braun, H. J. Egelhaaf, C. J. Brabec and A. J. Meixner, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 492–499 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xue, W. Li, G. G. Hoffmann, J. G. P. Goossens, J. Loos and G. de With, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2852–2858 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, J. Wang, F. H. Hao, M. Q. Zhang and Q. Tian, Appl. Opt., 2010, 49, 1845–1848 Search PubMed .
A. Hartschuh, M. R. Beversluis, A. Bouhelier and L. Novotny, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2004, 362, 807–819 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kharintsev, G. G. Hoffmann, P. S. Dorozhkin, G. de With and J. Loos, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 315502 Search PubMed .
L. G. Cancado, A. Hartschuh and L. Novotny, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1420–1426 CrossRef CAS .
D. Roy, J. Wang and M. E. Welland, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 132, 215–225 RSC .
T. Deckert-Gaudig and V. Deckert, Small, 2009, 5, 432–436 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pettinger, G. Picardi, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, Single Mol., 2002, 3, 285–294 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schmid, B. S. Yeo, G. Leong, J. Stadler and R. Zenobi, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1392–1399 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Anderson and W. T. Pike, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2002, 73, 1198–1203 CrossRef CAS .
L. Novotny, R. X. Bian and X. S. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
L. Novotny, E. J. Sanchez and X. S. Xie, Ultramicroscopy, 1998, 71, 21–29 Search PubMed .
M. Sackrow, C. Stanciu, M. A. Lieb and A. J. Meixner, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 316–320 CrossRef CAS .
C. Debus, M. A. Lieb, A. Drechsler and A. J. Meixner, J. Microsc., 2003, 210, 203–208 Search PubMed .
C. Stanciu, M. Sackrow and A. J. Meixner, J. Microsc., 2008, 229, 247–253 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lieb and A. J. Meixner, Opt. Express, 2001, 8, 458 CrossRef CAS .
N. Davidson and N. Bokor, Opt. Lett., 2004, 29, 1318–1320 Search PubMed .
W. Sun and Z. Shen, Mater. Phys. Mech., 2001, 4, 17–21 Search PubMed .
V. Poborchii, T. Tada and T. Kanayama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L202–L204 Search PubMed .
P. G. Gucciardi, F. Bonaccorso, M. Lopes, L. Billot and M. L. de la Chapelle, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 8064–8072 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Gucciardi, M. Lopes, R. Deturche, C. Julien, D. Barchiesi and M. L. de la Chapelle, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 215702 Search PubMed .
R. Ossikovski, Q. Nguyen and G. Picardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 9 Search PubMed .
B. Deutsch, R. Hillenbrand and L. Novotny, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 652–656 Search PubMed .
S. Berweger, C. C. Neacsu, Y. Mao, H. Zhou, S. S. Wong and M. B. Raschke, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 496–499 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Gucciardi and J. Valmalette, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 263104 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Aizpurua and H. Xu, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1343–1348 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, Y. Fang, Z. Yang and H. Xu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9412–9419 RSC .
B. Pettinger, K. F. Domke, D. Zhang, R. Schuster and G. Ertl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 113409 CrossRef .
N. Peica, S. Rohrig, A. Rudiger, K. Brose, C. Thomsen and J. Maultzsch, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2708–2712 Search PubMed .
D. Naumann, P. Hermann, A. Hermelink, V. Lausch, G. Holland, L. Moller and N. Bannert, Analyst, 2011, 136, 1148–1152 RSC .
L. Servant, N. Marquestaut, D. Talaga, P. Yang, P. Pauzauskie and F. Lagugne-Labarthet, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1441–1445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Popp, R. Bohme, M. Richter, D. Cialla, P. Rosch and V. Deckert, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1452–1457 CrossRef .
Y. Ogawa, T. Toizumi, F. Minami and A. V. Baranov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 081302 Search PubMed .
T. Ichimura, S. Fujii, P. Verma, T. Yano, Y. Inouye and S. Kawata, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 186101 Search PubMed .
U. Neugebauer, P. Roesch, M. Schmitt, J. Popp, C. Julien, A. Rasmussen, C. Budich and V. Deckert, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1428–1430 CrossRef CAS .
G. Seine, R. Coratger, A. Carladous, F. Ajustron, R. Pechou and J. Beauvillain, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 60, 11045 Search PubMed .
P. Sandoz, J. M. Friedt and E. Carry, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79, 86102 Search PubMed .

          W. H. J. Rensen, PhD thesis, University of Twente,  2002 .
F. Festy, A. Demming and D. Richards, Ultramicroscopy, 2004, 100, 437–441 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Demming, F. Festy and D. Richards, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 184716 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Yeo, W. H. Zhang, C. Vannier and R. Zenobi, Appl. Spectrosc., 2006, 60, 1142–1147 Search PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370 CrossRef CAS .
M. McMahon, R. Lopez, H. Meyer, L. Feldman and R. Haglund, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2005, 80, 915–921 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dickmann, F. Demming and J. Jersch, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1996, 67, 845–846 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iwami, Y. Uehara and S. Ushioda, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1998, 69, 4010–4011 Search PubMed .
B. Ren, G. Picardi and B. Pettinger, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2004, 75, 837–841 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Cui and B. Ren, Chemical Journal of Chinese Universities-Chinese, 2007, 28, 522–525 Search PubMed .
C. Williams and D. Roy, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2008, 26, 1761–1764 Search PubMed .
V. Snitka, R. D. Rodrigues and V. Lendraitis, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 2759–2762 Search PubMed .
D. Roy, C. M. Williams and K. Mingard, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 2010, 28, 631–634 Search PubMed .
Y. You, N. A. Purnawirman, H. Hu, J. Kasim, H. Yang, C. Du, T. Yu and Z. Shen, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2010, 41, 1156–1162 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nordlander, C. Oubre, E. Prodan, K. Li and M. I. Stockman, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 899–903 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hayazawa, Y. Saito, M. Motohashi, M. Iyoki and S. Kawata, Conference on Plasmonics: Nanoimaging, Nanofabrication, and their Applications II, 2006, 6324, L3240–L3240 Search PubMed .
X. D. Cui, W. H. Zhang, B. S. Yeo, R. Zenobi, C. Hafner and D. Erni, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 8309–8316 Search PubMed .
X. D. Cui, D. Erni, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 453, 262–265 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kidoaki and T. Matsuda, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7639–7646 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, J. Atesang, P. Dudek, J. Rinderknecht, Y. Ritz, H. Geisler, U. Herr, R. Greer, E. Zschech and M. Hecker, Mater. Sci.-Pol., 2007, 25, 19–31 Search PubMed .
K. J. Yi, X. N. He, Y. S. Zhou, W. Xiong and Y. F. Lu, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79, 73706 Search PubMed .
J. N. Farahani, D. W. Pohl, H. J. Eisler and B. Hecht, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 017402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78, 081101 Search PubMed .
E. G. Bortchagovsky and U. C. Fischer, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1386–1391 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fleischer, A. Weber-Bargioni, M. V. P. Altoe, A. M. Schwartzberg, P. J. Schuck, S. Cabrini and D. P. Kern, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2570–2579 Search PubMed .
F. De Angelis, G. Das, P. Candeloro, M. Patrini, M. Galli, A. Bek, M. Lazzarino, I. Maksymov, C. Liberale, L. C. Andreani and E. Di Fabrizio, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bek, F. De Angelis, G. Das, E. Di Fabrizio and M. Lazzarino, Micron, 2011, 42, 313–317 Search PubMed .
A. Weber-Bargioni, A. Schwartzberg, M. Cornaglia, A. Ismach, J. J. Urban, Y. Pang, R. Gordon, J. Bokor, M. B. Salmeron, D. F. Ogletree, P. Ashby, S. Cabrini and P. J. Schuck, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1201–1207 CrossRef .
J. Stadler, T. Schmid and R. Zenobi, Chimia, 2011, 65, 235–239 Search PubMed .
G. Picardi, M. Chaigneau, R. Ossikovski, C. Licitra and G. Delapierre, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1407–1412 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Zhang, T. Schmid, B. S. Yeo and R. Zenobi, Isr. J. Chem., 2007, 47, 177–184 Search PubMed .
J. N. Chen, W. S. Yang, K. Dick, K. Deppert, H. Q. Xu, L. Samuelson and H. X. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 93110 Search PubMed .
B.-S. Yeo, E. Amstad, T. Schmid, J. Stadler and R. Zenobi, Small, 2009, 5, 952–960 CrossRef .
M. Chaigneau, G. Picardi and R. Ossikovski, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2011, 12, 1245–1258 Search PubMed .
T. Schmid, A. Messmer, B. S. Yeo, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391, 1907–1916 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Carrier, C. M. Kownacki and Z. D. Schultz, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2065–2067 RSC .
H. Watanabe, Y. Ishida, N. Hayazawa, Y. Inouye and S. Kawata, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 11 Search PubMed .
K. F. Domke, D. Zhang and B. Pettinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14721–14727 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rasmussen and V. Deckert, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2006, 37, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 1662–1665 CAS .
T. Deckert-Gaudig and V. Deckert, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1446–1451 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Yeo, S. Maedler, T. Schmid, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4867–4873 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gullekson, L. Lucas, K. Hewitt and L. Kreplak, Biophys. J., 2011, 100, 1837–1845 Search PubMed .
D. Cialla, T. Deckert-Gaudig, C. Budich, M. Laue, R. Moller, D. Naumann, V. Deckert and J. Popp, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 240–243 CrossRef CAS .
U. Neugebauer, U. Schmid, K. Baumann, W. Ziebuhr, S. Kozitskaya, V. Deckert, M. Schmitt and J. Popp, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 124–137 CrossRef CAS .
L. Opilik, T. Bauer, T. Schmid, J. Stadler and R. Zenobi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9978–9981 RSC .
R. Bohme, M. Richter, D. Cialla, P. Rosch, V. Deckert and J. Popp, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1452–1457 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, U. Heinemeyer, C. Stanciu, M. Sackrow, K. Braun, L. E. Hennemann, X. Wang, R. Scholz, F. Schreiber and A. J. Meixner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 056601 Search PubMed .
L. Zhu, C. Georgi, M. Hecker, J. Rinderknecht, A. Mai, Y. Ritz and E. Zschech, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 104305 CrossRef .
N. Hayazawa, M. Motohashi, Y. Saito, H. Ishitobi, A. Ono, T. Ichimura, P. Verma and S. Kawata, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2007, 38, 684–696 Search PubMed .
A. Tarun, N. Hayazawa, M. Motohashi and S. Kawata, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2008, 79, 013706 Search PubMed .
H. Hanafusa, N. Hirose, A. Kasamatsu, T. Mimura, T. Matsui, H. M. H. Chong, H. Mizuta and Y. Suda, Appl. Phys. Express, 2011, 4, 25701 Search PubMed .
H. Zhoutong, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 085001 Search PubMed .
G. G. Hoffmann, G. de With and J. Loos, Macromol. Symp., 2008, 265, 1–11 Search PubMed .
K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1427–1433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, P. Verma, K. Masui, Y. Inouye and S. Kawata, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1434–1440 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartschuh, H. Qian, C. Georgi, M. Bohmler and L. Novotny, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2009, 394, 1787–1795 Search PubMed .
K. Katayama, Y. Ogawa and F. Minami, Phys. E., 2011, 43, 808–810 Search PubMed .
Y. Hirata, K. Sakamoto, Y. Uehara and S. Ushioda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 110206 Search PubMed .
B. Yan, C. L. Du, L. Liao, Y. M. You, H. Cheng, Z. X. Shen and T. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 73105 Search PubMed .
D. H. Pan, N. Klymyshyn, D. H. Hu and H. P. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 3 .
P. C. Sevinc, X. Wang, Y. Wang, D. Zhang, A. J. Meixner and H. P. Lu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1490–1494 Search PubMed .
E. Bailo and V. Deckert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1658–1661 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartschuh, N. Anderson and L. Novotny, J. Microsc., 2003, 210, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
N. Anderson, A. Hartschuh, S. Cronin and L. Novotny, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2533–2537 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Andrew and T. M. Hancewicz, Appl. Spectrosc., 1998, 52, 797–807 CAS .
B. Muik, B. Lendl, A. Molina-Diaz, M. Valcarcel and M. J. Ayora-Canada, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 593, 54–67 Search PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, R. Jarvis, J. Allwood, G. Batman, R. Moore, E. Marsden-Edwards, L. Hampson, I. Hampson and R. Goodacre, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 398, 3051–3061 Search PubMed .
J. Guicheteau, L. Argue, D. Emge, A. Hyre, M. Jacobson and S. Christesen, Appl. Spectrosc., 2008, 62, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
M. Richter, M. Hedegaard, T. Deckert-Gaudig, P. Lampen and V. Deckert, Small, 2011, 7, 209–214 Search PubMed .
B. S. Yeo, T. Schmid, W. H. Zhang and R. Zenobi, Appl. Spectrosc., 2008, 62, 708–713 Search PubMed .
T. Ichimura, H. Watanabe, Y. Morita, P. Verma, S. Kawata and Y. Inouye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9460–9464 Search PubMed .
K. F. Domke and B. Pettinger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 236401 CrossRef .
K. F. Domke, D. Zhang and B. Pettinger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8611–8616 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudelski and B. Pettinger, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 321, 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Moyer, J. Schmidt, L. M. Eng, A. J. Meixner, G. W. Sandmann, H. Dietz and W. Plieth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5409–5410 CrossRef CAS .
M. Veres, M. Füle, S. Toth, M. Koos and I. Pocsik, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2004, 13, 1412–1415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maruyama, M. Ishikawa and M. Futamata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 108, 673–678 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang and L. J. Rothberg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3387–3391 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taguchi, N. Hayazawa, K. Furusawa, H. Ishitobi and S. Kawata, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1324–1330 CrossRef CAS .
V. Poborchii, T. Tada, T. Kanayama and P. Geshev, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1377–1385 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grafstroem, J. Kowalski, R. Neumann, O. Probst and M. Woertge, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 1991, 9, 568 Search PubMed .
D. Smith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 3825 Search PubMed .
A. Latini, A. Downes, O. Fenwick, A. Ambrosio, M. Allegrini, P. G. Gucciardi, S. Patanè, C. Daniel, C. Silva, R. Daik, W. J. Feast and F. Cacialli, Synth. Met., 2004, 147, 165–169 Search PubMed .
B. McCarthy, Y. Zhao, R. Grover and D. Sarid, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 111914 Search PubMed .
A. Tarun, N. Hayazawa, M. Motohashi and S. Kawata, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2008, 7033, 70330C Search PubMed .
A. V. Malkovskiy, V. I. Malkovsky, A. M. Kisliuk, C. A. Barrios, M. D. Foster and A. P. Sokolov, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1349–1354 Search PubMed .
A. Downes, D. Salter and A. Elfick, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 5216–5222 Search PubMed .
W. H. Zhang, T. Schmid, B. S. Yeo and R. Zenobi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2104–2108 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Agapov, A. V. Malkovskiy, A. P. Sokolov and M. D. Foster, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8900–8905 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Johannes Stadler	Johannes Stadler was born 1982 in Germany. He received his Diploma of Chemistry in 2006 from the Univ. of Tübingen and currently is a doctoral candidate in the Group of Prof. Zenobi, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich. He received a Roche Research Foundation Fellowship for his Ph.D. in 2008. His main research focuses on tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy and imaging of opaque samples using a top illumination TERS System. Additionally, confocal Raman spectroscopy, AFM, and STM analysis are part of his active projects.
Thomas Schmid	Thomas Schmid is a senior research associate and lecturer at ETH Zurich (Switzerland). Born and grown up in Bolzano (Italy), he received his Diploma (MSc) in Chemistry in 1999 and his Ph.D. in 2003 from Technische Universität München (Germany). In 2005, he joined ETH as a fellow of the German Research Foundation (DFG) and got appointed as a senior research associate/lecturer in 2007. His current research interests include nanoscale chemical analysis and chemical imaging using tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) and generally, combinations of AFM/STM and Raman microscopy, emphasizing methods development as well as applications in biology and materials science.
Renato Zenobi	Renato Zenobi is Professor of Analytical Chemistry at the ETH Zurich. After receiving a M.Sc. degree (ETH Zurich, 1986), a Ph.D. (Stanford University, 1990), and two postdoctoral appointments (Univ. of Pittsburgh and Michigan, 1990–1991), he returned to Switzerland as a Werner Fellow at the EPFL (1992). He became assistant professor at the ETH (1995), was promoted to associate professor in 1997, and to full professor in 2000. Zenobi's research areas include laser-based analytical chemistry, electrospray and laser-assisted mass spectrometry, laser-surface interactions, and near-field optical microscopy and spectroscopy. He is a pioneer of tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, a powerful emerging tool for nanoscale analytics.
Δx = 0.61λ/NA	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Synge's idea of scanning a backside-illuminated opaque metal screen with a small aperture in close distance over a sample for imaging with sub-wavelength resolution (a) compared to the principle of an aperture SNOM probe consisting of a glass fiber tip coated with an opaque metal film having a small aperture at the tip end (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  Wessel's idea of using a resonantly enhanced metal particle mounted on a transparent probe holder as a nanometre-sized light source (a) compared to bottom and side-illumination configurations used in TERS experiments (b). The red field lines represent the enhanced electromagnetic field at the tip end.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of the different possible illumination and detection geometries for tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Standard bottom and side illuminations are displayed in the upper part, and top illumination with parabolic mirror or lens based focusing in the bottom row.	 

AFM	Bottom ill.	102–104	
46–48
	4, 14–20 nm	
46, 49, 50, 51

Top ill.	contr. <2	
52, 53
	20–50 nm	
53

Side ill.	104, contr. 40	
54, 55
	20 nm	
56

STM	Side ill.	104–107	
29, 57–59
	20–50 nm	
57, 60

Top ill. (lens)	105–107	
45, 61
	12–15 nm	
45, 62

Top ill. (PM)	104–106	
32, 63, 64
	10–15 nm	
32, 65

Shear Force	 	103–105	
66–70
	18–70 nm	
66, 69–71


 	Fig. 4  Selection of available TERS tips. (a) Silver coated AFM TERS tip. (b) Etched full metal STM TERS tip. (c) Bow tie antenna on an AFM cantilever. Reprinted with permission from 125. (d) Photonic crystal cavity on a Si3N4 cantilever with attached tapered waveguide. Reprinted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.129	 

 	Fig. 5  TERS image from a patterned self assembled monolayer of two isomeric thiols evaluated for (a) the specific marker bands of pyridine-2-thiol (deposited in the circles) at 1000 cm−1 and (b) the pyridine-4-thiol marker band (located in the gaps) at 1100 cm−1 respectively. (c) Shows the quotient of both thiol bands exhibiting no enhancement fluctuations any more. In (d) tip-enhanced Raman spectra (1 s integration time) from the SAM in (a)–(c) are visible and (e) shows confocal and SERS reference spectra (10–120 s integration time) of a thiol SAM. Adapted from ref. 61.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
