Decorating carbon nanotubes with metal or semiconductor nanoparticles  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B700857K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B700857K
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2679-2694Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDecorating carbon nanotubes with metal or semiconductor nanoparticles

        
          
            Vasilios 
            Georgakilas
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Dimitrios 
            Gournis
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vasilios 
            Tzitzios
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lucia 
            Pasquato
          
          
        
      *cd, 
      
        
          
            Dirk M. 
            Guldi
          
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Maurizio 
            Prato
          
          
        
      df
aInstitute of Material Science, N. C. S. R. Demokritos, Ag. Paraskevi, Athens, Greece. E-mail: georgaki@ims.demokritos.gr
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina, 45110 Ioannina, Greece
cDipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Università di Trieste, via L. Giorgieri 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy. E-mail: lpasquato@units.it
dINSTM, Trieste Unit
eInstitute for Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Universität Erlangen, 91058 Erlangen, Germany
fDipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche, Università di Trieste, p. le Europa 1, 34127 Trieste, Italy
Received 
      18th January 2007
    , Accepted 30th March 2007First published on 3rd May 2007AbstractDue to their large chemically active surface and stability at high temperatures carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been used as a support material for the dispersion and stabilization of metal and semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs). These hybrid materials have found several applications in catalysis, nanoelectronics, optics, nanobiotechnology, etc. Several ways have been described in the literature to immobilize NPs on CNTs and they can be divided into two main pathways: (a) the formation (and stabilization) of metal NPs directly on the carbon nanotube surface, and (b) the connection of chemically modified NPs to carbon nanotubes or to modified CNTs. A plethora of methods for the synthesis of different NPs have been very recently developed. This know-how is now available for the generation of a large variety of new hybrid products in combination with CNTs. A selection of representative examples of the synthesis, properties and applications of NP–CNTs is here reported and discussed.Vasilios GeorgakilasVasilios Georgakilas received his BS and PhD degrees in Chemistry from the University of Ioannina (Greece) in 1989 and 1998, respectively. He then worked in the laboratory of nanostructured and composite materials in the Institute of Material Science of N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” (Greece) for one year as a Postdoctoral Fellow. In 2000, he moved to the laboratory of Prof. M. Prato at the University of Trieste, Italy, as a Postdoctoral Fellow, working on the organic functionalization of carbon nanostructures (carbon nanotubes and fullerenes). In 2002, he moved back to the Institute of Material Science of N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” (Greece)—working as a Research Associate. His research interests lie in the functionalization of nanostructured materials and their applications focusing on carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, metallic nanoparticles, inorganic layered and nanoporous materials, their derivatives and organic–inorganic hybrid nanocomposites.Dimitrios GournisDimitrios Gournis received his degree in Chemistry from the University of Ioannina (Greece) in 1992. Then, he worked (1993–1997) as a Postgraduate Fellow in the Institute of Physical Chemistry at N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” (Athens, Greece). He received his PhD in 1998 from the Dept of Chemical Engineering at the National Technical University of Athens. After a postdoc (1999–2000) at the Institute of Materials Science, N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” with Prof. D. Petridis, he moved to the Dept of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina as a lecturer and then Assistant Professor (non tenure track, 2000–2004). In 2004, he joined the group of Prof. P. Rudolf as a Research Associate at the Materials Science Center, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen (the Netherlands). In 2005 he was appointed Assistant Professor (tenure track) in the Dept of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina. He is an experimental synthetic chemist working in the area of layered and nanoporous materials. His research interests concern the chemistry of phyllomorphous materials (in particular clays, carbon layered structures), hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposites, carbon nanostructures (carbon nanotubes, fullerenes) and mesoporous materials.Vasilios TzitziosVasilios Tzitzios graduated from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in 1995. He completed his MSc and PhD with Prof. T. N. Angelidis for work in the heterogeneous catalytic decomposition of NOx. Nowadays, he has a Postdoctoral Fellowship in the Institute of Material Science, N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” Athens with Dr. D. Niarchos and works on the synthesis and characterization of nanocrystalline materials. His research interests focuses on inorganic nanoparticles and composites materials synthesis.Lucia PasquatoLucia Pasquato graduated in Chemistry in Padova, in 1983, under the supervision of Prof. G. Modena. In 1985 she was appointed as a researcher with the CNR (National Council of Research). In 2002 she moved to the University of Trieste to become Associate Professor. She was a research associate at the University of Würzburg with Prof. W. Adam in 1985–86. Her current research interests focus on metal nanoparticles for applications in catalysis and as templates to design functional 3D self-assembled monolayers for biochemical and material sciences applications.Dirk M. GuldiDirk M. Guldi graduated from the University of Cologne (Germany) in 1988, from where he received his PhD in 1990. In 1992, after a postdoctoral appointment at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, he took a research position at the Hahn-Meitner Institute, Berlin. After a brief stay as a Feodor-Lynen Stipend (Alexander von Humboldt Foundation) at Syracuse University he joined in 1995 the faculty of the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory where he was promoted to Associate Scientist in 1996. Since 2004 he is a Chaired Full Professor at the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen (Germany). His research focuses on the areas of charge separation in donor–acceptor ensembles and construction of nanostructured thin films for photoenergy conversion. He is particularly interested in molecular recognition as a means to control the composition, separation, orientation, and charge separation in nanostructured ensembles.Maurizio PratoMaurizio Prato studied chemistry at the University of Padova, Italy, where he was appointed Assistant Professor in 1983. He then moved to Trieste as an Associate Professor in 1992 and was promoted to Full Professor in 2000. He spent a postdoctoral year in 1986–87 at Yale University and was a Visiting Scientist in 1992–93 at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He was Professeur Invité at the Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, in July 2001. His research focuses on the functionalization chemistry of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes for applications in materials science and medicinal chemistry, and on the synthesis of biologically active substances.
1. Introduction
The exciting electronic and mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), reported first by Iijima in 1991,1 have generated broad and interdisciplinary attention.2,3 In recent years, many efforts have led to the development of versatile chemical modification methodologies, targeting CNT derivatives with even more attractive features.4 To this end a wide range of derivatives have been prepared and fully characterized that exhibit promising applications in nanobiotechnology, energy conversion/fuel storage, catalysis, nanotechnology, electronic nanodevices etc.5,6
Nanomaterials7 and especially metal nanoparticles8 (NPs) have emerged as a new class of compounds that are particularly interesting for materials science due to their unique electronic, optical, magnetic and catalytic properties. Importantly, these features differ from those of the bulk materials9 and depend on the size and shape of the NP.10 Current issues in NP research focus on the synthesis of NPs of noble metals such as Au, Ag, Pt;11 on studies of their properties;12 and on their applications in several areas from chemistry13 to physics,14 to material sciences,15 to biology and medicine.16 Impressive results have been attained with semiconductor NPs.10a,17 Of particular interest are new synthetic strategies to control the shape and the dimensionality of the NPs.17,18 Intensive research has been devoted to the study of shape-dependence of the fascinating properties and their applications.19 Other classes of nanoparticles are intensively studied, such as iron/platinum (FePt), cobalt/platinum (CoPt),20 magnetic nanoparticles,21 that exhibit novel optical and electrical properties.22
The combination of the two classes of material (CNTs and NPs) may lead to a successful integration of the properties of the two components in the new hybrid materials that present important features for catalysis and nanotechnology.23
The CNT surface serves as a template where NPs are absorbed or, when bearing functional groups, CNTs may be linked through organic fragments,24 to metal or semiconductor NPs—either “naked” or stabilized by a protecting monolayer.
The first report on decorating CNTs with metal clusters dates back to 1994. Ajayan and coworkers25 described the use of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) as a support material for dispersing ruthenium NPs that act as catalysts in heterogeneous catalysis. In particular, ruthenium 2,5-pentanedionate was spread onto the walls of SWNTs and subsequently reduced under a hydrogen stream. The Ru NPs thus obtained were well dispersed on the nanotube surface as corroborated by detailed TEM analysis. The final material contains 0.2% w/w of Ru. Catalytic assays that include liquid-phase hydrogenation of cinnamaldehyde revealed a particularly high selectivity for cinnamyl alcohol (up to 92%) with an 80% conversion of cinnamaldehyde. In contrast, under similar conditions, Ru NPs of similar size supported on Al2O3 catalyze the formation of cinnamyl alcohol with a selectivity of 20–30% only.
Following this promising work, hybrid composites were developed with either metal or semiconductor NPs. This review highlights hybrid composites constituting of CNTs and metallic and semiconductor materials. A selection of examples is here critically reported as representative of the many different synthetic methodologies so far reported. These new hybrid materials have been used as catalysts and comparison with the performance obtained using more traditional catalysts is not always available for the different reaction conditions used. Nevertheless new frontiers are open taking advantage of new properties still under investigation.
2. Carbon nanotubes/nanoparticles
The composites of CNTs with NPs can be achieved through two main pathways. Naked NPs are grown and/or deposited directly onto the CNT surface. In an alternative approach, NPs are pre-formed and connected to CNTs using covalent linking through organic fragments.
2.1 Formation of metal nanoparticles directly on the carbon nanotube surface
Salts of noble metals are commonly used as precursors of NPs, which are obtained by a reduction process. If this process occurs in the presence of CNTs, the NPs can be deposited onto the CNT walls mostly through van der Waals interactions, which in some cases seem to be sufficiently strong to guarantee meaningful adhesion. Various methods—application of heat, light, and reducing agents—have been utilized to perform the metal cation reduction. Precious and noble metals (Pt, Au, Pd, Ag, Rh, Ru) as well as Ni26,27 have been used extensively in the literature.26–51 These metals are commonly used in heterogeneous catalytic reactions and their properties can be enhanced when CNTs are employed as support materials.23 Applications of these hybrid materials as functional components in supercapacitors,32 gas sensors,33a biosensors, hydrogen storage have been reported.26,33b
Chen and coworkers28 addressed its interest to a variety of metals and described a method for the growth of Pt, Ag, Au, Pd and Cu NPs and fibers34 onto multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs). The metal cations were initially dispersed onto the nanotube surfaces and then reduced under hydrogen stream while heating. Besides acting as a supporting material, CNTs, very likely, play the role of templates in tailoring the size of metal particles. This hypothesis was supported by the fact that the NPs are remarkably larger when the reduction of the metal cations is performed in the presence of graphite or amorphous carbon. Moreover, the number of NPs deposited on graphite or active carbon using the same method is very low with respect to that found in the presence of CNTs.
Lordi and coworkers35 treated SWNTs with diluted nitric acid to create oxygenated functions on the nanotube walls. The surface presents mostly carboxylic groups that can act as anchors in the formation and deposition of Pt NPs. Ethylene glycol (EG) was used as the reducing agent. The final material contained about 10% of Pt NPs, with a mean diameter of about 1–2 nm (Fig. 1). The Pt–SWNT catalytic system was probed in the hydrogenation of 3-methyl-2-butenal and its activity started above 75 °C. These results seem to be promising even though they did not show any significant catalytic enhancement for the Pt decorated SWNTs compared to traditional catalysts.
 Fig. 1  Formation and deposition of Pt NPs directly on oxidized CNTs (EG = ethylene glycol).35 
Polymer electrolyte and direct methanol fuel cells (PEFC and DMFC respectively) are new power sources for several applications such as electric vehicles and electronic portable devices. Platinum NPs and alloys immobilized on carbon black are the most utilized electrocatalysts in these devices. However, the high cost that occurred from the use of Pt as a catalyst is a serious disadvantage for the commercialization of such devices. Carbon nanotubes could be an ideal substrate in this application since they offer very attractive characteristics such as high surface area, excellent electronic conductivity and high chemical stability.
Xin and coworkers reported a procedure for the synthesis of Pt–MWNT nanocomposites in order to study their catalytic efficiency in DMFC.36 Two different reduction procedures were used in the preparation of Pt NPs supported on oxidized MWNTs. A first sample was obtained by reduction of the hexachloroplatinic acid with an aqueous solution of formaldehyde whereas the second sample was obtained by reduction of the Pt precursor with an EG solution. Both samples contained a metal loading of 10 wt% but the one prepared by EG treatment had a more homogeneous dispersion of spherical Pt NPs with a narrow particle size distribution. TEM and XRD analyses show a 2.5 nm average particle size. The products were tested for their efficiency in DMFC, whereas the EG-generated sample displayed significantly higher performance than the Pt loaded on commercial XC-72 carbon. This improvement in catalytic performance was attributed to the greater dispersion of the supported Pt particles when the EG method is used and to possible unique structural and higher electrical properties of the MWNTs once compared to carbon black XC-72 as a support.
A uniform deposition of Pt NPs with a diameter lower than 5 nm was obtained using a sonochemical method.37 The resulting material had a loading of up to 30% as shown in Fig. 2. Pt–CNT composites were used for cyclic voltammetry measurements in the electrochemical adsorption and desorption of hydrogen, exhibiting much higher efficiency as compared to Pt on carbon black.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of high loaded CNTs with Pt NPs at 10, 20, and 30 wt%, respectively, from left to right (reproduced with permission from ref. 37) 
Liu et al.38 applied a sensitization step for Pt NP deposition on the surface of highly functionalized CNTs. In this case CNTs were oxidized with HNO3 and K2Cr2O7/H2SO4 and then sensitized by aging in SnCl2/HCl solution. Pt NPs were successfully deposited on the sensitized CNTs by an electroless plating procedure. The sensitization step seems to influence the deposition and the homogeneous distribution of Pt NPs in a substantial way. The Pt–CNT electrodes showed high electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction in a single stack polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell. Iridium has also been used as a promoter for the formation of Pt/Ru/Ir alloy NPs with very small sizes (about 1 nm). Their immobilization on CNTs produced a Pt/Ru/Ir–CNT composite that shows excellent activity in methanol oxidation.39
It has been observed that Ni NPs facilitate the chemisorption of hydrogen on CNTs thus suggesting that Ni–CNT composites could be used for effective reversible hydrogen storage.16 Xu and coworkers used Pd and Sn as nucleation seeds for the deposition of Ni and Pd NPs on CNTs by electroless plating.27
A different approach to CNT functionalization takes advantage of microwave irradiation to introduce carboxyl, carbonyl, hydroxyl, and allyl terminal groups on the CNT surface without the use of strong acids or ultrasonication. The functional groups serve as the preferred nucleation centers for the reduction of the metal ions present in solution. MWNTs were dispersed into a water solution containing HAuCl4, using EG as reducing agent. After microwave irradiation, gold NPs uniformly dispersed on the CNT surfaces were formed (Fig. 3).40 Fig. 3  Decoration of multiwalled CNTs with Au NPs of 3–10 nm diameter. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40). 
Dai and coworkers reported an unprecedented result related to the reduction of metal ions in the presence of CNTs.41 The authors observed that Pt and Au NPs could be formed in the presence of CNTs, from metal precursors without any reducing agent. They proposed that a direct redox reaction occurs between the metal ions and CNTs. The NPs formed spontaneously and exclusively on SWNT walls right after the immersion of CNTs in a solution of HAuCl4 (Au3+) or of Na2PtCl2 (Pt2+) for 3 min. The metal ion reduction and SWNT oxidation during this process was probed by measuring the electrical conductance of the SWNTs immersed in solutions. The latter act as the electron donors and the hole injection into SWNTs is expected to generate an increase in the electrical conductance to the already p-type nanotubes due to O2 doping under ambient conditions. This electroless metal deposition was effective only using Au and Pt. Other metal cations such as Ag+, Ni2+ and Cu2+ could not be reduced in the same way because of their lower redox potentials (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  AFM images of (a) Au and (b) Pt NPs on SWNTs. (c) Diagram of the Fermi energy (EF) of a SWNT, and the reduction potentials of Au3+ and Pt2+vs. SHE, respectively. The reduction potentials of most other metal ions lie above EF, except for Ag+ (reproduced with permission from ref. 41). 
Another method for the electroless deposition of metal NPs on CNTs in the absence of any additional reducing agent has also been reported.42 In this case, metals with lower redox potentials than that of CNTs such as Cu and Ag NPs were included. The reaction process is described in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the deposition of metal nanoparticles on carbon nanotubes via the substrate enhanced electroless deposition (SEED) process.42 
The deposition of metal NPs is achieved via the redox reaction of a galvanic cell, where the nanotube acts as a cathode for metal deposition (e.g. Au) via reduction of metal ions in solution, while a metal substrate (e.g. Cu) serves as an anode where metal atoms are oxidized to the corresponding ions and dissolved in solution. This method can be used for the growth and deposition of any metal NPs on carbon nanotubes as long as the redox potential of the metal substrate is lower than that of the metal ions in solution, indicating a great potential for functionalization of carbon nanotubes with various metal NPs.
Recently, the immobilization on SWNTs of Au, Pt, and Rh NPs obtained by reduction of the precursor salts by polyethylene glycol has been reported (Fig. 6). The addition of oleylamine that passivate the NP surface enhanced solubility of the new materials in organic solvents,43 which can be an advantage for applications in the catalysis of organic reactions.
 Fig. 6  Modification of SWNTs by metal NPs and subsequent addition of oleylamine. Inset: a representative TEM image from Pt (oleylamine)–SWNT composite.43 
Another method used to form metal NPs on CNTs is electrodeposition.44,45 Immersing CNTs in a solution of HAuCl4, K2PtCl4, or (NH4)2PdCl4 and controlling the potential, the pulse and the concentration of the precursor salt in an electrochemical system results in the deposition of Au, Pt and Pd NPs respectively on CNTs. The external surface of the NTs was fully covered by metal and thus the product could be characterized as a metallic nanowire. The electrodeposition occurs to the same extent on the sidewall surface and on the tips of CNTs and the presence of carboxylate, hydroxyl or other groups did not act as activators in the electrodeposition (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the SWNT as an electrode used for electrodeposition of metal NPs.44 
Metal NP–CNT composites have often been used as catalysts in a variety of organic reactions showing very good performance. CNTs offer important advantages as a supporting material in catalytic systems. They are a very light but stiff material, with large surface area, high thermal and electrical conductivity and chemical inertness under “normal” conditions. Metal NPs are in general, easily immobilized on the CNT surface in fine dispersion. In contrast to other supporting materials such as amorphous carbon, CNTs are not a porous material. As a result, most of their surface is accessible to metal deposition and the deposited NPs are exposed to the reactants. Furthermore, the lack of porosity in CNTs facilitates the diffusion of the reactants toward the metallic surface and the removal of the reaction products from the catalytic surface. Indeed, the difficulty in diffusion and recovery of the products are major disadvantages of the most common supporting materials in catalytic reactions.
As an example, Pd and Rh NPs and a Rh/Pd alloy on CNTs have been recently compared for catalytic hydrogenations and coupling reactions.46 A water-in-oil microemulsion technique and the hydrogen reduction of cationic precursors of the metals have been applied to prepare and deposit metal NPs onto CNT surfaces. The metal precursor was added to a water–hexane microemulsion and the reduction by hydrogen gave rise to NPs dispersed on the CNT outer surface. The microemulsion technique leads to a fine dispersion of NPs with small size, in contrast to a simple deposition. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the composite materials on SWNTs showed a metal deposition of about 13% for Pd and 17% for Rh. The metal NP–CNT composites were tested as catalysts for organic synthesis reactions. As an example, Pd–CNT composites were used to catalyze the Heck coupling reaction between iodobenzene and styrene (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Catalytic formation of 1,2-diphenylethane from styrene after Heck coupling reaction and hydrogenation in the presence of Pd–CNT and Pt–CNT as catalyst respectively.46 
The product was obtained with 94% yield after 3 h while under the same reaction conditions the classical Pd/carbon (10 wt%) gave the product with 53% yield in 24 h. Subsequent hydrogenation with Pt–CNT yielded 1,2-diphenylethane with 99% yield after 10 min using 1 atm of H2 gas at 25 °C. In comparison, when commercial Pt catalyst was used, the hydrogenation reached a similar yield after only 1 h. The hydrogenation of anthracene was selected to test the catalytic activity of Rh–CNT composites. Anthracene was completely hydrogenated after 1 h at 25 °C under 10 atm of H2. Using the commercial Rh/carbon catalyst, no conversion of anthracene was detected after 2 h of reaction under the same conditions. Rh–Pd NPs deposited on MWNTs using the microemulsion procedure seem to be more active than the single metal NPs on CNTs in the catalytic hydrogenation of anthracene.
Rh NPs deposited onto CNTs have been also used to catalyze hydrogenation and hydroformylation reactions.47 Highly dispersed Rh NPs were obtained from a [Rh2Cl2(CO)4] complex in the presence of carboxylated MWNT surface by a reduction step (Fig. 9). This catalyst exhibited very high selectivity for both hydrogenation and hydroformylation.
 Fig. 9  Formation of Rh NPs on CNTs.47 
Hor and coworkers immobilized Pt clusters on CNTs.48 Carboxylic groups on the CNT surface, obtained by oxidation with HNO3 or a H2SO4–HNO3 mixture, behave as nucleation sites for a well dispersed deposition of Pt NPs on the surface of CNTs. The authors suggest that such kinds of materials are potentially useful in catalysis, while the formation of these composites through a chemical modification method would also be beneficial to the preparation and applications of new metal–nanofiber composites.
Pt–CNT composites have also been synthesized in supercritical carbon dioxide using Pt(II)-acetylacetonate as the metal precursor (Fig. 10).49 These catalysts showed to possess a high catalytic activity both in the oxidation of methanol and in the oxygen reduction reactions. This performance has been attributed to the large surface area of CNTs and the decrease in the overpotential for methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions. Electrochemical measurements showed that the oxygen reduction reaction at the Pt–CNT electrode is a diffusion-controlled process. The experimental results show that Pt–CNT nanocomposites synthesized in supercritical carbon dioxide are effective electrocatalysts for low temperature fuel cells.
 Fig. 10  A typical TEM image of CNTs decorated by Pt NPs synthesized in supercritical carbon dioxide (reproduced with permission from ref. 49). 
Xu and coworkers have reported that the presence of salts such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), sodium tosylate, lithium triflate, or lithium perchlorate in the reaction solution leads to a high dispersion and loading of platinum NPs on CNTs without aggregation (Fig. 11).50 The salt seems to support the heterogeneous nucleation which results in a fine metal dispersion and depresses the homogeneous nucleation which causes the growth of large aggregates of metal NPs.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of salt-directed selective metal nucleation and growth on CNTs (left part) and the TEM images of Pt–CNT derivatives (right part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 50). 
2.2 Connecting metal nanoparticles and CNTs
Metal NPs can be linked to the CNT surface via covalent or weaker bonds. Therefore, the NPs are prepared and modified with suitable functional groups for the connection to the CNT surface. These linkers can be of two types: (1) the functional groups may be used to form covalent bonds with functional groups present on the CNT surface or (2) the linker simply sticks to the CNT surface through weak intermolecular interactions such as π–π stacking, hydrophobic or electrostatic attractions.

2.2.1 Covalent linkage. 
Haddon and collaborators51 first reported that oxidation of SWNTs and subsequent reaction with aliphatic amines, to give amides, leads to soluble functionalized SWNTs. Au NPs were connected to oxidized SWNTs using aminothiols or bifunctional thiols, which act as linkers for Au colloids (Fig. 12).52,53
 Fig. 12  Connecting gold NPs to SWNTs by an aminothiol linker (upper part). AFM images of pristine SWNTs before (left) and after (right) exposure to the aminothiol linker and gold particles (lower part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 52). 
The so-called Bingel reaction has also been used to functionalize the CNT surface with thioether groups.54 These groups then bind gold NPs as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Connection of gold NPs to CNTs using the Bingel reaction and the AFM image of the as formed Au–SWNT (reproduced with permission from ref. 54). 


2.2.2 Hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds. 
Hydrophobic interactions between the ligands forming the monolayer that passivate the metal surface have been used to immobilize the metal NPs onto CNTs. Acetone molecules adsorbed on CNTs can interact hydrophobically with Au nanoclusters covered with a monolayer of octanethiols.55 These systems may become important for exploring and creating a rich variety of molecular nanostructures for device applications.
A simple procedure has been reported to produce a composite material where MWNTs and SWNTs were decorated with Au NPs protected by a monolayer of dodecanethiol molecules simply by mixing dispersions of both components in dichloromethane.56 It is important to point out that the nanoparticle protective monolayer imparts solubility properties to the new composite. The resulting Au–CNT system shows strong electronic coupling, which suggests interesting physicochemical properties. Transient absorption spectra analysis, following photoexcitation, suggests that the Au NPs function as electron acceptors, receiving additional electron density from MWNTs or SWNTs.
A combination of hydrophobic and hydrogen bond interactions has been used to anchor mixed-monolayer protected Au clusters to functionalized surfaces of CNTs.57 Au NPs, with a size of 2 nm or 5 nm, covered by a mixed-monolayer of decanethiol and mercaptoundecanoic acid, were linked efficiently to oxidized CNTs due to the presence of carboxylic acid groups on the surface. Thus, besides the hydrophobic interactions between the alkyl chains and the CNT surface, hydrogen bonds between carboxylic groups of CNTs and those present on the NP surface led to very stable composite materials (Fig. 14). Thermal treatment, for example, at 300 °C to remove the capping shells of the Au NPs induced aggregation of NPs that stick strongly to the nanotube surface. Sonication in hydrophobic solvents failed to disassemble the composite material.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustrations of the assembly of mixed-monolayer capped NPs on oxidized CNTs and a characteristic TEM image of the resulting derivative (reproduced with permission from ref. 57). 
Very recently, Zhu and coworkers have proposed that bamboo-like carbon nanotubes (BCNTs) can be used as a substrate for the immobilization of Au NPs rather better than normal carbon nanotubes.58 The authors observed that nitrogen atoms present on the wall of BCNTs contribute to the high-density and uniform assembly of Au NPs on BCNTs. The BCNTs were produced by pyrolysis of iron(II) phthalocyanine then were dispersed in toluene by sonication and mixed with a solution of organically modified Au NPs by a simple hand shaking. Au–BCNT nanocomposites were isolated by centrifugation and characterized. The lower part of Fig. 15 presents characteristic TEM images of pristine and Au decorated BCNTs. These images clearly revealed that gold NPs are finely dispersed and present a high dense population of NPs on the N doped CNT surface. The observed increase in density of NPs with respect to classical CNTs has been explained by the authors by the presence of specific Au–N interactions which determine the uniform assembly of NPs.
 Fig. 15  (Upper part) Illustration of the direct assembly of Au NPs on bamboo-like CNTs. (Lower part) TEM images of bamboo-like CNTs (left) and Au–BCNT nanocomposites (center and right) (reproduced with permission from ref. 58). 
 Fig. 16  Ammonium-modified MWNTs and the noncovalent self-assembly of Au nanoparticles with crown ether-modified monolayer (upper part). TEM images of crown-modified Au NPs (a) adsorbed on modified MWNTs and (b) not adsorbed on unmodified MWNTs (reproduced with permission from ref. 60). 
Very recently, Fitzmaurice and collaborators reported a predictive model for interactions (charge transfer, van der Waals, osmotic, elastic, non elastic and covalent) between TOAB-stabilized Au NPs (TOAB = tetraoctylammonium bromide) and covalently modified MWNTs with alkyl and alkylthiol chains in order to predict the coverage of CNTs by Au NPs for a range of different experimental conditions.59 For example, comparison between theory and experiments showed that as the length of the alkyl chains at the surface of the MWNTs increases, the coverage decreases. The understanding of the parameters that control the MWNT-templated assembly of NPs has been the basis for the design and control of more complex hybrid materials.
An elegant self-assembly coverage of cation-modified MWNTs with crown-modified Au NPs has been reported by Fitzmaurice and coworkers60 where ammonium cations thread the crown ethers present on the Au NP monolayer surface (Fig. 16).61


2.2.3 π-Stacking. 
Among other aromatic compounds, pyrene derivatives stack onto the CNT surface by π–π interactions.62–64 Thus, pyrene molecules, bearing a long aliphatic chain terminated by a thiol group, can connect CNTs to Au NPs via
						π-staking of the pyrene moiety to the CNT surface as shown in Fig. 17(a).62 Spectroscopic experiments on the composite material show that the pyrene fluorescence is completely quenched and the Raman spectrum of the CNT is enhanced. These results imply a charge transfer character between CNTs and Au NPs—mediated by the linker. Electron transfer processes between donor groups and CNTs have also been observed to occur on SWNT–Zn porphyrin hybrid materials.63,64
 Fig. 17  Noncovalent attachment of gold or magnetic NPs onto SWNTs using pyrene derivatives as interlinkers.62,65 
A similar strategy was adopted to anchor magnetic NP, such as Fe3O4, Co or CoPt to SWNT, using a ligand having a pyrene ring and a carboxylic group at the two ends, respectively. The pyrene is attached on the SWNT surface while the carboxylic group is linked to the magnetic NPs resulting in their homogeneous dispersion on the SWNT surface. Furthermore the presence of an organophilic layer of oleic acid surrounding the inorganic nanoclusters makes the resulting composites highly soluble in organic solvents, such as chloroform, toluene, hexane [Fig. 17(b)].65
Besides the enhanced solubility, an interesting feature of the modified CNT is the modification of their magnetic properties.65 Both properties are illustrated in Fig. 18. Photographs (a) and (b) show the characteristically colored solutions of magnetically modified CNTs in chloroform. Photograph (c) presents the same composite material dispersed in acetone and (d) the response of this dispersion to a permanent magnet. Another important issue, in this study, is that the NPs are not directly and permanently attached to the CNT surface. Due to the linker length, there is a tunable distance between the NP and the nanotube surface, which could be modulated in the study of the electronic and magnetic properties of the modified CNTs. The magnetically coated CNTs have great potential as tips for high resolution Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) or for several other applications in biology and nanoelectronics.
 Fig. 18  (a), (b) Photographs of magnetically modified CNTs in chloroform at different concentrations, (c) dispersion in acetone and (d) their response to a permanent magnet.65 
Another example is the formation of Au–CNT nanocomposites in aqueous solutions using 1-pyrenemethylamine as the linker (Fig. 19).66 Au NPs with diameters of 2–4 nm were densely assembled on the surface of the MWNT. Au NPs were functionalized with 1-pyrenemethylamine. The formation of the composite material was followed by UV-Vis and luminescence spectroscopy. In the modified Au NPs, the absorbance value of pyrene chromophore was decreased and the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) was red shifted from 508 to 556 nm due to interparticle plasmon coupling. The photoluminescence of the pyrene moiety was largely quenched when attached to gold NPs and the pyrene emission intensity was further lowered upon formation of Au NP–CNT composites. The present approach to form deposition of high-density gold NPs on the surface of MWNTs has been extended to other molecules with similar structures such as N-(1-naphthyl)ethylenediamine and phenethylamine, demonstrating the generality of this strategy for making Au–CNT nanostructure composites.
 Fig. 19  Gold NP assembly on carbon nanotubes through 1-pyrenemethylamine interlinker and a TEM image of the derived product (upper part). UV-Vis absorption spectra of (a) free 1-pyrenemethylamine in ethanol, (b) an aqueous gold NP solution, (c) the mixture of 1-pyrenemethylamine and gold NPs, and (d) the solution containing Au–CNT nanoparticle composites (lower part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 66). 
An interesting application of Pt–CNT nanocomposites, as anode catalyst for methanol oxidation fuel cells, has been recently described (Fig. 20).67 Pt NPs covered by triphenylphosphine (PPh3) were deposited on the surface of MWNTs. The resulting composites have shown higher electrocatalytic activity and better tolerance to poisoning species in methanol oxidation than the commercial E-TEK catalyst. The Pt–CNT composite was annealed to remove PPh3 molecules. Even though thermal treatment led to some degree of aggregation of Pt NPs, the mean size remained smaller than 4 nm.
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis procedures of Pt–CNT composite (left part) and the TEM image of a metal decorated CNT (reproduced with permission from ref. 67). 
The fine dispersion of Pt NPs on the CNT surface and their strong adhesion to the nanotube walls are the advantages of this method. On the other hand, the long time sonication (5 d) required for dispersion of Pt NPs is the main disadvantage. The electrochemical performance of the new Pt NP–CNT composite was tested for methanol oxidation. The comparison of the cyclic voltammograms (Fig. 21) of the new catalyst with commercially available E-TEK Pt/C catalyst shows that the oxidation current observed with Pt–CNT composite is considerably higher than that of the E-TEK catalyst moreover, the voltammogram of the new catalyst indicates more effective removal of the poisoning species on the catalyst surface showing better catalyst tolerance with respect E-TEK catalyst.
 Fig. 21  Cyclic voltammograms of methanol oxidation on Pt–CNT composite (solid line) and commercial E-TEK Pt/C catalyst (dashed line) in 2 M CH3OH/1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 20 mV S−1 at room temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 67). 


2.2.4 Electrostatic interactions. 
Electrostatic interactions have also been used to anchor metal colloids to CNTs.68–78 To this end, oxidized CNTs were treated with an ionic polyelectrolyte which serves as an anchor for charged metal NPs. In a typical example, oxidized CNTs were modified with a cationic polyelectrolyte and exposed to negatively charged Au NPs.68 By choosing different kinds of polyelectrolytes the surface of the CNT can be also negatively charged in order to accept positively charged NPs.
A similar electrostatic approach has been used to build mixed Au NP–MWNT layers using the LBL (layer-by-layer) methodology.70 Acid-functionalized MWNTs were first covered with a layer of a positively charged polymer [PDDA, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride)] and then with a layer of a negatively charged polymer [PSS, poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate)]. Subsequently, positively charged Au NPs were anchored through electrostatic interactions to the PSS layer. Positively charged Au NPs may also interact directly with MWNTs presenting carboxylate groups on their surface. However, the direct binding happens with a much lower density than that observed for the PDDA/PSS LBL method.
The polyelectrolyte LBL approach has been recently used to prepare a new class of hybrid materials composed of Au nanorods aligned along the walls of MWNTs.71 In this case, the MWNTs were treated with a negatively charged polyelectrolyte (PSS), followed by electrostatic assembly of a positively charged polyelectrolyte (PDDA). Over this charged monolayer Au nanorods, prepared following the method of Nikoobakht and El-Sayed72 and after exchange of CTAB (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) with PVP [poly(vinylpyrrolidone)], were deposited. A very uniform string of Au nanorods aligned over MWNTs is formed, where the rods connect through end-to-end contacts. Such morphology results in uniaxial plasmon coupling, but can be used to monitor the degree of alignment of CNTs within polymer films or other nanostructured systems.
Polyethyleneimine (PEI) is an amino-rich cationic polyelectrolyte, which interacts with CNTs via physisorption. PEI has been recently used as a reducing and protecting agent for the preparation of gold NPs. Dong and coworkers73 combined these two features of PEI for the formation of Au–CNT composites through in situ reduction of Au cations by PEI adsorbed on the sidewalls of MWNTs (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the experimental procedure in which PEI possibly interacts with acid-functionalized MWNTs through electrostatic interaction and physisorption processes (reproduced with permission from ref. 73). 
The coverage of Au NPs on CNT surfaces can be controlled by several parameters such as the initial concentration of PEI, the Au precursor and MWNTs, the temperature and the duration of the heat treatment.
Jerome and collaborators74 devised an easy route to decorate carbon nanotubes with magnetic NPs (Fe3O4). The two components form a stable composite by electrostatic interactions. MWNTs were functionalized with carboxylate terminated alkyl chains using pre-formed poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP) chains by a covalent bonding technique using a radical metal-free method.75 The chemical functionalization led to an increase of the grafting density of carboxylate groups onto the CNT surface with respect to oxidative methods which cause, also, a severe reduction of the CNT length. The magnetite NPs were treated with a HNO3 solution to obtain positive charges at their surface. The derivatized MWNTs, as well as the charged NPs, were dispersible in water whereas the final composite was not. Fig. 23 shows a characteristic part of the decorated MWNTs where small magnetic NPs are densely immobilized on the carbon surface.
 Fig. 23  Grafting of P2VP to CNTs and decoration by Fe3O4 NP. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the magnetite–CNT nanohybrids (reproduced with permission from ref. 74). 
Several studies have focused on the potential applications of CNTs and their derivatives as platforms for biosensors and electronic nanodevices to exploit the ability of CNTs to promote electron transfer reactions with enzymes and other biomolecules. To this aim, Luong and collaborators76 used a Pt–SWNT composite to improve an electrochemical biosensor for the detection of hydrogen peroxide, an analyte that is released during the oxidation of the substrate by a pertinent oxidoreductase in the presence of oxygen. Nafion was used to modify and disperse carbon nanotubes making their surface negatively charged. Then, Pt NPs were immobilized on the modified carbon nanotube surface mainly by strong charge interactions. Nafion is a perfluorosulfonated polymer with a polar side chain, biocompatible, with unique ion exchange properties. SWNTs modified by Nafion are easily dispersible in water solutions or alcohol.77
The Pt–SWNT composite has been used to modify a glassy carbon electrode and a carbon fiber microelectrode in order to improve their electroactivity for H2O2. The authors demonstrated that Pt NPs are in electrical contact, through the SWNTs, with the glassy carbon or carbon fiber, enabling the composite structure to function as an electrode. With glucose oxidase as an enzyme model, a biosensor was constructed, more sensitive to glucose than those modified by Pt NPs or CNTs alone. The response time and detection limit of this biosensor was determined to be 3 s and 0.5 µM, respectively.76
In addition to the use of metal NP–CNT composites in fine dispersion for potential applications as catalytic systems or biosensors, CNTs have been used as templates for the formation of metal nanowires. In a characteristic example CNTs were used as templates for the formation of Au nanowires.78 Au NPs were stabilized with tetraoctylammonium cations and dispersed in chloroform. When immersing MWNTs in this solution, Au NPs were deposited around carbon nanotubes. The authors suggest that Au NPs are adsorbed on the CNT surface similar to the case of Au NPs interacting with fullerenes. Then, the mixed composite was heated so that the metal NPs melt and amalgamate. The result of the heating process was the formation of metal wires with large aspect ratios having CNTs as the cores. This method seems to be applicable to a wide range of metal species.

2.3 Connecting semiconductor nanoparticles and CNTs
Semiconductor NPs and CNTs represent an intriguing combination. The metal nanostructures, commonly named quantum dots (QDs), are NPs composed of groups III–V or II–VI elements with optical and electronic properties that depend on the size of the NP as a consequence of the quantum confinement effect on the photoexcited species.
QDs are very attractive tools in biological labelling,79 solar cells,80 light emitting devices81 and other photonic applications. However several difficulties need to be overcome for their use. As an example, QDs have been used in solar cells in composites with polymers with quantum yields less than 2%. This percentage is relatively low in comparison to inorganic solar cells. This disadvantage is mainly due to the difficulty in transferring the charge carriers away from QD NPs in the device.82
CNTs decorated by QDs could act as nanowires that promote direct charge transport and efficient charge transfer to QDs, thus increasing the efficiency in solar cells. The above described technique to connect CNTs and metal NPs by using an interlinker has been also used for the connection of semiconductor NPs such as CdSe to CNTs. As an example, QD NPs were stabilized with a mixed-monolayer of trioctylphosphine oxide and 2-aminoethanethiol. The amino-functionalized QDs react with the carboxylic groups of the oxidized SWNTs, forming amide bonds.82 Using a similar route to realize QD–CNT, Banerjee and Wong observed a significant charge transfer occurring in QD–CNT.83
Similarly, Ozkan and collaborators84 reported the formation of heterojunctions between MWNTs and thiol-stabilized ZnS-capped CdSe QDs (Fig. 24). The surface of MWNTs was purified and functionalized with carboxylate groups by gentle oxidation (i.e., HNO3). The QD NPs were protected with 2-aminoethanethiols and the heterojunction was formed in the presence of EDC (N-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-N′-ethylcarbodiimide) between the acid groups present at the ends of oxidized CNTs and the amino groups of the QDs.
 Fig. 24  Scheme of the synthesis of ZnS-capped CdSe–MWNT conjugates.84 
This strategy was used by Willner and collaborators to assemble a CdS NP–CNT system on an Au electrode and to study the photoinduced charge transport of this system in the presence of triethanolamine (as a sacrificial electron donor).85 The generated photocurrent was impressively high, I(l390) = 0.83 mA, for the CdS NP–CNT monolayer. From the intensity of the light absorbed by the sample a quantum efficiency for the photon-to-electron conversion of 25% was estimated. The quantum efficiencies increase as the digestion time treatment of the CNTs increases (shorter CNTs) reaching a quantum efficiency up to 70%. The results suggest that the length of the CNT plays a major role in the formation of photocurrents and probably the defects in the CNTs affect the extent of charge separation that follows the photoexcitation of the CdS NPs.
SnO2 is an n-type semiconductor with a wide energy gap. Chemical sensors, solar cells, heterojunctions, transparent coatings, and conductive electrodes are applications where SnO2 semiconductor is involved.
A uniform and thin coating of carbon nanotubes by SnO2 NPs was reported by Zettl and Han.86 Acid treated CNTs were dispersed in a solution of SnCl2 and conc. HCl in water. After a short sonication, SnO2 NPs with a 4 nm average diameter are visible on the nanotube surface.
SWNTs and MWNTs were also linked to CdTe NPs, through electrostatic interactions.87 The CdTe NPs were stabilized by thioglycolic acid. The novel nanohybrids were characterized both in the ground and excited state with specific attention to electron transfer chemistry. These studies provided kinetic and spectroscopic evidence that support a partial transfer of charge density, with rapid formation of microsecond-lived radical ion pair states. This remarkable feature was exploited to construct photoelectrochemical cells. Photocurrents were generated through the implementation of CdTe and SWNTs or MWNTs, which serve as excited state electron donor components and electron acceptors, respectively. Very recently Kamat and coworkers reported the synthesis of CdS NP–SWNT composites. This new material shows charge transfer interactions between photoexcited QD–NP and SWNTs (Fig. 25).88
 Fig. 25  (Right part) Synthesis of CdS–SWCNT hybrid material: (a) SWNT suspension in THF following the addition of CdI2 solution, (b) dropwise addition of Na2S, (c) completion of the reaction as the CdS–SWNT composite settles down in THF, and (d) resuspension of CdS–SWNT in methanol. (Left part) Charge-transfer interaction between photoexcited CdS NP and SWCNT. (reproduced with permission from ref. 88). 
An attractive application in the area of nanomedicine has very recently reported by Bottini et al.89 Streptavidin conjugated quantum dots (Str-QD) were adsorbed on the surface of the SWNTs, forming a supramolecular nanostructure fully dispersible in buffer solution. The recognition of biotinylated anti-CD3 antibodies on the surface of the Jurkat T leukemia cell membrane anchors the functional CNT on the cell surface. This luminescent nanoassembly was clearly visible by both optical and confocal fluorescent microscopies and might be used for the construction of intracellular polyvalent nanoprobes, mimicking natural viral delivery entities with enhanced loading capacity compared to small molecules (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  Photographs of pristine SWNT (a) and of the SWNT-streptavidin-QD nanoassembly (b) in phosphate-buffered saline. c) Schematic representation of the interactions between CD3 receptors on the Jurkat T leukemia cell membrane and a SWNT-streptavidin-QD nanoassembly. A biotinylated anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody was used to link CD3 to the nanoassembly. The supramolecular luminescent nanoassembly acted as a multivalent delivery system, with each nanoassembly capable of binding many biotinylated RCD3-CD3 receptor complexes (reproduced with permission from ref. 89). 
Liz-Marzán and coworkers have recently reported the combination of both polymer wrapping and LBL self-assembly techniques for the deposition of CdTe nanocrystals onto CNTs, yielding linear colloidal CdTe–CNT composites with a high degree of coverage. The photoluminescence quenching of the QDs can be controlled through the growth of a silica-shell spacer between the CNT surface and the deposited QDs. The main general steps of this method for the deposition of CdTe QDs onto CNTs and onto silica-coated CNTs (CNTs@SiO2) are represented in Fig. 27.90
 Fig. 27  A possible route for the preparation of CdTe–CNTs@SiO2 nanocomposites. PSS: poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate); PDDA: poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride). TEM images of CNTs from aqueous solution (a) after the deposition of two layers of polyeletrolyte (PSS/PDDA) and (b) after the assembly of CdTe nanocrystals (reproduced with permission from ref. 90). 
PSS was wrapped around CNTs, providing very stable dispersions of individual negatively charged carbon nanotubes. After the deposition of a thin layer of SiO2 which is formed by the hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane, a second layer of the positive charged poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) was added. These two layers of polyelectrolyte (PSS and PDDA) on the CNTs facilitate their dispersion in aqueous solution and the subsequent deposition of semiconductor CdTe nanocrystals. The deposition of a silica spacer between the nanocrystals and the CNTs minimize the photoluminescence quenching and preserve the quantum confinement effects. This linear nanoassembly could be ideally incorporated in optical and electronic devices.
Amide-based dendrons have been also used to stabilize quantum dots on CNTs.91 SWNTs presenting carboxylic groups on their surface were derivatized by amino-dedron and then CdS were stabilized by the dendron arms (Fig. 28). The CdS nanoclusters exhibited reduced fluorescence emission intensity at 434 nm compared to that of CdS quantum dots stabilized by untethered dendrons due to partial emission quenching by the SWNTs.
 Fig. 28  Dendronized CNTs with QDs (upper part). TEM image of pristine (left part) and CD-dendron-SWNT composites (right part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 91). 
Another methodology to reduce the photoluminescence quencing of QDs adsorbed on CNTs has been recently reported by Gao and coworkers.92 They used two general routes to decorate CNTs with CdTe NPs and magnetic Fe3O4 through electrostatic interactions. Both routes are based on the functionalization of CNTs with neutral or protonated amino groups through an appropriate polymer or monomer moieties. The two strategies are described schematically in Fig. 29.
 Fig. 29  Synthesis procedures for preparation of NP–MWNT hybrids from multiamino-functionalized MWNTs by the electrostatic self-assembly approach (reproduced with permission from ref. 92). 
For the cationic polyelectrolyte-grafted MWNTs, higher amounts of CdTe or Fe3O4 can be adsorbed due to the high-density of ammonium groups on the nanotube surfaces and the resulting hybrids keep both the optical properties of QDs and magnetic properties of the Fe3O4 NPs.92
Conclusions
The most important and crucial point for the future expansion of these new hybrid materials for technolological applications is to find powerful synthetic methodologies to produce materials with reproducible properties and performances.
Many approaches have been devised to glue metal NPs to CNTs such as a reduction/deposition and chemical linking processes. By comparing the different ways, advantages and disadvantages can be found in all cases. It is the potential application that indicates which way is preferable each time. The direct reduction/deposition is usually a simple and effective method and a large amount of metal NPs are easily immobilized on the CNT surface. On the other hand, this is not an easily controlled procedure regarding the characteristics of the NP size, shape, and composition—and the percentage of the deposited metal.
Connecting pre-formed NPs with CNTs is a more complicated procedure. Normally, more than one reaction is needed, e.g., formation of the metal NPs, chemical modifications of both components and their connection. In addition, in the case of the covalent bonding, the number of metal NPs that are usually attached to the CNT surface in this way is associated with the number of carboxylates or other chemical functionalities of the CNT surface, and thus limited. The advantages of this pathway are that NPs can be selected by size or shape—since they are formed previously—and the connection is under certain circumstances reversible.
Also, a fine dispersion with high-density can be achieved when organically modified metal NPs are immobilized on the surface of carbon nanotubes by hydrophobic or electrostatic interactions especially when the nanotubes are initially modified by polymers which enhance these interactions.
A brief description of the synthetic approaches to metal NP–CNTs or metal cation–CNTs and their potential applications has been presented.
The interaction of CNTs with metallic species produces significant composite derivatives with several potential applications such as in gas sensors, biosensors, electronic nanodevices, polymer electrolyte fuel cells, etc. In many recent reports metal NP–CNTs are involved in catalytic systems with noteworthy results. The main advantages of CNTs as a supporting material in general are: the high surface to volume area, the thermal and electrical conductivity, the chemical inertness and the lack of porosity. The results so far reported in the field of the heterogeneous catalysis are very promising and in this area there will be a growing interest toward efficient industrial use of hybrid metal NP–CNTs as catalysts. Still many aspects have to be studied more deeply such as the stability and the recovery of the catalyst. Also, a screening of the many reactions that can be catalysed by NP–CNT materials is far from being complete. Another key aim is the use of CNTs as a scaffold to realize 1D self-assembled nanowires of metal, semiconductor or magnetic nanomaterials. The properties of these new materials have been disclosed only partially. The electronic “communication” between NPs and CNTs has opened up new avenues in the design of optoelectronic and light-energy conversion devices. It is easy to foresee that these intriguing systems will stimulate more and more studies aimed at practical applications.
Acknowledgements
Part of the work described in this review has been supported by Università di Trieste, INSTM (PRISMA Project PRI 04 STST 3), MUR (PRIN 2006, prot. 2006034372 and 2006039071 and FIRB prot. RBNE033KMA).
References
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .

          M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. Avouris, Carbon Nanotubes in Topics in Applied Physics, Springer, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed .

          C. N. R. Rao and A. Govindaraj, Nanotubes and Nanowires, RSC Publishing, RSC, Cambridge, UK,  2005 Search PubMed .

  (a) 
Acc. Chem. Res.,  2002, 35, Issue no. 12, dedicated to carbon nanotubes Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 4001 CrossRef .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Zerbetto and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 871 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Bianco, K. Kostarelos and M. Prato, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 674 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Banerjee, M. G. C. Kahn and S. S. Wong, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 1898 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. S. Harrison and A. Atala, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 344 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) G. Pagona and N. Tagmatarchis, Curr. Med. Chem., 2006, 13, 1789 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            G. A. Ozin and A. C. Arsenault, Nanochemistry: A Chemical Approach to Nanomaterials, RSC Publishing, Cambridge, UK,  2005 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) C. N. R. Rao and A. K. Cheetham, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2887 RSC .

  (a) 
Nanoparticles, ed. G. Schmid, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
Nanoparticles: Building Blocks for Nanotechnology, ed. V. M. Rotello, Kluver Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) P. D. Cozzoli, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1195 RSC .

  (a) A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 41 CrossRef ; 
  (c) 
Nanoscale Materials in Chemistry, ed. K. J. Klabunde, Wiley-Interscience, New York,  2001, p. 3343 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) C. N. R. Rao, G. U. Kulkarni, P. J. Thomas and P. P. Edwards, Chem.–Eur. J., 2002, 8, 29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) I. W. Hamley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1692 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) R. Schloegl and S. B. Abd Hamid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1628 CrossRef ; 
  (g) G. Hodes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 639 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2005, 437, 664 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. L. Feldheim and C. D. Keating, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 1 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. N. Xia, P. D. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. J. Murphy, T. K. San, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. X. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 326 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) Y. G. Sun and Y. N. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) J. Perez-Juste, I. Pastoriza-Santos, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1870 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) X. G. Liu, N. Q. Wu, B. H. Wunsch, R. J. Barsotti, Jr. and F. Stellacci, Small, 2006, 2, 1046 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. L. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) K. G. Thomas and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 888 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) R. Shenhar and V. M. Rotello, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 549 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. C. Templeton, W. P. Wuelfing and R. W. Murray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 27 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Badia, R. B. Lennox and L. Reven, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 475 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Hu, J. Y. Chen, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. D. Li, M. Marquez and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084 RSC ; 
  (b) P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. D. Malinsky, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1471 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. P. Collier, R. J. Saykally, J. J. Shiang, S. E. Henrichs and J. R. Heath, Science, 1997, 277, 1978 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) A. M. Jackson, J. W. Myerson and F. Stellacci, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 330 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. Lucarini, P. Franchi, G. F. Pedulli, C. Gentilini, S. Polizzi, P. Pengo, P. Scrimin and L. Pasquato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16384 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. W. Chen, R. S. Ingram, M. J. Hostetler, J. J. Pietron, R. W. Murray, T. G. Schaaff, J. T. Khoury, M. M. Alvarez and R. L. Whetten, Science, 1998, 280, 2098 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. J. Kiely, J. Fink, M. Brust, D. Bethell and D. J. Schiffrin, Nature, 1998, 396, 444 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. P. Andres, T. Bein, M. Dorogi, S. Feng, J. I. Henderson, C. P. Kubiak, W. Mahoney, R. G. Osifchin and R. Reifenberger, Science, 1996, 272, 1323 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. P. Andres, J. D. Bielefeld, J. I. Henderson, D. B. Janes, V. R. Kolagunta, C. P. Kubiak, W. J. Mahoney and R. G. Osifchin, Science, 1996, 273, 1690 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C. P. Collier, T. Vossmeyer and J. R. Heath, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 371 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Akthakul, A. I. Hochbaum, F. Stellacci and A. M. Mayes, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 532 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. Grunes, A. Zhu and G. A. Samorjai, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2257 RSC ; 
  (e) M. M. Stevens, N. T. Flynn, C. Wang, D. A. Tirrell and R. Langer, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 915 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) D. Astruc, F. Lu and J. R. Aranzaes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7852 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) N. Hickey, P. A. Larochette, C. Gentilini, L. Sordelli, L. Olivi, S. Polizzi, T. Montini, P. Fornasiero, L. Pasquato and M. Graziani, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 650 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
Nanobiotechnology: Concepts, Applications and Perspectives, ed. C. M. Niemeyer and C. A. Mirkin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) N. L. Rosi, D. A. Giljohann, C. S. Thaxton, A. K. R. Lytton-Jean, M. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2006, 312, 1027 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. G. Georganopoulou, L. Chang, J. M. Nam, C. S. Thaxton, E. J. Mufson, W. L. Klein and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 2273 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) U. Drechsler, B. Erdogan and V. M. Rotello, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5570 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) O. Veiseh, C. Sun, J. Gunn, N. Kohler, P. Gabikian, D. Lee, N. Bhattarai, R. Ellenbogen, R. Sze, A. Hallahan, J. Olson and M. Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1003 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) E. Katz and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6042 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) H. F. Wang, T. B. Huff, D. A. Zweifel, W. He, P. S. Low, A. Wei and J. X. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 15752 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) C. Guarise, L. Pasquato, V. De Filippis and P. Scrimin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 3978 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Fang, C.-H. Ye, L.-D. Zhang, Y.-H. Wang and Y.-C. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 63 CrossRef CAS .
X.-S. Fang and L. D. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2006, 22, 721 CAS .

  (a) L. S. Li, J. T. Hu, W. D. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 349 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. B. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. Pellegrino, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, A. Muñoz-Javier, L. Manna and W. J. Parak, Small, 2005, 1, 48 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) E. Katz, I. Willner and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2004, 16, 19 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Hyeon, Chem. Commun., 2002, 927 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. H. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) V. Tzitzios, D. Niarchos, G. Hadjipanayis, E. Devlin and D. Petridis, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2188 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) V. Tzitzios, D. Niarchos, G. Margariti, J. Fidler and D. Petridis, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 287 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. B. Mao, D. J. Solis, B. D. Reiss, S. T. Kottmann, R. Y. Sweeney, A. Hayhurst, G. Georgiou, B. Iverson and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2004, 303, 213 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. E. Euliss, J. A. DuPont, S. Gratton and J. DeSimone, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1095 RSC ; 
  (b) S. H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 393 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. Duguet, S. Vasseur, S. Mornet and J. M. Devoiselle, Nanomedicine, 2006, 1, 157 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) H. W. Gu, K. Xu, C. Xu and B. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2006, 941 RSC .

  (a) C. B. Murray, D. J. Norrs and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. K. Yi, S. T. Selvan, S. S. Lee, G. C. Papaefthymiou, D. Kundaliya and J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4990 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Santra, H. S. Yang, P. H. Holloway, J. T. Stanley and R. A. Mericle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1656 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Gerion, F. Pinaud, S. C. Williams, W. J. Parak, D. Zanchet, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8861 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. F. Wuister, I. Swart, F. van Driel, S. G. Hickey and C. de Mello Donega, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 503 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Wildgoose, C. E. Banks and R. G. Compton, Small, 2006, 2, 182 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Niyogi, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, B. Zhao, P. Bhowmik, R. Sen, M. E. Itkis and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. C. Satishkumar, E. M. Vogl, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1996, 29, 3173 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Planeix, N. Coustel, J. Coq, V. Brotons, P. S. Kumbhar, R. Dutartre, P. Geneste, P. Bernier and P. M. Ajayan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 7935 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, H. Lee, K. S. Han, J. H. Kim, M. S. Song, M. S. Park, J. Y. Lee and J. K. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8983 CrossRef .
L. M. Ang, T. S. A. Hor, G. Q. Xu, C. H. Tung, S. P. Zhao and J. L. S. Wang, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2115 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xue, P. Chen, Q. Hong, J. Lin and K. L. Tan, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2378 RSC .
C. Xu, J. Chen, Y. Cui, Q. Han, H. Choo, P. K. Liaw and D. Wu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2006, 8, 73 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. Wang, B. Liu, Z. Fan, K. Cui and Y. Kuang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11775 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Tian, S. P. Jiang, Y. M. Liang and P. K. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5343 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Ye, H. F. Cui, X. Liu, T. M. Lim, W. D. Zhang and F. S. Sheu, Small, 2005, 1, 560 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Kong, M. G. Chapline and H. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1384 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Yoo, L. Gao, T. Komatsu, N. Yagai, K. Arai, T. Yamazaki, K. Matsuishi, T. Matsumoto and J. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18903 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Wu, J. Lin and K. L. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4559 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lordi, N. Yao and J. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 733 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Qiu, Z. Zhou, G. Sun and Q. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xing, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19255 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Lin, J. Y. Lee, W. Zhang, M. Han and L. M. Gan, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 4054 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Liao, K. A. Holmes, H. Tsaprailis and V. I. Birss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3504 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Raghuveer, S. Agrawal, N. Bishop and G. Ramanath, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1390 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Choi, M. Shim, S. Bangsaruntip and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 9058 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10806 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tzitzios, V. Georgakilas, E. Oikonomou, M. Karakassides and D. Petridis, Carbon, 2006, 44, 848 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Quinn, C. Dekker and S. G. Lemay, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6146 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. M. Day, P. R. Unwin, N. R. Wilson and J. V. Macpherson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10639 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Wang, M. Waje, X. Wang, J. M. Tang, R. C. Haddon and Y. Yan, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 345 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yoon and C. M. Wai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17174 CrossRef CAS .
R. Giordano, P. Serp, P. Kalck, Y. Kihn, J. Schreiber, C. Marhic and J.-L. Duvail, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2003, 610 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, L. Chen, Q. Liu, J. Lin, K. L. Tan, S. C. Ng, H. S. O. Chan, G. Q. Xu and T. S. A. Hor, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, X. Cui, C. Yen and C. M. Wai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Tian, Y. Zong, H. Cheng and C. Lin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2542 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, M. A. Hamon, H. Hu, Y. S. Chen, A. M. Rao, P. C. Ecklund and R. C. Haddon, Science, 1998, 282, 95 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Azamian, K. S. Coleman, J. J. Davis, N. Hanson and M. L. H. Green, Chem. Commun., 2002, 366 RSC .
R. Zanella, E. V. Basiuk, P. Santiago, V. A. Basiuk, E. Mireles, I. Puente-Lee and J. M. Saniger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16290 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Coleman, S. R. Bailey, S. Fogden and M. L. H. Green, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8722 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Ellis, K. Vijayamohanan, R. Goswami, N. Chakrapani, L. S. Ramanathan, P. M. Ajayan and G. Ramanath, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 279 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Rahman, D. M. Guldi, E. Zambon, L. Pasquato, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Small, 2005, 1, 527 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, W. Wu, F. L. Kirk, J. Luo, M. M. Maye, N. N. Kariuki, Y. Lin, C. Wang and C. J. Zhong, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6019 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Liu, L. Fu, L. Cao, D. Wei, G. Yu and D. Zhu, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3139 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sainsbury, J. Stolarczyk and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16310 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sainsbury and D. Fitzmaurice, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2174 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fitzmaurice, S. N. Rao, J. A. Preece, J. F. Stoddart, S. Wenger and N. Zaccheroni, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 1147 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Liu, T. Wang, J. Li, Z.-X. Guo, L. Dai, D. Zhang and D. Zhu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 367, 747 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Q. Yang, B. Hennequin and E. Sacher, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5033 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5526 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, M. Prato, S. H. Qin and W. Ford, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2015 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, V. Tzitzios, D. Gournis and D. Petridis, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1613 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Ou and M. H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mu, H. Liang, J. Hu, L. Jiang and L. Wan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22212 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, A. Eitan, L. S. Schadler, P. M. Ajayan, R. W. Siegel, N. Grobert, M. Mayne, M. Reyes-Reyes, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 275 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Carrillo, J. A. Swartz, J. M. Gamba, R. S. Kane, N. Chakrapani, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1437 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Gao, C. D. Vo, Y. Z. Jin, W. Li and S. P. Armes, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8634 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Gao, W. Li, H. Morimoto, Y. Nagaoka and T. Maekawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7213 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim and W. M. Sigmund, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8239 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Correa-Duarte, J. Perez-Juste, A. Sanchez-Iglesias, M. Giersig and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4375 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, T. Wang, X. Qu and S. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 853 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stoffelbach, A. Aqil, C. Jerome, R. Jerome and C. Detrembleur, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4532 RSC .
X. Lou, C. Detrembleur, C. Pagnoulle, R. Jerome, V. Bocharova, A. Kiriy and M. Stamm, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hrapovic, Y. Liu, K.B. Male and J. H. T. Luong, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1083 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Musameh and Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fullam, D. Cottell, H. Rensmo and D. Fitzmaurice, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1430 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Bruchez, Jr., M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Warren C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Schlamp, X. G. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 5837 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Haremza, M. A. Hahn, T. D. Krauss, S. Chen and J. Calcines, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1253 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ravindran, S. Chaudhary, B. Colburn, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 447 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheeney-Haj-Ichia, B. Basnar and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 78 CrossRef .
W. Q. Han and A. Zettl, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 681 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, V. Sgobba, N. A. Kotov, D. Bonifazi and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2315 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bottini, F. Cerignoli, M. I. Dawson, A. Magrini, N. Rosato and T. Mustelin, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 2259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzelczak, M. A. Correa-Duarte, V. Salgueiriño-Maceira, M. Giersig, R. Diaz and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 415 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hwang, C. N. Moorefield, P. Wang, K. U. Jeong, S. Z. D. Cheng, K. K. Kotta and G. R. Newkome, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7505 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Gao, H. Qian, J. Ren and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1852 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
Vasilios Georgakilas	Vasilios Georgakilas received his BS and PhD degrees in Chemistry from the University of Ioannina (Greece) in 1989 and 1998, respectively. He then worked in the laboratory of nanostructured and composite materials in the Institute of Material Science of N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” (Greece) for one year as a Postdoctoral Fellow. In 2000, he moved to the laboratory of Prof. M. Prato at the University of Trieste, Italy, as a Postdoctoral Fellow, working on the organic functionalization of carbon nanostructures (carbon nanotubes and fullerenes). In 2002, he moved back to the Institute of Material Science of N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” (Greece)—working as a Research Associate. His research interests lie in the functionalization of nanostructured materials and their applications focusing on carbon nanotubes, fullerenes, metallic nanoparticles, inorganic layered and nanoporous materials, their derivatives and organic–inorganic hybrid nanocomposites.
Dimitrios Gournis	Dimitrios Gournis received his degree in Chemistry from the University of Ioannina (Greece) in 1992. Then, he worked (1993–1997) as a Postgraduate Fellow in the Institute of Physical Chemistry at N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” (Athens, Greece). He received his PhD in 1998 from the Dept of Chemical Engineering at the National Technical University of Athens. After a postdoc (1999–2000) at the Institute of Materials Science, N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” with Prof. D. Petridis, he moved to the Dept of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina as a lecturer and then Assistant Professor (non tenure track, 2000–2004). In 2004, he joined the group of Prof. P. Rudolf as a Research Associate at the Materials Science Center, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen (the Netherlands). In 2005 he was appointed Assistant Professor (tenure track) in the Dept of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Ioannina. He is an experimental synthetic chemist working in the area of layered and nanoporous materials. His research interests concern the chemistry of phyllomorphous materials (in particular clays, carbon layered structures), hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposites, carbon nanostructures (carbon nanotubes, fullerenes) and mesoporous materials.
Vasilios Tzitzios	Vasilios Tzitzios graduated from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki in 1995. He completed his MSc and PhD with Prof. T. N. Angelidis for work in the heterogeneous catalytic decomposition of NOx. Nowadays, he has a Postdoctoral Fellowship in the Institute of Material Science, N. C. S. R. “Demokritos” Athens with Dr. D. Niarchos and works on the synthesis and characterization of nanocrystalline materials. His research interests focuses on inorganic nanoparticles and composites materials synthesis.
Lucia Pasquato	Lucia Pasquato graduated in Chemistry in Padova, in 1983, under the supervision of Prof. G. Modena. In 1985 she was appointed as a researcher with the CNR (National Council of Research). In 2002 she moved to the University of Trieste to become Associate Professor. She was a research associate at the University of Würzburg with Prof. W. Adam in 1985–86. Her current research interests focus on metal nanoparticles for applications in catalysis and as templates to design functional 3D self-assembled monolayers for biochemical and material sciences applications.
Dirk M. Guldi	Dirk M. Guldi graduated from the University of Cologne (Germany) in 1988, from where he received his PhD in 1990. In 1992, after a postdoctoral appointment at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, he took a research position at the Hahn-Meitner Institute, Berlin. After a brief stay as a Feodor-Lynen Stipend (Alexander von Humboldt Foundation) at Syracuse University he joined in 1995 the faculty of the Notre Dame Radiation Laboratory where he was promoted to Associate Scientist in 1996. Since 2004 he is a Chaired Full Professor at the Friedrich-Alexander University in Erlangen (Germany). His research focuses on the areas of charge separation in donor–acceptor ensembles and construction of nanostructured thin films for photoenergy conversion. He is particularly interested in molecular recognition as a means to control the composition, separation, orientation, and charge separation in nanostructured ensembles.
Maurizio Prato	Maurizio Prato studied chemistry at the University of Padova, Italy, where he was appointed Assistant Professor in 1983. He then moved to Trieste as an Associate Professor in 1992 and was promoted to Full Professor in 2000. He spent a postdoctoral year in 1986–87 at Yale University and was a Visiting Scientist in 1992–93 at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He was Professeur Invité at the Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, in July 2001. His research focuses on the functionalization chemistry of fullerenes and carbon nanotubes for applications in materials science and medicinal chemistry, and on the synthesis of biologically active substances.

 	Fig. 1  Formation and deposition of Pt NPs directly on oxidized CNTs (EG = ethylene glycol).35	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of high loaded CNTs with Pt NPs at 10, 20, and 30 wt%, respectively, from left to right (reproduced with permission from ref. 37)	 

 	Fig. 3  Decoration of multiwalled CNTs with Au NPs of 3–10 nm diameter. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 40).	 

 	Fig. 4  AFM images of (a) Au and (b) Pt NPs on SWNTs. (c) Diagram of the Fermi energy (EF) of a SWNT, and the reduction potentials of Au3+ and Pt2+vs. SHE, respectively. The reduction potentials of most other metal ions lie above EF, except for Ag+ (reproduced with permission from ref. 41).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the deposition of metal nanoparticles on carbon nanotubes via the substrate enhanced electroless deposition (SEED) process.42	 

 	Fig. 6  Modification of SWNTs by metal NPs and subsequent addition of oleylamine. Inset: a representative TEM image from Pt (oleylamine)–SWNT composite.43	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the SWNT as an electrode used for electrodeposition of metal NPs.44	 

 	Fig. 8  Catalytic formation of 1,2-diphenylethane from styrene after Heck coupling reaction and hydrogenation in the presence of Pd–CNT and Pt–CNT as catalyst respectively.46	 

 	Fig. 9  Formation of Rh NPs on CNTs.47	 

 	Fig. 10  A typical TEM image of CNTs decorated by Pt NPs synthesized in supercritical carbon dioxide (reproduced with permission from ref. 49).	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of salt-directed selective metal nucleation and growth on CNTs (left part) and the TEM images of Pt–CNT derivatives (right part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 50).	 

 	Fig. 12  Connecting gold NPs to SWNTs by an aminothiol linker (upper part). AFM images of pristine SWNTs before (left) and after (right) exposure to the aminothiol linker and gold particles (lower part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 52).	 

 	Fig. 13  Connection of gold NPs to CNTs using the Bingel reaction and the AFM image of the as formed Au–SWNT (reproduced with permission from ref. 54).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustrations of the assembly of mixed-monolayer capped NPs on oxidized CNTs and a characteristic TEM image of the resulting derivative (reproduced with permission from ref. 57).	 

 	Fig. 15  (Upper part) Illustration of the direct assembly of Au NPs on bamboo-like CNTs. (Lower part) TEM images of bamboo-like CNTs (left) and Au–BCNT nanocomposites (center and right) (reproduced with permission from ref. 58).	 

 	Fig. 16  Ammonium-modified MWNTs and the noncovalent self-assembly of Au nanoparticles with crown ether-modified monolayer (upper part). TEM images of crown-modified Au NPs (a) adsorbed on modified MWNTs and (b) not adsorbed on unmodified MWNTs (reproduced with permission from ref. 60).	 

 	Fig. 17  Noncovalent attachment of gold or magnetic NPs onto SWNTs using pyrene derivatives as interlinkers.62,65	 

 	Fig. 18  (a), (b) Photographs of magnetically modified CNTs in chloroform at different concentrations, (c) dispersion in acetone and (d) their response to a permanent magnet.65	 

 	Fig. 19  Gold NP assembly on carbon nanotubes through 1-pyrenemethylamine interlinker and a TEM image of the derived product (upper part). UV-Vis absorption spectra of (a) free 1-pyrenemethylamine in ethanol, (b) an aqueous gold NP solution, (c) the mixture of 1-pyrenemethylamine and gold NPs, and (d) the solution containing Au–CNT nanoparticle composites (lower part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 66).	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustrations of the synthesis procedures of Pt–CNT composite (left part) and the TEM image of a metal decorated CNT (reproduced with permission from ref. 67).	 

 	Fig. 21  Cyclic voltammograms of methanol oxidation on Pt–CNT composite (solid line) and commercial E-TEK Pt/C catalyst (dashed line) in 2 M CH3OH/1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at 20 mV S−1 at room temperature (reproduced with permission from ref. 67).	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the experimental procedure in which PEI possibly interacts with acid-functionalized MWNTs through electrostatic interaction and physisorption processes (reproduced with permission from ref. 73).	 

 	Fig. 23  Grafting of P2VP to CNTs and decoration by Fe3O4 NP. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the magnetite–CNT nanohybrids (reproduced with permission from ref. 74).	 

 	Fig. 24  Scheme of the synthesis of ZnS-capped CdSe–MWNT conjugates.84	 

 	Fig. 25  (Right part) Synthesis of CdS–SWCNT hybrid material: (a) SWNT suspension in THF following the addition of CdI2 solution, (b) dropwise addition of Na2S, (c) completion of the reaction as the CdS–SWNT composite settles down in THF, and (d) resuspension of CdS–SWNT in methanol. (Left part) Charge-transfer interaction between photoexcited CdS NP and SWCNT. (reproduced with permission from ref. 88).	 

 	Fig. 26  Photographs of pristine SWNT (a) and of the SWNT-streptavidin-QD nanoassembly (b) in phosphate-buffered saline. c) Schematic representation of the interactions between CD3 receptors on the Jurkat T leukemia cell membrane and a SWNT-streptavidin-QD nanoassembly. A biotinylated anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody was used to link CD3 to the nanoassembly. The supramolecular luminescent nanoassembly acted as a multivalent delivery system, with each nanoassembly capable of binding many biotinylated RCD3-CD3 receptor complexes (reproduced with permission from ref. 89).	 

 	Fig. 27  A possible route for the preparation of CdTe–CNTs@SiO2 nanocomposites. PSS: poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate); PDDA: poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride). TEM images of CNTs from aqueous solution (a) after the deposition of two layers of polyeletrolyte (PSS/PDDA) and (b) after the assembly of CdTe nanocrystals (reproduced with permission from ref. 90).	 

 	Fig. 28  Dendronized CNTs with QDs (upper part). TEM image of pristine (left part) and CD-dendron-SWNT composites (right part) (reproduced with permission from ref. 91).	 

 	Fig. 29  Synthesis procedures for preparation of NP–MWNT hybrids from multiamino-functionalized MWNTs by the electrostatic self-assembly approach (reproduced with permission from ref. 92).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
