Surface strategies for catalytic CO 2 reduction: from two-dimensional materials to nanoclusters to single atoms   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00163H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00163H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310-5349Surface strategies for catalytic CO2 reduction: from two-dimensional materials to nanoclusters to single atoms†

        
          
            Liming 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenlong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Doudou 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yaping 
            Du
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Rose 
            Amal
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shizhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Jianbo 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *bf and 

        
          
            Zongyou 
            Yin
          
          
        
      *a
aResearch School of Chemistry, Australian National University, ACT 2601, Australia. E-mail: zongyou.yin@anu.edu.au
bState Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China. E-mail: jianbowu@sjtu.edu.cn
cSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, National Institute for Advanced Materials, Center for Rare Earth and Inorganic Functional Materials, Nankai University, Tianjin 300350, China
eSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@adelaide.edu.au
fCenter of Hydrogen Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
Received 
      30th June 2019
    First published on 7th October 2019AbstractRedox catalysis, including photocatalysis and (photo)electrocatalysis, may alleviate global warming and energy crises by removing excess CO2 from the atmosphere and converting it to value-added resources. Nano-to-atomic two-dimensional (2D) materials, clusters and single atoms are superior catalysts because of their engineerable ultrathin/small dimensions and large surface areas and have attracted worldwide research interest. Given the current gap between research and applications in CO2 reduction, our review systematically and constructively discusses nano-to-atomic surface strategies for catalysts reported to date. This work is expected to drive and benefit future research to rationally design surface strategies with multi-parameter synergistic impacts on the selectivity, activity and stability of next-generation CO2 reduction catalysts, thus opening new avenues for sustainable solutions to climate change, energy and environmental issues, and the potential industrial economy.
Liming Wang
Liming Wang obtained his BS and MS degrees at Zhejiang University in 2015 and 2018 in China. He is now a PhD candidate at research school of chemistry, ANU, under the supervision of Dr Zongyou Yin. Currently, Liming is working on photocatalytic CO2 reduction and N2 reduction.
Wenlong Chen
Wenlong Chen obtained his BS degree at Shandong University in China in 2012, and after he obtained his MS degree at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering in 2015, then he transferred to School of Materials Science and Engineering and now he is a PhD candidate in Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China, under the supervision of Professor Jianbo Wu and Professor Tao Deng. His current research interest is shape and electronic-structure controlled nanomaterials for fuel cells, energy conversion and related electrocalytic applications.
Doudou Zhang
Doudou Zhang obtained her MS and PhD degrees at Shaanxi Normal University in 2014 and 2018 in China. She stared to be co-cultured in Dalian Institute of Chemical and Physics from 2013. In 2018, she got the scholarship from China scholarship council to visit UNSW. In 2019, she started her postdoc career at ANU. Her research interests are electrochemical, photoelectrochemical water splitting and CO2 reduction.
Shizhang Qiao
Shizhang Qiao is currently a Chair Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide, Australia. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 375 papers in refereed journals with over 41000 citations, h-index 103. In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ARC Laureate Fellow (2017), ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), and the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, the ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society). Dr Qiao is a Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher (Chemistry, Materials Science).
Jianbo Wu
Dr Jianbo Wu is an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MS&E) at Shanghai Jiao Tong University since 2014. He obtained his BS and MS degrees at Zhejiang University in China in 2007, received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from University of Rochester in US in 2012, and two years’ postdoctoral training in the Department of MS&E at the University of Illinois. His current research focuses on shape controlled nanocrystals, fuel cell, electrocatalysis, functional materials for energy and environmental applications, and in situ TEM characterization to understanding the catalysts formation and degradation during catalysis.
Zongyou Yin
Dr Zongyou Yin obtained his BS and MS degrees at Jilin University in China, and completed his PhD at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore in 2008. Then, he started his postdoc careers at NTU/Singapore, IMRE/Singapore, followed by MIT and then Harvard University. Dr Yin started his own Research Group at Australian National University (ANU) from 2017. His group's research is interdisciplinary, encompassing chemistry and physics of nano-to-atomic materials, fundamental relationship among materials-structures-devices, and synergistic integration of multi-functions towards systems for energy and wearable applications.
1. Introduction
The increase in the combustion of fossil fuels since the industrial revolution has been gradually disrupting the balance of the carbon cycle, leading to a dramatic increase in CO2 concentration in the atmosphere from approximately 280 ppm in the early 1800s to 410 ppm today, which makes global warming a pressing problem.1–4 As shown in Fig. 1, without effective strategies to solve this problem, the steadily increasing annual CO2 emissions will result in a synchronized increase in the global-mean air surface temperature on the earth and the sea level from 1990 to 2100.5
 Fig. 1  (A) Atmospheric CO2 concentrations and (B) surface air global-mean temperature for the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) fossil intensive (A1FI) and HALVED-BY-2050 (halving the 1990 global Kyoto-gas emissions by 2050) scenarios (C) sea-level change from 1990 to 2100.5 Reproduced with permission from ref. 5, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
CO2 capture is considered the first step in CO2 removal and has been commercialized since the 1950s as a pretreatment for cryogenic air separation.6–8 However, one remaining challenge is how to deal with the captured CO2. Approaches such as pumping CO2 deep underground and dissolving it in the mid-depth ocean have been proposed and adopted for long-term storage.9 Unfortunately, increasing concerns, such as potential leakage, massive energy consumption, and unsustainability, prevent such CO2 capture and storage strategies from being adopted worldwide.10
Another possible method to deal with excess CO2 removed from the atmosphere is to convert it into highly reusable value-added chemicals. As early as the 19th century, some pioneering works were performed to convert CO2 into value-added chemicals such as HCOOH and (NH2)2CO.11 To date, CO2 conversion has been achieved by chemical reforming or by photochemical, biological, mineralization, and electrochemical methods.12–18 To achieve an adequate reaction rate for conversion of CO2 to value-added chemicals, catalysts with active sites containing metal centres are widely used. According to the phases in which a catalyst and the reactant(s) are present, catalysis can be classified as homogeneous, heterogeneous or biological. While homogeneous catalysts and biological catalysts require relatively mild environments, heterogeneous catalysts are stable even under relatively harsh reaction conditions (such as high temperatures and pressures) and are readily separated from the reactants and products, making them suitable for industrial applications.19,20 Because of these advantages, in this review, we limit our scope to heterogeneous catalysts.
Among various types of heterogeneous catalysis, (heterogeneous) photocatalysis, electrocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis are considered promising strategies in terms of their ready utilization of clean energy and operation under ambient temperature and pressure conditions.21–24 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction has been regarded as a “kill two birds with one stone” approach for saving energy and simultaneously protecting our environment.25 CO2 reduction by electric power is also an important transformation method with a high possibility of application because of its high environmental compatibility and good combination with other renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind energy.26 However, the low efficiency, poor selectivity, and weak thermodynamic stability of these catalysts make their practical application difficult.
Of the catalytic materials researched for CO2 reduction, two-dimensional (2D) materials showed great superiority compared to their bulk counterparts.27–31 The first immediate advantage of 2D materials is that layered materials usually offer a higher surface-to-volume ratio, which provides abundant surface area for solar harvesting (photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis), surface active sites for CO2 adsorption and surface catalytic sites for initiating redox reactions. Second, the atomic thickness can minimize the carrier's migration distance from the interior to the surface, thus reducing carrier recombination and potentially improving redox catalysis. Third, the exposed surface-coordinated unsaturated sites could function as active centres and drive multi-step reactions by intimately contacting/interacting with the intermediate products.32 Finally, the large specific area makes 2D materials a versatile platform for combination with other materials to realize multicomponent catalysts in pursuit of modern multifunctional catalytic systems. Surface properties, like those of 2D materials, are of great importance since they play a dominant role in determining the catalytic activity in CO2 reduction. To increase the surface-to-volume ratio and improve atom usage, explorations have been extended to nanoclusters and even to single-atom catalysts.33,34 In addition to inheriting the advantages of 2D materials, nanoclusters and single atoms, with a much smaller size, have dramatically increased surface-to-volume ratios, which provides more catalytic active sites on the surface and improves the atom economy. The precise control of the structures of nanoclusters and single atoms provides an ideal model for mechanistic studies. In this review, we summarize and review the recent development of surface strategies, i.e., surface science, surface design, and surface engineering, of catalysts based on 2D materials, nanoclusters and single atoms and present the major challenges and opportunities for future development of this field in terms of both fundamental understanding and potential industrial applications.
2. Material synthesis and surface strategies for CO2 reduction
2.1. The CO2 reduction mechanism and measurement
While fossil fuels are being depleted and some other clean energy sources, such as wind, tides, biomass, and geothermal sources, are limited in scale, solar radiation is widely considered to be an infinite energy source.35,36 In fact, it was estimated that converting approximately 10% of the solar energy on 0.3% of earth's land surface would meet the annual global consumption of energy in 2050.37 Additionally, effectively converting CO2 into carbon fuels via solar power is considered to mimic photosynthesis in nature, which can simultaneously store solar energy and reduce CO2 emissions. Such CO2-derived fuels for future use would close the carbon cycle itself, resulting in no further addition of CO2 into the atmosphere. In addition, solar energy stored in the form of C–H, especially in the liquid phase, is also superior to the energy available from water splitting, which suffers from the hydrogen storage issue.38 Mainly, there are three major routes to make use of solar energy in CO2 conversion: (1) using solar energy directly for catalytic CO2 conversion, which is referred to as photocatalytic CO2 reduction; (2) applying electricity generated from commercialized photovoltaic cells for catalytic CO2 conversion, which is referred to as electrocatalytic CO2 reduction; and (3) directly irradiating electrochemical cells, so-called photoelectrochemical cells, during redox catalysis, which is referred to as photoelectrocatalysis. We will discuss photocatalysis in this section and (photo)electrocatalysis in the next section.
Owing to the low solubility of CO2, CO2 adsorption on the surface of catalysts is a prerequisite for subsequent reduction steps and the suppression of the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Through interactions with surface atoms, CO2 can be both physiosorbed as a linear molecule and chemisorbed as a partially charged CO2δ˙− species.39 Three possible coordination schemes were proposed for CO2 molecules on a surface. First, oxygen atoms in CO2 have lone pairs of electrons that can be donated to surface Lewis acid centres (Fig. 2A). Second, the positively charged carbon atom could also act as a Lewis acid, receiving electrons from Lewis base centres, such as oxide ions, to form a carbonate-like species (Fig. 2B). Third, both oxygen atoms and carbon atoms in the CO2 molecule can act as electron donors and acceptors, respectively, to form a mixed coordination structure (Fig. 2C).40,41
 Fig. 2  The possible structures of adsorbed CO2δ˙− on catalysts.41 Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It is well known that CO2 is an extremely stable molecule with a high CO dissociation energy of ∼750 kJ mol−1, which makes it difficult to cleave this bond to form new chemicals.42 However, such bent CO2δ˙− species weaken the linear symmetry of the free CO2 molecule and lower the barrier for electron acceptance because the LUMO energy level decreases as the molecule bends.41
The catalytic reduction of CO2 into value-added products has been considered a compelling solution for alleviating global warming and energy crises. The reduction of CO2 is multi-electron stepwise reduction process with different reactivities of surface-bound species to generate intermediates, which subsequently evolve into a number of possible carbon products, such as carbon monoxide, formate, formaldehyde, methane, methanol, and C2+ hydrocarbons and oxygenates.43–46 In addition to the consumption of different numbers of electrons and protons, different intermediates may be generated, providing routes/opportunities to control the production of different final products. Therefore, both high activity and high selectivity towards the target product should be controllable for commercial CO2 reduction in the future.

2.1.1. Pathway for C1 products. 
The major C1 products are HCOO− or HCOOH, CO, HCHO, CH3OH and CH4. The formation of HCOO− or HCOOH may occur through three different pathways: (i) the insertion of CO2 into the metal–hydrogen bond or direct protonation of CO2 with H+ from solution, where the as-formed intermediate binds with the catalyst surface via the oxygen atoms in either a monodentate or bidentate fashion (Fig. 3A); (ii) the reaction between CO2*− radicals and protons (Fig. 3B); (iii) the reaction between CO2 and surface hydroxyl groups to form surface-bound carbonate (Fig. 3C). CO possibly evolves via the formation of a carboxyl intermediate (*COOH) through a concerted proton–electron transfer to CO2 (Fig. 3D).47
 Fig. 3  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCOO− or HCOOH: (A) Monodentate or bidentate intermediate route; (B) CO2*− radical intermediate route; (C) surface-bound carbonate intermediate. (D) Possible reaction pathways for CO2 to HCOO− or HCOOH. (E) Possible reaction paths for CO2 reduction to produce HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4. Possible reaction paths for methane formation: (F) carbene route; (G) glyoxal route.47,48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2017, Elsevier and from ref. 48, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
C1 products such as HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4 may be generated via the initial formation of *CO and subsequent hydrogenation to *CHO, *CH2O (which desorbs as HCHO), and *CH3O (methoxy). Furthermore, the *CH3O intermediate may convert into CH4, leaving *O on the surface, which would evolve into H2O (Fig. 3E). Another way to form CH4 also originates from the formation of *CO on the surface. This intermediate is hydrogenated to form *COH on the surface, which is subsequently dehydrated to form *C. Via step-by-step hydrogenation, this intermediate forms CH4 (Fig. 3F).47 An additional mechanism that differs from these two pathways is also proposed. Rather than the initial formation of *CO, this mechanism begins with bidentate coordination of CO2*−via the oxygen atoms, which is followed by the evolution of HCO2*, H2OCO* and *CHO. Through a dimerization process, the intermediate is further converted into glyoxal, which further reacts to form *CHOHCHO, CH2OHCHO, *CH2CHO, CH3CHO and *COCH3. With the release of CO, this intermediate becomes *CH3, which is further converted into CH4via proton–electron transfer (Fig. 3G).48


2.1.2. Pathway for C2 products. 
On the basis of constraints from reported experimental observations and density functional theory (DFT) simulations, Alejandro J. Garza et al. proposed pathways to C2 products on copper surfaces.49 The formation of CO is considered to be the starting point for further reduction into C2 products. The next two steps are the formation of *CHO and the formation of *COCHO. *COCHO is the key intermediate for generating C2 compounds and for determining selectivity between ethylene and ethanol, which can be converted into glyoxal and undergo further reaction to form glycolaldehyde, ethylene glycol, and acetaldehyde. Another possible pathway for the intermediate is the formation of *COCHOH, which can also react to form acetic acid, acetaldehyde and ethylene (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Proposed mechanism for the reduction of CO to C2 products at high potentials on Cu(100). Calculated free energies (eV) are the numbers parallel to reaction arrows, where ΔG values at U = 0 V using the CHE appear in standard font (steps involving H+ + e− can be corrected to U = −1 V by subtracting 1 eV). ΔG values at U = −1 V using the CEP (at pH = 7) appear in bold font. The seven C2 products of CO2 reduction on copper are highlighted in green. Calculated free energy barriers (eV) are provided for the critical reductive step from intermediate 3 to either 4a or 4b that determines selectivity between the pathway to ethylene (purple) and ethanol (blue).49 Reproduced with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


2.1.3. Pathway for C3 products. 
The reduction of CO2 to yield long-chain products such as C3 products remains a challenge. To date, the only reported C3 products from CO2 reduction are (CH3)2CHOH, CH3CH2CH2OH and acetone. It was hypothesized that an adsorbed C2 intermediate can undergo intermolecular C–C coupling with an adjacent C1 intermediate, followed by proton/electron transfer to form propionaldehyde (CH3CH2CHO), which is further reduced to C3H7OH (Fig. 5A).47 The probable mechanism for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to n-propanol/2-propanol and acetone is shown in Fig. 5B. Alternatively, HCOads (formed by the addition of 3e− and 3H+ to CO2) is coupled with a C2 species to form a C3-adsorbed intermediate, which subsequently leads to the formation of n-propanol/2-propanol and acetone (Fig. 5B).50
 Fig. 5  (A) Possible reaction paths for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to produce C3H7OH.47 (B) Mechanistic pathways leading to the formation of 2-propanol and acetone on Cu–ZnO.50 Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2017, Elsevier and from ref. 50, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.4. Factors determining the reaction pathways. 
As shown in Fig. 3–5, the CO2 reduction pathway depends on the nature of the intermediate on the surface. Thus, the binding of key intermediates and the surface of the catalysts should be optimized, as excessively strong binding leads to catalyst poisoning, while excessively weak binding prohibits the commencement of further reactions. It is believed that negatively charged intermediates, such as the adsorbed CO2*− anion intermediate and the adsorbed (CO)2− anionic dimer, play a crucial role in some of the mechanisms of C1 and C2 formation. These intermediates are particularly sensitive to the intrinsic properties of materials as well as the outside environment.
On p-block metals such as In, Sn, Hg, and Pb, formic acid and formate are the main products. Cu is a special catalyst for CO2 reduction that can even promote the reaction of CO to C3 products. Some solid basic hydroxides and oxides, such as NaOH, MgO, CaO, ZrO2 and Ga2O3, can act as electron donors during interactions with the carbon atom in CO2.41 Controlling the acid–base properties and activities of materials during the individual reaction steps is a key to achieving C2 chemical-mediated long-chain hydrocarbon synthesis.51 The surface morphology and facets of the catalyst are also considered to be factors that influence the selectivity. It has also been observed that the ratio between C1 and C2/C3 products is strongly affected by the surface morphology of Cu, where the more open Cu(100) surface exhibits greater selectivity to products with C–C bonds than the close-packed Cu(111) face.49
In addition to intrinsic properties, pH and solvent effects may influence the behaviour of protons to direct the reaction pathway.41 Cations in the electrolyte can play a role in CO2 reduction by influencing the potential at the outer Helmholtz plane or by delivering water molecules from their solvation shell to the electrode, thus influencing the hydrogen coverage on the electrode.52 On Cu electrodes, an increase in the selectivity for the production of ethylene over methane has been observed as a result of an increase in the Stokes radii of the hydrated cations, Li+ > Na+ > K+ > Cs+.52


2.1.5. Measurements of catalytic activity. 
The most frequently used parameter used to evaluate catalytic performance is the rate of formation of a product, which is generally defined as the amount of product divided by both the time required to accumulate and the amount of catalyst. Accordingly, the common unit of the rate is mol of product per hour per gram of catalyst, although the product is also often given in smaller molar units (mmol) or as a concentration (ppm).41 Even though this rate is widely used in the literature when reporting catalytic activity, it should be noted that the catalytic activity actually does not have linear relationships with the amount of catalyst and time, which makes it an imperfect indicator.53 Photocatalytic studies also include measurements of the apparent quantum efficiency, which is defined as , where d[x]/dt is the rate of change in the concentration of the reactant (or product) and d[hν]inc/dt is the total optical power to which the sample is exposed.54 The apparent quantum efficiency does not take into account the fraction of light absorbed by the photocatalyst, which in fact leads to a lower limit for the true quantum yield. Alternately, turnover frequency (TOF = nproduct/nsite) is often considered an ideal way to characterize catalytic activity for comparing catalyst activities.55 Because it is difficult to determine the number of active sites on a surface, most studies on photocatalysis do not report TOF, making it difficult to compare different catalysts. In addition to catalytic efficiency, catalyst reproducibility and stability are also considered important factors for evaluating catalysts and are important indicators for potential applications.54

2.2. 2D materials (photocatalysts)
To make use of solar light, photocatalysts should be semiconductors whose band gap lies in the range of solar emission. As shown in Fig. 6, when the energy of the incident photon is larger than the related band gap of the photocatalysts, the electron transitions from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), which generates electrons in the CB and holes in the VB.37 While most of the electrons and holes undergo recombination either within materials via volume recombination or on the material surface via surface recombination, some of the electrons and holes, which have a long lifetime, can migrate to the surface and potentially be utilized in the reduction of CO2 or H2O or the oxidation of H2O or as a sacrificial agent. Here, we again stress the superiority of 2D materials for achieving high catalytic performance through low-volume recombination due to their high specific area and decreased carrier diffusion distance.
 Fig. 6  Photoinduced formation of an electron–hole pair in a semiconductor with possible decay paths. A = electron acceptor, D = electron donor.37 Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
To cause redox reactions to occur on the material surface, the generated electrons and holes should satisfy some thermodynamic criteria. As shown in Fig. 7, to drive the reaction, the bottom of the conduction band should be more negative than the potential of the desired reduction half-reaction, and the top of the VB should be more positive than the potential of the oxidation half-reaction, making a sufficiently band gap necessary for photocatalysts.56 However, for optimal use of solar light, the band gap of photocatalysts should be as narrow as possible. These criteria appear to conflict with each other, but some research progress has been made based on proper structural design of 2D materials for use as catalysts, with the potential for achieving high photocatalytic performance.
 Fig. 7  Scheme of photo-reduction of CO2.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Since Inoue and his coworkers demonstrated photoinduced conversion of carbon dioxide to organic compounds, photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction into fuels has become an attractive research field.57–59 In the pursuit of higher catalytic activity, 2D materials with different surface features have been well explored. Because the surface properties of such 2D materials play important roles in surface CO2 adsorption and activation, light harvesting, and surface charge separation, here, we present different surface strategies to obtain 2D materials for CO2 reduction.
Table 1 Photocatalysts for CO2 reduction




Materials
Preparation
Lamp
Reaction medium
Product
Yield
Ref.




Defective-graphene–TiO2 nanocomposite
Solution-phase isolation
365 nm ∼110 W m−2
H2O-Saturated CO2 (99.99%)
CH4
8.3 μmol m−2 h−1

60



VZn-one-unit-cell ZnIn2S4
Hydrothermal method
UV Xe ∼100 W cm−2 AM 1.5
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
33.2 μmol g−1 h−1

61



VV-single-unit-cell o-BiVO4
Solvothermal method
UV Xe ∼100 W cm−2 AM 1.5
CO2-Bubbled solution
Methanol
398.3 μmol g−1 h−1

62



VO–ZnAl-LDH
Bottom-up strategy
—


CO
7.6 μmol g−1 h−1

63



VO–PO4-BWO
Solvothermal method
300 W Xe AM 1.5
CO2 and H2O vapor
Methanol
157 μmol g−1 h−1

64



VO–BiOBr
Hydrothermal method
300 W Xe


CO
87.4 μmol g−1 h−1

65



VO–CeO2−x
Homogeneous alkalization route
300 W Xe
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
1.68 μmol g−1 h−1

66



VO-ultrathin cubic WO3 layers
Hydrothermal
40 W SiN
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
∼2.7 μmol g−1 h−1

67



VC-melon polymeric matrix
Steam-etching approach
A 300 W Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm)


CO
21.5 mmol h−1

68



SnOx–SnS2
Hydrothermal method
300 W Xe 50 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
12.28 μmol g−1 h−1

69



Amine-g-C3N4
Thermal decomposition
300 W Xe
H2SO4 + NaHCO3
CH4
0.34 mol h−1 g−1

70



CH3OH
0.28 mol h−1 g−1


Mg–TiO2
Hydrothermal method
550 W Xe 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter
CO2 and H2O vapor
CH4
1 μmol h−1 g−1

71



Ni-Doped ZnCo2O4
Solvothermal method
Xe 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
31.4 μmol g−1 h−1

72



CH4
20.2 μmol g−1 h−1


Nickel metal–organic framework monolayers
—
5 W white LED (400–800 nm)


CO
12.5 mmol h−1

73



Sulfur-doped g-C3N4
Thermal decomposition
Xe
CO2 and H2O vapor
CH3OH
1.12 μmol g−1

74



(Pt, Pd, Au) loaded Zn–Cr LDH
Precipitation & photochemical deposition
200 W Hg–Xe
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
7.8 μmol g−1

75



Carbon + indium-oxide


300 W Xe
CO2 (1.01 bar) 10 vol% TEOA solution (H2O)
CO
126.6 μmol h−1

76



CH4
27.9 μmol h−1


Graphitic-C3N4- + N-graphene






Methanol
105.89 μmol g −1

77





Ethanol
256.45 μmol g −1


P25@CoAl LDH


300 W Xe
CO2 and H2O vapor
CO
1.1 μmol h−1 g−1

78



WO3 + LDH


500 W Xe 33 mW cm−2
CO2 and H2O vapor
Methanol
0.045 μmol h−1 g cat−1

79



Quadruple metal-based layered structure


300 W Xe


CO
30 μmol m−2

80



N-TiO2 on graphene scaffold


15 W energy-saving daylight lamp (8.5 mW cm−2)
Wet CO2 at 5 mL min−1
CH4
3.70 μmol g catalyst−1

81



Ag/Au + zinc-gallium LDH


500 W Xe 42 mW cm−2


CH3OH
30 nmol h−1 g cat−1

82



CO
201 nmol h−1 g cat−1


Ni-Nanocluster loaded black TiO2
One-pot hydrothermal reaction
300 W halogen
Continuous CO2 and H2O vapor
CH3CHO
1.6 μmol g−1 cat h−1

83



Hexamolybdenm clusters-GO
Sol–gel
20 W white cold LED flood light 75 W m−2
CO2-Bubbled solution
Methanol
1644 μmol g−1 cat

84



Silica-cluster-Ni nanocrystals
Chemical precipitation method
Xe 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter
CH4 + CO2
CO
19.9 mmol min−1 g−1

85



Co single atoms on partially oxidized graphene nanosheets
Freeze drying and annealing
300 W Xe λ > 420 nm 264.25 mW cm−2
CO2 (1.01 bar) [Ru(bpy)3] Cl2·6H2O + acetonitrile/triethanolamine/H2O


3.77 min−1

86






2.2.1. Defect engineering. 
Defects exist to some extent in crystals, interrupting the periodicity of the atom arrangement and introducing new possibilities with their unique electronic and optical states. Deliberately constructing defects on the surface of a material to improve performance is called defect engineering. According to the dimensionality of the crystal lattice (Fig. 8), defects in solids are classified into four different types: (1) zero-dimensional defects (point defects) are places where an atom is missing or irregularly placed in the normal crystal array; (2) one-dimensional defects (line defects) designate extended dislocations, such as edge and screw dislocations or combinations thereof; (3) grain boundaries, twin boundaries, and stacking faults are typical 2-dimensional defects (planar defects), which are interfaces between homogeneous regions of the material; and (4) three-dimensional defects (volume defects) are aggregates of atoms or vacancies such as precipitates, dispersants, and voids/cracks.87 Among these defects, zero-dimensional defects, including vacancies and impurities, are widely used to improve catalytic performance. We discuss the functions of vacancies in this section and the effects of impurities in heteroatom engineering in the next section.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of various defects in crystals.87 Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One of the most popular functions of vacancies in photocatalysts is the introduction of new defect levels in the band gap, which would narrow the band gap and dramatically broaden the photoresponse region (Fig. 9). In an extreme example, Liang Liang et al. reported that the intermediate band created by oxygen vacancies in WO3 atomic layers resulted in infrared-driven CO2 overall splitting to CO, breaking this basic limitation of photoresponse reliance on interior energy levels (CBs and VBs) from the band gap.67
 Fig. 9  Schematic energy band diagram for solar CO2 overall splitting into hydrocarbons and O2.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Furthermore, these defects in the band gap help improve the electronic conductivity of many thermal excitation carriers, thus facilitating carrier transportation.62 Another benefit of vacancies, especially oxygen vacancies in metal oxides, is the creation of unsaturated metal ions. With the existence of neighbouring oxygen vacancies, metal oxides can reserve some outer electrons that can be donated to CO2 molecules on the surface to achieve chemisorption on the surface.63 With the continuous transport of electrons to metal sites, an unsaturated metal ion can provide sites for CO2 reduction. One more advantage is that vacancy-induced charged sites can serve as trapping sites for electrons or holes, which improves carrier separation.65 To better illustrate the function of surface vacancies, Xingchen Jiao et al. reported the preparation of one-unit-cell-thick ZnIn2S4 layers with rich vs. poor Zn defects by controlling hydrothermal temperatures (Fig. 10).88 The ultrafast photogenerated electron transfer time of ∼15 ps from the conduction band to the trap states demonstrated that the presence of zinc vacancies ensured a high charge density and efficient carrier transport. Zinc vacancies were also found to serve as electron capture centres to greatly avoid electron–hole recombination and hence improved the photoreduction performance. Together with ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy, surface photovoltage spectroscopy, and PL spectroscopy analysis, a higher zinc vacancy concentration resulted in an ∼1.7-fold increase in average recovery lifetime, which led to promoted carrier separation rates. As a result, samples with higher zinc vacancies exhibited a carbon monoxide formation rate of 33.2 μmol g−1 h−1, approximately 3.6 times higher than that of ZnIn2S4 layers with poor zinc vacancies.
 Fig. 10  (A) VZn-rich one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab and (B) VZn-poor one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab along the [001] orientation. The corresponding unit cell structure of (C) VZn-rich one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab and (D) VZn-poor one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab along the [001] orientation. (E) Scheme for the photoreduction CO2 into CO on the VZn-rich one-unit-cell ZIS layers.88 Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In 2D photocatalysts, one easy way to produce oxygen vacancies is radiation. Ju Wu et al. reported the utilization of ultraviolet radiation to produce oxygen vacancies on a BiOBr atomic layer (Fig. 11A).65 The oxygen-deficient BiOBr atomic layers achieved visible-light-driven CO2 reduction with a CO formation rate of 87.4 μmol g−1 h−1, which was 20 times higher than that of the BiOBr atomic layers. In addition to radiation, parameters such as the thickness of 2D nanocrystals or the preparation temperature defect density increases as well (Fig. 11B and C).63,89 In addition to oxygen vacancies, Pengju Yang et al. prepared carbon vacancies in a melon polymer (MP) matrix via a steam-etching approach.68 Such vacancies were demonstrated to boost the reaction kinetics by functioning as active sites for CO2 activation while stabilizing COOH* intermediates. Such carbon vacancy-modified melon polymer displayed a 45-fold improvement in CO2-to-CO activity over the pristine MP, and the apparent quantum efficiency of the MP-TAP-CVs was 4.8% at 420 nm.
 Fig. 11  Preparation of defects via (A) UV irradiation,65 (B) tuning thickness,63 and (C) preparation parameters.89 Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH, ref. 63, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH and ref. 89, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
While most experiments have shown that vacancies in photocatalysts improved the photocatalytic activity, there are also concerns that too many defects in photocatalysts might hinder the conductivity due to the abundance of scattering sites. Yuteng Liang and his coworkers prepared a solvent-exfoliated graphene (SEG)–TiO2 nanocomposite and a solvent-reduced graphene oxide (SRGO)–TiO2 nanocomposite to construct nanoplatelets with different defect densities (Fig. 12).60 The less defective SEG showed improved electrical mobility and a higher photocatalytic activity than RGO for the reduction of CO2 to CH4,60 reminding us of the potential necessity to optimize the vacancy concentration to achieve a balanced desired outcome.
 Fig. 12  Photocatalytic mechanism for graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites.60 Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
One major concern regarding defect engineering is stability because defects are often considered to be metastable in terms of thermodynamics. Consider metal oxide photocatalysts as an example: oxides generated from the oxidation of H2O can easily recombine with oxygen vacancies or oxidize unsaturated metal ions into the highest oxidation state, decreasing the number of active sites on the surface and subsequently undermining the surface catalytic activity. However, there are also reports showing no obvious changes in photocatalytic activity towards CO2 reduction for up to 96 h, which drives the study of how these defects survive and at what state such vacancies exist in an electrochemical environment. These issues are likely to be better explored with in situ atomic-resolution microscopy technology in the near future.


2.2.2. Heteroatom engineering. 
Incorporating heteroatoms into catalysts, which is also referred to as doping, is a strategy to modulate the electronic structure to achieve enhanced performance. Sometimes, dopants can act as catalytic sites for CO2 adsorption, activation and subsequent reduction, converting noncatalytic materials into catalysts. For example, in diluted CO2 (10%), while isostructural Co metal–organic framework (MOF) monolayers were almost inactive, Ni MOF monolayers exhibited an apparent quantum yield of 1.96% and a CO selectivity of 96.8%.73 Thus, suitable doping can efficiently reduce the energy barrier and improve the selectivity of a reaction path.
One possible function of doping is the creation of doping energy levels within the band gap of the host materials, which would help decrease the absorption edge, improve the electronic conductivity and increase the electron–hole pair generation. For instance, Mo doping of C3N4 formed a dopant energy level within the band gap, leading to an effective redshift of the band edge absorption threshold since an electron could transit from the VB to the dopant level or from the dopant level to the CB.90 A higher concentration of dopants in the host materials would increase the concentration of carriers, thus leading to a dramatic increase in electronic conductivity. Another advantage is that such an impurity generally disrupts the electronic structure, which may enable the charged sites to act as an electron sink to receive photogenerated electrons, thus reducing the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs.
Moreover, doping of catalytically active metals (especially in unsaturated situations) can reduce the energy barrier of CO2 reduction due to electron donation from the unsaturated metal ions to CO2 in the form of chemisorption. Such differences in the adsorption and activation of CO2 on the surface can dramatically affect the pathway of CO2 reduction, which further tunes the selectivity of products. For example, Cu/g-C3N4(001) prefers to directly dissociate CO2 into CO, whereas cis-COOH is the preferred product of CO2 reduction on Mo/g-C3N4(001).91
With different electronic structures, in addition to potentially different CO2 adsorption and activation schemes and different intermediate affinities, the desorption of the final products can be modulated to control product selectivity in some cases. Katong Liu et al. reported that the Ni-doped ZnCo2O4 atomic layers showed a lower CO desorption temperature than the ZnCo2O4 atomic layers, which led to a higher CO selectivity (Fig. 13).72 In addition, on metal oxide catalysts, reducing metal dopants such as Mg and Fe can reduce the metal site to an unsaturated state, which provides more active sites for the reduction reaction. This possibility was verified in an experiment performed by Yangang Wang et al., where introducing Fe into CeO2 increased the surface Ce3+ concentrations and led to a higher CO2 reduction activity.92
 Fig. 13  Electron structure of ZnCo2O4 atomic layers with/without Ni-doping.72 Reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2017, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. 
In addition to metal dopants, non-metal dopants such as N,93,94 S,95 and I96 have also been used to introduce impurities into photocatalysts. Consequently, photogenerated electrons can easily jump from the impurity state to the CB or from the VB to the impurity state to help improve the catalytic activity.


2.2.3. Composite. 
Since a single component cannot perfectly meet the requirements of complex CO2 reduction, a possible solution is to combine different materials on one surface to improve the performance of the catalyst.82,97–101 For instance, In2O3 is a good candidate for photocatalytic CO2 reduction because of its chemical stability, high catalytic activity, and appropriate energy levels, but it also shows high H2 formation activity, reducing the selectivity towards pure CO2 reduction.102–106 To address this problem, Yun-Xiang Pan et al. coated a 5 nm-thick carbon layer on indium oxide (In2O3) nanobelts via a hydrothermal method with water as the reductant and Pt as the co-catalyst (Fig. 14A).76 Under illumination, In2O3 absorbed photons to produce electrons and holes for further reaction, and the introduction of a carbon layer on In2O3 increased the absorption of sunlight and sharply decreased the electron–hole recombination rate through the electric double layer at the interface. Additionally, the carbon coating favoured CO2 chemisorption and suppressed the competing HER. The Pt nanoparticles on the surface accepted the photogenerated electrons from C-In2O3, providing sites for photocatalytic reactions. Consequently, the composite participated in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO and CH4, with CO and CH4 evolution rates of 126.6 and 27.9 μmol h−1, indicating the great potential for this complex in CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic of the mechanism of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction with water on Pt/C-In2O3, with TEOA as the electron donor to bind with the hole.76 (B) Proposed mechanism of CO2 photoreduction due to heterojunction formation on SnS2/SnO2 composite semiconductors.69 (C) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and separation of electron–hole pairs for the reduction of CO2 with H2O to CH4.81 Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 and 69, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society and from ref. 81, copyright 2014, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelerg. 
One challenge for photocatalysis is the high recombination rate of photoinduced electron/hole pairs. To efficiently separate electrons and holes, the construction of different junctions, such as facet-based homojunctions,107 crystalline phase-based homojunctions, and heterojunctions, has been widely adopted.41 A mainstream strategy for this type of composite is to construct a type II heterojunction in the composite to better separate photoexcited carriers via the intrinsic electric field.108–111 For example, Santosh Kumar et al. reported that hierarchical nanocomposites of P25 nanoparticles encapsulated within microporous CoAl-layered double hydroxides (CoAl-LDHs) were prepared via a simple one-pot hydrothermal synthesis.78 A heterojunction was formed between CoAl-LDH and P25, where photoinduced electrons diffused to TiO2 for CO2 reduction and holes were transported to the surface of the LDH to oxidize water, achieving a high electron–hole separation efficiency with the intrinsic electric field. Thus, P25@CoAl-LDH nanocomposites exhibited excellent selectivity (>90%) under full-spectrum irradiation for the aqueous-phase photoreduction of CO2 to CO. Another way to form type II heterojunctions is to control the degree of surface oxidation during the preparation procedure. As shown in Fig. 14B, SnS and surface-oxidized SnO2 formed a type II heterojunction, which facilitated the separation of electron and hole pairs.69 SnO2 and SnS worked synergistically, with SnO2 acting as the active site for CO2 reduction and SnS favouring H2O oxidation. DFT calculations demonstrated that localization of electrons on the local oxidized Sn atoms could lower the CO2 activation energy barrier by stabilizing the COOH* intermediates in the rate-limiting step. Mildly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers exhibited CO formation rates of 12.28 μmol g−1 h−1, approximately 2.3 and 2.6 times higher than those of the poorly oxidized SnS2 atomic layers and the SnS2 atomic layers under visible light illumination.
Another way to avoid recombination is to introduce metals as co-catalysts to form a Schottky barrier at the interface. With high work functions, noble metals are widely used to act as electron traps to promote inhibition of charge recombination.75 Single-crystal noble metal materials (e.g., Pd, Pt, Au, Ag and their alloys) are rarely directly used without the assistance of other materials in the photoreduction of CO2, but they have frequently been employed as co-catalysts for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with H2O. Similar to the mechanism proposed for the photocatalytic splitting of water, one key role of these noble metal co-catalysts is to extract the photogenerated electrons for the reduction of CO2. The Ye Wang group has compared the catalytic performances of TiO2 doped with different noble metal co-catalysts (including Pt, Pd, Rh, Au, and Ag) for photocatalytic CO2 reduction in H2O vapour.112 As a result, these researchers found that these noble co-catalysts could accelerate the formation of CH4. However, the production of CO was not significantly enhanced. The authors claimed that the rate of CH4 formation increased in the order of Ag < Au < Rh < Pd < Pt, corresponding well to the increase in the efficiency of electron–hole separation. For some semiconductor photocatalysts producing CO as the major product during the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), different trends were observed for the effect of noble metal co-catalysts. For example, Kudo et al.113 found that Ag was the most active co-catalyst for the reduction of CO2 to CO over the semiconductor material BaLa4Ti4O15, although the number of reacted electrons decreased in the order of Au < Rh < Cu < Ag. Another work by Li et al. indicated that the introduction of Ag onto KTaO3 nanoflakes can accelerate the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO.114 However, the addition of the noble metal Pt decreased the formation of CO over the KTaO3 catalyst. It was found that Pt is not an efficient co-catalyst for CO formation because of the strong poisoning effect of chemisorbed CO species, which could block the active site of Pt for subsequent CO2 reduction. In addition, the ability of some single metals, such as Cu, as a co-catalyst to extract electrons from a semiconductor is not optimized because the work function of these metals is lower than those of other noble metals, weakening their ability to extract electrons from the cooperative semiconductor substrates. Thus, a combination of binary metals may enhance the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 because of the optimal tuning of their work functions; hence, a few groups have investigated the catalytic behaviours of TiO2 promoted with Pt and Cu bimetallic co-catalysts.115,116 Additionally, AuCu,117 AuPt,118 and AgPt119 co-catalysts have been studied for their ability to improve the photoreduction of CO2.
In addition to noble metals, materials such as graphene and MXenes show similar properties to noble metals, making them applicable as electron sinks in the photocatalytic system to enhance both photoinduced electron–hole separation and photocatalytic activity. Shaowen Cao et al. reported the preparation of ultrathin Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 nanosheets by in situ growth of Bi2WO6 on the surface of ultrathin Ti3C2 nanosheets. Due to the high work function for Ti3C2, electrons generated by Bi2WO6 nanosheets migrated to the surface of Ti3C2, where reduction occurred to convert CO2 to methane and methanol.
To maximize the efficiency of the composite, some groups have chosen to combine different strategies to achieve as many improvements as possible.77 For example, Wee-Jun Ong et al. reported the preparation of anatase nitrogen-doped TiO2 (N-TiO2) nanoparticles with exposed facets deposited on graphene (GR) sheets (N-TiO2-001/GR) for CO2 reduction via a facile and reproducible solvothermal route (Fig. 14C).81 The exposed facets led to high absorption of visible light and high catalytic activity, and the addition of acid-treated SEG induced higher absorption intensity in the visible region and improved charge anti-recombination of graphene. The incorporation of localized states of N dopants favoured visible light absorption and provided electron-trapping centres, which further inhibited the recombination process. Overall, this composite showed an enhanced efficiency, but this method needs to be used carefully because of not only the potential risk of decreasing the efficiency but also the rising cost for the relative complexity.
Most recently, metals such as Au, Ag and Cu have been considered promising materials for CO2 reduction applications due to the weak CO adsorption on their surfaces. On the other hand, these group 11 elements (such as Au, Ag and Cu) also usually have strong localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) properties in the visible region.120 Many plasmonic catalysts have been reported as promising candidates to improve catalytic efficiencies because of their unique localized SPR effects.121 All of them exhibit strong plasmonic effects and hence are capable of improving cooperative semiconductor efficiency. Due to the SPR effect, resonance occurs when the wavelength of the incident photons matches the oscillation frequency of the plasmonic metal surface's free electrons, leading to a strong oscillation of the surface electrons. Hence, SPR-excited electrons (usually considered so-called hot electrons) can be created.120,122–124 These SPR-excited electrons that form on the metal surface usually have high energy and hence can directly transfer to the adjacent semiconductor and subsequently induce photocatalytic reactions. Combining these plasmonic metals and semiconductors to establish metal/semiconductor heterojunctions could enhance photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation. Suitable metals (e.g., Au and Ag) with a visible light range of plasmonic absorption can be utilized as sensitizers for semiconductors with a wide band gap to efficiently achieve visible light photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Furthermore, plasmonic effects could create strong and highly localized electromagnetic (EM) fields around the contacted semiconductors and enhance the electron–hole separation efficiency.123 Furthermore, these plasmonic metals may have several promising advantages when coupled with semiconductors to enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction performance, including the following: (1) the specific light absorption of plasmonic metals can be simply and rationally controlled by tuning their size and shape, making it easy to receive and respond to different or broad light absorption to achieve performance improvement; (2) the required amount of loading of the noble plasmonic metals can be small but can greatly enhance the photocatalytic performance; and (3) these plasmonic metals usually have excellent stability for long-term use.
Considering the above discussion, much effort to improve the CO2 reduction performance based on the SPR effect has been made by scientists. For example, Dinesh Kumar et al. reported the use of reduced graphene-coated gold nanoparticles (r-GO-AuNPs) as excellent visible-light-responsive photocatalysts for the photoconversion of CO2 to formic acid (HCOOH) (Fig. 15).125 The composite showed excellent selectivity towards HCOOH (>90%) and a quantum yield of HCOOH of 1.52% with reduced graphene layers as highly efficient electron acceptors and transporters to facilitate the use of hot electrons generated by Au nanoparticles for plasmonic photocatalysts.
 Fig. 15  Schematic illustrating photoreduction of CO2 to HCOOH over r-GO-AuNPs.125 Reproduced with permission from ref. 125, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.4. Surface molecule functionalization. 
Another way to improve CO2 reduction is surface molecule functionalization.126 This method is based on the fact that CO2 is considered a Lewis acid, and some basic groups, such as amine groups, which are Lewis bases, can adsorb acidic CO2 by means of chemisorption. Qian Huang and his coworkers reported the preparation of amine-functionalized g-C3N4 by heating urea at 500 °C with a subsequent functionalization treatment by a monoethanolamine solution.70 Compared to pristine g-C3N4, the amine-functionalized g-C3N4 exhibited a much higher CO2 adsorption capability and a significantly enhanced CO2 photoreduction efficiency.

2.3. 2D materials ((photo)electrocatalysts)
Photoelectrochemical (or photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) in this text) reduction of CO2 is a chemical process aimed at carbon dioxide reduction on semiconducting materials assisted by the energy of the incident light. In contrast to photocatalysis, this process needs to combine semiconductor materials, suitable electrolytes, applied tunable potentials, temperatures, pressures, etc. Avoiding the hydrogen generation reaction between protons and electrons under a low overpotential at −0.41 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) is a challenge.148 Among common photoelectrocatalysts with semiconductors and electrocatalysts such as Ni, Fe, Pt, and Ti, CO2 reduction is always accompanied by the HER.149 Therefore, sluggish reaction kinetics, low energy efficiency, competitive H2O reduction, and poor selectivity are the main challenges for CO2 reduction.150,151 Similar to the abovementioned artificial photosynthetic CO2 reduction, photoelectrochemical reduction can also be carried out under ambient temperature and pressure, driven by solar light on the catalysts; however, this process is highly dependent on the properties of the semiconductor component. The energy band gap of each semiconductor between its intrinsic CB and VB affects the targeted CO2 reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively.152 In addition, in contrast to the aforementioned shortcomings in part I, such as the complex semiconductor photocatalyst design with low conversion efficiency,153 high recombination of photogenerated charge carriers,154 unfavourable band positions for CO2 reduction or H2O oxidation,155 and poor selectivity,156 the combination of electrochemistry and photocatalysis to overcome the limits of photocatalytic (PC) CO2 reduction, i.e., photoelectrocatalytic (PEC) CO2 reduction, is promising. Generally, a PEC cell for CO2 reduction should consist of bulk semiconductors and special catalysts with favourable adsorption of CO2 materials.125 However, the photoelectrode used in CO2 reduction is mainly bulk semiconductors for electron and hole generation and separation with multiple complex components, such as the p-type photovoltaic semiconductors GaP,157–161 InP,162 and Si;163 the traditional oxides TiO2,164,165 ZnTe/ZnO,166 CuO167 and Cu2O;168 and graphitic-like C3N4 deposited on the substrate for reaction. Strictly speaking, the superiority and morphology of the 2D material are affected by the preparation and integration into thick bulk film; actually, real 2D material-based PEC materials for CO2 reduction have rarely been reported to date. Thus, this review will focus on the development of electrocatalytic (EC) CO2 reduction and the design of electrocatalysts for effectively converting CO2 into hydrocarbon fuels and balancing global carbon recycling in the future (Fig. 16).42 Therefore, among the atomic-scale surface strategies for CO2 reduction enhancement, electrocatalysts from layered materials and clusters to single atoms are being designed. The electrocatalytic CO2 reduction encompasses the following elementary steps: (1) CO2 adsorption on active sites, (2) activation of CO2 to form intermediates, (3) dissociation of the C–O bond comprising the participation of protons and electron transfer (one-, two- or multiple-electron processes), and (4) desorption of reduced products from the active sites. This section contains a short introduction to the valuation used in electrochemical CO2 reduction and a parallel comparison such as the target products and the selectivity among recent investigations in this field. Then, we will discuss various types of pathways for catalyst design and the resulting property changes in the reaction. In addition, we summarize the deep understanding of the heterogeneous electrocatalyst dimension effect on the mechanism of CO2 reduction. Furthermore, strategies for designing inexpensive catalysts composed of earth-abundant elements and exhibiting high CO2 conversion efficiency at a low overpotential, high turnover frequency at certain units, better selectivity for target products and long-term durability are proposed (Table 2).
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram and engineering strategy of electrochemical reduction of CO2 into fuels.42 Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 2 Electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction




Materials
Over-potential
Faradaic efficiency (%)
Current density
Product
Selectivity (%)
Durability (h)
Reaction rate (mmol cm−2 h−1)
Ref.




1.72 nm thick Co3O4 layers
−0.88 V vs. SCE
64.30
0.68 mA cm−2
Formate


20



127



Vo–Co3O4 atomic layers
−0.87 V versus SCE
87.60
2.7 mA cm−2
Formate
85
40



128



Co 4-atom-thick layers
−0.85 V vs. (SCE)
90.10
10.59 mA cm−2
Formate
90
40



129



Ultrathin MoTe2 layers
−1.0 vs. RHE
83 ± 3
25.6 mA cm−2
CH4


45



130



Gold nanoparticles/graphene nanoribbon
−0.2 V vs. RHE
>90


CO


>24



131



Layered zeolitic imidazolate frameworks/Ag2O nanoparticles
−1.2 V
80.50
26.2 mA cm−2









132



Gold/layered titanate nanosheets
−0.65 V RHE
82
−46.5 mA mg cat−1
CO
80





133



Metallic tin quantum sheets/graphene
−1.8
>85
21.1 mA cm−2
Formate


50



134



E-MoS2 nanosheets
−1.1 V to −0.9 V
81.20
61 mA cm−2
CO







135



Metal-doped nitrogenated carbon
90%




CO
80





136



Nickel-nitrogen-modified graphene
−0.7 V versus RHE
90
0.2 mA cm−2
CO







137



4-Atom-thick Co sheets with Co oxide
−0.85


10.59 mA cm−2
Formate
90.1
48



138



Fe single atom on nitrogen-doped graphene
−0.57 V (vs. RHE)
80


CO


10



139



Iron(III) oxyhydroxide on nitrogen-doped carbon
−0.5 V vs. SCE
37
−0.36 mA cm−2
HCOOH







140



60.90
CH3COOH
61


3.4


Atomically dispersed Co/polymer-derived hollow N-doped porous carbon spheres
−0.73, −0.79 V vs. RHE
99


CO







141



Ni single atom in graphene shell


Over 90
60 mA mg−1
CO
>90





142



Ni–graphene nanosheets
550 mV
95
50 mA cm−2
CO
97
20
2.1 × 105 h−1

143



Cu nanoclusters-(1010) ZnO
−1.4 V vs. SCE
45.10


H2




0.572

144



10.20


C2H5OH




0.0027


10.10


C2H4




∼2.65 × 10−4


7.70


HCOO–




0.0244


5.40


CO




0.069


2.80


CH3OH




0.00153


1.80


CH4




0.0078


<0.1



n-C3H7OH




<1.40 × 10−4


<0.1


CH3COO–




0.0244


Cu32H20L12 nanoclusters


>90




>80





145



Nickel single atom on commercial carbon black
−0.681 V
∼99
>100 mA cm−2
CO
∼100
20



146



Nickel single atom on carbon paper
−1.0 V
97
48.66 mA cm−2
CO
>90





147





For electrochemical CO2 reduction, the thermodynamic potentials vary with the various products, and proton-coupled multiple-electron reduction dominates the sluggish kinetics, leading to a high overpotential for electrochemical heterogeneous reduction of CO2 to hydrocarbons and alcohols. Moreover, the solvent effect should be seriously considered in EC CO2 reduction because of the adsorption and desorption of CO2 and intermediates. The aqueous media are mainly water with ∼35 mM CO2 solubility, and the products are mainly acid, alcohol, and carbon monoxide. The non-aqueous media are DMSO, acetonitrile (AN), CH3OH, propylene, DMF, DMSO, ionic liquids and solid oxide. Table 3 shows the potential versus NHE at pH = 7 for different reactions. Therefore, the onset potential and the kinetic energy barrier that must be overcome are direct criteria for EC CO2 reduction defined by the intrinsic properties of the catalyst. In addition, the standard and normalized reduction current is equally critical to the electrode activity for determining the reaction rate of CO2 reduction. Subsequently, the Tafel slope can be calculated versus the logarithm of the current–potential curve to estimate the mechanism and the rate-determining reaction steps. For comparison, Tafel slopes of approximately 60 and 120 mV dec−1 suggest different reduction mechanisms; the former encompasses a fast 1 e−1 transfer to CO2˙− and a slower chemical reaction as the rate-determining step, whereas the latter mechanism includes reactions that mainly occur on the metal electrode and are determined by the absorption of a CO2˙− intermediate on the surface. The commonly used faradaic efficiency (FE) indicates the target product ratio after the reaction processes. The FE can be calculated simply by dividing the effective charge consumed by the target product formation by the total circuit charge to show the selectivity of the electrocatalysts. Consider the conversion of CO2 to CH4 as an example: the FE is calculated by multiplying 8 electrons by number of moles of the desired product and the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1) and then dividing this value by the total charge passing through the circuit. The FE is directly related to product selectivity.169 In fact, the activity is highly dependent on the textured electrochemical surface area of the catalyst, which is obvious on porous or hollow structural catalysts with special morphology. The ECSAs are determined by both the geometric area of the bulk and the roughness estimated from the double-layer capacitance current correlating the cyclic voltammetry with different scan rates.170
Table 3 Possible reactions occurring in the electrochemical cells




Reaction

E° (V) vs. NHE (pH = 7)




CO2 + 4e− + 4H+ → C + 2H2O
−0.200


CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → CO + H2O
−0.530


CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → HCOOH
−0.610


CO2 + 4e− + 4H+ → HCHO + H2O
−0.480


CO2 + 6e− + 6H+ → CH3OH + H2O
−0.380


CO2 + 8e− + 8H+ → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.240


2CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → H2C2O4
−0.913


2CO2 + 6e− + 6H+ → OHCCHO + 2H2O
−0.160


2CO2 + 8e− + 8H+ → CH3COOH + 2H2O
−0.260


2CO2 + 10e− + 10H+ → CH3CHO + 3H2O
0.050


2CO2 + 12e− + 12H+ → C2H4 + 4H2O
−0.349


2CO2 + 12e− + 12H+ → C2H5OH + 3H2O
−0.329


2CO2 + 14e− + 14H+ → C2H6 + 4H2O
−0.270


3CO2 + 16e− + 16H+ → CH3COCH3 + 5H2O
−0.140


3CO2 + 18e− + 18H+ → C3H7OH + 5H2O
−0.310


2H+ + 2e− → H2
−0.420


H2O + 2h+ → 1/2O2 + 2H+
0.820




Combined with the recent research development in the field of CO2 reduction, the main elements, parameters, main product species, and surface engineering are listed to understand the catalytic trends in carbon dioxide reduction. According to Fig. 17A, the data distribution showed that CO and formate are the main products from the Group VIII elements with FE values greater than 80%. Moreover, formic acid and acetic acid are produced mainly on the copper atom or iron single-atom surface with a relatively low FE. In a detailed yet concise summary, the electrocatalysts used in CO2 reduction are classified into four groups depending on their H and O affinities relative to that of common CO2 reduction on Cu, as shown in Fig. 17B. Particles, layers, clusters, single atoms, and nanosheets all comprehensively display good superiority associated with 2D materials, with high surface areas per unit volume. For CO2 reduction, this rational strategy of designing electrocatalysts, which focuses on increasing the number of active sites and the selectivity, will be explained later in the review. The adsorption energetics of specific reaction intermediates should also be noted. According to the theoretical calculation and experimental results, the binding energies of *COOH and *H demonstrated the trend of 2e− CO and HCOOH generation in the reaction, whereas the binding energies of *CO and *H were applied as the descriptors to predict activity towards deep reduction products.171 The whole process of electrochemical CO2 reduction on a 2D catalyst surface includes CO2 molecule absorption, electron and proton transportation, cathodic potential, electrolyte salts, and catalyst composition. The interactions among these complex parameters may lead to different pathways and hence the generation of different products. Taking the precious metals as examples, as presented in Fig. 17B, Au and Ag catalysts have a tendency to form CO from CO2. By contrast, Co and Sn single atoms and their oxides, SnO2 and Co3O4, which mainly possess p electrons, can increase the adsorption of CO2˙ − to produce formate as the main product. For copper and cuprous oxide, H3CO species easily form CH4 on the former surfaces, and CH3OH is readily formed on the latter surfaces. Stable H3CO species tend to form if H attaches to an oxygen atom instead of a carbon atom. Therefore, the key is to discern how many electrons will be involved in the reaction process; e.g., 2-, 4-, 6-, and 8-electron processes, respectively, lead to the production of CO/HCOOH, HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4, as mentioned in Table 1. DFT calculations were performed to determine the ΔECO from a limiting potential, as shown in Fig. 17D.172 A volcano plot was generated after fitting the experimental onset potentials with the predicted product formations on different elements. The trend of the intermediate transfer overpotential can be deduced according to the degree of catalyst bonding to promote CO* → CHO* or CO → CHO* because CO desorption is the competing reaction.170 As seen in Fig. 17D, Cu had an optimal ΔECO near the top of the volcano plot and easily formed methane or methanol under the predicted overpotential of ∼0.8 V. This phenomenon is also observed in other metals because of multiple reaction steps leading to multiple intermediates and multiple products.173 It is better to decrease the overpotential by increasing the binding energy of CHO* relative to that of CO* to drive protonation from CO* to CHO*.174 This process can be controlled by defect engineering, heteroatom incorporation, alloying, composite formation, electrolyte addition to capture the surface species promoters, and hydrogen bond donor or acceptor addition. The C2+ products are more complex and challenging to control because the C–C bond formation is much different. This control would be feasible by hydrogenation or dimerization of CO, where acetaldehyde is considered an important intermediate in ethanol formation.174,175 Although the carbon dioxide reduction reaction is complex, many breakthroughs have been achieved to discover the underlying reaction mechanisms and intermediates. For example, Xijun Liu et al. reported the preparation of ultrathin MoTe2 layers via chemical vapour deposition and ultrasonic exfoliation for the electroreduction of CO2 to CH4.130 The layered materials provided many active sites on the surface and benefited CO2 adsorption. The system reported an FE of 83 ± 3% in methane production and a durability of 45 h under a 25.6 mA cm−2 current at −1.0 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Certainly, further research and insight would be helpful to study and improve the efficiency and selectivity for carbon monoxide reduction reactions and to avoid potential catalyst poisoning from formate formation.175–177
 Fig. 17  (A) CO2 reduction products trend with faradaic efficiency under the potential of various electrocatalysts in aqueous media. Data points marked with main metal elements.127–147 (B) Grouping of various metals based on O and H affinities from previous studies. (C) Reaction mechanism of electrochemical CO2 reduction on electrodes in aqueous solutions and the formation paths for the five main C1 products during the reduction process.163–166 (D) Volcano plot for carbon dioxide reduction on metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164 and 170, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry and from ref. 172, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 

2.3.1. Defect engineering. 
Decreasing the thickness of layered materials is an effective way to cultivate surface unsaturated coordinated atoms, which can help tune the properties of catalysts to create more active sites for CO2 reduction. Rulle Reske et al. reported that catalytic selectivity can be controlled by changing the thickness of Cu metal layers to produce different products during the CO2 electroreduction process.178 The main method is to prepare 2D materials with more metal atoms in lower coordination environments exposed on the surface that can thus participate in reactions as active sites. In addition, Shan Gao et al. reported Co3O4 layers with thicknesses of 1.72 nm and 3.51 nm prepared by quickly heating the Co(CO3)0.5(OH)0.11H2O precursors (Fig. 18A).127 The Co atoms in low-coordination environments showed higher intrinsic activity than the bulk structures in stabilizing the CO2*− intermediate during the reaction. Moreover, the ultrathin Co3O4 layers were demonstrated to not only provide more active sites for CO2 adsorption but also increase the electronic conductivity. As a result, the ultrathin Co3O4 showed a conductivity of 0.68 mA cm−2 at −0.88 V vs. SCE and increased FE and stability. However, the Co-based electrocatalysts easily formed formate, which is not preferential for CO2 reduction.
 Fig. 18  (A) (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms and (b) Tafel plots of formate for the Co3O4 atomic layers with different thicknesses. (c) Scheme for the electroreduction CO2 into formate on the Co3O4 atomic-layers.127 (B) Scheme for the formation of Vo-rich and Vo-poor Co3O4 single-unit-cell layer, respectively.128 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH and from ref. 128, copyright 2017, Nature Communication. 
To further improve the performance of cobalt oxide layers, Shan Gao et al. prepared single-unit-cell cobalt oxide layers via a lamellar inorganic–organic hybrid intermediate strategy to introduce vacancies into the catalyst (Fig. 18B).128 Different concentrations of oxygen vacancies were controlled by a fast-heating process under an air or O2 atmosphere to grow the single-unit-cell Co3O4 layers. The presence of O(II) vacancies was found to favour CO2 adsorption and HCOO− desorption and stabilize the rate-determining HCOO−* intermediate transfer. These vacancies also helped to lower the CO2 activation energy barrier from 0.51 to 0.40 eV, as further confirmed by the decrease in the onset potential from 0.81 to 0.78 V versus SCE and the decrease in the Tafel slope from 48 to 37 mV dec−1, respectively. As a result, the cobalt oxide single-unit-cell layers with abundant oxygen vacancies exhibited current densities of 2.7 mA cm−2 with approximately 85% formate selectivity during 40 h tests. However, the high percentage of formate formation indicated that the interior VO did not effectively work for CO2 catalytic systems. Overall, effectively controlling the thickness and the dimensions of the catalysts is verified as a strategy to improve the active sites for CO2 catalytic reactions.


2.3.2. Heteroatom engineering. 
Incorporating heteroatoms into a catalyst is another widespread strategy to improve the performance of the catalyst.179–183 Ana Sofia Varela reported the application of metal (Fe, Mn)-doped nitrogenated carbon materials as selective electrocatalysts for the reduction of CO2 to CO.136 Although there is competition with hydrogen evolution on the nitrogen-based functional groups on heteroatom surfaces, the strong interaction between CO and the metal enabled the protonation of CO and the formation of hydrocarbons. The metal (Fe, Mn)-doped nitrogenated carbon catalysts showed a comparable high CO selectivity of up to 80% at −0.5 V versus RHE. Panpan Su reported the preparation of Ni–N-modified graphene (Ni–N–Gr) via heat treatment (900 °C) of Ni pentaethylenehexamine and graphene oxides (GOs) within 1 min under an inert atmosphere (Fig. 19).137 The CO2 reduction reaction was enhanced, while the HER reaction was effectively suppressed on the surface of Ni–N–Gr.
 Fig. 19  Nickel–nitrogen-modified graphene (Ni–N–Gr) with Ni–N coordination sites on Ni–N–Gr as active centers effectively reduce CO2 to CO.137 Reproduced with permission from ref. 137, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 


2.3.3. Composite. 
The effect of the composition of electrocatalysts on stability during CO2 reduction is a priority. Nanomaterials have faced the dilemma of increasing the surface energy and activity and consequently decreasing stability during the catalysing process. For example, nanoparticles were reported as ideal materials to offer aqueous compatibility and reasonable selectivity for CO2 reduction to CO; however, the aggregative degradation under harsh electrocatalytic conditions is a bottleneck. To overcome this challenge, Cameron Rogers et al. reported a composite material composed of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) embedded in a graphene nanoribbon (GNR) matrix that was prepared by a rational bottom-up method (Fig. 20A).131 The strong d–π interactions between the nanoribbon and Au nanoparticles led to enhanced dispersion and stabilization and further modulated the electronic structure at the surface of the electrocatalysts. The stability of the composite was greatly extended over 24 h, and the catalytic activity was maintained. It was found that the requisite CO2 reduction overpotential was decreased by hundreds of millivolts (catalytic onset >−0.2 V versus RHE), which suppressed hydrogen evolution. The composite showed an FE of over 90% and a total catalytic output of more than 100-fold compared to traditional AuNPs with amorphous carbon as a support.
 Fig. 20  (A) GNR–AuNP composite materials.131 (B) Immobilized gold nanoparticles on layered titanate nanosheets.133 (C) Schematic formation process of the partially oxidized and pure-Co 4-atomic-layer.129 (D) Schematic illustration depicts the several advantages of ultrathin metal layers confined in graphene for CO2 electroreduction into hydrocarbon fuels.134 Reproduced with permission from ref. 131, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, from ref. 133, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, from ref. 129, copyright 2016, Nature, and from ref. 134, copyright 2016, Nature Communication. 
For the CO2 electrochemical reduction reaction, the major challenge is to suppress the HER and enhance CO2 conversion. Interestingly, a new idea is to balance both. Filipe Marques Mota et al. proposed a new method by preparing well-dispersed AuNPs on ultrathin titanate nanosheets (Fig. 20B).133 The CO product selectivity was effectively controlled with the FE from 3% to over 80%, while the contents of Au varied from 0 to 93 wt% in the hybrid architecture by H2 reduction. The control of both component amounts was suggested to result in a variety of electronic properties based on the interaction between AuNPs and the Ti NS substrate, dictating the stabilization of the formed intermediates and hence the product selectivity. More evidence for the stability should be provided to help evaluate the possibility for further application of this approach. The approach was carried out with a reasonable mixture of CO and H2 to retain an effective hybrid structure, which favours the potential application of this approach in industrial catalytic processes in the future.
Intimating the natural oxides in photosynthesis is beneficial for obtaining high-performance electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction. A correct oxidation state was reported to transform a material that was considered nearly noncatalytic for the CO2 electroreduction reaction into an active catalyst. To reveal the role of the oxidation state, Shan Gao et al. prepared freestanding 4-atom-thick Co sheets with and without surface Co oxide by using a ligand-confined growth strategy (Fig. 20C).129 Surface cobalt atoms grown in atomically thin layers displayed higher intrinsic activity and selectivity towards formate production at lower overpotentials than the cobalt atoms on bulk samples. The assembled catalysts showed a current density of approximately 10 mA cm−2 over 40 h, with approximately 90% formate selectivity. This finding verified that the partial oxidation state increased the intrinsic activity and catalytic performance. For most materials, the oxidation state is quite stable but can be adjusted by rational experimental design.
Similarly, ultrahigh amounts of surface atoms and ultrathin layered materials exposed to ambient conditions can easily be oxidized in a non-controlled manner. To solve this problem, Fengcai Lei et al. constructed a material model of ultrathin metal layers confined in graphene to avoid the oxidation of highly reactive metals under an ambient atmosphere (Fig. 20D).134 In this sandwich-like structure, the gap between the graphene layers provided space for CO2 to freely diffuse into/out of the deep matrix of graphene, and the metal ultrathin layers were found to afford abundant surface atoms to act as active sites for efficient CO2 adsorption. Moreover, the highly conductive graphene endured fast electron penetration to the metal ultrathin layers, and metal atoms in low-coordination environments on the surface with many dangling bonds could help to stabilize the CO2− intermediate. As a result, the composite showed an FE of more than 85% during the 50 h measurement. Compared with the results reported in other experiments, the durability of the catalysts has been greatly extended due to the combination of composite materials. The sandwich structure preserves the advantages of two-dimensional materials by preventing the exposure of unsaturated coordinated atoms on the ultrathin surface.


2.3.4. Surface molecular functionalization. 
Kuilin Lv et al. reported the preparation of fluorosilane-decorated hydrophobic exfoliated MoS2 nanosheets from bulk MoS2 by a cost-effective ball-milling method (Fig. 21).135 Fluorosilane decoration on the surface of the MoS2 electrode was found to change the electronic properties of the edge Mo atom, which facilitated the rate-limiting CO desorption step, thus promoting CO2 reduction. The hydrophobicity of the electrode was proposed to provide abundant three-phase contact points for accelerating CO2 diffusion into the electrode, which enhanced the CO2RR performance. Unlike other methods that used surface ammonia molecules to enhance CO2 adsorption onto the surface, this method provided another route for surface molecule modification. This method appears useful because the H–E-MoS2 showed a high current density of 61 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V and a high CO FE of 81.2% at −0.9 V, which are higher than those of unmodified MoS2. This method is useful for CO production, but for hydrocarbon production, hydrogen must participate simultaneously.
 Fig. 21  (A) Calculated free energy changes for the HER on the E-MoS2 monolayers under an H2O environment (black line) and CO2 environment (red line). Optimized geometries of the H* intermediate on the E-MoS2 monolayers under (B) an H2O environment and (C) a CO2 environment (H–Mo bond lengths are in Å). (D) A thin layer of E-MoS2 film is immobilized on a GC electrode substrate that appears hydrophilic and aerophobic. The red line illustrates the liquid (electrolyte)/gas (CO2)/solid (electrode) contact point (TPCP) where electron transfer happens. (E) After the wettability regulation, an H–E-MoS2 film is immobilized on the GC electrode substrate, which becomes hydrophobic and aerophilic.135 Reproduced with permission from ref. 135, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


2.3.5. Surface alloys. 
Another way to design a surface for enhanced catalytic performance for CO2 reduction is surface alloying. Jiaqi Xu et al. reported the preparation of MoSeS alloy monolayers via a liquid–liquid interface-mediated strategy (Fig. 22).184 The shortened Mo–S bonds and the lengthened Mo–Se bonds tailored the d-band electronic structure of the Mo atoms, which led to an off-centred charge density around the Mo atoms. This off-centre charge density decreased the overlap between the d orbitals of the metal Mo atom and the p orbitals of the Se atom, which created a biased electron density on the Mo atoms in the MoSeS alloy monolayers. Such a phenomenon was found to stabilize the COOH* intermediate and facilitate CO desorption, which led to enhanced catalytic performance. Compared with MoS2 and MoSe2, this alloyed MoSeS monolayer showed a much higher FE of 45.2%. This experiment demonstrated the possibility of improving the catalytic activity by forming alloys. However, this method still requires further improvements because of its relatively low efficiency compared to other systems and its high overpotential, which may cause potential loss of energy due to competition with the HERs.
 Fig. 22  Representation of the formation of MoSeS alloy monolayers at the oil/water interface.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 184, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 

2.4. Nanoclusters
Most recently, nanoclusters—nearly monodispersed particles that are generally less than 10 nm (100 Å) in diameter—have drawn great attention for use in catalysis.185–188 When materials vary from two-dimensional to nanoclusters, the properties of the materials, such as the dynamic structural fluxionality, the fraction of under-coordinated surface atoms, and the interactions between the deposited cluster and the support, change.189 The smaller the catalysts are, the higher the surface-to-volume ratio, resulting in more exposure of surface active sites for CO2 adsorption and activation. Such nanoclusters differ from larger nanoparticles because of their quantized energy levels and molecule-like electronic structures.190 Nanoclusters have shown enhanced catalytic activity for a variety of reactions, such as direct propylene epoxidation, CO oxidation, and oxidative dehydrogenation of propane.191–193
In the process of CO2 reduction, ∼2 nm metallic copper clusters in copper(II) phthalocyanine have been demonstrated to be active sites that are responsible for the high activity in carbon dioxide-to-methane conversion.194 Studies have shown that the energy barriers of the CO → CHO* step decrease with decreasing particle size.195 For example, Douglas R. Kauffman et al. studied the interaction between CO2 and inherently charged Au25, demonstrating that CO2-induced redistribution of charge within the cluster produced spectroscopic and electrochemical changes similar to those seen upon cluster oxidation (Fig. 23A).196 Compared with Au nanoparticles and bulk Au, Au25 promoted the CO2 → CO reaction within 90 mV of the formal potential (thermodynamic limit), representing an approximate 200–300 mV improvement. Peak CO2 conversion occurred at −1 V (vs. RHE) with approximately 100% efficiency and a rate 7–700 times higher than that observed for larger Au catalysts and 10–100 times higher than those observed for current state-of-the-art processes.
 Fig. 23  (A) Space-filled model of the Au25–CO2 couple (left), potential-dependent CO formation rates for Au25 (right).196 (B) TEM images of (a) the 8 nm Au NPs and (b) the C–Au NPs. (c) Potential-dependent FEs of the C–Au on electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO. (d) Current densities for CO formation (mass activities) on the C–Au at various potentials.197 Reproduced with permission from ref. 196, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society and from ref. 197, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
However, we must note that there may be a non-monotonic dependence of the catalytic activities of nanoclusters on size, which normally means that smaller catalysts are better. For example, it has been demonstrated that Co55 nanoclusters exhibited the lowest adsorption strength and the greatest catalytic activity for the dissociation of CO2 with the smallest reaction barrier of 0.38 eV among three differently sized Co13, Co38 and Co55 nanoclusters.198
In another example, Wenlei Zhu et al. reported that 8 nm Au nanoclusters showed the maximum FE for electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide among the monodisperse 4, 6, 8, and 10 nm nanoclusters tested (Fig. 23B).197 Their results suggested that more edge sites (active for CO evolution) than corner sites (active for the competitive H2 evolution reaction) on the Au nanocluster surface facilitated the stabilization of the reduction intermediates, such as COOH*, and the formation of CO, suggesting the great importance of the surface properties of nanoclusters.
Another concern related to nanoclusters is that nanoclusters must be stabilized against aggregation into larger particles and, eventually, bulk materials to achieve thermodynamic stability. To address this problem, two major solutions have been identified that target surface properties: electrostatic (charge) ‘inorganic’ stabilization and steric ‘organic’ stabilization.188 Another idea to address this problem is to load nanoclusters onto certain supports to minimize the surface energy. In this review, we first summarize the surface strategies, i.e., surface science, design, and engineering, for nanoclusters, and then we discuss the support issues for nanoclusters with the aim of providing a broad picture for nanoclusters in CO2 reduction.

2.4.1. Heteroatom engineering. 
Doping in nanoclusters allows modification and control of the electronic structure and consequently modulates the chemical reactivity. Qiyan Zhang et al. studied chalcogen-doped Cu4 metal clusters (Cu4O, Cu4S, and Cu4Se) as catalysts for the electrochemical CO2 reduction with toluene as a solvent by using DFT calculations (Fig. 24).199 Compared with the pristine Cu4 cluster, the doped clusters showed better catalytic performance, especially in terms of their activation energy barriers. The adsorption of CO2 was accelerated by O or S atom doping, showing tremendous development potential for electrochemical CO2 reduction in the future.
 Fig. 24  Structures of global minima and some selected bond lengths (in Å) of the chalcogen doped Cu4 clusters.199 Reproduced with permission from ref. 199, copyright 2018, Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC, Elsevier. 


2.4.2. Alloys. 
One way to enhance the catalytic performance of CO2 reduction is by alloying, which alters the electronic and chemical properties of metals through the intimate interaction and special structure configuration of metals.200 Sooho Lee et al. explored the photocatalytic CO2 reduction of CuPt alloy nanoclusters on TiO2 (Fig. 25).201 Compared with Cu and Pt single-element nanoclusters, CuPt alloy nanoclusters exhibited high photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CH4. While Cu atoms provide sites for photogenerated electrons through strong binding with CO2 molecules, alloying with Pt improved the protonation of CO intermediates and lowered free energy barriers for intermediates, resulting in efficient production of CH4. It was also demonstrated that a large population of low-coordination-number edge atoms on nanoclusters strongly adsorbed CO2, enabling multi-electron transfer onto CO2.
 Fig. 25  Illustration of the CO2 conversion mechanism on small and large CuPt nanoclusters on TiO2. Small CuPt adsorbs CO2 more strongly and interacts with TiO2 more actively than large CuPt.201 Reproduced with permission from ref. 201, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.4.3. Surface molecule functionalization (surface ligands). 
To stabilize nanoclusters, ligands are widely used to achieve thermodynamic stability. However, surface ligands can influence the surface properties, which mediate the overall catalytic activity. Owing to the lack of active sites for catalysing reactions as a result of tight ligand capping on the metal surfaces, even though Au nanoclusters hold great potential for harvesting visible light, they can hardly accomplish solar-driven CO2 reduction.202 A DFT study showed that the presence of ligands can limit the accessibility of reactants to Au sites, resulting in reduced catalyst activity and that the removal of a ligand such as –SR and –R on the Au25(SR)18q (q = −1, 0, +1) generated surface active centres for electrocatalysis.203 Xiaofeng Cui et al. reported an effective strategy of grafting metal cations (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Cu2+) onto Au nanoclusters using L-cysteine as a bridging ligand to make Au nanoclusters catalytically active for visible-light-driven CO2 reduction (Fig. 26A).202 It was demonstrated that the grafted metal cations received photoinduced electrons from the Au nanoclusters, served as catalytic sites for CO2 reduction with the help of the metal–S bonding bridge, and provided various d-band centres and CO2 binding energies to tune the electron transfer efficiency and CO2 activation energy. Moreover, through encapsulation with MOFs, the photostability of the Au nanocluster-based catalyst was significantly enhanced.
 Fig. 26  (A) Gold nanocluster grafted with metal cations.202 (B) Overall mechanism of CO2 reduction on Cu32H20L12via the lattice-hydride channel.204 Reproduced with permission from ref. 202, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society and from ref. 204, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Qing Tang et al. showed the use of dithiophosphate ligands to obtain structurally precise ligand-protected Cu-hydride nanoclusters (Cu32H20L12) for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction with unique selectivity at low overpotentials (Fig. 26B).204 The presence of negatively charged hydrides in the copper cluster improved the selectivity of HCOOH over CO with a lower overpotential via the lattice-hydride mechanism, in which surface hydrides reduce CO2 to the HCOOH product, while the hydride vacancies are readily regenerated by the electrochemical proton reduction.
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) is an excellent stabilizer and reducing reagent for the synthesis of metal nanoclusters due to its strong affinity towards inorganic salts and large amount of cysteine. Si-Xuan Guo et al. reported the preparation of silver nanoclusters capped with bovine serum albumin (AgNC@BSA) for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.205 Mediated by [α-SiW12O40]4− anions, the AgNC@BSA catalyst showed high FE (>75%) for CO in CO2 reduction, which was not observed with either component on its own, in dimethylformamide containing 1% (v/v) water. Additionally, compared with that of the bulk silver electrode, the onset potential for this catalytic CO2 reduction process is approximately 400 mV more positive.


2.4.4. Composite. 
Because the functionality of a single nanocluster is normally limited, forming a composite with two or more functionally complementary clusters together can be a good way to improve catalytic performance. Because of the versatile tunability of their compositions, nanoclusters can act as active sites, photosensitizers, and energy level adjusters, all of which are key factors to achieving higher catalytic CO2 reduction activity.
Wooyul Kim et al. developed a cuprous oxide nanocluster catalyst coupled with an oxo-bridged binuclear ZrOCoII light absorber for photocatalytic CO2 reduction (Fig. 27A).206 The Cu oxide cluster was prepared by photodeposition of a [Cu(NCCH3)4]2+ precursor by visible light excitation of the ZrOCo charge-transfer chromophore, followed by mild calcination at 350 °C. The CO2 photoreduction yield was observed to be strongly dependent on the oxidation state of the surface Cu centres, which received electrons from the ZrOCoII unit. In another case, Wooyul Kim et al. reported the utilization of an iridium oxide nanocluster (IrOx) for CO2 reduction (Fig. 27B).207 The preparation comprised visible light excitation of the ZrOCoII metal-to-metal charge-transfer (MMCT) chromophore in the presence of an [Ir(acac)3] (acac: acetylacetonate) precursor followed by calcination under mild conditions. When illuminating the photocatalytic unit exposed to a mixture of carbon dioxide and water vapour, IrOx served as a water oxidation catalyst together with the Co donor centre to reduce CO2 to CO along with the evolution of O2.
 Fig. 27  (A) Hierarchical assembly of an oxo-bridged binuclear ZrOCoII light absorber unit coupled to a cuprous oxide nanocluster catalysts.206 (B) An all-inorganic polynuclear unit consisting of an oxobridged binuclear ZrOCoII group coupled to an iridium oxide nanocluster (IrOx).207 (C) An aqueous colloidal system comprising a pseudoternary complex formed among carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH), silver nanoclusters stabilized by polymethacrylic acid (AgNCs-PMAA), and TiO2 nanoparticles.208 and (D) thin film of SrTiO3 nanorods loaded with reduction and oxidation cocatalysts.209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society, from ref. 207, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society, from ref. 208, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society and from ref. 209, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Liyun Zhang et al. reported that polymethacrylic acid-stabilized Ag nanoclusters acted as photosensitizers to enhance CO2 reduction activity (Fig. 27C).208 Together with carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH) and TiO2 nanoparticles, the composite achieved selective, visible-light-driven conversion of CO2 to CO with a turnover frequency of 20 s−1 under visible light irradiation at 25 °C. AgNCs-PMAA on TiO2 greatly enhanced the electrocatalytic ability of CODH for CO2 reduction, and the individual Ag nanoclusters interacted directly and dynamically with the enzyme surface, most likely at exposed cysteine thiols.
One additional function of nanoclusters in composites is the modulation of the electron structures of catalysts. Shusaku Shoji et al. prepared CuxO nanoclusters and phosphate-based co-catalysts (CoPi) on SrTiO3 nanorod films (Fig. 27D).209 The highly dispersed loading of nanoclusters improved the electron and hole densities, which favoured the multi-electron/hole reactions of both CO2 reduction and water oxidation. Compared to the bare SrTiO3 film, the dual co-catalyst-loaded SrTiO3 film exhibited 2.5 times higher CO generation.
In addition to the monodispersed nanoclusters, which are modified in different ways, nanoclusters can be used on supports where interactions between nanoclusters and supports are of great importance. A balanced catalyst–support interaction results in remarkable activity, high coke resistivity, and long durability of the catalyst system.210


2.4.5. Metal oxide supports. 
The most commonly used support for nanoclusters to date is metal oxides. It has been demonstrated that the loading of nanoclusters onto supports mediates the surface charge, which can further influence the catalytic activity.211 Evan Andrews et al. prepared Cu nanoclusters on a single-crystal (10−10) ZnO electrode.212 ZnO was demonstrated to help disperse Cu and improve the CO2 absorption and reduction activity via synergistic behaviours. Compared with the selectivity of pure Cu electrodes, the selectivity for alcohols on Cu/ZnO electrodes was improved by an order of magnitude. Ge Yin et al. reported the preparation of amorphous copper oxide (Cu(II)) nanoclusters on niobate (Nb3O8−) nanosheets for the reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) to carbon monoxide (CO). Niobate (Nb3O8−) nanosheets serve as light harvesters to photogenerate active holes in the VB, which can react with water, and active electrons in the conduction band, which can be injected into the Cu(II) nanoclusters through the interface to reduce CO2 to CO (Fig. 28A).213
 Fig. 28  (A) Photocatalytic CO2 reduction by copper oxide nanocluster-grafted Niobate nanosheets.213 (B) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic CO2 reduction mechanism of Ni/TiO2[Vo].83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 213, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society and from ref. 83, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Since the pioneering research by Fujishima and Honda in 1972 on TiO2 for photocatalysis, TiO2 has remained at the forefront of photocatalysis research due to its abundance, low cost, non-toxicity and robustness under operating conditions.214–216 Loading nanoclusters onto TiO2 is a popular strategy to improve the catalytic performance. Stephen Rhatigan's results showed that ceria nanocluster–TiO2 rutile composites favoured non-stoichiometry, contributing to the emergence of energy states in the energy gap of the TiO2 host for enhanced visible light response.217 CO2 was adsorbed and activated at multiple sites on the reduced CeOx–TiO2 composite surfaces, while H2O spontaneously dissociated at oxygen vacancy sites. Min Liu et al. found that Cu(II) oxide amorphous nanoclusters on Ti3+ self-doped TiO2 consumed the photoinduced electrons to suppress the recombination of electron–hole pairs at the isolated Ti3+ band via efficient oxygen reduction.218
Sooho Lee et al. reported that CuPt nanoclusters on a TiO2 support showed a larger population of low-coordination-number edge atoms that strongly adsorbed CO2, enabling multi-electron transfer onto CO2.201 Moreover, the strong interaction between small nanoclusters and the surface of the TiO2 support facilitated the formation of COOH, which enhanced the photocatalytic CO2 conversion efficiency.
In addition to the rutile phase, other phases of TiO2, including brookite, also attract scientists’ interests. Jingpeng Jin et al. synthesized small Cu nanoclusters onto brookite TiO2 quasi-nanocubes (BTN) through a one-pot hydrothermal reaction.219 The Cu nanoclusters decorated on the brookite modified the properties of the surface states, which resulted in a partial increase of the VB of Cu-BTN, leading to a redshift of the absorption edge and better charge separation and electron utilization efficiency. Moreover, the resultant Cu-BTN improved the activity and selectivity of CO2 photoreduction to CH4, yielding a maximum overall photocatalytic activity (150.9 μmolg−1h−1) for CO/CH4 production that was ≈11.4 times higher than that of pristine BTN (13.2 μmolg−1h−1).
Furthermore, Tadesse Billo et al. reported Ni-nanocluster-loaded black TiO2 (Ni/TiO2[VO]) with built-in dual active sites for the selective photocatalytic CO2 conversion (Fig. 28B).83 The synergistic effects of deliberately inducing Ni nanoclusters and oxygen vacancies into the composite were shown to provide energetically stable CO2 binding sites with the lowest activation energy (0.08 eV), highly reactive sites, a fast electron transfer pathway, and enhanced light harvesting by decreasing the band gap. As a result, the Ni/TiO2[VO] photocatalyst demonstrated highly selective and enhanced photocatalytic activity with more than 18 times higher solar fuel production than the commercial TiO2 (P-25).


2.4.6. Carbon-based materials. 
With great potential for the suppression of photogenerated carrier recombination and an increase in CO2 adsorption and activation, graphene is considered to be a good candidate to enhance the photocatalytic CO2 reduction activities. Haiying He et al. investigated the effect of the support on the adsorption and single-electron activation of CO2 on ZnO nanoclusters with and without a modified graphene support using a first-principles approach (Fig. 29).220 They found that n-type doping retained the photoexcited electron and hence facilitated CO2 reduction on ZnO, whereas p-type doping enhanced charge transfer from the photoexcited ZnO to graphene and would be useful for reductions occurring on graphene.
 Fig. 29  Variation of the binding energies as a function of the charge on the ZnO cluster.220 Reproduced with permission from ref. 220, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is also one of the most promising visible-light-driven photocatalysts for CO2 reduction. Holey g-C3N4 nanotubes were first fabricated to modify the light-harvesting ability, the redox potential and the charge separation efficiency, and transparent zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) nanoclusters were introduced to further increase CO2 capture capacity without sacrificing the light absorption capacity.221 The optimized ZIF-8-modified tubular g-C3N4 photocatalysts exhibited a great enhancement in photocatalytic CH3OH production efficiency by more than 3 times relative to the bulk g-C3N4 (BCN) photocatalyst synthesized by conventional pyrolysis of melamine.


2.4.7. Zeolites. 
Yuecong Tong et al. prepared a Ti-HZSM-5 hybrid with Ti species highly dispersed as nanoclusters via the sol–gel method.222 Compared with the common TiO2-HZSM-5 composite sample, the as-prepared Ti-HZSM-5 sample exhibited enhanced activity for photocatalytic CO2 reduction due to the higher concentration of excited state electrons and faster electron transfer rate.

2.5. Single-atom catalysts
The ultimate small entity for clusters is the single atom, which has been demonstrated to exhibit encouraging catalytic activity when dispersed on supports. The idea of using single atoms as catalysts originated from the early assumption of active centres for catalysis. Later, studies further confirmed that many catalytic reactions mainly depended on single atoms, especially coordinatively unsaturated sites such as corner atoms and edge atoms, rather than ensembles of atoms. Chiara Genovese et al. reported the preparation of nanostructured iron(III) oxyhydroxide on nitrogen-doped carbon by impregnation and subsequent thermal annealing of the Fe nitrate precursor onto pieces of N- and O-functionalized C paper.140 The formation of nitrogen-coordinated iron(II) sites as single atoms or polyatomic species at the interface between iron oxyhydroxide and the nitrogen-doped carbon improves the activity towards acetic acid at a very low potential (−0.5 V vs. silver/silver chloride), which enables high FE (97.4%) and selectivity towards acetic acid (61%). The lack of atomic ensembles favours adsorbate binding and specific metal–support interactions that lead to discrete energy levels around the Fermi level that can participate in catalysis. It was demonstrated that the absence of atomic ensembles in the single-atom catalyst would substantially change the reaction pathway compared with that of conventional nanoparticle catalysts.223 Seoin Back et al. even proved that the lack of a Pt ensemble was responsible for the significantly weaker binding of *CO on Pt@dv-Gr, which benefited the release of the final products generated.224
Early exploration of single-atom catalysts dates back to 1999, when atomically dispersed Pt cations on MgO were found to be as active as metallic Pt NPs in propane combustion.226,227 Although great advances have been made in the intervening years, there have been few reports providing direct evidence for the bonding and spatial distribution of single atoms. In 2011, after great advancements in characterization, Zhang and coworkers reported high activity for single Pt atoms on FeOx towards CO oxidation and for the first time combined high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM), spectroscopy and computational techniques to provide solid evidence for single atoms. The term single-atom catalysts was then proposed and defined as a supported metal catalyst exclusively containing isolated monometallic active sites on a surface.228 Very recently, Kun Jiang et al. used atomic-resolution 3D atom probe tomography to provide direct evidence for single Ni atoms coordinated in graphene vacancies (Fig. 30).225
 Fig. 30  Three-dimensional atom probe tomography of Ni Single Atoms in a Graphene Shell.225 Reproduced with permission from ref. 225, copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Compared with conventional catalysts, single-atom catalysts exhibit fascinating activity due to their ultrahigh ratio of low-coordination-number metal atoms and unique electronic structures. Considering economic issues, single-atom catalysts also hold great potential for minimizing material usage, especially for noble metals that are adopted for high catalytic activity but whose use is hindered by their high price and limited conservation. Homogeneity in the active sites and geometric structures of single-atom catalysts results in similar spatial and electronic interactions with substrates and endows these catalysts with great potential to enhance selectivity, which is considered to be at least equally important to activity. Moreover, with their well-defined structure, single-atom catalysts are promising ideal models for mechanistic studies.
In the field of CO2 reduction, the first metals used in single-atom forms are noble atoms due to their high catalytic activity. Noble metals such as Pt, Pd, Ir, Ru, and Rh supported on different supports have been demonstrated to exhibit great enhancement of performance for CO2 reduction.229–234 Later experiments indicated that some nonnoble metals, such as Cu, Co, and Ni, also show great potential in the field of CO2 reduction.235,236 Ni was even demonstrated to show a lower overpotential for CH4 production than noble metals such as Os and Ru.224
One major concern for single-atom catalysts is stability due to the substantial tendency for these catalysts to aggregate during the catalytic process or even during storage, resulting in thermodynamic instability. Here, we must note that the definition of single-atom catalysts does not extend to gaseous single atoms that are not able to accomplish a catalytic circle independently. In contrast to our first intuition, single atoms that are fixed onto supports tend to interact strongly with the support to decrease the surface energy, which significantly improves their stability against leaching and/or aggregation. The bottleneck of single-atom catalysts is the development of proper supports and the ability to fix the catalysts onto the support with atomic dispersity. Preparation methods such as mass-selected soft loading and atomic layer loading have been demonstrated to be effective approaches, but their low-yield and high-cost fabrication limits large-scale production. Wet-chemistry synthetic methods, including defect engineering, spatial confinement, and coordination design, have been well adopted for the preparation of single-atom catalysts due to the facile operation and feasibility of large-scale manufacturing.237 Upon application of single-atom catalysts, the supports are believed to play an important role in both stability and catalysis. Ideally, a support should possess the following features: (i) specific anchoring sites to tightly “grasp” the single atoms, (ii) a large surface area and a flexible surface to allow high loading of catalytic sites, and (iii) high carrier mobility to facilitate electron transfer.238 Here, we feature supports for use with single-atom catalysts in CO2 reduction to provide a preliminary picture of the relationship between supports and performance.

2.5.1. Carbon-based materials. 
To date, the most popular support has been carbon-based materials. With a high specific surface area, carbon-based materials can strongly interact with metal atoms, which could prevent their metal aggregation, resulting in promising loading density and uniform improvement. Most carbon materials have good conductivity, making them low-resistance media for electron transportation and ready platforms for electrocatalytic systems. Another advantage is that carbon-based materials are quite stable for most redox reactive systems, making them promising for future potential applications. Currently, carbon in the form of carbon black,140 porous carbon,239 carbon sphere,141 carbon nanotube,240 graphene,241,242 and graphene oxide86 have been demonstrated to be good candidates as support for single atom catalyst. Among them, graphene and graphene oxide are chosen due to their large surface area and surface defects.238,243
The most popular synthetic methods to prepare single-atom catalysts on the surface of carbon are based on the bottom-up strategy, such as the impregnation method, in which metal ions are absorbed onto the surface functional groups of graphene via an ion exchange process and then fixed onto the surface to act as active sites for catalysis through a freeze-drying method followed by thermal treatment (Fig. 31A).86
 Fig. 31  (A) Schematic illustration for the synthetic procedure of the Co1–G catalyst.86 (b) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of the Co–NG catalyst.244 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH and from ref. 244, copyright 2009, Nature Communication. 
Later, heteroatom dopants such as nitrogen and sulfur were adopted to further improve the performance of single-atom catalysts. To introduce nitrogen, NH3 along with Ar is used as the atmosphere during the annealing process (Fig. 31B).244 N doping occurs at a temperature as low as 300 °C and is accompanied by the reduction of GO.245 It was also reported that the doping of N in graphene oxide creates an n-doping phenomenon that also favours conductivity. Such enhancement of the conductivity benefits continuous charge transfer from the substrate to the active metal centre during catalysis.
Furthermore, the introduction of N dopants can generate vacancies such as single vacancies (SVs) or double vacancies (DVs) with one or two C atoms.246 The N-doped divacancy site of graphene was found to be responsible for anchoring these metal atoms, leading to a relatively strong binding strength due to the strong hybridization between transition metal d orbitals and N 2p orbitals.247 With different support environments, the catalysts would show different free energies towards the adsorption of *COOH and *CO intermediates, which determine the catalytic activity (Fig. 32).219
 Fig. 32  Simulations of CO2-to-CO reduction on different atomic sites (A) schematic of the reaction steps of electrocatalytic CO2 to CO reduction. (B) Different atomic configurations in graphene for the DFT calculations. (C) The free energy diagram of CO2 to CO conversion on different atomic sites under an equilibrium potential of –0.12 V versus RHE.219 Reproduced with permission from ref. 219, copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
The incorporation of N can potentially help with isolating the metal atoms by forming M–N bonds in addition to M–C bonds in the M–NG catalyst.143 Jian Yang et al. reported the preparation of single Ni atoms using a top-down strategy via the thermal diffusion of Ni nanoparticles. When Ni nanoparticles are exposed to N-doped carbon, the strong coordination splits the Ni atoms from Ni NPs. The Ni atoms are stabilized and anchored on the surface of the carbon substrate. The continuous loss of atomic Ni species from the NPs would ultimately result in atomization of Ni NPs during the catalytic process.248
N dopants in the carbon structure exist either at the edges or within the core structure of the carbon material by replacing one of the sp2-hybridized carbon atoms in the graphitic structure.249 Chenhao Zhang et al. found that that a change in the occupied density of states (DOS) with additional nitrogen substitution on graphene improved the catalytic activity of the Fe–N4 moieties by lowering the energy barrier of COOH* formation and facilitating the CO* desorption step, according to the free energy diagram.139Fig. 33 shows the various proposed forms of involvement of both pyridinic and graphitic species, as well as pyrrolic species, as active sites.249 While electrons are located in the p* antibonding orbital for graphitic-like nitrogen, making them less accessible for CO2 binding, pyridinic defects retain a lone pair of electrons that are capable of binding CO2.250 Jun Gu et al. reported the preparation of atomically dispersed Fe3+ sites on a N-doped carbon support.251 They revealed that the pyrrolic N ligands stabilized Fe3+ relative to Fe2+, whereas the pyridinic N ligands had the opposite effect. Pyrrolic N ligands were found to be important to keep Fe sites in the +3 oxidation state during CO2 electroreduction and consequently maintained the high activity and stability of Fe3+ sites through electronic coupling to the conductive carbon support. Such preservation of the +3 oxidation state during CO2 electroreduction is counterintuitive because the formation of highly reduced, low-valent Fe species is necessary for molecular Fe catalysts. Fe3+ sites derive their superior activity from faster CO2 adsorption and weaker CO absorption than those of conventional Fe2+ sites.
 Fig. 33  Different forms of nitrogen-functionalized carbon. C gray, N blue, and O red.249 Reproduced with permission from ref. 249, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to N doping, Yang et al. reported the preparation of single-Ni-atom catalysts by pyrolysing a mixture of an amino acid (L-alanine or L-cysteine), melamine and nickel acetate in argon, where the amino acid was introduced as a sulfur source.252 The additional S doping resulted in a lower degree of crystallization and a defect-rich structure, and the onset potential of CO2 reduction over A-Ni-NSG was improved by at least 100 mV compared to that without S doping (A-Ni-NG). The single-Ni-atom catalyst exhibited high intrinsic CO2 reduction activity, reaching a specific current of 350 A gcatalyst−1 and a turnover frequency of 14800 h−1 at a mild overpotential of 0.61 V for CO conversion with 97% FE.
In addition to the abovementioned functions, supports can also play an important role in CO2 diffusion during CO2 reduction. Considering the fact that layer-by-layer stacked graphene nanosheets can block the gas diffusion pathways, Tingting Zheng et al. used commercial carbon black to prepare Ni single-atom catalysts (Fig. 34). The nanoparticulate morphology of the carbon black support facilitated CO2 diffusion across the gas diffusion layer to ensure a high local concentration of reactants, achieving an extraordinary performance in reducing CO2 to CO with a current density above 100 mA cm−2 and 100% selectivity for CO.146
 Fig. 34  Ni single atoms on commercial carbon black toward CO production.146 Reproduced with permission from ref. 146, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Another important role for carbon-based materials, such as carbon nitride, is as photosensitizers, which can generate electrons and holes under light irradiation, converting single-atom catalysts into photocatalysts. With cooperation between the support and single metal atoms, the visible light absorption could be significantly enhanced. Guoping Gao et al. used DFT calculations to investigate single atoms of palladium and platinum supported on graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), i.e., Pd/g-C3N4 and Pt/g-C3N4, respectively, for use as photocatalysts for CO2 reduction (Fig. 35).253 The deposition of single-atom catalysts on g-C3N4 significantly enhanced the visible light absorption, rendering them ideal for visible-light-driven reduction of CO2.
 Fig. 35  Single atom (Pd/Pt) Supported on graphitic carbon nitride as an efficient photocatalyst for visible-light reduction of carbon dioxide.253 Reproduced with permission from ref. 253, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 


2.5.2. MOF-based materials. 
MOFs constitute a class of porous and crystalline materials that provide effective coordination sites to anchor individual metal atoms, thereby improving the dispersion of single atoms and increasing the loading amount. Furthermore, CO2 adsorption can be enhanced due to the large surface area, which also benefits the catalytic performance. Huabin Zhang et al. reported the preparation of a new MOF-525-metal (Co and Zn) composite with coordinatively unsaturated metal sites incorporated into the porphyrin units (Fig. 36A).254 MOF-525 was chosen due to its excellent performance in CO2 capture and utilization of visible light. MOF-525-Co was formed by an impregnation process with a simple thermal treatment of mixed MOF-525 and metal precursors. Directional migration of photogenerated excitons from porphyrin to catalytic Co centres was found to provide a supply of long-lived electrons for the reduction of CO2 molecules adsorbed on Co centres. Upon acquisition of photoexcited electrons from porphyrin units, the coordinatively unsaturated Co centres become an active catalytic material for the activation of CO2 molecules. As a result, the MOF-525-Co composite showed a high CO evolution rate of 200.6 mmol g−1 h−1 (yield: 2.42 mmol) and a CH4 evolution rate of 36.76 mmol g−1 h−1 (yield: 0.42 mmol) under light illumination for 6 h.
 Fig. 36  (A) (a) Mechanisms underlying the photoexcited dynamics involved in MOF-525-Co. (b) Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by the MOF-525-Co heterogeneous photocatalyst under visible light irradiation.254 (B) (a) Single oxidative LSV scans in N2-saturated 0.5m NaOH for different catalysts. (b) EXAFS and (c) CO specific current density for Co–N2 and NH3-treated Co–N2. (d) Calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction to CO on Co–N2 and Co–N4.255 Reproduced with permission from ref. 254, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH and from ref. 255, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are also used as supports for single-atom catalysts. In addition to their function as supports, the variability of MOFs makes them ideal materials to study the function of coordination on CO2 reduction. Xiaoqian Wang et al. prepared a series of atomically dispersed Co catalysts in ZIFs with different nitrogen coordination numbers to study the relation between coordination number and CO2 reduction (Fig. 36B).255 Compared with Co–N4, Co–N2 exhibited the lowest charge-transfer resistance from the catalyst surface to the reactant, providing a faster electron transfer to CO2 for CO2˙− intermediate generation. Co-N2 showed a tendency for stronger adsorption of CO2˙− compared to the Co–N4 surface, benefiting the overall CO2 reduction.


2.5.3. Metal oxide-based materials. 
Metal oxides such as ceria (CeO2) can generate strong metal–support interactions and enhance the dispersion of loading metals, even at atomic levels. Yifei Wang et al. developed a Cu-doped CeO2 electrocatalyst via a wet impregnation process (Fig. 37).256 Single-atom Cu substitution on the CeO2(110) surface was found to be stably enriched with three oxygen vacancies around each Cu site, yielding a highly effective catalytic centre for CO2 adsorption and activation. Cu species in CeO2 nanorods are highly dispersed at the single-atomic level with the direct association of 3 oxygen vacancies with each Cu ion on the surface. Such oxygen vacancy-bound, single-atom Cu-substituted CeO2 enabled excellent electrocatalytic selectivity in reducing CO2 to methane with an FE as high as 58%.
 Fig. 37  Schematic illustration of Cu–CeO2 for CO2 reduction.256 Reproduced with permission from ref. 256, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 


2.5.4. Others. 
In addition to the above supports, TiC was also demonstrated to be a good candidate for serving as support for a single atom. Seoin Back et al. reported that Ir@d-TiC lacked a Sigma-type bonding interaction with *CO, which resulted in a deviation from the usual scaling relation of transition metals and thus a considerable reduction in the limited potential. It is worth mentioning here that recently, single-atom alloy catalysts, i.e., single metal atoms grown on a metal support, were also considered to be a promising for CO2 reduction. M. J. Cheng et al. reported that Rh@Au single-atom alloys (SAAs) are promising electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction to C-1 hydrocarbons in aqueous solution.257 They demonstrated that SAAs could efficiently reduce CO2 to methane with as little as 40% loss to the HER for Rh@Au(100) and as little as 10% for Rh@Ag(100).
Even though single-atom catalysts show superior catalytic activity with proper supports, the low loading required to prevent aggregation decreases their overall activity and inhibits their potential application. Increasing the metal loading of single-atom catalysts would greatly enhance the density of active sites and the corresponding mass activity, especially for industrial applications. The mainstream way to enhance loading is to create as many defects as possible on the surface to grasp single atoms to avoid aggregation, but to date, the highest loading is 3 wt%, which still leaves much room for improvement in the future for the development of industrial applications.258
Another problem with the use of single-atom catalysts is effective large-scale preparation. Changming Zhao et al. applied solid-state diffusion between the N-doped carbon phase and bulk Ni metal to synthesize hierarchical, self-supported atomistic catalysts that were considered programmable and scalable to meet industrial demand and could be directly used as binder-free electrodes for CO2 electroreduction. These catalysts delivered a current density of 48.66 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V versus RHE, a high FE of 97% to CO and a selectivity of over 90% in a wide range of working potentials of −0.7 to −1.2 V versus RHE.147

2.6. Surface strategies for the evolution from 2D materials and clusters to single atoms

2.6.1. Laterally referenceable strategies. 
Considering the dominant factors controlling CO2 reduction performance, surface unsaturated atoms/sites are of vital importance, as we have frequently mentioned before. First, such sites are responsible for CO2 adsorption and CO2 activation by acting as Lewis bases to donate electrons to CO2. Activation of CO2 weakens the ultra-stable CO bond, making it possible to initiate subsequent reactions. Second, with a tuned electronic structure, surface unsaturated sites improve the surrounding electronic environment to achieve high electronic mobility for entire catalytic materials. Such active sites may act as anti-recombination sites on the surface to consume/remove electrons (holes) of photoexcited excitons and leave holes (electrons) for the targeted functionalities, i.e., carrier separation enhancement.
Regardless of how the size of catalysts changes from 2D materials to nanoclusters and single atoms, these materials share common laterally referenceable surface strategies for CO2 reduction, i.e., alloying and oxidation states. For convenient reference, the surface strategies for photocatalysis and electrocatalysis in 2D materials are summarized in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI†), respectively, in the ESI.† The surface strategies applied to clusters and single atoms, which are random and unsystematic, are not summarized. Obviously, 2D materials contain two different levels of alloying, i.e., heteroatom engineering and composites: the former is performed based on the atomic dimensions in local regions of a 2D flake, while the latter is a uniformly distributed nanoscale heterojunction across the whole 2D support. As seen, such an alloying strategy with heteroatom engineering for improving surface unsaturated atoms is applicable to both cluster and single-atom catalysts and hence is a kind of laterally referenceable surface strategy. On the other hand, oxidation states will consistently play important roles in tailoring gas adsorption/desorption and electronic structures during CO2 reduction for the three types of catalytic materials (2D materials, clusters, and single atoms). All methods/strategies to realize and tune the oxidation states of catalysts are laterally referenceable.


2.6.2. Uniquely applicable strategies. 
The unique large surface of 2D materials leaves abundant space for surface modification and defect engineering. Again, as seen from Tables S1 and S2 in the ESI,† unique strategies such as plasmonic surface functionalization and surface molecule functionalization for 2D materials promote the utilization of solar energy and modulate surface CO2 adsorption behaviour. Alternatively, defect engineering in 2D materials is promising for tailoring surface active sites and electronic structures. While there is still room for nanoclusters to be functionalized and defects to be introduced, single-atom catalysts are isolated and hence make such molecule modification and defect engineering challenging. On the other hand, the versatile supports for single-atom catalysts leave considerable space for function-oriented modification as necessary.
Obviously, with the decrease in dimension from 2D materials to nanoclusters and single atoms, the ratio of surface active sites increases dramatically. The atom utilization efficiency of single-atom catalysts reaches almost 100%, which brings the advantages of both homogenous catalysts and heterogeneous catalysts together. Additionally, according to the quantum confinement mechanism, such a decrease in the size of materials substantially changes the electronic structures of these three kinds of materials. 2D materials possess quasi-continuous band levels whose band gap is slightly wider than that of its bulk counterpart due to the quantum confinement from the Z-direction. As the X–Y dimension decreases, three-dimensional quantum confinement leads to discrete energy levels that become more separated for single atoms, which we refer to as molecule orbitals. This unique phenomenon for single atoms has a significant effect on CO2 adsorption, CO2 activation, and subsequent reactions, providing more manipulation parameters and thus a thermodynamic driving force for optimizing CO2RR reactions.

3. Challenges and opportunities
In this review, we summarized the recent progress of surface strategies, i.e., surface science, design and engineering, applied to 2D materials and reviewed recent developments in nanocluster catalysts and even single-atom catalysts for CO2 reduction. With a high surface-to-volume ratio, a short carrier diffusion distance, unique electronic structures, and abundant active sites, these low-dimensional materials have drawn great attention. Although great achievements have been made in recent years, there is still a long way to go to achieve practical usage of these materials.
3.1. Cost-competitive scalable preparation of catalysts
The preparation of low-dimensional materials is still problematic due to their thermal instability. How to prepare two-dimensional catalysts in an inexpensive, green and easy way still remains an open question. A recent report showed great potential for utilizing a computational method to accelerate the process of optimizing the synthesis of materials for CO2RR.259 High reactivity makes the life span of such catalysts quite short, which also increases the cost and hampers their practical application.
3.2. Enhancement of catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability
(i) For photocatalysts, the major problems are as follows: (a) the utilization efficiency of solar energy, (b) the efficiency of carrier separation, and (c) product selectivity.
(a) The low efficiency for solar usage originates from the trade-off between the redox reaction (which requires a large band gap to provide basic reaction energy levels for oxidation and reduction) and light adsorption (which requires a narrow band gap so that the induced photon is able to excite electrons). To realize the desired energy level, most current catalysts have a wide band gap, which can operate under only ultraviolet light, resulting in great waste of solar energy. One possible way to overcome this problem is to introduce defect levels or dopant levels into the band gap to realize absorption of longwave light without obviously tuning the intrinsic energy levels. However, how to design an ideal pair of body materials and doping materials or surface defects, regardless of whether such induced energy levels will increase the recombination rate or decrease the selectivity of the final products, is still challenging. More detailed work on the mechanism may gradually help to solve such problems.
(b) Carriers separation is considered to be the bottleneck for further improvement of photocatalysts. The recombination of photoinduced electron–hole pairs leads to a waste of energy and effective reaction sites. Two-dimensional materials may help because their ultrathin thickness minimizes the required charge diffusion distance. A reasonable design of heterojunctions seems to be a possible solution to efficiently separate carriers by introducing an intrinsic electric field. Other methods, such as defect engineering, can also favour carrier separation by trapping electrons or holes. However, the scattering of electrons can be significant when the defect concentration is too high, which would have an adverse effect on the catalytic performance. In addition to recombination inside the materials, surface recombination also consumes a large number of carriers, and an efficient way to modify the surface to diminish surface carrier recombination is also of great importance.
(c) Another problem for CO2 reduction is low product selectivity. Due to the complexity of CO2 reduction, various reaction routes produce different products. Such diversity of products makes it difficult for potential products to lower the significance of CO2 reduction. Currently, we do not know much about the mechanism of product selectivity. To improve the product selectivity, calculations and machine learning are promising to help design energy levels exactly, and the delicate synthesis of the designed catalysts needs urgent development.
(ii) For electrocatalysts, one challenge is the accompanying HER, which lowers the efficiency. There are some possible solutions for this problem.
(a) Lowering the overpotential. With a relatively low overpotential, the HER can be minimized or even avoided. However, because of the adsorption of intermediate products on the catalysts, the required potential is always high. This problem may benefit from guidance from calculations and good catalyst design.
(b) Protecting CO2 reduction from water. By preventing direct contact between the catalyst and liquid water using an anion membrane electrode, the H2 evolution side reaction can be suppressed. Other groups use a highly hydrophobic surface to prevent the participation of H2O in the process of CO2 reduction.
(c) Alloying with different metals to utilize their advantages may be a solution for preventing the HER while providing more protons for CO2 reduction reaction.
(d) Facet control of catalysts. The correlation between CO2RR performance and the crystal orientation of the catalysts has been demonstrated with different metals in different studies. Different facets may introduce different activities and selectivities towards reduced products. Hence, for specific catalysts, it is reasonable to fabricate crystals with specific facets to maximize the desired product while decreasing the evolution of H2.
(e) Surface modification. This method may change the surface activity to favour different products, and to realize this, we can control the surface modification by adding ligands or through other methods to enhance the desired reaction while suppressing the production of H2.
(f) For the photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2, a very promising strategy is to combine the plasmonic effect of the catalysts to improve the activity and stability.
(g) The development of computational technology for chemistry has played a tremendous role. Moving forward, the DFT method will be of critical importance to discover potential materials and various hypotheses. Moreover, computational methods will also help us to further understand the mechanism of CO2RR.
(h) Tuning the coordination environment of single atoms as well as the synergy between metal atoms and the support may facilitate C–C coupling by stabilizing C2+ reaction intermediates.260
3.3. Understanding the catalyst/solid–gas interface dynamics in the whole redox system
During the CO2 reduction process, several participants need to co-exist at the catalyst/solid–gas interface, including gaseous CO2 molecules to be reduced, gaseous/liquid H2O molecules to provide protons, solid catalysts/electrodes to provide reductive electrons and oxidative holes, and reaction sites on solid catalysts/electrodes to promote dehydrogenation from H2O molecules and hydrogenation onto CO2 molecules. To complete reduction of one CO2 molecule, these multiple participants need to work synergistically, especially for the specific targeted product. A fundamental understanding of such interface dynamics in the whole redox system is needed to perform successful product-oriented redox reactions. The interface dynamics for such multi-step reactions mainly include adsorption of molecules (CO2, H2O) onto the reaction sites of solid surfaces, interaction of the charge carriers (electrons, hole) with these molecules, diffusion of protons (H+), activation of redox reactions, competition between CO2 reduction and the HER, desorption of the intermediates and final products, and adsorption/desorption selectivity. A deep understanding of these surface dynamics benefits the design of more efficient redox reaction systems and more reliable control of the final product selectivity.
3.4. Exploring the mechanism of multi-step redox reactions
Although great achievements have been made in this field, a complete understanding of the reaction has not yet been developed, and further exploration of the full mechanism is still needed, especially for multi-step redox reactions during CO2 reduction. The mechanistic study for CO2 multi-step redox reactions is complicated but still has the potential to be conducted by computer calculations using DFT or first-principles methods. Most studies focus on a certain material or a certain category, which causes concerns for its universal application. Considering the complex reaction mechanism associated with numerous factors during multi-step redox reactions, a layered single crystal may be a good model because of its definite structure and controllable surface, which would promote the understanding of the reaction on the surface by combining the newly developed nano-to-atomic level microscopy and/or spectroscopy technologies.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the ANU Futures Scheme (Q4601024), the ANU Global Research Partnership Scheme (R468504649), ActewAGL Endowment Fund (Q4601028), the Australian Research Council (DP190100295, LE190100014, DP170104464, DP160104866, DE160101163, FL17010), the National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFB0406000), the National Science Foundation of China, (21875137), and the thousand talents program for distinguished young scholars from the Chinese government.
References
Y. H. Fu, D. R. Sun, Y. J. Chen, R. K. Huang, Z. X. Ding, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Caldeira and M. E. Wickett, Nature, 2003, 425, 365 CrossRef CAS .
V. Masson-Delmotte, M. Kageyama, P. Braconnot, S. Charbit, G. Krinner, C. Ritz, E. Guilyardi, J. Jouzel, A. Abe-Ouchi, M. Crucifix, R. M. Gladstone, C. D. Hewitt, A. Kitoh, A. N. LeGrande, O. Marti, U. Merkel, T. Motoi, R. Ohgaito, B. Otto-Bliesner, W. R. Peltier, I. Ross, P. J. Valdes, G. Vettoretti, S. L. Weber, F. Wolk and Y. Yu, Clim. Dyn., 2006, 27, 437–440 CrossRef .
J. W. C. White, P. Ciais, R. A. Figge, R. Kenny and V. Markgraf, Nature, 1994, 367, 153 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3962–4179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Rubin, J. E. Davison and H. J. Herzog, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2015, 40, 378–400 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yu, L. H. Xie, J. R. Li, Y. G. Ma, J. M. Seminario and P. B. Balbuena, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9674–9754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Keith, G. Holmes, D. S. Angelo and K. Heidel, Joule, 2018, 2, 1573–1594 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Benson and F. M. Orr, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 303–305 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Orr, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 449–458 RSC .

          Y. Hori, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. Gamboa-Aldeco, Springer New York, New York, NY,  2008, pp. 89–189,  DOI:10.1007/978-0-387-49489-0_3 .
Q. Zafar, T. Mattisson and B. Gevert, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 3485–3496 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Gadalla and B. Bower, Chem. Eng. Sci., 1988, 43, 3049–3062 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Lin and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1610–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogata, S. Yanagida, B. S. Brunschwig and E. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6708–6716 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kainiemi, S. Eloneva, A. Toikka, J. Levanen and M. Jarvinen, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 94, 352–358 CrossRef .
K. Nakata, T. Ozaki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 871–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kortlever, I. Peters, S. Koper and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3916–3923 CrossRef CAS .
D. Astruc, F. Lu and J. R. Aranzaes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7852–7872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pritchard, G. A. Filonenko, R. van Putten, E. J. M. Hensen and E. A. Pidko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3808–3833 RSC .
C. D. Windle and R. N. Perutz, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2562–2570 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 RSC .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .
Y. Oh and X. L. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2253–2261 RSC .
K. Teramura, S. Iguchi, Y. Mizuno, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8008–8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8798–8801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Lin, R. L. Li, M. M. Lu, C. Q. Chen, D. L. Li, Y. Y. Zhan and L. L. Jiang, Fuel, 2015, 162, 271–280 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. J. Li, C. P. Chen, T. Ayvali, H. R. Suo, J. W. Zheng, I. F. Teixeira, L. Ye, H. B. Zou, D. O'Hare and S. C. E. Tsang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4390–4401 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iguchi, K. Teramura, S. Hosokawa and T. Tanaka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17995–18003 RSC .
X. J. Liu, H. Yang, J. He, H. X. Liu, L. D. Song, L. Li and J. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 7 Search PubMed .
T. Oshima, T. Ichibha, K. S. Qin, K. Muraoka, J. J. M. Vequizo, K. Hibino, R. Kuriki, S. Yamashita, K. Hongo, T. Uchiyama, K. Fujii, D. L. Lu, R. Maezono, A. Yamakata, H. Kato, K. Kimoto, M. Yashima, Y. Uchimoto, M. Kakihana, O. Ishitani, H. Kageyama and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8154–8158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. Li, M. Q. Xue, J. Z. Li, X. L. Ma, L. Chen, X. J. Zhang, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14718–14722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Wein, H. W. Zhang, K. Urushidate, M. Miyano and Y. Izumi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 447, 687–696 CrossRef .
B. Hua, N. Yan, M. Li, Y. Q. Zhang, Y. F. Sun, J. Li, T. Etsell, P. Sarkar, K. Chuang and J. L. Luo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 207–215 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, Z. Tang, D. Sun, L. Ouyang and M. Zhu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 88, 1–48 CrossRef .
M. Favaro, H. Xiao, T. Cheng, W. A. Goddard, J. Yano and E. J. Crumlin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6706–6711 CAS .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Chang, T. Wang and J. L. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
S. J. Xie, Q. H. Zhang, G. D. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 35–59 RSC .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309–2326 RSC .
Y. Hori, R. Takahashi, Y. Yoshinami and A. Murata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7075–7081 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Garza, A. T. Bell and M. Head-Gordon, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1490–1499 CrossRef CAS .
S. Munir, A. R. Varzeghani and S. Kaya, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2532–2541 RSC .
K. D. Yang, C. W. Lee, K. Jin, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 538–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J. P. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qureshi and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 158–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Buriak, P. V. Kamat and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11815–11816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla, Y. Gogotsi, N. A. Kotov, Y. Li, R. M. Penner, R. E. Schaak and P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9635–9638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704649 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, R. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, G. I. N. Waterhouse, R. Shi, J. Zhao, M. Zhang, L. Shang, G. Sheng, X. Zhang, X. Wen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704663 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Gao, S. Y. Cao, H. Chen, Y. Yao, J. G. Hou and L. C. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Liang, B. K. Vijayan, K. A. Gray and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Jiao, Z. W. Chen, X. D. Li, Y. F. Sun, S. Gao, W. S. Yan, C. M. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, B. C. Gu, X. C. Jiao, Y. F. Sun, X. L. Zu, F. Yang, W. G. Zhu, C. M. Wang, Z. M. Feng, B. J. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3438–3445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Zhao, G. B. Chen, T. Bian, C. Zhou, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, L. J. Smith, D. O'Hare and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7824–7831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Hou, S. Y. Cao, Y. Z. Wu, F. Liang, Y. F. Sun, Z. S. Lin and L. C. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. D. Li, W. Shi, P. Q. Ling, Y. F. Sun, X. C. Jiao, S. Gao, L. Liang, J. Q. Xu, W. S. Yan, C. M. Wang and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8719–8723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ye, W. M. Huang, L. M. Zeng, M. L. Li and J. L. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, X. Li, Y. Sun, Y. Tan, X. Jiao, H. Ju, Z. Qi, J. Zhu and Y. Xie, Joule, 2018, 2, 1004–1016 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, H. Zhuzhang, R. Wang, W. Lin and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1134–1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Jiao, X. D. Li, X. Y. Jin, Y. F. Sun, J. Q. Xu, L. Liang, H. X. Ju, J. F. Zhu, Y. Pan, W. S. Yan, Y. Lin and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18044–18051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, J. G. Yu, S. W. Cao, C. Cui and B. Cheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 350–355 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manzanares, C. Fabrega, J. O. Osso, L. F. Vega, T. Andreu and J. R. Morante, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 150, 57–62 CrossRef .
K. T. Liu, X. D. Li, L. Liang, J. Wu, X. C. Jiao, J. Q. Xu, Y. F. Sun and Y. Xie, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2897–2908 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, X. Ou, Z. Deng, Y. Song, C. Tian, H. Deng, Y.-J. Xu and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16811–16815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. S. Liu, B. Cheng, W. K. Ho and J. G. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 44–52 Search PubMed .
K. Katsumata, K. Sakai, K. Ikeda, G. Carja, N. Matsushita and K. Okada, Mater. Lett., 2013, 107, 138–140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Pan, Y. You, S. Xin, Y. T. Li, G. T. Fu, Z. M. Cui, Y. L. Men, F. F. Cao, S. H. Yu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4123–4129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Li, S. Y. Gan, H. Y. Wang, D. X. Han and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6906–6913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, M. A. Isaacs, R. Trofimovaite, L. Durndell, C. M. A. Parlett, R. E. Douthwaite, B. Coulson, M. C. R. Cockett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 394–404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morikawa, Y. Ogura, N. Ahmed, S. Kawamura, G. Mikami, S. Okamoto and Y. Izumi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1644–1651 RSC .
K. H. Kim, S. Kim, B. C. Moon, J. W. Choi, H. M. Jeong, Y. Kwon, S. Kwon, H. S. Choi and J. K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8274–8279 RSC .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai, S. T. Yong and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1528–1547 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawamura, M. C. Puscasu, Y. Yoshida, Y. Izumi and G. Carja, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 238–247 CrossRef CAS .
T. Billo, F. Y. Fu, P. Raghunath, I. Shown, W. F. Chen, H. T. Lien, T. H. Shen, J. F. Lee, T. S. Chan, K. Y. Huang, C. I. Wu, M. C. Lin, J. S. Hwang, C. H. Lee, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 11 Search PubMed .
P. Kumar, H. P. Mungse, S. Cordier, R. Boukherroub, O. P. Khatri and S. L. Jain, Carbon, 2015, 94, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, M. Y. Mao, Q. Zhang, Y. Z. Li, J. L. Bai, Y. Yang, M. Zeng and X. J. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 11 Search PubMed .
C. Gao, S. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Song, W. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704624 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Li, G. R. Blake and T. T. M. Palstra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1693–1706 RSC .
X. Jiao, Z. Chen, X. Li, Y. Sun, S. Gao, W. Yan, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lin, Y. Luo and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7586–7594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, B. Gu, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, X. Zu, F. Yang, W. Zhu, C. Wang, Z. Feng, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3438–3445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Wang, H. Qin, X. Li, Y. Zuo, S. Kang and L. Cui, Catal. Commun., 2016, 74, 75–79 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Li, F. Wang, S. Q. Wei, X. Y. Li and Y. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4405–4410 RSC .
Y. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Zhang, B. Li, S. Kang, X. Li and L. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 602–609 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Akple, J. Low, Z. Qin, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi, J. Yu and S. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2127–2134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, C. S. Tiwary, L. Ma, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5364–5371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, Q. Li, B. Liu, B. Cheng, W. Ho and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176-177, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Li, E. A. Ackerman, M. Gajdardziska-Josifovska and H. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 400, 195–202 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Ong, L. L. Tan, S. P. Chai and S. T. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 858–861 RSC .
P. Q. Li, H. Jing, J. F. Xu, C. X. Wu, H. Peng, J. Lu and F. S. Lu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11380–11386 RSC .
L. Hurtado, R. Natividad and H. Garcia, Catal. Commun., 2016, 84, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Jiang, K. Katsumata, J. Hong, A. Yamaguchi, K. Nakata, C. Terashima, N. Matsushita, M. Miyauchi and A. Fujishima, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 783–790 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Su, D. K. Shao, S. W. Zeng and W. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8366–8373 RSC .
K. K. Ghuman, L. B. Hoch, P. Szymanski, J. Y. Y. Loh, N. P. Kherani, M. A. E-Sayed, G. A. Ozin and C. V. Singh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1206–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bielz, H. Lorenz, W. Jochum, R. Kaindl, F. Klauser, B. Klotzer and S. Penner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9022–9029 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Chen, J. Xu, Y. Cao, H. Y. He, K. N. Fan and J. H. Zhuang, J. Catal., 2010, 272, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Ye, C. J. Liu and Q. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7817–7825 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and M. A. A. Schoonen, Am. Mineral., 2000, 85, 543–556 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9547–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Tu, Y. C. Li, L. B. Kuai, Y. Zhou, Q. F. Xu, H. J. Li, X. Y. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9065–9070 RSC .
J. Y. Do, Y. Im, B. S. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and M. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 275, 288–297 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, B. S. Kwak, S. W. Jo and M. Kang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 103, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Tang, R. T. Chen, X. G. Meng, B. H. Lv, F. T. Fan, J. H. Ye, X. Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, C. Li and Z. G. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5126–5129 RSC .
S. J. Xie, Y. Wang, Q. H. Zhang, W. P. Deng and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3644–3653 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, A. D. Handoko, M. Khraisheh and J. W. Tang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9767–9773 RSC .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. LaTempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 731–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhang, F. Han, B. Shi, S. Farsinezhad, G. P. Dechaine and K. Shankar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12732–12735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, T. Wang, P. Li, L. Q. Liu, K. Chang, M. Li and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 841–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, S. W. Cao and C. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25939–25947 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Mankidy, B. Joseph and V. K. Gupta, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 405402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. X. Low, B. Cheng and J. G. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 658–686 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abou Asi, L. F. Zhu, C. He, V. K. Sharma, D. Shu, S. Z. Li, J. N. Yang and Y. Xiong, Catal. Today, 2013, 216, 268–275 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Dai and M. H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813–9825 RSC .
S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, F. K. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. J. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Zhan, R. Xu, Y. Mi, H. P. Zhao and Y. Lei, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4583–4590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kumar, A. Lee, T. Lee, M. Lim and D.-K. Lim, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1760–1767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Tan, Z. H. Gao, C. F. Shen, Y. L. Du, X. D. Li and W. Huang, Chin. J. Catal., 2014, 35, 1955–1971 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, X. C. Jiao, Z. T. Sun, W. H. Zhang, Y. F. Sun, C. M. Wang, Q. T. Hu, X. L. Zu, F. Yang, S. Y. Yang, L. Liang, J. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 698–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Z. T. Sun, W. Liu, X. C. Jiao, X. L. Zu, Q. T. Hu, Y. F. Sun, T. Yao, W. H. Zhang, S. Q. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. C. Jiao, Y. F. Sun, Q. Q. Luo, W. H. Zhang, D. Q. Li, J. L. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, H. Yang, J. He, H. Liu, L. Song, L. Li and J. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1704049 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Rogers, W. S. Perkins, G. Veber, T. E. Williams, R. R. Cloke and F. R. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4052–4061 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Jiang, H. H. Wu, S. J. Chang, R. Si, S. Miao, W. X. Huang, Y. H. Li, G. X. Wang and X. H. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19371–19377 RSC .
F. Marques Mota, D. L. T. Nguyen, J.-E. Lee, H. Piao, J.-H. Choy, Y. J. Hwang and D. H. Kim, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4364–4374 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lei, W. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, K. Liu, L. Liang, T. Yao, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lv, C. Teng, M. Shi, Y. Yuan, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, Z. Kong, X. Lu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802339 CrossRef .
A. S. Varela, N. Ranjbar Sahraie, J. Steinberg, W. Ju, H.-S. Oh and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10758–10762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Su, K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, Small, 2016, 12, 6083–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Wu, M. Liu, S. Yazdi, M. Ren, J. Sha, J. Zhong, K. Nie, A. S. Jalilov, Z. Li, H. Li, B. I. Yakobson, Q. Wu, E. Ringe, H. Xu, P. M. Ajayan and J. M. Tour, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703487 CrossRef .
C. Genovese, M. E. Schuster, E. K. Gibson, D. Gianolio, V. Posligua, R. Grau-Crespo, G. Cibin, P. P. Wells, D. Garai, V. Solokha, S. Krick Calderon, J. J. Velasco-Velez, C. Ampelli, S. Perathoner, G. Held, G. Centi and R. Arrigo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 935 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. J. Chen, S. J. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. X. Chen, K. L. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. R. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Q. Liu, C. G. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. S. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, A. J. Akey, Y. B. Li, Z. Y. Lu, J. Lattimer, Y. F. Hu, C. Stokes, M. Gangishetty, G. X. Chen, Y. W. Zhou, W. Hill, W. B. Cai, D. Bell, K. R. Chan, J. K. Norskov, Y. Cui and H. T. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, T. T. Zheng, Y. F. Hu, S. Hwang, E. Stavitski, Y. D. Peng, J. Dynes, M. Gangisetty, D. Su, K. Attenkofer and H. T. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 893–903 RSC .
K. S. Rawat, A. Mahata and B. Pathak, J. Catal., 2017, 349, 118–127 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, Y. J. Lee, D. Y. Li, W. Choi, C. W. Liu, D. Lee and D. E. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9728–9736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Zheng, K. Jiang, N. Ta, Y. F. Hu, J. Zeng, J. Y. Liu and H. T. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zhao, Y. Wang, Z. J. Li, W. X. Chen, Q. Xu, D. S. He, D. S. Xi, Q. H. Zhang, T. W. Yuan, Y. T. Qu, J. Yang, F. Y. Zhou, Z. K. Yang, X. Q. Wang, J. Wang, J. Luo, Y. F. Li, H. H. Duan, Y. Wu and Y. D. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 584–594 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Spinner, J. A. Vega and W. E. Mustain, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 19–28 RSC .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Augustynski, P. Kedzierzawski and B. Jermann, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. T. Inui, M. Anpo, K. Izui, S. Yanagida and T. Yamaguchi, Elsevier,  1998, vol. 114, pp. 107–116 Search PubMed .

          B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, in Annual Review of Physical Chemistry, Vol 63, ed. M. A. Johnson and T. J. Martinez, Annual Reviews, Palo Alto,  2012, vol. 63, p. 541 Search PubMed .
S. B. Wang, J. L. Lin and X. C. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14656–14660 RSC .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan and X. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1422–1423 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, G. Zhang, Z. Lin and X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 413–419 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun and S. Wang, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 22–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. Halmann, Nature, 1978, 275, 115–116 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aurian-Blajeni, M. Halmann and J. Manassen, Sol. Energy Mater., 1983, 8, 425–440 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Ajmal, X. Z. Zheng and L. W. Zhang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 510–537 RSC .
E. E. Barton, D. M. Rampulla and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6342–6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, M. Lessio, P. Zhao, C. Riplinger, A. Boscoboinik, D. E. Starr, P. Sutter, E. A. Carter and B. E. Koel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17762–17772 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Parkinson and P. F. Weaver, Nature, 1984, 309, 148–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ali Tahir, H. Ullah, P. Sudhagar, M. Asri Mat Teridi, A. Devadoss and S. Sundaram, Chem. Rec., 2016, 16, 1591–1634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Q. Li, J. Zhang, H. Y. Wang, H. Jing, J. F. Xu, X. N. Sui, H. T. Hu and H. Z. Yin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1070–1077 RSC .
Y. Xu, Y. Jia, Y. Zhang, R. Nie, Z. Zhu, J. Wang and H. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 254–261 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jang, S. Cho, G. Magesh, Y. J. Jang, J. Y. Kim, W. Y. Kim, J. K. Seo, S. Kim, K.-H. Lee and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5852–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rajeshwar, N. R. de Tacconi, G. Ghadimkhani, W. Chanmanee and C. Janáky, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Sci. China Mater., 2014, 57, 70–100 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11326–11353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, H. A. Hansen, A. C. Lausche and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4720–4727 RSC .
A. Bagger, W. Ju, A. S. Varela, P. Strasser and J. Rossmeisl, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 3266–3273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, T. Hatsukade, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram, J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14107–14113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .
J. H. Montoya, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 737–742 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bertheussen, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, D. Ravasio, J. H. Montoya, D. B. Trimarco, C. Roy, S. Meier, J. Wendland, J. K. Nørskov, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1450–1454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. P. Schouten, Z. Qin, E. Pérez Gallent and M. T. M. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9864–9867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reske, M. Duca, M. Oezaslan, K. J. P. Schouten, M. T. M. Koper and P. Strasser, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2410–2413 CrossRef CAS .
A. Januszewska, R. Jurczakowski and P. J. Kulesza, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14314–14321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Li, M. M. Lu, S. P. Xu, C. Q. Chen, Y. Y. Zhan and L. L. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 5063–5071 CrossRef CAS .
T. Masuda, Y. Sun, H. Fukumitsu, H. Uehara, S. Takakusagi, W. J. Chun, T. Kondo, K. Asakura and K. Uosaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16200–16210 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tripkovic, M. Vanin, M. Karamad, M. E. Bjorketun, K. W. Jacobsen, K. S. Thygesen and J. Rossmeisl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9187–9195 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Shen, Y. W. Li and Q. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3963–3969 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Ju, T. Yao, C. Wang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 129, 9249–9253 CrossRef .
V. Jeseentharani, N. Pugazhenthiran, A. Mathew, I. Chakraborty, A. Baksi, J. Ghosh, M. Jash, G. S. Anjusree, T. G. Deepak, A. S. Nair and T. Pradeep, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 1454–1463 CrossRef CAS .
I. Chakraborty and T. Pradeep, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 8208–8271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Kauffman, D. Alfonso, C. Matranga, H. F. Qian and R. C. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10237–10243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Aiken and R. G. Finke, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1999, 145, 1–44 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamamoto, T. Yoshida, N. Yamamoto, T. Nomoto, Y. Yamamoto, S. Yagi and H. Yoshida, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16810–16816 RSC .
D. Lee, R. L. Donkers, G. Wang, A. S. Harper and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6193–6199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-R. Chang, Y.-G. Wang and J. Li, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely, A. F. Carley, P. Landon and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2008, 321, 1331–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, J. P. Greeley, C. L. Marshall, L. A. Curtiss, G. A. Ballentine, J. W. Elam, S. Catillon-Mucherie, P. C. Redfern, F. Mehmood and P. Zapol, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng, Y. Wu, M. Wang, J. Jiang, K. Yang, S. Huo, X.-F. Wang, Q. Ma, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista, Y. Liang, Z. Feng and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 415 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Shin, J. S. Won, J. A. Kwon, M.-S. Kim and D.-H. Lim, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2017, 1120, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kauffman, D. Alfonso, C. Matranga, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10237–10243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, Ö. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, D. Cao, A. Fisher, R. L. Johnston and D. Cheng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 396, 539–546 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-Y. Zhang, Q.-F. Zhao, X.-M. Liang, X.-L. Wang, F.-X. Ma, B.-B. Suo, W.-L. Zou, H.-X. Han, Q. Song, Q. Wu, Y.-W. Li and H.-Y. Zhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 9935–9942 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gong, J. J. Chen and Y. Mu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 28344–28353 RSC .
S. Lee, S. Jeong, W. D. Kim, S. Lee, K. Lee, W. K. Bae, J. H. Moon, S. Lee and D. C. Lee, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10043–10048 RSC .
X. Cui, J. Wang, B. Liu, S. Ling, R. Long and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16514–16520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Austin, S. Zhao, J. R. McKone, R. C. Jin and G. Mpourmpakis, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 3795–3805 RSC .
Q. Tang, Y. Lee, D.-Y. Li, W. Choi, C. W. Liu, D. Lee and D.-e. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9728–9736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-X. Guo, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 80–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kim and H. Frei, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5627–5635 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kim, G. Yuan, B. A. McClure and H. Frei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11034–11042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Can, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2789–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shoji, A. Yamaguchi, E. Sakai and M. Miyauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20613–20619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, S. Thakur, A. Bag, M. S. Gupta, P. Mondal and A. Bordoloi, J. Catal., 2015, 330, 46–60 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, A. Michaelides, D. A. King and S. J. Jenkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2175–2182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Andrews, M. M. Ren, F. Wang, Z. Y. Zhang, P. Sprunger, R. Kurtz and J. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, H841–H846 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yin, M. Nishikawa, Y. Nosaka, N. Srinivasan, D. Atarashi, E. Sakai and M. Miyauchi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2111–2119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ge, J. Cai, J. Iocozzia, C. Cao, J. Huang, X. Zhang, J. Shen, S. Wang, S. Zhang, K.-Q. Zhang, Y. Lai and Z. Lin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 8418–8449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rhatigan and M. Nolan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9139–9152 RSC .
M. Liu, X. Qiu, M. Miyauchi and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5282–5286 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Jin, J. Luo, L. Zan and T. Y. Peng, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 3230–3239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. He, S. Sekoulopoulos and S. Zygmunt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16732–16740 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Liu, F. Chen, S. T. Li, X. X. Peng and Y. Xiong, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Tong, L. Chen, S. B. Ning, N. Tong, Z. Z. Zhang, H. X. Lin, F. Y. Li and X. X. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 725–730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2058–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Back, J. Lim, N. Y. Kim, Y. H. Kim and Y. Jung, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 1090–1096 RSC .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, A. J. Akey, Y. Li, Z. Lu, J. Lattimer, Y. Hu, C. Stokes, M. Gangishetty, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Hill, W.-B. Cai, D. Bell, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, Y. Cui and H. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 CAS .
K. Asakura, H. Nagahiro, N. Ichikuni and Y. Iwasawa, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 188, 313–324 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. J. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kwak, L. Kovarik and J. Szanyi, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2094–2100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, A. Q. Wang, B. T. Qiao, X. Y. Liu, X. F. Yang, X. D. Wang, J. X. Liang, J. X. Li, J. Y. Liu and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15314–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Matsubu, V. N. Yang and P. Christopher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3076–3084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Kim, Y. J. Tak, A. Soon and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2058–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mori, T. Taga and H. Yamashita, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. He and Y. Jagvaral, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 11436–11446 RSC .
S. Backs and Y. S. Jung, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 969–975 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, S. M. Chen, Y. Wang, J. W. Wang, X. S. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, L. Song, W. K. Zhang and Y. J. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 9 Search PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W.-C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, J. Song, Q. Shi, D. Su, M. H. Engelhard, X. Li, D. Xiao, D. Li, L. Estevez, D. Du and Y. Lin, Small, 2017, 13, 1603407 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, H. Yi, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10484–10487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Qiu, Y. Ito, W. Cong, Y. Tan, P. Liu, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14031–14035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Sredojević, Ž. Šljivančanin, E. N. Brothers and M. R. Belić, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2631–2637 CrossRef .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jiménez, G. Ye, N. Dong Kim, E. L. G. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Li, H. L. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Li, W. Zhou, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Wang, J. X. Zhao and Q. H. Cai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 23113–23121 RSC .
J. Yang, Z. Qiu, C. Zhao, W. Wei, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Qu, J. Dong, J. Luo, Z. Li and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14095–14100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Masa, W. Xia, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10102–10120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Sharma, J. Wu, R. M. Yadav, M. Liu, C. J. Wright, C. S. Tiwary, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan and X.-D. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13701–13705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, C.-S. Hsu, L. Bai, H. M. Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S. F. Hung, S. Liu, K. D. Yuan, S. Miao, L. P. Zhang, X. Huang, H. Y. Wang, W. Z. Cai, R. Chen, J. J. Gao, X. F. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Q. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, E. R. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6292–6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Zhang, J. Wei, J. C. Dong, G. G. Liu, L. Shi, P. F. An, G. X. Zhao, J. T. Kong, X. J. Wang, X. G. Meng, J. Zhang and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14308–14312 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Chen, P. Han, Y. Du, Z. Gu, X. Xu and G. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7113–7119 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Cheng, E. L. Clark, H. H. Pham, A. T. Bell and M. Head-Gordon, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7769–7777 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kunwar, S. Zhou, A. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Xiong, X. I. Pereira-Hernández, S. C. Purdy, R. ter Veen, H. H. Brongersma, J. T. Miller, H. Hashiguchi, L. Kovarik, S. Lin, H. Guo, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3978–3990 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tran and Z. W. Ulissi, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 696–703 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jia, Q. Fan, S. Liu, J. Qiu and Z. Sun, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2019, 16, 1–6 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00163hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Liming Wang
	Liming Wang obtained his BS and MS degrees at Zhejiang University in 2015 and 2018 in China. He is now a PhD candidate at research school of chemistry, ANU, under the supervision of Dr Zongyou Yin. Currently, Liming is working on photocatalytic CO2 reduction and N2 reduction.

Wenlong Chen
	Wenlong Chen obtained his BS degree at Shandong University in China in 2012, and after he obtained his MS degree at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering in 2015, then he transferred to School of Materials Science and Engineering and now he is a PhD candidate in Shanghai Jiao Tong University in China, under the supervision of Professor Jianbo Wu and Professor Tao Deng. His current research interest is shape and electronic-structure controlled nanomaterials for fuel cells, energy conversion and related electrocalytic applications.

Doudou Zhang
	Doudou Zhang obtained her MS and PhD degrees at Shaanxi Normal University in 2014 and 2018 in China. She stared to be co-cultured in Dalian Institute of Chemical and Physics from 2013. In 2018, she got the scholarship from China scholarship council to visit UNSW. In 2019, she started her postdoc career at ANU. Her research interests are electrochemical, photoelectrochemical water splitting and CO2 reduction.

Shizhang Qiao
	Shizhang Qiao is currently a Chair Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering of The University of Adelaide, Australia. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 375 papers in refereed journals with over 41000 citations, h-index 103. In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ARC Laureate Fellow (2017), ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), and the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, the ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society). Dr Qiao is a Thomson Reuters/Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher (Chemistry, Materials Science).

Jianbo Wu
	Dr Jianbo Wu is an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MS&E) at Shanghai Jiao Tong University since 2014. He obtained his BS and MS degrees at Zhejiang University in China in 2007, received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from University of Rochester in US in 2012, and two years’ postdoctoral training in the Department of MS&E at the University of Illinois. His current research focuses on shape controlled nanocrystals, fuel cell, electrocatalysis, functional materials for energy and environmental applications, and in situ TEM characterization to understanding the catalysts formation and degradation during catalysis.

Zongyou Yin
	Dr Zongyou Yin obtained his BS and MS degrees at Jilin University in China, and completed his PhD at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore in 2008. Then, he started his postdoc careers at NTU/Singapore, IMRE/Singapore, followed by MIT and then Harvard University. Dr Yin started his own Research Group at Australian National University (ANU) from 2017. His group's research is interdisciplinary, encompassing chemistry and physics of nano-to-atomic materials, fundamental relationship among materials-structures-devices, and synergistic integration of multi-functions towards systems for energy and wearable applications.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Atmospheric CO2 concentrations and (B) surface air global-mean temperature for the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) fossil intensive (A1FI) and HALVED-BY-2050 (halving the 1990 global Kyoto-gas emissions by 2050) scenarios (C) sea-level change from 1990 to 2100.5 Reproduced with permission from ref. 5, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The possible structures of adsorbed CO2δ˙− on catalysts.41 Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Possible reaction pathways for CO2 reduction to HCOO− or HCOOH: (A) Monodentate or bidentate intermediate route; (B) CO2*− radical intermediate route; (C) surface-bound carbonate intermediate. (D) Possible reaction pathways for CO2 to HCOO− or HCOOH. (E) Possible reaction paths for CO2 reduction to produce HCHO, CH3OH, and CH4. Possible reaction paths for methane formation: (F) carbene route; (G) glyoxal route.47,48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2017, Elsevier and from ref. 48, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Proposed mechanism for the reduction of CO to C2 products at high potentials on Cu(100). Calculated free energies (eV) are the numbers parallel to reaction arrows, where ΔG values at U = 0 V using the CHE appear in standard font (steps involving H+ + e− can be corrected to U = −1 V by subtracting 1 eV). ΔG values at U = −1 V using the CEP (at pH = 7) appear in bold font. The seven C2 products of CO2 reduction on copper are highlighted in green. Calculated free energy barriers (eV) are provided for the critical reductive step from intermediate 3 to either 4a or 4b that determines selectivity between the pathway to ethylene (purple) and ethanol (blue).49 Reproduced with permission from ref. 49, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Possible reaction paths for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction to produce C3H7OH.47 (B) Mechanistic pathways leading to the formation of 2-propanol and acetone on Cu–ZnO.50 Reproduced with permission from ref. 47, copyright 2017, Elsevier and from ref. 50, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photoinduced formation of an electron–hole pair in a semiconductor with possible decay paths. A = electron acceptor, D = electron donor.37 Reproduced with permission from ref. 37, copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Scheme of photo-reduction of CO2.56 Reproduced with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

Defective-graphene–TiO2 nanocomposite	Solution-phase isolation	365 nm ∼110 W m−2	H2O-Saturated CO2 (99.99%)	CH4	8.3 μmol m−2 h−1	
60

VZn-one-unit-cell ZnIn2S4	Hydrothermal method	UV Xe ∼100 W cm−2 AM 1.5	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	33.2 μmol g−1 h−1	
61

VV-single-unit-cell o-BiVO4	Solvothermal method	UV Xe ∼100 W cm−2 AM 1.5	CO2-Bubbled solution	Methanol	398.3 μmol g−1 h−1	
62

VO–ZnAl-LDH	Bottom-up strategy	—	
	CO	7.6 μmol g−1 h−1	
63

VO–PO4-BWO	Solvothermal method	300 W Xe AM 1.5	CO2 and H2O vapor	Methanol	157 μmol g−1 h−1	
64

VO–BiOBr	Hydrothermal method	300 W Xe	
	CO	87.4 μmol g−1 h−1	
65

VO–CeO2−x	Homogeneous alkalization route	300 W Xe	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	1.68 μmol g−1 h−1	
66

VO-ultrathin cubic WO3 layers	Hydrothermal	40 W SiN	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	∼2.7 μmol g−1 h−1	
67

VC-melon polymeric matrix	Steam-etching approach	A 300 W Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm)	
	CO	21.5 mmol h−1	
68

SnOx–SnS2	Hydrothermal method	300 W Xe 50 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	12.28 μmol g−1 h−1	
69

Amine-g-C3N4	Thermal decomposition	300 W Xe	H2SO4 + NaHCO3	CH4	0.34 mol h−1 g−1	
70

CH3OH	0.28 mol h−1 g−1
Mg–TiO2	Hydrothermal method	550 W Xe 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter	CO2 and H2O vapor	CH4	1 μmol h−1 g−1	
71

Ni-Doped ZnCo2O4	Solvothermal method	Xe 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	31.4 μmol g−1 h−1	
72

CH4	20.2 μmol g−1 h−1
Nickel metal–organic framework monolayers	—	5 W white LED (400–800 nm)	
	CO	12.5 mmol h−1	
73

Sulfur-doped g-C3N4	Thermal decomposition	Xe	CO2 and H2O vapor	CH3OH	1.12 μmol g−1	
74

(Pt, Pd, Au) loaded Zn–Cr LDH	Precipitation & photochemical deposition	200 W Hg–Xe	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	7.8 μmol g−1	
75

Carbon + indium-oxide	
	300 W Xe	CO2 (1.01 bar) 10 vol% TEOA solution (H2O)	CO	126.6 μmol h−1	
76

CH4	27.9 μmol h−1
Graphitic-C3N4- + N-graphene	
	
	
	Methanol	105.89 μmol g −1	
77


	Ethanol	256.45 μmol g −1
P25@CoAl LDH	
	300 W Xe	CO2 and H2O vapor	CO	1.1 μmol h−1 g−1	
78

WO3 + LDH	
	500 W Xe 33 mW cm−2	CO2 and H2O vapor	Methanol	0.045 μmol h−1 g cat−1	
79

Quadruple metal-based layered structure	
	300 W Xe	
	CO	30 μmol m−2	
80

N-TiO2 on graphene scaffold	
	15 W energy-saving daylight lamp (8.5 mW cm−2)	Wet CO2 at 5 mL min−1	CH4	3.70 μmol g catalyst−1	
81

Ag/Au + zinc-gallium LDH	
	500 W Xe 42 mW cm−2	
	CH3OH	30 nmol h−1 g cat−1	
82

CO	201 nmol h−1 g cat−1
Ni-Nanocluster loaded black TiO2	One-pot hydrothermal reaction	300 W halogen	Continuous CO2 and H2O vapor	CH3CHO	1.6 μmol g−1 cat h−1	
83

Hexamolybdenm clusters-GO	Sol–gel	20 W white cold LED flood light 75 W m−2	CO2-Bubbled solution	Methanol	1644 μmol g−1 cat	
84

Silica-cluster-Ni nanocrystals	Chemical precipitation method	Xe 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5 filter	CH4 + CO2	CO	19.9 mmol min−1 g−1	
85

Co single atoms on partially oxidized graphene nanosheets	Freeze drying and annealing	300 W Xe λ > 420 nm 264.25 mW cm−2	CO2 (1.01 bar) [Ru(bpy)3] Cl2·6H2O + acetonitrile/triethanolamine/H2O	
	3.77 min−1	
86


 	Fig. 8  Schematic of various defects in crystals.87 Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic energy band diagram for solar CO2 overall splitting into hydrocarbons and O2.67 Reproduced with permission from ref. 67, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) VZn-rich one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab and (B) VZn-poor one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab along the [001] orientation. The corresponding unit cell structure of (C) VZn-rich one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab and (D) VZn-poor one-unit-cell ZIS layers slab along the [001] orientation. (E) Scheme for the photoreduction CO2 into CO on the VZn-rich one-unit-cell ZIS layers.88 Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Preparation of defects via (A) UV irradiation,65 (B) tuning thickness,63 and (C) preparation parameters.89 Reproduced with permission from ref. 65, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH, ref. 63, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH and ref. 89, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photocatalytic mechanism for graphene–TiO2 nanocomposites.60 Reproduced with permission from ref. 60, copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Electron structure of ZnCo2O4 atomic layers with/without Ni-doping.72 Reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2017, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic of the mechanism of the photocatalytic CO2 reduction with water on Pt/C-In2O3, with TEOA as the electron donor to bind with the hole.76 (B) Proposed mechanism of CO2 photoreduction due to heterojunction formation on SnS2/SnO2 composite semiconductors.69 (C) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and separation of electron–hole pairs for the reduction of CO2 with H2O to CH4.81 Reproduced with permission from ref. 76 and 69, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society and from ref. 81, copyright 2014, Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelerg.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic illustrating photoreduction of CO2 to HCOOH over r-GO-AuNPs.125 Reproduced with permission from ref. 125, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram and engineering strategy of electrochemical reduction of CO2 into fuels.42 Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

1.72 nm thick Co3O4 layers	−0.88 V vs. SCE	64.30	0.68 mA cm−2	Formate	
	20	
	
127

Vo–Co3O4 atomic layers	−0.87 V versus SCE	87.60	2.7 mA cm−2	Formate	85	40	
	
128

Co 4-atom-thick layers	−0.85 V vs. (SCE)	90.10	10.59 mA cm−2	Formate	90	40	
	
129

Ultrathin MoTe2 layers	−1.0 vs. RHE	83 ± 3	25.6 mA cm−2	CH4	
	45	
	
130

Gold nanoparticles/graphene nanoribbon	−0.2 V vs. RHE	>90	
	CO	
	>24	
	
131

Layered zeolitic imidazolate frameworks/Ag2O nanoparticles	−1.2 V	80.50	26.2 mA cm−2	
	
	
	
	
132

Gold/layered titanate nanosheets	−0.65 V RHE	82	−46.5 mA mg cat−1	CO	80	
	
	
133

Metallic tin quantum sheets/graphene	−1.8	>85	21.1 mA cm−2	Formate	
	50	
	
134

E-MoS2 nanosheets	−1.1 V to −0.9 V	81.20	61 mA cm−2	CO	
	
	
	
135

Metal-doped nitrogenated carbon	90%	
	
	CO	80	
	
	
136

Nickel-nitrogen-modified graphene	−0.7 V versus RHE	90	0.2 mA cm−2	CO	
	
	
	
137

4-Atom-thick Co sheets with Co oxide	−0.85	
	10.59 mA cm−2	Formate	90.1	48	
	
138

Fe single atom on nitrogen-doped graphene	−0.57 V (vs. RHE)	80	
	CO	
	10	
	
139

Iron(III) oxyhydroxide on nitrogen-doped carbon	−0.5 V vs. SCE	37	−0.36 mA cm−2	HCOOH	
	
	
	
140

60.90	CH3COOH	61	
	3.4
Atomically dispersed Co/polymer-derived hollow N-doped porous carbon spheres	−0.73, −0.79 V vs. RHE	99	
	CO	
	
	
	
141

Ni single atom in graphene shell	
	Over 90	60 mA mg−1	CO	>90	
	
	
142

Ni–graphene nanosheets	550 mV	95	50 mA cm−2	CO	97	20	2.1 × 105 h−1	
143

Cu nanoclusters-(1010) ZnO	−1.4 V vs. SCE	45.10	
	H2	
	
	0.572	
144

10.20	
	C2H5OH	
	
	0.0027
10.10	
	C2H4	
	
	∼2.65 × 10−4
7.70	
	HCOO–	
	
	0.0244
5.40	
	CO	
	
	0.069
2.80	
	CH3OH	
	
	0.00153
1.80	
	CH4	
	
	0.0078
<0.1	
	
n-C3H7OH	
	
	<1.40 × 10−4
<0.1	
	CH3COO–	
	
	0.0244
Cu32H20L12 nanoclusters	
	>90	
	
	>80	
	
	
145

Nickel single atom on commercial carbon black	−0.681 V	∼99	>100 mA cm−2	CO	∼100	20	
	
146

Nickel single atom on carbon paper	−1.0 V	97	48.66 mA cm−2	CO	>90	
	
	
147


CO2 + 4e− + 4H+ → C + 2H2O	−0.200
CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → CO + H2O	−0.530
CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → HCOOH	−0.610
CO2 + 4e− + 4H+ → HCHO + H2O	−0.480
CO2 + 6e− + 6H+ → CH3OH + H2O	−0.380
CO2 + 8e− + 8H+ → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.240
2CO2 + 2e− + 2H+ → H2C2O4	−0.913
2CO2 + 6e− + 6H+ → OHCCHO + 2H2O	−0.160
2CO2 + 8e− + 8H+ → CH3COOH + 2H2O	−0.260
2CO2 + 10e− + 10H+ → CH3CHO + 3H2O	0.050
2CO2 + 12e− + 12H+ → C2H4 + 4H2O	−0.349
2CO2 + 12e− + 12H+ → C2H5OH + 3H2O	−0.329
2CO2 + 14e− + 14H+ → C2H6 + 4H2O	−0.270
3CO2 + 16e− + 16H+ → CH3COCH3 + 5H2O	−0.140
3CO2 + 18e− + 18H+ → C3H7OH + 5H2O	−0.310
2H+ + 2e− → H2	−0.420
H2O + 2h+ → 1/2O2 + 2H+	0.820

 	Fig. 17  (A) CO2 reduction products trend with faradaic efficiency under the potential of various electrocatalysts in aqueous media. Data points marked with main metal elements.127–147 (B) Grouping of various metals based on O and H affinities from previous studies. (C) Reaction mechanism of electrochemical CO2 reduction on electrodes in aqueous solutions and the formation paths for the five main C1 products during the reduction process.163–166 (D) Volcano plot for carbon dioxide reduction on metals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164 and 170, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry and from ref. 172, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) (a) CO2 adsorption isotherms and (b) Tafel plots of formate for the Co3O4 atomic layers with different thicknesses. (c) Scheme for the electroreduction CO2 into formate on the Co3O4 atomic-layers.127 (B) Scheme for the formation of Vo-rich and Vo-poor Co3O4 single-unit-cell layer, respectively.128 Reproduced with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH and from ref. 128, copyright 2017, Nature Communication.	 

 	Fig. 19  Nickel–nitrogen-modified graphene (Ni–N–Gr) with Ni–N coordination sites on Ni–N–Gr as active centers effectively reduce CO2 to CO.137 Reproduced with permission from ref. 137, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) GNR–AuNP composite materials.131 (B) Immobilized gold nanoparticles on layered titanate nanosheets.133 (C) Schematic formation process of the partially oxidized and pure-Co 4-atomic-layer.129 (D) Schematic illustration depicts the several advantages of ultrathin metal layers confined in graphene for CO2 electroreduction into hydrocarbon fuels.134 Reproduced with permission from ref. 131, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society, from ref. 133, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society, from ref. 129, copyright 2016, Nature, and from ref. 134, copyright 2016, Nature Communication.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Calculated free energy changes for the HER on the E-MoS2 monolayers under an H2O environment (black line) and CO2 environment (red line). Optimized geometries of the H* intermediate on the E-MoS2 monolayers under (B) an H2O environment and (C) a CO2 environment (H–Mo bond lengths are in Å). (D) A thin layer of E-MoS2 film is immobilized on a GC electrode substrate that appears hydrophilic and aerophobic. The red line illustrates the liquid (electrolyte)/gas (CO2)/solid (electrode) contact point (TPCP) where electron transfer happens. (E) After the wettability regulation, an H–E-MoS2 film is immobilized on the GC electrode substrate, which becomes hydrophobic and aerophilic.135 Reproduced with permission from ref. 135, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  Representation of the formation of MoSeS alloy monolayers at the oil/water interface.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 184, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Space-filled model of the Au25–CO2 couple (left), potential-dependent CO formation rates for Au25 (right).196 (B) TEM images of (a) the 8 nm Au NPs and (b) the C–Au NPs. (c) Potential-dependent FEs of the C–Au on electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO. (d) Current densities for CO formation (mass activities) on the C–Au at various potentials.197 Reproduced with permission from ref. 196, copyright 2012, American Chemical Society and from ref. 197, copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Structures of global minima and some selected bond lengths (in Å) of the chalcogen doped Cu4 clusters.199 Reproduced with permission from ref. 199, copyright 2018, Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Illustration of the CO2 conversion mechanism on small and large CuPt nanoclusters on TiO2. Small CuPt adsorbs CO2 more strongly and interacts with TiO2 more actively than large CuPt.201 Reproduced with permission from ref. 201, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) Gold nanocluster grafted with metal cations.202 (B) Overall mechanism of CO2 reduction on Cu32H20L12via the lattice-hydride channel.204 Reproduced with permission from ref. 202, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society and from ref. 204, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (A) Hierarchical assembly of an oxo-bridged binuclear ZrOCoII light absorber unit coupled to a cuprous oxide nanocluster catalysts.206 (B) An all-inorganic polynuclear unit consisting of an oxobridged binuclear ZrOCoII group coupled to an iridium oxide nanocluster (IrOx).207 (C) An aqueous colloidal system comprising a pseudoternary complex formed among carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH), silver nanoclusters stabilized by polymethacrylic acid (AgNCs-PMAA), and TiO2 nanoparticles.208 and (D) thin film of SrTiO3 nanorods loaded with reduction and oxidation cocatalysts.209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society, from ref. 207, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society, from ref. 208, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society and from ref. 209, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) Photocatalytic CO2 reduction by copper oxide nanocluster-grafted Niobate nanosheets.213 (B) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic CO2 reduction mechanism of Ni/TiO2[Vo].83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 213, copyright 2015, American Chemical Society and from ref. 83, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 29  Variation of the binding energies as a function of the charge on the ZnO cluster.220 Reproduced with permission from ref. 220, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  Three-dimensional atom probe tomography of Ni Single Atoms in a Graphene Shell.225 Reproduced with permission from ref. 225, copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 31  (A) Schematic illustration for the synthetic procedure of the Co1–G catalyst.86 (b) Schematic illustration of the synthetic procedure of the Co–NG catalyst.244 Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH and from ref. 244, copyright 2009, Nature Communication.	 

 	Fig. 32  Simulations of CO2-to-CO reduction on different atomic sites (A) schematic of the reaction steps of electrocatalytic CO2 to CO reduction. (B) Different atomic configurations in graphene for the DFT calculations. (C) The free energy diagram of CO2 to CO conversion on different atomic sites under an equilibrium potential of –0.12 V versus RHE.219 Reproduced with permission from ref. 219, copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 33  Different forms of nitrogen-functionalized carbon. C gray, N blue, and O red.249 Reproduced with permission from ref. 249, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  Ni single atoms on commercial carbon black toward CO production.146 Reproduced with permission from ref. 146, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 35  Single atom (Pd/Pt) Supported on graphitic carbon nitride as an efficient photocatalyst for visible-light reduction of carbon dioxide.253 Reproduced with permission from ref. 253, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  (A) (a) Mechanisms underlying the photoexcited dynamics involved in MOF-525-Co. (b) Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of CO2 by the MOF-525-Co heterogeneous photocatalyst under visible light irradiation.254 (B) (a) Single oxidative LSV scans in N2-saturated 0.5m NaOH for different catalysts. (b) EXAFS and (c) CO specific current density for Co–N2 and NH3-treated Co–N2. (d) Calculated Gibbs free energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction to CO on Co–N2 and Co–N4.255 Reproduced with permission from ref. 254, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH and from ref. 255, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 37  Schematic illustration of Cu–CeO2 for CO2 reduction.256 Reproduced with permission from ref. 256, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00163h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
