Magnetron sputtering enabled synthesis of nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07644A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07644A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20260-20285Magnetron sputtering enabled synthesis of nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage

        
          
            Fengyi 
            Wang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Haitao 
            Zhao†
c, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Liang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tingshuai 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongsong 
            Luo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Siyu 
            Lu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Xifeng 
            Shi
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Baozhan 
            Zheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Juan 
            Du
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Xuping 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, Sichuan, China. E-mail: xpsun@uestc.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, Sichuan, China. E-mail: dujuanchem@scu.edu.cn
cMaterials and Interfaces Center, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China
dGreen Catalysis Center and College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China
eCollege of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, Shandong, China
Received 
      4th August 2020
    , Accepted 3rd September 2020First published on 3rd September 2020AbstractBatteries and supercapacitors are promising candidates for electrochemical energy storage while the development of their electrode materials is becoming a bottleneck. This limitation necessitates the design of electrode materials with high specific capacity/capacitance and excellent cycling stability, yet at a low cost. Herein, we present the research progress of magnetron sputtering enabled nanostructured materials as electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage. Firstly, magnetron sputtered anode materials (Si-based materials, metal-based materials, metal oxides, etc.) and cathode materials (i.e., transition metal oxides and phosphates) for lithium/sodium ion batteries are systematically reviewed. Secondly, magnetron sputtered electrode materials (metals and metal oxides, metal nitrides, etc.) for electrochemical supercapacitors are discussed. Furthermore, critical insights into the corresponding electrical conductivity and cycling stability of the electrode materials are provided through illustrations of how to rationally design and optimize electrode materials via magnetron sputtering technology. Finally, the emerging challenges and future directions of magnetron sputtered electrode materials for electrochemical energy storage are discussed.Xuping SunXuping Sun received his PhD degree from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. During 2006–2009, he carried out postdoctoral research at the University of Konstanz, University of Toronto, and Purdue University. In 2010, he started his independent research career as a full Professor at CIAC and then moved to Sichuan University in 2015. In 2018, he joined the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China where he founded the Research Center of Nanocatalysis & Sensing. He was recognized as a highly cited researcher (2018 & 2019) in both areas of chemistry and materials science by Clarivate Analytics. He has published over 470 papers with over 38000 total citations and an h-index of 103. His research mainly focuses on rational design of functional nanostructures toward applications in electrochemistry for energy conversion and storage, sensing, and environment.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices such as lithium ion batteries (LIBs), sodium ion batteries (SIBs), and supercapacitors (SCs) have been considered as important technologies to exploit greener and more sustainable resources (wind and solar power, etc.).1–5 These devices store the available electrical energy in the form of chemical energy and release it through reversing the electrochemical reaction whenever needed.6–8 However, the low energy density of SCs, and low power density and short lifetime of LIBs/SIBs prevent them from meeting the growing demand for energy conversion and storage.9 Therefore, the main goal in this field is to develop high performance electrode materials with improved specific capacity/capacitance and extended cycle life for their application in EES.
To boost the overall performance of EES, nanoscience and nanotechnology have provided numerous opportunities to exploit new nanomaterials as electrodes over the last few decades.9–11 Moreover, new materials modified through deposition strategies offer significantly enhanced functions for energy storage applications. Currently, various deposition approaches, such as the sol–gel method,12,13 solution-based precipitation,14 layer-by-layer (LBL) deposition,15 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),16 atomic layer deposition (ALD)17,18 and physical vapor deposition (PVD),19,20 have been well-established. Among them, using the sol–gel and solution-based precipitation methods, it is hard to precisely control the thickness and uniformity of the coating layers;21 LBL deposition involves energy cost and complex operation; for ALD, many technologically crucial materials such as certain metals and multicomponent oxides cannot be deposited cost-effectively;22 CVD technology requires a higher deposition temperature, consumes higher energy, and is not suitable for low melting point current collectors such as aluminum.21,23,24 In comparison to other methods, however, PVD technology (magnetron sputtering) has great potential for construction of electrode materials for high energy density batteries and SCs due to its versatility, environmental benignity, and sustainability.25
In detail, fabrication of electrode materials based on magnetron sputtering to controllably construct nanostructures on substrates is very attractive due to the following aspects: (1) the high density of sputtered films; (2) the excellent adhesion between the substrates and sputtered materials; (3) this technology can sputter materials at low temperature and high deposition rates regardless of their melting temperature; (4) it is easy to control the sputtered composite material's ratio; (5) materials are easily oxidized and complex compounds are difficult to synthesize using common chemical techniques, but it can be realized through magnetron sputtering technology using corresponding targets.26 Benefiting from these merits, various nanostructured materials could be designed and fabricated by magnetron sputtering in combination with other approaches, and these magnetron sputtered materials exhibited high capacity and good cyclability as electrode materials for LIBs, SIBs, and SCs.27–29
Recently, review papers related to magnetron sputtering technology have been presented for thin films,30–32 polymer nanoparticles,33 oblique angle sputtering,34 synthesis of electrochemical catalysts,35 as well as biomedical applications.36 Nevertheless, there have been hardly any reviews concentrating extensively on magnetron sputtered nanostructured materials for rechargeable batteries and SCs. Moreover, from the structure and composition point of view, there is growing research interest in nanostructured materials based on magnetron sputtering for EES applications. Accordingly, an updated review of sputtered nanostructured materials is necessary for the development of electrode materials for LIBs, SIBs and SCs.
Therefore, we review the recent research progress on magnetron sputtered nanomaterials as electrodes for rechargeable batteries and SCs. In this review, the principle and apparatus of magnetron sputtering are briefly introduced. Then, we emphasize the importance of magnetron sputtering as a preparation/modification approach during the construction of nanostructured anode materials for rechargeable batteries. Meanwhile, how cathode materials are utilized as a host/substrate doped with metal ions or hybridized with conductive materials to enhance the electrochemical performance is also discussed. Furthermore, metal and metal oxides, metal nitrides, and metal sulfides, as well as their electrochemical performances for SCs are discussed. Finally, the existing challenges and future perspectives are also presented.
2. Principles of magnetron sputtering
Magnetron sputtering as an industrial-scale method has been extensively exploited for depositing highly pure functional materials due to its facile, manageable, and high efficiency.37,38 As shown in Fig. 1, the apparatus of magnetron sputtering is mainly composed of four parts: (a) vacuum system; (b) magnetron and substrate (sputtering system); (c) power supply; (d) working gas (Ar and reactive gas), where the main sputtering parameters mainly include working gas types, gas flow rate, supplied sputtering power, gas pressure, substrate bias potential, target–substrate distance, and target orientation. The grain size and film thickness can be well controlled via improving the above-mentioned conditions, thus obtaining the desired nanomaterials. During the magnetron sputtering process, the target plate served as a cathode and the substrate was used as an anode. The energetic ions derived from the inert gas interact with target surface producing the ejection of atoms which condense on a substrate under the certain voltage and eventually formed thin films (deposited layer).25,26
 Fig. 1  Brief description of the apparatus of magnetron sputtering and schematic illustration of the principle of magnetron sputtering. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
This technology traces its roots back to the mid-1800s, and Grove firstly observed that sputtering was an undesired ‘dirt effect’. After that, the sputtering technology received enormous attention. However, its widespread application for preparing nanomaterials was significantly impeded owing to the low deposition rates and poor ionization efficiencies in the plasma, as well as high substrate heating effects. Subsequently, these limitations were overcome in the 1970s by the introduction of external magnetic fields, in which the configured magnetic field restricts the plasma to a close proximity of the cathode, which greatly increases the deposition rate.33,37 Since then, magnetron sputtering has become an indispensable tool for deposition of different conductive metal thin films. Moreover, the discovery and exploration of non-metallic or non-conductive thin films initiated the development of novel concepts of magnetron sputtering, which include dual-magnetron sputtering,39 high-power pulsed magnetron sputtering,30,40 direct current (DC) magnetron sputtering,41 and radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering.42,43 Among these techniques, RF magnetron sputtering is commonly used for the deposition of inorganic materials (e.g., metal oxides and nitrides) and polymer-like coatings, which greatly promotes the application of electrode materials in EES.
Particularly, magnetron sputtering technology has been considered to be a fascinating method/auxiliary approach for preparing electrode materials for EES over the past few years. The reason is that the active materials were deposited on the current collectors or precursors and the sputtered materials could be directly applied as electrodes without the addition of a binder, thus leading to high specific capacitance, excellent cycling durability and impressive rate performance.29,34,44 Simultaneously, the active materials could be sputtered on flexible substrates as electrode materials, facilitating their application in wearable devices.45,46
3. Magnetron sputtered electrode materials for lithium ion and sodium ion batteries
Currently, rechargeable batteries (lithium ion batteries (LIBs) and sodium ion batteries (SIBs)) have attracted enormous attention due to their high energy density and lack of memory effect. In particular, LIBs have penetrated many aspects of daily life such as portable electronics and electronic vehicles since their commercialization in the 1990s. However, the limited lithium resources on the Earth hindered its further application in large-scale energy storage devices. Considering the similar chemical properties of Li and Na, numerous researchers started to concentrate on the investigation of SIBs. Moreover, the abundant natural resources of sodium promoted its large-scale application in renewable energy storage and smart grids. In terms of LIBs and SIBs, their electrochemical performances mainly depend on the electrode materials; thus, the main challenges for achieving high-performance rechargeable batteries lie in designing and fabricating functional nanomaterials with high active surface area, outstanding structural stability and excellent electronic conductivity. Magnetron sputtering technology has been recognized as a promising and effective preparation/modification method to construct specific morphologies by adopting various precursors, such as nanowires,47,48 nanorods,49–51 nanosheets52,53 and so forth. In addition, introducing a conductive or coating layer,54,55 doping with a metal or non-metal,56,57 and combining with an active/inactive component58,59 can also be achieved by magnetron sputtering technology, thus enhancing their electrochemical performances (Table 1). It is noteworthy that the electrode materials prepared via magnetron sputtering can be directly regarded as binder-free electrodes. In this section, we mainly discuss anodes (silicon-based materials, metal-based materials, metal oxides, etc.) and cathodes (transition metal oxides and phosphates) constructed by magnetron sputtering technology for their applications in LIBs and SIBs.
Table 1 Electrochemical performances of magnetron sputtered anode/cathode materials for LIBs/SIBs




Electrode materials
Coating
Substrate
Performances
Reference




Copper-coated Si NWs
Cu
Stainless steel 304
LIBs: 2840 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1

47



Si/a-C nanocomposites
Si and graphite
Cu foil
LIBs: 609.4 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles

80



3D Cu@Si@Cu
Cu and Si
Cu foil
LIBs: 569 mA h g−1 after 10000 cycles at 10C followed by 2000 cycles at 5C

88



NiSi films
Ni and Si
Cu foil
LIBs: 881 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 300 cycles

91



Sn–Al core–shell nanocomposite
Sn and Al
Cu foam
LIBs: 313 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles

96



Ge/cyclized-PAN
Ge
Ni foam
LIBs: 700 mA h g−1 at 1C after 100 cycles

106



Sb–Si alloys
Si and Sb
Si chips or 304 stainless steel
SIBs: 663 mA h g−1 after 140 cycles

111



Sb films
Sb
Cu foil
SIBs: 612.7 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles

58



Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheets
Sb
Stainless steel mesh
SIBs: 972.6 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles

53



3D Cu@Mg@C
Mg and C
Cu foil
LIBs: ∼500 mA h g−1 after 4000 cycles even at 2C

50



SnO2:Sb–MWCNT nanocomposites
SnO2:Sb
MWCNT buckypaper
LIBs: 753 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

120



3D NiO nanorods
NiO
Cu foil
LIBs: 500 mA h g−1 at 2C after 1000 cycles

135



CuO nanosheets
CuO
Carbon cloth
LIBs: 448.9 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1

142



Fe3O4–CNT nanocomposite
Fe3O4
Si wafer with super-aligned CNT arrays
LIBs: 1670 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

44



MoO2 thin films
MoO2
Cu foil
LIBs: 760 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

150



Amorphous Sb2S3
Sb2S3
Stainless steel fiber foil
LIBs: 585.4 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 250 cycles

152



FeN thin films
FeN
Glass
LIBs: 1024 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2 A g−1

155



ZnO-coated LiCoO2
ZnO
LiCoO2
LIBs: 155 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles

163



Al2O3-doped ZnO coated LiCoO2
Al2O3 and ZnO
LiCoO2
LIBs: 173 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles

164



TiO2 coated LiCoO2
TiO2
LiCoO2
LIBs: 160 mA h g−1 at 1C after 100 cycles

165



Li0.28Co0.29Ni0.30Mn0.20O2 thin films
LiCo1/3Ni1/3Mn1/3O2
Stainless steel
LIBs: 138 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

176



ZnO coated 0.3Li2MnO3-0.7LiNi5/21Co5/21Mn11/21O2
ZnO
C/Al foil
LIBs: 256.7 mA h g−1 at 0.1C rate after 50 cycles

177



ZnO coated LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2
ZnO
LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2
LIBs: 169 mA h g−1 after 90 cycles

178



Phosphate-coated LiFePO4
Li3PO4
LiFePO4
LIBs: 159.1 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

182



Mn-doped LiFePO4
LiFePO4 and LiMnPO4
ITO glass
LIBs: 45.7 μA h cm−2 μm−1

186





3.1 Anode materials

3.1.1 Silicon-based materials. 
Silicon (Si) has been projected as an attractive anode material in LIBs due to its high theoretical capacity (∼3580–4200 mA h g−1) and other merits such as low cost, natural abundance and environmental friendless.60 However, the original Si electrode (particularly bulk or micrometer-sized Si particles) still suffers from low intrinsic electrical conductivity as well as massive volume changes (about 300%) during the lithium storage process, which induce mechanical instability and drastic capacity fading.61,62 Research studies demonstrated that downsizing the Si particles and coupling with coating layers are effective strategies to address these above problems, thus improving its lithium storage capacity. For example, Miyazaki et al.63 sputtered an amorphous Si (a-Si) film on a glass ceramic by RF magnetron sputtering. As anode materials for LIBs, the resulting samples exhibit a high capacity of 2400 mA h g−1 at a high current discharge of 10 mA cm−2 and excellent cyclability when a 70Li2S·30P2S5 glass ceramic serves as the solid electrolyte. However, Demirkan et al.64 found that the density of Si thin films has a significant influence on its cyclability. Thus they modulated the density of multilayer Si thin film by adjusting the working gas pressure (Ar) during sputtering deposition utilizing an RF/DC magnetron sputtering system. In this work, low working gas pressure (1.5 × 10−3 mbar) produced high density films, while high working gas pressure (1.5 × 10−2 mbar) generated low density films. This phenomenon is mainly attributed to the formation of voids due to the shadowing effect derived from obliquely incident atoms at high pressures with higher porosity (∼30%). Moreover, the lower density Si layer can act as compliant layer to relax bullied-up stress during cycling making it more durable compared to conventional Si anodes.
Compared to a flat current collector, a rough/porous one could provide high surface area for deposition of Si film, facilitating the permeation of electrolyte. For instance, Mukanova's team65 deposited N-type doped amorphous Si thin films on a rough copper current collector via magnetron sputtering using an N-type Si target. As a result, the rough Si thin film gives high capacity retention (∼67 μA h cm−2 after 120 cycles) and rate capability (up to 300 μA cm−2 at 2C). Similarly, Moon and co-workers66 fabricated Si film on a porous Cu current collector as an anode material for LIBs via a magnetron sputtering method. The resulting electrode delivers excellent high rate capacity and cycling stability compared to a Si anode on a flat Cu current collector, which can be attributed to the release of the volumetric expansion stress of the Si anode on the porous Cu current collector with holes (Fig. 2b). In comparison to the morphology of the electrode on the flat current collector after cycling, the cracking and agglomeration of Si nanoparticles on porous Cu foil are effectively buffered during the cycling process (Fig. 2a).
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM images of flat Cu/Si (I) before cycling and (II) after 50 and (III) after 100 cycles and porous Cu/Si (IV) before cycling and (V) after 50 and (VI) after 100 cycles. The insets are photos of flat Cu/Si and porous Cu/Si before and after the cycling process. (b) Cycling performance of flat Cu–Si (blue curves) and porous Cu–Si (red curves) and the corresponding mechanism illustration. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (c) SEM image of copper-coated Si NWs; (d) TEM image of copper-coated Si NWs. (e) Initial charge–discharge curves of the pristine Si NWs, Si NWs with carbon-coating and copper-coating at a rate of 0.05C. (f) Capacity–cycle number curves for Si NWs with carbon-coating and copper-coating at a rate of 0.5C. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011. 
At present, designing various Si nanostructures is a promising strategy to alleviate volume variation issues.67,68 Given the limitations of preparing materials with different nanostructures via magnetron sputtering, various other methods have been adopted to regulate a material's morphology in combination with magnetron sputtering technology. For instance, Huang et al.52 first prepared cobalt nanosheet arrays as a precursor through chemical bath deposition and hydrogen reduction, followed by directly depositing Si film to construct an anode material. Benefiting from the special electrode structure, the obtained anode material delivers a good cycling performance (1910 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5C). Similarly, 3D Cu–Ni nano-pillar arrays (CNPs) have also been designed as a precursor to support Si film, which helped to retain the high capacity delivered by Si thin film. For Si@CNPs, the enhanced cyclability and rate performance of the as-produced Si@CNP electrode are ascribed to the following aspects: (1) the thinner and nanosized Si film effectively reduces the occurrence of large stress; (2) CNPs increase the contact area between Si and the current collector; (3) CNPs play a significant role in coating the active Si film, buffering the interfacial stress and decreasing the amount of active material falling off from the current collector, which are closely related.69 Additionally, Wu and co-workers70 prepared NiO nanosheet arrays by chemical bath deposition and then coated them with Si via magnetron sputtering. The as-prepared composite film delivers higher reversible capacity than NiO, and presents better cyclability than that of Si due to the synergistic effects between the two components.
Introducing a conductive additive or coating layer, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),71 graphene,72 amphorous carbon,73,74 or SiOx,75 is an important strategy to overcome the aforementioned problems. For example, Chen et al.47 prepared Si nanowires (Si NWs) via a vapor–liquid–solid growth method, which were further decorated with a copper layer through magnetron sputtering (Fig. 2c and d). When applied as anode materials for LIBs, the as-prepared samples manifest high capacity and outstanding cycling durability with 2840 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1. Even at a current density of 3200 mA g−1, their capacity still remains at 1523 mA h g−1 (Fig. 2e and f). Such remarkably high electrochemical performances are attributed to the synergistic effect of unique nanowire structures and Cu coating layers. The former can shorten the ionic transport and the latter can significantly accelerate electronic transport. In addition, carbon as a commonly used conductive matrix has been comprehensively studied as a buffer layer composited with Si. Lu and co-workers76 utilized carbon nanotubes as a conductive additive to couple with Ni and Si layers for constructing core–shell CNT–Ni–Si nanowires via plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) and magnetron sputtering applied to LIBs. As displayed in Fig. 3a and b, CNT–Ni–Si shows a core–shell nanostructure; after coating with Ni and Si, the three layers of the material can be clearly observed from Fig. 3c and d. The as-prepared nanostructured anode materials present high capacity over 2500 mA h g−1 and a low fading rate of merely 0.2% per cycle over 110 cycles (Fig. 3e and f).
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM image of the CNT–Ni–Si nanowire arrays at a tilted angle; (b) TEM image of a CNT–Ni–Si core–shell nanowire; (c) STEM image of a portion of the nanowire and the corresponding EDX mapping data of Si, Ni, O, and C, respectively; (d) HRTEM image at the CNT–Ni–Si interface; the inset is the corresponding FFT pattern of the Si layer. (e) A typical voltage profile for a full galvanostatic charge and discharge cycle at 0.2C; (f) specific charge/discharge capacities and coulombic efficiency of the CNT–Ni–Si core–shell nanowire anode versus cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013. (g) The preparation process of Cu–Si/a-C electrodes and a digital photo; (h) TEM, (i) HRTEM, and (j) SEM-EDS elemental mapping images of the 20% Si/a-C nanocomposite material; (k) cycling performance of the 20% Si/a-C electrode at a current density of 1 A g−1 before (pink curve) and after (red curve) Si lithiation. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Of particular note is that interfacial engineering of Si and carbon layers plays a critical role within the Si–C electrode.77 Placke's team78 constructed a sophisticated surface design and modified the electrode structure using amorphous carbon layers to increase the mechanical integrity, and then studied the effect of surface layer (C/Si) or interlayer carbon (Si/C/Si) on stabilizing the electrochemical cycling performance of Si electrodes. It was discovered that both silicon electrodes with a surface layer of carbon and interlayer carbon can improve electrochemical performance in terms of capacity retention and coulombic efficiency, and the interlayer of carbon can effectively control the volume change and significantly enhance the mechanical stability of Si during lithium uptake/extraction. Likewise, Zhang et al.79 also synthesized Si–C multilayer films using magnetron sputtering technology and gained a deep understanding of the impact of the carbon layer on the electrochemical performance of the Si–C system through experiments and first principles calculations. According to the first principles calculations, the average length of the Li–Si bond near the silicon–carbon interface is significantly shorter than that in silicon, corresponding to an irreversible capacity loss. Therefore, the structure with the largest carbon layer thickness exhibits the best cycling performance and superior rate performance. Recently, a silicon-doped amorphous carbon (Si/a-C) nanocomposite without any added binder or conductive agents for LIBs has also been reported by Zhu et al.80via co-sputtering deposition of silicon and carbon on Cu foil; the preparation process of Cu–Si/a-C electrodes is displayed in Fig. 3g; the silicon and carbon in the Si/a-C nanocomposite have a typical amorphous structure and the uniform distribution of Si and C elements is observed from Fig. 3h–j. The obtained nanocomposited electrode (20% Si/a-C) achieves superior initial discharge capacity (845.3 mA h g−1) and excellent cycling performance (609.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 up to 1000 cycles) seen from Fig. 3k as well as a high capacity of 602.8 mA h g−1 even under various extreme conditions (−40–70 °C). Such high performances are attributed to the Si/a-C electrode effectively reducing the volume expansion of silicon and improving the electrical conductivity of the composites. Constructing a multiphase form composed of two metal compounds can also circumvent the problem of volume expansion in electrode materials such as Si–M (M = Mg, Al, Mo, Ge, Cu, Ag, Y, Ti, V, Fe, Ni, etc.),81–85 in which M can inhibit the conductivity of Si. Active Ge element has been found to effectively suppress volume changes such as the unique Si/Ge core–shell nanorod arrays (NRs) rationally designed by Li et al.51 The main fabrication process of Si/Ge NRs involves four procedures: (1) a monolayer dispersed polystyrene (PS) nanosphere silicon substrate was produced by spin-coating and then etched by O2 plasma; (2) Si NRs were produced by a commercial inductively coupled plasma (ICP) system on this PS monolayer masked Si substrate; (3) a modified ICP etching process was performed on the Si substrate patterned with the template of PS nanospheres as well as removal of the PS nanospheres and etching the Si substrate in HF (2%); (4) the Ge film was deposited on these Si NR arrays by RF magnetron sputtering. Si/Ge nanorod arrays with Ge film coating produced by 200 W power sputtering deposition delivered improved cyclability (420 μA h cm−2) compared with the Si NR electrode. In 2014, this group further investigated the effect of different core–shell structures (Si NRs, Si–Ge NRs, Si–airbag–Ge NRs) on the electrochemical performance of Si–Ge nanorod arrays through experiments and theoretical calculations. The experimental results demonstrated that Si inner cores could be effectively protected by the connected Ge shells and displayed enhanced capacity by ∼68%, which was also further verified by the first-principles calculations, which indicated that the restricted volume expansion and smaller forces on the inner Si cores were due to the covering of the Ge outer shells.86 To further improve the cycling performance of the Si–Ge alloy, CNTs have been adopted to support the Si–Ge alloy. Bensalah et al.87 synthesized Si–Ge binary alloy thin films on rough Cu foil and MWCNTs using magnetron sputtering; the performance of Si–Ge@MWCNT was higher than that of Si–Ge@Cu owing to the greater space of CNTs to alleviate volume changes during the lithiation/delithiation reactions. Recently, Zhang et al.88 introduced a general method to prepare multishelled Cu@Si@Cu microparticles supported on 3D Cu current collectors fabricated as stable and binder-free LIB anodes as displayed in Fig. 4a. The core–shell nanowire morphology of 3D Cu@Si and 3D Cu@Si@Cu is shown in Fig. 4b and c, respectively. In addition, the as-produced electrode exhibits superior rate capability (76% capacity retention when cycled from 1C to 10C) and ultralong cycling stability (retaining 569 mA h g−1 even after an ultralong cycling test for 10000 cycles at 10C followed by 2000 cycles at 5C) (Fig. 4d–f). Compared with 3D Cu@Si@Cu, the capacity of 3D Cu@Si NWs decreases from 1054 to 379 mA h g−1 with 36% capacity retention after 2000 cycles (Fig. 4g). The superior electrochemical performances are mainly attributed to the unique structure of 3D Cu@Si@Cu microparticles having the capability of accommodating the volume change and facilitating contact between the Cu@Si@Cu particles and the current collector during cycling.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for Cu(OH)2 NWs, Cu(OH)2@M1 NWs, 3D Cu@M1 NWs, and 3D Cu@M1@M2 NWs. M1 and M2 refer to Cu, Al, C, Si, SiO2, Si3N4, Ag, Ti, Ta, Sn, In2O5, Au, V, Nb, W, Mg, Fe, Ni, Sn, ZnO, or TiN. (b) SEM images of 3D Cu@Si. (c) SEM images of 3D Cu@Si@Cu. (d) Rate performances of 3D Cu@Si and 3D Cu@Si@Cu NWs cycled at various rates from 1C to 10C. (e) Discharge/charge profiles of 3D Cu@Si@Cu NWs cycled at various rates from 1C to 10C. (f) Cycling performance and CEs of 3D Cu@Si@Cu NWs cycled at 10C for 10000 cycles and 5C for 2000 cycles. (g) Cycling performance and CEs of 3D Cu@SiNWs for 2000 cycles. The electrode was then etched with HCl and reduced with H2 to remove the SEI before it was cycled for another 1000 cycles. The Si-loading is ∼0.02 mg cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Park's team constructed a SiMox (ref. 89) composite electrode as an anode material for LIBs, which displayed good cycle retention and high capacity. On this basis, a three-element Si–Ge–Mo90 anode composite material has been prepared by this group via RF/DC magnetron sputtering; the fabricated Si0.41Ge0.34Mo0.25 composite film exhibits high energy density (1st charge: 1193 mA h g−1), long cyclability (870 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles) and good initial coulombic efficiency (96%). To increase the permeation of electrolytes and shorten the Li+/electron transfer length, Yang's group49 finely designed SiGe porous nanorod arrays through three steps: (1) synthesis of ZnO nanorod arrays on a Cu substrate as a sacrificial template; (2) co-sputtering Si and Ge targets on the template; (3) removal of the template via a high-temperature reduction process. Moreover, the electrochemical performance of the SiGe porous nanorod arrays (reversible capacity ∼800 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1) is better than that of the Si porous nanorod arrays and planar electrodes, and a reversible capacity of 300 mA h g−1 is retained even when the current density is increased to 16 A g−1.
For instance, Karahan91 reported alternate layers of nickel and silicon (<15 nm) as well as additional Ni-rich layers of 60 nm thickness on the Ni/Si bilayer. It was found that the additional Ni layer can act as a ‘skeleton’ retained integrity of thin film during cycling, increasing the mechanical resistance of the electrode. Benefiting from this merit, the as-prepared Ni/Si bilayer with additional Ni-rich layers shows high electrochemical performance (discharge capacity of 881 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 300 cycles). Similarly, a series of amorphous Fe–Si thin films with different amounts of Fe were prepared by Li and co-workers92 who studied their electrochemical performance. The experiment test results revealed that the cycling stability increased but the specific capacity of the thin films decreased with increasing content of Fe element. This is because the addition of Fe can reduce the resistivity and the volume expansion of Si. Nevertheless, the FexSi100x amorphous films present excellent initial charge/discharge capacity and superior cycling stability after 100 cycles. Especially for the Fe19.1Si80.9 film, the charge transfer between the two electrolytes and the electrode interface causes the two smallest impedances.


3.1.2 Metal-based materials. 
Tin (Sn), as a promising anode material, has been widely investigated due to its high gravitational and volumetric capacities in LIBs and SIBs.93 In 2014, Wu et al.19 prepared a Sn thin film on copper foil via magnetron sputtering for application in LIBs, and it exhibits a high initial capacity of 908 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 but the capacity decayed in the first 15 cycles. Nevertheless, the pure Sn anode material was subjected to a huge volume change during the alloying/dealloying cycle with Li ions, resulting in mechanical failure of the active material, which hindered its application as an electrode material. To address the inherent problem, alloying of active elements (Sn, Al) with inactive components (Cu, Zr, Y) in a composite matrix has been designed to reduce the irreversible capacity loss and alleviate the volumetric change. In this regard, Lee's group prepared Sn, Cu–Sn, and Sn–Zr–(O) anodes94via RF magnetron sputtering for LIBs and discussed the effects of alloying elements on the electrochemical properties. Related results indicated that the alloying of Sn with Cu or Zr can enhance the cycling performances, especially for Sn thin films alloyed with Zr, which is ascribed to the crucial role of the strong bonding between Sn and Zr in limiting the reaction of Sn with Li.
However, the introduction of inactive materials will decrease the specific capacity of the anode materials; thus, the novel anodes of the two active materials possessed high specific capacity, and good cycling performance was obtained. Sn–Al thin films95 and Sn–Al core–shell films96 have been reported for LIBs via magnetron sputtering. As shown in Fig. 5a and b, the Sn–Al film consisted of regular round shaped nanoparticles with a thickness of around 200 nm; the TEM image in Fig. 5c further confirms the core–shell structure of the Sn–Al film. Such structure can restrain the volume expansion and stabilize the structure of the electrode. Benefiting from the Sn–Al core–shell structure, the electrochemical performance of the Sn–Al electrode with an optimized Al content of 18 wt% has greatly improved at high current density compared to that of the pure Sn film electrode (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of the surface morphology of Sn–18 wt% Al; (b) SEM image of the thickness of Sn–18 wt% Al deposited on the glass; (c) HRTEM image of Sn–18 wt% Al film scraped from the glass (inset image obtained from Fourier transformation); (d) discharge capacities of Sn–18 wt% Al film and pure Sn thin films at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
There are some studies which have reported that reducing the size of alloy grains can achieve high reversible specific capacity.97,98 For example, Ferguson et al.99 fabricated a Sn–Co–C material with different sizes by sputter deposition and mechanical methods, and evaluated the lithium storage capacity. Related electrochemical characterization shows that smaller grains of Sn are more accessible to the lithium than larger grains, thus leading to higher electrochemical performance. Based on the above research results, Thorne and co-workers100 used magnetron sputtering to produce Sn27Cu33C40 nanomaterials which acted as anode materials for application in LIBs, delivering a high capacity of around 400 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles in a Li-half cell.
Germanium (Ge) is also regarded as a promising anode material for SIBs and LIBs because of the high lithium diffusivity and better electronic conductivity.101,102 Herein, Baggetto et al.103 utilized magnetron sputtering to prepare Ge thin films deposited on Cu foil as anode materials for SIBs; the as-prepared electrode delivers a reversible capacity of around 350 mA h g−1 and high rate capability with 220 mA h g−1 at 170C, which match with the expected values for the formation of NaGe. However, huge capacity loss of the pure Ge electrode occurred after a few cycles owing to large volume expansion. To address this problem, the inactive matrix of Mo has been incorporated into Ge. Park's group104 constructed a Ge–Mo composite as an anode material for LIBs using magnetron sputtering, in which a Ge0.88Mo0.12 composite film electrode exhibits reversible gravimetric capacities of up to 1000 mA h g−1 and 77.9% capacity retention after 100 cycles.
Recently, rational design of architectures based on nanoarrays or 3D current collectors has been developed as a novel strategy to fabricate a Ge-based anode material.105,106 Wu et al.105 synthesized Ni nanopyramid arrays by a facile electrodeposition followed by sputtering a Ge target to produce an amorphous Ge anode material for SIBs. In this rationally designed configuration, the Ni matrix is used for structural support and as an electron collection/transport medium, and the space of each pyramid modulates the stress of volume expansion during Na alloying/dealloying with Ge. On the other hand, the rough surface of Ni nanopyramid arrays and the shortened sodium diffusion distance are beneficial for achieving enhanced rate capabilities. In addition, 3D Ge/cyclized-polyacrylonitrile (PAN) thin film anodes applied in LIBs were also fabricated via magnetron sputtering by Fang et al.,106 and the Ge/cyclized-PAN manifests excellent high specific capacity and good cycling stability (about 98% capacity retention with less capacity fading after 100 cycles at 1C) compared with pristine Ge nanofilm, which may be ascribed to the following aspects: (1) the porous 3D nickel foam has enough space to bear the volume expansion and allows for the optimization of Ge mass loading on foam; (2) commercially available cyclized-PAN serves as a buffer layer to minimize the volume changes and contact between Ge and electrolyte. Moreover, the good ionic conductivity of cyclized-PAN coatings plays a significant role in improving the electrochemical performances; finally, the unique structural features of the electrode realize the improvement of specific capacity, cycling performance, and rate capability.
Antimony (Sb) possesses a theoretical capacity of 660 mA h g−1 owing to the production of Na3Sb, which exhibits excellent potential as an anode material for SIBs. Nevertheless, previous research revealed that Sb film prepared by magnetron sputtering exhibited inferior cycling stability derived from the pulverization of Sb and huge volume changes during electrochemical reactions.107 Currently, the two major directions to solve the problem are modulating the coating structure and coating structure interface. For instance, Baggetto and co-workers108 synthesized Cu2Sb thin films via DC magnetron sputtering in Ar plasma and investigated the electrochemical performance of Cu2Sb thin films as an anode material for SIBs. The Cu2Sb electrode offered a reversible storage capacity (250 mA h g−1 or 2100 mA h cm−3) and high rate capability with 70% maximum capacity at 10C-rate under a reaction potential of around 0.55 V vs. Na/Na+. Subsequently, a more rational way is intrinsically adjusting the architecture by increasing the working pressure without adding other additives compared with interfacial modulation through the introduction of a bonding layer. Gao et al.61 developed a structural refining strategy for Cu–Sb alloy applied in SIBs that involved increasing the working pressure to modulate the column-channel architecture; the electrochemical test results reveal that Sb@0.3 Pa delivers enhanced cycling stability and rate performance compared with Sb@0.1 Pa and Sb@0.2 Pa because the refined structure effectively accelerated the ion/electron transfer and alleviated the volumetric variations. Previous studies have reported a common finding that alloys are superior to pure elements both in cyclability and rate capability.109 Subsequently, the research group of Baggetto110 used magnetron sputtering to synthesize Mo3Sb7 thin films as an anode material for LIBs and SIBs. The electrode films achieve around 430 and 330 mA h g−1 for the reactions with Li and Na, respectively. These results confirm the good prospects of Mo3Sb7 as an electrode material for Li-ion and Na-ion batteries. More recently, Kalisvaart et al.111 investigated the effect of composition of Si–Sb co-sputtered alloy films on their electrochemical properties. They found that Sb-rich (>50 at%) compositions delivered improved cyclability compared to element Sb and the reversible capacity of the co-sputtered materials decreased with increasing Si content. These results are attributed to the fully sodiated state of the co-deposited films from an amorphous single-phase to a mixture of Sb-rich and Si-rich sodiated phases during cycling. Furthermore, Si0.07Sb0.93 reaches a high capacity of 663 mA h g−1 after 140 cycles. Considering the promising results of Sn–Sb and Sb–Bi systems, the tri-metal composition is expected to yield a higher electrochemical performance than the alloys. So, Xie et al.112 fabricated Sn–Bi–Sb alloys by magnetron sputtering as anode materials for application in SIBs, in which optimized Sn10Bi10Sb80 exhibits the best performance in terms of capacity (615 mA h g−1) during cycling after 100 cycles.
3D nanoarrays have also been fabricated using magnetron sputtering.113,114 For instance, Zhang and co-workers53 fabricated a core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode by tailoring the coating structure for SIBs. The preparation process of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode anchored on a stainless steel mesh is illustrated in Fig. 6a; we can see from Fig. 6b and c that the Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet is a hexagonal sheet with a core–shell structure. The film electrode produced by magnetron sputtering delivers a high discharge capacity of 972.6 mA h g−1, excellent cycling stability over 200 cycles even at 0.2 A g−1 and superior rate performance with 383.5 mA h g−1 at 30 A g−1 (Fig. 6d and e). Compared with the pure Sb film electrode, the notably improved electrochemical performance of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet is mainly attributed to the open framework of the Co(OH)2 substrate, boosting the ion & electron transportation as well as providing a buffer layer for mitigating the volumetric change.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration exhibiting the fabrication process for the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode anchored on SS-mesh; (b) SEM image of the Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet; inset: the SEM image at a higher magnification; (c) TEM image of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode; (d) cycling performance of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode at 0.5 A g−1; (e) cycling performances of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet and Co(OH)2 electrodes at 0.0584 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
More recently, magnesium (Mg) as a low cost alkaline metal was found to form a solid solution with Li in a wider concentration range, enabling the Mg anode to deliver a high reversible capacity of 2150 mA h g−1 for Li1.95Mg, which is six times that of graphene.115 Moreover, the small volume expansion of magnesium's lithiation reaction (∼120%) and a low voltage (0.0325 V for Mg) make Mg-based LIBs have high full-cell energy density. In 2019, Zhang et al.50 prepared a Mg/C composite on 3D Cu current collectors through magnetron sputtering as shown in Fig. 7a. First, an array of Cu nanowires is grown on Cu foil via an oxidation–coating–reduction approach followed by alternating sputtering of Mg and C on the Cu nanowires to obtain the 3D Cu@Mg@C nanorod structure displayed in Fig. 7b. The presented 3D Cu@Mg@C as an LIB anode delivered 1146 mA h g−1 up to 1000 cycles at 0.5C; the electrode also maintained around 500 mA h g−1 after 4000 cycles even at 2C (Fig. 7c). The remarkably improved cycling performance may be attributed to the following reasons: (i) the incorporation of a carbon layer on Mg restrained the formation of high-impedance films on its surface, which allows the electrochemical activity to be maintained; (ii) the 3D Cu nanowires and carbon network resulting from the composite structure effectively alleviate the volume expansion of Mg during cycling and also facilitate its electrical contact with the current collector.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of 3D Cu@Mg@C anodes; (b) SEM image of 3D Cu@Mg@C nanowires; (c) cycling properties of 3D Cu@Mg@C, 3D Cu@Mg, and planar Cu–Mg@C anodes at 0.5C for 1000, 1000, and 100 cycles, respectively (1C = 2150 mA g−1 of Mg). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. 


3.1.3 Metal oxides. 
Many researchers have dedicated themselves to the study of metal oxide materials prepared by magnetron sputtering technology for LIBs, such as SnO2, Li4Ti5O12, TiO2, NiO, and CuO. This section summarizes the recent development of metal oxides as anode materials for LIBs.
Enormous attention has been focused on materials based on SnO2 owing to its high theoretical capacity (781 mA h g−1) as well as low potential of lithium ion intercalation.116 Here, Kohler et al.117 synthesized amorphous and nano-crystalline SnOx thin film by modulating the volume ratio of O2 and Ar as anode materials for LIBs via magnetron sputtering, which exhibits good battery performance and cycling stability. Considering that the large volume change during cycling would limit the cycling performance of the SnO2 electrode material, an effective approach has been adopted to introduce a buffer layer, such as multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), to accommodate the volume expansion.118 To increase the structural stability and electrochemical conductivity of the SnO2-based material, metal ion doping may be an effective strategy. By adjusting the Ar/O2 gas mixture at a flux ratio of 4/1, Ouyang et al.56,57 and Cevher et al.119 prepared Sb-doped SnO2 thin film via magnetron sputtering technology showing enhanced performance. Then, Cevher et al.120 also reported a SnO2:Sb target deposited on Cr-coated stainless steel and MWCNT nanocomposites producing a core–shell structure by multifunctional magnetron sputtering with an RF power supply of 125 W in a pure Ar environment. The electrode material of SnO2:Sb–MWCNT displays a high reversible discharge capacity of 753 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, higher than those of MWCNTs (140 mA h g−1 after two cycles) and SnO2:Sb-coated on stainless steel (51 mA h g−1 after 59 cycles), due to the high surface area of SnO2:Sb and buffer component of MWCNTs. To further control the volume variation, Huang and co-workers121 designed a ZnO/SnO2 composite thin film via magnetron sputtering. Benefiting from the buffer effect of ZnO thin film, the magnetron sputtered ZnO/SnO2 composite shows an improved rate performance and alleviates the irreversible capacity loss. Moreover, carbon coated122 and carbon composited SnO2 (ref. 123) were also fabricated by several groups to further stabilize the structure during cycling and increase the electrical conductivity of the electrode material. For instance, Xu et al.124 reported a comprehensive study of a SnO2/carbon cloth (CC) composite as an anode material through magnetron sputtering. Compared with pure carbon cloth and SnO2, the SnO2/CC composited electrode showed better cyclability and rate capability, which may be ascribed to the high surface area, porous structure and the intrinsic soft features of CC alleviating the volume change during cycling.
A series of research studies was conducted on metal oxide materials prepared by magnetron sputtering based on an intercalation/de-intercalation mechanism for LIBs, such as Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) and TiO2. Owing to its zero-strain lithium insertion and relatively high operating voltage (1.55 V vs. Li/Li+), LTO has drawn much attention as a prospective anode material for LIBs. Unfortunately, the low lithium-ion diffusion coefficient and poor electronic conductivity of LTO present a serious constraint to the practical application.125,126 To solve these problems, nano-sized LTO thin films have been reported and applied. Yu et al.127 synthesized amorphous structure LTO thin films with hierarchical channels by using RF magnetron sputtering. Owing to the unique thin film structural features and the introduction of Ti3+ sites into LTO thin films, the as-produced LTO thin film exhibits high capacity (283.5 mA h g−1 at 10 μA cm−2) and good cycling stability (capacity retention of ∼97% after 100 cycles at a current density of 10 μA cm−2). To further enhance the electrical conductivity of LTO film, Tsai and co-workers128 reported a more in-depth study of spinel LTO, which was fabricated using LTO film with a thickness of about 200 nm sputtered on a Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si (100) substrate followed by post-annealing treatment from 500 °C to 700 °C. The results demonstrated that the high capacity and good reversibility may be attributed to the high crystallinity of the LTO and amorphous TiO2 phase.
TiO2 has received substantial attention as a fascinating anode material for LIBs because of its chemical stability, low cost, non-toxicity and high theoretical specific capacity of about 330 mA h g−1.129 Similar to LTO, the poor lithium diffusion and electrical conductivity hinder the practical application of TiO2. Nanotechnology has been introduced to prepare TiO2 thin film via magnetron sputtering in order to improve the electrochemical performance by shortening the diffusion path distance of electrons and Li+ and increasing the contact area between the electrolyte and electrode.130 Aslan et al.131 presented nanocrystalline TiO2 thin films deposited on stainless steel substrates via magnetron sputtering followed by in situ direct current plasma oxidation, which delivers high specific capacity and good cycling stability. Besides, the TiO2 film can also be deposited on MWCNTs132,133 by magnetron sputtering technology to improve its electronic conductivity, resulting in high lithium storage capacity.
NiO is one of the most promising materials for energy storage with a high theoretical specific capacity (718 mA h g−1), but the practical capacity of unmodified NiO is much lower and fades rapidly, especially at high current densities. To improve the electrochemical performance, conductive components are introduced to fabricate nanostructures composited with metals for instance. Mai et al.134 reported Ni-coated NiO arrays by combining chemical bath deposition and magnetron sputtering. The prepared Ni-coated NiO array electrode with an optimized sputtering time of 60 s exhibited enhanced reversible capacity and rate capability. However, the content of conductive components should be strictly controlled because excessive amounts would reduce the overall specific capacity. Nanostructured materials can also be directly realized by glancing angle deposition or the oblique angle deposition configuration based on the shadowing effect during PVD under high vacuum conditions. 3D NiO nanorods deposited on Cu foil have been established using RF magnetron sputtering with glancing and the oblique angle deposition technique by Xia et al.135 The results revealed that NiO presented a well aligned nanorod structure when the glancing angle was 85°, and the optimized NiO electrode displays a high reversible capacity of 710 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and ultra-long cycling performance with 500 mA h g−1 at 2.0C after 1000 cycles. The superior performance benefits from the nanorod structure and its macroporosity, which reduce the ion diffusion distance and provide a large surface contact area and space for easy electrolyte access. Ni2N with high electronic and ionic conductivity has been applied to LIBs.136 Enlightened by this report, Jia et al.137 synthesized NiO/Ni2N thin films using magnetron sputtering with a Ni metal target under an atmosphere of 1 vol% O2 and 99 vol% N2. The incorporation of Ni2N imparts bifunctional features that improve charge transfer kinetics and contribute to the formation of a stable SEI. Consequently, rate capability (515.3 mA h g−1 at 1.6 A g−1) and enhanced cycling stability (98.8% retention after 50 cycles) are achieved.
More recently, CuO has attracted much attention as an anode material for LIBs because of the reversibility of the conversion reaction reported by Tarascon and co-workers.138 However, the large size of the CuO particles with micrometer dimensions causes poor reversibility of the conversion reaction, which can be effectively improved with nanostructure materials.139–141 To enhance the electronic conductivity and alleviate the volume change during cycling, highly ordered CuO nanosheets with high porosity as well as large specific surface area directly deposited on conductive carbon cloth in two steps including magnetron sputtering and solution immersion have been designed by Cheng et al.142 The grown process of the CuO nanostructure is shown in Fig. 8a, and the nanosheet structure can be observed from Fig. 8b and c. Moreover, the CuO nanosheet electrode showed a high initial capacity of 711.2 mA h g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1 and 88% retention after 100 cycles. Even at 2000 mA g−1, a stable capacity of 448.9 mA h g−1 was still maintained, which is much higher than that of commercial CuO (Fig. 8d and e). The enhanced electrochemical performance is mainly ascribed to the following reasons: (1) the nanosheets structure shortened the diffusion length, accelerated electron transfer and efficiently accommodated volume variation; (2) flexibility and electrical conductivity of carbon cloth; (3) the enhanced mechanism of adhesion of the intermediate copper layer; (4) the 3D hierarchical structure increased the contact area between the active material and electrolyte. Recently, Tang et al.143 and Li et al.144 also synthesized C-doped or N-doped CuO nanorod arrays to improve the electrochemical activity of CuO nanorods using magnetron sputtering, and investigated their electrochemical performance. In addition, other transition metal oxides (Fe2O3,145 Fe3O4,44 Co3O4,146,147 WO3,148,149 and MoO2 (ref. 150)) are fascinating electrode materials for LIBs and SIBs. Meanwhile, their lithium or sodium storage capacity can also be significantly improved by depositing them on inactive substances via magnetron sputtering.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth process of CuO nanostructures on carbon cloth; (b) a typical SEM image of CuO nanosheets grown on carbon cloth; (c) TEM image of the as-synthesized CuO structure peeled off from the carbon cloth. Inset: magnified image of the selected area showing the broken edge of a CuO nanosheet; (d) capacity versus cycle number of the CuO nanosheets/carbon cloth and commercial CuO electrodes at a current density of 500 mA g−1; (e) rate capacities of the CuO electrode and commercial CuO from 200 to 10000 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. 


3.1.4 Other metal compounds. 
Apart from alloys and metal oxides, metal sulfides and metal nitrides have also been developed as anode materials for application in batteries. Compared to metal oxides, metal sulfides show a high theoretical capacity and relatively high electronic conductivity. However, they suffer from serious volume expansion during the cycling process, hindering their further application as anode materials in rechargeable batteries. To compensate for the above-mentioned drawbacks, coupling with carbon materials is widely employed to alleviate the volume expansion of metal sulphides upon electrochemical reaction. For example, Patel et al.151 fabricated CNTs grown on a Cu mesh by CVD as a matrix to load MoS2 nanoflakes deposited by RF magnetron sputtering at a substrate temperature of 300 °C; the nanoflake coated 3D CNTs with strong interfacial bonding offer a suitable conduction channel and shorten the diffusion path of Li+ as well as accommodating the volume expansion during lithiation/delithiation, resulting in a high areal capacity of ∼1.65 mA h cm−2 with an areal density of ∼0.35 mg cm−2 at 0.5C rate. Wang and co-workers152 used 316L stainless steel (SS) as a 3D conductive network acting as a substrate to directly deposit amorphous Sb2S3 through RF magnetron sputtering at a low temperature of 200 °C. By integrating the advantages of the amorphous structure and 3D network of SS, the obtained Sb2S3 anode exhibits a high capacity of 585.4 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 250 cycles in an a-Sb2S3/Li half-cell test. When paired up with a LiFePO4 cathode to assemble a Li+ full cell, a high capacity of 467.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 100 cycles is achieved.
Metal nitrides have been considered as promising anode candidates due to the high reversibility and large reversible capacities for lithium ion batteries. In 2008, Fu's group153 constructed VN thin films using a metallic V target through magnetron sputtering under a N2 atmosphere, showing high capacity above 800 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. Afterwards, CoN films with a nanoflake structure were also prepared by Das et al.154via magnetron sputtering in an atmosphere of Ar/N2 mixture (2:1), and experiment results demonstrated that the conversion reaction involved the intermediate of nano-phase composite “Co–Li3N” when cycling to an upper cut-off voltage of 3.0 V. Recently, Ma et al.155 fabricated γ′′-FeN thin film as an anode material for LIBs and a conversion reaction between γ′′-FeN and Fe occurs during cycling (Fig. 9a). From Fig. 9b, the thickness of γ′′-FeN is homogeneous, measured to be about 630 nm (inset of Fig. 9b). As shown in Fig. 9c, the γ′′-FeN film electrode achieves a high specific capacity of 1024 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. As the current density increased to 10 A g−1, a remarkable rate performance (469.0 mA h g−1) is obtained, which benefits from the fast charge transport in the nanocrystalline γ′′-FeN thin films.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process based on FeN thin films; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of γ′′-FeN thin film; (c) electrochemical Li-storage rate performances of γ′′-FeN thin film electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 

3.2 Cathode materials
Tremendous efforts have been made to develop magnetron sputtered cathode materials for LIBs mainly focused on lithium-based transition metal oxides and transition metal phosphates, such as LiCoO2, spinel LiMn2O4 and LiFePO4. Among these materials, LiCoO2 (LCO) with a layered structure has been extensively used as a commercial cathode in LIBs because of its high specific capacity and operating voltage. Magnetron sputtering has been applied to LCO thin films in LIBs owing to its advantages of large area and rapid growth of thin films.156–159 Here, multiple reports have discussed the use of categories of target materials doped in or coated on various host cathode materials, such as doping of metallic ions, metal oxides, metal phosphates and even metallic carbonate which showed enhanced electrochemical performance. For instance, this sputtering method was used to fabricate LCO thin films, Ti and Zr-doped LCO thin films, and Zr-doped thin films, revealing that doping with Zr improved the cycling stability and specific capacity in that the tetravalent Zr doping in place of Co sites in LCO stabilized the layered structure and enhanced the electrical conductivity compared with pristine LCO.160–162 Inserted metal oxides such as ZnO, Al2O3, and TiO2 can be utilized as coating materials to improve LCO's electrochemical performance. Dai et al.163 found that a ZnO coating material prepared by magnetron sputtering technology can significantly enhance the rate capacity (106 mA h g−1 at 10C) and cycling performances (81% retention after 200 cycles) between 3.0 and 4.5 V at 0.2C. Moreover, Dai et al.164 coated an LCO electrode with conductive Al2O3-doped ZnO (AZO) via a magnetron sputtering technique and retained up to 90% capacity (173 mA h g−1) after 150 cycles between 3.0 and 4.5 V. In addition, the rate capability is remarkably improved with a reversible capacity of 112 mA h g−1 at 12C. Afterwards, Li's group165 tested the cycling performance of a TiO2-coated LCO electrode between 3.0 and 4.5 V, and the as-fabricated LCO composite electrode delivers a capacity of 109 mA h g−1 at 10C, 47% higher than that of the bare electrode (74 mA h g−1) because the oxide coating alleviates the decomposition of electrolyte at high voltage and reduces side reactions. Moreover, a possible reaction between the TiO2 layer and electrolyte forms a new metal fluoride layer (TiFx) protecting the electrode. Zhou et al.54 showed that the cyclability and rate capability of LCO could also be greatly improved by the use of an ion conductive and electrochemically stable Li3PO4 coating layer. Recently, Li's group coated ion conductive, electron-insulated and electrochemically stable Li2CO355 or LTO166 on an as-fabricated LCO composite electrode via a facile magnetron sputtering technique. They found that the as-produced composited LCO electrode still exhibits remarkably enhanced cycling stability when the charging potential is above 4.7 V or the operation temperature rises to 55 °C. Apart from that, microstructure changes, morphology control and optimization of thin film thickness for the LCO electrode have been thoroughly investigated and improved rate capability and long-term cycling stability have been achieved.167–169
As an environmentally benign and low cost cathode material, LiMn2O4 (LMO) has drawn much interest with its relatively high voltage and high energy density, widely used in LIBs.170,171 However, the capacity fading of LMO, which arises from dissolution of Mn2+, Jahn–Teller transition, and decomposition of the electrolyte, restricts its commercial applications. To circumvent these obstacles, one effective strategy is to modify the surface of LMO with more stable metals to protect the electrode from side reactions with the electrolyte. Akbulut et al.172 reported ZnO as a coating layer on LMO/MWCNT to fabricate a nanocomposited cathode with a thickness of 10 nm. They found that the coating layer of ZnO can suppress the formation of passivation on the surface of LMO, which prevented decomposition of the electrolyte leading to Mn dissolution. Besides, Chae et al.173 showed that the rate capability and thermal stability of the electrode can also be improved by coating Li–Ni–Mn–O on the surface of LMO via a simple RF magnetron sputtering using LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as a target. Another strategy is introducing artificial protective coating layers on the surface of the LMO cathode. For instance, Wang and co-workers174 showed that a graphite layer can be directly coated on the surface of an LMO-based electrode (GLMO) by DC magnetron sputtering at room temperature, in which the LMO electrode was prepared by mixing it with super P (10 wt%) carbon black and polyvinylidene fluoride with 10 wt% (PVDF) in N-2-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP). Then, different graphite samples were coated on the LMO electrode by sputtering for 10 min (GLMO-10), 20 min (GLMO-20), 30 min (GLMO-30), and 60 min (GLMO-60) under 0.4 A, 200 V DC power. The electrochemical performances of LMO and GLMO electrodes were evaluated at 1C between 3.0 and 4.5 V. These results reveal that all GLMO electrodes present higher cycling stability than bare LMO, and among them GLMO-30 exhibits the best performance (96.2% capacity retention after 200 cycles).
Additionally, cation-substituted spinel LixMyMn2yO4 (M = Co, Ni, etc.) has been widely studied to overcome these issues. Tan et al.175 prepared Li–Co–Ni–Mn oxide thin films with controllable crystal orientation by a combination of RF magnetron sputtering under Ar/O2 gas and in situ post-annealing. They found that their electrochemical properties are closely related to crystallinity and crystal orientation, and that the crystalline preferred orientation growth is determined by the surface energy and volume strain energy of the deposited layer. Furthermore, a thin film cathode with crystal orientation delivers higher electrochemical performance than the amorphous cathode in cell tests due to its improved conductivity and interfacial resistance. Similarly, Wu and co-workers176 reported the synthesis of Li-deficient Li0.28Co0.29Ni0.30Mn0.20O2 with a polycrystalline nanostructure and high tap density via RF magnetron sputtering using a Co1/3Ni1/3Mn1/3O2 target followed by annealing at 800 °C under an Ar atmosphere as shown in Fig. 10a. Fig. 10b and c display the SEM images of annealed Li–Co–Ni–Mn–O thin films which exhibit a cliff structure with obvious edges and corners, manifesting the good crystallization structure of the as-fabricated thin films. The as-deposited thin films exhibit high reversible capacity (138 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles) and good cycling performance (Fig. 10d and e). Afterwards, LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 was also prepared by partial substitution of the Mn cations in LiMn2O4 cathode thin films by Su et al.177 at a substrate bias of −30 V. To further improve the electrochemical capability of the LMO electrode, ZnO modified Li-rich layered 0.3Li2MnO3-0.7LiNi5/21Co5/21Mn11/21O2 (LMO-NCM) was fabricated via a reactive magnetron sputtering using a metallic Zn target by Qiu and his co-workers.178 Compared with pristine LMO-NCM, the ZnO coated LMO-NCM electrode achieved a discharge capacity of 238.0 mA h g−1 at 1.0 C-rate with an optimized sputtering time of 2 min. Very recently, Lai and his colleagues179 synthesized a LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 cathode by sputtering nanoscale ZnO film; the as-synthesized LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 is uniformly coated by ZnO layers. The ZnO coated electrode shows a higher discharge capacity of 169 mA h g−1 than that of pristine LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (127 mA h g−1), ascribed to the role of nanoscale ZnO coatings that reduced charge transfer resistance and suppressed cation dissolution in the LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 electrode.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram showing the deposition process for the Li–Co–Ni–Mn–O thin film; FE-SEM images of (b) the surface and (c) cross-section of the annealed Li–Co–Ni–Mn–O thin film; (d) charge–discharge profiles of the Li/PLTF half cell; (e) cycling performance of the Li/PLTF half cell. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
Besides, LiFePO4 (LFP) with an olivine structure has been the focus of research for LIBs due to its advantages such as high theoretical capacity (170 mA h g−1), high operating voltage (3.4 V vs. Li+/Li), long cycle life (>2000 times), and environmental benignity.180–182 To achieve higher electrochemical performance, the low intrinsic electronic and ionic conductivity limitation of LiFePO4 should be overcome. For example, Lee et al.183 designed a flexible battery for contact lens application utilizing an LFP cathode directly deposited on a flexible polyimide substrate via magnetron sputtering and single step low-temperature annealing as shown in Fig. 11a, and the steps for preparing the battery on the polyimide substrate are displayed in Fig. 11c. The SEM image of the fabricated battery in Fig. 11d reveals that there is a dense interface between the cathode film (LiFePO4) and the electrolyte (LiPON). After that, electrochemical performance was measured, and the discharge capacity of the battery reached 14.1 μAh μm−1 cm−2 after 70 cycles (Fig. 11e and f) and the cell showed stable performance even under wet conditions (energy storage capacity of 35 μW h) (Fig. 11b). One effective strategy proposed to overcome the electronic and ionic transport limitation is coating stable Li+ conductors on the surface of nanoscale LFP to increase the diffusion of Li+ ions. Tan et al.184 reported a coralline glassy Li3PO4 with an amorphous structure possessing good ionic conductivity as the surface modification layer of an LFP composite electrode prepared by RF magnetron sputtering, the synthetic route to glassy lithium phosphate-coated LFP (GLP-LFP). The prepared GLP-LFP displays stable cycling performance, higher capacity and improved power capability compared to the bare one.
 Fig. 11  (a) Smart lens applications of solid-state thin film batteries; (b) top view, side view and operation of the fabricated battery lighting an LED while wet; (c) the fabrication processes of the battery on a polyimide substrate with the deposition steps; (d) SEM image of the fabricated battery's cross-section; (e) the cycling performance of the batteries after 70 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Coating with high-conductivity materials can also improve the intrinsic electronic conductivity. Wang et al.185 used Ag, Co, and indium tin oxide (ITO) nanodots coated on LFP to fabricate a composite cathode material, showing higher discharge capacities of 161.3, 154.7, and 147.9 mA h g−1, respectively, than that of the pristine one (146.6 mA h g−1). Afterwards, Yang et al.186 modified Cu/CuxO having an eccentric core–shell structure with copper as the core on the surface of LFP through a facile magnetron sputtering technique at a sputtering time of 60 s, delivering enhanced rate performances and cycling stability at high current density, because the surface modification of Cu/CuxO can effectively suppress the degeneration of the electrode material's crystal structure. To reduce the transport path length of Li ions, Sugiawati et al.187 successfully synthesized porous olivine-type LFP via RF magnetron sputtering and subsequent post-annealing treatments. When the post-annealing temperature increased to 700 °C, the porous olivine type-LFP had completely transformed from porous NASICON-type Li3Fe2(PO4)3, leading to enhanced electrochemical activity that was ∼9 times higher than that of the as-deposited thin film at C/10 rate. Later, Lee et al.188 reported an olivine LiFe0.77Mn0.23PO4 thin-film by adopting a strategy of doping Mn ions into an LFP electrode; they found that the optimal Mn-doped olivine composition exhibits an improved discharge capacity of 45.7 μA h cm−2 μm−1 compared to that of the LFP electrode.
4. Magnetron sputtered materials for supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (SCs) stand out as another class of energy storage devices due to their advantages such as high power density, quick charge/discharge process, and long cycling lifetime.189–193 Numerous studies have demonstrated that the electrochemical performance of SCs mainly depends on the electrode materials. Due to the excellent adhesion, controllable composition, thickness, greatly improved ionic transport and electronic conductivity of materials prepared by magnetron sputtering technology,26 they are also widely regarded as electrode materials for SCs. In this section, we summarize the recent research progress of magnetron sputtered materials as electrode materials in SCs, such as metals and metal oxides, metal nitrides, and metal sulfides, as well as their electrochemical performances for SCs (Table 2). Furthermore, some effective strategies for constructing high-performance electrode materials for SCs are highlighted.
Table 2 Electrochemical performances of magnetron sputtered electrode materials for SCs




Electrode materials
Coating
Substrate
Electrochemical performances
Reference




Ag2O thin films
Ag2O
Microscope glass slides and stainless-steel
650 F g−1, 2 mV s−1, ionic electrolyte

202



Cu2O thin films
Cu2O
Stainless steel
908 F g−1, 0.5 mA cm−2, phosphate-buffered solution

249



Cu/Cu2O/cellulose
Cu
Cellulose paper
238 mF cm−2 (915 F g−1), 1 mA cm−2 (3.8 A g−1), 1 M KOH

207



MnO1.9 thin films
MnO1.9
Copper
50.2 mF cm−2, 0.1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M Na2SO4

208



α-MnO2 nanorod forests
MnO2
High thermal conductivity copper
346 F g−1, 0.71 A g−1, 1 M Na2SO4

209



MnO2 thin films
MnO2
Graphite foil
344 F g−1,100 mV s−1, MnO2, 0.5 M LiCl

210



MnO2 rods
MnO2
Aluminium foil
796 F g−1, 2 mV s−1, 0.5 M Na2SO4

211



NiO nanopyramids
NiO
Stainless steel
325 F g−1, 0.4 mA cm−2, 1 M KOH

213



VO2 nanorods
VO2
Indium tin oxide-coated glass
∼486 mF cm−2, 10 mV s−1, 0.1 M NaOH

214



V2O5 thin films
V2O5
Silicon
960 mF cm−2, 1 mA cm−2, 1 M Li2SO4

215



α-MoO3 nanosheets
α-MoO3
Carbon cloth
240 F g−1, 1.5 mA cm−2, 1 M Na2SO4

216



ZnO/MnO2
ZnO
Fluorine-doped indium tin oxide
204 μF cm−2, 1 V s−1, LiCl/PVA gel electrolyte

219



TiO2/RuO2/SnO2
SnO2
Tantalum
692 F g−1, 50 mV s−1, 0.5 M Na2SO4

220



TiN films
TiN
Si(100) wafer
146.4 F cm−3, 0.5 M K2SO4

250



3D Si@Ti@TiN thin films
Ti/TiN
Silicon arrays
43.8 mF cm−2, 1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M K2SO4

227



ZnONR/Ti/TiN
Ti/TiN
Polyethylene terephthalate
1.24 mF cm−2, 5 mV s−1, sol–gel electrolyte

228



VN thin films
VN
Silicon wafer
1.2 F cm−2, 5 mV s−1, 1 M KOH

230



CrN films
CrN
Silicon
35.4 mF cm−2, 1.2 mA cm−2, 0.5 M H2SO4

233



3D nanorhombus Ni3N
Ni3N
Silicon (100)
319.5 mF cm−2, 10 mV s−1, 3 M KOH

240



W2N thin films
W2N
Stainless steel
163 F g−1, 0.5 mA cm−2, 1 M H2SO4

251



Mo2N thin films
Mo2N
Polycrystalline Ti
55 mF cm−2 (722 F cm−3), 5 mV s−1, 1 M Li2SO4

237



Cu doped Mo3N2 thin films
Mo3N2
Stainless steel glass and silicon (1 0 0)
619.5 F cm−3, 5 mV s−1, 1 M KOH

238



Mn3N2 thin films
Mn3N2
Silicon wafer
118 mF cm−2, 10 mV s−1, 1 M KOH

239



NbN thin films
NbN
Silicon (1 0 0)
707.1 F cm−3, 1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M H2SO4

241



HfN films
HfN
—
5.6 mF cm−2, 1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M Na2SO4

252



RuN thin films
RuN
Stainless steel, glass and silicon
37 F g−1, 200 mV s−1, 1 M KOH

253



MoS2 nanoworms
MoS2
Copper foil
589 F g−1, 5 mV s−1, 1 M Na2SO4

246



TiC-CDC films
TiC
Silicon or Si/SiO2 wafers
350 F cm−3/103 mF cm−2, 5 mV s−1, 1 M H2SO4

248



Graphene/Co3O4 nanowires
Graphite
Co3O4/Ni foam
0.67 F cm−2 (2030 F g−1), 1 mA cm−2, 6 M KOH

254



Graphene/VN films
VN
Graphene hydrogel
236.5 F g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 6 M KOH

233





4.1 Metals and metal oxides
There has been fast growing development of magnetron sputtered metals and metal oxides as pseudocapacitive electrode materials for SCs in recent years.194,195 Among all these sputtered materials, RuO2 is recognized as a superior SC material because of its remarkably high specific capacitance and reversible redox features. In 2004, RuO2 thin films were prepared by magnetron sputtering at different temperatures and cyclic voltammetry has shown that, despite the high physical density of RuO2 films, compared with the physical density of those obtained by thermochemical methods, they exhibit large charge-storage capacities.196 In addition, with large surface area, excellent electrical conductivity and good mechanical properties, graphene can be used as a backbone to support active materials like metal oxides to realize higher energy and power densities. By using a solution-free and low-cost magnetron sputtering technique, ultrafine RuO2 nanoparticles were uniformly dispersed on the surface of vertically aligned few layered graphene nanoflakes to form a nanoparticle-adhering-nanoflake architecture.197 Owing to the synergistic effect between the conductive graphene backbone and active RuO2 nanoparticles, the graphene/RuO2 electrode reveals a specific capacitance of 650 F g−1 at 0.5 V s−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, which is much higher than that of the bare RuO2 film (320 F g−1) and pristine graphene nanoflakes (6 F g−1). The significant enhancement could be attributed to the synergistic effect between the conductive graphene backbone and active RuO2 nanoparticles. In another study, RuO2 with controllable loading was also coated on vertical graphene via magnetron sputtering to form a three-dimensional porous structure.198 The symmetric SC based on the resultant graphene/RuO2 nanocomposites is able to deliver a capacitance of 15.3 mF cm−2 at 100 mV s−1 in PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte. In Li's work, graphene/RuOx composites with sputtered RuOx coated on individual graphene nanowall nanoflakes were prepared by chemical vapor deposition followed by magnetron sputtering.199 The micro-SC based on the hierarchical electrode exhibits a reasonable capacitance of 116 mF cm−2 at 0.22 mA cm−2 in H3PO4/PVA electrolyte.
With superior conductivity and admirable capacitive behaviour, silver because of its oxidation state is a promising material for SC applications. A better understanding of the wettability of silver oxide thin films, especially wettability of the films in contact with different types of electrolytes, is crucial for their superior performances when used as electrode materials for SC applications. Mirzaeian et al.200 reported the preparation of silver oxide thin films via magnetron sputtering with different oxygen flow rates and deposition power. It was found that silver oxide films with improved wettability toward water can be produced at higher oxygen flow rates because electrons in polar water molecules gathered around the oxides at higher oxidation states. Oje et al.201 prepared Ag and Ag2O thin films with different sputtering power (250, 300, 350 W) and found that by using higher sputtering power, better wettability and a pronounced pore structure of the Ag and Ag2O samples can be obtained. As a result, in 0.5 M NaCl electrolyte, both Ag and Ag2O thin film electrodes deposited at 350 W exhibit higher capacitances of 240.52 F g−1 and 275.50 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 due to the better penetration and interaction of the electrodes with the electrolyte. In addition, by switching to 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide ionic electrolyte, at the same scan rate and sputtering power (350 W), much higher specific capacitances (431 F g−1, 650 F g−1) were also obtained by Oje et al.202,203 for the prepared Ag and Ag2O thin film electrodes, respectively.
Due to the high cost of Ru and Ag, some traditional metal oxides have attracted widespread attention as electrode materials for SCs. For example, single-phase cubic Cu2O and monoclinic CuO films were fabricated by a magnetron sputtering technique via controlling the oxygen flow rate, and they showed specific capacitances of 215 and 272 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 in 6 M KOH, respectively.204 Similarly, by varying the O2/Ar ratio from 1:25 to 1:1 during the magnetron sputtering process, copper oxide films with different phases (Cu2O, Cu4O3 and CuO) can be obtained.205 The films prepared at an O2/Ar ratio of 1:11 with the Cu2O phase and high surface roughness provide a specific capacitance of 357 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2. Furthermore, Durai et al.206 prepared Mn doped CuO films by magnetron co-deposition, in which the RF power for the copper and magnetron targets was fixed at 80 W and 20 W, respectively. With smaller crystallites and a reduced roughness, the prepared Mn doped CuO film electrodes show a capacitance of 87 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, which is nearly 2 times higher than that of their undoped counterparts. In Wan's work, Cu arrays were deposited on a cellulose fiber framework via magnetron sputtering, and the as-prepared Cu/cellulose was then converted to Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrids with a forest-like structure through an electro-oxidation process (Fig. 12a).207 The CV profiles of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrids are distinct from the electric double-layer capacitance, which is attributed to the faradaic redox reactions of Cu(I)/Cu(II) transition (Fig. 12b). Based on the galvanostatic charge–discharge curves, the resulting film electrode displays a high specific capacitance of 915 F g−1 (238 mF cm−2) at 3.8 A g−1 (1 mA cm−2) (Fig. 12c). Besides, an excellent cycling durability (91.7% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles) is achieved (Fig. 12d). Furthermore, the energy density reached 53.7–28.9 W h kg−1 at power densities ranging from 1.25 to 40 kW kg−1 (Fig. 12e). As shown in Fig. 12f, a novel symmetric SC device also exhibits promising specific capacitance (409 F g−1), specific energy (24 W h kg−1 at 0.625 kW kg−1) and cycling durability (90.2% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles). Such remarkable performance is mainly attributed to the following merits: (i) the hierarchical Cu2O branches/Cu arrays with a forest-like structure significantly maximize the electrochemically active sites for the reversible redox reactions; (ii) the highly conductive Cu rod arrays provide electron “superhighways” for charge storage and delivery; (iii) the generated Cu2O branches have a high theoretical capacitance of 2075 F g−1; (iv) the porous cellulose framework with good wettability not only serves as an electrolyte storage unit to facilitate ion transport but also provides a spatial isolation and lateral confinement for Cu2O/Cu arrays.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode; (b) CV curves of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode at various scan rates; (c) GCD curves of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode at various current densities; (d) cycling performance of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode measured at a current density of 16 mA cm−2; (e) Ragone plot of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode; (f) schematic diagram of the assembled Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper-based symmetric SC device. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
Manganese oxides with a theoretical capacitance of ∼1370 F g−1 have become a research hotspot as a potential SC electrode material. By using magnetron sputtering with manganese as the target, an amorphous MnO1.9 thin film was prepared and it achieved a reasonable capacitance of 50.2 mF cm−2 at 0.1 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte.208 Kumar et al.209 synthesized porous a-MnO2 nanorods with a smooth and compact surface by a magnetron sputtering technique, revealing a capacitance of 346 F g−1 at 0.71 A g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4. A maximum energy density of 38.92 W h kg−1 and power density of 3.59 kW kg−1 were also achieved. Moreover, MnO2 thin films prepared under different sputtering conditions were tested as SC electrodes in 0.5 M LiCl electrolyte.210 A capacitance of 344 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1 was obtained for the MnO2 electrode with optimum sputtering pressure, power, and time and volume flow rate of oxygen (20 mTorr, 60 W, 60 min, 10 sccm). In another study, a Ag nanolayer and α-MnO2 nanorods were successively deposited on a porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) insulator as a current collector by magnetron sputtering.211 With fast charge transfer and ionic diffusion, the specific capacitance at 2 mV s−1 was found to be 796 F g−1 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte for MnO2/Ag/AAO electrodes. Furthermore, reasonable energy and power densities (26.4 W h kg−1, 36 kW kg−1) were also achieved by constructing a symmetric SC based on the MnO2/Ag/AAO electrodes.
Lu et al.212 varied the oxygen partial flow (5% and 100%) in a mixture of O2 and Ar gases at a fixed pressure (1.33 Pa) during the magnetron sputtering process to prepare both crystalline and amorphous NiO films. It was found that the specific capacitances obtained from the surfaces of amorphous and crystalline NiO films are the same, while the bulk contributions of amorphous NiO films can be six times larger than that of crystalline NiO films at the same scan rate. Kumar et al.213 also prepared sputtered NiO films, which directly served as electrodes without addition of any binder and reveal a specific capacitance of 325 F g−1 at 0.4 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH electrolyte.
Vanadium oxide has been considered as a promising material because of its broad oxidation states, natural abundance and high theoretical capacitance. Recently, monoclinic VO2 films were prepared by magnetron sputtering and revealed a specific capacitance of ∼486 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1.214 V2O5 with a higher oxidation state of vanadium offers the possibilities of storing more than one electron per formula unit; V2O5 films were prepared via magnetron sputtering and demonstrated pseudocapacitive behavior with a specific capacitance of 960 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 when used as SC electrodes.215
MoO3 nanosheets were also prepared by magnetron sputtering, which could provide a capacitance of 240 F g−1 at 1.5 mA cm−2 along with 78.8% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles at 2.5 mA cm−2.216 Kim et al.217 investigated the electrochemical and structural properties of sputtered Co3O4 film electrodes in all-solid-state thin-film SCs and found that the microstructure and carrier mobility of the Co3O4 electrodes depended on the gas flow ratio of O2/(Ar + O2).
In comparison with unitary metal oxides, the combination of different metal oxides, forming composites with designed structures (porous, core–shell, etc.), can lower charge transfer resistance, and improve electron transport and ion diffusion. In recent years, considerable attempts on designing composites composed of different metal oxides for SC applications have been made. For instance, RuO2/MnO2 core–shell nanorods were prepared via magnetron sputtering, followed by electroplating treatment for the growth of active MnO2 coating.218 The resultant RuO2/MnO2 composite electrode with an excellent match of charge storage and charge transport reveals a high capacitance of 556 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in Na2SO4 electrolyte. In Borysiewicz's work, a nanoporous ZnO film skeleton was prepared by magnetron sputtering and then decorated with MnO2 nanoparticles via water-based solutions.219 When tested in symmetric transparent SCs, the resultant ZnO/MnO2 composite electrode could give a capacitance of 204 μF cm−2 at 1 V s−1 in LiCl/PVA gel electrolyte. In Li's work, a sandwiched framework composed of a TiO2-doped RuO2 activated layer, SnO2 modified layer and tantalum substrate was fabricated by ball milling, sol–gel process and magnetron sputtering.220 In 0.5 M Na2SO4 electrolyte, the prepared ternary TiO2-doped RuO2/SnO2 composites (15 wt% TiO2) reveal a reasonable capacitance of 692 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1.
4.2 Metal nitrides
Transition metal nitrides (TMNs) with versatile chemistry have expanded rapidly in various domains (electronics, drilling equipment, and photo-, electro- and chemical catalysis).221–223 As another pseudocapacitive material, TMNs have outstanding electronic conductivity with respect to metal oxides. Besides, they show high chemical resistance against corrosion, which made them quite competitive materials for high-performance SCs.224,225
In Achour's work, the effect of nitrogen doping level in the TiN film surface on its capacitance was demonstrated by using the sputtered TiN films as electrodes for SCs.226 In detail, the nitrogen doping level of the resultant TiN film gradually increased when the annealing temperature increased from 400 to 550 °C, leading to a three-fold increase in the areal capacitance (up to 8.2 mF cm−2 in K2SO4 electrolyte). In another study, Ti/TiN thin films were deposited onto Si arrays through a magnetron sputtering process.227 The resultant 3D binder-free Si@Ti@TiN thin film array electrode provides a high specific capacitance of 43.8 mF cm−2 at 1.0 mA cm−2. Moreover, the corresponding symmetric SC device is able to achieve a reasonable energy density of 20.5 mW h cm−3 at 0.86 W cm−3. Flexible micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) as potential power sources are essential for miniaturization of electronic devices. Wang et al.228 utilized a magnetron sputtering technique to deposit Ti and TiN layers on ZnO nanorods to form ZnO nanorod/Ti/TiN core–shell nanostructures (Fig. 13a and b). The MSC based on the ZnO nanorod/Ti/TiN core–shell nanostructures reveals a capacitance of 1.24 mF cm−2 at 5 mV s−1 in sol–gel electrolyte, which is 8 times higher than that of the ZnO nanorod-based MSC counterpart (Fig. 13c). The MSC also exhibits good cyclability, retaining 98% of the initial value after 5000 cycles (Fig. 13d). Furthermore, the energy density and power density of the MSC are greatly increased to 432 W kg−1 and 0.24 W h kg−1, respectively (Fig. 13e). The enhanced performance is mainly ascribed to following aspects: (i) the Ti interlayer endows the core–shell nanostructure with fast electron transfer and a decreased barrier; (ii) TiN films elevate the overall electronic conductivity and offer a short ion diffusion pathway.
 Fig. 13  (a) Low-temperature-operated fabrication process for the flexible ZnO NR/Ti/TiN micro-SC; (b) TEM images for the ZnO NR/Ti/TiN core–shell structure; (c) areal specific capacitance curves comparing the ZnO NR/Ti/TiN core–shell based MSC to ZnO NR-based and ZnO seed layer/Ti/TiN-based devices; (d) capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency of the MSC against number of cycles at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2; inset: the charge/discharge curve as a function of time for the last ten cycles; (e) Ragone plots comparing the ZnO NR/Ti/TiN core–shell based MSC to ZnO NR-based and ZnO seed layer/Ti/TiN-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 
Eustache et al.229 reported an asymmetric device based on sputtered VN film as a negative electrode and NiO as a positive electrode in 2013, which was able to offer a cell voltage of up to 1.8 V and a power density of 40 mW cm−2 in 1 M KOH electrolyte. Through fine-tuning of the sputtering deposition parameters, Robert et al.230 increased the porosity of the VN films, reached a fine trade-off between electronic conductivity and the surface capacitance value, and thus enhanced their electrochemical performances. In this research, deposition temperature and pressure were shown to be key factors to tune the inter- and intra-column porosities. The optimized VN thin film electrode exhibits a capacitance of 220 mF cm−2. Also, symmetrical VN/VN micro-supercapacitors display an energy density of 2 μW h cm−2 at a power density of 10 mW cm−2. Very recently, the charge storage mechanism in VN films was investigated with advanced characterization techniques.231 It was found that the amorphous mixed-valence vanadium oxide shell located at the edge of each column is the redox-active center, while the sputtered VN film acts as a conductive scaffold (Fig. 14a). The unique structure greatly improved charge transfer as well as electron transport, contributing to outstanding electrochemical performances with both high areal (1.2 F cm−2) and volumetric capacitances (4700 F cm−3), as well as promising capacitance retention (50000 cycles). The VN system is a promising material for SC applications due to its excellent electrical conductivity and chemical durability, rapid faradaic redox response and high theoretical capacity. In Durai's work, Cr doped VN thin films were prepared via magnetron co-sputtering to serve as electrode materials for SCs.232 With a uniform distribution of Cr (∼5.71 at%), V and N in the Cr doped VN films, the films display a capacitance of 190 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1, which is 7 times higher than that of undoped VN films. Recently, Li's group reported an SC electrode composed of VN and graphene aerogel (GA).233 GA treated through magnetron sputtering was served as a three-dimensional conductive matrix with numerous channels, large surface area and good mechanical graphene/VN film electrode. The prepared graphene/VN exhibits a capacitance of 236.5 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which is about 4 times higher than that of pristine GA.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the charge storage process. Reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the porous CrN thin films; (c) areal specific capacitance versus current density of the CrN and porous CrN thin film electrodes; (d) Ragone plot. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Generally, the preparation of porous metal nitrides is less common and more difficult compared with metal oxides. Wei et al.234 prepared porous CrN films by selectively etching Cu foil, forming CrCuN thin films (Fig. 14b). The resultant CrN thin film electrodes exhibit a high capacitance of 31.3 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 due to the sufficient active sites and electrolyte diffusion. Furthermore, an energy density of 14.4 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 0.3 W cm−3 is achieved for the CrN-based symmetric SC (Fig. 14c and d). Haye et al.235 utilized bipolar magnetron sputtering at the glancing angle and explored four tilt angles of 0, 45, 60 and 75° to enhance the porosity of CrN films. A high areal capacitance of 35.4 mF cm−2 at 1.2 mA cm−2 is obtained for the sample deposited at 45° due to an open mesoporous network. Apart from the metal nitrides mentioned above, some other metal nitrides prepared via magnetron sputtering such as W2N, Mo2N and NbN have also been used as electrodes for SC applications. Ouendi et al.236 demonstrated the sputtering deposition of W2N films onto a silicon wafer, and a high areal capacitance of 550 mF cm−2 was obtained for the prepared W2N films with a thickness of 7.9 μm. Chen et al.237 prepared Mo2N thin films at an optimum deposition temperature of 400 °C and N2 to Ar–N2 gas mixture ratio of 0.35, and they exhibited a specific capacitance of 55 mF cm−2 (722 F cm−3) at 5 mV s−1 in 1 M Li2SO4 electrolyte. In addition, Cu doped Mo3N2 films with a needle/cone shaped microstructure were also prepared as SC electrode materials and exhibited a capacitance of 619.5 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1, which is 3.57 times higher than that of undoped Mo3N2 films.238 In another study, Mn3N2 thin films with a pyramid-like surface morphology were prepared and tested as electrode materials in different electrolytes (KOH, KCl, Na2SO4).239 In 1 M KOH electrolyte, the Mn3N2 electrodes exhibit a capacitance of 118 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1 and excellent capacitance retention of 98.5% after 4000 cycles, which are much higher than those of KCl (68 mF cm−2, 89%) and Na2SO4 (27 mF cm−2, 83%). Ni3N thin films were fabricated by Prasad et al.240 and revealed a capacitance of 319.5 mF cm−2 at 10 mV s−1. NbN thin films were also synthesized by reactive DC magnetron sputtering, and showed a volumetric capacitance of 707.1 F cm−3 with a capacitance retention of 92.2% after 20000 cycles.241
Unlike metal oxides with many preparation routes, the synthesis of nitride chemistry progressed slowly for most of the twentieth century due to the great strength of nitrogen's triple bond.242 Magnetron sputtering as an effective technology can realize excellent adhesion, controlled thickness and chemical stoichiometry of the prepared nitride thin films. For instance, TiVN thin films with different Ti/V ratios were fabricated and tested as SC electrodes.243 The sample with a Ti/V ratio close to 1.1 shows a capacitance of 15 mF cm−2 at 2 mV s−1 with nearly no decay after 10000 cycles due to the synergistic effect of two types metal nitrides. In another study, sputtered TiVN films were also prepared and they showed a capacitance of 69.6 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 when serving as an SC electrode.244
4.3 Other metal compounds
MoS2 possesses an intriguing sheet-like structure and multiple oxidation states in the Mo atom, which made it a promising material for SCs. In 2015, Choudhary et al.245 prepared MoS2 films with open pores on the upper layer through a one-step magnetron sputtering process and used the MoS2 films as an SC electrode for the first time. The prepared MoS2 with a large surface area shows a capacitance of 33 mF cm−2 at 25.47 mA cm−2 with a capacitance retention of 97% after 5000 cycles. In another study, sputtered MoS2 with a worm like structure was also fabricated via the sputtering process and tested as a binder-free electrode, which provided a reasonable capacitance of 589 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1.246
Apart from metal sulfides, sputtering methods are widely used to fabricate metal carbide-derived carbon (CDC) electrodes for SCs.247,248 For example, Lethien et al.248 demonstrated a fine-tuning fabrication approach for preparing a sputtered TiC layer acting as a precursor for CDC electrodes of MSCs. It was found that the high deposition temperature of the TiC layers, the high mobility of ad-atoms, and high deposition pressure lead to low stress of TiC films. Moreover, after the partial chlorination of the sputtered TiC layer, a porous nanostructure of the derived carbon material and a stronger adhesion onto the silicon wafer substrate can also be obtained. As a result, due to the diffusion process of ad-atoms and ion peening effect, when the optimal sputtering deposition was performed at 750 °C and 10−2 mbar, thick, stress-free and highly conductive TiC-CDC electrodes (CDC thickness of 3.2 μm) can be obtained and reveal a volumetric capacitance of 350 F cm−3 (areal capacitance of 103 mF cm−2) at 5 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
Magnetron sputtering technology is a prospective approach to fabricate electrode materials for EES. In this review, we discussed state-of-the-art sputtered nanostructures for EES. First, we highlighted magnetron sputtering as a preparation/modification strategy for preparing electrode materials for LIBs and SIBs. Furthermore, sputtered metals, metal oxides, and metal nitrides as electrode materials were discussed for SCs. Despite the fact that substantial achievements have been made in sputter-based electrode materials so far, several points and opportunities still need to be explored.
(i) In practical application, adhesion strength between the thin film and substrate, which is determined by the properties of the active and support materials, plays a critical role in the cycling durability of electrode materials for EES. The low adhesion strength between the thin film and substrate makes the active material fall off, thus resulting in poor stability. Hence, more attention should be concentrated on the choice of both thin film and substrate as well as introduction of an intermediate layer for improving their interaction, thus leading to impressive cycling performance.
(ii) As an EES electrode material, 3D arrays of nanowires/nanosheets have obvious advantages:255–258 (1) the open spaces between the nanowires or nanosheets allow for enhanced diffusion of electrolyte and more efficient utilization of electroactive sites; (2) the binder-free feature not only leads to improved conductivity, but effectively avoids agglomeration of active materials. More future studies should focus on template-directed fabrication of 3D nanotube arrays using magnetron sputtering to enhance the electrochemical properties.
(iii) High electronic conductivity greatly benefits the electrochemical applications of electrode materials. Manipulating the electronic structure of a material is a common strategy to enhance the conductivity. Defect engineering and heteroatom doping borrowed from electrocatalyst design259 can be considered for effective post-modification of magnetron sputtered EES materials.
(iv) As a simple technique for direct in situ growth of an electrode material on a conductive current-collector, magnetron sputtering can enable intimate contact, good mechanical adhesion and excellent electrical connection between the material and substrate, leading to enhanced electron transport and high structural robustness. Thus, this technology can be adopted to design and develop flexible EES devices to meet the growing demand for portable and wearable devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1833124 and 21876117).
References
A. S. Aricò, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 Search PubMed .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621–638 Search PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 Search PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2012, 334, 917–918 Search PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 Search PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 Search PubMed .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11700–11721 Search PubMed .
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, eaan8285 Search PubMed .
L. Peng, Z. Fang, Y. Zhu, C. Yan and G. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702179 Search PubMed .
J. Ni and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600278 Search PubMed .
M. Mladenov, R. Stoyanova, E. Zhecheva and S. Vassilev, Electron. Commun., 2001, 3, 410–416 Search PubMed .
D. Gu and F. Schuth, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 313–344 Search PubMed .
L. Cheng, J. Yan, G. N. Zhu, J. Y. Luo, C. X. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 595–602 Search PubMed .
K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi, G. Rydzek, Q. Ji and J. P. Hill, Chem. Lett., 2014, 45, 36–68 Search PubMed .
D. S. Choi, C. Kim, J. Lim, S. H. Cho, G. Y. Lee, H. J. Lee, J. W. Choi, H. Kim, I. D. Kim and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805023 Search PubMed .
J. Dendooven, R. K. Ramachandran, E. Solano, M. Kurttepeli, L. Geerts, G. Heremans, J. Ronge, M. M. Minjauw, T. Dobbelaere, K. Devloo-Casier, J. A. Martens, A. Vantomme, S. Bals, G. Portale, A. Coati and C. Detavernier, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1074 Search PubMed .
C. Huang, A. Kim, D. J. Chung, E. Park, N. P. Young, K. Jurkschat, H. Kim and P. S. Grant, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15624–15633 Search PubMed .
M. Wu, X. Li, Q. Zhou, H. Ming, J. Adkins and J. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 144–150 Search PubMed .
X. Niu, S. P. Stagon, H. Huang, J. K. Baldwin and A. Misra, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 136102 Search PubMed .
X. Wang and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1889–1904 Search PubMed .
T. Zerrin, M. Kurban, M. M. Dickson, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1515–1529 Search PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Jiang, X. Yao, Y. Leng, L. Wang and Q. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26880–26890 Search PubMed .
J. A. Stewart and R. Dingreville, Acta Mater., 2020, 188, 181–191 Search PubMed .
S. Swann, Phys. Technol., 1988, 19, 67–75 Search PubMed .
G. Bräuer, B. Szyszka, M. Vergöhl and R. Bandorf, Vacuum, 2010, 84, 1354–1359 Search PubMed .
S. Oh, Y. S. Park, P. J. Ko and N. H. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 6213–6219 Search PubMed .
T. Song, H. Cheng, H. Choi, J.-H. Lee, H. Han, D. H. Lee, D. S. Yoo, M. S. Kwon, J. M Choi, S. G. Doo, H. Chang, J. Xiao, Y. Huang, W. Park, Y. C. Chung, H. Kim, J. A. Ronger and U. Paik, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 303–309 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, J. N. Culver and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3627–3634 Search PubMed .
K. Sarakinos, J. Alami and S. Konstantinidis, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 1661–1684 Search PubMed .
X. Q. Tan, J. Y. Liu, J. R. Niu, J. Y. Liu and J. Y. Tian, Materials, 2018, 11, 1400–1413 Search PubMed .
A. Palmero and N. Martin, Coatings, 2020, 10, 419 Search PubMed .
O. Kylián, A. Shelemin, P. Sola, P. Pleskunov and H. Biederman, Materials, 2019, 12, 2366 Search PubMed .
A. Barranco, A. Borras, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe and A. Palmero, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 76, 59–153 Search PubMed .
O. K. Alexeeva and V. N. Fateev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 3373–3386 Search PubMed .
M. Qadir, Y. Li and C. Wen, Acta Biomater., 2019, 89, 14–32 Search PubMed .
L. Z. Zhao, Q. L. Niu, M. He, S. C. Su, Q. Ru and X. H. Hou, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 516–517, 1706–1709 Search PubMed .
J. Lin, W. D. Sproul, J. J. Moore, Z. Wu, S. Lee, R. Chistyakov and B. Abraham, JOM, 2011, 63, 48–58 Search PubMed .
S. Schiller, K. Goedicke, J. Reschke, V. Kirchhoff and F. Milde, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1993, 61, 331–337 Search PubMed .
J. Ding, X. Yin, L. Fang, X. Meng and A. Yin, Materials, 2018, 11, 1400 Search PubMed .
Y. I. Chen, K. T. Liu, F. B. Wu and J. G. Duh, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 2207–2212 Search PubMed .
G. Y. Sung, K. Y. Kang and S. C. Park, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1991, 74, 437–439 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, D. Jiang, C. Shan, Z. Zhang, B. Yao, D. Zhao and D. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2428–2430 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Wei, J. Wang, K. Jiang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 818–823 Search PubMed .
S. W. Chen, X. Cao, N. Wang, L. Ma, H. R. Zhu, M. Willander, Y. Jie and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601255 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Choi, H. K. Kim, H. W. Koo, T. W. Kim and S. N. Lee, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 2011, 29, 061502 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, Y. Xiao, L. Wang and Y. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6657–6662 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Zhang, F. Yin, Z. Bakenov, N. Umirov, M. Jin and G. Zhou, Ionics, 2017, 24, 373–378 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, N. Du, J. Wang, H. Zhang and D. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 577, 564–568 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Zhao, M. Xia, R. Qi, M. Liu, J. Nie, Z. L. Wang and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806400 Search PubMed .
J. Li, C. Yue, Y. Yu, Y. S. Chui, J. Yin, Z. Wu, C. Wang, Y. Zang, W. Lin, J. Li, S. Wu and Q. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14344–14349 Search PubMed .
X. H. Huang, J. B. Wu, Y. Q. Cao, P. Zhang, Y. Lin and R. Q. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 203, 213–220 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Gao, J. Niu, W. Ma, Y. Shi, M. Song, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11678–11688 Search PubMed .
A. Zhou, J. Xu, X. Dai, B. Yang, Y. Lu, L. Wang, C. Fan and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2016, 322, 10–16 Search PubMed .
X. Dai, A. Zhou, J. Xu, Y. Lu, L. Wang, C. Fan and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 120, 422–430 Search PubMed .
P. Ouyang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Z. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5056–5060 Search PubMed .
P. Ouyang, H. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 61, 9–15 Search PubMed .
P. Ouyang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Z. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 5056–5060 Search PubMed .
P. Ouyang, H. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 61, 9–15 Search PubMed .
M. Li, J. Li, K. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, D. Gosselink and P. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 659–666 Search PubMed .
H. Gao, X. Yan, J. Niu, Y. Zhang, M. Song, Y. Shi, W. Ma, J. Qin and Z. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124299 Search PubMed .
K. Kinoshita and K. Zaghib, J. Power Sources, 2002, 110, 416–423 Search PubMed .
R. Miyazaki, N. Ohta, T. Ohnishi, I. Sakaguchi and K. Takada, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 541–545 Search PubMed .
M. T. Demirkan, L. Trahey and T. Karabacak, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 52–61 Search PubMed .
A. Mukanova, A. Nurpeissova, A. Zharbossyn, S. S. Kim, M. Myronov and Z. Bakenov, Mater. Today, 2018, 5, 22759–22763 Search PubMed .
S. H. Moon, S. J. Kim, M. C. Kim, J. Y. So, J. E. Lee, Y. K. Shin, W. G. Bae and K. W. Park, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 223, 152–156 Search PubMed .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 Search PubMed .
V. Baranchugov, E. Markevich, E. Pollak, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 796–800 Search PubMed .
Y. Ren, S. Zhang, L. Zhang and X. He, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2020, 9, 1549–1558 Search PubMed .
J. B. Wu, X. H. Huang, Y. Q. Cao and R. Q. Guo, Mater. Lett., 2018, 216, 28–31 Search PubMed .
U. Tocoglu, O. Cevher, M. O. Guler and H. Akbulut, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 402–411 Search PubMed .
A. Mukanova, A. Nurpeissova, A. Urazbayev, S. S. Kim, M. Myronov and Z. Bakenov, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 800–806 Search PubMed .
M. A. Bruk, V. A. Bespalov, B. A. Loginov, V. B. Loginov, N. A. Degtyarev, N. A. Degtyarev, I. D. Zefirov, V. A. Kal’nov, A. V. Klochikhina, T. L. Kulova, Y. E. Roginskaya and A. V. Skundin, Inorg. Mater., 2008, 44, 1086–1090 Search PubMed .
M. K. Datta, J. Maranchi, S. J. Chung, R. Epur, K. Kadakia, P. Jampani and P. N. Kumta, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4717–4723 Search PubMed .
H. S. Sitinamaluwa, H. Li, K. C. Wasalathilake, A. Wolff, T. Tesfamichael, S. Zhang and C. Yan, Nano Mater. Sci., 2019, 1, 70–76 Search PubMed .
C. Lu, Y. Fan, H. Li, Y. Yang, B. K. Tay, E. Teo and Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2013, 63, 54–60 Search PubMed .
L. Tong, P. Wang, W. Fang, X. Guo, W. Bao, Y. Yang, S. Shen and F. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29242–29252 Search PubMed .
A. Reyes Jimenez, R. Klopsch, R. Wagner, U. C. Rodehorst, M. Kolek, R. Nolle, M. Winter and T. Placke, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4731–4744 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, N. Liao, H. Zhou and W. Xue, Acta Mater., 2019, 178, 173–178 Search PubMed .
X. Zhu, X. Jiang, X. Yao, Y. Leng, X. Xu, A. Peng, L. Wang and Q. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45726–45736 Search PubMed .
N. Takao, I. Tanaka and H. Adachi, Intermetallics, 1996, 4, 113–118 Search PubMed .
C. M. Hwang and J. W. Park, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, S439–S446 Search PubMed .
L. B. Chen, J. Y. Xie, H. C. Yu and T. H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 8149–8153 Search PubMed .
B. D. Polat, O. L. Eryilmaz and O. Keles, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 654, 363–370 Search PubMed .
G. Schmuelling, M. Winter and T. Placke, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20124–20133 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu, C. Yue, S. Sun, W. Lin, H. Su, B. Xu, J. Li, S. Wu, J. Li and J. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5884–5890 Search PubMed .
N. Bensalah, M. Matalkeh, N. K. Mustafa and H. Meraber, Phys. Status Solidi, 2020, 217, 1900414 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and X. Lu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3587–3599 Search PubMed .
C. M. Hwang, C. H. Lim, J. H. Yang and J. W. Park, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1061–1067 Search PubMed .
C. M. Hwang and J. W. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6737–6747 Search PubMed .
B. D. Karahan, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 823, 153644 Search PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Zheng, Z. Li, Y. Liu, H. Huang, Q. Wang and C. Dong, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 243, 122666 Search PubMed .
D. Larcher, S. Beattie, M. Morcrette, K. Edström, J. C. Jumas and J. M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3759–3772 Search PubMed .
S. J. Lee, H. Y. Lee, S.-H. Jeong, H. K. Baik and S. M. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 345–349 Search PubMed .
H. W. Yu, S. J. Hu, X. H. Hou, Q. Ru, L. Z. Zhao and W. S. Li, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2009, 610–613, 467–471 Search PubMed .
L. Wei, K. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 644, 742–749 Search PubMed .
R. Alcantara, I. Rodriguez and J. L. Tirado, Chemphyschem, 2008, 9, 1171–1177 Search PubMed .
P. P. Ferguson, A. D. W. Todd and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 25–31 Search PubMed .
P. P. Ferguson, A. D. W. Todd and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1041–1044 Search PubMed .
J. S. Thorne, J. R. Dahn, M. N. Obrovac and R. A. Dunlap, J. Power Sources, 2012, 216, 139–144 Search PubMed .
C. Y. Chou, M. Lee and G. S. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14843–14850 Search PubMed .
V. Sharma, K. Ghatak and D. Datta, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 14423–14434 Search PubMed .
L. Baggetto, J. K. Keum, J. F. Browning and G. M. Veith, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 41–44 Search PubMed .
C. M. Hwang and J. W. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 6590–6597 Search PubMed .
H. Wu, W. Liu, L. Zheng, D. Zhu, N. Du, C. Xiao, L. Su and L. Wang, ChemistryOpen, 2019, 8, 298–303 Search PubMed .
S. Fang, L. Shen, P. Nie, G. Xu, J. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 49, 2279–2285 Search PubMed .
L. Yue, H. Zhao, Z. Wu, J. Liang, S. Lu, G. Chen, S. Gao, B. Zhong, X. Guo and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11493–11510 Search PubMed .
L. Baggetto, E. Allcorn, A. Manthiram and G. M. Veith, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 168–171 Search PubMed .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444–11502 Search PubMed .
L. Baggetto, E. Allcorn, R. R. Unocic, A. Manthiram and G. M. Veith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11163–11169 Search PubMed .
W. P. Kalisvaart, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber and J. M. Buriak, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2205–2213 Search PubMed .
H. Xie, W. P. Kalisvaart, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber, D. Mitlin and J. M. Buriak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9661–9670 Search PubMed .
X. l. Huang, X. Zhao, Z. L. Wang, L. M. Wang and X. B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3764–3769 Search PubMed .
T. Li and X. Nie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16943–16946 Search PubMed .
M. N. Obrovac and V. L. Chevrier, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11444–11502 Search PubMed .
L. Luo, W. Xu, Z. Xia, Y. Fei, J. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Wei, H. Qiao and X. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 10826–10832 Search PubMed .
R. Kohler, H. Besser, M. Hagen, J. Ye, C. Ziebert, S. Ulrich, J. Proell and W. Pfleging, Microsyst. Technol., 2011, 17, 225–232 Search PubMed .
U. Toçoğlu, G. Hatipoğlu, M. Alaf, F. Kayış and H. Akbulut, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 389, 507–513 Search PubMed .
O. Cevher, U. Tocoglu and H. Akbulut, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 21429–21434 Search PubMed .
O. Cevher, M. O. Guler, U. Tocoglu and H. Akbulut, Int. J. Energy Res., 2014, 38, 499–508 Search PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Liu, L. Lu, J. Fang, H. Ni and Z. Ji, Appl. Phys. A, 2015, 120, 519–524 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Wang and Z. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 106258–106264 Search PubMed .
S. Park, K. S. Lee and Y. S. Yoon, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2016, 294, 139–144 Search PubMed .
P. Xu, G. Wang, J. Yan, Z. Zhang, M. Xu, S. Cai, X. Ruan and Z. Deng, Mater. Lett., 2017, 190, 56–59 Search PubMed .
C. Jiang, Y. Zhou, I. Honma, T. Kudo and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 514–518 Search PubMed .
G. N. Zhu, C. X. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A102 Search PubMed .
Z. Yu, G. Zhu, H. Xu and A. Yu, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 767–772 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Tsai, K. Z. Fung and C. T. Ni, ECS Trans., 2015, 68, 37–43 Search PubMed .
A. Lamberti, N. Garino, A. Sacco, S. Bianco, D. Manfredi and C. Gerbaldi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 102, 233–239 Search PubMed .
S. K. Das, S. Darmakolla and A. J. Bhattacharyya, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1600–1606 Search PubMed .
S. Aslan, M. O. Guler, O. Cevher and H. Akbulut, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 9248–9253 Search PubMed .
M. O. Guler, O. Cevher, T. Cetinkaya, U. Tocoglu and H. Akbulut, Energy Convers. Manage., 2013, 72, 111–116 Search PubMed .
M. O. Guler, T. Cetinkaya, M. Uysal and H. Akbulut, Int. J. Energy Res., 2015, 39, 172–180 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Mai, X. H. Xia, R. Chen, C. D. Gu, X. L. Wang and J. P. Tu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 67, 73–78 Search PubMed .
Y. Xia, B. Sun, S. Zhu, S. Mao, X. Li, B. Guo, Y. Zeng, H. Wang and Y. Zhao, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 269, 132–137 Search PubMed .
Z. Y. Ma, H. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Guo and Z. C. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 420, 196–204 Search PubMed .
Y. Jia, Z. Ma, Z. Li, Z. He, J. Shao and H. Zhang, Front. Mater. Sci., 2019, 13, 367–374 Search PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon, S. Grugeon, M. Morcrette, S. Laruelle, P. Rozier and P. Poizot, C. R. Chim., 2005, 8, 9–15 Search PubMed .
J. C. Park, J. Kim, H. Kwon and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 803–807 Search PubMed .
M. A. Dar, S. H. Nam, Y. S. Kim and W. B. Kim, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1719–1726 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Wang, W. Ma, C. Dong, G. Cheng and Z. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 88–98 Search PubMed .
S. Cheng, T. Shi, X. Tao, Y. Zhong, Y. Huang, J. Li, G. Liao and Z. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 212, 492–499 Search PubMed .
C. Tang, H. Zhang, D. Jiao, R. Hu and Z. Liu, Mater. Des., 2019, 162, 52–59 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Zhang, J. Qian, Y. Ma, Y. Li, W. Li, F. Wang, L. Li, F. Wu and R. Chen, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900252 Search PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, T. Yu, C. H. Sow, Z. X. Shen, C. T. Lim, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2792–2799 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Xia, J. Tu, Q. Xiong, Y. Yu, X. Wang and C. Gu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15056–15061 Search PubMed .
R. Perekrestov, A. Spesyvyi, J. Maixner, K. Mašek, O. Leiko, I. Khalakhan, J. Maňák, P. Kšírová, Z. Hubička and M. Čada, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 686, 137427 Search PubMed .
W. Li and Z. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2447–2452 Search PubMed .
A. I. Inamdar, H. S. Chavan, A. T. A. Ahmed, S. Cho, J. Kim, Y. Jo, S. M. Pawar, Y. Park, H. Kim and H. Im, Mater. Lett., 2018, 215, 233–237 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Zhang, P. Ouyang, W. Chen, Y. Wang and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4714–4721 Search PubMed .
M. D. Patel, E. Cha, N. Choudhary, C. Kang, W. Lee, J. Y. Hwang and W. Choi, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 495401 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Lai, F. Liu, L. Jiang and M. Jia, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900928 Search PubMed .
Q. Sun and Z. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 54, 403–409 Search PubMed .
B. Das, M. V. Reddy, P. Malar, T. Osipowicz, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1061–1068 Search PubMed .
Z. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Zeng, P. Li and H. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 159–165 Search PubMed .
J. Xie, N. Imanishi, T. Matsumura, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 362–370 Search PubMed .
B. Ketterer, H. Vasilchina, K. Seemann, S. Ulrich and C. Adelhelm, Int. J. Mater. Res., 2008, 99, 1171–1177 Search PubMed .
J. Xie, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 365–370 Search PubMed .
C. Ziebert, B. Ketterer, M. Rinke, C. Adelhelm, S. Ulrich, K. H. Zum Gahr, S. Indris and T. Schimmel, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, 1589–1594 Search PubMed .
S. Tintignac, R. Baddour-Hadjean, J. P. Pereira-Ramos and R. Salot, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 472–476 Search PubMed .
K. Sivajee-Ganesh, B. Purusottam-Reddy, O. M. Hussain, A. Mauger and C. M. Julien, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2016, 209, 30–36 Search PubMed .
K. Sivajee Ganesh, B. Purusottam Reddy, P. Jeevan Kumar and O. M. Hussain, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 828, 71–79 Search PubMed .
X. Dai, L. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang, A. Zhou and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15853–15859 Search PubMed .
X. Dai, A. Zhou, J. Xu, B. Yang, L. Wang and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 114–122 Search PubMed .
A. Zhou, Y. Lu, Q. Wang, J. Xu, W. Wang, X. Dai and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 346, 24–30 Search PubMed .
A. Zhou, X. Dai, Y. Lu, Q. Wang, M. Fu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34123–34131 Search PubMed .
H. HakanYudar, S. Pat, S. Özen, R. Mohammadigharehbagh, C. Musaoğlu, Ş. Korkmaz and Z. Pat, Vacuum, 2018, 152, 248–251 Search PubMed .
M. Yoon, S. Lee, D. Lee, J. Kim and J. Moon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 412, 537–544 Search PubMed .
J. Trask, A. Anapolsky, B. Cardozo, E. Januar, K. Kumar, M. Miller, R. Brown and R. Bhardwaj, J. Power Sources, 2017, 350, 56–64 Search PubMed .
J. Fischer, C. Adelhelm, T. Bergfeldt, K. Chang, C. Ziebert, H. Leiste, M. Stueber, S. Ulrich, D. Music and B. Hallstedt, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 528, 217–223 Search PubMed .
K. H. Prasad, S. Vinoth, A. Ratnakar, M. Venkateswarlu and N. Satyanarayana, Mater. Today, 2016, 3, 4046–4051 Search PubMed .
A. Akbulut, T. Cetinkaya, M. O. Guler and H. Akbulut, Acta Physiol. Pol., 2014, 125, 331–334 Search PubMed .
Y. Chae, J. K. Lee and W. Choi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 730, 20–25 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo, D. Xu and K. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16021–16029 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, F. Wu, J. Lu, R. Chen, L. Li and K. Amine, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10611–10622 Search PubMed .
F. Wu, G. Tan, J. Lu, R. Chen, L. Li and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1281–1287 Search PubMed .
S. H. Su, K. F. Chiu and H. J. Leu, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 572, 15–19 Search PubMed .
B. Qiu, J. Wang, Y. Xia, Z. Wei, S. Han and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9185–9193 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Lai, M. Xu, Z. A. Zhang, C. H. Gao, P. Wang and Z. Y. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 309, 20–26 Search PubMed .
H. Li, L. Peng, D. Wu, J. Wu, Y.-J. Zhu and X. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802930 Search PubMed .
J. Xie, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4631–4637 Search PubMed .
Y. S. Yu, C. Kim, D. A. Shapiro, M. Farmand, D. Qian, T. Tyliszczak, A. L. Kilcoyne, R. Celestre, S. Marchesini, J. Joseph, P. Denes, T. Warwick, F. C. Strobridge, C. P. Grey, H. Padmore, Y. S. Meng, R. Kostecki and J. Cabana, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4282–4288 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, S. Kim, K. B. Kim and J. W. Choi, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 225–231 Search PubMed .
G. Tan, F. Wu, L. Li, R. Chen and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6013–6021 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Yi, Z. Shen, L. Liu, H. Liu and X. Zhang, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1800634 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Peng, Y. Lin, J. Li, Z. Hong, G. Xu and Z. Huang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4652–4663 Search PubMed .
V. A. Sugiawati, F. Vacandio, C. Perrin-Pellegrino, A. Galeyeva, A. P. Kurbatov and T. Djenizian, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 11172 Search PubMed .
H. Lee, S. Kim, N. S. Parmar, J. H. Song, K. Y. Chung, K. B. Kim and J. W. Choi, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226713 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, R. Paul and L. Dai, Natl Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 453–489 Search PubMed .
N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 Search PubMed .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D. H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 Search PubMed .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, H. Zhao, L. Yue, G. Fan, T. Li, S. Lu, G. Chen, S. Gao, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16747–16789 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Sanger, A. Kumar, Y. Kumar and R. Chandra, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 1761–1769 Search PubMed .
G. Li, J. Li, T. Li and K. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 425, 39–43 Search PubMed .
G. Battaglin, V. Rigato, S. Zandolin, A. Benedetti, S. Ferro, L. Nanni and A. D. Battisti, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 946–952 Search PubMed .
N. Soin, S. S. Roy, S. K. Mitra, T. Thundat and J. A. McLaughlin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14944–14950 Search PubMed .
Z. J. Han, S. Pineda, A. T. Murdock, D. H. Seo, K. Ostrikov and A. Bendavid, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17293–17301 Search PubMed .
J. Li, M. Zhu, Z. An, Z. Wang, M. Toda and T. Ono, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 204–212 Search PubMed .
M. Mirzaeian, A. A. Ogwu, H. F. Jirandehi, S. Aidarova, Z. Ospanova and N. Tsendzughul, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 519, 223–230 Search PubMed .
A. I. Oje, A. A. Ogwu, M. Mirzaeian and N. Tsendzughul, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 829, 59–68 Search PubMed .
A. I. Oje, A. A. Ogwu, M. Mirzaeian, N. Tsendzughul and A. M. Oje, J. Sci. Adv. Mater. Devices, 2019, 4, 213–222 Search PubMed .
A. I. Oje, A. A. Ogwu, M. Mirzaeian, A. M. Oje and N. Tsendzughul, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 488, 142–150 Search PubMed .
S. M. Pawar, J. Kim, A. I. Inamdar, H. Woo, Y. Jo, B. S. Pawar, S. Cho, H. Kim and H. Im, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21310 Search PubMed .
B. Purusottam-Reddy, K. Sivajee-Ganesh, K. Jayanth-Babu, O. M. Hussain and C. M. Julien, Ionics, 2015, 21, 2319–2328 Search PubMed .
G. Durai, P. Kuppusami and K. Viswanathan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 2051–2058 Search PubMed .
C. Wan, Y. Jiao and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17267–17278 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Xie, J. Li and J. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 102–103, 30–32 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Sanger, A. Kumar, Y. Kumar and R. Chandra, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 712–720 Search PubMed .
C. C. Lin and P. Y. Lin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A753–A759 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Sanger, A. Kumar, Y. K. Mishra and R. Chandra, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 3885–3891 Search PubMed .
Q. Lu, Z. J. Mellinger, W. Wang, W. Li, Y. Chen, J. G. Chen and J. Q. Xiao, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1367–1370 Search PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Sanger, A. Kumar and R. Chandra, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 6080–6087 Search PubMed .
I. N. Reddy, A. Sreedhar, J. Shim and J. S. Gwag, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 835, 40–47 Search PubMed .
M. Dhananjaya, N. Guru Prakash, A. Lakshmi Narayana and O. M. Hussain, J. Electron. Mater., 2020, 49, 1922–1934 Search PubMed .
D. Murugesan, S. Prakash, N. Ponpandian, P. Manisankar and C. Viswanathan, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 569, 137–144 Search PubMed .
H. K. Kim, T. Y. Seong, J. H. Lim, W. Cho and Y. S. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 167–171 Search PubMed .
J. C. Chou, Y. L. Chen, M. H. Yang, Y. Z. Chen, C. C. Lai, H. T. Chiu, C. Y. Lee, Y. L. Chueh and J. Y. Gan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8753–8758 Search PubMed .
M. A. Borysiewicz, M. Ekielski, Z. Ogorzałek, M. Wzorek, J. Kaczmarski and T. Wojciechowski, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7577–7587 Search PubMed .
X. Li, F. Zheng, D. F. Zhou, Y. M. Luo, Y. F. Li and F. H. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 289, 292–310 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 Search PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, Y. Huang, W. Qiu, H. Yang, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 425–451 Search PubMed .
C. Hu, K. Guo, Y. Li, Z. Gu, J. Quan, S. Zhang and W. Zheng, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 688, 137339 Search PubMed .
R. S. Ningthoujam and N. S. Gajbhiye, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 70, 50–154 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhou, W. Guo and T. Li, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 21062–21076 Search PubMed .
A. Achour, M. Chaker, H. Achour, A. Arman, M. Islam, M. Mardani, M. Boujtita, L. L. Brizoual, M. A. Djouadi and T. Brousse, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 349–354 Search PubMed .
B. Wei, H. Liang, Z. Qi, D. Zhang, H. Shen, W. Hu and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1402–1405 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Sun, P. Song, C. Zhao, S. Kuang, H. Liu, D. Xiao, F. Hu and L. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 448, 227415 Search PubMed .
E. Eustache, R. Frappier, R. L. Porto, S. Bouhtiyya, J.-F. Pierson and T. Brousse, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 28, 104–106 Search PubMed .
K. Robert, C. Douard, A. Demortière, F. Blanchard, P. Roussel, T. Brousse and C. Lethien, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800036 Search PubMed .
K. Robert, D. Stiévenard, D. Deresmes, C. Douard, A. Iadecola, D. Troadec, P. Simon, N. Nuns, M. Marinova, M. Huvé, P. Roussel, T. Brousse and C. Lethien, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 949–957 Search PubMed .
G. Durai, P. Kuppusami, T. Maiyalagan, J. Theerthagiri, P. Vinoth Kumar and H. S. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 12643–12653 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, G. Xing, Y. N. Zhao, C. Yu, Q. Liu, C. Zhao and Y. Li, Mater. Lett., 2020, 261, 127085 Search PubMed .
B. Wei, G. Mei, H. Liang, Z. Qi, D. Zhang, H. Shen and Z. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 385, 39–44 Search PubMed .
E. Haye, A. Achour, A. Guerra, F. Moulaï, T. Hadjersi, R. Boukherroub, A. Panepinto, T. Brousse, J. J. Pireaux and S. Lucas, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 324, 134890 Search PubMed .
S. Ouendi, K. Robert, D. Stievenard, T. Brousse, P. Roussel and C. Lethien, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 243–252 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, C. Liu and Z. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 237–248 Search PubMed .
G. Durai, P. Kuppusami and J. Theerthagiri, Mater. Lett., 2018, 220, 201–204 Search PubMed .
G. Durai, P. Kuppusami, T. Maiyalagan, M. Ahila and P. V. kumar, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 17120–17127 Search PubMed .
S. Prasad, G. Durai, D. Devaraj, M. S. AlSalhi, J. Theerthagiri, P. Arunachalam, M. Gurulakshmi, M. Raghavender and P. Kuppusami, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 8828–8835 Search PubMed .
H. Shen, B. Wei, D. Zhang, Z. Qi and Z. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 229, 17–20 Search PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, W. Qiu, W. Wang, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1364–1387 Search PubMed .
A. Achour, R. Lucio-Porto, M. Chaker, A. Arman, A. Ahmadpourian, M. A. Soussou, M. Boujtita, L. L. Brizoual, M. A. Djouadi and T. Brousse, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 77, 40–43 Search PubMed .
V. V. Anusha Thampi, U. Nithiyanantham, A. K. Nanda Kumar, P. Martin, A. Bendavid and B. Subramanian, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 12457–12465 Search PubMed .
N. Choudhary, M. Patel, Y. H. Ho, N. B. Dahotre, W. Lee, J. Y. Hwang and W. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24049–24054 Search PubMed .
Neetika, A. Sanger, V. K. Malik and R. Chandra, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 11141–11149 Search PubMed .
P. Huang, C. Lethien, S. Pinaud, K. Brousse, R. Laloo, V. Turq, M. Respaud, A. Demortiere, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, B. Chaudret, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Science, 2016, 351, 691–695 Search PubMed .
M. Létiche, K. Brousse, A. Demortière, P. Huang, B. Daffos, S. Pinaud, M. Respaud, B. Chaudret, P. Roussel, L. Buchaillot, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and C. Lethien, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606813 Search PubMed .
B. Purusottam Reddy, K. Sivajee Ganesh and O. M. Hussain, Appl. Phys. A, 2016, 122, 128 Search PubMed .
A. Achour, R. L. Porto, M.-A. Soussou, M. Islam, M. Boujtita, K. A. Aissa, L. Le Brizoual, A. Djouadi and T. Brousse, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 525–532 Search PubMed .
R. Prakash, A. Kumar, A. Pandey and D. Kaur, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 10823–10832 Search PubMed .
Z. Gao, Z. Wu, S. Zhao, T. Zhang and Q. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2019, 235, 148–152 Search PubMed .
S. Bouhtiyya, R. Lucio Porto, B. Laïk, P. Boulet, F. Capon, J. P. Pereira-Ramos, T. Brousse and J. F. Pierson, Scr. Mater., 2013, 68, 659–662 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Ma, J. Yao, X. Li, Y. Sun, Z. Xiong and D. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 740, 174–179 Search PubMed .
C. Tang, R. Zhang, W. Lu, Z. Wang, D. Liu, S. Hao, G. Du, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 842–846 Search PubMed .
P. Jiang, Q. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Tian, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12855–12859 Search PubMed .
D. Sun, X. Zhu, B. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. Tang, H. Wang and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801197 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, K. Zhang, J. Yang, G. H. Lee, J. Shin, V. W. Lau and Y. M. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800283 Search PubMed .
X. Zhu, S. Mou, Q. Peng, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, G. Chen, S. Gao and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1545–1556 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Xuping Sun	Xuping Sun received his PhD degree from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. During 2006–2009, he carried out postdoctoral research at the University of Konstanz, University of Toronto, and Purdue University. In 2010, he started his independent research career as a full Professor at CIAC and then moved to Sichuan University in 2015. In 2018, he joined the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China where he founded the Research Center of Nanocatalysis & Sensing. He was recognized as a highly cited researcher (2018 & 2019) in both areas of chemistry and materials science by Clarivate Analytics. He has published over 470 papers with over 38000 total citations and an h-index of 103. His research mainly focuses on rational design of functional nanostructures toward applications in electrochemistry for energy conversion and storage, sensing, and environment.

 	Fig. 1  Brief description of the apparatus of magnetron sputtering and schematic illustration of the principle of magnetron sputtering. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

Copper-coated Si NWs	Cu	Stainless steel 304	LIBs: 2840 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1	
47

Si/a-C nanocomposites	Si and graphite	Cu foil	LIBs: 609.4 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	
80

3D Cu@Si@Cu	Cu and Si	Cu foil	LIBs: 569 mA h g−1 after 10000 cycles at 10C followed by 2000 cycles at 5C	
88

NiSi films	Ni and Si	Cu foil	LIBs: 881 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 300 cycles	
91

Sn–Al core–shell nanocomposite	Sn and Al	Cu foam	LIBs: 313 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles	
96

Ge/cyclized-PAN	Ge	Ni foam	LIBs: 700 mA h g−1 at 1C after 100 cycles	
106

Sb–Si alloys	Si and Sb	Si chips or 304 stainless steel	SIBs: 663 mA h g−1 after 140 cycles	
111

Sb films	Sb	Cu foil	SIBs: 612.7 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles	
58

Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheets	Sb	Stainless steel mesh	SIBs: 972.6 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
53

3D Cu@Mg@C	Mg and C	Cu foil	LIBs: ∼500 mA h g−1 after 4000 cycles even at 2C	
50

SnO2:Sb–MWCNT nanocomposites	SnO2:Sb	MWCNT buckypaper	LIBs: 753 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
120

3D NiO nanorods	NiO	Cu foil	LIBs: 500 mA h g−1 at 2C after 1000 cycles	
135

CuO nanosheets	CuO	Carbon cloth	LIBs: 448.9 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1	
142

Fe3O4–CNT nanocomposite	Fe3O4	Si wafer with super-aligned CNT arrays	LIBs: 1670 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
44

MoO2 thin films	MoO2	Cu foil	LIBs: 760 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
150

Amorphous Sb2S3	Sb2S3	Stainless steel fiber foil	LIBs: 585.4 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 250 cycles	
152

FeN thin films	FeN	Glass	LIBs: 1024 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2 A g−1	
155

ZnO-coated LiCoO2	ZnO	LiCoO2	LIBs: 155 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles	
163

Al2O3-doped ZnO coated LiCoO2	Al2O3 and ZnO	LiCoO2	LIBs: 173 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles	
164

TiO2 coated LiCoO2	TiO2	LiCoO2	LIBs: 160 mA h g−1 at 1C after 100 cycles	
165

Li0.28Co0.29Ni0.30Mn0.20O2 thin films	LiCo1/3Ni1/3Mn1/3O2	Stainless steel	LIBs: 138 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
176

ZnO coated 0.3Li2MnO3-0.7LiNi5/21Co5/21Mn11/21O2	ZnO	C/Al foil	LIBs: 256.7 mA h g−1 at 0.1C rate after 50 cycles	
177

ZnO coated LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2	ZnO	LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2	LIBs: 169 mA h g−1 after 90 cycles	
178

Phosphate-coated LiFePO4	Li3PO4	LiFePO4	LIBs: 159.1 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
182

Mn-doped LiFePO4	LiFePO4 and LiMnPO4	ITO glass	LIBs: 45.7 μA h cm−2 μm−1	
186


 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM images of flat Cu/Si (I) before cycling and (II) after 50 and (III) after 100 cycles and porous Cu/Si (IV) before cycling and (V) after 50 and (VI) after 100 cycles. The insets are photos of flat Cu/Si and porous Cu/Si before and after the cycling process. (b) Cycling performance of flat Cu–Si (blue curves) and porous Cu–Si (red curves) and the corresponding mechanism illustration. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (c) SEM image of copper-coated Si NWs; (d) TEM image of copper-coated Si NWs. (e) Initial charge–discharge curves of the pristine Si NWs, Si NWs with carbon-coating and copper-coating at a rate of 0.05C. (f) Capacity–cycle number curves for Si NWs with carbon-coating and copper-coating at a rate of 0.5C. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM image of the CNT–Ni–Si nanowire arrays at a tilted angle; (b) TEM image of a CNT–Ni–Si core–shell nanowire; (c) STEM image of a portion of the nanowire and the corresponding EDX mapping data of Si, Ni, O, and C, respectively; (d) HRTEM image at the CNT–Ni–Si interface; the inset is the corresponding FFT pattern of the Si layer. (e) A typical voltage profile for a full galvanostatic charge and discharge cycle at 0.2C; (f) specific charge/discharge capacities and coulombic efficiency of the CNT–Ni–Si core–shell nanowire anode versus cycle number. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2013. (g) The preparation process of Cu–Si/a-C electrodes and a digital photo; (h) TEM, (i) HRTEM, and (j) SEM-EDS elemental mapping images of the 20% Si/a-C nanocomposite material; (k) cycling performance of the 20% Si/a-C electrode at a current density of 1 A g−1 before (pink curve) and after (red curve) Si lithiation. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for Cu(OH)2 NWs, Cu(OH)2@M1 NWs, 3D Cu@M1 NWs, and 3D Cu@M1@M2 NWs. M1 and M2 refer to Cu, Al, C, Si, SiO2, Si3N4, Ag, Ti, Ta, Sn, In2O5, Au, V, Nb, W, Mg, Fe, Ni, Sn, ZnO, or TiN. (b) SEM images of 3D Cu@Si. (c) SEM images of 3D Cu@Si@Cu. (d) Rate performances of 3D Cu@Si and 3D Cu@Si@Cu NWs cycled at various rates from 1C to 10C. (e) Discharge/charge profiles of 3D Cu@Si@Cu NWs cycled at various rates from 1C to 10C. (f) Cycling performance and CEs of 3D Cu@Si@Cu NWs cycled at 10C for 10000 cycles and 5C for 2000 cycles. (g) Cycling performance and CEs of 3D Cu@SiNWs for 2000 cycles. The electrode was then etched with HCl and reduced with H2 to remove the SEI before it was cycled for another 1000 cycles. The Si-loading is ∼0.02 mg cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of the surface morphology of Sn–18 wt% Al; (b) SEM image of the thickness of Sn–18 wt% Al deposited on the glass; (c) HRTEM image of Sn–18 wt% Al film scraped from the glass (inset image obtained from Fourier transformation); (d) discharge capacities of Sn–18 wt% Al film and pure Sn thin films at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration exhibiting the fabrication process for the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode anchored on SS-mesh; (b) SEM image of the Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet; inset: the SEM image at a higher magnification; (c) TEM image of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode; (d) cycling performance of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet anode at 0.5 A g−1; (e) cycling performances of the core–shell Sb@Co(OH)2 nanosheet and Co(OH)2 electrodes at 0.0584 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration for the preparation of 3D Cu@Mg@C anodes; (b) SEM image of 3D Cu@Mg@C nanowires; (c) cycling properties of 3D Cu@Mg@C, 3D Cu@Mg, and planar Cu–Mg@C anodes at 0.5C for 1000, 1000, and 100 cycles, respectively (1C = 2150 mA g−1 of Mg). Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth process of CuO nanostructures on carbon cloth; (b) a typical SEM image of CuO nanosheets grown on carbon cloth; (c) TEM image of the as-synthesized CuO structure peeled off from the carbon cloth. Inset: magnified image of the selected area showing the broken edge of a CuO nanosheet; (d) capacity versus cycle number of the CuO nanosheets/carbon cloth and commercial CuO electrodes at a current density of 500 mA g−1; (e) rate capacities of the CuO electrode and commercial CuO from 200 to 10000 mA g−1. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process based on FeN thin films; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of γ′′-FeN thin film; (c) electrochemical Li-storage rate performances of γ′′-FeN thin film electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram showing the deposition process for the Li–Co–Ni–Mn–O thin film; FE-SEM images of (b) the surface and (c) cross-section of the annealed Li–Co–Ni–Mn–O thin film; (d) charge–discharge profiles of the Li/PLTF half cell; (e) cycling performance of the Li/PLTF half cell. Reproduced from ref. 176 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Smart lens applications of solid-state thin film batteries; (b) top view, side view and operation of the fabricated battery lighting an LED while wet; (c) the fabrication processes of the battery on a polyimide substrate with the deposition steps; (d) SEM image of the fabricated battery's cross-section; (e) the cycling performance of the batteries after 70 cycles. Reproduced from ref. 183 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

Ag2O thin films	Ag2O	Microscope glass slides and stainless-steel	650 F g−1, 2 mV s−1, ionic electrolyte	
202

Cu2O thin films	Cu2O	Stainless steel	908 F g−1, 0.5 mA cm−2, phosphate-buffered solution	
249

Cu/Cu2O/cellulose	Cu	Cellulose paper	238 mF cm−2 (915 F g−1), 1 mA cm−2 (3.8 A g−1), 1 M KOH	
207

MnO1.9 thin films	MnO1.9	Copper	50.2 mF cm−2, 0.1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M Na2SO4	
208

α-MnO2 nanorod forests	MnO2	High thermal conductivity copper	346 F g−1, 0.71 A g−1, 1 M Na2SO4	
209

MnO2 thin films	MnO2	Graphite foil	344 F g−1,100 mV s−1, MnO2, 0.5 M LiCl	
210

MnO2 rods	MnO2	Aluminium foil	796 F g−1, 2 mV s−1, 0.5 M Na2SO4	
211

NiO nanopyramids	NiO	Stainless steel	325 F g−1, 0.4 mA cm−2, 1 M KOH	
213

VO2 nanorods	VO2	Indium tin oxide-coated glass	∼486 mF cm−2, 10 mV s−1, 0.1 M NaOH	
214

V2O5 thin films	V2O5	Silicon	960 mF cm−2, 1 mA cm−2, 1 M Li2SO4	
215

α-MoO3 nanosheets	α-MoO3	Carbon cloth	240 F g−1, 1.5 mA cm−2, 1 M Na2SO4	
216

ZnO/MnO2	ZnO	Fluorine-doped indium tin oxide	204 μF cm−2, 1 V s−1, LiCl/PVA gel electrolyte	
219

TiO2/RuO2/SnO2	SnO2	Tantalum	692 F g−1, 50 mV s−1, 0.5 M Na2SO4	
220

TiN films	TiN	Si(100) wafer	146.4 F cm−3, 0.5 M K2SO4	
250

3D Si@Ti@TiN thin films	Ti/TiN	Silicon arrays	43.8 mF cm−2, 1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M K2SO4	
227

ZnONR/Ti/TiN	Ti/TiN	Polyethylene terephthalate	1.24 mF cm−2, 5 mV s−1, sol–gel electrolyte	
228

VN thin films	VN	Silicon wafer	1.2 F cm−2, 5 mV s−1, 1 M KOH	
230

CrN films	CrN	Silicon	35.4 mF cm−2, 1.2 mA cm−2, 0.5 M H2SO4	
233

3D nanorhombus Ni3N	Ni3N	Silicon (100)	319.5 mF cm−2, 10 mV s−1, 3 M KOH	
240

W2N thin films	W2N	Stainless steel	163 F g−1, 0.5 mA cm−2, 1 M H2SO4	
251

Mo2N thin films	Mo2N	Polycrystalline Ti	55 mF cm−2 (722 F cm−3), 5 mV s−1, 1 M Li2SO4	
237

Cu doped Mo3N2 thin films	Mo3N2	Stainless steel glass and silicon (1 0 0)	619.5 F cm−3, 5 mV s−1, 1 M KOH	
238

Mn3N2 thin films	Mn3N2	Silicon wafer	118 mF cm−2, 10 mV s−1, 1 M KOH	
239

NbN thin films	NbN	Silicon (1 0 0)	707.1 F cm−3, 1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M H2SO4	
241

HfN films	HfN	—	5.6 mF cm−2, 1 mA cm−2, 0.5 M Na2SO4	
252

RuN thin films	RuN	Stainless steel, glass and silicon	37 F g−1, 200 mV s−1, 1 M KOH	
253

MoS2 nanoworms	MoS2	Copper foil	589 F g−1, 5 mV s−1, 1 M Na2SO4	
246

TiC-CDC films	TiC	Silicon or Si/SiO2 wafers	350 F cm−3/103 mF cm−2, 5 mV s−1, 1 M H2SO4	
248

Graphene/Co3O4 nanowires	Graphite	Co3O4/Ni foam	0.67 F cm−2 (2030 F g−1), 1 mA cm−2, 6 M KOH	
254

Graphene/VN films	VN	Graphene hydrogel	236.5 F g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 6 M KOH	
233


 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode; (b) CV curves of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode at various scan rates; (c) GCD curves of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode at various current densities; (d) cycling performance of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode measured at a current density of 16 mA cm−2; (e) Ragone plot of the Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper electrode; (f) schematic diagram of the assembled Cu2O/Cu/cellulose hybrid paper-based symmetric SC device. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Low-temperature-operated fabrication process for the flexible ZnO NR/Ti/TiN micro-SC; (b) TEM images for the ZnO NR/Ti/TiN core–shell structure; (c) areal specific capacitance curves comparing the ZnO NR/Ti/TiN core–shell based MSC to ZnO NR-based and ZnO seed layer/Ti/TiN-based devices; (d) capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency of the MSC against number of cycles at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2; inset: the charge/discharge curve as a function of time for the last ten cycles; (e) Ragone plots comparing the ZnO NR/Ti/TiN core–shell based MSC to ZnO NR-based and ZnO seed layer/Ti/TiN-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 228 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the charge storage process. Reproduced from ref. 231 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the porous CrN thin films; (c) areal specific capacitance versus current density of the CrN and porous CrN thin film electrodes; (d) Ragone plot. Reproduced from ref. 234 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
