Power-to-What? – Environmental assessment of energy storage systems   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE03051F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE03051F
(Analysis)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 389-400Power-to-What? – Environmental assessment of energy storage systems†

        
          
            André 
            Sternberg
          
        
       and 

        
          
            André 
            Bardow
          
        
      *
      Lehrstuhl für Technische Thermodynamik, RWTH Aachen University, 52062 Aachen, Germany. E-mail: andre.bardow@ltt.rwth-aachen.de;  Fax: +49 241 8092255;   Tel: +49 241 8095380
Received 
      25th September 2014
    , Accepted 18th December 2014First published on 20th January 2015AbstractA large variety of energy storage systems are currently investigated for using surplus power from intermittent renewable energy sources. Typically, these energy storage systems are compared based on their Power-to-Power reconversion efficiency. Such a comparison, however, is inappropriate for energy storage systems not providing electric power as output. We therefore present a systematic environmental comparison of energy storage systems providing different products. As potential products, we consider the reconversion to power but also mobility, heat, fuels and chemical feedstock. Using life cycle assessment, we determine the environmental impacts avoided by using 1 MW h of surplus electricity in the energy storage systems instead of producing the same product in a conventional process. Based on data for several countries including the United States, Brazil, Japan, Germany and the United Kingdom, our analysis determines the highest reduction of global warming and fossil depletion impact for using surplus power in heat pumps with hot water storage and battery electric vehicles. Third highest environmental benefits are achieved by electrical energy storage systems (pumped hydro storage, compressed air energy storage and redox flow batteries). Environmental benefits are also obtained if surplus power is used to produce hydrogen but the benefits are lower. Our environmental assessment of energy storage systems is complemented by determination of CO2 mitigation costs. The lowest CO2 mitigation costs are achieved by electrical energy storage systems.

Broader context
Environmental impact reduction is the major motivation for increasing the use of renewable energies. Since renewable energy sources like wind and solar are intermittent in nature, their increased installation leads to unused surplus power. Therefore, storage for surplus power is required. Since the potential of pumped hydro storage as the only installed large scale storage system is nearly exhausted, a large variety of concepts are currently investigated to use the surplus power. The proposed concepts span from electrical storage over storage in battery electric vehicles to production of hydrogen. Hydrogen can then be used in several ways including reconversion to power in fuels cells or conversion of hydrogen with CO2 to hydrocarbons. However, surplus power is limited and therefore only storage systems with the highest contribution to the reduction of environmental impacts should be implemented. This article therefore provides a method to compare energy storage systems based on their environmental impact reductions using life cycle assessment.

1. Introduction
The share of renewable energy sources in electricity generation rises worldwide. Over 50% of the electricity generation capacity installed in 2012 was based on renewables.1 Currently, in many countries (e.g. the United States and Brazil), over half of the renewable generation capacity is provided by hydro power. However, the potential of hydro power is almost exhausted: compared to 2011, hydro power has grown by 3% while intermittent renewable energies like wind and solar power have grown by 19% and 42%, respectively.1 This development suggests that the intermittent renewable energies wind and solar power will most likely provide the majority of renewable electricity in the future.
The high penetration of intermittent energy sources will lead to increasing numbers of hours where generation exceeds demand, so-called surplus power.2,3E.g. for Australia, Elliston et al.4 determined 24.9 TW h a−1 surplus electricity for a future energy scenario with 59% share of wind power generation. The amount of surplus electricity corresponds to 11% of the Australian power generation (see Table S1 in ESI†). Curtailment of surplus power can be avoided by using energy storage systems. Currently, 99% of the storage capacity installed worldwide is provided by pumped hydro storage.5 However, the expansion potential of pumped hydro storage is limited due to the lack of favorable geographic sites.6
For this reason, storage systems such as batteries and compressed air energy storage are moving into the scientific focus.5,7–9 While these systems also provide power as output (Power-to-Power), alternatives are increasingly considered such as Power-to-Mobility, using surplus power in battery electric vehicles,10–12 and Power-to-Heat, using heat pumps.13,14 Alternatively, surplus power can be used to produce hydrogen by electrolysis (Power-to-Fuel).15 Hydrogen can either be used directly or converted to hydrocarbons. The hydrocarbons can then be reconverted to electric power, used for mobility, or as chemical feedstock.16–21
A comparative assessment of the proposed energy storage systems is required to support decision makers. However, energy storage systems producing fuels or chemicals cannot be compared directly to energy storage systems producing power due to their different products. Systematic comparisons of energy storage systems are so far only available for energy storage systems with reconversion to power.5,7–9 These energy storage systems are usually assessed by the energy efficiency for surplus Power-to-Power. Barnhart and Benson22 present a method for electrical energy storage systems based on the energy stored on energy invested (ESOI). The ESOI also accounts for the production of the electrical energy storage systems. For the comparison of energy storage systems producing fuels and those producing power, reconversion of the fuel to electrical power is often assumed.18,19 However, reconversion to power might not be the most favorable use of the fuel, which could be employed also for transportation or as chemical feedstock.
In this paper, a general method is presented for the comparison of energy storage systems with different products. The storage systems are compared with respect to their environmental impacts based on the life cycle assessment (LCA) principle. In the main text, the focus is on global warming and fossil depletion as assessment indicators to reflect the fact that the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and the limited fossil fuels are the key drivers for renewable energies. In short, this paper tries to answer the question: given 1 MW h of surplus electricity from renewable energies, which energy storage system brings the greatest environmental benefit? This assessment obviously depends on the geographic scope: we therefore consider the use of surplus electricity in a variety of countries including the United States, Brazil, Germany and Japan. Finally, we combine the environmental assessment with an economic assessment and determine CO2 mitigation cost for the US.
The proposed method for the comparison of energy storage systems is presented in Section 2. In Section 3, a systematic overview of the considered energy storage systems is provided and the results are presented. Finally, conclusions for the environmental assessment of energy storage systems are drawn in Section 4.
2. LCA method for comparative assessment of energy storage systems
In this section, a general method is presented for the comparative assessment of energy storage systems. Energy storage systems are compared by their environmental benefits. The environmental benefits result from the substitution of conventional processes producing the same products as the energy storage systems. The environmental benefit is determined by life cycle assessment (LCA).
LCA is a systematic method for the environmental assessment of processes and products based on energy and material flows.23 LCA requires a functional unit that describes the subject under study. In a comparative LCA, all processes must have the same functional unit. In the present paper, the functional unit of the storage systems is the use of 1 MW h surplus electricity. The energy storage systems are compared in detail by the following environmental impact categories: global warming (GW) and fossil depletion (FD). These impacts are chosen because they are the key drivers for renewable energy systems. The environmental impacts are determined according to ReCiPe 1.08 Midpoint (Hierarchist)24 because ReCiPe provides an indicator for the depletion of fossil fuels and global warming. The results for fossil depletion and global warming impact are presented in oil-equivalents and CO2-equivalents, respectively. Results for the impact categories eutrophication (freshwater and marine), human toxicity, ionizing radiation, mineral resource depletion, photochemical oxidant formation, ozone depletion, particulate matter and terrestrial acidification have also been analyzed and are given in the ESI.† Water footprint is also an important potential impact and should be considered once assessment methods are sufficiently well established25 and sufficient data for energy storage systems are available.
Most accurate results are achieved if site-specific conditions are considered for both the energy storage systems (e.g. heat and power supply) and the substituted products.26 However, LCA-databases typically provide country-specific values.27,28 For this reason, we use a country-specific approach to minimize the effort of data acquisition.
2.1 Approach
The proposed method for the comparative assessment of energy storage systems consists of the following three steps (Fig. 1):
 Fig. 1  The environmental impact reductions for energy storage systems (ESS) are the difference between the environmental impacts of products from conventional processes and from energy storage systems. The environmental impacts of the energy storage systems consider the processes: (i) heat and grid power supply, (ii) CO2 supply, (iii) construction, and (iv) combustion of fuels. The combustion of fuels from Power-to-Fuel energy storage systems must be considered if the fuel is converted to power or used for mobility. The environmental impacts of processes in the gray boxes are modeled using aggregated data from LCA databases. The amount of product gained from the energy storage system is defined by the use of 1 MW h surplus electricity. 
1. The energy storage systems are modeled to determine input and output flows. All storage systems use 1 MW h of surplus electricity. The input and output flows are then used to determine the global warming impact (GWESS) and fossil depletion impact (FDESS) of the energy storage systems (ESS) according to GWESS = Q GWheat supply + Pgrid GWgrid power supply + mCO2 GWCO2 supply + Pcapacity GWconstruction + Mproduct GWcombustion,(1)and FDESS = Q FDheat supply + Pgrid FDgrid power supply + mCO2 FDCO2 supply + Pcapacity FDconstruction.(2)
Here, the input flows are heat (Q), grid power (Pgird) and CO2 (mCO2). The environmental impacts (GWsupply and FDsupply) for the supply process are explained in Section 3.2. The environmental impacts from construction (GWconstruction and FDconstruction) are based on the capacity (Pcapacity) of the energy storage systems. The output flow is the product (Mproduct) of each energy storage system. Emissions from combustion (GWcombustion) of products are taken into account for Fuel-to-Power and Fuel-to-Mobility processes. The environmental impacts of construction and combustion are also explained in Section 3.2.
2. For each product of the energy storage system, the replaced conventional production process is identified. The environmental impacts of the replaced conventional processes are determined from LCA-databases (see Section 3.3).
3. In the final step, the global warming impact reduction (GWreduction) and fossil depletion impact reduction (FDreduction) are calculated from: GWreduction = Mproduct GWconv − GWESS,(3)and FDreduction = Mproduct FDconv − FDESS.(4)
Here, we insert the amount of product (Mproduct) and environmental impacts of energy storage system (GWESS and FDESS) determined in step 1. The environmental impacts of the replaced conventional processes (GWconv and FDconv) are determined in step 2.
The computed values for GWreduction and FDreduction allow to rank the energy storage systems according to the environmental impact reduction (see Section 3.4).
3. Comparison of environmental impact reduction for energy storage systems
In this section, a case study for selected energy storage systems is presented using LCA data sets for different countries. All considered countries are presented in the ESI (see Tables S9–S12†). In Section 3.1, a systematic overview and a short description of the considered energy storage systems is provided (Fig. 2). For all energy storage systems, the current efficiencies and the storage potential are briefly discussed. In Sections 3.1–3.4, the three steps of the proposed method for a comparative environmental assessment are applied to the case study. In Section 3.5, the CO2 mitigation costs for the US are presented.
 Fig. 2  Overview of considered energy storage systems for surplus power categorized by their products. 
3.1 Considered energy storage systems

Power-to-Power. 
Power-to-Power storage systems convert electricity to chemical or mechanical energy, which is stored and later reconverted to electric power. Today, large scale Power-to-Power is mostly based on pumped hydro storage (PHS). PHS achieves efficiencies of 65–80% but it is limited by geographical constraints.7–9
The other Power-to-Power technology already operating at large scale is compressed air energy storage (CAES). However, currently only two plants are in operation worldwide.5 These plants require 0.7–0.8 kW h input electricity and 1.2–1.3 kW h natural gas to generate 1 kW h electricity.7,29 The natural gas demand for CAES can be avoided by storing the heat released during air compression:30 the stored heat is then used to preheat the air before it is expanded in a gas turbine. These so-called adiabatic compressed air energy storage systems are supposed to achieve efficiencies of about 75% (ref. 30) but they are still under development. We therefore, consider non-adiabatic CAES. CAES is also limited geographically by the availability of suitable salt caverns.6
Batteries are a mature energy storage technology for small scale applications.7–9 A promising technology for medium scale storage are flow batteries, storing energy in solutions. Flow batteries are characterized by high efficiencies of 65–85%, very low self-discharge and high cycle capability.7–9 A drawback of flow batteries is the low volumetric energy density compared to other batteries.


Power-to-Mobility. 
Power-to-Mobility storage systems store input electricity in battery electric vehicles (BEV). The most discussed storage units for battery electric vehicles are lithium-ion and nickel metal-hydride batteries.11 In this paper, a lithium-ion battery is considered. This technology seems to be the most promising based on its high efficiency of about 80% and its high cycling capability.7–9 Battery electric vehicles consume 0.14–0.2 kW h km−1.10,11 Although first commercial vehicles are already available, the technology is still in development. Hennings et al.31 investigated the utilization of surplus wind power in electric vehicles. The storage potential of this technology is theoretically only limited by the mobility demand. For example, to satisfy the annual mobility demand of the US, about 300–450 TW h surplus electricity are required (see Table S3 in ESI†).


Power-to-Heat. 
Power-to-Heat storage systems convert power directly to heat. The ratio of the heat obtained to the power input is the characteristic efficiency of these systems, the coefficient of performance (COP). Mature technologies to generate heat are electric boilers and heat pumps. The maximum COP for an electric boiler is 1. A more efficient Power-to-Heat technology are heat pumps. Braungardt et al.32 report annual COPs of air source heat pumps of 2.1–3.4, and of ground source heat pumps of 2.6–4.9 based on field tests. The generated heat can be stored directly in buildings or in hot water tanks. Hedegaard et al.13 and Hewitt14 investigated the potential of heat pumps to integrate wind power. The storage potential of Power-to-Heat storage systems is theoretically only limited by the heat demand. For example, to satisfy the annual space heating demand of the US, about 250–575 TW h surplus electricity are required (see Table S3 in ESI†).


Power-to-Fuel. 
Power-to-Fuel storage systems produce hydrogen by electrolysis. A suitable technology to absorb the fluctuating surplus power from renewable energies is proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolysis. 1 MW h electricity allows the production of 18–22 kg hydrogen.33 Hydrogen can be used directly as fuel, as chemical feedstock or converted to other fuels.
If hydrogen is used as fuel or chemical feedstock, the fluctuating production has usually to be compensated by storage. Hydrogen storage requires huge storage volumes because of the low volumetric energy density of hydrogen. The construction of additional hydrogen storage capacities can be avoided by directly feeding hydrogen into the already existing natural gas grid (feed-in of H2). However, the fraction of hydrogen in the natural gas grid is limited, for example in Germany to 5–12 vol%.19
An alternative option to deal with the low energy content of hydrogen is the conversion to hydrocarbons with higher energy content. These hydrocarbons can not only be used as fuels but also as platform chemicals. In addition to hydrogen, the production of hydrocarbons requires a carbon-containing feedstock. A currently discussed C1-building block for hydrocarbons is CO2.16,17 CO2 can be captured from biogas plants, power plants, chemical plants34 and even air.35
The currently most developed hydrogen conversion process is methanation. First demonstration plants are already operating.18 Hydrogen reacts with CO2 to methane according to the Sabatier-reaction: CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O, ΔhR = −167.9 kJ mol−1(5)
Müller et al.18 report that 95% of the CO2 is converted to methane in a demonstration plant. The reaction is highly exothermic which leads to high conversion losses when the heat is not completely used. Müller et al.18 report an electricity consumption of 0.33 kW h per kgCH4 for the compression of reactants and products. The major benefit of this process is that methane can be used in the already existing natural gas infrastructure (feed-in of CH4). To satisfy the annual natural gas demand of the US, about 2500–4200 TW h surplus electricity are required (see Table S3 in ESI†).
Hydrogen can also be converted with CO2 to methanol according to CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O, ΔhR = −49.2 kJ mol−1(6)
Rihko-Struckmann et al.21 investigated the production of methanol from CO2 based on process simulations and assuming equilibrium conversion. In this case, about 27% of CO2 is converted in the reactor (250 °C and 5 MPa). The unreacted CO2 is separated from the raw product gas and recycled to the reactor. Hereby, a total CO2 conversion of 96.8% is achieved. Jadhav et al.36 report that the equilibrium conversion efficiency can nearly be obtained with a copper catalyst. The required electricity consumption of methanol production (1.33 kW h per kgCH3OH) is higher than for methanation because additional compressor power is required for the recycle stream. However, methanol synthesis has less conversion losses because it is less exothermic. Methanol seems to be a promising storage option because it has a higher volumetric energy density than hydrogen and methane, and it can be combusted in gasoline engines.20 A disadvantage is that currently no large scale infrastructure exists.
Hydrogen can also be converted to syngas. Syngas is a mix of H2 and CO, and has various applications in the chemical industry, e.g. production of methanol. We consider syngas as hydrocarbon due to similarities in the processing. In the reverse water–gas-shift reaction, hydrogen reacts with CO2 to CO as follows CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O, ΔhR = 41.2 kJ mol−1(7)
In contrast to methanation and methanol synthesis, this process typically requires hydrogen storage because the reaction is carried out at steady-state conditions today. A dynamic operation is currently not possible due to the high temperatures. For the supply of syngas with a typical industrial molar ratio of H2:CO of 3:1, hydrogen is added to the product CO. The production of 1 kg syngas requires 0.61 kW h heat and 1.34 kW h electricity.37 In ref. 37, equilibrium conversion of CO2 (about 85%) is assumed and unreacted CO2 is recycled to the reactor. Kaiser et al.38 report that the equilibrium conversion of CO2 is almost reached above 900 °C with a nickel catalyst.
In this work, we also consider the conversion of fuel to three further products:

Fuel-to-Power. Reconversion of fuels to power in fuel cells is considered. Fuel cells achieve an efficiency of 45–60%.39

Fuel-to-Mobility. We also investigate the utilization of fuel for vehicles. Hydrogen can be used in a fuel cell vehicle with a consumption of about 0.36 kW h km−1.40 Methane and methanol can be used in a vehicle with an internal combustion engine. These engines consume about 0.52 kW h km−1 (ref. 41) and 0.44 kW h km−1 (ref. 42), respectively.

Fuel-as-Chemical. Fuel can also be used directly as feedstock for the chemical industry. The considered fuel molecules (hydrogen, methanol and syngas) are all so-called platform chemicals for the chemical industry. In this case, the fuel replaces conventional fossil-based feedstock. The use of fuel as chemical feedstock avoids conversion losses, in contrast to Fuel-to-Power and Fuel-to-Mobility processes. The storage potential of hydrogen, methanol and syngas is limited by the demand of these chemicals. To satisfy the annual global demand of hydrogen and methanol about 3200–5400 TW h and 575–950 TW h are required, respectively. For syngas, no data on the global demand is available. For syngas use in polyurethane production only, a demand of 25–40 TW h would be required (see Table S2 in ESI†).

3.2 Environmental impacts of energy storage systems (step 1)
To determine the environmental impacts, the energy storage systems described in Section 3.1 are modeled in GaBi 6.3.28 The models are based on efficiencies. For each technology, we consider the range of efficiencies presented in Section 3.1. Hydrogen conversion is modeled using literature data obtained through process simulations. For the hydrogen conversion processes, we assumed an uncertainty of ±10% for the heat and grid power demand. Detailed information about the used data can be found in the ESI (Tables S4–S7†). The processes considered for the determination of the environmental impacts of the energy storage system are shown in Fig. 1 and explained in the following:
(i) Heat and grid power supply. Heat is only required for syngas production and compressed air energy storage. Syngas production requires heat to drive the endothermic reverse water–gas-shift reaction. Compressed air energy storage requires heat to run gas turbines. In both cases, it is assumed that heat is provided by natural gas combustion.
An additional grid power demand occurs for the hydrogen conversion processes to compress the gases and to separate the products. For both heat from natural gas and grid power, we consider LCA data sets for several countries (see Table S9 in ESI†).
(ii) CO2supply. The conversion of hydrogen to hydrocarbons requires CO2 as carbon source. We consider two scenarios for the CO2 supply:
• CO2emissions avoided: in this scenario, CO2 is used which otherwise would be emitted to the atmosphere. The environmental impact of the CO2 supply depends on the CO2 capture process. We consider two cases:
- Ideal case: the CO2 is captured from a process where CO2 is already separated with high purity but then emitted to the atmosphere. Hence, no additional energy is required to capture the CO2. In this case, the global warming impact of CO2 supply is −1 kgCO2−eq per kgCO2 and all other environmental impacts of CO2 supply are zero.
- Realistic case: the CO2 is captured from a coal fired power plant with a net power output of 550 MW. Based on the DoE case 10,43 the efficiency (based on higher heating value) of the power plant is 26.2%, and 90% of the CO2 is captured. The environmental impacts of the power plant with CO2 capture cannot be attributed only to CO2 supply because the power plant provides two products: power and CO2.44,45 To determine the environmental impact of CO2 supply, we give a credit for avoiding environmental impacts of power generation in a power plant without CO2 capture. The coal fired power plant without CO2 capture has a net efficiency (based on higher heating value) of 36.8% and the total CO2 is emitted to the atmosphere (DoE case 9).43 The environmental impacts of both coal supply and coal combustion are calculated country-specific (see Table S11 in ESI†). For the US, the global warming and fossil depletion impact of CO2 supply is −0.67 kgCO2−eq per kgCO2 and 0.08 kgoil−eq per kgCO2, respectively.
• CO2storage avoided: in this scenario, CO2 is used which otherwise would be stored. Hence, no additional energy is required to capture the CO2 but also no CO2 emissions are avoided. Thus, the environmental impact of CO2 supply is zero.
(iii) Construction of plants and storage units. The environmental impacts of construction are considered for storage units, electrolysis, fuel cells and hydrogen conversion processes. For conventional industrial steady-state processes using fossil fuels, the environmental impacts of construction are usually of minor importance compared to the overall environmental life cycle impacts.46 In this paper, however, construction is considered for the energy storage systems because of the fluctuating operation. This fluctuating operation requires larger plants due to lower full load hours compared to operation in steady-state. Construction is not considered for vehicles using methane and methanol, as well as for vehicles using diesel or gasoline. For battery electric vehicles, only the construction of the lithium-ion battery is considered. Furthermore, we assume that the specific environmental impacts for construction of plants and storage units are not affected by the size of the plant and storage unit. The employed values are based on literature data and the ecoinvent database v2.2.27 The values are reported in detail in the ESI (Table S8†).
(iv) Combustion of fuel. For Power-to-Fuel storage systems, the emissions of combustion have to be taken into account if the fuel is combusted, i.e., converted to power or used for mobility. CO2 emissions are calculated by assuming complete combustion.

Global warming impact of energy storage systems. 
The global warming impact of energy storage systems are computed according to eqn (1). Fig. 3 shows the breakdown of the global warming impact of energy storage systems into the considered processes: heat and grid power supply, CO2 supply, construction and combustion of fuel (cf.Fig. 1). The global warming impacts span a range due to both the considered technology uncertainties (e.g. range of efficiencies) and the use of LCA data sets for different countries. These two sources of variation are visualized as follows: the narrow ranges (patterned) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further cover the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. For heat and grid power supply, the narrow range is very close to the top of the broad range because the US has almost the highest global warming impact for heat from natural gas of all considered countries. If only one range is shown, global warming impacts are independent from country-specific LCA data sets. The global warming impact of combustion is a fixed value because CO2 emissions for complete combustion per kg feedstock are independent from efficiencies and country-specific LCA data sets.
 Fig. 3  Breakdown of global warming (GW) impact of energy storage systems into considered processes. All values are per MW h surplus electricity. The narrow ranges (patterned) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further cover the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. If only one range is shown, global warming impacts are independent from country-specific LCA data sets. For the global warming impact of fuel combustion, a single value is shown. For CO2 supply, only the global warming impact for the scenario CO2emissions avoided is shown. For the scenario CO2storage avoided, the corresponding global warming impact would be zero. PHS – pumped hydro storage; CAES – compressed air energy storage; VRB – vanadium redox flow battery; BEV – battery electric vehicle; NG – natural gas. 
For pumped hydro storage, global warming impact is only due to construction (about 0.005 tCO2−eq per MW h). Compressed air energy storage (CAES) has nearly the same global warming impact during construction as pumped hydro storage. Additionally 0.45–0.47 tCO2−eq per MW h arise from heat supply for the US. This value drops to 0.34 tCO2−eq per MW h for Norway which is the country with the lowest global warming impact for heat from natural gas. CAES have the highest global warming impact for heat and power supply of all energy storage systems. However, the additional heat supply leads to the fact that CAES is the only considered energy storage system which produces more than 1 MW h electricity. Batteries as well as heat pumps induce global warming impacts only during their construction. Here, the heat pump has the highest global warming impact (0.08–0.1 tCO2−eq per MW h) followed by the lithium-ion battery and the vanadium redox flow battery. For the direct utilization and the feed-in of H2, global warming impact is also only related to construction. For the conversion of hydrogen to hydrocarbons, global warming impact occurs during construction, and from the supply of heat and grid power. For all hydrocarbons, the global warming impact during construction is in the same order of magnitude as for compressed air energy storage. Regarding heat and grid power supply, methanol and syngas have the highest global warming impact (0.08–0.11 tCO2−eq per MW h for the US) among the hydrocarbons. The global warming impact for heat and grid power supply strongly depends on the considered country. Grid power has the highest impact. All hydrogen conversion processes get a credit for the utilization of CO2 in the scenario CO2emissions avoided. Methanol production receives the largest credit (up to −0.15 tCO2−eq per MW h) because it uses most CO2 per converted hydrogen. In the scenario CO2storage avoided, the global warming impact of CO2 supply is zero. If hydrocarbons are converted to power or used for mobility, the global warming impact during combustion has to be taken into account. The highest global warming impact arises for the combustion of methanol (0.15 tCO2−eq per MW h).


Fossil depletion impact of energy storage systems. 
The contributions from construction, heat and grid power supply, and CO2 supply (scenario: CO2storage avoided) to fossil depletion impact correspond well with global warming impact. In contrast to global warming impact, the fossil depletion impact for CO2 supply (scenario: CO2emissions avoided) is positive because the power plant with CO2 capture has a lower efficiency than the power plant without CO2 capture (see Fig. S1 in ESI†).

3.3 Identification of conventional processes replaced by energy storage systems (step 2)
In this section, we identify the conventional processes replaced by the energy storage systems. For each product, the conventional process with the highest marginal costs is replaced assuming market behavior according to the industry cost curve.47 Processes with co-products are not considered because of the remaining co-product demand. The LCA data sets used for the conventional processes can be found in the ESI (Table S7†).
The power produced by the energy storage systems replaces power from a gas turbine with an efficiency of 40%. This process is chosen because it is a peak load technology with high costs and it is in this regard comparable to the power generation from energy storage systems (e.g. PHS).48
Energy storage systems producing mobility replace gasoline and diesel vehicles. We consider both types of fuel because the diffusion of gasoline and diesel strongly depends on the considered country. The fuel consumption of the replaced gasoline and diesel vehicles is 0.52 kW h km−1 and 0.38 kW h km−1, respectively.28
For energy storage systems producing heat, it is assumed that heat generation by natural gas boilers with an efficiency of 91% is replaced. In 2020, natural gas boilers will have the highest costs of fossil-based heating systems.49
Hydrogen produced by the energy storage systems replaces hydrogen from natural gas steam reforming. This process is the main industrial process with only hydrogen as product.50
For the feed-in of H2 or CH4, we consider two cases: in the first case, the natural gas consumption mix does not change due to the feed-in of H2 or CH4. Hence, the utilization of the natural gas is irrelevant and the replaced conventional process is fossil natural gas supply. For the feed-in of H2, it is also considered that the combustion of hydrogen emits no greenhouse gases in contrast to the combustion of natural gas. In the second case, we assume that the feed-in of H2 or CH4 leads to an increased natural gas demand in the mobility sector. The automotive industry could promote the utilization of feed-in H2 or CH4 to reduce the CO2 emissions of their fleets. In this case, the replaced conventional process is a gasoline or diesel vehicle.
Methanol from energy storage systems replaces the natural gas based production of methanol because this is the typical industrial scale process.36
Syngas from the conversion of hydrogen and CO2 replaces syngas from natural gas steam reforming because this is the industrial scale standard process.51
In the ESI,† the replaced technologies are varied and the resulting environmental impacts are shown for Power-to-Heat (Fig. S11†), Power-to-Mobility (Fig. S12†) and Power-to-Power (Fig. S13†).
3.4 Global warming and fossil depletion impact reductions for energy storage systems (step 3)

Global warming impact reductions. 
The global warming impact reductions are shown for all considered energy storage systems in Fig. 4. The heat pump and the battery electric vehicle have the highest global warming impact reduction potential (up to 1.4 tCO2−eq per MW h and 1.2 tCO2−eq per MW h, respectively). For heat pumps, a wide range of COPs is considered because the COP of a heat pump depends on many factors (e.g. type of heat pump, required heating temperature). Heat losses during storage are not considered. A technology with a COP of 1 like an electric boiler would still save about 0.3 tCO2−eq per MW h (see Fig. S11 in ESI†). The battery electric vehicle saves most greenhouse gases if gasoline vehicles are replaced because gasoline vehicles have a lower efficiency than diesel vehicles. Here, we assume that the storage unit of the heat pump and battery electric vehicle is large enough to store the product from using surplus power. The Power-to-Power systems (PHS, CAES, and VRB) save between 0.3 and 0.6 tCO2−eq per MW h.
 Fig. 4  Global warming (GW) impact reduction for the considered energy storage systems. The narrow ranges (colored) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further include the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. For Power-to-Mobility and Fuel-to-Mobility, impact reductions are shown for two replaced conventional processes: the left bar represents gasoline vehicles and the right bar represents diesel vehicles. For Power-to-Fuel systems, impact reductions are shown for the different utilization routes of the products. For the hydrocarbon routes, the global warming impact reductions are shown for both CO2 supply scenarios (CO2emissions avoided and CO2storage avoided). PHS – pumped hydro storage; CAES – compressed air energy storage; VRB – vanadium redox flow battery; BEV – battery electric vehicle; NG – natural gas. 
The global warming impact reductions of the Power-to-Fuel systems are much lower than for the other storage systems: the global warming impact reductions are even less than for Power-to-Heat with a COP of 1.
Among the Power-to-Fuel systems, the direct utilization of hydrogen without any further conversion achieves the highest impact reductions. All considered direct utilization routes for hydrogen lead to very similar global warming impact reductions. The feed-in of H2 saves 0.1–0.2 tCO2−eq per MW h if the natural gas consumption mix does not change due to the feed-in of H2. If the resulting natural gas is used as fuel for mobility, this process will save 0.12–0.31 tCO2−eq per MW h. The impact reductions for the feed-in of H2 into the natural gas grid and the subsequent use as fuel for mobility are lower than for the direct use of hydrogen as fuel for mobility because the feed-in H2 is converted with a lower efficiency than pure hydrogen.
For the hydrocarbon routes, the two scenarios for the credit of CO2 supply have to be distinguished (cf. Section 3.2): the hydrocarbon routes achieve highest impact reductions if CO2 emissions are avoided. However, the impact reductions are lower than for the direct use of hydrogen due to additional power demand and conversion losses.
The feed-in of CH4 into the natural gas grid saves 0.03–0.15 tCO2−eq per MW h. The utilization of fuel for mobility saves 0.04–0.24 tCO2−eq per MW h.
The results for methanol strongly depend on country-specific LCA data. This is mainly due to the grid power demand. For all utilization routes of methanol, the global warming impact can even increase. Among the utilization routes for methanol, mobility has the lowest global warming impact reductions because the efficiency for conversion of methanol and gasoline are nearly the same. In contrast, for the conversion of methanol to power, a higher efficiency is assumed than for the conventional process.
For syngas, the results also strongly depend on country-specific LCA data. The production of syngas and the subsequent utilization as feedstock saves up to 0.26 tCO2−eq per MW h. The reconversion of syngas to power saves no CO2 because the production of syngas has a high energy demand for the separation of the products. However, this separation is only required if the syngas is used as feedstock but not if it is reconverted to power. This example demonstrates that an assessment based on reconversion to power is in general not appropriate for hydrocarbons used as chemical feedstock. If CO2 utilization avoids CO2 storage, the impact reductions for all hydrocarbon routes decrease. For the US, global warming impact reductions are only obtained by the feed-in of CH4 and the utilization of syngas as chemical feedstock.


Fossil depletion impact reductions. 
The fossil depletion impact reductions for the energy storage systems are shown in Fig. 5. The results correspond well to the global warming impact reductions (Fig. 4), except for the Power-to-Fuel storage systems using CO2 (case: CO2storage avoided). However, the gap between Power-to-Heat storage systems and battery electric vehicles increases. Also, the gap between battery electric vehicles and Power-to-Power storage systems decreases compared to global warming impact reductions. This is due to the different replaced fossil fuels: all storage systems producing power and heat replace natural gas which has lower specific emissions (kgCO2−eq per MJ) than gasoline and diesel.
 Fig. 5  Fossil depletion (FD) impact reductions for the considered energy storage systems. The narrow ranges (colored) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further include the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. For Power-to-Mobility and Fuel-to-Mobility, impact reductions are shown for two replaced conventional processes: the left bar represents gasoline vehicles and the right bar represents diesel vehicles. For Power-to-Fuel systems, the impact reductions are shown for the different utilization routes of the products. For the hydrocarbon routes, the fossil depletion impact reductions are shown for both CO2 supply scenarios (CO2emissions avoided and CO2storage avoided). PHS – pumped hydro storage; CAES – compressed air energy storage; VRB – vanadium redox flow battery; BEV – battery electric vehicle; NG – natural gas. 
For the hydrocarbon routes, the fossil depletion impact reductions are the same for both scenarios CO2emissions avoided (ideal case) and CO2storage avoided as no additional energy is required for CO2 capture. However, the fossil depletion impact reductions are lower for the scenario CO2emissions avoided (realistic case) than for the scenario CO2storage avoided due to the additional coal required for CO2 capture.


Further environmental impact reductions. 
Further environmental impact reductions are presented in the ESI (Fig. S2–S10†). For these impact categories, we neglected the impact of construction due to lack of data. The variation of the LCA data due to the different countries is larger than for global warming and fossil depletion impact reductions. Environmental impact reductions are always achieved by Power-to-Heat, Power-to-Mobility, Power-to-Power and Power-to-Hydrogen storage systems. As for global warming and fossil depletion impacts, Power-to-Heat and Power-to-Mobility storage systems achieve highest impact reductions. The hydrocarbon routes reduce environmental impacts for freshwater eutrophication and mineral resource depletion. For marine eutrophication, human toxicity, ozone depletion, particulate matter and photochemical oxidant formation, reductions are not always achieved and depend on the country. For terrestrial acidification and ionizing radiation, the hydrocarbon routes increase the environmental impacts.

3.5 CO2 mitigation costs
In this section, the environmental assessment is complemented with an economic assessment calculating CO2 mitigation costs. For energy storage systems, CO2 mitigation costs are the ratio of additional costs compared to the conventional process producing the same product and the global warming impact reduction determined in Section 3.4: (8)
Here, the amount of product per MW h surplus electricity (Mproduct) and the global warming impact reduction (GWreduction) are used from step 1 and 3 in Section 2. The levelized product costs (LPC) are the minimum prices required to cover all expenses of production, i.e., the ratio of total annual costs and the annual amount of products. The total annual costs consider operating costs and the capital costs multiplied with the capital recovery factor (CRF). We use an interest rate of 6%.
We calculate CO2 mitigation costs for the US in 2020. Hence, US-specific global warming impact reductions are used. The data used for calculation of the levelized product costs for energy storage systems (LPCESS) and for conventional processes (LPCconv) are presented in Tables S13–S15 in ESI.† We assume a constant demand of all products. The costs for the surplus power supply are zero.
For the Power-to-Fuel storage systems, capital costs are only considered for hydrogen production. The capital cost for the hydrogen conversion processes (methane, methanol and syngas) are not considered due to a lack of data. However, for the CO2 mitigation costs only the difference between LPCESS and LPCconv is required. Hence, we also neglect capital costs for the conventional production of methane, methanol and syngas. For the battery electric vehicle, the battery is sized for a daily travel distance of 30 km.
The levelized product costs for the energy storage systems strongly depend on two factors: when and how often is surplus power available. We therefore present the CO2 mitigation costs as function of the available surplus power. Fig. 6 shows the mean value for the CO2 mitigation costs if surplus power occurs once a day. The case for surplus power occurring once a week is presented in Fig. S14 in the ESI.† The available surplus power has the highest influence on CO2 mitigation costs for Power-to-Fuel storage systems and the heat pump. This implies that the levelized product costs for these energy storage systems are dominated by the capital costs for electrolysis and heat pump. The CO2 mitigation costs for the battery electric vehicle are independent from the available surplus power because the capital costs of the battery only depend on the energy capacity costs.
 Fig. 6  CO2 mitigation costs of energy storage systems as a function of available surplus power. In this case, surplus power occurs once a day. 
The lowest CO2 mitigation costs are found for the battery electric vehicle. The CO2 mitigation costs are even negative, i.e., the reduction of CO2 emissions is economically beneficial. The second lowest CO2 mitigation costs are found for the electric boiler. For less hours with surplus power supply, the electric boiler is follow by Power-to-Power storage systems. Only for more than 6000 hours with surplus power supply, the heat pump achieves third lowest CO2 mitigation costs. The highest CO2 mitigation costs occur for Power-to-Fuel storage systems. Among the Power-to-Fuel storage systems, Power-to-H2 has the lowest CO2 mitigation costs and production of methane highest CO2 mitigation costs.
If the surplus power occurs only once a week (see Fig. S14 in ESI†), CO2 mitigation costs increase for all energy storage systems. The increased period without surplus power supply has the highest influence on vanadium redox flow battery, battery electric vehicle and the systems using heat storage (heat pump and electric boiler). In this case, the compressed air energy storage and the pumped hydro storage achieve the lowest CO2 mitigation costs.
This cost analysis can only be indicative due to the high uncertainty for the novel technologies considered, we study the uncertainty for the CO2 mitigation costs in the ESI (Fig. S15†).
4. Conclusions
We present a general method based on life cycle assessment to compare energy storage systems with the products power, heat, mobility, fuel and chemical feedstock. The presented method accounts for the actual use of the products. The results of our case study show that the highest global warming and fossil depletion impact reductions are achieved by using surplus power in heat pumps (Power-to-Heat) and battery electric vehicles (Power-to-Mobility). The third highest environmental impact reductions are achieved by the Power-to-Power systems.
Environmental impact reductions are also achieved for the direct utilization of hydrogen. However, these impact reductions are significantly lower than for the Power-to-Heat, Power-to-Mobility and Power-to-Power systems. The climate benefit of converting hydrogen into hydrocarbons depends strongly on the credit of the CO2 supply: the utilization of CO2 only contributes to global warming impact reductions if the CO2 supply avoids emissions. If CO2 is used which otherwise would be stored, greenhouse gas emissions even increase in most cases. In contrast to greenhouse gas emissions, the hydrocarbon routes decrease fossil depletion for both scenarios of CO2 supply.
An estimate of costs indicates that lowest CO2 mitigation costs are achieved by compressed air energy storage and pumped hydro storage. These energy storage systems are even economically beneficial for less than 1000 hours surplus power supply and if the surplus power occurs only once a week. The battery electric vehicle and the Power-to-Heat storage systems also have the potential for low CO2 mitigation costs but they require a more frequent surplus power supply (e.g. once a day) and more hours with surplus power supply. The presented method allows decision makers to identify environmentally and economically promising energy storage system depending on country-specific conditions.
Acknowledgements
This work has been carried out within the project “CO2RRECT” (033 RC 1006B). The project is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the funding priority “Technologies for Sustainability and Climate Protection – Chemical Processes and Utilization of CO2”. The authors would like to thank four anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and recommendations that significantly helped to improve this work.
References

          J. L. Sawin, et al., Renewables 2013 Global Status Report, REN21, Paris,  2013 Search PubMed .
C. J. Barnhart, M. Dale, A. R. Brandt and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2804–2810 Search PubMed .
G. R. Timilsina, G. C. van Kooten and P. A. Narbel, Energy Policy, 2013, 61, 642–652 CrossRef .
B. Elliston, I. MacGill and M. Diesendorf, Energy Policy, 2013, 59, 270–282 CrossRef .
A. Chatzivasileiadi, E. Ampatzi and I. Knight, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 25, 814–830 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beaudin, H. Zareipour, A. Schellenberglabe and W. Rosehart, Energy Sustainable Dev., 2010, 14, 302–314 CrossRef .
H. Ibrahim, A. Ilinca and J. Perron, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1221–1250 CrossRef CAS .
F. Díaz-González, A. Sumper, O. Gomis-Bellmunt and R. Villafáfila-Robles, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 2154–2171 CrossRef .
H. L. Ferreira, R. Garde, G. Fulli, W. Kling and J. P. Lopes, Energy, 2013, 53, 288–298 CrossRef .
M. Metz and C. Doetsch, Energy, 2012, 48, 369–374 CrossRef .
G. Majeau-Bettez, T. R. Hawkins and A. H. Strømman, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 4548–4554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zackrisson, L. Avelln and J. Orlenius, J. Cleaner Prod., 2010, 18, 1519–1529 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hedegaard, B. V. Mathiesen, H. Lund and P. Heiselberg, Energy, 2012, 47, 284–293 CrossRef .
N. J. Hewitt, Appl. Energy, 2012, 89, 37–44 CrossRef .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peters, B. Köhler, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, P. Markewitz and T. E. Müller, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1216–1240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 CAS .
B. Müller, K. Müller, D. Teichmann and W. Arlt, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2011, 83, 2002–2013 CrossRef  , in German.
K. Müller, J. Geng, J. Völkl and W. Arlt, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2012, 84, 1513–1519 CrossRef  , in German.
F. Schüth, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2011, 83, 1984–1993 CrossRef .
L. K. Rihko-Struckmann, A. Peschel, R. Hanke-Rauschenbach and K. Sundmacher, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 11073–11078 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1083–1092 CAS .
ISO 14040:2009, Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework, European Committee for Standardization, Bruessels, 2009.

          M. Goedkoop, R. Heijungs, M. Huijbregts, A. D. Schryver, J. Struijs and R. V. Zelm, ReCiPe 2008, A life cycle impact assessment method which comprises harmonised category indicators at the midpoint and the endpoint level; First edition Report I: Characterisation,  2009 Search PubMed .
Y. Gu, J. Xu, H. Wang and F. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 6531–6532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Henriksson, J. Guinée, R. Heijungs, A. Koning and D. Green, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2014, 19, 429–436 CrossRef .

ecoinvent Data V 2.2, Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, http://ecoinvent.org/, accessed  March 2014 Search PubMed .

GaBi 6.3, Software-System and Database for Life Cycle Engineering, PE INTERNATIONAL AG, Germany,  2013 Search PubMed .
P. Denholm and G. L. Kulcinski, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 2153–2172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Foley and I. D. Lobera, Energy, 2013, 57, 85–94 CrossRef .
W. Hennings, S. Mischinger and J. Linssen, Energy Policy, 2013, 62, 139–144 CrossRef .

          S. Braungardt, D. Günther, M. Miara, J. Wapler and W. Weßing, Electrically driven heat pumps, FIZ Karlsruhe GmbH, Karlsruhe,  2013 Search PubMed .
DOE H2A Production Analysis, http://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/h2a_production.html, accessed December 2014.
P. Markewitz, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, J. Linssen, P. Zapp, R. Bongartz, A. Schreiber and T. E. Müller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7281–7305 CAS .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, G. K. Surya Prakash and G. A. Olah, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7833–7853 CAS .
S. G. Jadhav, P. D. Vaidya, B. M. Bhanage and J. B. Joshi, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2014, 92, 2557–2567 CrossRef CAS .
CO2RRECT, ref. no. 033RC1006B, CO2-Reaction using Regenerative Energies and Catalytic Technologies, Final project report, in preparation, 2014, in German.
P. Kaiser, R. Unde, C. Kern and A. Jess, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2013, 85, 489–499 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peighambardoust, S. Rowshanzamir and M. Amjadi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9349–9384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granovskii, I. Dincer and M. A. Rosen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1186–1193 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ou, X. Zhang and S. Chang, Energy Policy, 2010, 38, 3943–3956 CrossRef .
L. Rose, M. Hussain, S. Ahmed, K. Malek, R. Costanzo and E. Kjeang, Energy Policy, 2013, 52, 453–461 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Gerdes, J. Haslbeck, N. Kuehn, E. Lewis, L. L. Pinkerton, M. Woods, J. Simpson, M. J. Turner and E. Varghese, Cost and Performance Baseline for Fossil Energy Plants – Volume 1: Bituminous Coal and Natural Gas to Electricity, Revision 2a, National Energy Technology Laboratory Report DOE/NETL-2010/1397, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington DC,  2013 Search PubMed .
N. von der Assen, J. Jung and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2721–2734 CAS .
N. von der Assen, P. Voll, M. Peters and A. Bardow, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7982–7994 RSC .

          Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Life Cycle Assessment of Chemicals, ecoinvent report no. 8,  2007 Search PubMed .

The Chemical Industry at the Millennium, ed. P. Spitz, Chemical Heritage Foundation,  2003, vol. 978-0-941901-34-5 Search PubMed .
F. Sensfuß, M. Ragwitz and M. Genoese, Energy Policy, 2008, 36, 3086–3094 CrossRef .

          J. Nitsch, T. Pregger, Y. Scholz, T. Naegler, M. Sterner, N. Gerhardt, A. von Oehsen, C. Pape, Y. Saint-Drenan and B. Wenzel, Langfristszenarien und Strategien für den Ausbau der erneuerbaren Energien in Deutschland bei Berücksichtigung der Entwicklung in Europa und global, Study BMU - FKZ 03MAP146,  2010, in German Search PubMed .
S. Baufumé, F. Grüger, T. Grube, D. Krieg, J. Linssen, M. Weber, J.-F. Hake and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 3813–3829 CrossRef .
L. Chen, Y. Lu, Q. Hong, J. Lin and F. Dautzenberg, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 292, 295–304 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed information about input data for considered energy storage systems and conventional processes, and results for additional environmental impact categories. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee03051fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
Environmental impact reduction is the major motivation for increasing the use of renewable energies. Since renewable energy sources like wind and solar are intermittent in nature, their increased installation leads to unused surplus power. Therefore, storage for surplus power is required. Since the potential of pumped hydro storage as the only installed large scale storage system is nearly exhausted, a large variety of concepts are currently investigated to use the surplus power. The proposed concepts span from electrical storage over storage in battery electric vehicles to production of hydrogen. Hydrogen can then be used in several ways including reconversion to power in fuels cells or conversion of hydrogen with CO2 to hydrocarbons. However, surplus power is limited and therefore only storage systems with the highest contribution to the reduction of environmental impacts should be implemented. This article therefore provides a method to compare energy storage systems based on their environmental impact reductions using life cycle assessment.


 	Fig. 1  The environmental impact reductions for energy storage systems (ESS) are the difference between the environmental impacts of products from conventional processes and from energy storage systems. The environmental impacts of the energy storage systems consider the processes: (i) heat and grid power supply, (ii) CO2 supply, (iii) construction, and (iv) combustion of fuels. The combustion of fuels from Power-to-Fuel energy storage systems must be considered if the fuel is converted to power or used for mobility. The environmental impacts of processes in the gray boxes are modeled using aggregated data from LCA databases. The amount of product gained from the energy storage system is defined by the use of 1 MW h surplus electricity.	 
GWESS = Q GWheat supply + Pgrid GWgrid power supply + mCO2 GWCO2 supply + Pcapacity GWconstruction + Mproduct GWcombustion,	(1)
FDESS = Q FDheat supply + Pgrid FDgrid power supply + mCO2 FDCO2 supply + Pcapacity FDconstruction.	(2)
GWreduction = Mproduct GWconv − GWESS,	(3)
FDreduction = Mproduct FDconv − FDESS.	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Overview of considered energy storage systems for surplus power categorized by their products.	 
CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O, ΔhR = −167.9 kJ mol−1	(5)
CO2 + 3H2 → CH3OH + H2O, ΔhR = −49.2 kJ mol−1	(6)
CO2 + H2 → CO + H2O, ΔhR = 41.2 kJ mol−1	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Breakdown of global warming (GW) impact of energy storage systems into considered processes. All values are per MW h surplus electricity. The narrow ranges (patterned) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further cover the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. If only one range is shown, global warming impacts are independent from country-specific LCA data sets. For the global warming impact of fuel combustion, a single value is shown. For CO2 supply, only the global warming impact for the scenario CO2emissions avoided is shown. For the scenario CO2storage avoided, the corresponding global warming impact would be zero. PHS – pumped hydro storage; CAES – compressed air energy storage; VRB – vanadium redox flow battery; BEV – battery electric vehicle; NG – natural gas.	 

 	Fig. 4  Global warming (GW) impact reduction for the considered energy storage systems. The narrow ranges (colored) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further include the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. For Power-to-Mobility and Fuel-to-Mobility, impact reductions are shown for two replaced conventional processes: the left bar represents gasoline vehicles and the right bar represents diesel vehicles. For Power-to-Fuel systems, impact reductions are shown for the different utilization routes of the products. For the hydrocarbon routes, the global warming impact reductions are shown for both CO2 supply scenarios (CO2emissions avoided and CO2storage avoided). PHS – pumped hydro storage; CAES – compressed air energy storage; VRB – vanadium redox flow battery; BEV – battery electric vehicle; NG – natural gas.	 

 	Fig. 5  Fossil depletion (FD) impact reductions for the considered energy storage systems. The narrow ranges (colored) represent country-specific LCA data sets for the US considering the technology uncertainties. The broad ranges (gray striped) further include the full range of LCA data sets for all countries. For Power-to-Mobility and Fuel-to-Mobility, impact reductions are shown for two replaced conventional processes: the left bar represents gasoline vehicles and the right bar represents diesel vehicles. For Power-to-Fuel systems, the impact reductions are shown for the different utilization routes of the products. For the hydrocarbon routes, the fossil depletion impact reductions are shown for both CO2 supply scenarios (CO2emissions avoided and CO2storage avoided). PHS – pumped hydro storage; CAES – compressed air energy storage; VRB – vanadium redox flow battery; BEV – battery electric vehicle; NG – natural gas.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 6  CO2 mitigation costs of energy storage systems as a function of available surplus power. In this case, surplus power occurs once a day.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed information about input data for considered energy storage systems and conventional processes, and results for additional environmental impact categories. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee03051f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
