Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometry  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B408602N View PDF VersionPrevious Article  DOI: 10.1039/B408602N
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19, 1020-1057Atomic spectrometry update. Atomic mass spectrometryJeffrey R. Bacona, Joanna C. Greenwoodb, Luc Van Vaeckc and John G. WilliamsdaThe Macaulay Institute, Craigiebuckler, Aberdeen, UK AB15 8QHbSmartWater Europe Ltd., PO Box 115, Wellington, Telford, Shropshire, UK TF1 5WEcMicro- and Trace Analysis Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Wilrijk, BelgiumdNu Instruments Ltd., Unit 74, Clywedog Road South, Wrexham Industrial Estate, Wrexham, UK LL13 9XSReceived 7th June 2004First published on 19th July 2004Contents1. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)1.1. Reviews1.2. Instrumentation1.3. Developments in radiocarbon analysis1.4. Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbon2. Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)2.1. Instrumentation2.2. Fundamental studies2.3. Analytical methodology2.4. Quantification2.5. Depth profiling3. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)3.1. Fundamental studies and instrumentation3.2. Interferences3.3. Sample introduction3.4. Separation and speciation3.5. Analytical methodology3.6. Isotope ratio measurement4. Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)4.1. Instrumentation4.2. Fundamental studies4.3. Analytical methodology5. Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)5.1. Reviews5.2. Instrumentation5.3. Analytical methodology6. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)6.1. Instrumentation6.2. Fundamental studies6.3. Analytical methodology6.4. Quantitative analysis6.5. Single and multi-dimensional analysis6.6. Static SIMS (S-SIMS)6.7. Surface and subsurface analysis with S-SIMS and SIMS7. Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)8. Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)8.1. Reviews8.2. Instrumentation8.3. Analytical methodology8.4. Sample preparation9. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)9.1. Instrumentation9.2. Calibration9.3. Analytical methodology9.4 Sample preparation10. Other methods10.1. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)10.2. Gas chromatography–electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC–EIMS)10.3. New methodologiesGlossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis Update is part of a series of annual reviews which cover the various aspects of analytical atomic spectrometry and follows the same format as last year's.1 Although an attempt is made to consider all relevant refereed papers, conference abstracts, reports, book chapters and patents for inclusion in this review, the content of the review is highly selective. The selection of papers is based on criteria applied to focus sharply on the most significant developments in instrumentation and methodology or improved understanding of the fundamental phenomena involved in the MS process. The increasing importance of speciation and the blurring of boundaries between atomic and molecular MS require a high degree of judgement to be made in considering papers for inclusion. The main ruling criterion for all speciation papers is that the work should involve or be intended for the study of natural systems. For example, the study of synthetic metal clusters is generally not included, whereas the determination of organometallic compounds in environmental samples is.Applications of atomic MS are not covered in this Update and readers are referred to the Updates on Industrial Analysis: Metals, Chemicals and Advanced Materials,2 Environmental analysis3 and Clinical and Biological Materials, Food and Beverages.4Throughout this review, the term molecular ion will be restricted to denote only the positive or negative radical ion formed by removal or capture, respectively, of an electron. In contrast, addition of a proton or cation to a neutral molecule gives molecular adduct ions. Deprotonated molecules are considered as fragments.Although reproducibility or precision is a key figure of merit in MS, there is no agreed format for quoting it. The reader can assume that values of precision given in this Update as a percentage correspond to the RSD unless otherwise specified. In isotope analyses, however, values of precision are generally given as the SD of a permil value.It is a widespread phenomenon that analytical techniques in general and MS in particular spawn a large number of abbreviations and acronyms. A glossary of terms used in this Update appears at the end. Commonly used abbreviations are not defined in the text: others are defined in the text when used first and again in the glossary.1. Accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS)1.1. ReviewsThe overview of AMS by Hellborg et al.5 gave a concise, yet clear, introduction to the design principles of an AMS system, with particular reference to the instrumentation at the Lund facility. The characteristics of AMS that made it possible to measure very low isotope ratios (e.g., 14C∶12C down to 10−15) were highlighted and emphasis was placed on the importance of the ion source. A list of all AMS facilities worldwide was presented with details of the type of accelerator. Several topical applications were discussed, including the use of 14C in dating, environmental and biomedical studies and the measurement of 27Al and 59Ni.Although the use of gas-filled magnets for isobaric separation requires relatively powerful accelerators, it allows measurement time to be reduced as a result of the increased beam intensities. The review by Leino6 on gas-filled separators had a relatively brief section on AMS but included a useful discussion on the characteristics of the separators and their main design principles.The publication of several application reviews highlighted the wide range of research topics that AMS supports. The review of Muzikar et al.7 on AMS in geological research can be recommended for its overview of AMS techniques and their strengths and limitations. Production and transport of cosmogenic nuclides (26Al, 10Be, 14C, 36Cl 129I) in the atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere were discussed and specific applications in areas such as geomorphology, tectonics, climatology, hydrology and geochronology were used to demonstrate the wide range of geological studies for which AMS was being used. In addition to presenting a good overview of the AMS technique, Lappin and Garner8 highlighted the role of AMS in the increasing use of human trials for drug development. The role of AMS in forensic science was described by Tuniz et al.,9 in particular as an ultra-sensitive tool for crime laboratories.1.2. InstrumentationRegular upgrades are applied to AMS instruments to improve performance and increase the range of elements that can be determined. As a result, each instrument becomes unique in its design and capability, which are usually described in the form of a “facility report”. The Vienna Environmental Research Accelerator has been upgraded to a universal facility to allow long-lived radionuclides from the lightest (10Be) to the heaviest (244Pu) to be measured at natural abundance.10,11 Detailed descriptions and excellent schematic layouts were given for all components of the system (ion source, low-energy injection system, tandem accelerator, high-energy analyser and heavy-ion beam line). All components were designed to avoid beam losses, to achieve ultimate sensitivity, and to maximize stability. Additional, moveable slits were installed after the injection magnet in order to increase mass resolution to about 900 while maintaining high transmission. Good insulation was required as the slits were mounted inside the multi-Faraday-cup chamber, which was at 13 kV. A high-resolution electrostatic analyser (ESA) replaced the Wien filter of the original configuration. Charge changing and scattering of ions inside the ESA were reduced through maintenance of good vacuum (<10−7 mbar). As the detector to be used depended on the ion to be measured, a switching magnet at the end of the ESA exit beam line deflected the ion beam to the appropriate detector. Only a TOF detector had sufficient resolution to distinguish between neighbouring isotopes of heavy ions. The diamond-like carbon foils used as the start and stop detectors were the thinnest carbon foils available and were mounted on a flat copper mesh (1.2 µm wire thickness) of 90% transmission.A well-designed optical system is required in an AMS instrument to transport the beam from the ion source aperture to the accelerator with a minimum of loss. Older designs of the low energy system have been seriously limited by the use of a single-focusing magnet with a bending angle of only 15°. A new injector installed at the Lund AMS facility included a 90° double-focusing magnet and a 90° spherical ESA for optimum mass and energy separation, respectively.12 The calculations used for the design of the optics were discussed in detail. Other improvements reported for the Lund system included the installation of terminal pumping in the accelerator.13 In comparison with the unmodified instrument, this allowed a higher gas density in the stripper and improved vacuum in the accelerator tubes to be used, and resulted in increased beam transmission and better measurements. Pressure profiles were calculated from vacuum conditions obtained for different stripper gases and gas pressures in the modified system and were compared with those obtained for the unmodified system. The pressure profiles were to be used to calculate the transmission and charge-state distribution for the stripping of different heavy ions.Improvements at the University of Arizona facility, where a new 3 MV system was installed in 2000, have centred mainly on sample preparation for radiocarbon dating.14 Details were given of the new instrument and its advantages for the measurement of 26Al, 10Be and 129I. The processing of samples followed several well-defined steps and targets were pressed into a holder designed in-house. A stepped-combustion procedure was developed for the analysis of bulk sediments with low C concentrations.The report from the Seoul National University facility highlighted some of the problems experienced in running their system.15 Sparking in the accelerators was attributed to excessive moisture present during the monsoon season. Precautions were required to prevent memory effects which could occur when both biomedical samples with high 14C concentrations and other samples with lower concentrations were analysed on the system. In order to prevent the detector from becoming flooded with excessive count rates, the stripping efficiency was reduced to a low level by not recirculating the stripper gas (Ar). Use of an elemental analyser to combust samples was preferred as it gave lower background levels than combustion using CuO, even though the resulting targets gave a much lower ion beam current.An AMS facility dedicated to the depth profiling of 3H in graphite samples from the wall material of fusion experiments was installed at Rossendorf (Germany) in order to prevent contamination of the existing facility.16 The dedicated facility was based on an air-insulated low-energy (100 keV) accelerator equipped with gas stripper. After gaining experience with this system, a second, compact, system was constructed with a SF6-insulated 100 kV tandem accelerator and diamond-like carbon stripper foils. The LOD was 5×1010 atoms cm−3 and the depth range >50 µm. Although results obtained on the different AMS systems were consistent, a difference of a few orders of magnitude was observed between samples with low concentrations analysed by AMS or a conventional procedure involving combustion followed by liquid scintillation counting. The compact system could also be used for the simultaneous depth profiling of Be, C, 2H and Li using a Faraday cup at the entrance of the accelerator (SIMS mode).Methods for on-line AMS analysis continue to receive attention. A laser-induced sample combustion interface has been designed for the continuous production and analysis of CO2.17 In this way, a sample such as the effluent stream from a chromatographic or electrophoretic separation could be analysed without the fractionation normally required. A direct-injection pyrolytic interface, used to produce H2 for the determination of 3H, was designed for nl min−1 flow rates and operated without desolvation.Most of the methods developed to overcome the problem of atomic isobaric interference are variants of the “range and rate of energy loss” methods used to identify heavy ions. Litherland et al.18 modelled the use of resonant and near-resonant keV ion reactions for isobar separation of 135Ba+ and 135Cs+. Although the method could theoretically be exploited for isobar suppression, multiple scattering could be a problem and needed to be taken into account.A microchannel plate detection system with double delay line anodes and using custom-designed readout electronics has been developed for AMS.19 The 12 modules, each with a 10×2 cm active area, together covered 80% of the 1.5 m focal plane in the split-pole spectrograph. The MeV ion beam passed through a thin carbon foil, placed at 40° with respect to the beam, to produce electrons that were detected by the array. A horizontal resolution of 0.4 mm was obtained for secondary electrons accelerated to 2.5 keV. To improve this resolution, a Helmholtz-type coil pair was built to confine further the secondary electrons within a magnetic field. The new detector system was seen to hold the advantages of high-resolution position measurements, subsequent energy analysis, simultaneous readings at different positions, tolerance of high-intensity beams, handling a wide mass range and low background when used with other detectors.1.3. Developments in radiocarbon analysisImprovements in sample preparation have dominated advances in AMS radiocarbon analysis. In their overview of radiocarbon dating of iron-based artefacts, Cook et al.20 focused mainly on the simplification of sample preparation and reduction in the sample size requirement. The use of rust as a viable source of material for dating would allow precious samples to be analysed with little damage to the artefact but only on the condition that original carbon remained within the rust matrix. The authors demonstrated that carbon could be extracted from rust cleanly and gave plausible dates for the artefact, but issues of contamination and post-deposition carbon exchange still needed to be investigated. A summary was presented of all 63 previously published results for iron-based materials, together with 29 results previously unpublished. Not all iron-based materials were suitable for radiocarbon analysis, especially when materials were reworked, and Craddock et al.21 questioned in considerable depth the interpretation of AMS dates obtained from C in iron. A notable feature of the paper was the detailed discussion of the various manufacturing processes used to produce iron and steel through history and the consequences these would have on the accuracy of dating. The authors concluded that any iron samples could have been subjected to several processes involving heat, reduction, oxidation and carburization with a variety of fuels and fluxes, each containing C in a number of forms. This would make dating unreliable. For most artefacts the technology used to produce the iron is unknown and there was a high likelihood that the final process removed all evidence of earlier processes. The authors were not entirely pessimistic, however, and considered radiocarbon dating, when used together with other archaeological information, to be useful for elucidating the possible history of the artefact, even if a reliable date was not available.A plasma-chemical procedure for the extraction of 14C from perishable archaeological artefacts was found to have four main advantages over traditional combustion.22 It was “virtually non-destructive”, acid pre-treatment to remove carbonate was unnecessary, the background was low and the presence of oxalates in the sample did not affect extraction. Samples were initially subjected to multiple Ar plasmas to remove loosely adsorbed CO2 and then to multiple O2 plasmas to produce CO2 from the sample. The process selectively oxidized organic C in samples (for example, cloth, wood, bone) and was almost non-destructive in that it only removed organic matter (about 0.1 mg C) and left carbonate, oxalate and other mineral phases unattacked. No visible changes in paint samples were discernable. Mass fractionation was low (equivalent to ±32 years) and could be corrected by measuring the δ13C in the same aliquot of CO2 used for the 14C determination. Dates obtained by the procedure agreed well with those obtained previously by combustion.A major drawback in the direct dating of archaeological ceramics is that organic carbon in buried artefacts can be contaminated by migrating soil organic matter of a different age. An important advance in such analyses targeted pure organic compounds derived from organic residues of commodities processed in the vessels during their use.23 Automated preparative capillary GC with wide-bore capillary columns was used to isolate n-hexadecanoic and n-octadecanoic acids from lipid extracts from archaeological potsherds in high purity (>95%) and an amount (>200 µg) sufficient for AMS analysis. The major advantage of the compound-specific technique was that 14C dates could be obtained for the individual compounds, which could be associated directly to the commodities (e.g., animal fats) processed in the vessels. Analyses of appropriate blanks and controls established that introduction of background 14C contamination was minimal. Initial results yielded good correlations between the predicted date of pottery and that measured using n-octadecanoic acid. The use of n-hexanoic acid could provide anomalously young dates, probably as a result of contamination by soil organic matter.Kristiansen et al.24 hypothesized that the age of a prehistoric burial mound could be determined by dating components of soil organic matter from a buried soil surface. The soil organic C was probably formed by photosynthesis at, or shortly before, the time of burial. Soil samples were taken carefully using augurs, thereby minimizing disturbance to the mounds, and the soil organic matter extracted using acid–alkali–acid fractionation. The best age estimates were obtained by dating humic acid fractions from the organic-rich layer in the upper cm of buried soil. Considerable discrepancies from the reference dates were found for the age estimates of some samples. This probably resulted from the migration and recycling of soil organic matter and led to an uncertainty of at least 280 years. The approach could only be recommended if no more than minimal disturbance of the earthworks were allowed and no macroscopic organic remains were available.The potential problem of contamination in the direct dating of pigments in prehistoric cave paintings was addressed by applying a sample treatment procedure designed to extract only the organic C from the pigment.25 A succession of “acid–base–acid” treatments removed carbonates from the limestone walls or ground water, humic acids from the degradation of organic matter and bacteria and other living micro-organisms. The purified charcoal or humic acids were heated in a stream of O2 to remove additional organic contaminants prior to analysis. The purification process removed more than 90% of the original mass to produce pellets containing 0.5–1 mg of C. Dates obtained for paintings in several French caves suggested that ideas on the evolution of prehistoric art had to be revised.The main problem in the radiocarbon dating of bone lies in the difficulty of extracting material that contains indigenous C in sufficient amount for analysis. Three methods investigated for the pretreatment of old bones were acid treatment to remove carbonate and leave collagen for dating (Longin method), the Longin method with additional alkali extraction of collagen and reaction of free amino acids with ninhydrin to produce CO2 from carboxyl C atoms (Nelson's method).26 The modified Longin method was chosen as it gave more reliable results than the Longin method yet was less laborious than Nelson's method. The last method also required an improved vacuum line which was not available. The unreliability of the unmodified Longin method was probably due to the presence of contamination that was not removed during the pretreatment.A method for the graphitization of CO2 from carbonaceous samples was based on the use of septa-sealed vials, together with commercially available disposable materials to eliminate cross contamination, minimize handling and lower costs.27 Samples containing 0.25–10 mg C could be reduced to graphite in about 4 h and about 150 samples could be prepared in a working day. It was intended that the method would form the basis for an automated sample preparation system in which combustion products from a commercial carbon analyser would be trapped and reduced to graphite.1.4. Developments in the measurement of elements other than carbonThe high sensitivity of AMS has been exploited to measure the extremely low yields of products from super-asymmetric neutron-induced fission of uranium.28 The ability to measure 60Fe∶Fe ratios down to 1×10−16 with AMS allowed 60Fe fission products to be detected, even at yields as low as 1×10−12%. Iron was extracted from high-level radioactive waste concentrate by a two-step procedure involving complexation on and elution from a column of Tru-spec™ resin followed by cation exchange chromatography. The Fe fraction was finally extracted into diisopropyl ether and re-extracted into water, which was evaporated to form iron oxide and hydroxide for target preparation. The total decontamination factor was >107 and 40% of the total Fe was recovered. Use of a gas-filled dipole magnet with subsequent energy loss measurement gave an overall suppression of the isobaric 60Ni by a factor of >10.10Merchel et al.29 developed a procedure for the extraction of clean nanodiamond samples from primitive meteorites in just a week. A significant reduction in the processing time of standard procedures was achieved through the use of microwave digestion and oxidizing acids to dissolve major minerals. The use of AMS to investigate the isotopic composition of trace elements in diamonds was explored by measuring the Pt isotope ratios in the Allende and Murchison diamond samples. If suitable standards were available to correct for fractionation effects, accuracy on the order of 2% should be achievable. The upper limit of 1×1014 atoms g−1 placed on the abundance of 198Pt-H in nanodiamonds was consistent with what would be expected from an extrapolation of the apparently mass dependent abundance trend of the associated noble gases.The detection of cosmic γ-radioactivity of live nuclides from supernovae remnants has had an immense impact on the understanding of stellar nucleosynthesis. It is expected that nuclides with half lives of about 107 years, such as 247Cm, 182Hf, 244Pu and 146Sm, should also be present in the interstellar medium as freshly synthesised matter but they are not detectable by γ-spectrometry because of their low activity. Paul et al.30 have reported an unsuccessful attempt to detect 244Pu in a deep-sea sediment sample using AMS. The 239Pu and 240Pu present in the sample from nuclear test fallout was used throughout as an in-situ tracer for the 244Pu determination. Following separation by anion-exchange chromatography, Pu was electrodeposited on a stainless steel disk for α-counting and was subsequently processed by co-precipitating with Fe for preparation of AMS targets. Careful calibration of the voltages of the accelerator terminal and of the Wien filter was necessary to analyse the different Pu9+ isotopes in the beam transport system. An overall AMS detection efficiency of 3×10−6 was estimated from the combined number of 239Pu and 240Pu counts and the cathode content (known from α-counting and chemical recovery). Only one count of 244Pu was detected over an interval of 3.5 h. This would correspond, within statistical error, to the estimated stratospheric fallout content of the sample. The lack of detectable interstellar 244Pu placed an upper limit on the deposition of interstellar 244Pu of 0.2 atoms cm−2 year−1.2. Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDMS)2.1. InstrumentationA new electrostatic quadrupole extraction lens
					(EQEL) minimized the ion beam scattering caused by pressure gradients and space charge effects in the region between the second vacuum stage (10−3 mbar) and the high vacuum (10−6 mbar).31 Although the optics were developed for a GD source on a Mattauch–Herzog high resolution (HR) mass spectrometer, the design would be also applicable to ICP-MS. The EQEL consisted of a single cylindrical electrode and coaxial inner tube with a series of slits. Calculations showed that the penetration of the static field from the outer electrode through the slits gave the same focusing effect as a rf field in a quadrupole when the potential difference between the inner and outer electrodes was ≥500 V. The EQEL increased the sensitivity in Ar GD analysis of a Ti pin by a factor of 35 in comparison with existing optics.Oxley et al.32 developed a pin sample holder for a Grimm-type source in GD-TOFMS. The sample device was mounted on the source and a raised edge on the cathode surface ensured reproducible sample positioning. In this way, a quick change from pin to flat sample analyses was combined with the advantages of a Grimm source. Operation in the µs-pulsed mode revealed the occurrence of a diode-type discharge, which was in contrast to the usual situation of a discharge confined by the anode cylinder. Both the cylindrical surface and the flat end of the sample pin were sputter etched. Use of a macor sleeve to restrict the sputtering to the flat surface resulted in unstable operation. The sputter rate of 1.5 ng per pulse at a current density of 0.07 mA mm−2 was 50% higher than that in the normal Grimm source with 0.15 mA mm−2. The intensity of matrix ions such as Cu+ was 10% lower than when a common flat sample source was used. Analysis of NIST SRM 494 (copper) gave estimated LOD for Ag, Sb and Sn of 0.7, 1 and 0.4 ppm, respectively. The 118Sn∶116Sn ratio was measured with an accuracy of 1.9%. Polyatomic interferences were more abundant than with the Grimm type source but could be minimized by increasing the operating pressure. Preliminary experiments on a Ni–Cd coated steel pin showed that the pin sample holder could be used for depth profiling.A compact GD source, which incorporated a focusing lens, was designed for the analysis of sub-mg quantities of insulating samples or atmosphere samples.33 The coaxial-design of the source featured optical elements behind the discharge surface to direct ions efficiently towards the ion sampler. Non-conducting materials such as depleted uranium (DU) dioxide powder were mixed with indium and rolled between two titanium plates to form a wire with a diameter of 1 mm. The wire was mounted into the source by means of a rod connected to the manifold with Swagelock fitings and Vespel ferrules. Experiments confirmed the predicted tenfold increase in transmission in comparison with the previous source. Isotopes of W were measured by sputtering away only one atom layer using 2 µs pulses. Use of a capillary (internal diameter of 0.125 mm) instead of the rod allowed fluorinated organic gases such as freon 12 and perfluorotributylamine in the atmosphere to be sampled.2.2. Fundamental studiesPotapov et al.34 investigated atomization and ionization in pulsed GD with a thin-walled metal hollow cathode
					(TWMHC) by collecting dry residues of the introduced analyte solution. Use of high currents (up to 4 A) in the pulsed mode resulted in high sputtering and ionization yields due to heating of the cathode to 1200–1400 °C and the low bonding energy between the residue and the cathode surface. A self-consistent description of plasma particle distributions and dynamics together with electrical field calculations gave good agreement with experimental data for the concentrations and spatial and temporal distributions of plasma species (electrons, ions, sample atoms) and the discharge current. The simulations were also used for the experimental optimization of the sampling time and transport processes from TWMHC to the TOF analyser. The LOD for Cd and Cu were 20 and 15 ng l−1, respectively.Modeling of the ionization dynamics in atmospheric sampling GDMS identified the key experimental factors for optimization of the analytical performance.35 The simulations accounted for the generation and thermalization of secondary electrons, the formation of reagent and analyte ions by electron capture (EC) and ion–molecule reactions, the removal of ions by recombination, diffusion and ion–molecule reactions and the sampling and pumping parameters of the source. Although thermal electrons and positive reagent ions reached similar number densities, the high rate of EC relative to ion–molecule reactions caused the formation of analyte anions by EC to dominate the generation of positive analyte ions by ion–molecule reaction. The high number densities of thermal electrons and reagent ions explained the linear response over a wide dynamic range. Simulations predicted an enhancement of the analyte ion densities by increasing the flow rate through the cell or decreasing the source radius.The addition of N2 to ms-pulsed Ar GD allowed diagnostic measurements of the fundamental excitation and ionization processes to be performed.36 Specifically, Penning excitation involving metastable Ar atoms and ground state N2 molecules, as well as charge transfer between Ar ions and the added N2, decreased the ionization of sputtered atoms during the power-on plateau period by a factor of 10 when the discharge gas contained 1%
					(vol.) N2. Complementary GD-TOFMS and GD-OES experiments on a NIST SRM 1767 (iron disk) with 2 µs pulses and a fall time of <45 ns demonstrated the energy transfer from excited argon atoms to nitrogen molecules during the voltage-on period. The resulting reduction of the number of argon metastable states lowered the analyte ionization. In the voltage-off period, recombination of argon ions restored the number of metastable states, which in turn promoted Penning ionization and caused Fe+ to be detected several ms after the pulse. The nitrogen pressure could be used to control the after-peak delay and thereby to reduce the interferences by optimizing the ratio of analyte to discharge ions.The study of the distinct time regimes for ion formation in ms-pulsed GD revealed the potential of time-gated methods to combine quantification and speciation of halogenated compounds in applications such as GC-GD-TOFMS.37 The GD was operated at a rate of 100 Hz with a 50% duty cycle. Three independent digitizers collected data at >7.5 MHz in separate time regimes. Atomic ion generation prevailed during the first 15 µs after the plasma onset, whereas formation of structural fragments was at a maximum in the plateau or steady state regime (about 100 µs into the pulse cycle). Measurement during the after-peak period favoured the detection of molecular ions and protonated molecules, which were formed by inelastic collisions of neutrals from the analyte with long-lived metastables. Structural fragments were formed through electron ionization (EI), charge transfer and Penning ionization. In contrast, Penning ionization was the dominant mechanism for the formation of analyte ions in the pre-peak regime. As a result, tuning of discharge parameters in combination with time-gated data acquisition gave unprecedented control over the ionization process.The ion transport in a source by means of diffusion, migration and convection was studied by Oxley et al.38 by introducing a gas sleeve system to force the gas stream over the sample surface. The in-house designed Grimm GD source was operated in the µs-pulsed mode and combined with a commercial TOF analyser. The sample-to-cone distance and source orifice diameter were 13 and 0.7 mm, respectively, and Ar flow rate was up to 500 ml min−1. Experiments were performed with the NIST SRM 1104 (free cutting brass) and 1122 (Be–Cu) and a RM CKD 239 (cast-iron). The gas flow affected significantly the ratio of argon to analyte ions because washout effects in the plasma changed the relative importance of the ionization processes. Optimizing the pressure yielded similar results. An additional restriction between source and sampler further improved the discrimination between analyte and gas ions. The choice of appropriate delay settings eliminated the interferences from C2+, C2H+ and CN+ on the Mg signal from cast iron.2.3. Analytical methodologyThe change in signal intensities of discharge gas and analyte ions, sputter rate and crater shape due to the addition of 0.5–10%
						(v/v) hydrogen in Ar dc GD-TOFMS was systematically investigated for flat discs of RM with copper, copper–zinc and iron matrices.39 It was observed that the pressure had to be raised with increasing hydrogen concentration to maintain the discharge current (under constant voltage). This confirmed the theoretically predicted decrease of electron density due to recombination with ArH+ and H3+ ions. Whereas the Ar2+ ion signals increased by 50% and a factor of 2 upon addition of 0.5 and 10% hydrogen, respectively, those of Ar2+ increased only slightly. Analyte ion intensities were enhanced up to four-fold by hydrogen addition and increased with voltage for hydrogen concentrations >0.5%. On the other hand, the sputter rate decreased by >50% when 1% hydrogen was added but stayed nearly constant at higher concentrations. Chemical reaction of hydrogen with the surface was believed to decrease the sputter rate. The shape of the crater bottom worsened with increasing hydrogen addition.The use of collision induced dissociation (CID) of diatomic ions was an efficient way to reduce interferences in rf GDMS with an ion trap modified for the injection of externally generated ions through the grounded end cap.40 Neon served both as discharge and ion trap bath gas. Slow heating resonance excitation allowed TaO+ to be dissociated with minimal scattering loss of Au+. Ions of different m/z could be ejected or kept in the trap by sequential excitation at selected voltages in the fixed frequency mode. In this way, interferences of, for example, 154GdO+ and 155GdO+ on the 170Yb+ and 171Yb+ signals, respectively, could be avoided. Broadband excitation eliminated the contributions of 63Cu2+, 63Cu65Cu+ and 65Cu65Cu+ ions from the signals of 126Te+, 128Te+ and 130Te+, respectively. Application of CID experiments to selected Te isotopes did not change the peak intensity ratios of the other isotopes. It was foreseen that the method could be used to recover atomic ions from polyatomic species.A systematic investigation of the discharge parameters resulted in optimization of GC-GD-TOFMS with ms-pulses for atomic-ion detection with chemical speciation.41 Analyte identification exploited the GC retention time as well as the atomic ion, structural fragment and molecular weight information obtained in the pre-peak, plateau and after-peak regimes, respectively. The efficiency of analyte ionization and ion sampling decreased with pressure. Sampling close to the cathode surface maximized atomic ion signals. Increasing the distance between the sampling orifice and the cathode favoured detection of structural fragments analogous to those produced by 70 eV EIMS. Strikingly, sampling close to the cathode increased the relative importance of molecular ions produced by Penning ionization whereas sampling further from the cathode maximized detection of protonated molecules generated through proton transfer reactions with, for instance, ArH+.A comparison of atomic ion generation in both double and single pulsed GD revealed an analytical improvement through use of the additional pulse for the post-ionization of atoms sputtered during the first pulse.42 Experiments with NIST SRM 1104 and 1122 showed the delay between the pulses to be critical for the signal intensity in GD-TOFMS. The second pulse was applied at a delay of 10–140 µs and the repeller pulse delay (ion extraction) was varied between 10–330 µs. Optimized timing increased the signals from Ar+ and Cu+ ions in double pulse GD relative to the single pulse mode by 20% and a factor of 1.5, respectively, at low flow rates. At high flow rates, the signal improvement was about 20% for both ions. The optimal time window for ion extraction in the double pulse mode was larger than in the single pulse mode, facilitating optimal ion extraction. Although the addition of 10% methane to Ar reduced the formation of polyatomic ions less than expected, Cu+ ion signals increased by a factor of 5. It was believed that the destruction of methane by the first pulse improved the ionization of the sputtered neutrals by the second pulse.2.4. QuantificationA round-robin test evaluated the determination of trace and ultratrace elements in the concentration range of 1–20 µg g−1 with GD-OES and GDMS using BCR CRM 074 and 075 (copper).43 Because all 10 laboratories used HR-GDMS instruments from the same manufacturer, the study primarily addressed the comparability of the procedures. In spite of the use of pin or disc samples and different relative sensitivity factors (RSF), quantitative results were found to be relatively consistent. However, the application of the same RSF to the raw data further improved the agreement between the results from different laboratories. Hence, the authors stressed the need for exchanging calibration data.Trace levels of Cl compromise the fracture toughness of Zr–2.5Nb alloys in coolant tubes for nuclear reactors. Shekhar et al.44 developed a method for the direct determination of Cl down to ppb levels in melt ingots of Zr–2.5Nb using Ar dc GD and a quadrupole analyser. The use of both an electron multiplier and a Faraday cup for the detection of minor and major signals, respectively, resulted in a dynamic range of 9 decades. The detectors were cross-calibrated daily by measuring the 96Zr+ isotope. The RSF of 35Cl was determined on a zirconium standard disc with a Cl concentration of 155 ± 5 µg g−1 and checked by analyzing samples by both GDMS and pyrohydrolysis-ion chromatography (IC). Surface Cl contamination was believed to be responsible for the long stabilization time of ∼50 min. At concentrations <3 µg g−1, the 35Cl ion was measured because ArH+ interfered with 37Cl. Analytical figures of merit included a LOD of 22 ng g−1 and an overall precision of 1% and 10% for concentrations in the µg g−1 and ng g−1 ranges, respectively.Pulsed-rf GD-TOFMS was used for the determination of Br from organic flame retardants in commercial plastics.45 The generation of atomic and structural ions gave both quantification and speciation analysis. Measurement of the weight loss due to sputtering revealed a strong correlation between the yield and the sputter rate. The prominence of EI caused the Br+ signal to reach a constant level about 1 ms after the start of the 5 ms pulse but it lasted for only 0.2 ms after the power pulse. Low thermal stability and sputter yield prevented direct quantification in the bulk plastics, which had to be compacted in a silver matrix. The reduction of the power loss in the sample increased the sputter atomization and ionization yields. Linear calibration of the signal intensity was achieved for 0–15% Br and the LOD were 0.2 and 0.5% for discharges in Ar and Ne, respectively. The precision of the determination was 8%. The method eliminated the laborious dissolution of plastics normally required for element analysis.2.5. Depth profilingThe use of dc and rf GDMS for depth profiling of layers with a thickness of ∼100 nm was investigated by simulations and experiments.46 Modeling showed that crater shape determined the resolution of depth profiles of stacked layers each with a thickness of 100 nm. However, the non-Gaussian crater shapes made the commonly used MRI (mixing, roughness, information-depth) model inadequate for GD experiments. Hence, the depth resolution had to be defined as the reciprocal of the maximum slope instead of the distance between 16 and 84% of that maximum. Experimental evaluation was performed on 10 layers of Cu and Ni40Cr60
					(total thickness of 1 µm) on silicon. Optimized discharge conditions in Ar and use of an anode diameter of 2–4 mm yielded depth resolutions of 25 and 100 nm at depths of 0.1 and 1 µm, respectively. The depth resolution was identical for both dc and rf GD. Simulations of the gas flow in a Grimm-type GD source showed strong correlation between the crater shape in a sample of 5 µm aluminum oxide on aluminum and the calculated pressure profile in the plane 0.1 mm above the sample surface.Peláez et al.47 undertook the optimization of analytical depth profiling using a simple GD source made in-house in combination with TOFMS. The precision and depth resolution was determined for the three operating modes of Ar dc-GD (variation of either current, pressure or voltage while keeping the other two parameters constant) using Zn-based coatings (thickness of 1 µm) on steel. Variation of current in the constant pressure–voltage mode resulted in craters with vertical walls and flat bottoms parallel to the sample surface and gave best resolution. In contrast to results obtained using a commercial rf-GD-OES instrument, the sensitivity of GD-TOFMS was sufficient for detection of elements such as As and Bi at concentrations of <0.05%. A subsequent study using steel coated with galfan (Zn5Al), electroplated ZnNi (Zn12Ni) and a galvanized coating containing lead (Zn0.26Al0.11Pb) focused on quantitative depth profiling.48 Absolute sensitivity factors were derived from the analyte signal intensity as a function of the sputtering rates times the elemental concentration in homogeneous RM with 0.01–100% concentrations of Al, Fe, Ni, Pb and Zn. The constant current–pressure method was found to yield slightly better results than the constant voltage–pressure method but the constant voltage–current method was inadequate. The nominal concentrations and the depth agreed within 10–15% with the expected values.A practical comparison of depth profiling techniques using ion sputtering showed that Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), GDMS and SIMS all gave acceptable depth profiles but that sputter times and resolution differed significantly.49 Whereas Auger electron spectroscopy and SIMS were 10 times faster than XPS, they were 1000 times slower than GDMS. Auger electron spectroscopy and XPS gave the best resolution, with values of 8 and 12 nm, respectively, at a depth of 450 nm. The speed of analysis of GDMS was excellent but quantitative analysis was less impressive. Although SIMS had the best LOD, matrix effects hampered quantification. No matter how much attention was paid to calibration of the depth scale, none of the methods could achieve the accuracy of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of cross-sections.3. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)3.1. Fundamental studies and instrumentationAlthough not widely used, ICP-TOFMS has attracted sufficient interest to warrant a detailed discussion of performance, together with a brief overview of applications.50 The advantages of TOFMS detectors over quadrupole mass filters for multi-elemental analysis of fast transient signals were discussed. The applications of ICP-TOFMS to the detection of signals from LA, ETV, GC, LC, CE and FI analysis were reviewed.The poor ionization of the halogens in a conventional Ar-based ICP (Ar-ICP)
					(e.g., 9×10−4% for F) has led to use of the low-pressure He-ICP as an ion source in the determination of Br, Cl, F and I.51 A 5 µl aliquot of an aqueous sample was placed on a looped tungsten filament and heated electrothermally to ∼2500 °C. The resulting sample vapour was transported to the ICP with He. The LOD of 0.13, 2.4, 23 and 0.05 ng ml−1 for Br, Cl, F and I, respectively, were much better than those from an Ar-ICP. The absolute system LOD using 5 µl of sample were in the sub-pg range and allowed the direct determination of F at the ng ml−1 level in water to be made.Park et al.52 achieved improved ionization of As, Ge and Se by the addition of methane (10 ml min−1) to the coolant gas. The analytical sensitivity of the proposed system was at least two-fold superior to that of a conventional Ar-ICP. The LOD obtained for As, Ge and Se were 0.012, 0.014 and 0.064 µg l−1, respectively. Recoveries of 103, 99.9 and 96.5% for As, Ge and Se, respectively, were obtained for NIST SRM 2670 (freeze-dried urine).A conventional ICP consumes about 15 l min−1 Ar. A high-efficiency torch (HET) for ICP-MS was developed53 in which the plasma could be sustained at an Ar flow rate of 8 l min−1. The sensitivity, electron number density, degree of ionization and ionization temperature of the plasma sustained by the HET were evaluated and compared with those from a conventional ICP torch. The HET could be used for ICP-MS without significantly degrading the performance of the ICP. Furthermore, the HET reduced the matrix effects which occurred in the presence of calcium and sodium species.The 13C ∶
					12C isotope ratio could be determined in aqueous solutions of tryptophan, myoglobin and β-cyclodextrin with about 1% RSD using a prototype ICP-MS instrument with a pair of quadrupoles operated in parallel.54 Spectral interference on 13C+, thought to be from 12C1H+, occurred with incomplete dissociation of myoglobin and/or β-cyclodextrin, but was not apparent with tryptophan. Decreasing the aerosol gas flow rate slightly from that yielding maximum signal eliminated the 12CH+ interference. The count rate of the minor isotope (13C+) was artificially enhanced by increasing the voltage of the 13C+ detector, and/or by changing the ion beam splitter potential from a central position. Modifications were made to the skimmer orifices and ion extraction optics to improve sensitivity.The performance characteristics of MIP-TOFMS using Ar, Ar–He and He as plasma gases were studied.55 The use of He plasma gas provided both a very simple background spectrum free from any significant Ar peaks (but still with NO+ peaks) and good analyte sensitivity. The Ar-MIP, on the other hand, had a background containing many Ar, H2O, N2 and O2 species under a wide range of plasma sampling distances.A simple diagnosis procedure for estimating matrix effects used both non-analyte and analyte signals.56 Non-analyte signals (e.g., ArO+, N+) were used to monitor changes in plasma conditions. Matrix effects of Al, Ba, Cs, K and Na on 19 non-analyte signals and 15 element signals were monitored. Multiple linear regression was used to build the prediction models for objective feature selection. The use of non-analyte elemental and polyatomic signals was evaluated for diagnosing matrix effects. Models used to diagnose overall matrix effects were more accurate than those which used the effect of individual analytes. The models presented were able to diagnose successfully matrix effects with at least an 80% success rate.3.2. InterferencesThe formation and elimination of interferences in ICP-MS remains a subject for much discussion. The correct optimization of experimental conditions and appropriate choice of skimmer cone materials (aluminium, copper, gold, nickel, silver) was, yet again, re-emphasized in a study of the heat of formation for polyatomic species.57 Segura et al.58 investigated the determination of ultratrace levels of Fe in complex matrices, such as ground water and mineral samples, using cold plasma conditions (shield torch, 700 W rf power) to reduce Ar-based interferences. In order to overcome the increase of Ca-based interferences in a cold plasma, a microcolumn (5.0 cm length and 3.0 mm id) filled with an Fe-specific chelating agent was used to separate Ca and Fe. A preconcentration factor for Fe of ∼92 and a LOD of 0.74 µg l−1 were achieved using 10 min sampling time and 1 M HNO3
					(200 µl) as eluent.The use of mixed-gas plasmas to reduce the effects of non-spectroscopic interferences was studied using spatial profiling of ion distributions.59 The addition of 5.9% N2 to the outer Ar gas flow greatly reduced the effects of matrix-induced enhancement. The formation of analyte oxides decreased by over an order of magnitude in the mixed-gas plasma, at the expense of overall sensitivity. A comparison of the analyte profiles with those of background ions suggested that EI was the predominant ionization mechanism in Ar plasma whereas, in mixed-gas plasmas, charge-transfer with Ar+ was implied by the close match between the Ar2+ profiles and those of the analytes. The identical radial profiles of background polyatomic ions also suggested that the Ar-containing ions all had Ar+ as the precursor ion in the plasma. In contrast, the different profiles observed for these ions compared with Ar2+ in the mixed-gas plasma implied that these ions originated from the combination of neutral Ar with an ion. A mixed O2–Ar plasma was used by Kralj and Veber60 in an evaluation of non-spectroscopic effects caused by moderate concentrations of organic compounds (methanol, acetonitrile, tris-(hydroxymethyl)methylamine, glucose and ammonium acetate). Analyte signal changes were ascribed to the effect of C derived from volatile organic compounds (VOC). It was concluded that the high signal enhancements observed for As, Se and Zn could be attributed to more efficient ionization, caused by the presence of C+ ions from the modifiers.The effect of various dynamic reaction cell (DRC) parameters (collision gas flow rate, reaction gas flow rate and bandpass settings) and the matrix composition on the mass discrimination of isotopic ratios was studied by Vanhaecke et al.61 In-cell fractionation resulting from collisional losses, space-charge and kinetic effects differed with various DRC parameters. It was concluded that accurate results could be gained by using an external rather than internal correction for mass discrimination. The matrix composition also had a significant influence on the mass discrimination, especially when condensation product ions were used for isotope ratio measurement. This effect could be overcome by the use of a matrix-matched isotopic standard for external correction or by isolation of the target element from the major matrix components.The use of collision cells for the reduction of interferences continues to attract attention. The LOD for the radioisotopes 135Cs, 137Cs, 210Pb, 226Ra and 90Sr improved by factors of 33, 22, 500, 50 and 100, respectively, after optimization of collision cell parameters.62 It was noted that Cs and Sr measurements required different collision cell parameters when Ba or Zr, respectively, were present. O'Brien et al.63 used a hexapole collision cell with a direct injection high efficiency nebulizer (DIHEN) to determine elements such as As, Ca, Cr, Fe and Se. Compared with analysis using a micronebulizer–spray chamber arrangement, improved sensitivities (by a factor of 2–9), LOD and precisions were obtained. The use of CID with H2 reduced isobaric interferences, whereas the use of He as a collision gas enhanced analyte ion transmission as a result of collisional focusing. The technique was successfully applied to the determination of Ag, Al, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb, Sr and Zn (0.49–6.5×109 atoms cm−2) on silicon wafer surfaces. The method was also applied to the determination of Cr in DNA.The application of ICP-MS with a DRC has been investigated by a number of workers for reduction of the Ar2+ ion population in the determination of Se. Operating parameters, including reaction gas flow and transmission settings, of the DRC using various reaction gases (CH4, H2, N2O and O2) were optimized using isotope ratio measurements and the S/B ratio of the analytes.64 The highest reaction efficiency for the determination of Se was obtained using CH4 as reactant gas. The use of N2O and O2 also suppressed the Ar2+ interference, but reaction or scattering losses of Se+ and SeO+ were significant under these conditions. The use of H2 led to a high S/B ratio but it was also the least efficient gas for reducing the levels of Ar2+ interference. The determination of Se as SeO+ was also investigated using N2O and O2 as reaction gases, but the slow oxygenation of the potentially interfering Mo+ ion reduced the analytical use of this approach. The best LOD in natural waters (2 ng l−1) were obtained by determining 80Se+ using CH4 to suppress the levels of Ar2+. The use of a tunable-bandpass reaction cell for the determination of Se in serum and urine RM was evaluated by Nixon et al.65 Samples were diluted with a solution containing 10% ethanol, 1% HNO3, 0.5% Triton X-100 and internal standards (Ga and Y). Reaction cell conditions were optimized for the suppression of Ar2+ using CH4 as the reaction gas. It was concluded from the analysis of NIST SRM (bovine serum and urine) that closer correlation with reference concentrations was obtainable with DRC-ICP-MS than with conventional ICP-MS.Further applications of collision cell technology included its use to reduce carbon-based polyatomic ion interferences in the ETV-ICP-MS determination of Cr, Mg and Si.66 Interferences on Cr and Mg isotopes were reduced by the use of NH3 as a reaction gas. The LOD for 28Si+ and 29Si+ were greatly improved over those for conventional ICP-MS; however, NH3 was found to be unsuitable as a reaction gas for the determination of 30Si+, presumably due to the formation of NO+ species. The results of S/B studies indicated that the optimized experimental conditions for DRC were similar to those for solution nebulization and ETV for Cr, but different for Mg and Si. Potential interferences on 28Si+ were found to be reduced by the use of NH3 reaction gas in a DRC.67 Optimization of operating parameters improved the S/N by over an order of magnitude for the determination of Si in steel, giving a LOD of 2 µg g−1. Validation of the method was carried out by the determination of Si in NIST SRM 15h (Carbon Steel, 0.1 C) and 368 (Carbon Steel, AISI 1211). Accuracy was better than 3% with a precision <5%.Liu and Jiang68 used DRC-ICP-MS for accurate determination of Cu in coal fly ash samples with high levels of titanium. The polyatomic isobaric interferences caused by the formation of TiO+ at m/z 63 and 65 were avoided by measuring the product cluster ion Cu(NH3)2+. The method was applied to the determination of Cu in NIST SRM 1633a and 1633b (coal fly ash). The precision between sample replicates was <2.0% and the results agreed well with the certified values. The LOD for Cu was 0.015 ng ml−1.The determination of S and selected trace elements in metallothionein (MT)-like proteins using CE-ICP-MS with an octopole reaction cell was described by Profrock et al.69 Polyatomic ions that interfered with the determination of 32S were minimized by the addition of Xe to the collision cell. The method was applied to the detection of Cd, Cu, S and Zn in commercially available MT preparations and MT-like proteins extracted from liver samples of bream (Abramis brama L.). The LOD were 0.5, 0.3, 3.2, 1.3 and 0.5 µg l−1 for Mn, Ni, 32S, 34S and Zn, respectively. The authors recommended the use of external calibration for the determination of Cd and S in commercially available MT preparations.3.3. Sample introductionThe continuing development of sample introduction techniques has yet again provided a large body of research, somewhat at the expense of new technology. Again, LA has attracted numerous studies, with the trend continuing towards descriptions of applications, rather than novel developments. The coupling of separation techniques, such as CE, GC and HPLC, to ICP-MS instruments appears to have almost reached routine status, with ICP-MS increasingly being relegated to the role of an element-specific detector.3.3.1. Laser ablation. The use of LA for sample introduction remains as popular as ever. Much effort is being put into elucidating the nature, formation and sizes of particles generated during the ablation process. Günther and his colleagues have been prolific in their studies in this field. The use of wavelengths (λ) of 266, 213 and 193 nm under identical conditions with a single solid state laser source (1064 nm Nd∶YAG) for harmonic generation, together with sum frequency mixing and optical parametric oscillation, was evaluated.70,71 Experiments were carried out on the NIST 600 series SRM (silicate glasses). Particle size distributions for all three wavelengths increased in the order 193 nm < 213 nm < 266 nm and were believed to be related to the absorption behaviour of the sample at each wavelength. The change towards larger particle sizes with increasing wavelength influenced the noise in the transient signals and their intensity ratios. Ablation at 193 nm produced a smaller number of particles with diameters of >150 nm than ablation at longer wavelengths. Due to the decreased number of particles with diameters >150 nm, vaporization-induced elemental fractionation within the ICP was reduced, especially for the more transparent samples. The ICP-MS response for ablation at λ
						= 213 nm was biased towards that at λ
						= 193 nm and λ
						= 266 nm for opaque and transparent samples, respectively. The work showed that the choice of wavelength influenced the particle size distribution, which could be controlled to enhance vaporization, atomization and ionization effects within the ICP.Horn and Günther72 investigated the influence of ablation cell carrier gasses Ar, He and Ne on the particle size distribution generated and subsequently transported during the LA process. Several glass RM were analysed using λ
						= 193 and 266 nm. The particle size distributions were determined using an optical particle counter within the diameter range of 0.1 to >2 µm. The results illustrated that the ablation carrier gas strongly influenced the particle size distribution for λ
						= 193 nm while this effect was far less pronounced for ablation using λ
						= 266 nm. The experiments also showed that ablation at λ
						= 266 nm produced primary particles, which were not principally influenced by the ablation carrier gas environment, whereas ablation at λ
						= 193 nm produced a larger amount of vapour, which subsequently condensed to form aggregates. This explained the large increase in sensitivity obtainable by ICP-MS when using He carrier gas together with 193 nm ablation systems, whereas only a minor increase was observed when using λ
						= 266 nm under similar conditions. The influence of the laser energy density on the particle size distribution as well as on values for transport efficiency was also investigated.Interaction of the laser with different samples leads to distinct particle size distributions. A particle separation device, developed to minimize particle-size-related incomplete sample ionization in the ICP, gave effective particle separation by using centrifugal forces in a thin coiled tube.73 The particle cut-off size was varied by changing the number of turns in the coil, the gas flow and the tube diameter. Quantitative analysis with non-matrix-matched calibration RM, revealed that the particle cut-off sizes had to be chosen according to the ICP conditions and the instrument used for analysis. Analysis of various sample materials demonstrated the applicability of the device. The production of ions for silicate matrices in the ICP was significantly reduced for particles >0.5 µm in diameter and was dependent on the element monitored. A washout procedure was developed to reduce memory effects caused by the separated particles. This had the additional benefit of allowing trapped particles to be studied. This work showed the importance of particle-size-dependent ICP-MS signal response and the potential of the separator for reducing ICP-induced elemental fractionation.In a study of the ablation of copper metal, Jackson and Günther74 showed that, whilst significant isotopic fractionation occurred at the ablation site at low laser fluence, the dominant source of isotopic fractionation at high laser fluence was the preferential volatilization of 63Cu during incomplete vaporization and ionization in the ICP of particles >0.5 µm in diameter. The larger particles (>100 nm) in a laser-produced brass aerosol were enriched in Cu, whereas the smallest measurable particles (<100 nm or in the vapour phase) were enriched in zinc.75 Solution nebulization analysis on digested filter-collected aerosols resulted in a higher Cu ∶ Zn ratio than the certified value for the brass sample. A number of conclusions were drawn from the study: the ablation process led to no measurable Cu enrichment at the ablation crater rim; the deposition of Zn between the ablation site and the aerosol collection on filters led to a Cu ∶ Zn ratio up to 37% higher on the filter in comparison with the certified value; LA aerosols measured by ICP-MS led to significantly lower Cu ∶ Zn ratios in comparison with the certified value. The various sources of fractionation were thought to cancel each other out and to lead to an agreement between measured and certified values.To evaluate a new chemically assisted LA-ICP-MS technique for elemental ratio analysis of soil samples, Hirata76 determined Pb∶U ratios for zircon samples previously analysed by other techniques. Conventional LA for measurement of Pb ∶ U ratios showed considerable elemental fractionation during ablation, mainly due to the large difference between the elemental volatilities of Pb and U. Introduction of 1,1,1,2-tetrafluoroethane into the laser cell caused a reaction of refractory U compounds to form volatile UF6 under the high-temperature conditions at the ablation site and avoided the redeposition of U around ablation pits. Despite the incomplete reaction, formation of volatile UF compounds improved the transport efficiency of U. Precision of the 206Pb∶238U ratio measurement was 3–5%
						(2σ) for NIST SRM 610 (silicate glass) and Nancy RM 91500 (zircon). The U–Pb age data obtained agreed, within analytical uncertainties, with the previously reported values. The observed Pb∶U ratio for solid samples was relatively insensitive to laser power and ablation time.The analytical performance of LA-ICP-MS using fs and ns UV laser pulses was assessed in an attempt to overcome thermally induced chemical fractionation.77 These lasers had Gaussian beam energy profiles. Resulting crater morphologies and analytical signals showed that the use of a fs laser yielded ablation with minimal thermal effects. Despite the less stable energy output of the fs laser, the measured Pb, Pb∶Th and Pb∶U isotopic ratios were more precise, repeatable, and accurate than those obtained with a ns laser. Measurements on glass, monazite and zircon RM also showed that fs LA-ICP-MS calibration was less matrix dependent than when ns lasers were used and was therefore more versatile.High-speed photographs and videos of an ICP have been used to examine the fates of solid particles produced by LA by means of the trajectories through the plasma, the lifetimes and emission behaviour of particles.78 Desolvated particles from a nebulized Y solution and particles ablated from a Y2O3 pellet were mixed and introduced simultaneously into an ICP. High-resolution digital photographs and video sequences were captured with shutter speeds of approximately 65 µs. The plasma behavior of particles generated by a frequency-quadrupled Nd∶YAG laser (λ
						= 266 nm) or an ArF excimer laser (λ
						= 193 nm) was compared, and either Ar or He was used as transport gas through the ablation cell. No red emission from YO was visible in the ICP when a 20 µl min−1 nebulizer was used to spray a 2000 ppm aqueous Y solution. This suggested that the wet droplets from this nebulizer desolvated almost completely before entering the ICP. These particles atomized and ionized like the small dry particulates from LA. However, many large ablated particulates were observed to pass through the plasma intact, possibly contributing to signal noise, deposition on the sampler and skimmer cones, and elemental fractionation.A two-point calibration method for LA-ICP-MS was based on the mixing of desolvated particles from a Teflon microconcentric nebulizer (MCN) and particles ablated from a localized position on a solid sample.79 The comparison of analyte signals from the solution with those from the ablated solid allowed calibration to be achieved without the use of matrix-matched or pelletized solid standards. The loss of sample weight in the ablation cell was measured on-line with a piezoelectric microbalance for signal normalization. The relative accuracy of the quantitative analyses of NIST SRM 612 (glass) and 1264a (steel) were 3–12%, except for Bi and Pb in steel which were distributed heterogeneously and probably subject to fractionation. The use of He instead of Ar as transport gas reduced fractionation.Bizzarro et al.80 determined in-situ Sr isotopic compositions of apatites and carbonates. The study examined the Sr isotopic homogeneity among coexisting igneous minerals with high Sr (>3000 ppm) and low Rb (<<1 ppm) levels within a single ∼50 µm thin-section. The precision (∼0.005%, 2σ) of 87Sr ∶
						86Sr values measured by LA-ICP-MS was similar to that obtained by TIMS analysis but the measurement time of only 100 s was much reduced from the >1 h needed for TIMS analysis. The combined total analyses (n
						= 107) of apatite and carbonate yielded 87Sr∶86Sr ratios ranging from ∼0.7025 to ∼0.7031. This variation in Sr isotopic composition was larger than the estimated external reproducibility (∼0.00005, 2σ). The large range of 87Sr∶86Sr values suggested to the authors that apatite and carbonate precipitated predominantly under non-equilibrium conditions.3.3.2. Thermal and chemical vaporization. A novel electrostatic precipitator for the determination of analyte transport efficiencies from a tube furnace ETV-ICP-MS was described by Ertas and Holcombe.81 The simple experimental set-up captured the analyte electrostatically using a negative corona discharge. The absolute transport efficiencies were determined for Be, Bi, Cd, In and Pb to be 26±3, 35±1, 39±8, 35±1 and 50±11%, respectively. Addition of Pd as carrier enhanced transport efficiencies by 20–50% for all elements except Bi, for which the efficiency decreased by 17%. The addition of NaCl produced transport enhancements of up to 50% for all five analytes. The mean efficiency for collection of the aerosol leaving the ETV was >90% for the five elements studied. Reasonable precision could be obtained with approximately 10 ETV firings consuming ∼20 ng. The transport results were in good agreement with previous studies using similar ETV design and analyte masses.A tungsten filament ETV and ICP-TOFMS system was developed for the rapid and simultaneous determination of Cr, Cu, Li and Pb in human whole blood and serum samples.82 The vaporizer, based on a commercial tungsten filament in a 17.3 ml quartz cell with a filament lifetime of >350 firings, was especially suited to the evaporation of minute amounts of sample. The vaporizer was coupled to the plasma torch via an 8 cm (3 mm id) glass tube. Sequential and “modified simplex” algorithms were used to optimize the voltage/current heating programs (drying, pyrolysis, vaporization and filament cleaning) for sample evaporation as well as the ICP-TOFMS operational parameters (carrier gas flow rate, modulation pulse width) for the simultaneous determination of 17 isotopes. The compromise operation parameters of the tungsten filament ETV system differed for aqueous standard solutions, human whole blood and serum samples. An Ar-ICP carrier gas flow rate of 1.16 l min−1 provided optimum results for the detection of transient signals. By using 10 µl sample volumes of aqueous multi-elemental standard solutions, absolute LOD (3σ) in the range 0.007–0.1 pg (Ba, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Ga, In, Mn, Ni and Sr), 0.11–0.19 pg (Ag, As, Bi, Li, Pb and Pd) or 11 pg (Fe) were achieved. The precision was 2–6% for 10 replicate analyses of multi-elemental sample solutions (5 ng ml−1 for all elements except Fe, which was at 20 ng ml−1). The method accuracy was verified by the analysis of NIST SRM 909 (Human Serum) and Nycomed Pharma 404108 RM (Human Whole Blood) for Cr, Cu, Li and Pb. Other than the addition of a phosphate-based matrix modifier, followed by appropriate dilution, no sample pretreatment was necessary. Calibration was achieved by internal standardization using multi-elemental solutions. Good agreement with the certified values was observed.Slurry sampling ETV-ICP-MS has been applied to a variety of materials and analytes. In one study, Cd, Hg, Pb and Tl were determined in coal and in coal fly ash.83 An ultrasonic probe was used to homogenize a 25 mg ml−1 slurry in the autosampler cup just before introduction of the slurry into the graphite tube. The procedure was optimized for analyte sensitivity, furnace temperature program, amount of modifier, acid concentration, gas flow rate and particle size. For Hg, the pyrolysis stage was omitted and a low vaporization temperature (450–1000 °C) was used. The residual matrix was eliminated in the first step of the following cycle. The modifiers used were: Pd for Cd and Tl; Au, Ir or Pd for Hg; Ir or Pd for Pb. The accuracy of the method was assessed by analysing six coal RM and one coal fly ash RM. With the exception of Hg in BCR No. 180, results were typically within the 95% confidence interval of the certified values, or close enough (sic) to the recommended values, as long as the samples were ground to a small enough particle size. The LOD were typically around 0.08, 0.03, 1 and 0.02 µg g−1 for Cd, Hg, Pb and Tl, respectively. The precision was <5%. In another study, Hg and Tl were determined in environmental samples.84 The slurry was homogenized in the autosampler cup with a constant flow of Ar, just before transferring an aliquot to the graphite furnace. Modifiers and carriers studied included solutions of KMnO4, in both untreated and Ru-treated tubes, K and Mn in solution. The best thermal stabilization and sensitivity were obtained with KMnO4 in an untreated tube, in particular for the determination of Tl. The accuracy of the method was assessed by the analysis of eight certified RM. External calibration was used with aqueous standards prepared in the same medium as the slurries. The LOD in the samples were 0.18 and 0.07 µg g−1 for Hg and Tl, respectively. The precision (n
						= 3) found for the different samples was 0.8–11 and 1–9% for Hg and Tl, respectively. In a third paper the determination of As, Pb, Se and Sn was reported in sediment slurries.85 The ETV tube was treated with Ru as a permanent modifier, and an optimized mass of 1 µg of NaCl was added to the slurry (1 mg ml−1) as a physical carrier. The optimum pyrolysis and vaporization temperatures were 800 °C and 2300 °C, respectively. The effect of different acid concentrations in the slurry on the analyte signal intensities was evaluated. The concentrations measured for six sediment RM were within the 95% confidence level of the certified values. The LOD were: 0.17, 0.3, 0.05 and 0.28 µg g−1 for As, Pb, Se and Sn, respectively. The precision (n
						= 5) for the different sediment samples was 1–8, 29, 6–12 and 3–8 for As, Pb, Se and Sn, respectively.The influence of instrument operating conditions and slurry preparation was investigated for ultrasonic slurry sampling ETV-DRC-ICP-MS for the determination of Cr and V in soil samples.86 Ascorbic acid was used as the modifier to enhance the ion signals. The intensities of ions isobaric with Cr and V were significantly reduced by using NH3 as the reaction cell gas. Results obtained for Cr and V in NIST SRM 2709 (San Joaquin soil) and 2711 (Montana soil) using the method of standard additions agreed with the certified values. The precision between sample replicates was better than 3% and the method LOD, estimated from standard addition curves, was approximately 0.16 and 0.24 µg g−1 for Cr and V, respectively.Elemental signatures of rare earth elements (REE) in fish otoliths were determined by Arslan and Paulson87 using a solid phase extraction protocol in combination with ETV as a sample introduction procedure for ICP-MS. Various parameters, such as carrier gas flow rate, atomization temperature and chemical modification, were optimized. Severe memory problems were experienced at atomization temperatures of <2800 °C due to incomplete vaporization. An increase in the Pd chemical modifier concentration up to 0.5 µg in the 70 µl injection volume led to a four-fold enhancement of the integrated signals. This phenomenon was attributed to the carrier effect of Pd rather than stabilization, since no significant losses were observed for drying at around 700 °C, even in the absence of Pd. Preconcentration was performed on-line at pH 5 by using a mini-column of Toyopearl AF-Chelate 650M chelating resin, which also eliminated the calcium matrix of otolith solutions. After preconcentration of 6.4 ml of solution, the concentrate was collected in 0.5%
						(v/v) HNO3
						(0.65 ml) in autosampler cups, and then analyzed by ETV-ICP-MS. The method was validated with the analysis of a fish otolith RM. Results obtained from otoliths of fish captured in the same habitat indicated that otolith REE concentrations were more dependent on environmental conditions of the habitat than on species differences.Anderson and Pergantis88 developed a novel sequential pneumatic nebulization (PN) hydride generation (HG) ICP-MS method for the determination of As and Se species. The method offered the advantage of sample introduction via either PN or HG by simply rotating a 4-way switching valve while the system was in operation. In PN mode, the liquid sample was aspirated into the ICP, allowing the total amount of each element to be determined. In HG mode, only the As and Se species that formed volatile hydrides were measured. Conveniently, this differentiated between the four most toxic arsenic species (arsenate, arsenite, monomethylarsonic acid and dimethylarsinic acid) on the one hand, which formed volatile hydrides, and the virtually non-toxic forms (arsenobetaine, arsenosugars, etc.), which did not, on the other. This allowed the amounts of toxic and non-toxic As species present in a sample to be estimated. For As, the technique gave LOD of 36 and 1 ng l−1 in PN and HG modes, respectively. For Se, the LOD were 1.50 and 220 ng l−1 in PN and HG modes, respectively. The technique gave good long- and short-term stabilities of <6% RSD for both elements.3.3.3. Nebulization. A DIHEN was used by Baca et al.89 to couple a thin-layer electrochemical flow cell with an ICP-MS instrument to perform on-line anodic stripping voltammetry
						(ASV). The ASV-DIHEN-ICP-MS technique was capable of analysing selected heavy metals present at ultratrace levels (sub-pg g−1 levels) and with LOD lower than that available from conventional ICP-MS. In addition to good analytical performance, the technique offered other attractive features, such as the ability to eliminate matrix effects and the possibility of probing electrode reactions involving trace amounts of metal species. For conducting ASV on-line with ICP-MS, the DIHEN offered advantages over the MCN, such as reduction of both memory effects and potential artifacts from the erosion of the Hg film into the flowing solution stream. Compared with a direct injection nebulizer (DIN), the DIHEN was easier to operate and its simpler design and the lack of back pressure in the DIHEN capillary made it more compatible with coupling to the thin-layer electrochemical cell.The most critical operating parameters for the determination of Hg present in organic solvents using a DIHEN with FI sample introduction were the nebulizer gas flow rate and amount of O2 added to the plasma.90 A nebulizer gas flow rate of 0.3 l min−1 together with O2
						(50 ml min−1) added to the plasma auxiliary gas flow gave stable conditions and high analyte sensitivity. The recovery of Hg from HgCl2, CH3HgCl, (CH3)2Hg and HgO in hexane was 99±4, 101±4, 95±4 and 104±7%, respectively. The LOD for Hg in hexane was 85 pg ml−1 based on 3σ on the signal for a 201Hg-spiked blank. A gradual deposition occurred at the nebulizer tip and partly blocked the gas annulus and, under the optimized conditions used in this work, the nebulizer could be used for only ∼50 hexane samples before cleaning was necessary. The rate of deposition seemed to be related to the amount of carbon introduced through the nebulizer.A DIHEN-ICP-MS system was used by Kahen et al.91 to analyse petroleum samples dissolved in volatile organic solvents. To minimize solvent loading, the solution uptake rate was reduced to 10 µl min−1, far less than the 85 µl min−1 commonly used for aqueous sample introduction to the DIHEN, and O2 was added to the nebulizer gas flow and outer flow of the ICP. Factorial design was applied to investigate the effect of nebulizer tip position within the torch and of the nebulizer and intermediate gas flow rates on the precision and the net signal intensities in multi-elemental analysis. Cluster analysis and PCA were performed to distinguish between the different isotopes, oxide species and doubly charged ions. Acceptable recoveries (100 ± 10%) and precision (<3%) were obtained for trace elements in a certified gas oil sample and a custom-made RM using FI analysis. Because of high blank levels, LOD were 1–3 orders of magnitude poorer for organic sample introduction than those obtained for aqueous solutions.Jensen et al.92 investigated the suitability of a DIN and a MCN for the analysis of drug substances containing Br, Cl and I. Using the DIN at flow rates of 25 and 50 µl min−1, the influence of 0–50% methanol and 0–25% acetonitrile on the sensitivity was studied. The relative sensitivity of Br and Cl decreased with increasing amounts of organic solvent, whereas that for I reached a maximum at low concentrations of organic solvent and then declined with increasing amounts of organic solvent. Unlike the response of the DIN, that of the MCN depended on the analyte structure because many Br-, Cl- and I-containing compounds were partially lost in the desolvating unit. For those compounds that were not lost, the sensitivity was independent of methanol concentration in the solvent.When self-aspirating nebulizers are used for coupling CE to ICP-MS, it is important to offset the suction effect to avoid degradation of the separation. Sample uptake rates for three MCN of the same model, in combination with a cyclonic spray chamber, were characterized and compared for utilization in CE-ICP-MS interfaces.93 The specific model studied had a nominal uptake rate of 100 µl min−1 at 1 l min−1 Ar gas flow rate. Sample uptake rates at various nebulizer gas flows were measured by aspirating water from a weighed container and calculating the uptake rate in µl min−1. The nebulizers studied provided good day-to-day reproducibility, but a comparison of the three nebulizers reflected a significant difference in performance. The characteristic of decreasing uptake rates with increasing nebulizer gas flow could be exploited for sample introduction for CE-ICP-MS. Uptake rates showed strong dependence on Ar gas flow rates and the dimensions of the sample uptake tubing.3.3.4. Flow injection. A novel low-volume electrolysis cell was developed specifically for use in a system with electrochemical HG (EcHG) sample introduction for the rapid and simultaneous determination of the hydride forming elements As, Bi, Ge, Hg, Sb and Se.94 The EcHG conditions (electrolyte concentrations and flow rates, electrolysis voltage and current), and ICP-TOFMS operational parameters (carrier gas flow rate, modulation pulse width) were optimized for the simultaneous determination of 12 selected isotopes. The absolute LOD (3σ) using a 200 µl sample loop were in the range 10–160 pg for As, Bi, Ge, Hg, Sb and 1.1 ng for Se. The precision was 4–8% for seven replicate injections of 20–100 ng ml−1 multi-elemental sample solutions. The analysis of NIST SRM 1643d (Trace Elements in Water) showed good agreement with the certified values for As and Sb. However, the value obtained for Se was dramatically different from the certified value. This was believed to be due to the presence of hydride-inactive Se species in the sample. Recoveries of better than 93% for Ge and Hg and 83.9% for Se were achieved on a spiked SRM sample. The method was successfully applied to the simultaneous multi-elemental determination of hydride forming elements in spring water samples originating from two different regions in Hungary.A FI system combining electrolytic dissolution and programmable isotope dilution (ID) ICP-MS was proposed by Packer et al.95 for the determination of Pb in high-purity copper. Best electrolytic conditions were achieved using 1.5 M HNO3 as electrolytic solution and applying 2.5 A (dc) current via a gold cathode for 4 s. The 206Pb∶208Pb ratio was measured before and after on-line addition of the 208Pb-enriched solution. Precisions for isotope ratio measurements and the determination of concentration in samples containing 7–70 µg g−1 Pb were 0.5%
						(n
						= 3) and <4%
						(n
						= 9), respectively. No significant difference at the 95% confidence level was observed when the results were compared with those obtained by conventional dissolution.Band broadening due to laminar flow and spray chamber dead volume is a potential problem in FI-ICP-MS. Sonke et al.96 studied these two dispersion effects with a sheath flow CE-ICP-MS interface. A numerical model was used to simulate advection diffusion processes in the CE-capillary and dispersion in the spray chamber. Experimental results of FI with this CE-ICP-MS interface agreed well with numerical modeling results. Dispersion due to laminar flow depended strongly on capillary diameter and analyte diffusion coefficient, and to a lesser extent on laminar velocity and capillary length. This typically amounted to a peak width increase of one order of magnitude. Use of three different spray chambers of 5, 20 and 150 ml dead volume demonstrated an increase in band broadening and peak tailing with increasing dead volume. The use of standard Scott-type spray chambers (>90 ml volume) increased peak widths by 5–10 s regardless of the injection time. A low-dead-volume spray chamber was recommended for experiments for which resolution was critical. The authors felt that this modeling approach could be extended to the coupling of other FI techniques, such as micro-LC and nano-LC with ICP-MS.3.4. Separation and speciationThe coupling of chromatography to ICP-MS remains as popular as ever, with the emphasis still strongly on the separation science. The review of Montes-Bayon et al.97 focused on the basic principles of LC-ICP-MS, its historical development and the many ways in which this technique could be applied. Different LC separations were discussed as well as the factors that had to be considered for their coupling with ICP-MS. Recent applications to the speciation of environmental, biological and clinical samples were also presented.The coupling of CE with ICP-MS allows high separation efficiency to be combined with good sensitivity, low sample consumption and good LOD. The interface between CE and the nebulizing system of the ICP-MS plays a key role in their combination. The most important factors in interface design, considered by Ye et al.98 in a review with 35 references, included electrical connections, nebulizer designs and flow compensation in the nebulizer system. Methods for achieving a stable electrical current within the capillary included the employment of concentric sheath flow, stainless steel components, platinum wire and silver paint. The structures and performance of various nebulizer designs (concentric, micro-concentric, high efficiency, ultrasonic and direct injection) were reviewed and compared. Four compensation systems suggested for elimination of nebulizer suction were negative pressure at the inlet of the capillary, a sol–gel frit at the outlet of the capillary, the pumping of an appropriate make-up flow to the interface and the make-up flow rate. An overview of the evolution of CE-MS focused on its application to speciation analysis.99 Different interfaces of CE to ICP-MS, as well as various nebulizer designs, were described and their characteristics presented. The efficiency of CE coupled to MS in speciation analysis was illustrated by a number of relevant applications to the study of inorganic, organometallic (Hg speciation) and bio-inorganic (As and Se speciation) compounds.A simple, rapid and accurate multicapillary GC-ICP-TOFMS method was developed for speciation analysis of methylmercury (MeHg+) and inorganic mercury (Hg2+).100 The potential of ICP-TOFMS for transient multi-isotope detection of very short signals with full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 0.4 s was evaluated. Purge-and-trap (P&T) and split injection systems were compared for species separation and profile of transient signals. The use of P&T injection, after in situ derivatization of the ionic mercury species with sodium tetraethylborate, gave a baseline chromatographic separation of MeHg+ and Hg2+ within 35 s. To correct for matrix-induced ion signal variation and instrumental drift, propylmercury (PrHg+) was used as internal standard. The LOD were 16 and 257 fg g−1 for MeHg+
					(as Hg) and Hg2+, respectively, and the analytical precision for 10 successive injections of a standard mixture containing 10 pg MeHg+
					(as Hg) and Hg2+ were 1.2 and 4.1% for MeHg+ and Hg2+, respectively. The method was validated by analysis of NRCC RM DORM-2 (dogfish muscle) and BCR CRM 464 (freeze-dried tuna fish).A sheathless interface based on a total consumption micronebulizer operating at flow rates of 0.5–7.5 µl min−1 was developed as an interface between capillary HPLC and ICP-MS.101 Mobile phases containing up to 100% organic solvent could be nebulized and transported into the plasma efficiently without the need for cooling of the spray chamber or addition of oxygen. The coupled system was applied to selenopeptide mapping in a protein fraction isolated from a selenized yeast extract. The LOD of 150 and 200 fg for 80Se and 82Se, respectively, were a factor of 100–150 better than those reported previously for HPLC-ICP-MS. The minimal peak broadening (∼5 s at FWHM) allowed baseline resolution of more than 30 selenopeptides to be made. This is not feasible using conventional HPLC-ICP-MS coupling.Yang et al.102 described a method for the accurate and precise determination of dibutyltin (DBT) and tributyltin (TBT) by species-specific ID-GC-ICP-MS. The analytes were extracted with acetic acid using open microwave digestion, derivatized with sodium tetraethylborate and extracted into iso-octane. Mass bias correction was based on the expected ratio of 120Sn∶117Sn to that of the mean 120Sn∶117Sn ratio calculated from the inorganic Sn peaks detected in all chromatograms. The precision of calculated 120Sn∶117Sn ratios for both DBT and TBT in RM improved by a factor of two when a sector field instrument was used instead of a quadrupole instrument. The method was validated using NRCC RM PACS-2 (marine sediment). The three-fold enhancement in S/B obtained with the sector field instrument led to LOD for DBT and TBT of 0.3 and 0.4 ng g−1, respectively. An on-line mode, based on continuous nebulization of a Sb solution, was successfully applied for mass bias corrections in the rapid and precise determination of TBT in sediments and biological tissues.103 A simultaneous microwave extraction and spiking procedure was rapid (2 min) and gave a precison of 0.7–13.7%.Encinar et al.104 reviewed the innovative approach of using isotopically-labeled butyltin species for sea-water and sediment speciation analysis. The capability of the “multi-isotope-labeled multispecies” spikes to control every step in speciation, even the initial solid–liquid extraction of the species from a solid sample, was discussed. This strategy allowed detection and correction for species degradation during the extraction process to be achieved. This method was applied to the study and validation of the solid–liquid extraction of butyltin species from a sediment RM using mechanical shaking and microwave, ultrasonic and pressurized liquid extraction.Application of a large volume sample stacking technique improved, by a factor of 9–13, the LOD obtained with two different CE-ICP-MS interfaces (a Babington and a high efficiency nebulizer).105 The proposed methodology was successfully applied to metal speciation studies of MT isoforms present in eel liver from both control and Cd-induced groups. Not only was there an increase in Cd isoform signals following exposure to Cd, but differences in the profiles and signal intensities of the Cu and Zn isoforms were also observed.Smith et al.106 described the use of HPLC-ICP-MS for the quantitative determination of ZD0473, a platinum anticancer drug, and its related biologically active “aqua” compounds in biofluid samples. Comparison of the method performance with that of a conventional HPLC-triple quadrupole MS (HPLC-MS/MS) system showed that both methods were capable of providing accurate and precise results but that the HPLC-ICP-MS method had advantages of extended linear range and superior sensitivity. The LOQ for ZD0473 of 0.1 ng ml−1 was considerably better than that (5 ng ml−1) obtained using the HPLC-MS/MS method. Use of a single combined HPLC-ICP-MS/MS system made it possible to determine the relative MS/MS response of the “aqua” compounds for the first time.An ICP-MS instrument equipped with a DRC was used for on-line detection of V in serum after size exclusion chromatography.107 Use of a buffer at physiological salinity (0.15 M NaCl) was necessary to ensure the stability of the V compounds during chromatography but resulted in ClO interferences on V in the ICP-MS analysis. This was overcome through use of the DRC, which resulted in unhindered detection of V without adapting the conditions of the chromatographic separation. The merits of CH4, CO, NH3 and O2 reaction gases were compared, as well as those for the combination of Ar (collision gas) and H2
					(reaction gas). In each instance, the reaction cell parameters were optimized in order to obtain the lowest LOD for 51V (as 51V+ or as 51V16O+ with O2 as the reaction gas) in the Cl-rich solution. The best LOD for vanadate of 4 pg V in 100 µl serum injected was obtained with NH3 reaction gas. The repeatability was 7%.The use of HPLC-ICP devices for the determination of non-metals is less common than with metals. Peters and Jones108 reviewed the applications of HPLC-ICP techniques for the determination of compounds containing C, P, S and the halogens. The instrumentation used for each application was described, and the performance of the systems summarized.3.5. Analytical methodologyThe high resolution and sensitivity of HR-ICP-MS has been exploited by Chipley et al.109 to determine very low concentrations of elements in soils by a new, on-line, continuous-leach technique, producing real-time data. Solvents (deionized H2O, 1% HNO3, 10% HNO3 and 30% HNO3), were sequentially pumped through a column loaded with 20–50 mg of the sample. The mass spectrometer was scanned continuously at low, medium or high resolution, depending on the element and the interferences to be resolved. The authors found that release patterns of the trace elements could be matched to the major element composition of specific minerals.The provision of timely information on the distribution and level of contamination following a nuclear incident has been investigated using HR-ICP-MS combined with ultrasonic nebulization and on-line ion chromatography (IC).110 A method for the determination of Am, Np and Pu in food within 3 h, without compromising accuracy or LOD, was presented. Samples were prepared by HNO3 closed-vessel microwave digestion, evaporated to dryness and diluted into a mobile phase of 1.5 M HNO3 and 0.1 mM 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid. Separation of 239Pu from 238U was achieved using a commercially available polystyrene–divinylbenzene IC column. Instrumental sensitivity for 238U was found to be >2 × 107 cps ppb−1, giving a LOD for Pu of 0.02 pg g−1.The analysis of both aqueous and organic phases following solvent extraction is often a time-consuming process. Ekberg et al.111 presented a technique whereby Zr in both aqueous and organic phases, contained in an ethanol carrier phase, could be measured using the same calibration curve. The method was successful as long as the organic and aqueous content in the carrier phase was <10% and was suitable for environmental studies involving the analysis of organic fractions, such as metal fingerprinting of petroleum fluids. The ability to use readily available and traceable aqueous standards led to significantly improved confidence in the analytical results.A study of single particle analysis of colloids in water using ICP-MS showed that the transient signal induced by the flash of ions due to the ionization of a colloidal particle in the plasma torch could be detected and measured.112 The intensity of the signal was recorded and the peaks analysed as a function of both the particle size and the fraction of the total element concentration in the colloid phase. The frequency of the flashes was found to be directly proportional to the concentration of particles in the colloidal suspension. After developing the theory on detection, composition and intensity of ion flashes generated by colloid ionization in the plasma torch, tests were performed on model colloids (rutile, alumina, goethite) and on a natural clay (montmorillonite). The experimental conditions and isotopes used to detect natural colloids in a single particle analysis mode were described.3.6. Isotope ratio measurementA new approach to the estimation and correction of mass bias was based on modelling the instrument response function.113 Isotope ratio measurements of Cd and Sn were used to study the variation of mass bias with time, absolute mass and mass difference between isotopes in multiple collector (MC) ICP-MS. No statistically significant variations were seen over the first 20 min of analysis, after which the data deviated significantly from the original measurement. The pattern of the points about the mean value suggested spectral interference and/or inaccurate values for the true isotope ratios as the cause of the deviation. However, the variation of bias with mass difference between isotopes did show a linear relationship. When a true instrument-response function was investigated using a multi-element solution, a second order polynomial provided the best fit to the data. The mass bias correction derived from such a model was used to calculate corrected Cd isotope ratios that were closer to the natural values than those obtained from other, commonly used, correction expressions. Increasing the concentration of a matrix element (bismuth or calcium) significantly affected the value of Cd and Mg isotope ratios. The direction and magnitude of the effect was dependent on the position in the MC array with the heavier isotopes suffering higher levels of suppression. This effect was instrument dependent and was not observed for an instrument with a different MC array. A method of semi-quantitative analysis was developed that used the bias of 16 isotope ratios across the m/z range to define the parameters in a quadratic instrument-response function. The function was then applied to calculate the concentration of 24 analyte elements based on knowledge of ionization efficiencies and the concentration of a single internal standard. This approach gave errors in the calculated concentrations that were comparable with the results obtained by using 6 internal standards, and did not require separate measurement of a standard solution to predetermine the instrument response.The use of transient and steady state signals for the determination of isotope ratios was discussed by Carrion et al.114 The transient signals were generated using a FI system with four different loop volumes coupled to an ICP-TOFMS via a Meinhard or an ultrasonic nebulizer. No matrix effect on the measured isotopic ratio and its precision was observed in the analysis of solutions (0.5–100 ng ml−1 in 4% HNO3) of isotopic Pb and Rb, with or without added matrix (110 mg l−1 Na). Under steady state conditions (30 s integration, n >5), the best possible precision (RSD) for isotopic ratios was 0.08, 0.49, 0.04 and 0.07% for 85Rb∶87Rb, 204Pb∶206Pb, 207Pb∶206Pb and 208Pb∶206Pb, respectively, using the analogue detection mode. In transient mode, the corresponding precisions were 0.2, 0.1, 0.3 and 0.3% RSD, respectively. Best accuracy and precision were achieved with calculations using the peak height at a minimum of five data points. The quality of the measurements improved for longer integration times, higher concentrations and with transient peak profiles that reached a steady state level. The data obtained for the two smallest loops were of poorer quality since the analogue signal intensities were rather low. The ion counting data obtained for concentrations ≥10 ng ml−1 and the two larger loops had to be dead-time corrected. Use of ultrasonic nebulization gave better precision than the Meinhard nebulizer due to a 10-fold increase in signal intensity.Capillary GC coupled to either MC-ICP-MS or ICP-TOFMS, with simultaneous aspiration of aqueous samples creating wet plasma conditions, was investigated for the isotope ratio determination of the transient signal from trimethylstibine. 115 In addition, the influence of different mathematical models on the precision of the isotope ratio determination of transient signals was investigated. The trapezium integration of full or half peak gave precisions of 0.08 and 0.02%, respectively, using MC-ICP-MS, whereas ICP-TOFMS gave values of around 0.2%. Use of MC-ICP-MS revealed a chromatographic isotope fractionation of trimethylstibine with (CH3)3123Sb eluting earlier than (CH3)3121Sb. As a consequence, the measured 123Sb∶121Sb ratio shifted by about 2%. Two different approaches were attempted to correct instrumental mass bias effects in order to be able to measure natural isotope fractionation. First, Cd and Sb in aqueous solution were simultaneously introduced with the GC carrier and ICP Ar gas flow, and secondly, a standard–sample bracketing approach with a gas standard introduced via the GC was used. The co-elution of chloroform had no significant influence on the isotope ratio of Sb in trimethylstibine determined by GC-ICP-MS. Samples from a laboratory sewage sludge fermentor were analysed and isotopic fractionation of the biologically produced trimethylstibine was found.A new technique for the precise and accurate determination of Cd stable isotope compositions using MC-ICP-MS was applied to geological materials and meteorites.116 Mass bias correction was made using external normalization to Ag. The accuracy of the new procedure was ascertained by comparing results for meteorites with published TIMS data or by external normalization using a different MC-ICP-MS instrument. Separate dissolutions and multiple analyses of several rock and meteorite samples gave a long-term reproducibility of ±1.1 εCd u−1
					(2σ) where εCd u−1 represents the deviation of a Cd isotope ratio in a sample from that in the JMC Cd standard, in parts per 104, and normalized to a mass difference of 1 u. As little as 5–20 ng of Cd was sufficient for the acquisition of precise and accurate data.An ‘off line’ method of data integration overcame problems experienced with the determination of Cr isotope ratios using single collector ICP-MS and led to a nearly ten-fold improvement in the repeatability of measurement of natural 52Cr∶50Cr ratios.117 The reproducibility of the ratios was improved by more than a factor of 4 and the variability in average ratio from 12.5 to 0.75%. Under these conditions, direct ID could be applied as a primary method of measurement for the certification of the Cr content in a 51Cr-enriched material. The isotope ratios were measured with a repeatability of 0.1–0.7%, depending on the value of the ratio, and were corrected for mass discrimination effects using the certified isotopic RM IRMM-625.A time-resolved-analysis data acquisition technique was used to monitor the time profiles of 65Cu∶63Cu and 56Fe∶54Fe isotope ratios in the LA-ICP-MS isotopic analysis of two NIST metal RM.118 An ArF excimer laser (λ
					= 193 nm) produced pit sizes of 16–63 µm in the ablation of Cu and Fe from the metal samples. A systematic increase (1–2‰) in the measured 65Cu ∶
					63Cu ratio under prolonged ablation could be reduced to <1‰ by applying a new correction technique for the slow response of a Faraday preamplifier. Compared with that obtained by conventional measurements, the precision was improved two-fold to 0.7‰. This correction technique also improved the measurement of 56Fe∶54Fe isotopic ratios in iron and reduced the systematic increase in the measured ratio to <1‰.The first reported cold plasma ICP-MS Fe isotope study relied on reduced temperature operation of the ICP source to eliminate Ar polyatomic interferences.119 Instrumental mass bias corrections were performed by sample–standard bracketing and using Cu as an external mass bias drift monitor. Repeated measurements of a terrestrial basalt RM gave an external reproducibility (1σ) of ±0.06 and ±0.25‰ for δ56Fe and δ58Fe, respectively. The measured Fe isotopic compositions of various bulk meteorites were identical, within error, to the composition of the terrestrial basalt RM, suggesting that Fe mass fractionation during planet formation and differentiation was too small to be measurable.An alternative approach was the use of HR-MC-ICP-MS for the measurement of Fe isotopic composition.120 Spectral interferences (ClOH+ or ArN+) resulting from the use of HCl or HNO3, respectively, were completely resolved and did not affect the accuracy of the determined Fe isotope ratios. External reproducibilities of 56Fe∶54Fe and 57Fe∶54Fe isotope ratios were better than 50 ppm (1σ) at a concentration of 5 mg l−1. The instrumental mass discrimination observed for raw ratios drifted by as much as 0.09% per u over an analytical run, but could be corrected on-line by simultaneous monitoring of the 62Ni∶60Ni isotope ratio. Variations in the Fe concentrations or the acid strength of the solutions affected the apparent mass discrimination. A relative decrease in the raw 56Fe∶54Fe and 57Fe∶54Fe isotope ratios with increasing Fe concentration ruled out space charge effects as an explanation for this phenomenon. The authors suggested that the larger dry aerosol particles formed at higher Fe concentrations were not completely vaporized until later in the plasma, thus reducing the relative rate of diffusional losses of lighter 54Fe from the central channel. Virtually identical work on high precision Fe isotope ratios was undertaken by Weyer and Schwieters.121 Various interface set-ups were investigated, using both wet and dry plasma techniques, and a wide range of concentrations (50 ppb to 10 ppm) measured to demonstrate the flexibility, robustness and sensitivity of the technique. It was concluded that precision and accuracy were independent of both the sample introduction system and the sample concentration.The determination of 129I in environmental samples at ultratrace levels is very difficult by ICP-MS because of 129Xe impurities in the Ar plasma gas, 127I1H2+ interferences and the low abundance sensitivity of ICP-MS for 129I∶127I isotope ratio measurement. These problems were overcome through use of a hexapole collision cell with a mixture of He and O2 reaction gases to reduce the background intensity at m/z 129.122 After optimization of measurement procedures the LOD for 129I+ in aqueous solution was 0.8 pg ml−1. The LOD for direct 129I+ determination in contaminated environmental (soil) samples via gas-phase desorption without any additional sample preparation was 30 pg g−1.Crowe et al.123 presented a method, using quadrupole ICP-MS with a Nd ∶ YAG (λ
					= 266 nm) LA sample introduction system, for the precise (0.2% relative standard error on 206Pb ∶
					207Pb)
					determination of common Pb isotope ratios at low (∼2 ppm) Pb concentrations. Focusing the laser above the sample surface significantly improved the ratio measurement precision as a result of increased count rates and improved the homogeneity of ablated particulate matter. The use of a mixed Ar–N plasma significantly increased sensitivity and reduced mass bias.Measurement of Li isotopic ratios by MC-ICP-MS using “cold” plasma conditions was characterized by fewer baseline interferences and improved reproducibility when compared with conventional hot plasma techniques.124 The 2σ precisions for 1200, 800 and 680 W ICP forward powers were conservatively estimated as 1.1, 0.7 and 0.5‰, respectively. Matrix effects were significant at the coldest plasma temperatures, with deviations of >0.5‰ in δ7Li being observed at 680 W for solutions containing 100 and ≥500 ng g−1 Li and Na, respectively. However, no matrix effects were detected at 800 W for solutions containing up to 5 µg g−1 Na. Measurements under all conditions were strongly sensitive to variations in acid concentration and required precise matching of sample and standard matrices. Self-induced Li matrix effects were not evident for Li concentrations below 120 ng g−1. Blank corrections were, however, necessary.Variations in Hg isotope ratios in cinnabar ores obtained from different countries were determined by MC-ICP-MS.125 Values of δ198Hg (relative difference of 198Hg∶202Hg from the ratio in NIST SRM 1641d (Hg solution)) varied from 0.0 to 1.3‰. The typical external uncertainty of the δ values was 0.06–0.26‰. The Hg was introduced into the plasma as elemental Hg after reduction by sodium borohydride. The Hg isotope ratios could not be normalized using the measured 208Pb∶206Pb ratio because of a significant fractionation of Pb isotopes in the lead hydride generated with the mercury hydride. Instead, the Hg ratios were corrected using the 205Tl∶203Tl ratio measured simultaneously. The internal precision of the isotope ratio measurement was as good as 14 ppm for 60 ng Hg generated from a 10 ng ml−1 Hg solution over 10 min. A deviation of ≈50.2% per u from IUPAC values was explained by the inadequacy of the exponential law to correct for mass bias in MC-ICP-MS measurements. The absence of a precisely characterized Hg isotope RM prevented unambiguous determination of the absolute Hg ratios of the ore samples.Wombacher and Rehkamper126 investigated the application of the generalized power law (GPL) for mass bias correction as the large instrumental mass discrimination of plasma source mass spectrometers could not be accurately corrected with the common mass fractionation laws. The Nd isotope ratio data acquired with two MC-ICP-MS instruments from the same manufacturer were compared with published Nd reference values determined by TIMS. The GPL applied a variable, n, that could be used to describe different mass-dependencies. In particular, the GPL is equivalent to the power law for n
					= 1 and approaches the exponential law as n approaches 0. Whereas the exponential and power law corrected data displayed significant (>100 ppm) deviations from the reference values for some Nd isotope ratios, the instrumental mass discrimination was accurately described by the GPL. For three data sets acquired under optimal operating conditions this was achieved with n
					≈
					−0.23, but during routine operation of the instrument the n-values were observed to vary between −0.2 and −0.4. It was concluded that the GPL was a valuable tool for data evaluation in isotope ratio mass spectrometry and for the characterization of instrumental mass-dependencies. The observed mass-dependencies were in accord with isotope fractionation by kinetic transport processes.A MC-ICP-MS instrument fitted with multiple ion counting detectors in addition to the array of Faraday detectors was used to measure Pu isotopes.127 Use of the multiple ion counting detectors avoided the need to cycle a number of small ion beams through a single collector. This increased efficiency of ion beam usage, combined with the elimination of ion beam instability, made multi-channel analysis ideal for low-level Pu isotope analysis. Mass and inter-detector bias could be corrected for by using an external U- or Pu-based standard solution. Using minimized analytical times and desolvating nebulization, 240Pu∶239Pu ratios could be reproduced to better than 3%
					(2σ) with less than 10 fg Pu.Precise Si isotopic fractionation in silica (quartz), opal (diatomite, sponges) and standards has been determined by employing MC-ICP-MS in dry plasma mode, using a desolvating nebulization system.128 Instrumental mass bias was corrected by measurement of Mg isotopes in dynamic mode and application of the fractionation exponential law and external normalization. The repeatability and the internal precision on the δ29Si measurements of a 1 ppm Si solution in diluted HF/HCl were better than ±0.1%
					(2σ). The accuracy was assessed by comparison with data obtained by analysis of an in-house standard using laser fluorination SIRMS. The dry plasma methodology improved the sensitivity more than ten fold compared with wet plasma MC-ICP-MS.Deschamps et al.129 examined the optimum conditions for rapid, precise and accurate determination of 234U∶238U ratios in geological materials by MC-ICP-MS. Isotopic measurements were performed using Faraday collectors in static mode only, in order to eliminate the difficulty of proper calibration of the Daly/Faraday gain ratio. However, since the instrument used had a poor abundance sensitivity, the major issue to be addressed was the tail correction, for which a modified version of that described by Thirlwall130 was used. This was based on correction of the actual tail contribution under each peak, as assessed by the tail shape measurements on mono-isotopic ion beams, instead of the usual half-mass zeros baseline estimation. A 236U∶233U double spike was employed to correct for mass discrimination bias. A desolvating-nebulizer sample-introduction system, consuming a minimum of 200 ng U, gave a 234U signal of ∼4–5 mV for 50 measurement cycles of 5 s each. Replicate measurements of an RM using this time-consuming, 10-min procedure, yielded a mean δ234U value of −36.42±0.80‰
					(2σ, n
					= 19), which was highly consistent with values reported by other laboratories. The total reproducibility, including both chemical separation and spectrometric measurement, was assessed to be ∼1.3‰
					(2σ) for geological samples.Hellstrom131 used the parallel ion-counting capability of an appropriately configured MC-ICP-MS to measure simultaneously 230Th∶234U and 234U∶238U ratios in a single solution. The method fully integrated the measurement of elemental fractionation, instrument mass bias and ion counter gain, and allowed U/Th ages to be calculated on-line on a cycle-by-cycle basis. Permil-level precision could be achieved for both 230Th∶234U and 234U∶238U ratios on as little as a few tens of ng U. As it was not necessary to collect separate U and Th fractions, a simple Tru-spec™ ion exchange resin procedure could be used to give a high sample throughput. Repeat analyses of RM gave excellent agreement with results from other laboratories.A series of experiments was undertaken by Segal et al.132 to determine the isotopic composition of Yb as accurately as possible. The 171Yb∶172Yb ratio, measured in an erbium–hafnium–ytterbium mixture and normalized using the known values for both 167Er∶166Er and 179Hf∶177Hf ratios, was used to correct all Yb ratios. The mean Yb ratios measured in this study were in fair agreement with data reported over the last 25 years and were considered by the authors to be closest to the true values. The precision (2σ) was at least 3–8 times better compared with that obtained by TIMS.A new technique for the precise and accurate determination of Zr isotopic composition in geological samples depended on complete separation of Zr from Cr, Fe and Ti using a two-stage anion-exchange procedure to avoid the presence of argides on the Zr isotopes.133 Analyses of synthetic standard solutions showed that isobaric interferences of Mo and Ru could be adequately corrected. Replicate dissolutions of the Allende carbonaceous chondrite with <100 ng Zr yielded a long-term reproducibility of ±39, 25 and 82 ppm for 91Zr∶90Zr, 92Zr∶90Zr and 96Zr∶90Zr, respectively. The method was successfully applied to terrestrial igneous rocks, meteorites and mineral separates including samples with high Ti contents.4. Laser ionization mass spectrometry (LIMS)This section covers the one-step laser irradiation–ionization of solids as well as the two-step method involving laser post-ionization of laser-generated neutrals. The section on RIMS will be confined to publications dealing with the ionization of atomic beams or gas phase neutrals under resonant conditions. Laser microprobe mass spectrometry (LMMS) refers to the use of a focused laser with a spot diameter on the sample of less than 5 µm. The application of LMMS to suspended particles in combination with TOF analysis is called aerosol-TOF LMMS (aTOF LMMS). Laser ionization using irradiation spot sizes on the sample with a diameter above 5 µm is denoted as laser plasma ionization (LPI). To summarize the characteristics of the laser, the wavelength and nominal pulse duration are denoted by the symbols λ and τ, respectively.4.1. InstrumentationUchimura et al.134 developed a rugged TOFMS with supersonic jet (SSJ) or effusive molecular beam (EMB) sample introduction for the speciation and determination of Cl in organic components of flue gases from waste incinerators. The SSJ system injected the analytes through a pulsed nozzle with Ar carrier gas while the EMB interface used a capillary without cooling. An excimer-pumped tunable dye laser or a frequency-doubled narrowband optical parametric oscillator pumped by a frequency-tripled Nd∶YAG was used for resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization. The selective ionization of different chlorophenol isomers illustrated the high degree of speciation that could be achieved. The molecular cooling in the SSJ interface improved the selectivity and sensitivity in comparison with the EMB and resulted in a LOD of 56 ng l−1 for 2,4-dichlorophenol. The sensitivity decreased with increasing number of Cl atoms in the analyte because of the shorter lifetime of the excited-state and the need for three-photon-ionization.4.2. Fundamental studiesThe TOF LMMS study of the ion emission from neodymium and praseodymium carbides at fluences between 0.5 and 16 J cm−2 with a frequency-doubled Nd∶YAG (λ
					= 512 nm, τ
					= 6 ns, repetition rate = 10 Hz) used an intensified charge-coupled device camera to detect the light of the plume with a spatial and temporal resolution of 37 µm and 5 ns, respectively.135 The signal intensity ratio of MCn+∶M+
					(M = Nd or Pr) ions was as high as 0.5, regardless of whether carbides or metal oxide–graphite mixtures were irradiated. Measurement of the velocity distributions for the emitted ions and neutral species at a distance of 0.5 mm above the sample showed mean velocities of 3 × 105 cm s−1 for neutrals and 8×105–8.7×105 cm s−1 for C+, Pr+ and Pr2+ ions. The data suggested the occurrence of high temperature vaporization followed by gas phase reactions. However, the onset of LA involved complex processes including in situ reaction of oxides with graphite to form carbides and the selvedge formation of MCn+.The relative importance of the neutral and ionized Si atoms desorbed by laser irradiation was used to investigate the redistribution of photon energy in the solid.136 In principle, this redistribution can lead to melting of the material in the subsurface over a depth corresponding to the diffusion length, or to the direct ejection of particles through distortion of the electronic structure of the sample components. The desorption was achieved with a frequency tripled Nd ∶ YAG laser beam (λ
					= 355 nm, τ
					= 5 ns, repetition rate 10 Hz) in the fluence range between 85 and 165 mJ cm−2. A tunable dye or optical parametric oscillator laser was used for the post-ionization of Si under resonant conditions (λ
					= 243.877 nm), allowing the emission of only 100 sputtered neutrals (<0.1% of a monolayer) to be detected. Energy filtering before the quadrupole discriminated against directly ejected ions in the SNMS mode. The number of ions and neutrals emitted as a function of the deposited laser energy (mJ per pulse) followed functions of e11 and e6.84, respectively. The kinetic energy (KE) distributions of the neutrals, measured by post-ionization at different distances to the target, were bimodal and the derived temperatures reflected the occurrence of both thermal and electronic emission mechanisms. Additionally, the threshold laser energy corresponded to that of molten rather than of crystalline silicon.The effect of the laser power density on the distribution between ions and neutrals generated from α-iron disilicide was studied with KrF excimer LA with and without post-ionization by an ArF excimer at a distance of 65 mm from the sample.137 An adjustable delay between the two lasers allowed KE distributions of the neutrals to be measured. The data reflected the existence of distinct regimes at low, moderate and high fluence. Specifically, a fluence of <0.7 J cm−2 produced only Fe, Si and Si2 neutrals. The Maxwell–Boltzmann equation described the velocity distribution of Si atoms. The mean KE of 0.35 eV and the derived target surface temperature of 4000 K were consistent with thermal emission. Singly and doubly charged Fe and Si ions appeared only at higher fluence and their mean KE ranged from several eV to 100 eV at a moderate fluence up to 2.5 J cm−2. Under these conditions, surface heating no longer explained the results and effective acceleration of the ions in the dense plasma was believed to occur.A study of the ion composition generated by pulsed LPI of Se targets provided evidence for cluster growth in the plasma.138 Irradiation was performed by excimer XeCl laser (λ
					= 308 nm, τ
					= 20 ns) at a fluence of 5 J cm−2. The gas phase components were sampled at distances of between 1.5 and 2.5 cm from the target. It was found that the plume closer to the sample contained Se2+, Se+, SeO+ and Se2+ as the major components with minor contributions from Sen+ cluster ions (n
					= 3–5). At greater distances from the target, however, Se+ ions were accompanied by a series of Sen+ cluster ions with n as high as 12. The Se12+ ion was the most abundant. Interestingly, all the ions with low m/z values except H+ disappeared almost completely.4.3. Analytical methodologyA significant breakthrough for speciation in frozen hydrated cells could result from the novel use of infrared (IR) matrix-assisted laser-desorption ionization (MALDI).139 In contrast to conventional UV-MALDI, in which the added matrix absorbs UV radiation, irradiation of samples at a λ in the mid-IR molecular fingerprint region allows IR chromophores intrinsic to the sample such as H2O and NaNO3 to be excited and results in the expulsion of ions. The approach was demonstrated for frozen sodium chloride solutions as a model for frozen cells. The sample was irradiated with 100 ns pulses of a free-electron laser, tunable between 2 and 10 µm. The diameter of the laser spot (100–250 µm) on the sample allowed a power density of 106 W cm−2 to be achieved. A commonly used TOFMS instrument with an ion reflector together with a laser tuned to a λ
					= 5.9 µm, was used to detect the Na+ cationized H2O and NaCl (mixed) adducts up to m/z 600. The relative contribution of the NaCln(H2O)mNa+, (H2O)nNa+ and (NaCl)nNa+ ions in single shot spectra reflected the local concentration and formation of NaCl-enriched domains due to phase separation during freezing. This study offered the prospect of quantitative speciation in sample volumes about that of a single biological cell.A mobile aTOF LMMS instrument called laser mass analyser for particles in the airborne state
					(LAMPAS) was developed for the chemical analysis of surface components in individual soot particles.140 Particle introduction was detected through light scattering, which triggered a pulsed ionization laser (λ
					= 337 nm, N2 laser). The positive and negative ions produced from the same particle were recorded simultaneously using two separate TOF tubes with a mass resolution of 400. The feasibility of speciation analysis by the analysis of soot particles (diameter of 0.2–0.5 µm) generated either from a graphite spark discharge in Ar or by a diesel engine and diluted in a chamber with 60 ppb nitrogen oxides was investigated. Quantitative analysis of diesel soot in the presence of ammonium sulfate particles revealed difficulties in distinguishing between neat diesel, neat ammonium sulfate and mixed particles.The use of laser ionization TOFMS for depth profiling has been evaluated in a study on the diffusion of phosphor and titanium dioxide coatings in solar cells.141 The absence of charge build-up on the sample was a particularly attractive feature of laser ionization in contrast to the use of SIMS. A Nd ∶ YAG laser beam (λ
					= 1064 nm, τ
					= 6.5 ns, repetition rate 2 Hz) impinged upon the sample at an incidence angle of 60°. Application of 300 shots at fluence between 1.5 and 7.1 J cm−2 yielded elliptical craters with a diameter of 1.5–2 mm. The average erosion rate was 0.3 nm per shot for titanium dioxide coatings. The top-hat intensity profile of the laser beam eliminated the typical crater effects of Gaussian beams. Comparison of LIMS with SIMS for the depth profiling of silicon wafers doped with different levels of P showed good agreement for the shape and slope of the distribution. The LIMS analysis was, however, 64 times faster than SIMS analysis. The resolution of a few nm at the interface of a 1.2 µm titanium oxide coating on silicon demonstrated the feasibility of fast depth profiling of thick non-conductive layers.5. Resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS)5.1. ReviewsA thorough treatise on RIMS instrumentation and applications to rare isotope research concluded that the method is now mature.142 Despite the steady development and refinement of high-power pulsed and continuous-wave (CW) lasers, copper-vapour pumped dye systems retained their work-horse status because of their high power and repetition rate. Although the repetition rate of only 1 kHz constrained the use of excimer laser pumping, the ns pulse length perfectly suited combination with TOFMS and allowed the LOD of 106 atoms to be achieved at a mass resolution up to 1500. The introduction of tunable, solid-state lasers offered compact, inexpensive and maintenance free alternative systems for the copper-vapour pumped dye lasers for ultra-trace analysis of Pu. The use of HR CW lasers for the determination of trace isotopes with relative abundances of 10−10 allowed RIMS to be used for applications normally undertaken by AMS, such as environmental protection, biomedical tracer studies, cosmochemistry and radiodating.The state-of-the-art and prospects of RIMS for isotopic ratio determinations in presolar grains were compared with those of magnetic sector SIMS with MC detection.143 The 40-reference review on the study of presolar grains critically assessed the use of resonant post-ionization of neutrals sputtered by primary ion beam bombardment for isotope analysis of elements such as Ba, Mo and Zr in single silicon carbide grains. Presolar material typically had 95Mo∶96Mo and 97Mo∶96Mo ratios that were about a factor of 2 higher than those in solar systems, while the excess of 138Ba and 96Zr could exceed solar levels by a factor of 3–5. A HR SIMS instrument, which allowed a Cs+ gun to be focused on a spot with diameter as small as 30 nm, was considered as a valuable complement to RIMS for the isotope imaging of interplanetary dust samples with a sub-µm resolution.5.2. InstrumentationA new ETV source with 6 filaments was used for the trace determination of Vitamin B12 in fruit juice using a 1-colour 2-photon RIMS scheme at a λ of 298.71 nm to detect Co.144 The new vaporizer allowed sequential analysis of µl aliquots to be performed without breaking the vacuum. Only filtration was required in the preparation of the juice for analysis. The method of standard addition was used for quantification in the range 1–1000 ng g−1, for which precision was about 10–12%. Although the LOD for Co was <5 pg, typical juices contained 10–30 pg µl−1.Upgrading a TOF LMMS instrument with independent lasers for desorption and ionization allowed145 traces of Pd and Rh in minerals to be determined with a LOD of 15 ng g−1. Pulsed ion extraction reduced the noise from directly emitted ions. The solid was ablated with a frequency-quadrupled Nd ∶ YAG (λ
					= 266 nm) laser and the neutral species in the gas phase were post-ionized using a Nd∶YAG pumped tunable dye laser. This instrumental combination was suitable for analysis of all elements except He and Ne. The ion signal measured as a function of the ion fluence showed that saturation of the ionization step required application at two different λ. Calibration was performed with a series of NIST SRM, containing 1.3–119 µg g−1 Pd and 7.2–49.5 µg g−1 Rh in a gold or silver matrix. The precision of the quantitative analysis was <15% and measured values agreed within 10% with those obtained using SIMS.The use of high-repetition rate (10 Hz) tunable Ti∶sapphire lasers with short pulses
					(τ
					= 100 ps) improved the overall efficiency of trace element analysis by a factor of 100 in comparison with the use of conventional dye lasers producing 10 ns pulses at 1 Hz.146 Instead of the traditional multi-laser configuration, a single laser was used in the split mode for both irradiation with a spot of 50 µm and post-ionization of the gas phase neutrals. In this way, high sensitivity and isotopic selectivity could be achieved with a simple set-up, allowing a TOF analyser with mass resolution of only 200 to be used. The LOD of Al was 3 ng g−1 per laser shot. Compared with conventional systems, the combination of higher repetition rate and more efficient post-ionization lowered the concentration that could be measured per second.5.3. Analytical methodologyThe Chicago–Argonne resonant laser ionization mass analyser (CHARISMA) upgraded with frequency-tripled diode-pumped Nd∶YAG (λ
					= 355 nm, τ
					= 8 ns, repetition rate 1 kHz) and Ti∶sapphire laser systems for desorption and post-ionzation, respectively, was evaluated for the isotopic analysis of heavy elements in individual presolar grains as small as a few µm.147 A lateral resolution of 1 µm was achieved through the use of a Schwarzschild cassegrain microscope. The application of suitable RIMS schemes circumvented the numerous isobaric interferences that would normally require HR, such as the contributions from Al2, AlSi, CaO, Cr, FeH, Ni, Si2, SiC2, TiC, and hydrocarbon ions on the signals from Fe, Mo and Zr. The analytical performance was checked by the isotopic analysis of Ba in a terrestrial sample of barium titanate and in a single silicon carbide grain with a diameter of 2 µm, isolated from the Indarch meteorite. Using 3×105 laser shots, the δ130Ba and δ138Ba values (both normalized on δ136Ba) in the meteorite grain were −888±161‰ and −266±50‰
					(2σ), respectively. These results confirmed the extra-terrestrial origin of the grain. The method was applied to the analysis of 19 single presolar silicon carbide grains (diameter 2.3–5.3 µm) recovered from the Murchison meteorite and pressed in a thin sheet of gold.148 The 2σ uncertainties of <15%
					(relative) for δ135Ba, δ137Ba and δ138 Ba (normalized on 136Ba) compared well with results obtained previously using SIMS or TIMS.6. Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)The bombardment of a sample with primary ions in the 1–25 keV range causes the development of a collision cascade over a distance of several tens of nm below the surface. Along its trajectory the projectile imparts sufficient energy to the lattice to break all intermolecular forces and to move individual atoms from their initial positions in the lattice. The generation of the analytically used secondary ions is believed to occur through the recoil of momentum towards the surface. While the extensive atom relocation destroys the molecular structures in the subsurface, a substantial fraction of the analytes in the upper (few) monolayer(s) remain intact because of the ultra-fast penetration. In static SIMS (S-SIMS) experiments, sputtering is limited to only a fraction of the upper monolayer to maximize the contribution of ions that are representative of the molecular form of the element. Speciation and characterization of organic surface analytes forms the major application of this technique. Depth profiling experiments are excluded by the principle of S-SIMS. This review restricts the use of the acronym SIMS to the dynamic mode that uses continuous sputtering for the erosion of subsequent layers. As a result, the elemental composition in the subsurface can be monitored as a function of depth. To clearly distinguish between the essentially different analytical features of the two methods, SIMS is treated in sections 6.2–6.5 and S-SIMS in a separate section 6.6. Both types of instrumentation are covered in section 6.1. As TOF mass analysers provide advantages for dynamic as well as static experiments, explicit distinction will be made between TOF SIMS and TOF S-SIMS. The incidence and emission angles, mentioned throughout this section, are expressed as the angle between the beam and the normal to the sample surface. Unless otherwise specified, the surface roughness is referred to by the root mean square (rms) parameter.6.1. InstrumentationTakanashi et al.149 combined focused ion beam milling and secondary ion analysis for 3-D analysis. A high intensity, focused Ga+ ion beam created a flat surface by the so-called “shave off” technique while another pulsed Ga+ primary ion beam generated secondary ions. The set-up was evaluated by the 3-D analysis over a depth of 8 µm of insulating polyester fibers with diameters up to a few tens of µm. The surface roughness, large depth range and sample charging during analysis made this a demanding test case. The imaging of eight planes 0.9 µm apart took about 30 hours, which included the long time required for “shaving off”. The distribution of polymerization agents such as calcium stearate was imaged by means of Ca+ and CaO+ secondary ions while Cn− ions allowed an organic UV stabilizer to be located.The bombardment of solids with a gas-cluster ion beam
					(GCIB) showed significant potential for ultra-shallow depth profiling.150 The GCIB was generated by EI of the neutral clusters in a supersonic jet of argon, oxygen or nitrogen. Space charge effects limited the diameter of the primary ion beam on the sample to 1 mm. Generation of 20 keV primary ion clusters from argon at a current density of 300 nA cm−2 allowed metals and semiconductor targets to be etched at a rate of 0.5–1 nm min−1. The KE distributions of secondary Aln+ ions (n
					= 1–6) generated from aluminium foil showed a maximum for ions with energy of only 1.5 eV while the FWHM was about 2.5 eV. Apart from atomic ions, argon GCIB typically generated cluster MAr(n)+ ions with n
					= 1,2, depending on the metal under study. The use of oxygen or nitrogen gas in the GCIB produced strong signals of SinOm+ or SinNm+
					(n
					= 1–5, m
					≥
					n) secondary ions, respectively, from silicon. The yield of high m/z ions significantly exceeded that obtained when using polyatomic projectiles such as SF5+. Analysis of native oxide films on metals required a minimal acceleration of the Ar cluster ions up to about 7 keV, equivalent to ∼3 eV per incident Ar atom. Depth profiling of a Ni–Fe permalloy film clearly distinguished between the native oxide and the alloy while the sputter-induced topography was minimal.Nittler and Alexander151 developed an analytical system for the fully automated determination of isotopic ratios in µm-sized particles on the basis of ion imaging and new algorithms to localize the particles. Scanning of a 75×75 or 150×150 µm area with a Cs+ or O− primary ion beam, focused to a spot with diameter of 1 or 0.5 µm, respectively, localized the particles of interest, which were then individually analysed with a focused ion beam scanned over an area of 3×3 µm. Use of optical encoders circumvented the poor reproducibility of the commercial sample stage and positioned the beam within 1 µm of a predefined point. The statistical error on δ28Si and δ29Si using the peak-jumping mode was 2.6 and 2.7‰, respectively, while the intrinsic uncertainty remained within 3‰. The accuracy of Al isotope determinations was within the counting error of 10–15‰. The automated analysis typically processed 300 particles per day, depending on the number of grains per area and their size.6.2. Fundamental studiesUltra-shallow depth profiling requires insight into ionization under low energy primary ion bombardment in the transient regime.152 Specifically, the effect of variations in the work function and valence bands on the emission of 28Si− ions was studied for silicon, with and without native oxide layers, sputtered by 1 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 60°. Measurement of the potential difference between the sample and a Kelvin probe head at zero current showed a significant decrease of the work function for oxide-free silicon wafers and XPS data revealed no appreciable change in the valence band close to the Fermi edge. Furthermore, the exponential relationship between the work function and the intensity of Si− ions produced from oxygen-free silicon was consistent with the resonance charge transfer assumed in the electron-tunneling model. In contrast, the exponential dependence of the Si− ion emission on the work function for Si− ion emission was no longer seen for wafers with native oxide layers and XPS data showed growth of sub-band features under Cs+ ion bombardment. The results indicated the creation of new resonance charge transfer channels which caused the observed enhancement of the Si− ion yield from oxide-covered silicon.The formation mechanisms of MCs+ and MCs2+ ions
					(M = Cu or Ni) were studied by measurement of the KE distributions of the secondary ions generated from pure metal foils under Cs+ primary ion bombardment.153 While the Cu− secondary ion intensities reflected the expected matrix effect, oxygen flooding did not influence the yield of CuCs+ and CuCs2+ secondary ions. Furthermore, the signal intensity of CuCs2+ was higher than that of CuCs+, regardless of the energy of the Cs+ primary ions (1–5 keV). In contrast, the yield of Ni− ions generated from nickel targets decreased with increasing energy and surface concentration of the Cs+ primary ions. The energy of NiCs+ ions at the maximum of the KE distribution depended on the energy of the Cs+ primary ions and was always higher than for that for NiCs2+, reflecting the lower surface binding energy of NiCs2+ than of NiCs+. The data pointed to the formation of MCs2+ ions through recombination of sputtered M− and two Cs+ ions rather than through Cs+ attachment to sputtered MCs neutrals.Molecular dynamic based simulations of sputtering of a single silver crystal by 15 keV C60 projectiles used sophisticated interaction potential functions to describe the behavior of 165000 atoms in a time domain of 4–10 ps after impact.154 The energy deposition in the immediate near-surface region was found to be responsible for the ejection of secondary particles, while the generated pressure wave in the subsurface did not cause damage or atom displacement. The diameter of the sputtered crater was about 10 nm. The yield of Ag and Ag3 particles using C60 projectiles exceeded that using Ga+ primary ions by a factor of 10 and 25, respectively.The feasibility of speciation analysis during depth profiling depends on whether the detected ions are formed through direct emission or selvedge recombination of sputtered species in the dense gas phase above the sample. Sarkar et al.155 addressed this fundamental question by depth profiling the interfaces of Au–Cu multilayers on silicon or glassy substrates. As the interface was approached from the Au layer, the Au2Cu+ and Au+ ion signals reached a maximum closer to the interface than AuCu+ and AuCu2+ ion signals. The reverse was observed when the interface was approached from the Cu layer. The dependence of Au2Cu+ or AuCu2+ ion formation on the position relative to the interface was seen as evidence against ion-beam-induced damage and selvedge recombination. Furthermore, the integrated intensities of the different clusters agreed very well with those for Cu3Au alloy, whose local presence in the multilayer was confirmed with X-ray diffraction and HR TEM data.A new statistical 3-D damage accumulation model for ion implant simulation featured automated reduction of the statistical noise by dividing the dose into sections as well as a new scheme for parallel calculations to speed up the simulations.156 Calculations of the particle trajectories accounted for the partial amorphization of a local region caused by a prior impact. The model needed only one fitting parameter for electronic stopping and used 3-D electron density distributions for different targets, including semiconductors. The model could also simulate the implantation of molecular and cluster projectiles. Simulated and experimental depth profiles agreed well for silicon implanted with As, B and BF2 projectiles at energies of 15–100 keV, angles of 0–22° and doses of 1013–1015 atoms cm−2.6.3. Analytical methodologyA systematic study of atomic ion yields for Ca, Fe, La, Lu, Mg, Sc, Si and Y from synthetic silicate glasses showed the importance of energy filtering for the reduction of matrix effects.157 Pyroxene samples were bombarded with O− primary ions (0.5–3 nA) while energy filtering with a bandwidth of 20 eV was applied between 0 and 130 eV. The absolute sensitivity of the atomic ions from the minor elements depended non-linearly on the Fe content, and matrix effects decreased with increasing secondary ion energy. The dependence of the yield of the major components on the Fe concentrations and selected energy range was different for each element. The detection of ions with energy between 60 and 100 eV provided the best compromise for minimizing matrix effects.The yield of Sin+
					(n
					= 1–11) and Sin+XlYk+ ions (X, Y = Au, B, C, N) secondary ions generated from single silicon crystals by polyatomic Aum−
						(m
						= 1–5) projectiles
					(4–18 keV) increased158 non-linearly with m. In contrast, the yield of hetero-atomic clusters such as Si3B+, Si3C+ and Si2N+, increased with the projectile energy for a given m. The strong emission of Si3B+ ions under Au5− bombardment was partly due to the non-additive sputtering and partly to the lowering of the formation energy by the saturated valence bonds. Polyatomic projectiles improved the LOD for B, C and N impurities by a factor of 100–1000 in comparison with atomic-primary-ion bombardment. Important applications were foreseen in the field of shallow depth profiling because primary ions with only a few hundreds of eV per impacting atom could be used without significant effect on the sensitivity.The combination of shallow bevelling and use of an isotope tracer
					(18O) improved the study of self-diffusion in yttria-stabilized zirconia.159 The 18O diffusion was measured as a function of temperature (650–1200 K) and yttria content (8–24 mol%). Because of the deep penetration of oxygen, samples were polished to form a new surface at an angle of 1–3° to the original surface. The shallow bevel allowed the depth range to be “magnified” by a factor of 10 in comparison with the perpendicular cross section while beam-induced artifacts were avoided. The agreement between the measured depth distributions and predictions from simulations showed the virtues of converting a depth profile experiment into surface analysis.A new procedure to deduce bulk and boundary diffusivities of oxygen in polycrystalline oxides from shallow depth profiling experiments was developed by Fielitz et al.160 Traditionally, the 18O∶16O peak intensity ratio is plotted as a function of depth (z1.2) and the boundary diffusivity is derived from the slope of the linear tail. The volume diffusivity must be deduced from the data obtained close to the surface. Both the initial surface roughness and that introduced by coating the sample with a conductive layer often hampered the procedure. The improved, alternative procedure used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and appropriate imaging software to determine the length of the grain boundaries per cm2 which was needed to calculate the volume diffusivity from the depth profile data at great depth. The approach was successfully applied to oxygen grain-boundary-diffusion experiments on high-purity dense polycrystalline 3/2-mullite material.The use of matrix ion signal intensities for the correction of topography effects exploited the similar m/z shifts for matrix and analyte ions generated from rough surfaces.161 Topography effects caused variations in the flight time of given ions of up to 50 ns. Application of PCA to the images of the matrix ions showed that all the principal components were associated with different aspects of the local topography. Mapping of the topography-related m/z shifts could be used to deconvolute the analyte ion signals and thereby to increase the mass resolution of the reconstructed spectra. It was considered that this approach would also improve the analytical precision and sensitivity.6.4. Quantitative analysisCareful optimization of the primary-ion-beam density and use of analytical expressions for recorded signal intensities as a function of bulk concentration, memory effect, and adsorption from the residual vacuum allowed Pivarov et al.162 to achieve a LOD of 6×1014 atoms cm−3for N in silicon carbide. Epitaxial layers with 1018 and <1015 N atoms cm−3 were analysed by scanning the 10 keV Cs+ primary ion beam over a 45 × 45 µm area and extracting the secondary ions from the central field of 30 × 30 µm. Cluster ions (12C14N+13C14N)−, 12C11B− and 12C13C− were used for detection because their narrow KE distributions made energy filtering independent of small KE shifts during analysis. Variation of the raster size at constant current allowed the relative signal contributions from the background, surface and bulk to be optimized.The determination of Al, B, Be, H, N and O in silicon carbide was systematically studied using 6H–SiC standards implanted with 1014–1015 ions cm−2 at 30–100 keV energy.163 Samples were bombarded with Cs+ or O2+ primary ions, depending on the element under study. Energy filtering was applied to the secondary ions with a band pass of 130 or 30–50 eV in the low and high mass resolution mode, respectively. Serious matrix effects for all cluster ions except MCs+ and for HR measurements with the narrow band pass energy filter were revealed by calculating RSF under different analytical conditions. The intensity of SiO− ions was inadequate for assessing the local oxygen distribution in silicon carbides but O− or CsSiO+ ions could be used as an alternative. The discrepancy between the depth profiles obtained using O− and SiO− ion beams except at the beginning of the experiment, was explained by the breaking of Si–C and formation of Si–O bonds when the number of beam-induced vacancies exceeded 3.3 × 1021 cm−3.Optimized determinations of the isotopic composition of B, C and O with a lateral resolution of 30–50 µm in coral skeletons allowed the pH variations during growth to be assessed with a time resolution as good as 12 hours.164 The isotopes of C and O were measured with a mass resolution of 2000, MC detection and Cs+ primary ions. A mass resolution of 5000, electron multiplier detection and O− projectiles were used for B isotopes. The internal 1σ error on 12C− and 16O− was ±0.1–0.2‰ and about 3 times higher for 11B−. The average external reproducibility estimated from replicate measurements on carbonate standards over 4 years was ±0.4, 0.65 and 0.9‰ for B, C and O, respectively. The external reproducibility for O during one day was ±0.17‰. The instrumental mass fractionation (IMF), determined by analysis of various carbonate standards, showed a systematic difference between calcite and aragonite of 4.5 and 2.7‰ for C and O, respectively. Duplicate δ18O measurements of the same spot in different sessions agreed within 0.5‰. The isotopic compositions of B and O at the µm scale could be substantially different from those measured by conventional techniques.The δ18O in stalactites is used to delineate the temperature of precipitation and climate change. Kolodny et al.165 demonstrated the benefits of SIMS with high lateral resolution for isotopic analysis of O in stalactites in comparison with conventional procedures of micro-drilling and SIRMS analysis. The resolution provided by the SIMS procedure (25 µm diameter) was a significant improvement over that of micro-drilling (0.5 mm diameter). The 16O− and 18O− secondary ions were generated by Cs+ primary ion bombardment and simultaneously collected on Faraday cups. The IMF was determined from repeated analysis of a standard (optical calcite) with a chemical composition similar to that of the stalactite. The overall precision of about 1.0‰ for 45 measurements was primarily limited by slow drift effects. The analysis of spots only 100 µm apart yielded a time resolution of between 4 and 100 years, depending on the stalactite growth rate.A comprehensive study of the analytical errors in zircon U–Pb geochronological measurements with the sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP) showed the advantage of using the 206Pb+∶238UO2+ signal intensity ratio instead of the 206Pb+∶238U+ ratio because of superior counting statistics and unreliable correction of the inherent mass discrimination by means of 238UO+∶238U+ ratios.166 The NIST SRM 610 (glass) and a natural zircon RM (Z6266) were used to delineate the relative importance of the uncertainties on the 206Pb+∶238U+ isotope ratio measurements with SHRIMP. The within-spot analytical errors of 0.58%
					(relative) for the 208Pb+∶206Pb+ and 232ThO+∶238UO+ ratios accounted for the standard deviation of the whole data set. An unaccounted uncertainty (1σ) of about 1% occurred in the measurement of 206Pb+∶238 UOx+
					(x
					= 0,1,2) ratios in both materials. By correcting the inherent discrimination using the 206Pb+∶238U+ ratio, the unexplained variation in the commonly used 238UO+∶238U+ ratios was avoided.The generation of secondary ions with lower energy than in most ion microprobes facilitated the measurement of oxygen isotope ratios in meteoritic phosphate minerals.167 The 16O− and 18O− secondary ions generated with 20 keV Cs+ primary ions from 25 µm diameter spots were detected in a MC system. Count rates of 106–109 cps reduced the analysis time to 5 min, including the pre-sputtering step. The IMF determined for whitlockite and apatite agreed within 1.19‰ despite the large differences in the composition of the minerals. The in situ measured δ18O of between 2.8 and 6.4‰ was similar to values measured for Martian meteorite whole-rock and terrestrial igneous phosphate.Mojzsis et al.168 found deviations from the mass dependent fractionation for δ33S in Archean sedimentary sulfides. The mineral-specific IMF was derived from analysis of standard grains whose matrix composition was quantified by wavelength dispersive spectroscopy electron probe microanalysis. Spots (25 µm diameter) were analysed with 20 keV Cs+ primary ions. Ion beam pre-cleaning of the samples eliminated preferential sputtering effects in the transient regime. Setting the mass resolution to 4000 reduced the contribution of 32SH− ions to the 33S signal to <10 ppm. Variations in the baseline current in the amplifiers of the MC detection system restricted the precision of the deviations from the mass-dependent fractionation line (Δ33S) to 0.1‰.Another study of the S isotope composition on the µm scale focused on the textural variations in sphalerites.169 Polished disc sections were bombarded with Cs+ primary ions over an area of 15 × 30 µm. The 34S ∶
					32S intensity ratio was measured by magnetic field switching and extreme energy filtering (200 eV). Standards of similar matrix were used to determine the IMF. The precision of 0.8‰ for δ34S measurements allowed sphalerites and associated pyrites to be categorized into pre-sphalerite, diagenetic pyrite and syn-sphalerite pyrite, intergrown with sphalerite. Furthermore, two textural varieties of sphalerite mineralization could be characterized.Imaging was used for the determination of N and its isotopic composition in interplanetary dust particles containing 2H-rich macromolecular organic components.170 The Cs+ primary ion beam was focused to a 1.5 µm diameter spot. Images of C−, O− and Si− secondary ions identified the grains of interest for subsequent analysis of the N concentration and isotope composition in the spot mode. Detection of N as 12C14N− and 12C15N− ions overcame the problem of low N− yield. Overcoming interferences from 10B16O−, 11B16O−, 12C2H−, 13C12CH− and 13C14N− required a mass resolution of 7000. Count rates were 1.2 × 104–6.6 × 103 and 25–55 cps for 12C14N and 12C15N, respectively. Analysis of kerogen standards and a mixture of olivine with kerogen showed that errors due to matrix effects were <5‰. An accuracy within 5‰ was achieved for 30 µm kerogen grains with known 15N ∶
					14N ratio. The counting statistics made the precision of µm-scale measurements a function of the size and N content of the grain studied.The O isotopic composition in presolar spinel grains as small as 150 nm from the Murray and Murchison carbonaceous chondrites was determined with an instrument which featured a 16 keV Cs+ primary ion beam with a spot size of 50–100 nm.171 Miniaturized electron multipliers, of which four could be moved into the focal plane of the instrument, allowed MC detection of O isotopes to be used. The grains were deposited on gold foils along with standards of aluminium oxide particles and a Murchison matrix sample. Separation of 16OH− and 17O− ions required a mass resolution of 5000, whereas 3000 was sufficient for the detection of 16O−, 18O− and MgO−. Images of 16O− ions and secondary electrons in areas of 20×20 µm located the grains. Subsequently, the beam was focused to 0.8 µm for isotope analysis. The SD on 17O∶16O and 18O∶16O isotope ratios were 26–34 and 32–49‰, respectively. A scatter plot of the δ17O∶16O as a function of the δ18O∶17O located meteoritic and presolar grains both inside and outside a central elliptical area.6.5. Single and multi-dimensional analysis6.5.1. Depth profiling. The sputter rate variation in ultra-shallow depth profiling was studied by analysis of 5–10 short period δ-layers of boron nitride between silicon layers (1–5 nm thickness).172 Matrix effects were avoided through use of a 0.37 partial monolayer of boron nitride with a nominal thickness of 0.05 nm. Oxidation of the first δ-layer and the high sputtering rate of 1 keV O2+ primary ions prevented detection of the first two δ-layers in samples with silicon spacers up to 3 nm thick. The differences between the δ-layer positions measured with 250 and 1000 eV primary ions at incidence angles of 0 and 9°, respectively, decreased with depth and disappeared at the 10th layer in the sample with 3 nm thick spacers. Compared with analysis in the steady state regime, the sputtering rate increased by a factor of 1.5 and 3.5 for bombardment with primary ions of 250 and 1 keV, respectively, over a depth of 2–3 nm. This depth corresponded to the atomic mixing range.Ohr et al.173 demonstrated the advantages of TOF SIMS for depth profiling 1–5 nm thick carbon layers at the top of several functional layers on glass-based hard discs. Application of the dual-beam method in TOF SIMS with 1 keV Cs+ and 15 keV Ga+ ions for sputtering and analysis, respectively, allowed 100 data points to be collected for a 1–5 nm layer with simultaneous detection of CrCs2+, CoCs2+ and CCs2+ secondary ions. The authors stressed the importance of using X-ray reflectivity data to determine accurately the thickness of carbon films as thin as 1 nm.A comparison of SIMS and low energy ion scattering (LEIS) for the analysis of 5 nm silicon nitride films demonstrated the different degree of ion-beam-induced broadening for the N depth profile.174 In comparison with SIMS, the LEIS method offered superior sensitivity for low-mass elements such as N and O. On the other hand, information on the depth distribution of N measured with LEIS was confined to about 13 monolayers (5 nm), whereas SIMS analysis yielded depth profiles to a depth of 7–12 nm. The Cs+-beam-induced atom mixing over a distance of 10 nm was believed to explain the increased width of the depth profiles in SIMS.The panoramic detection of TOF-SIMS together with the limited erosion typical of S-SIMS instruments allowed Jakschik et al.175 to determine simultaneously the depth distribution of many elements in thin layers. Atomic layer deposition was used to grow 5 nm thick ammonium oxide films on either silicon dioxide or silicon nitride layers (1 nm thickness) on the top of a silicon wafer. Application of 1 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45° in TOF SIMS allowed depth profiles for Al−, C−, H− and Si− to be recorded with 10 data points per nm. Unlike data from sequentially scanning SIMS instruments, the sensitivity and resolution of the TOF SIMS depth profile data were unaffected by the number of elements measured. In addition, there was no depth offset for the different ions.Depth profiling of alternating aluminium oxide and aluminium films with an individual layer thickness of 20 or 40 nm deposited on a (100) silicon substrate showed unexpectedly increasing variations in secondary ion signal with depth.176 By using signals from Al4+ secondary ions generated under Cs+ primary ion bombardment it was possible to distinguish between Al in a metallic or Al in a ceramic oxide environment. The increasing amplitude of the periodic intensity variation with depth excluded ion-beam-induced mixing effects. Detailed investigation of the surface at different stages of the layer deposition showed that the surface roughness rms parameter increased with the number of layers on the substrate and correlated well with the intensity variations produced by successive layers in the SIMS depth profile.The generally observed effect of ion-beam-induced damage in the subsurface did not exclude the feasibility of quantitative speciation by measurement of selected cluster ions.177 Specifically, the intensity ratio of AlOSi+ and Al2O+ secondary ions detected during depth profiling with 5 keV Ar+ primary ions allowed the binding between organosilanes and the aluminium surface to be selectively addressed. Measurements with XPS confirmed the validity of the approach. Strong adsorption of the silanes to the metal surface without effective binding made this example an excellent test case for speciation in the subsurface. The 5% precision of the ratio measurement allowed the effect of different preparation procedures and the initial surface topography of the treated metal on the silane binding to be studied.Comparison of SIMS and Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) for investigating the diffusion of Ag from Mg–Ag cathodes of organic light-emitting diodes based on tris(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminium (Alq3) revealed the importance of ion-beam-induced artefacts.178 The samples consisted of successive 50 nm thick layers of Mg∶Al, Alq3 and an organic hole transport polymer on indium tin oxide. Experimental and simulated RBS data pointed to the existence of an abrupt Ag–Alq3 interface with <0.5 at.% Ag in the first 20% of the organic layer. In contrast, SIMS depth profiles showed a significant tail of Ag extending deep into the organic layer. Furthermore, in spite of careful calibration of the sputter rate with profilometry, quite different depth profiles were obtained using 1 keV Ar+, 12.5 keV O2+ or O− primary ions. In addition to ion beam mixing and matrix effects, field-induced ion migration had to be considered to explain the discrepancy between SIMS and RBS data.The depth profiling of Se in organic semiconducting films of polyaniline emeraldine base required179 separation of 80Se− ions from isobaric interferences with m/z difference of only 0.060. The use of a TOF instrument provided sufficient mass resolution and the high transmission gave fast depth profiling of Se at total concentrations in the low µg g−1 range. Quantitative analysis using the RSF of Se in silicon showed surface concentrations of around 1011 atoms cm−2, far below the LOD of many surface analysis methods. Imaging revealed the formation of sub-µm Se-clusters, which could be of interest for quantum dot studies.Nanoscale assessment of wear and corrosion of inconel tubes required depth profiling of 59Co in nickel films on gallium arsenide substrates over a distance of >400 nm.180 A mass resolution of 300 was sufficient because the contribution of 58NiH+ to the signal of 59Co+ was <0.3%. Application of atomic force microscopy showed a roughness of 7 nm for nickel films implanted with 260 keV Co. The roughness of the crater bottom sputtered with 1.5 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45° was 14 and 58 nm at a depth of 90 and 620 nm, respectively, when no oxygen flooding was applied. Use of oxygen flooding virtually retained the initial surface roughness up to a depth of 620 nm and allowed a linear relationship to be obtained between crater depths and sputter time.The comparison of SIMS and Auger electron spectroscopy with ion beam sputtering for the depth profiling of multilayers on LiNbO3 focused on speciation and quantification.181 Specifically, a 150 nm thick Cu layer, sandwiched either between a 20 nm tantalum and a 30 nm titanium layer or between two 50 nm layers of Ta30Si18N52, was sputtered with 12.5 keV O− primary ions in SIMS analysis or 1.5 keV Ar+ projectiles for Auger electron measurements. Significant matrix effects and variations in the sputter rate occurred in spite of the in-situ oxidation by primary ions in SIMS. In contrast, peak shape analysis in Auger electron spectroscopy allowed variations in the binding energy, shape of the valence band and relocation effects as well as intrinsic or extrinsic losses to be accounted for. Although SIMS was, in general, inferior to Auger electron spectroscopy for speciation and quantification, its better LOD was necessary to probe elements with concentrations of <0.1%. Data on the position of the Ti/LiNbO3 interface obtained by Auger electron spectroscopy could be used to calibrate the SIMS depth profile.Determination of the depth distribution of H across the silicon dioxide–silicon interface at a depth of 600 nm, after treatment with low temperature hydrogen annealing, required careful optimization to avoid generation from the rim of the crater of H+ ions by electron bombardment.182 The H levels at the interface approached the trap density of 1010–1012 atoms cm−2. Alignment of the 2 keV electron and 5 keV Cs+ primary ion beams was critical as misalignment even over a distance as small as only a few 100 µm caused the signal intensity to vary by a factor of 2. A top-loaded sample holder was preferred as it gave a precision of 5.4% for the measurement of Si− signals in comparison with 10% obtained with a spring-back-loaded sample holder. Another key experimental parameter was the contribution of background hydrogen from surface contaminants and residual gas.The properties of novel bounded and hot pressed magnets depended on the hydrogen binding and electronic surface effects in hydrogenated Nd2(Fe/Co)14B alloys.183 Partial filling of the sample chamber with 2H2 allowed the material to be hydrogenated in-situ. The reduction was measured by the Nd+
						∶ NdO+ ratio which was particularly high when samples of Nd2(FexCo1−x)14B with x
						≥ 0.5 were deuterated. The fast decay of the Nd2H2−∶Fe2− ratio for x > 0. 5 pointed to the conversion of Nd2Fe14B2 into Fe, Fe2B and NdH2. The Fe2H−∶Fe2H2− and Co2H−∶Co2H2− ratios produced from Nd2Fe14B and Nd2Co14B, respectively, showed the preferential emission of Fe2H− and Co2H2− rather than Fe2H2− and Co2H−, respectively. This indicated that the capability of Fe to dissociate H2 was superior to that of Co, a trend that was confirmed by XPS.The benefits of backside depth profiling for the analysis of ultrashallow layers were demonstrated on silicon samples containing four B δ-layers (5 nm separation).184 The aim was to mimic the depth profiling of samples implanted with 100–200 eV B at a dose of 105 atoms cm−2. To avoid the high transient sputtering rate and surface roughness problems resulting from the use of low energy primary ions, backside depth profiling with 0.2–1 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 45° in conjunction with oxygen flooding was investigated. A layer of amorphous silicon was deposited on the top of the sample to avoid sputter rate variations at the interface with the adhesive in the backside mode. A 40 nm thin section was polished to a surface roughness of <0.1 nm in the area to be analysed (3 µm diameter). The 10B contamination of the surface allowed the original surface to be localized in the backside experiments. A depth resolution of 0.7 nm was achieved for both sides of the distribution when 200 eV O2+ primary ions were used.A new sample preparation method for the backside depth profiling of wafers with silicon-on-insulator (SOI) structure was based on the use of the dimpling technique in combination with polishing and etching.185 The sample (6 × 6 mm) was coated with 50 nm of palladium to improve conductivity and mounted with its front side on a glass plate. Subsequent polishing reduced the thickness from 720 to about 100 µm. Further thinning made use of the dimpling method used in TEM. Examination of the dimpled bottom provided accurate control of the thickness of the silicon layer because red light became visible through the layer at a thickness of 20 µm. Subsequent KOH etching removed residual Si without attacking the oxide layer. The roughness of the buried oxide was as good as 0.4 nm. The exposed area with a diameter of 800 µm was sufficient for SIMS analysis. Four samples could be prepared in a day. Results showed sharp interfaces in stack samples that were representative for current complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology.The improvement of depth resolution by backside depth profiling was demonstrated by a study of a B-implanted polycrystalline silicon layer with a thickness of 160 nm and deposited on a 1.5 nm thick nitrated silicon dioxide layer at the surface of a SOI wafer.186 The substrate was etched with tetramethylammonium hydroxide and subsequently treated with dilute HF. Backside depth profiling of B with 0.5 keV O2+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 56° together with oxygen flooding gave a decay length of 1 nm, whereas front side experiments gave a decay length of 2.7 nm. This was partly explained by the surface roughness of 4.5 nm for the polycrystalline layer whereas that of the etched backside surface was as low as 0.3 nm. Use of 2 keV Cs+ primary ions at an incidence angle of 44° and MCs+
						(M = B, N or O) detection gave a decay length of B profiles of 8 nm in front side experiments and 1.3 nm in backside profiling. Front side and backside experiments yielded decay lengths for N of 7 and 2.6 nm, respectively. The additional improvement for N in comparison with that for B came from the ion-induced diffusion of nitrogen in oxynitrides.6.5.2. Imaging and 3-D analysis. Use of benchtop SIMS provided a lateral resolution of 10–100 µm in the imaging of element distributions in filamentary trails of corrosion products on steel.187 The coating formed on steel by treatment with an organic corrosion inhibitor was delaminated by exposure to CsCl solutions. After peeling off the organic layer, images from secondary electrons and Cl− and Cs+ ions could be acquired from areas in the range 1.5×1.5 to 4.5×4.5 mm. Whereas Cs+ was homogeneously distributed over the surface, Cl− images showed minimal levels at the delamination front and enrichment in the head of the filiform corrosion tails. The low cost, easy operation and high throughput of the bench-top instrument were considered to compensate for the relatively poor lateral resolution.The superior sensitivity of TOF SIMS in comparison with SEM was exploited for the imaging of metals at the soil–root interface of trees from the vicinity of a copper smelter.188 The lateral distribution of Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na and Ti secondary ions was recorded over a 250×250 µm area. Normalization of the atomic ion intensities to the total number of secondary ion counts in each pixel corrected for the matrix effect. Topography effects in embedded samples due to height differences of up to 1–2 µm were responsible for the limited image resolution of 1 µm.Combination of imaging and depth profiling allowed Gammer et al.189 to perform a 3-D analysis of the non-metallic inclusions in a low-carbon chromium-steel
						(0.5% C, 13% Cr). Bombardment with Cs+
						(for Al, Ca, Mg) or O2+
						(for O and S) primary ions was used to produce secondary ion images from a central area of 150×150 µm in the sputtered region of 350 × 350 µm and to a depth of 15 µm. The lateral resolution was about 2 µm in the stigmatic mode and 0.2–0.5 µm in ion microprobe experiments on a restricted raster of 64 × 64 µm. Depending on the steel manufacturing process, spherical oxide or ring shaped particles with a size of 3–5 µm were formed with high levels of Al, Ca, Mg, O and S.6.6. Static SIMS (S-SIMS)6.6.1. Review. Belu et al.190 comprehensively discussed the present state-of-the-art and potential of TOF S-SIMS for the characterization of biomaterials. In addition to consideration of the basic principles, operational features and complications of quantitative analysis, attention was paid to the imaging capabilities, which were considered to represent the prime asset of the method for biomaterial research. Numerous examples were cited to assess critically the trade-off between ion yield and lateral resolution. Although the wealth of information obtainable through the use of atomic ions, structural fragments and molecular (adduct) ions was recognized, interpretation of the resulting complex spectral patterns was claimed to require multivariate statistical methods, which would additionally improve the LOD and precision of quantitative analysis.6.6.2. Instrumentation. Use of fine rhenium powder (635 mesh), mixed with barium sulfate in small tubes of rhenium or platinum, as the emitter in a polyatomic primary ion source increased the current of perrhenate projectiles by a factor of 1000 compared with the previously used mixture of barium perrhenate and europium oxide in a ceramic matrix.191 Heating the emitter to 1100–1300 °C yielded primary ion currents as high as 200 nA mm−2 for >100 h. This performance was maintained for barium sulfate concentrations in the range of 22 and 70% by volume. Interestingly, a freshly prepared emitter produced perrhenate ions from the central mixture but ageing caused the primary ions to come from the edge of the metal tube. A magnetic field separated the 10000-fold excess of electrons from the perrhenate beam. The high output current will need careful design of the optics to avoid space-charge effects.6.6.3. Fundamental studies. Li and Hirokawa192 resurrected the concept of fragment valence to describe the systematic trends in the composition of secondary ions produced from inorganic samples bombarded with Ga+ primary ions. Specifically, binary salts or oxides denoted as MpAn, were considered to generate secondary ions of the type MxAy with nx
						≥
						py
						+ 1 for positive ions and nx
						≤
						py
						+ 1 for negative ions. This simple approach was unsuccessful even for oxysalts, which required more complicated formulae to describe the detected ions. Even in this relatively simple case, the initial aim of predicting the major ions in a spectrum of a given analyte could not be achieved.In contrast to the previous study, Van Ham et al.193 used a comprehensive database for >100 compounds to demonstrate that ion formation could be explained by considering initial desorption of the analyte molecules in the form of neutrals by, for instance, ultra-fast thermal processes followed by ionization in the selvedge through electron interaction and adduct formation. All assignments were supported by m/z determinations typically accurate to within 50 ppm. The precision and accuracy of isotope ratio determinations were within 2%. Hence, even small deviations from expected isotope ratios could be used to detect interfering ions. The developed concepts allowed modification in surface composition to be deductively studied.The formation of secondary cluster ions from metals by Ga+ primary ions was related to the formation of eutectic phases with elements such as Al, Si and Zn.194 Specifically, the atomic and cluster ion signal intensities for Al, Co, Cr, Fe, Mn, Mo, Ni, Sb and Si were dependent on whether Ar+ or Ga+ primary ions were used and varied in a characteristic manner. Phase diagrams of Ga and the element under study revealed that formation of eutectic phases, intermetallic compounds and solid solutions could explain the detection of Ga-containing clusters for elements that form alloys with Ga, whereas metals with low solubility of Ga emitted primarily metal clusters. The authors believed that some kind of surface alloying would occur and govern the subsequent ion ejection.6.6.4. Analytical methodology. The empirical calibration of the relative intensities of secondary ions from the substrate and the surface coating allowed the thickness of ultra-thin carbon films on magnetic disks to be determined.195 The approach was elaborated for a multilayer system on glass, of which the two upper coatings consisted of a carbon layer with a thickness of 1–12 nm and a Co–Pt magnetic alloy. The ultra-smooth surface contributed to the successful calibration of the Co+∶C3H7+ ratio as a function of the independently determined thickness of the carbon film. Optimum emission of Co+ ions was obtained with a primary ion beam incidence angle of between 41 and 75°. Because of the generally accepted notion that the information depth of S-SIMS does not exceed one monolayer, the authors preferred to assume the presence of nanoscale holes in the carbon coatings even though TEM measurements did not reveal such defects.Two consecutive studies focused on the use of S-SIMS to obtain direct information on the chemical species in the upper surface layer of involatile getter (NEG) materials for MS pumps.196,197 An instrument with in situ heating capabilities was exploited to study the reaction kinetics of the activation of Zr–V coatings on steel. Use of 2 keV Ar+ primary ion bombardment caused oxidized NEG surfaces to emit M+ and MO+
						(M = V, Zr) ions. Minor signals from MC+, MH+ and MOH+ ions indicated the binding of hydrogen, hydroxyl and carbon to the metal. The activation involved reduction of the oxides by hydrogen diffusion from the bulk and/or hydrogen from the ambient atmosphere by decomposition of water and hydrocarbons at high temperature. The M+∶MO+ and MH+∶M+ intensity ratios measured as a function of the temperature were used to follow directly the activation process. The precision was sufficient to determine the ZrH+ contribution by subtraction of the different isotope signals. The second study focused on the NEG activation in Ti, V, Zr and Ti–V–Zr systems. The MX+
						∶ M+
						(X = C, CO, CO2, H, O, OH) intensity ratio could be used to measure coverage of the surface with specific oxygenated species.The differentiation of sp2 and sp3 C in activated carbon catalysts represents a speciation task far beyond the capabilities of most microprobes.198 A study of ASTM (American Society for Testing and Materials) grades of carbon showed that the relative intensities of the CH−, C2−, C2H− and C2H2− ions generated under bombardment with 5 keV Ar+ ions allowed the surface ratio of C ∶ H to be linked to the crystallinity and the content of sp2 and sp3 C. Quantitative analysis required independently characterized standards. Knowledge of the electron density and reactive sites was essential to optimize catalyst performance.A study of surface reactions on magnetic recording disks demonstrated the use of speciation capabilities for a complete description of a material with inorganic and organic components.199 Ceramic sliders and the magnetic disk were mounted inside the vacuum chamber to allow the wear tracks and slider heads to be studied without further exposure to ambient contamination. The slider contained an aluminium oxide, titanium nitride, diamond-like-carbon or cubic boron nitride coating with a thickness of 0.5 µm and the disks were composed of a multilayer of diamond-like carbon, Co-containing magnetic alloy and glass. A perfluorinated alkyl polyether film with a thickness of 10 nm served as lubricant. The detection of AlF4− ions from the wear track bombarded with Ga+ primary ions was direct evidence for the local presence of AlF3, known to catalyze lubricant decomposition. Furthermore, organic fragments showed that lubricant degradation started with the end groups. In contrast to aluminum oxide and titanium nitride coatings, layers of diamond-like carbon and cubic boron nitride on the slider suppressed the decomposition of the lubricant.An example of refined speciation analysis was the detection of covalent bonds between (100)GaAs and an ultra-thin (5 nm) S-containing polymer layer deposited by rf plasma to passivate the surface of GaAs.200 The simultaneous presence of signals from ions such as AsS2+ or GaS+ and RS+
						(R = organic chain) clearly pointed to the covalent binding of the sulfide functionality in the coating and the GaAs. The identification was confirmed with XPS data. Attempts to quantify the TOF S-SIMS signals were hindered by the typical complexity of the mass spectra from plasma-functionalized materials.An ultimate test for a speciation method is the detection of interphase interaction products. Specifically, an organic layer of heptahelicene on Ni(111) was studied because of its potential as a high-efficiency emitter of circularly polarized light in optical data storage and liquid crystal displays.201 Unambiguous identification of interphase interactions is always a challenge to MS, for which the analytes have to be released from the solid. Therefore, the intermolecular bonds within each phase must be broken but those between analytes in different phases should remain intact. The detection of heptahelicene–Ni+ and heptahelicene–Ni2+ showed that it is feasible to detect interphase interactions using S-SIMS. This application will become increasingly important with the growing use of chemical surface engineering and nanotechnology.One of the first S-SIMS studies in the field of biomedical tissue analysis dealt with the location of various elements and substances in epiretinal proliferative tissues excised during surgery.202 To preserve the distribution of the components within the tissue, samples were fast frozen in liquid nitrogen without any fixation and freeze-dried on silicon. The simultaneous detection of atomic ions such as Al, Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na and Zn and organic substances such as vitamins, palmitic, oleic and stearic acid allowed correlations of substantial interest for medical diagnosis to be made. Despite the superior lateral resolution of electron probe X-ray micro-analysis in comparison with that of TOF S-SIMS, the latter method was clearly preferred because of its lower LOD and ability to provide information on organic structures.The speciation of an interface layer buried deep under a porous oxide layer is a demanding analytical task. Development of cathode ray tubes using thermionic oxides required the chemical composition of a nickel–aluminum or nickel–magnesium alloy under a 50–100 µm porous layer of barium and strontium oxide to be investigated. Instead of dealing with depth profiling artifacts, Jenkins et al.203 focused on the development of a sample preparation method suitable for exposing the interface. The difference in mechanical properties between the porous overlayer and nickel prevented cross sectioning. Either use of adhesive tape to remove the bulk oxide in combination with physical scratching or delamination of the oxide layer under moisture attack proved to be adequate. The concentrations of Ni as well as of the activators Al and Mg were quantified by means of the atomic ion signal intensities. The interference from hydrocarbon ions on the signal of Al+ was corrected on the basis of the hydrocarbon fragments at m/z 29.The in situ study of the reaction between thin layers of sulfuric acid monohydrate with gaseous ammonia allowed the kinetics of this environmentally important process to be determined.204 Self-assembled monolayers (SAM) of sulfuric acid on gold were mounted on a cold stage at 200 K and exposed to 10−9 mbar of ammonia in the TOF S-SIMS sample chamber. Bombardment with 7.5 keV Ar+ primary ions generated molecule-specific adducts of sulfuric acid, water and ammonia up to m/z 250. The LOD were significantly better than those obtained using attenuated total-internal-reflection IR spectrometry. The mass spectra contained no evidence for ion-beam-induced damage of the surface layer.The separation of isobaric contributions from atomic ions and organic fragments was the key issue for the successful assessment of the geological and mineralogical origin of pyrites in coal seams in China.205 Whereas previous studies using low mass resolution instruments had failed, state-of the-art TOF SIMS provided sufficient mass resolution up to m/z 100 to separate the atomic ion signals from the organic interferences and thereby allow adequate quantification to be attempted. Once separated from the atomic ions, the organic fragments could be additionally used as fingerprints for cells and bacteria. As a result, distinction between bacteriogenic, framboidal, massive, cell-filling, fracture-filling, and nodular pyrites became feasible. For instance, bacteriogenic pyrites yielded high signals for Al+, Ca+, Cu+, Fe+, Ni+, Si+, Zn+ and C3H7+, whereas framboidal pyrites primarily generated Al+, AlO+ and Si+ ions together with organic contributions from C3H3+, C3H5+ and C4H7+.6.6.5. Quantitative analysis. Takeda and Fukuwa206 determined the surface concentration of hydroxyl groups in thin films of silicon oxide doped with Al, Ti or Zr and deposited on glass by rf magnetron sputtering. Although Fourier transform IR spectrometry was the most common method for characterization of silanol groups, the poor range over which information could be taken prevented selective measurements of the thin film surface. The chemical shift in XPS could not distinguish between oxide and hydroxide functions. Application of a 15 keV Ga+ primary ion beam to an area of only 80×80 µm allowed the absolute concentration of the hydroxyl groups to be determined from the 16O−∶OH− intensity ratio and calibration with RM. The <1% precision of the method led to an excellent correlation between contact angle measurements and the surface F-concentration after reaction with a perfluoroalkyl isocyanate silane.6.6.6. Imaging. The use of noise removal and multivariate image analysis allowed the distinction between surface features of similar composition to be significantly improved.207 Three established noise removal algorithms (down-binning, boxcar and wavelet filtering) were applied to the images of 20–100 µm thick patterned layers containing circular or square regions of photoresist or protein SAM and separated by 10–60 µm wide substrate channels. Increasing the pixel size by down-binning appeared to the most appropriate method for combining with PCA. The loadings of PCA models for the filtered images facilitated tracking back ions that caused the contrast in the total ion current image. Strikingly, high m/z organic ions were more useful than the atomic ions for explaining the contrast differences, even though the atomic ions had significantly higher intensities.Development of multi-gas sensors required both the removal of organosilanes from and the deposition of tin and iron oxides on micro-hot-plate sensing arrays to be characterized. The simultaneous recording of images and mass spectra in TOF S-SIMS was a significant advantage for probing the surface concentrations in layers as thin as a few nm.208 As the mass resolution in the imaging mode was inherently restricted to the separation of nominal masses, the presence of isobars was checked by taking spectra with primary ion pulses of 1 ns. The high yield of atomic ions facilitated imaging with high contrast and lateral resolution.Imaging and speciation of metal oxides by means of both atomic and cluster ions was exploited in a study on the microbially and electrochemically induced pitting of stainless steel ennobled by the microbial deposition of manganese oxides.209 Imaging revealed local spots where the Cr+ secondary ion intensity was anomalously low without a corresponding increase of the Mn+ ion intensity. Exposure of the steel to NaCl revealed the start of pitting at these sites. Analysis of Fe, Fe2O3, Fe3O4 and FeOOH reference samples showed that measurement of the FeH+∶Fe+ ratio allowed the oxidation state of the iron in the pits to be determined. Whereas Fe2O3 was prevalent in ennobled steel samples, an oxidation state between Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 was found in untreated metal.The simultaneous imaging of atomic ions and organic fragments was exploited to study the grade and stage of prostate cancer in biopsies with TOF S-SIMS.210 Prostate cancer cell cultures were fast frozen between steel plates and subsequent removal on one plate allowed cells to be cleaved in different planes, exposing the inside for analysis. After freeze drying, ion images over areas of 100×100 µm were taken with a Ga+ primary ion beam focused on to a 1 µm diameter spot. Use of the Na+∶K+ ratio, as well as the intensity of the Ca+ ions, pinpointed the fractured cells. Further confirmation could be obtained from the detection of phosphatidylethanolamine and choline fragments from the cell membrane components in fractured and unfractured cells, respectively. The specificity with which fractured cells could be located contributed significantly to correlating histology and the presence of elements such as Cu and Mg at specific sites in the cells.6.7. Surface and subsurface analysis with S-SIMS and SIMSThe capability of TOF SIMS to generate in the same experiment both molecular information on the surface and depth profiles of elements in the subsurface allowed Socha and Väyrynen211 to study the process in which silicon carbide is treated with HF and oxidized with H2O2. The co-deposition of nickel and sub-µm silicon carbide particles depended on oxidation conditions adequate for making the surface of the carbide particle hydrophilic. Application of Ga+ primary ion bombardment under static conditions generated intense signals from CxFy fragments, typical for Teflon, but none from SiFx species. Subsurface analysis at above the static ion dose confirmed the complete removal of SiFx and the formation of a SiOxCy layer under the Teflon.The combination of imaging under static conditions with depth profiling was exploited for the characterization of sphalerite (ZnS) and pyrite (FeS2) flotation samples.212 The 25 keV Ga+ primary ion beam was focused to a 200 nm diameter spot. The structural relevance of adduct ions generated in the static mode allowed interpretation of the image information to be refined. The agreement between Fe and FeOH images suggested adsorption or precipitation of ferric hydroxide on the surface. Interestingly, the change of the Cu+∶Zn+ ratio from 3.6 to 1 in the subsurface reflected the substitution of Zn atoms by Cu atoms when Cu migrated into the sphalerite mineral.The feasibiliy of surface and subsurface speciation of calcium phosphates was explored in a study of plasma-sprayed hydroxyapatite coatings on titanium implants.213 Fast plasma-annealing and subsequent cooling in layers of different thickness caused the initially generated metastable calcium phosphates to convert into different molecular forms. Application of 8 keV Cs+ primary ion bombardment on a 200×200 µm sample area showed that the ratios of low m/z cluster ions such as PO2−∶PO3− and Ca+∶CaOH+ could be used to distinguish adequately between hydroxyapatite, α- and β-tricalcium phosphate, calcium phosphate and orthocalcium phosphate. Careful calibration of the distinguishing ratios as a function of the ion dose allowed speciation to be extended to the transient regime and depth profiling mode. A study on uranium oxide particles confirmed the feasibility of speciation in the subsurface.214 Surface analysis in the static mode showed that normalization of the characteristic signals from uranium oxide ions to U+ or O− in the positive or negative ion mode, respectively, could be used to distinguish between UO2, U3O7, UO3 and U3O. Applications of dual-beam TOF SIMS depth-profiling over a distance of 2 nm on the oxidized samples showed that the normalized UO3 signal intensities agreed with the average UO3 concentration determined by XPS. Therefore, it was believed that, in spite of the ion beam damage, adequate speciation could be achieved in the subsurface.Möller et al.215 achieved the analytically demanding distinction between reacted, adsorbed and dissolved oxygen in polymers. Low-density polyethylene was exposed to an atmosphere enriched with 18O2 for up to 288 h at a temperature of 90 °C to speed up ageing. The surface and cross sections were analyzed with TOF S-SIMS using a Ga+ primary ion beam. Oxidation of the polymer structure was followed by measuring the CH318O+ and C2H318O+ ions. Interestingly, the signal intensities of 18O− and 18OH− detected as a function of the oxidation and ageing conditions correlated well with those of the organic ions, indicating the absence of adsorbed oxygen. Furthermore, analysis of cross sections confirmed that the reaction occurred homogeneously in depth terms, excluding the possible role of dissolved oxygen. Relative quantification was facilitated by using the corresponding 16O ions to normalize the peak intensities.7. Sputtered neutrals mass spectrometry (SNMS)An EI source was designed specifically to allow a quadrupole SIMS to be used in an alternative SNMS mode.216 Use of a large ionization volume in combination with a relatively low electron current minimized space charge effects. The high acceptance angle of the source, mounted at a distance of 20 mm from the sample, ensured that about 0.9% of the emitted neutrals was collected. About 1 in 107 of the total number of neutrals sputtered was detected as a post-ionized species. A retarding lens with a potential slightly above that of the ionization chamber discriminated against the residual gas ions. The energy-independent transmission of secondary ions in the EI source meant that it could be left in place during SIMS experiments.Electroceramics, such as perovskite, offer a wide potential for novel nanoscale devices such as multi-GBit memories, transistors and nano-actuators. Breuer et al.217 exploited the combination of SNMS and SIMS for the depth profiling of BaxSr1−xTiO3 dielectric films on multistack layers of Pt/TiO2/SiO2/Si or Pt/ZrO2/SiO2/Si, where TiO2 or ZrO2 served as an adhesion layer. Use of Cs+ sputtering and EI gave depth profiling measurements of interfacial reactions in the virtual absence of matrix effects. Hence, SNMS was the method of choice for the quantitative analysis in the interface region. However, the SNMS LOD was poorer than that of SIMS analysis, which therefore had to be used for determination of the depth distribution of trace elements.8. Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (SIRMS)8.1. ReviewsThe excellent review of Ghosh and Brand218 on the use of SIRMS in global climate change research presented a detailed yet clear description of the principles of the MS methods (with plentiful schematic diagrams), sample preparation and several typical applications. There were considered to be three main objectives of studying isotopes in relation to past climate—reconstruction of past natural climatic variability, testing of climate models using past environment conditions and improvement of model calibrations for predicting future climate.The review of Asche et al.219 on the sourcing of organic compounds based on natural isotopic variations discussed thoroughly the principles of this widely used approach to establish the origin of materials. A brief introduction to instrumentation associated with the high precision MS determination of stable isotope ratios was followed by an in-depth discussion of applications to establishing the authenticity, adulteration or source of foods, petroleum and endogenous steroids. Petroleum samples from different geographical locations could be distinguished on the basis of isotopic composition even though they were otherwise identical. Climatic conditions induced isotopic fractionation which could be characteristic for a particular region or even, for example, a specific vintage of wine. Intramolecular or chiral isotope analysis could be used to detect the origin of flavour compounds. Use of illicit, endogenous drugs could be detected by SIRMS analysis.Pouteau et al.220 discussed methods for the measurement of cholesterol absorption in humans and charted the switch from the use of radioisotopes to the application of stable isotope methods. The most promising procedure was considered to be a dual-stable-isotope dual-tracer approach based on the simultaneous administration of oral (enriched 2H) and intravenous (enriched 13C) differentially labelled tracers followed by plasma sampling for 3–4 days. The use of on-line GC-combustion-SIRMS and GC-pyrolysis-SIRMS allowed much smaller amounts of tracers to be detected than would have been possible using GC-EIMS.8.2. InstrumentationNormal background compensation or source cleaning were inadequate for accurate correction of short- and long-term memory effects which caused discrepancies of 0.1–0.2‰ per 10‰ difference in δ45(CO2) values between sample and reference gases.221 These effects were attributed to ion implantation and sputtering of the focusing lenses, in particular the ion source slit. Replacement with tantalum components minimized sputtering phenomena. In addition, the accelerating voltage was reduced to reduce implantation depth and changes were made to source conductance, inlet pressure, electron emission and inlet changeover equilibration time. The decrease in acceleration potential did not affect sensitivity provided that the instrument was calibrated and focused correctly. Significant improvements in measurement accuracy were realized and, after modification, changes in inlet equilibration time (>15 s) no longer influenced the measurement. Different settings of ion source conductance resulted in a five-fold improvement in the shift in δ13C to about 0.04‰ per 10‰ measurement difference between sample and reference.A system for the automated measurement of 13C∶12C ratios in CO2and dissolved inorganic carbon
					(DIC) in ecological and environmental studies consisted of an automated headspace sampler linked to a commercially available CO2 preconcentration system and continuous flow (CF)-SIRMS instrument.222 The objectives of the study were to test the performance of the system and to develop sampling procedures that minimized disturbance and off-line preparation while giving accurate analysis and high sample throughput. In the field, gas samples were injected directly into N2-filled autosampler vials, thereby allowing small samples to be analysed directly without the need for additional preparation. The system demonstrated good accuracy, precision (−36.6±0.06‰ for δ13C in a standard sample) and linearity with standard errors of <0.1‰ for replicate gas standards over a five-fold concentration range. Up to 40 samples with concentrations ranging from the ppb to the % level could be analysed in a 10 h run.A system for the unattended collection of 100-ml air samples in remote areas was designed primarily for collecting samples for research into CO2 fluxes between an ecosystem and the atmosphere.223 Although it was concluded that isotopic exchange between sampler components and air samples, held for up to 5 days at between 10 and 40 °C, was largely within the overall precision limits of the CF-SIRMS system used, unacceptable errors were found for samples held for longer or at higher temperature. The error observed for δ18O was substantially higher than that observed for δ13C. The prime source of error was stainless steel tubing. At this stage of development, the sampler described is clearly limited in its application, in particular for the measurement of δ18O in atmospheric CO2.The performance of an elemental analyser (EA)-SIRMS system for the measurement of both δ13C and δ15N in a single sample was improved by intoducing a six-port valve after the GC column and inserting a trap of CO2-absorbing material into a loop.224 This arrangement allowed the N2 peak to be switched through the trap and residual traces of CO2 from the previous sample to be removed. The CO2 peak, on the other hand, was switched directly to the analyser, thereby by-passing the trap. Serious errors were observed in the measurement of δ15N if the traces of CO2 were not removed. The lifetime of the combustion reactors was enhanced greatly, especially for the analysis of samples with high salt content, by partially replacing some of the Cr2O3 in the oxidation tube with CeO2 separated from the remaining Cr2O3 by a plug of quartz wool.Sacks et al.225 reported an experimental and theoretical evaluation of quantization error in CF-SIRMS systems. Samples of CO2
					(0.1–30 nmol) were injected into a GC-combustion-SIRMS system and the analogue signal digitized (24-bit at 10 Hz) and post-processed to simulate 12, 14 and 16-bit data sets. The value of δ13C was calculated for all data sets using either the conventional “summation” method or by curve-fitting the chromatographic peaks to the exponentially modified Gaussian function. Data reduction using curve-fitting was more robust than the conventional method when even modest levels of quantization error were present. Curve-fitting achieved a precision (1σ) of <0.3‰ for injections of 0.76 nmol, some 20-fold smaller than the 15 nmol required for the “summation” method. The poor performance of the summation algorithm was particularly noticeable at 12-bit resolution, at which an SD of <1‰ could not be reached even at the maximum injection size possible.8.3. Analytical methodologyAn investigation into the amount-dependent isotopic fractionation in compound specific isotope analysis (CSIA) using GC-combustion-SIRMS paid particular attention to where fractionation occurred within the system.226 Injection experiments with varying amounts of gases (CO2, n-hexane and toluene) revealed that the main source of fractionation was the split/splitless injector and that neither the combustion reactor nor the detector contributed. Although optimization of injection parameters reduced fractionation from 3 to 1‰, complete elimination could not be achieved. It was suggested that correction for the remaining and unknown amount-dependent fractionation could be made by analysing, with each batch of samples, standards of varying analyte concentrations and known δ13C values.The calculation of δ13C from raw CO2 isotope data involves correction of the ratio of the ion beams measured at m/z 45 and 44 for the contribution arising from 17O-containing molecules. The correction is based on the 18O abundance (measured at m/z 46∶44) and an assumed relationship between the 17O and 18O abundances. Assonov and Brenninkmeijer227 demonstrated that the three correction algorithms generally in use produced biased δ13C values and that the biases were larger than the precision of modern SIRMS instruments. The three algorithms were based on different determinations of the 17O absolute abundance ratio and different values of “λ”, the main characteristic of the oxygen isotopes relationship. The authors proposed that the slope of the fractionation line for waters (“λ”
					= 0.528) be used as a default value for the δ17O correction. In addition, there was considered to be a pressing need for redetermination of 17RVPDB-CO2
					(17O∶16O calculated on the VPDB-CO2 international scale) as the considerable discrepancy (80‰) between values currently used introduced bias into published data. An approach for this redetermination was discussed but results were not presented.The analytical frontier for SIRMS now lies in the development of automated position-specific isotope analysis
					(PSIA) systems for intramolecular studies. Sacks and Brenna228 used a GC-pyrolysis-GC preparation system coupled to a combustion SIRMS system for the high-precision PSIA of C in amino acid analogues. The C isotope ratios were measured in the gas-phase pyrolysis fragments from multiple sources of 3-methylthiopropylamine (3MTP) and isoamylamine (IAA), the decarboxylated analogues of methionine and leucine. Decarboxylation had the advantage over alternative derivatization methods of adding no exogenous C, which would interfere with the fidelity of the pyrolysis fragments. The characteristic pyrolysis products over a temperature range of 620–900 °C were CH4, C2H6, HCN and CH3CN for 3MTP and propylene, isobutylene, HCN and CH3CN for IAA. Optimum pyrolysis temperatures were established for each fragment so that the signal was at a maximum and the fragments produced retained their structural integrity. The PSIA results presented highlighted the intramolecular variability of isotope ratios and the information lost in CSIA. The pyrolysis efficiency was, however, only about 5% and so PSIA required several orders of magnitude more sample than CSIA.The two N atoms in the linear N2O molecule are not equivalent and the 15N abundance may vary independently at the two positions. A method for the automated PSIA of atmospheric N2O was based on the fragmentation of the N2O+ ion in the ion source to produce a significant number of NO+ fragment ions.229 A prerequisite for the method was that the collector configuration should allow both the NO+ ions at m/z 30 and 31 to be monitored simultaneously and the N2O+ ions at m/z 44, 45 and 46 to be measured conventionally. It was not necessary to measure both sets of ions at the same time but the latest generation of instruments do, in fact, allow collectors to be configured to monitor all masses of interest simultaneously. Such a set-up would make it possible to measure both 15N and 18O together. The analysis was complicated by the non-linearity of the fragment ion measurement and by isotopic scrambling in the ion source. Ideally the NO+ ion should contain only the N atom originally bound to the O atom but 8.5% of the NO+ fragments were found to contain the other N atom. The reproducibility for a 125 ml sample at ambient N2O concentrations was ±0.1 and ±0.2‰ for δ15N and δ18O, respectively.The determination of the isotopic composition of the microbial biomass C in soil is an increasingly important tool in the study of soil microbial ecology and soil C turnover. At present there is no standard procedure for the extraction of soil samples and preparation for isotope analysis. Potthoff et al.230 discussed the advantages and disadvantages of different methods for the determination of 13C∶12C in soil microbial biomass and proposed a new method based on UV-catalysed persulfate (Na2S2O8) oxidation of fumigated and non-fumigated soil extracts, cryogenic trapping of the released CO2 and GC-SIRMS. Comparison of the new procedure with an off-line dual-inlet SIRMS procedure and an on-line EA-SIRMS procedure showed that there were no significant differences in the δ13C values measured by all three procedures.Stable isotope approaches can help to improve our understanding of trophic interactions in complex systems such as soil. The most widely used approach for determining δ13C and δ15N in soil invertebrates, bulk analysis by SIRMS, has the major shortcoming of requiring tens to hundreds of organisms for a single determination. The application of on-line, thermally assisted hydrolysis and methylation reactions (using tetramethylammonium hydroxide) allowed the compound-specific determination of δ13C in fatty acids in soil mesofauna to be applied to a single organism.231 The derivatization took place in the pyrolysis-GC inlet of a pyrolysis-GC-combustion-SIRMS system. The fatty acids were converted rapidly to their methyl esters in a single step reaction, thereby avoiding the complicated protocols associated with wet chemical derivatization methods. Fatty acid profiles and corrected δ13C values showed excellent agreement with those obtained by conventional methods. Although a kinetic isotope effect prevented direct calculation of the fatty acid δ13C values by simple mass balance equations, the effect was reproducible so that correction factors could be applied and the associated error (±0.5‰) fully quantified. Results were presented for the first time for the δ13C values and fatty acid composition of individual soil mesofauna.The novel linking of fluorescence-activated cell sorting with SIRMS using in-line pyrolytic methylation greatly improved the resolution in discriminating and tracing the differential C pathways at the base of the pelagic food web.232 Natural phototrophic populations could be probed individually for their in-situ
					δ13C signatures. Concentrated cell suspensions (4 µl) were deposited on to the tips of ferromagnetic wires (Curie-point temperature, 480 °C), together with a methanolic solution of trimethylphenylammonium hydroxide (0.25 M, 1 µl). A release of the cellular fatty acid fraction from the sample by in-situ methylation was achieved with a 3 s pyrolysis time. The monitoring of phytoplankton for their in-situ
					δ13C signatures showed that algal and cyanobacterial clusters differed significantly in isotopic composition.Although CSIA has become a powerful tool for inferring the VOCin various systems, a major drawback is the relatively poor sensitivity. Enrichment prior to analysis is necessary as 0.8 nmol C in each individual compound is required. The use of on-column or splt/splitless injection combined with solid-phase microextraction (SPME) or P&T preconcentration has been investigated in the development of a CF-SIRMS procedure for the determination of δ13C values of commonly reported groundwater contaminants at µg l−1 concentrations.233 The best LOD (0.25–5.0 µg l−l) were obtained with P&T, which also had a higher reproducibility and smaller isotopic fractionation than SPME. As P&T and SPME are solventless methods, their use resulted in better chromatographic separation and LOD than those obtained with the liquid injection techniques. Although small but highly reproducible isotopic fractionation was observed for all the techniques, the magnitude was much smaller than that of natural fractionation resulting from microbial or chemical transformation reactions. The method could also be used for the determination of 2H∶1H ratios, although the LOD were 10–20 times poorer than those for 13C∶12C ratios.The first successful use of a total organic carbon (TOC) analyser in a CF-SIRMS system has been reported for the 13C analysis of DIC and dissolved organic carbon.234 For the TOC analyser to be coupled to the SIRMS instrument in CF mode, He replaced N2 as carrier gas as it could be used at a flow rate tolerated by the mass spectrometer. The SIRMS software was used to control the sample trigger. Sampling was performed using either a loop (low concentration, automatic mode) or a syringe (high concentration, single injection mode). Tests were carried out on various compounds ranging from those oxidized easily (sugars) to those oxidized with difficulty (humic acids). Typical analytical precision (2σ) was better than 0.20‰ and sample reproducibility 0.10–0.35‰ depending on the reactivity of the sample.Methods for the determination of isoflavones in food matrices are generally hampered by the lack of suitable analytical standards. The first demonstration of quantitative analysis by GC-combustion-SIRMS, using intrinsically labelled isoflavone standards, indicated that the method is as sensitive as published GC-EIMS methods for the determination of daidzein.235 Standards containing phytoestrogens with 13C abundances of up to 20% were produced by intrinsically labelling soya plants grown in an atmosphere enriched in 13CO2. Although incorporation of 13C into the plant molecules could not be controlled, combustion to CO2 removed the complexity of the isotopomeric distribution within the molecules. Isotope ratio measurements were made for the sample, the standard and an accurately prepared mixture of the two. A major advantage of the new technique was that the analytical standard matched the sample closely and could be expected to give realistic estimates of losses from all stages of the analytical procedure. The method was not, however, universally applicable. The instability of the silyl ether of genistein prevented its determination.Little has been reported previously on the use of CSIA for compounds highly enriched in 13C. Mottram and Evershed236 investigated the potential of GC-combustion-SIRMS as a very sensitive detector for enriched compounds, in particular by exploiting the amplifier gain applied to the m/z 45 cup in SIRMS instruments, which is higher than that applied to the other cups. Analysis of two 13C-enriched fatty acid methyl esters with δ13C values of ∼500‰ demonstrated that responses in the m/z 45∶44 intensity ratio could be detected even though the compound was at such a low concentration that no peak was observed in the m/z 44 ion chromatogram. The LOD were 30 and 20 pg injected for 13C-hexadecanoate and 13C-octadecanoate, respectively, using the m/z 45∶44 chromatogram, whereas the equivalent LOD using the m/z 44 ion chromatogram alone were 180 and 200 pg, respectively. Results were, however, both inaccurate and imprecise at amounts below 5 ng injected component. It was also found, perhaps unsurprisingly, that a significant within-run carryover effect existed due to tailing of chromatographic peaks. The isotope values recorded for compounds eluted immediately after an enriched component were changed significantly. Although the procedure could be used for qualitative analysis, considerable limitations remain for the quantitative analysis of real samples.An extensive new set of high precision measurements of δ13C and δ2H of stratospheric and upper tropospheric CH4 was made possible by the recent development of an on-line CH4 preconcentration system coupled to a CF-SIRMS instrument.237 The procedure required about three orders of magnitude less volume of whole air at ambient CH4 concentration and significantly less preparation time than analysis by conventional dual-inlet SIRMS with off-line preparation. Ambient air (60 ml) was introduced into a system consisting of three traps to preconcentrate the CH4 and to remove interfering gases. The CH4 was further purified on a capillary separation column and the eluate was either quantitatively oxidized to CO2 and H2O for carbon analysis or quantitatively pyrolysed to H2 and C for hydrogen analysis. The average precisions (1σ) were ±0.04 and ±1.25‰ for δ13C and δ15N, respectively.The increasing burden of atmospheric CH4 has a significant impact on both global warming and atmospheric chemistry, yet relatively little is known about the provenance of atmospheric CH4. Methodology for the measurement of δ2H in atmospheric CH4 is less well developed than that for measurement of δ13C because of the large sample size requirement (100 l air) and time-consuming sample preparation. An on-line extraction system coupled with GC-pyrolysis-SIRMS was faster (1 h per sample) and less laborious than previous methods, required only 120–360 ml of air containing 10–30 nmol CH4, and gave a precision of ±3.1‰.238 The same system could be used for the determination of δ13C when the pyrolysis furnace was replaced with a combustion reactor. By using a combination of δ13C and δ2H values, it was possible to show that 70% of CH4 in an urban atmosphere came from a landfill site.Determination of δ2H in keratin provides a novel means of tracking geographical movements of birds and other species. A key requirement of the analytical procedure is that it should provide a high sample throughput at low cost and at the same time take into account the fast hydrogen exchange between laboratory air moisture and exchangeable hydrogen in keratins. The method of Wassenaar and Hobson239 met these requirements by using an equilibration procedure in which keratin standards and samples of bird feathers were deliberately exposed in the laboratory for >96 h to equilibrate with ambient air moisture prior to analysis by EA-SIRMS with a flash pyrolysis furnace. The sample throughput of 120–160 samples per day was limited by the need to clean the pyrolysis column after about 180 samples due to accumulation of Ag from the sample capsules. The method was based on the not yet verified assumption that the powdered keratin standard and the solid feather would exchange hydrogen to the same degree.Headspace samples are usually transferred directly to septum-capped vials using a gas-tight syringe and stored prior to analysis. In a test of the reliability of screw-cap glass containers
					(12 ml) fitted with bromobutyl rubber septa for storage of samples containing 15N-labelled N2 and N2O, the concentration and isotopic composition were determined by automated CF-SIRMS at monthly intervals for 1 year.240 After a year the N2O concentration had decreased by 35 and 34% for test and standard mixtures, respectively, but there was no detectable change in 15N enrichment. The loss process therefore had no effect on enrichment. Losses of N2 were less than those for N2O because of the smaller pressure gradient between the inside and outside of the vials. Accurate determination of concentration was possible if a calibration gas was stored and analysed together with the sample.An elemental sulfur RM (IAEA-S-4) has been shown to be isotopically homogeneous in amounts as small as 41 µg and therefore suitable to be used as an isotopic sulfur RM.241 The δ34S vlaue was measured as +16.90±0.12‰
					(n
					= 66) on the VCDT (Vienna Cañon Diablo troilite) scale for both the coarse (>0.25 mm) and fine (<0.25 mm) fractions using 56 ± 3 µg sample.8.4. Sample preparationAlthough the effects of derivatization of amino acids for GC-combustion-SIRMS analysis have been studied extensively, few if any studies have investigated the possibility of isotopic fractionation during the hydrolytic cleavage of amino acids from their parent proteins or peptides. Jim et al.242 demonstrated that heating (100 °C, 24 h) in 6 M HCl to cleave amino acids from peptide standards did not result in significant isotopic fractionation. In addition, δ13C values calculated for bulk collagen samples from the values measured for the constituent amino acids were consistent with measured values for bulk collagen.The use of trimethylsilylation to derivatize sugars, alcohols and acids for the measurement of 13C has the fundamental advantage of not involving carbon bonds and therefore does not cause isotopic fractionation. The main disadvantage, however, is that three C atoms are added per derivatized hydroxyl group and must be accounted for in the measured 13C ∶
					12C ratios. Evaluation of the method for sugar analysis revealed that the number of added C atoms was actually less than expected from stoichiometry.243 This was attributed to incomplete derivatization or incomplete oxidation of methylsilyl C in the analysis. The isotope excess of enriched samples could be determined with a relative error of 5% using a calibration of the number of analysed added C atoms. Natural abundance δ13C in sugars could be measured with an accuracy of ±1.5‰. The sensitivity of the method was limited by the dilution of the sample signal by the added carbon.For many ecological applications of stable isotope techniques it is necessary to separate lipid and lipid-free fractions yet there has been no reported testing of the effect of lipid extraction on measured δ13C values. A comparison of a Soxhlet extraction method using petroleum spirit with two liquid–liquid extraction methods (methanol with chloroform and isopropanol with cyclohexane) for the extraction of lipids from fish feeds concluded that all three methods were suitable and gave values within 1‰ of each other.244 However, the amount of lipids extracted varied depending on the method used and data could only be compared if the same method were used for all samples. The extraction of lipids from diatoms required further investigation as marked differences in measured δ13C values were found dependent on the extraction method used.An improved procedure for determining 13C and 2H ratios in apple juices and related products involved chemical transformation of fructose into hexamethylenetetramine, which retained position-specific 13C and 2H isotopic information from the C and non-exchangeable H atoms in the sample.245 The 13C 12C and 2H∶1H ratios were measured by GC-combustion-SIRMS and GC-pyrolysis-SIRMS, respectively. In comparison with the use of nitro-sugar derivatives, the new method reduced analysis time and improved sensitivity. The addition of low cost commercial sugar syrups to apple juices could be detected.Chloroacetic acids are a major class of environmental pollutants widely distributed throughout the world and are of concern due to their phytotoxicity. In a new approach of using stable isotopic signatures to determine the sources of and processes affecting chloroacetic acids, the acids were reacted with acidic methanol to form the corresponding methyl chloroacetates for GC-combustion-SIRMS analysis.246 The derivatization reaction and other steps in the analytical procedure did not result in isotopic fractionation so the δ13C values in the chloroacetic acids were easily calculated from the measured values in the methyl esters. A major limitation of the current procedure was that chloroacetic acids are often present in the environment at concentrations (µg l−l to ng l−1) well below those detectable so samples needed to be concentrated prior to analysis. It was demonstrated that the isotopic signatures of chloroacetic acids differed depending on their origin, so the method could be used to trace chloroacetic acids in the environment.Spötl and Vennemann247 improved the preparation of carbonate minerals to provide a high sample throughput with high precision even for small sample sizes. Provided that the reaction time between acid and carbonate and the amount of acid were kept constant, temperatures (e.g., 72 °C) well above ambient could be used for the reaction. This, together with use of a heated GC column, resulted in fast chromatographic separation and high sample throughput (72 samples in 13 h). The entire calibration was based directly on standards run with the samples rather than solving fractionation equations for the acid–base reaction. Precisions of 0.12 and 0.16‰ were obtained for δ13C and δ15N, respectively, in 50 µg samples.Urea tracer experiments can help to assess metabolic responses to physiological stress, nutritional status, diet and medication. Whereas the determination of 13C-urea enrichment by GC-combustion-SIRMS requires a minimum of C atoms to be added during derivatization, analysis by GC-EIMS requires a stable molecule giving little fragmentation. Both these conditions were met by converting urea into 2-methoxypyrimidine.248 In a combined 13C- and 15N2-urea experiment, low resolution GC-EIMS did not discriminate between 13C-urea and 15N1-urea, whereas SIRMS analysis excluded detection of the 15N analogue. Combination of results from the two methods gave the abundances of 13C- and 15N1-urea. Overall, 13C-urea enrichments based on single point measurements by GC-combustion-SIRMS could be obtained as values ±0.02% atom percentage excess (range 0–1%) and 15N2-urea enrichments by GC-EIMS were obtained as values ±0.15 mole percentage excess (range 0–7%).For the first time, H2/H2O equilibration using a platinum catalyst has been reported for the determination of hydrogen isotope ratios in small volumes of water by CF-SIRMS.249 An equilibration of a few seconds could be achieved by vaporizing the water completely and by increasing the exchange temperature to 100 °C. Measurement precision and accuracy of <1‰ were achieved for 5 µl samples with an analysis time (including equilibration and processing) of 5 min. Ice samples could be analysed continuously by coupling a melting device to the instrument.Two different approaches have been proposed for the nitrogen isotope analysis of ammonium in KCl soil extracts for which current methods require relatively large sample size (100 ml), removal of the matrix and preconcentration. Norlin et al.250 demonstrated the potential of combining headspace GC-combustion-SIRMS with SPME extraction using fibres coated with Nafion®
					(a perfluorosulfonated ionomer). The ammonium was converted to ammonia, absorbed from the headspace and injected into the GC. Isotopic fractionation of 1.0117 ± 0.0009 occurred between the fibre and the gas. An ammonium concentration of 10 mM was needed to obtain sufficient absorbed ammonia for analysis. Preliminary results indicated that δ15N analysis was possible for only 0.4–0.5 µmol ammonium with an SD of 0.8‰
					(n
					= 5). Johnston et al.251 derivatized ammonium with o-phthaldialdehyde and sodium sulfite at pH 11.2 to produce 1-sulfonato-iso-indole, which was readily concentrated from dilute solutions by reversed-phase SPME. This derivatization procedure, complete within 2 h, avoided the use of N-containing reagents and had several advantages (simpler chemistry, more rapid, insensitive to salinity) over the alternative (synthesis of indophenol). Although partial derivatization of potentially interfering amino acids occurred, these derivatives were not extracted by SPME. The δ15N values of ammonium in KCl soil extracts could be measured within 48 h by automated CF-SIRMS with a precision of 0.23‰
					(1 SD). Parallel measurements of ammonium standards with known δ15N were made to correct for low-level contamination of the reagents by the absorption of ambient ammonium.The addition of water to fruit juices is better detected by use of 18O in both water and organic compounds than in water alone. A procedure for the measurement of 18O∶16O ratios in the sugars of orange juice involved fermentation and distillation to produce alcohol, which was placed in silver containers for EA-SIRMS analysis.252 Isotopic fractionation occurred during the fermentation and distillation but was reproducible if analytical conditions were well controlled. In addition, particular care was needed to ensure that the ethanol samples did not become contaminated with water or organic matter. Due to the robustness of the method and the fact that most 18O-enrichment in the sugars remained in the end-product, ethanol was considered to be a convenient internal reference to circumvent the spatial and temporal variability observed for 18O∶16O in water. Adulteration of juices with water was identified by a deviation from the strong correlation between the δ18O values of the juice water and ethanol.The conventional procedure for the determination of δ37Cl involves the separation of CH3Cl from CH3I by GC. Wu and Satake253 based their separation procedure on the difference in vapour pressures at the melting point of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane (−107 °C), which was contained within a sealed cold trap to prevent contact with the atmosphere. The recovery rate for CH3Cl was 100% when the operation was carried out twice. The isotopic fractionation in δ37Cl was <0.04‰.9. Thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)9.1. InstrumentationThe noise level of Faraday detectors has become a limiting factor in high precision analysis of small samples. Multicollector instruments are generally fitted with a single ion counting channel so peak jumping procedures are required for very small samples. Wieser et al.254 have developed a new multi ion-counting system consisting of up to eight specially miniaturized secondary electron multipliers identical in size with and interchangeable with Faraday cups. The detector system has been used for the measurement of Nd and U isotopes but information on the performance characteristics is awaited. In particular, the linearity and stability of the detectors need to be excellent and attention to proper cross calibration is important.9.2. CalibrationTwo different zircon samples have been proposed as RM for U–Pb geochronology suitable for use not only for TIMS but also LA-ICP-MS and SIMS analyses. The TEMORA 1 zircon from eastern Australia was homogeneous from sub-µm to intergranular scales and had an ID-TIMS age of (416.75±0.24)×106 years.255 A total of 21 zircon fractions were analysed over a period of two years. The analysis of a large set of single zircons (n
					= 27) from the Duluth Complex (North America) gave an age of (1099.1±0.2)×106 years which was indistinguishable from previously published results.256 Both materials were considered to be suitable for use as benchmarks, in particular for establishing systematic errors such as instrumental fractionation, laboratory blanks, sample–tracer equilibration and the calibration of ID tracer solutions.The 143Nd∶144Nd and 87Sr∶86Sr ratios in the NIST replacement geological RM BCR-2, BHVO-2 and AGVO-2 were found to be indistinguishable from the corresponding ratios in the original RM (BCR-1, BHVO-1 and AGVO-1).257 In addition, the same ratios were measured for eight Max Planck Institut–Dingwell glass RM. There was excellent isotopic homogeneity for all the samples analysed, so that they could be used as isotope RM. In the case of the NIST RM GSP-2, the ratios were not the same as those measured in GSP-1.9.3. Analytical methodologyNo detailed investigation of the physicochemical conditions of silica gel has been made even though particle size, size distribution and specific surface area can have large effects on ionization efficiency, ion beam stability and mass fractionation. A new silica-gel activator, prepared by the hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane, gave a stable 208Pb+ beam current of 4×10−11 A for 200 ng Pb.258 The ion beam current decayed less than 40% over a period of 30 min. The physicochemical conditions of the synthesized silica particles could be controlled through selection of hydrolysis conditions (temperature, pH, ratio of reagents), making the material ideal for a systematic study of ionization.In an iterative exact-matching technique for ID analyses, the same amount of isotopically labelled spike solution was added to both the sample and a calibration standard and, in addition, the amount of determinand in the calibration standard was matched to that in the sample.259 Each successive iteration of the procedure involved adjustment of the amount of calibration standard taken, to match the newly calculated determinand concentration, and adjustment of the amount of spike solution added to both sample and calibration blends. Typically, the determinand concentrations converged on the final value within three iterations. This procedure was applicable to ID analyses of both organic and inorganic samples.Isotope analyses of B can be performed using either positive or negative ionization TIMS procedures. Whereas the former method gives good precision (±0.01%) yet requires large sample size (several µg), the latter is much more sensitive yet suffers from poorer reproducibility because of problems in controlling fractionation. Furthermore, the negative ionization method gives a consistent but unexplained offset of 10‰ in the 11B∶10B ratio measured in the NIST SRM951 (boric acid). Shen and You260 made precise measurements using negative ionization by determining the BO2− ion abundance at m/z 42, 43 and 45 simultaneously and correcting for instrumental mass fractionation on the basis of empirically derived 18O∶16O ratios. The mean value for the 11B∶10B ratio in NIST SRM951 (boric acid) was measured as 4.0430±0.0015 (2σ
					= 0.36‰, n
					= 11), which matched the certified value of 4.043±0.003. This level of precision was of the same order as that obtainable using the positive ionization procedure measuring Cs2BO2+ but the sample requirement was three orders of magnitude smaller. Mass fractionation was dependent on the chemical form of B analysed so it was essential to ensure that all samples and standards had the same chemical form. In addition, the activator also affected fractionation. Best precision was obtained with Ba(OH)2 or B-free sea-water as activator.The use of MC ion detection was essential to obtain the degree of precision required to measure the naturally-occurring mass-dependent isotope fractionation of Mo in molybdenites at the 0.1‰ per u level.261 The fractionated molybdenites were isotopically lighter than the reference samples. A double 94Mo–100Mo spike was used for the analysis. Solutions of Mo were mixed with an ascorbic acid solution (4 µl), loaded on to single rhenium filaments and covered with a silica gel suspension (3 µl). A strict heating and analytical procedure was followed to ensure identical conditions for all samples. Further study was required to eliminate the additional and variable isotopic fractionation introduced by isolating Mo from molybdenite solution using ion exchange. The authors identified the need for a Mo isotopic RM that could serve as the standard for all Mo isotope abundance measurements.A nine-collector dynamic procedure was an improvement over single collector or static MC measurement of Ce isotopic composition and provided the precision required for the La–Ce dating of geological materials.262 Oxygen gas was leaked into the ion source chamber to maintain a stable beam (1×10−11 A) of 142CeO+ ions. Data were normalized to 136Ce∶142Ce = 0.01688 using the exponential law and corrections were made for isobaric interferences from CeO, 138LaO, 142NdO and 141PrO. A 138Ce∶142Ce ratio of 0.0225800±0.0000019 (2σ) was measured for Johnson-Matthey JMC304 (high purity CeO reagent).An ID-TIMS procedure based on stepwise dissolution gave precise and concordant U–Pb age data for metamict and highly discordant zircon crystals in agreement with SIMS data.263 It was possible to date three out of four zircons studied. A Pb–Pb evaporation procedure systematically gave dates slightly younger than those obtained by the other methods which were considered to be minimum 207Pb ∶
					206Pb apparent ages. The discrepancy was attributed to the indiscriminate nature of step heating which released Pb from a reaction front.Methods for the determination of ultratrace amounts of 231Pa in sea-water should have a low sample requirement and short measurement times, together with a low procedural blank, high S/N and high instrumental sensitivity. Traditional α- and β-counting techniques typically require several thousand litres of sea-water and counting times of up to months. An ID-TIMS procedure has been modified264 to extend the technique to very low concentrations of 50–2000 ag (1 ag = 1×10−18 g). Attention was paid to reducing procedural blanks and improving ionization efficiency. An ionization efficiency of 0.3–0.5% was achieved by loading Pa in 1 M HNO3–0.4 M HF followed by one drop of cleaned colloidal graphite on a single spot and 5–7 layers of graphite (∼0.2 mg). In comparison with previous studies, the increased ion beam current improved the S/N by a factor of 2–3. The procedural blank was 16±15 ag (2σ) and the measurement time <1 h. The amount of 231Pa needed to produce data with an uncertainty of ±4–12% was 100–1000 ag (3×105–3×106 atoms). The minimum sample size was 2 l of surface sea-water for analysis of suspended particulate matter or <1 l for filtered (<0.4 µm) sea-water.The paper of Richter and Goldberg265 was notable for the depth and clarity of detail given for their improved procedure for the determination of U isotopes in nuclear materials with high accuracy. In a modification of the conventional total evaporation technique, not only were data acquired until the whole sample had been consumed, but corrections were also made for the peak tails from 235U and 238U contributing to the measured 234U and 236U ion beams, respectively. This background was shown to be sample specific and so had to be measured and corrected on-line regularly during an analysis. Intensities were measured at m/z 233.5, 234.5, 235.5 and 236.5 and the background at m/z 234 and 236 calculated. In addition, the ion beam was refocused and recentred, thereby transforming the procedure closer to that in which measurement of blocks of ratios is made. The correction for the background introduced an interruption to the total evaporation procedure so it was necessary to introduce an external calibration using a RM analysed in a manner analogous to the samples. The new evaporation procedure was used with a dynamic MC measurement routine that further improved accuracy. During the switching from one set of isotopes to another, a slight change of ion beam dispersion occurred so it was necessary to change the dispersion within a fraction of a second. A new instrument equipped with a dispersion quadrupole was used to achieve this fast switching of the ion beam dispersion. Each mass cycle of the procedure required a unique setting of the dispersion quadrupole voltage. The 234U∶235U and 236U∶235U ratios in RM U500 were measured over a three year period with repeatabilities of 0.002 and 0.015%
					(1σ), respectively.A procedure for the determination of DU was used to demonstrate the significant presence of DU isotopes in body fluids nine years after exposure by inhalation.266 The DU was recovered from urine samples, using ion exchange resins, for both ID and isotopic composition measurements. The U fractions were loaded on to single rhenium filaments using a silica gel–H3PO4 procedure and the UO2+ ion beam measured using a secondary electron multiplier in peak jumping mode. The mean uncertainty was 0.74%, making it possible to detect deviations of >2% from the natural U isotopic composition.9.4 Sample preparationA procedure for the determination of Li isotopic composition in sea-water involved reduction of the Na content by passing the sample through a column of hydrated Sb2O5 which is an ion exchanger specific for removal of Na.267 No further separation was carried out as any ion exchange procedure would induce isotopic fractionation. The samples (40 ng Li as LiOH) were loaded directly onto single rhenium filaments using a silica gel procedure. A stable 7Li ion intensity of 1×10−10 A could be maintained for 4 h. A 6Li∶7Li ratio of 0.08260±0.00003 (n
					= 5) was measured for IAEA RM L-SVEC (Li2CO3).The use of mixed cation exchange (H+ form) and anion exchange (OH− form) resins in addition to a boron-specific resin (Amberlite IRA 743) improved separation for the recovery of B from samples with low concentrations.268 No isotopic fractionation was introduced by the procedure. The isotopic composition of B in foraminifera was determined using a positive ionization procedure with measurement of the Cs2BO2+ ions.A modified digestion procedure for preparation of relatively large (>0.2 g) oil samples for the ID-TIMS determination of S content was based on the use of semi-open vessels inside a pressurized autoclave.269 The method was intended to combine the advantages of both open and closed vessel digestion, such as low acid consumption, the use of HNO3 alone rather than mixed with H2SO4, comparatively large sample amounts and simple vessel design. Although reaction gases could escape from the reaction vessels into the autoclave, no losses of elements by volatilization were observed because of the high pressure of N2. After digestion, sulfate was reduced to H2S and S precipitated as As2S3 for TIMS analysis. The authors admitted that the new procedure held no advantage over conventional closed vessel digestion other than that of more convenient handling. Improvements to the MS procedure were, however, still required to enable low concentrations of S (<10 µg g−1) to be measured.The measurement of 226Ra by TIMS has the advantages of greater precision, smaller sample requirement and faster determination when compared with conventional radioactive counting methods. Isolation of Ra from samples is, however, problematical because of the high Ca ∶ Ra and Sr ∶ Ra ratios in many environmental samples, and consequently few data have been reported. A chemical separation procedure for the efficient isolation of Ba and Ra from carbonate samples was based on co-precipitation with MnO2, followed by separation of Ba and Ra on Sr-spec resin.270 The ability to extract Ra from carbonate samples or sea-water will allow it to be used as a Holocene chronometer or as a tracer of sea-water mixing.Good isolation of Ra, Th and U, essential for use of U-series disequilibria in studies of geological processes, has been achieved through use of a series of steps using element-specific and other resins.271 Recovery yields of ∼90% were obtained for all three elements. Analytical reproducibilities were 0.7, 0.2, 0.4, 0.1 and 0.6% for 230Th∶232Th, 234U∶238U, Th content, U content and 226Ra content, respectively, for the Geological Society of Japan RM JB-3.10. Other methods10.1. Electrospray mass spectrometry (ESMS)Three excellent reviews highlighted the role of ESMS in speciation analysis, in particular for providing molecule-specific detection to confirm the identity of species eluted from chromatographic systems. Rosenberg272 considered in detail the use of MS with atmospheric pressure ionization techniques (ES and chemical ionization), with emphasis on the literature published since 1998. The principles of the ionization techniques were covered in some depth but the major part of the 270-reference review discussed recent applications including the elucidation of metal–complex structures and the characterization and quantification of small organometallic species in environmental, health and food studies. Particular attention was given to the characterization of biomolecules and metalloproteins. McSheehy and Mester outlined the developments of ESMS for and applications to the analysis of biological tissues in a two-part review. The first part273 covered biosynthesised species of As and Se, whereas the second274 dealt with bio-induced ligands (metallothioneins and phytochelatins) and environmental contaminants (Hg, Pb, Sn). A feature of all the reviews was the substantial tables, which summarized the analytical procedures (extraction, separation and detection) and the metal species detected in the applications considered.Analytical methods for determining As species are becoming increasingly important. The ability of ESMS to provide both elemental and molecular information is useful for the identification of As compounds because As does not have a unique isotopic signature. Kuehnelt et al.275 observed, however, that the generation of As+ ions was critically dependent on the amount of O2 present in theN2 drying gas. At concentrations >0.1% O2, no As+ signal was observed. As the O2 concentration was decreased, the ion intensity at m/z 75 increased to about 3% of the total ion current.Measurement of urinary I is an efficient way to reveal deficiencies in the nutritional supply of this essential trace element. In an investigation of ion-exchange chromatography hyphenated with MS for the determination of I− in urine, satisfactory chromatographic isolation of I− could be achieved on a hydrophilic polymer-based anion-exchange column with 35 mM NaOH (0.45 ml min−1) as the mobile phase.276 A suppressor and flow splitter (split ratio 1 ∶ 10) was required between column and ES interface in order to convert the mobile phase into water and make the flow rate compatible with the interface. The ESMS LOD of 15 µg l−1, obtained with a flow rate into the interface of 0.03 ml min−1, was two or three orders of magnitude poorer than that achievable using ICP-MS. In addition, the reproducibility (7%) was poorer than that (0.55%) of magnetic sector ICP-MS. Although ICP-MS was seen as the preferred method for the determination of I−, the molecular detection capability of ESMS was considered an advantage when differentiation of I− from co-eluting species was required.Triiodobenzoic acid derivatives used in X-ray contrast media are detectable in the aquatic environment. Negative ionization ESMS, which would allow I− to be detected, has not previously been used for the analysis of these compounds because of the very low ion yield. Deliberate in-source fragmentation through application of a high cone voltage (>70 V) was useful for the ESMS analysis of organic iodine compounds with detection of I− at m/z 127.277 A series of iodobenzene derivatives could be detected even in complex matrices but the MS signal was dependent on the compound structure and on the composition of the LC eluent. This analysis could routinely be undertaken using ICP-MS but the ESMS procedure was considered an alternative tool for those without access to ICP-MS. An advantage of the new procedure was that reduction of the cone voltage provided both elemental detection and speciation information.Although the specificity of ESMS is a great advantage, the poor sensitivity limits more widespread application. The use of HPLC for the separation of methylmercury species rather than the more commonly used GC methods was seen to hold the principal advantage of not requiring the use of derivatization procedures.278 Although the LOD (39 µg l−1) of the HPLC-ESMS procedure was sufficient for investigating the equilibrium distribution of methylmercury in aqueous solution, it still exceeded that of other detectors. Consequently, ESMS was limited to the analysis of samples with high methylmercury concentrations such as fish samples. In addition, the HPLC separation required the use of an ion-pairing reagent which converted the majority of the methylmercury cations to uncharged complexes undetectable by MS. Only a minor fraction of the ionic methylmercury species was actually detectable by ESMS. The specificity of ESMS allowed the existence of several polynuclear mercury species in aqueous solutions to be established for the first time.The applications of ESMS are numerous and continue to expand into new fields of speciation analysis. The role of ESMS in metal speciation analysis is predominantly that of confirming the identity of species detected by ICP-MS in hyphenated systems. The Ni-containing peak in the ESMS spectrum of a Ni complex from a hyperaccumulating plant was identified as a chelate with a tricarboxylic amino acid ligand.279 The second most abundant As metabolite in sheeps' urine after administration of arsenosugars was identified as dimethylarsinoylacetate.280 Arsenosugars in seaweed were metabolized by humans to dimethylarsinic acid, which was more toxic than the parent compound.281 Although ESMS could be used to identify water-soluble Se-containing proteins in yeast, the drawbacks of poor sensitivity and the formation of doubly-charged ions of selenopeptides led to consideration of MALDI-TOFMS as an alternative detection technique.282,283 In the procedure subsequently developed, chromatographic peaks identified by ICP-MS as containing Se were analysed by MALDI-TOFMS to select target ions for CID-ESMS sequencing of the detected peptides. The characterization of metallothionein isoforms in liver284 and brain285 was made using ESMS, which was also used to study the interaction of As compounds with metallothionein.28610.2. Gas chromatography–electron ionization mass spectrometry (GC–EIMS)In this section, GC-EIMS is defined as the classical coupling of GC with EIMS, associated primarily the with structure determination of organic analytes.The majority of GC-EIMS reports concern the sample preparation and derivatization procedures required for the determination of organometallic compounds. These procedures can be tedious and time consuming. A dual-arm robotic sample preparation system was used to automate fully the in-vial derivatization and headspace SPME of aqueous samples for EI-GCMS.287 A key feature of the system was that the robotic arms were reprogrammed with a new software package which prevented collisions between the arms and allowed simultaneous rather than sequential operations to be carried out. The use of tetrahydrofuran (THF) as solvent kept the derivatizing agents (alkylborates) stable for 2 or 4 weeks when stored at 27 or 5 °C, respectively. The automated procedure offered improved precision (1.4, 3.2 and 1.7% RSD for Hg, Pb and Sn, respectively) in comparison with manual procedures (5.3–8.2% RSD).The potential of GC-EIMS for the structural analysis of organometallic species of As, Sb, Sn and Te in environmental samples has been investigated.288 Ionic species from compost samples were derivatized with NaBH4 and introduced into the mass spectrometer via a P&T system. Of seven As species identified by typical fragmentation patterns, three (diarsine, dimethylarsenomercaptane and monomethyl diarsine) were reported for the first time in environmental samples. As dimethylarsenomercaptane was also identified in the volatile fraction of hydrothermal gases, sampled directly on SPME fibres without derivatization, the presence of this species was not an artefact of the derivatization procedure. Although EIMS was less sensitive than ICP-MS, it was considered to have the advantage of providing essential molecule-specific information and should therefore be used as a technique complementary to ICP-MS.The determination of organotin compounds has continued to dominate the development of GC-EIMS procedures. A feature of a fast method for the determination of eight compounds in water, sediments and mussels was the use of low-pressure GC coupled to tandem MS.289 A vacuum was applied to the GC column (0.53 mm diameter) to increase the optimum linear velocity of the carrier gas from 15 to 80–100 cm s−1, thereby permitting low volume injection to be used. In comparison with conventional capillary GC, the overall analysis time was halved. The ionic Sn compounds were complexed with sodium diethyldithiocarbamate (NaDDC), extracted and derivatized by a Grignard reagent (n-pentylmagnesium bromide). Whereas SPME was used for water samples, extraction into toluene was preferred for sediment and mussel samples. Improvements to previously used procedures included the application of a clean-up step before injection of the extracts and the use of matrix-matched calibrants to avoid matrix effects. The LOD were in the ranges 1.1–9.6 ng l−1 and 0.03–6.1 µg kg−1 in water samples and other matrices, respectively.A new method for the speciation of butyltin compounds in marine sediments was based on the use of a continuous FI system for preconcentration and elution.290 Extracts (10 ml, pH 5.3) were introduced into the continuous flow system and the butyltin compounds were complexed with NaDDC and adsorbed on C60 fullerene. The high adsorption capacity of the fullerene allowed it to be used even in the presence of metal ions. The compounds were retained as neutral chelates, which were subsequently eluted and simultaneously derivatized using sodium tetra-n-propylborate in ethyl acetate. The procedure was linear over the range 0.2–35 ng g−1 and the LOD were 0.07, 0.09 and 0.10 ng g−1
					(as Sn) for mono-, di-, and tribuytltin, respectively.The use of hydride generation combined with headspace SPME has been proposed for the determination of butyltin compounds in sediments and sea-water291 and of arsenic metabolites in human urine.292 Metals were converted to their hydride forms using NaBH4 and the hydrides adsorbed on to a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-coated fibre (100 µm film thickness). The optimum extraction time in both studies was 20 min. After extraction, the fibre was inserted immediately into the GC injection port for thermal desorption. The method was solvent free, simple and fast in comparison with alternative procedures. The LOD for the butyltin compounds were in the range 0.1–0.5 pg. The LOD and precision for the As compounds were in the ranges 0.1–0.8 µg l−1 and 7–11%, respectively, except for AsV, for which they were 6.8 µg l−1 and 52%, respectively.Some used transformer oils containing about 60% polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) also contain tetraphenyltin as a stabilizing agent. As the PCB-containing waste oils must be destroyed without creating a new pollution of Sn compounds, methods are required to identify those wastes which contain Sn. A GC-EIMS method was the most sensitive and reproducible of several methods considered for the determination of phenyltin compounds in PCB-based transformer oil samples.293 Whereas tetraphenyltin could be determined following injection of a hexane extract of the oil directly on to the GC column, the mono-, di-, and triphenyltins needed to be derivatized with Grignard reagent (n-propylmagnesium bromide in THF). The LOD were 30, 9.8, 5.5 and 0.60 ng ml−1 for mono-, di-, tri- and tetraphenyltin, respectively. Although the selectivity of MS was slightly poorer than for the other detectors, interference from the PCB matrix was insignificant.Conflicting conclusions in the literature about the suitability of alkyl chloroformates as derivatization reagents for selenoamino acids prompted Haberhauer-Troyer et al.294 to carry out a detailed study. All selenoamino acids except selenocystine could be identified by detection of their molecular ion and typical fragment ions. Selenocystine could not be identified even at high concentrations. Although the reaction had a high (>90%) extraction and derivatization efficiency, the mass spectra were highly irreproducible due to decomposition reactions. These reactions were dependent not only on temperature but also the state of the mass spectrometer. The use of the most inert materials was therefore recommended. Use of a suitable internal standard (for example, selenoethionine for selenomethionine) compensated for the variations in conditions and the overall method repeatability was good at 1–2% RSD. Of three reagents tested, methyl chloroformate was the preferred derivatization reagent.A proposed scheme for the conversion of iodide into 4-iodo-N,N-dimethylaniline by reaction with 4-N,N-dimethylaniline was rapid (<1 min) and insensitive to the many ionic compounds present in salts, pharmaceuticals or foodstuffs.295 The derivative was suitable for extraction by SPME using PDMS- or polyacrylate-coated fibres or by single drop microextraction (SDME). In the latter technique, a drop (1 µl) of isooctane at the end of a 10 µl syringe needle was immersed for 15 min in the solution of derivatized sample, drawn back into the syringe and immediately injected into the GC-EIMS system for analysis. The calibration was linear over the range 0.1–104
					µg l−1. The LOD using SPME or SDME were 25 and 10 ng l−1, respectively. The recovery of peroxydisulfate oxidation was better than that of reaction with KOH for the mineralization of organic I in vegetables and milk powder. Organic matter in pharmaceutical samples was removed by solid phase extraction on a C18 cartridge. Iodate in salt samples was reduced to iodide with ascorbic acid.The 2.1% precision of a species-specific ID procedure for the determination of methylmercury in fish was a three-fold improvement over that obtainable using the standard addition method with ethylmercury as internal standard.296 Samples were digested with methanolic KOH and a 198Hg-enriched methylmercury spike was added. The propylated derivative of methylmercury (formed by reaction with sodium tetrapropylborate) was sampled using SPME with PDMS-coated fused-silica fibres. Selective ion monitoring of the ion currents at m/z 256 and 260 gave the 198Hg 202Hg ratio. A limitation on the wider applicability of this new approach is the need for species-specific enriched spikes for the compounds of interest. The method LOD of 37 ng g−1 for a 250 mg sample was the same as that (40 ng g−1 for a 500 mg sample) obtained by Chen et al.297 using microwave-assisted digestion of fish tissue with tetramethylammonium hydroxide, addition of Cu2+ to promote release of methylmercury from amino acid complexes, derivatization with sodium tetrapropylborate and extraction into n-heptane. Recovery from three fish tissue RM was in the range 89–95%. The concentrations of methylmercury in the National Research Council Canada RM DORM-2 (fish tissue), measured by the two methods, were identical at 4.34±0.09 and 4.34±0.24 µg g−1, respectively, and compared well with the certified value of 4.47±0.32 µg g−1.10.3. New methodologiesThere is considerable interest in cosmic dust, the fine-grained matter that pervades the solar system and beyond. A novel cosmic dust mass spectrometer called the Dustbuster has been designed to determine the elemental composition of cosmic dust particles by impact ionization and TOFMS.298 The performance of the Dustbuster was tested with µm-sized particles of copper and iron accelerated to 2–20 km s−1 in a 2 MV van de Graaff accelerator. Ions were produced by impact with the tantalum target plate and accelerated through a reflectron on to a microchannel plate. The Dustbuster was considerably smaller and lighter than previous dust analysers and its novel ion optics gave good mass resolution (typically 150–350, m/Δm, for Cu and Fe) combined with a large sampling area. The accuracy of the analysis was limited by the complicated ionization mechanism in impacts involving charged microparticles.The standard method for the determination of 15N abundance in total dissolved nitrogen (TDN) in aqueous samples, based on Kjeldahl digestion and either distillation or diffusion to isolate ammonium, is both time-consuming and laborious. A new approach to the determination of both N content and 15N abundance of TDN in aqueous samples involved a TOC analyser coupled to a quadrupole EIMS instrument.299 Several fundamental requirements had to be met. The carrier gas (He–O2) had to be completely free of N2 and with the O2 content at the minimum needed for quantitative oxidation of the sample. There had to be no conversion or dilution of the product NO leaving the TOC analyser and low formation of NO in the ion source. The method was rapid (15 min analysis time) and acceptably precise, but suffered from a number of limitations. Fluctuations in the O2 content during combustion caused variable background signals in the mass spectrometer. This was overcome by coupling the TOC analyser to the mass spectrometer through a trap and flush interface. A severe memory effect could only be overcome by running five replicates in series and rejecting the first two or three results. A strong dependence of the 15N measurement on the N concentration in the sample, in particular at ≤10 µg N, had to be corrected for using an exponential relationship. The precision was sufficient to determine 15N at 0.5 atom% if ≥50 µg of N were available per analysis. Correspondingly less N was required for higher 15N abundances. The LOD was 2 µg per analysis, corresponding to 0.7 mg l−1 in a maximum sample volume of 3 ml. The whole procedure was controlled manually and further development was required to produce an automated system suitable for routine analysis.A novel spark combustion reactor was designed for the quantitative determination of 13C in highly-enriched hydrocarbons.300 The reactor was loaded with the gaseous sample and O2 using a steel gas manifold and a high voltage applied using a platinum-electrode spark plug. The hydrocarbons were converted rapidly into CO2, which was analysed by quadrupole EIMS. The procedure as presented was limited in performance because of the formation of CO2 at natural abundance within the reactor itself. The source of this CO2 was suspected to be carbon contained within the interior walls of the reactor and on the spark plug surfaces. Although a 13C abundance of 99.6 atom% could be measured for a methane sample with 99.9 atom%
					13C, it was necessary to repeat the combustion cycle several times to reach this value.Glossary of termsAMS, Accelerator Mass SpectrometryASV, Anodic Stripping VoltammetryaTOF LMMS, Aerosol Time of Flight Laser Microprobe Mass SpectrometryBCR, Bureau Communautaire de ReferenceCE, Capillary ElectrophoresisCF, Continuous FlowCHARISMA, Chicago-Argonne Resonant Laser Ionization Mass AnalyserCID, Collision Induced DissociationCMOS, Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductorcps, counts per secondCRM, Certified Reference MaterialCSIA, Compound Specific Isotope AnalysisCW, Continuous WaveDBT, Dibutyltindc, direct currentDIC, Dissolved Inorganic CarbonDIHEN, Direct Injection High Efficiency NebulizerDIN, Direct Injection NebulizerDNA, Deoxyribonucleic AcidDRC, Dynamic Reaction CellDU, Depleted UraniumEA, Elemental AnalyserEC, Electron CaptureEcHG, Electrochemical Hydride GenerationEI, Electron IonizationEIMS, Electron Ionization Mass SpectrometryEMB, Effusive Molecular BeamEQEL, Electrostatic Quadrupole Extraction LensES, ElectrosprayESA, Electrostatic AnalyserESMS, Electrospray Mass SpectrometryETV, Electrothermal VaporizationFI, Flow InjectionFWHM, Full Width at Half MaximumGC, Gas ChromatographyGC-EIMS, Gas Chromatography Electron Ionization Mass SpectrometryGC-GD-TOFMS, Gas Chromatography-Glow Discharge Time of Flight Mass SpectrometryGCIB, Gas-Cluster Ion BeamGD, Glow DischargeGDMS, Glow Discharge Mass SpectrometryGD-OES, Glow Discharge Optical Emission SpectrometryGD-TOFMS, Glow Discharge Time of Flight Mass SpectrometryGPL, Generalized Power LawHET, High-Efficiency TorchHG, Hydride GenerationHPLC, High-performance Liquid ChromatographyHR, High ResolutionIAA, IsoamylamineIC, Ion ChromatographyICP, Inductively Coupled PlasmaICP-MS, Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass SpectrometryICP-TOFMS, Inductively Coupled Plasma Time of Flight Mass Spectrometryid, internal diameterID, Isotope DilutionIMF, Instrumental Mass FractionationIR, InfraredIUPAC, International Union of Pure and Applied ChemistryKE, Kinetic EnergyLA, Laser AblationLA-ICPMS, Laser Ablation-Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass SpectrometryLAMPAS, Laser Mass Analyser for Particles in the Airborne StateLC, Liquid ChromatographyLEIS, Low Energy Ion ScatteringLIMS, Laser Ionization Mass SpectrometryLMMS, Laser Microprobe Mass SpectrometryLOD, Limit of DetectionLOQ, Limit of QuantificationLPI, Laser Plasma IonizationMALDI, Matrix-Assisted Laser-Desorption IonizationMC, Multiple CollectorMCN, Microconcentric NebulizerMIP, Microwave-induced PlasmaMIP-TOFMS, Microwave-Induced Plasma Time of Flight Mass SpectrometryMS, Mass SpectrometryMT, Metallothioneinm/z, mass-to charge ratioNa-DDC, Sodium DiethyldithiocarbamateNEG, Non-Evaporable GetterNIST, National Institute of Standards and TechnologyNRCC, National Research Council CanadaP&T, Purge and TrapPCA, Principal Components AnalysisPCB, Polychlorinated BiphenylsPDMS, PolydimethylsiloxanePN, Pneumatic Nebulizationppb, parts per billionppm, parts per millionPSIA, Position-specific Isotope AnalysisRBS, Rutherford Backscattering SpectrometryREE, Rare Earth Elementsrf, radiofrequencyRIMS, Resonance Ionization Mass SpectrometryRM, Reference Materialrms, root mean squareRSD, Relative Standard DeviationRSF, Relative Sensitivity FactorSAM, Self-Assembled MonolayerS/B, Signal-to-Background RatioSD, Standard DeviationSDME, Single Drop MicroextractionSEM, Scanning Electron MicroscopySHRIMP, Sensitive High-Resolution Ion MicroprobeSIMS, Secondary Ion Mass SpectrometrySIRMS, Stable Isotope Ratio Mass SpectrometryS/N, Signal-to-Noise RatioSNMS, Sputtered Neutral Mass SpectrometrySOI, Silicon-on-InsulatorSPME, Solid Phase MicroextractionSRM, Standard Reference MaterialS-SIMS, Static Secondary Ion Mass SpectrometrySSJ, Supersonic JetTBT, TributyltinTEM, Transmission Electron MicroscopyTIMS, Thermal Ionization Mass SpectrometryTOC, Total Organic CarbonTOF, Time of FlightTOFMS, Time of Flight Mass SpectrometryTWMHC, Thin-Walled Metal Hollow CathodeUV, UltravioletVOC, Volatile Organic CompoundsXPS, X-ray Photoelectron SpectroscopyYAG, Yttrium Aluminium Garnet3-D, Three Dimensional3MTP, 3-Methylthiopropylamineλ, Wavelengthτ, Pulse DurationReferencesJ. R. Bacon, J. C. Greenwood, L. Van Vaeck and J. G. Williams, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 955 RSC .A. Fisher, P. S. Goodall, M. W. Hinds, S. N. Nelms and D. M. Penny, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(12), 1497 RSC .S. J. Hill, T. A. Arowolo, O. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, M. S. Cresser, C. Harrington and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(2), 301 RSC .A. Taylor, S. Branch, D. Halls, M. Patriarca and M. White, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(4), 505 RSC .R. Hellborg, M. Faarinen, M. Kiisk, C. E. Magnusson, P. Persson, G. Skog and K. Stenstrom, Vacuum, 2003, 70(2–3), 365 CrossRef CAS .M. Leino, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 204, 129 CrossRef CAS .P. Muzikar, D. Elmore and D. E. Granger, Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 2003, 115(6), 643 Search PubMed .G. Lappin and R. C. Garner, Nat. Rev. Drug Discov., 2003, 2(3), 233 Search PubMed .C. Tuniz, U. Zoppi and M. A. C. Hotchkis, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 213, 469 CrossRef CAS .C. Vockenhuber, I. Ahmad, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, V. Liechtenstein, A. Priller, P. Steier and S. Winkler, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 223(1–3), 713 CrossRef .C. Vockenhuber, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, A. Priller, P. Steier, S. Winkler and V. Liechtenstein, Pramana-J. Phys., 2002, 59(6), 1041 Search PubMed .R. Hellborg, S. Bazhal, M. Faarinen, K. Hakansson, C. E. Magnusson, P. Persson, G. Skog and K. Stenstrom, Pramana-J. Phys., 2002, 59(6), 1061 Search PubMed .P. Persson, R. Hellborg, M. Kiisk, G. Skog and K. Stenstrom, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2003, 500(1–3), 55 CrossRef CAS .A. J. T. Jull, G. S. Burr, J. W. Beck, D. J. Donahue, D. Biddulph, A. L. Hatheway, T. E. Lange and L. R. McHargue, J. Environ. Radioact., 2003, 69(1–2), 3 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Kim, M. Youn, I. C. Kim, J. H. Park, Y. M. Song, J. Kang and H. R. Choi, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2003, 43, S45 Search PubMed .M. Friedrich, W. Pilz, N. Bekris, M. Glugla, M. Kiisk and V. Liechtenstein, Pramana-J. Phys., 2002, 59(6), 1053 Search PubMed .P. L. Skipper, B. J. Hughey, R. G. Liberman, M. H. Choi, J. S. Wishnok, R. E. Klinkowstein, R. E. Shefer, S. R. Tannenbaum, S. P. Harriman and C. Prakash, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2002, 15(12), 105 .A. E. Litherland, I. Tomski and J. P. Doupe, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 204, 720 CrossRef CAS .C. Cetina, D. L. Knies, K. S. Grabowski, M. Getaneh, S. J. Tumey, R. Raffanti, O. H. W. Siegmund and J. V. Vallerga, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2003, 513(1–2), 403 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Cook, J. R. Southon and J. Wadsworth, JOM—J. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc., 2003, 55(5), 15 Search PubMed .P. T. Craddock, M. L. Wayman and A. J. T. Jull, Radiocarbon, 2002, 44(3), 717 CAS .K. L. Steelman and M. W. Rowe, in Archaeological Chemistry: Materials, Methods, and Meaning, ACS Syposium Series,  2002, vol. 831, pp. 8–21 Search PubMed .A. W. Stott, R. Berstan and R. P. Evershed, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(19), 5037 CrossRef CAS .S. M. Kristiansen, K. Dalsgaard, M. K. Holst, B. Aaby and J. Heinemeier, Radiocarbon, 2003, 45(1), 101 CAS .H. Valladas, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2003, 14(9), 1487 CrossRef CAS .N. Piotrowska and T. Goslar, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2002, 38(4), 267 Search PubMed .T. J. Ognibene, G. Bench, J. S. Vogel, G. F. Peaslee and S. Murov, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(9), 2192 CrossRef CAS .K. Knie, A. Elhardt, T. Faestermann, G. Korschinek, C. Lierse, G. Rugel and A. Stippschild, Nucl. Phys. A, 2003, 723(3–4), 343 CrossRef .S. Merchel, U. Ott, S. Herrmann, B. Spettel, T. Faestermann, K. Knie, G. Korschinek, G. Rugel and A. Wallner, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(24), 4949 CrossRef CAS .M. Paul, A. Valenta, I. Ahmad, D. Berkovits, C. Bordeanu, S. Ghelberg, Y. Hashimoto, A. Hershkowitz, S. Jiang, T. Nakanishi and K. Sakamoto, Nucl. Phys. A, 2003, 719, 29C CrossRef .J. H. Barnes, G. D. Schilling, M. B. Denton, D. W. Koppenaal and G. M. Hieftje, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1015 RSC .E. Oxley, K. Turney, J. Gasser and W. W. Harrison, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1376 RSC .G. P. Jackson, R. G. Haire and D. C. Duckworth, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 665 RSC .S. Potapov, E. Izrailov, V. Vergizova, M. Voronov, S. Suprunovich, M. Slyadnev and A. Ganeev, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 564 RSC .D. E. Goeringer, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 14(11), 1315 CrossRef CAS .G. P. Jackson and F. L. King, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 185 CrossRef .C. L. Lewis, M. A. Moser, D. E. Dale, W. Hang, C. Hassell, F. L. King and V. Majidi, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(9), 1983 CrossRef CAS .E. Oxley, C. L. Yang, J. Liu and W. W. Harrison, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(23), 6478 CrossRef CAS .A. Menendez, J. Pisonero, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 557 RSC .G. P. Jackson, F. L. King and D. C. Duckworth, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1026 RSC .C. L. Lewis, M. A. Moser, W. Hang, D. E. Dale, D. C. Hassell and V. Majidi, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 629 RSC .J. Pisonero, K. Turney, N. Bordel, A. Sanz-Medel and W. W. Harrison, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 624 RSC .M. Kasik, C. Venzago and R. Dorka, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 603 RSC .R. Shekhar, J. Arunachalam, H. R. Ravindra and B. Gopalan, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 381 RSC .L. Li, C. M. Barshick, J. T. Millay, A. V. Welty and F. L. King, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(16), 3953 CrossRef CAS .V. Hoffmann, R. Dorka, L. Wilken, V. D. Hodoroaba and K. Wetzig, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(7), 575 CrossRef CAS .M. V. Peláez, J. Pisonero, J. M. Costa-Fernández, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(6), 612 RSC .M. V. Peláez, J. M. Costa-Fernández, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 864 RSC .S. Oswald and S. Baunack, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 425(1–2), 9 CrossRef CAS .M. Balcerzak, Anal. Sci., 2003, 19(7), 979 CAS .H. Hayashi, Y. Hara, T. Tanaka and M. Hiraide, Bunseki Kagaku, 2003, 52(4), 275 CAS .K. S. Park, S. T. Kim, Y. M. Kim, Y. Kim and W. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2003, 24(3), 285 CAS .K. Yatabe, M. Ohata, N. Furuta, N. Sugiyama and K. Sakata, Bunseki Kagaku, 2003, 52(8), 559 .E. T. Luong and R. S. Houk, J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 14(4), 295 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Su, Z. Jin and Y. X. Duan, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2003, 48(3), 163 Search PubMed .M. Antler, H. Ying, D. H. Burns and E. D. Salin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(5), 837 .N. F. Zahran, A. I. Helal, M. A. Amr, A. Abdel-Hafiez and H. T. Mohsen, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 226(2), 271 CrossRef CAS .M. Segura, Y. Madrid and C. Camara, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1103 RSC .A. E. Holliday and D. Beauchemin, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 289 RSC .P. Kralj and M. Veber, Acta Chim. Sloven., 2003, 50(4), 633 Search PubMed .F. Vanhaecke, L. Balcaen, I. Deconinck, I. De Schrijver, C. M. Almeida and L. Moens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1060 RSC .V. N. Epov, V. Taylor, D. Lariviere, R. D. Evans and R. J. Cornett, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2003, 258(3), 473 CrossRef CAS .S. E. O'Brien, B. W. Acon, S. F. Boulyga, J. S. Becker, H. J. Dietze and A. Montaser, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 230 RSC .B. Hattendorf and D. Günther, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(1), 1 CrossRef .D. E. Nixon, K. R. Neubauer, S. J. Eckdahl, J. A. Butz and M. F. Burritt, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(1), 97 CrossRef .M. Ben-Younes, D. C. Gregoire and C. L. Chakrabarti, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 361 CrossRef .H. T. Liu and S. J. Jiang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(1), 153 CrossRef .H. T. Liu and S. J. Jiang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(2), 306 CAS .D. Profrock, P. Leonhard and A. Prange, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377(1), 132 CrossRef CAS .M. Guillong, I. Horn and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1224 RSC .I. Horn, D. Günther and M. Guillong, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(10), 1837 CrossRef .I. Horn and D. Günther, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 207(1–4), 144 CrossRef CAS .M. Guillong, H. R. Kuhn and D. Günther, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(2–3), 211 CrossRef .S. E. Jackson and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 205 RSC .H. R. Kuhn and D. Günther, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(4), 747 CrossRef CAS .T. Hirata, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(2), 228 CrossRef CAS .F. Poitrasson, X. L. Mao, S. S. Mao, R. Freydier and R. E. Russo, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(22), 6184 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Aeschliman, S. J. Bajic, D. P. Baldwin and R. S. Houk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1008 RSC .D. B. Aeschliman, S. J. Bajic, D. P. Baldwin and R. S. Houk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 872 RSC .M. Bizzarro, A. Simonetti, R. K. Stevenson and S. Kurszlaukis, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(2), 289 CrossRef CAS .G. Ertas and J. A. Holcombe, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(9), 1597 CrossRef .N. H. Bings and Z. Stefanka, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1088 RSC .S. M. Maia, D. Pozebon and A. J. Curtius, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 330 RSC .A. F. da Silva, L. F. Dias, T. D. Saint'Pierre, A. J. Curtius and B. Welz, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(4), 344 RSC .L. F. Dias, T. D. Saint'Pierre, S. M. Maia, M. A. M. da Silva, V. L. A. Frescura, B. Welz and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2002, 57(12), 2003 CrossRef .C. Y. Ho and S. J. Jiang, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(1), 63 CrossRef .Z. Arslan and A. J. Paulson, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 476(1), 1 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Anderson and S. A. Pergantis, Talanta, 2003, 60(4), 821 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Baca, A. B. De la Ree, F. M. Zhou and A. Z. Mason, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(10), 2507 CrossRef CAS .E. Bjorn and W. Frech, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(2), 274 .K. Kahen, A. Strubinger, J. R. Chirinos and A. Montaser, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(3), 397 CrossRef .B. P. Jensen, B. Gammelgaard, S. H. Hansen and J. V. Andersen, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(8), 891 RSC .E. G. Yanes and N. J. Miller-Ihli, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(5), 949 .N. H. Bings, Z. Stefanka and S. R. Mallada, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 479(2), 203 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Packer, A. P. G. Gervasio, C. E. S. Miranda, B. F. Reis, A. A. Menegario and M. F. Gine, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 485(2), 145 CrossRef CAS .J. E. Sonke, D. J. Furbish and V. J. M. Salters, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1015(1–2), 205 CrossRef CAS .M. Montes-Bayon, K. DeNicola and J. A. Caruso, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1000(1–2), 457 CrossRef CAS .M. Y. Ye, X. F. Yin and Z. L. Fang, Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal., 2003, 23(1), 89 CAS .K. Polec-Pawlak and M. Jarosz, Chem. Anal., 2002, 47(6), 783 Search PubMed .P. Jitaru, H. Goenaga Infante and F. C. Adams, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 489(1), 45 CrossRef CAS .D. Schaumloffel, J. R. Encinar and R. Lobinski, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(24), 6837 CrossRef .L. Yang, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1365 RSC .M. Monperrus, O. Zuloaga, E. Krupp, D. Amouroux, R. Wahlen, B. Fairman and O. F. X. Donard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 247 RSC .J. R. Encinar, P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, J. I. G. Alonso and A. Sanz-Medel, Trends Anal. Chem., 2003, 22(2), 108 CrossRef .G. Alvarez-Llamas, M. D. F. de la Campa and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(5), 460 RSC .C. J. Smith, I. D. Wilson, F. Abou-Shakra, R. Payne, T. C. Parry, P. Sinclair and D. W. Roberts, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(6), 1463 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Chery, K. De Cremer, R. Cornelis, F. Vanhaecke and L. Moens, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1113 RSC .H. L. Peters and B. T. Jones, Appl. Spectrosc. Rev., 2003, 38(1), 71 CrossRef CAS .D. Chipley, T. K. Kyser, D. Beauchemin and B. MacFarlane, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2003, 48(5), 269 Search PubMed .P. Evans, S. Elahi, K. Lee and B. Fairman, J. Environ. Monit., 2003, 5(1), 175 RSC .C. Ekberg, P. L. Brown, A. Odegaard-Jensen, D. M. Hill and A. W. Zawadzki, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2002, 374(7–8), 1330 CrossRef CAS .C. Degueldre and P. Y. Favarger, Colloid Surf., Part A, 2003, 217(1–3), 137 Search PubMed .C. P. Ingle, B. L. Sharp, M.
S. A. Horstwood, R. R. Parrish and D. J. Lewis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 219 RSC .M. C. Carrion, J. R. Andres, J. A. M. Rubi and H. Emteborg, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(5), 437 RSC .S. Wehmeier, R. Ellam and J. Feldmann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(9), 1001 RSC .F. Wombacher, M. Rehkamper, K. Mezger and C. Munker, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(23), 4639 CrossRef CAS .I. Tresl, C. R. Quetel and P. D. P. Taylor, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(3), 551 CrossRef .T. Hirata, Y. Hayano and T. Ohno, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1283 RSC .K. Kehm, E. H. Hauri, C. M. O. Alexander and R. W. Carlson, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(15), 2879 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Kumar, S. Tesfalidet, J. Snell and W. Frech, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(7), 714 RSC .S. Weyer and J. Schwieters, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 226(3), 355 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Izmer, S. F. Boulyga and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1339 RSC .S. A. Crowe, B. J. Fryer, I. M. Samson and J. E. Gagnon, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1331 RSC .C. J. Bryant, M. T. McCulloch and V. C. Bennett, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(7), 734 RSC .H. Hintelmann and S. Y. Lu, Analyst, 2003, 128(6), 635 RSC .F. Wombacher and M. Rehkamper, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1371 RSC .R. N. Taylor, T. Warneke, J. A. Milton, I. W. Croudace, P. E. Warwick and R. W. Nesbitt, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(5), 480 RSC .D. Cardinal, L. Y. Alleman, J. de Jong, K. Ziegler and L. Andre, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(3), 213 RSC .P. Deschamps, R. Doucelance, B. Ghaleb and J. L. Michelot, Chem. Geol., 2003, 201(1–2), 141 CrossRef CAS .M. Thirlwall, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2001, 16(10), 1121 RSC .J. Hellstrom, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(11), 1346 RSC .I. Segal, L. Halicz and I. T. Platzner, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(10), 1217 RSC .M. Schonbachler, M. Rehkamper, D. C. Lee and A. N. Halliday, Analyst, 2004, 129(1), 32 RSC .T. Uchimura, K. Hafner, R. Zimmermann and T. Imasaka, Appl. Spectrosc., 2003, 57(4), 461 CrossRef CAS .R. Teghil, L. D'Alessio, A. Santagata, D. Ferro and G. De Maria, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 208, 119 CrossRef .T. Gibert and T. Gonthiez, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93(10), 5959 CrossRef CAS .A. Narazaki, T. Sato, Y. Kawaguchi and H. Niino, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 208, 52 CrossRef .R. T. Rumianowski, R. S. Dygdala, W. Jung and W. Bala, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 252(1–3), 230 CrossRef CAS .R. F. Haglund, M. Baltz-Knorr, D. R. Ermer, M. R. Papantonakis and K. E. Schriver, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(6), 1125 CrossRef .U. Kirchner, R. Vogt, C. Natzeck and J. Goschnick, J. Aerosol. Sci., 2003, 34(10), 1323 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Garcia, J. M. Vadillo, J. Ruiz and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(7), 779 RSC .K. D. A. Wendt, K. Blaum, C. Geppert, R. Horn, G. Passler, N. Trautmann and B. A. Bushaw, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 204, 325 CrossRef CAS .S. Amari, Nucl. Phys. A, 2003, 718, 45C CrossRef .K. Song, H. Cha, S. H. Park and Y. I. Lee, Microchem J., 2003, 75(2), 87 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Dimov, S. L. Chryssoulis and R. H. Lipson, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(23), 6723 CrossRef CAS .K. Watanabe, K. Hattori, J. Kawarabayashi and T. Iguchi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2003, 58(6), 1163 CrossRef .M. R. Savina, M. J. Pellin, C. E. Tripa, I. V. Veryovkin, W. F. Calaway and A. M. Davis, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(17), 3215 CrossRef CAS .M. R. Savina, A. M. Davis, C. E. Tripa, M. J. Pellin, R. N. Clayton, R. S. Lewis, S. Amari, R. Gallino and M. Lugaro, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(17), 3201 CrossRef CAS .K. Takanashi, K. Shibata, T. Sakamoto, M. Owari and Y. Nihei, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(5), 437 CrossRef CAS .D. B. Fenner and Y. Shao, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2003, 21(1), 47 CrossRef CAS .L. R. Nittler and C. M. O. Alexander, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(24), 4961 CrossRef CAS .P. A. W. van der Heide and F. V. Azzarello, Surf. Sci., 2003, 531(3), L369 CrossRef CAS .S. Sarkar and P. Chakraborty, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 212, 364 CrossRef CAS .Z. Postawa, B. Czerwinski, M. Szewczyk, E. J. Smiley, N. Winograd and B. J. Garrison, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(17), 4402 CrossRef CAS .S. Sarkar, A. Datta, P. Chakraborty and B. Satpati, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(10), 793 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Hernández-Mangas, J. Lázaro, L. Enriquez, L. Bailón, J. Barbolla and M. Jaraiz, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 202, 138 CrossRef CAS .H. Lehmann, Geostand. Newsl., 2003, 27(1), 99 CAS .S. Akhunov, S. N. Morozov and U. K. Rasulev, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 203, 146 CrossRef CAS .M. Kilo, C. Argirusis, G. Borchardt and R. A. Jackson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5(11), 2219 RSC .P. Fielitz, G. Borchardt, M. Schmücker and H. Schneider, Solid State Ion., 2003, 160(1–2), 75 CrossRef CAS .L. A. McDonnell, T. H. Mize, S. L. Luxembourg, S. Koster, G. B. Eijkel, E. Verpoorte, N. F. de Rooij and R. M. A. Heeren, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(17), 4373 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Pivovarov, F. A. Stevie, D. P. Griffis and G. M. Guryanov, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A, 2003, 21(5), 1649 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kudriavtsev, A. Villegas, A. Godines, R. Asomoza and I. Usov, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(6), 491 CrossRef CAS .C. Rollion-Bard, M. Chaussidon and C. France-Lanord, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2003, 215(1–2), 275 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kolodny, M. Bar-Matthews, A. Ayalon and K. D. McKeegan, Chem. Geol., 2003, 197(1–4), 21 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Stern and Y. Amelin, Chem. Geol., 2003, 197(1–4), 111 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Greenwood, R. E. Blake and C. D. Coath, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(12), 2289 CrossRef CAS .S. J. Mojzsis, C. D. Coath, J. P. Greenwood, K. D. McKeegan and T. M. Harrison, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(9), 1635 CrossRef CAS .J. Peevler, M. Fayek, K. C. Misra and L. R. Riciputi, J. Geochem. Explor., 2003, 80(2–3), 277 CrossRef CAS .J. Aléon, F. Robert, M. Chaussidon and B. Marty, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(19), 3773 CrossRef CAS .E. Zinner, S. Amari, R. Guinness, A. Nguyen, F. J. Stadermann, R. M. Walker and R. S. Lewis, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(24), 5083 CrossRef CAS .Y. Homma, H. Takenaka, F. Toujou, A. Takano, S. Hayashi and R. Shimizu, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(6), 544 CrossRef CAS .R. Ohr, B. Jacoby, M. von Gradowski, C. Schug and H. Hilgers, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 173(1), 111 CrossRef CAS .G. Dinescu, M. Creatore and M. C. M. van de Sanden, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 174, 370 CrossRef .S. Jakschik, U. Schroeder, T. Hecht, D. Krueger, G. Dollinger, A. Bergmaier, C. Luhmann and J. W. Bartha, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 211(1–4), 352 CrossRef CAS .C. Le Paven-Thivet, S. Fusil, P. Aubert, C. Malibert, A. Zozime and P. Houdy, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 446(1), 147 CrossRef CAS .M. Teo, J. Kim, P. C. Wong, K. C. Wong and K. A. R. Mitchell, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 221(1–4), 340 CrossRef CAS .H. M. Grandin, S. M. Tadayyon, W. N. Lennard, K. Griffiths, L. L. Coatsworth, P. R. Norton, Z. D. Popovic, H. Aziz and N. X. Hu, Org. Electron., 2003, 4(1), 9 Search PubMed .E. Bormashenko, R. Pogreb, S. Sutovski, A. Shulzinger, A. Sheshnev and A. Gladkikh, Synth. Met., 2003, 139(2), 321 CrossRef CAS .L. Vincent, T. Sauvage, S. Houdayer, C. Tessier, S. Gautrot, O. Kaïtasov, J. Chaumont and M. Vayer, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 207(3), 339 CrossRef CAS .S. Baunack, S. Menzel, M. Pekariková, H. Schmidt, M. Albert and K. Wetzig, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(7), 891 CAS .Y. Kawashima, Z. Y. Liu, K. Terashima, K. Hamada, K. Fukutani, M. Wilde, S. Aoyagi and M. Kudo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 212, 804 CrossRef .D. Lebiedz, H. Züchner and O. Gutfleisch, J. Alloy. Compd., 2003, 356, 679 CrossRef .C. Hongo, M. Tomita, M. Takenaka, M. Suzuki and A. Murakoshi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2003, 21(4), 1422 CrossRef CAS .Z. X. Jiang, J. Lerma, J. J. Lee, D. Sieloff, S. Chen, J. Beck, S. Backer, W. Taylor, H. Tseng, P. Tobin and L. Svedberg, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2003, 21(4), 1487 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Yeo, A. T. S. Wee, R. Liu, F. F. Zhou and A. See, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 2003, 21(1), 193 CrossRef CAS .G. Williams and H. N. McMurray, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5(10), 871 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Martin, S. J. Naftel, S. Macfie, W. Skinner, F. Courchesne and V. Séguin, Chemosphere, 2004, 54(8), 1121 CrossRef CAS .K. Gammer, M. Rosner, G. Poeckl and H. Hutter, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376(2), 255 CAS .A. M. Belu, D. J. Graham and D. G. Castner, Biomaterials, 2003, 24(21), 3635 CrossRef CAS .K. B. Johnson, J. E. Delmore and A. D. Appelhans, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 229(3), 157 CrossRef CAS .Z. P. Li and K. Hirokawa, Anal. Sci., 2003, 19(9), 1231 CAS .R. Van Ham, L. Van Vaeck, A. Adriaens and F. Adams, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 500(1–2), 259 CrossRef CAS .Z. P. Li and K. Hirokawa, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 220(1–4), 136 CrossRef CAS .N. Tadokoro, M. Yuki, T. Miura and K. Osakabe, Tribol. Int., 2003, 36(4–6), 343 CrossRef CAS .J. Drbohlav and V. Matolin, Vacuum, 2003, 71(1–2), 323 CrossRef CAS .V. Matolin, J. Drbohlav and K. Masek, Vacuum, 2003, 71(1–2), 317 CrossRef CAS .P. W. Albers, J. Pietsch, J. Krauter and S. F. Parker, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5(9), 1941 RSC .T. Numata, H. Nanao, S. Mori and S. Miyake, Tribol. Int., 2003, 36(4–6), 305 CrossRef CAS .G. H. Yang, Y. Zhang, E. T. Kang, K. G. Neoh, W. Huang and J. H. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107(33), 8592 CrossRef CAS .K. H. Ernst, Y. Kuster, R. Fasel, C. F. McFadden and U. Ellerbeck, Surf. Sci., 2003, 530(3), 195 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kishikawa, H. Q. Gong, T. Kitaoka, T. Amemiya, K. Takaya, M. Tozu, T. Hoshi and Y. Ohashi, J. Electron Microsc., 2003, 52(3), 349 Search PubMed .S. N. Jenkins, D. K. Barber, M. Whiting and M. A. Baker, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 215(1–4), 78 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Nash, R. M. Sayer, S. B. Couling, J. Fletcher, A. Henderson, J. C. Vickerman and A. B. Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5(22), 5101 RSC .S. F. Dai, X. Q. Hou, D. Y. Ren and Y. G. Tang, Int. J. Coal Geol., 2003, 55(2–4), 139 CrossRef CAS .S. Takeda and M. Fukawa, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 444(1–2), 153 CrossRef CAS .B. T. Wickes, Y. Kim and D. G. Castner, Surf. Interface Anal., 2003, 35(8), 640 CrossRef CAS .N. O. Savage, S. Roberson, G. Gillen, M. J. Tarlov and S. Semancik, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(17), 4360 CrossRef CAS .X. Shi, R. Avci, M. Geiser and Z. Lewandowski, Corrosion Sci., 2003, 45(11), 2577 Search PubMed .E. Gazi, J. Dwyer, N. Lockyer, P. Gardner, J. C. Vickerman, J. Miyan, C. A. Hart, M. Brown, J. H. Shanks and N. Clarke, Faraday Discuss., 2004, 126, 41 RSC .R. P. Socha and J. Väyrynen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2003, 212, 636 CrossRef .A. Boulton, D. Fornasiero and J. Ralston, Int. J. Miner. Process., 2003, 70(1–4), 205 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Yan, Y. Leng and L. T. Weng, Biomaterials, 2003, 24(15), 2585 CrossRef CAS .R. A. Schueneman, A. I. Khaskelis, D. Eastwood, W. J. van Ooij and L. W. Burggraf, J. Nucl. Mat., 2003, 323(1), 8 Search PubMed .K. Möller, A. Jansson and P. Sjövall, Polym. Degrad. Stabil., 2003, 80(2), 345 Search PubMed .O. Ameziane, J. M. Blanco, J. J. Serrano, B. Guzman and M. Aguilar, Eur. Phys. J.-Appl. Phys, 2003, 22(3), 231 Search PubMed .U. Breuer, W. Krumpen and F. Fitsilis, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 375(7), 906 CAS .P. Ghosh and W. A. Brand, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 228(1), 1 CrossRef CAS .S. Asche, A. L. Michaud and J. T. Brenna, Curr. Org. Chem., 2003, 7(15), 1527 CAS .E. Pouteau, C. Piguet-Welsch, A. Berger and L. B. Fay, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2003, 39(4), 247 Search PubMed .R. M. Verkouteren, S. Assonov, D. B. Klinedinst and W. A. Brand, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(8), 777 CrossRef CAS .M. S. Torn, S. Davis, J. A. Bird, M. R. Shaw and M. E. Conrad, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(23), 2675 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Schauer, C. T. Lai, D. R. Bowling and J. R. Ehleringer, Agric. For. Meteorol., 2003, 118(1–2), 113 CrossRef .P. D. Brooks, H. Geilmann, R. A. Werner and W. A. Brand, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(16), 1924 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Sacks, C. J. Wolyniak and J. T. Brenna, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1020(2), 273 CrossRef CAS .J. Schmitt, B. Glaser and W. Zech, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(9), 970 CAS .S. S. Assonov and C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(10), 1007 CrossRef CAS .G. L. Sacks and J. T. Brenna, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(20), 5495 CrossRef CAS .T. Rockmann, J. Kaiser, C. A. M. Brenninkmeijer and W. A. Brand, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(16), 1897 CrossRef .M. Potthoff, N. Loftfield, F. Buegger, B. Wick, B. John, R. G. Joergensen and H. Flessa, Soil Biol. Biochem., 2003, 35(7), 947 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Evans, R. P. Evershed, H. I. J. Black and P. Ineson, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(22), 6056 CrossRef CAS .R. Pel, H. Hoogveld and V. Floris, Limnol. Oceanogr., 2003, 48(6), 2200 Search PubMed .L. Zwank, M. Berg, T. C. Schmidt and S. B. Haderlein, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(20), 5575 CrossRef CAS .G. St.-Jean, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(5), 419 CrossRef CAS .L. J. C. Bluck, K. S. Jones, J. Thomas, J. Liggins, M. Harding, S. A. Bingham and W. A. Coward, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2002, 16(24), 2249 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Mottram and R. P. Evershed, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(23), 2669 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Rice, S. C. Tyler, M. C. McCarthy, K. A. Boering and E. Atlas, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 2003, 108(D15), art. 4460 .K. Yamada, Y. Ozaki, F. Nakagawa, M. Tanaka and N. Yoshida, Atmos. Environ., 2003, 37(14), 1975 CrossRef CAS .L. I. Wassenaar and K. A. Hobson, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2003, 39(3), 211 Search PubMed .R. J. Laughlin and R. J. Stevens, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2003, 67(2), 540 CAS .H. P. Qi and T. B. Coplen, Chem. Geol., 2003, 199(1–2), 183 CAS .S. Jim, V. Jones, M. S. Copley, S. H. Ambrose and R. P. Evershed, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(20), 2283 CrossRef CAS .D. Derrien, J. Balesdent, C. Marol and C. Santaella, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(23), 2626 CrossRef CAS .C. Schlechtriem, U. Focken and K. Becker, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2003, 39(2), 135 Search PubMed .S. D. Kelly, C. Rhodes, J. H. Lofthouse, D. Anderson, C. E. Burwood, M. J. Dennis and P. Brereton, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2003, 51(7), 1801 CrossRef CAS .C. S. Wong, D. C. G. Muir and S. A. Mabury, Chemosphere, 2003, 50(7), 903 CrossRef CAS .C. Spötl and T. W. Vennemann, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(9), 1004 .W. Kulik, M. J. S. Oosterveld, R. M. Kok and K. de Meer, J. Chromatogr. B, 2003, 791(1–2), 399 CrossRef CAS .C. Huber and M. Leuenberger, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(12), 1319 CrossRef CAS .E. Norlin, K. Irgum and K. E. A. Ohlsson, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(9), 936 CAS .A. M. Johnston, C. M. Scrimgeour, H. Kennedy and L. L. Handley, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(11), 1099 CrossRef CAS .E. Jamin, R. Guerin, M. Retif, M. Lees and G. J. Martin, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2003, 51(18), 5202 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Wu and H. Satake, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(18), A537 .M. Wieser, D. Tuttas, C. Bouman and J. B. Schwieters, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(18), A532 .L. P. Black, S. L. Kamo, C. M. Allen, J. N. Aleinikoff, D. W. Davis, R. J. Korsch and C. Foudoulis, Chem. Geol., 2003, 200(1–2), 155 CrossRef CAS .M. D. Schmitz, S. A. Bowring and T. R. Ireland, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(19), 3665 CrossRef CAS .I. Raczek, K. P. Jochum and A. W. Hofmann, Geostand. Newsl., 2003, 27(2), 173 CAS .T. Miyazaki, T. Shibata and M. Yoshikawa, Proc. Jpn. Acad. Ser. B-Phys. Biol. Sci., 2003, 79(2), 58 Search PubMed .L. G. Mackay, C. P. Taylor, R. B. Myors, R. Hearn and B. King, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2003, 8(5), 191 Search PubMed .J. J. S. Shen and C. F. You, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(9), 1972 CrossRef CAS .M. E. Wieser and J. R. de Laeter, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 225(2), 177 CrossRef CAS .H. Kamioka, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(18), A197 CrossRef .J. L. Paquette, B. Moine and M. A. F. Rakotondrazafy, Precambrian Res., 2003, 121(1–2), 73 CrossRef CAS .C. C. Shen, H. Cheng, R. L. Edwards, S. B. Moran, H. N. Edmonds, J. A. Hoff and R. B. Thomas, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(5), 1075 CrossRef CAS .S. Richter and S. A. Goldberg, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 229(3), 181 CrossRef CAS .A. Durakovic, P. Horan and L. Dietz, Milit. Med., 2002, 167(8), 620 Search PubMed .N. Jabeen, E. U. Rehman and S. Ahmed, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2003, 258(2), 427 CrossRef CAS .C. G. Zhang, Y. K. Xiao, A. D. Sun, Q. Z. Wang and B. Y. Liao, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2003, 31(4), 405 CAS .M. Ostermann, P. Kettisch, D. Becker and J. Vogl, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 377(4), 779 CrossRef CAS .B. Ghaleb, E. Pons, P. Deschamps and C. Hillaire-Marcel, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(18), A118 .T. Yokoyama and E. Nakamura, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2003, 67(18), A568 .E. Rosenberg, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1000(1–2), 841 CrossRef CAS .S. McSheehy and Z. Mester, Trends Anal. Chem., 2003, 22(4), 210 CrossRef CAS .S. McSheehy and Z. Mester, Trends Anal. Chem., 2003, 22(5), 311 CrossRef CAS .D. Kuehnelt, W. Goessler and K. A. Francesconi, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(7), 654 CrossRef CAS .W. Buchberger, B. Czizsek, S. Hann and G. Stingeder, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(5), 512 RSC .A. Putschew and M. Jekel, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(20), 2279 CrossRef CAS .H. Hintelmann and D. A. Simmons, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2003, 48(4), 244 Search PubMed .V. Vacchina, S. Mari, P. Czernic, L. Marques, K. Pianelli, D. Schaumloffel, M. Lebrun and R. Lobinski, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(11), 2740 CrossRef CAS .H. R. Hansen, A. Raab and J. Feldmann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2003, 18(5), 474 RSC .C. Wei, W. H. Li, C. Zhang, M. Van Hulle, R. Cornelis and X. R. Zhang, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2003, 51(17), 5176 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Encinar, L. Ouerdane, W. Buchmann, J. Tortajada, R. Lobinski and J. Szpunar, Anal. Chem., 2003, 75(15), 3765 CrossRef .J. R. Encinar, M. Sliwka-Kaszynska, A. Polatajko, V. Vacchina and J. Szpunar, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2003, 500(1–2), 171 CrossRef CAS .V. Sanz-Nebot, B. Andon and J. Barbosa, J. Chromatogr. B, 2003, 796(2), 379 CrossRef CAS .P. Palumaa, E. Eriste, K. Kruusel, L. Kangur, H. Jornvall and R. Sillard, Cell. Mol. Biol., 2003, 49(5), 763 Search PubMed .G. F. Jiang, Z. L. Gong, X. F. Li, W. R. Cullen and X. C. Le, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2003, 16(7), 873 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Parkinson, I. Bruheim, I. Christ and J. Pawliszyn, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1025(1), 77 CrossRef CAS .J. Kosters, R. A. Diaz-Bone, B. Planer-Friedrich, B. Rothweiler and A. V. Hirner, J. Mol. Struct., 2003, 661, 347 CrossRef .J. L. M. Vidal, A. B. Vega, F. J. Arrebola, M. J. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, M. C. M. Sanchez and A. G. Frenich, Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 17(18), 2099 CrossRef .J. Munoz, J. R. Baena, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1023(2), 175 CrossRef CAS .R. M. Tripathi, S. Mahapatra, S. Sadasivan and V. D. Puranik, J. Phys. IV, 2003, 107, 1313 Search PubMed .R. Sur, H. Hajimiragha, J. Begerow and L. Dunemann, Chem. Unserer Zeit, 2003, 37(4), 248 Search PubMed .T. Yamamoto, Y. Noma, A. Yasuhara and S. Sakai, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1017(1–2), 195 CrossRef .C. Haberhauer-Troyer, G. Alvarez-Llamas, E. Zitting, P. Rodriguez-Gonzalez, E. Rosenberg and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1015(1–2), 1 CrossRef CAS .P. Das, M. Gupta, A. Jain and K. K. Verma, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1023(1), 33 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, V. Colombini, P. Maxwell, Z. Mester and R. E. Sturgeon, J. Chromatogr. A, 2003, 1011(1–2), 135 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Chen, S. S. Chou and D. F. Hwang, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1024(1–2), 209 CrossRef CAS .D. E. Austin, R. L. Grimm, H. L. K. Manning, C. L. Bailey, J. E. Farnsworth, T. J. Ahrens and J. L. Beauchamp, J. Geophys. Res.-Planets, 2003, 108(E5), art. 5038 Search PubMed .R. Russow, H. J. Kupka, A. Gotz and B. Apelt, Isot. Environ. Health Stud., 2002, 38(4), 215 Search PubMed .M. May, M. Gray, J. E. Kuo and C. T. Tan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74(4), 2507 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2004
