Oppositely charged MXene fibers as a highly efficient osmotic power generator from sea and river water   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA06557F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA06557F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 24915-24926Oppositely charged MXene fibers as a highly efficient osmotic power generator from sea and river water†

        
          
            Fatemeh 
            Hashemifar
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ali 
            Esfandiar
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran 11155-9161, Iran. E-mail: esfandiar@sharif.edu
Received 
      19th August 2022
    , Accepted 4th November 2022First published on 7th November 2022AbstractIon-exchange membrane-based reverse electrodialysis (RED) shows great potential for harvesting osmotic energy from seawater and converting it to electricity. However, their low energy conversion efficiency and huge ionic resistance hinder their application on large scales. The implementation of nanofluidic channels in RED devices can significantly improve the performance of osmotic power generators due to their selective and fast ion transport. However, technical challenges in scalable processing at the nanoscale and ion-selective membranes restrict their development in economically viable generators. Here, we report fibrous-based channels as positively and negatively charged MXene fibers (P-MF and N-MF) to extract osmotic energy from the natural and abundant conditions of the slat gradient of river and seawater. Due to the narrow (<2 nm), two-dimensional geometry and high surface charge densities (∼3.8 mC m−2) of nanochannels, the oppositely charged fiber membranes provide excellent transmissibility and ion selectivity and a stable output power density of 12.3 W m−2 for a few months. This record is much higher than the commercialization benchmark (5 W m−2) and most state-of-the-art membranes of osmotic power harvesters. By connecting more cells, the output voltage ascends to a value of 1.7 V, which can be used for powering many electronic devices without an intermediary. The introduced membrane breaks the bottleneck of RED devices as practical osmotic power generators toward establishing blue energy as a sustainable and renewable energy source.
Introduction
Due to increasing energy demands and the destructive side effects of the current fossil fuels, the crucial necessity for sustainable, abundant, and clean energy sources is going to be a top priority issue for modern human life more than ever.1 Global efforts are aligned towards a sharp reduction of greenhouse emissions by replacing new sustainable technologies and renewable energy sources to slow climate change and avoid the most severe impacts on weather extremes, ecosystems, human/animal health, and life infrastructures. Meeting the aspirational emission targets of reaching net-zero emissions by 2050 will require revolutionary technologies for economically efficient and environmentally friendly energy harvesting approaches. Osmotic energy, generally known also as blue energy, is a renewable source of energy derived from salt gradient sources ideally such as seawater and freshwater.2,3 In the conventional approach, reverse electrodialysis (RED) can harvest Gibbs free energy released between ionic solutions with different concentrations and convert it into electrical power.4–6 The minimal daily variability of osmotic energy compared with other energy sources, such as wind and solar energy, makes it a steady and reliable source.7 The total amount of osmotic energy between river water and seawater produced worldwide is estimated to be around 2 trillion watts.8–10 However, the traditional commercial ion-exchange membranes suffer from several limitations, such as high membrane resistance and inadequate mass ion streams, leading to inappropriate economic power densities of <2.2 W m−2.11–13 Due to this fact, boosting the efficiency and large-scale extraction of osmotic energy is still a longstanding scientific and technological challenge.
Recently, with the development of novel nanofluidic systems leading to well-controlled ion transport through nano- and sub-nanoscale physical confinement, new emerging candidates for osmotic power harvesting may be promised. Compared to the conventional RED devices, the energy conversion efficiency and power density of nanofluidic channels can be significantly improved by designing tunable ion transport dynamics and desired different ion transport properties.14 In a typical ionic nanoconduit, the surface charge on the walls provides an electrical double layer that absorbs the opposite charge and repels the same sign charges of the ions. This discrimination plays an important role when the Debye length and thickness of the diffuse layer in the double-layer structure are comparable with the channel height.15 Therefore, the key factors of ion-selective transport and electric power generation depend on the high surface charge density and narrow size of the nanochannel. The height or diameter of the nanochannels not only leads to overlapping of the ionic diffusion layers but also can sieve the larger ions.
To have smooth and controllable functional charged groups on the surface of the nanochannel walls, nanofluidics generally follows bottom-up approaches to make an assembly of nanochannels. Lamellar nanostructures, which can be easily fabricated by stacking two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets, may provide an encouraging and scalable alternative for having viable membranes with anomalous transport phenomena such as fast water transport and precise ionic selectivity.16 Lamellar 2D membranes have been reported for several 2D materials, such as graphene and graphene oxide (GO),17,18 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),19 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),20 which demonstrated both novel ion transport properties and osmotic energy conversion efficiencies. As another attractive member of the 2D layered material family, transition metal carbides and/or nitrides, known as MXenes, have recently attracted increasing attraction in water purification,21,22 gas separation,23,24 and electrochemical energy storage.25 The general formula of MXenes is Mn+1XnTx, wherein M represents an early transition metal (Ti, Mo, Cr, V, etc.), X is C and/or N, Tx denotes the surface terminations (such as –O, –OH, or –F) and n typically varies from 1 to 4.26 The high aspect ratio of MXene sheets causes their high flexibility and mechanical strength, and the abundant presence of oxygen and hydroxyl groups on the surface of the MXenes makes this family of 2D materials hydrophilic and stable in aqueous environments.25,27 These unique properties of MXenes can enable the construction of a highly oriented MXene membrane with excellent ion selectivity and transmissibility.28
On another side, liquid crystals (LCs) have unique structural characteristics that display both a crystal-like order and liquid-like fluidity and can be adjusted based on temperature, concentration, shear forces, and electric or magnetic fields.29,30 Membranes based on LC materials, such as polymeric membranes,31 biomimetic membranes,32 and graphene oxide membranes,33,34 exhibit enhanced ionic transport due to the alignment of nanosheets. The wet-spinning technique is an ideal choice to align the nanosheets through a scalable and facile method for 2D sheet assembly under the shear force in the spinneret. This leads to making an assembly of 2D nanosheets as LC structures and continuous meters-long nanofiber membranes.35 Recently, colloidal dispersions of MXenes have also displayed LC phases.26 Therefore, nanofibers prepared from liquid crystalline phases of MXenes as an ion-selective membrane are expected to be a fantastic candidate for generating osmotic power by RED devices. However, the use of additive-free MXene liquid crystals to make fiber membranes has not been successful yet due to some technical problems such as the lack of scalability and difficult coagulation.
In this work, using an improved wet spinning process, a fibrous nanofluidic RED system, including modified MXene sheets, is developed for osmotic energy harvesting (Fig. 1). The aligned fibers were prepared based on positively and negatively charged MXene flakes. The oppositely charged fibers show ion-selective transport under surface charge-governed conditions. By combining the aligned and narrow 2D nanochannels with high surface charge density, the output power density can reach 12.3 W m−2 for the concentration difference between artificial river and seawater.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the MXene membrane based nanofluidic osmotic energy harvesting cell. Pristine MXene flakes possess a negatively charged surface (N-MX), and positively charged MXene (P-MX) flakes can be made through surface modification. After making fibers through a wet spinning process, MF pairs were placed in an electrochemical cell with three reservoirs to investigate the nanofluidic behavior of N-MF (as cation-selective) and P-MF (as anion selective), which generate osmotic electrical power from the concentration gradient between river water and seawater. 
Experimental
Preparation and characterization of the oppositely charged MXene fibers
The MXene (Ti3C2Tx) flakes were obtained by selective etching of the aluminium atoms from the MAX (Ti3AlC2) phase (Fig. 2a).36 The elimination of the (104) peak in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the MXene powder (Fig. S1†) and the thickness of the Ti3C2Tx flakes in the range of 1.3–1.6 nm (Fig. S2† taken by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Veeco)) confirm the monolayer features and successful exfoliation of the MXene sheets from the MAX phase. Dynamic light scattering (DLS, Malvern) was used to estimate the lateral size of the exfoliated MXene monolayers with an average size of ∼1 μm (Fig. S3†), which was shown with the images of field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM: Mira3 TESCAN) (Fig. S4†). Due to the rich functional groups (–O, –OH, or –F) on the surface of the MXene flakes, exfoliated flakes can be considered negatively charged nanosheets (N-MX). To prepare a positively charged MXene (P-MX), polydiallyl dimethyl ammonium chloride (PDDA) has been chosen to positively modify the surface charge of the MXene flakes (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2c shows the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) of the MXene (N-MX) and modified peaks at 2328 cm−1 and 1380 cm−1 in the P-MX spectrum indicated the presence of nitrogen groups.37 The zeta potential shifting values from −37.4 mV for N-MX to 53.1 mV in comparison with the P-MX sample (Fig. 2d) demonstrate successful surface charge treatment.
 Fig. 2  Preparation and characterization of the oppositely charged N-MF and P-MF. (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of N-MX from MAX phases. (b) Schematic of the synthesis process of P-MX from N-MX with surface modification. (c) FTIR spectra of N-MX and P-MX. (d) Zeta potential measurement of N-MX (left) and P-MX (right) solutions at a concentration of ∼0.05 mg mL−1 (pH 6). (e) Schematics of liquid crystals of N-MX (up) and P-MX (down). (f) Presentation of the wet-spinning setup, including a coagulation ice-water bath. (g) Digital images of the gel-state N-MF (up) and P-MF (down) in a coagulation bath. (h) XRD patterns of dry N-MF (up) and P-MF (down). SEM images of (i) N-MF and (j) P-MF samples. 
Based on Onsager's theoretical model,38 aqueous MXenes can be converted into a lyotropic LC dispersion, which presents a phase transition from the isotropic to the nematic phase due to competition between rotational (packing) and translational (availability of free volume) entropies. By increasing the concentration of colloidal sheets, the free volume decreases, resulting in the domination of the rotational entropy compared to the translational entropy (nematic phase). The texture ordering of the prepared MXene sheet was observed with polarized optical microscopy (POM) images (Fig. S5†). The liquid crystallinity properties of the MXene dispersion are a key factor for wet spinning. Subsequently, N-MX and P-MX in the LC phase can be spun using a wet spinning process and become a well-ordered negatively MXene fiber (N-MF) and positively MXene fiber (P-MF) (Fig. 2e–g).
The liquid crystal dispersion was extruded through a narrow spinning nozzle (gauge 25) into a rotating coagulation bath (Fig. 2f). The coagulation bath conditions such as materials and temperature significantly affect the properties of the fibers. A mixture of isopropanol (IPA) and deionized water (DI) with a volume ratio of 9/1, including 5 wt% CaCl2, was used as a coagulation bath (Fig. S6†). It has been observed that a high fraction of IPA in the mixture assists in better water exchange from gel fibers, and consequently more a closely packed fiber can be achieved.39 In addition, the slow coagulation rate resulted in densely packed sheets in the fiber (Fig. S7†). Therefore, to decrease the coagulation rate for densely packed MXene fibers, the coagulation bath has been kept in ice-water. After the washing step, the gel fibers were then dried under tension conditions to obtain highly aligned MXene flakes.40
The XRD data from the fibers reveal an interlayer spacing of 1.3 nm and 1.7 nm for N-MF and P-MF, respectively (Fig. 2h). This channel height difference between N-MF and P-MF is attributed to the presence of PDDA in the positive channels. In Fig. 2i and j, SEM cross-sectional images illustrate stacked sheets of the N-MF and P-MF fibers in a closely packed arrangement with diameters of ∼30 μm and ∼20 μm, respectively. Mechanical measurements showed a tensile strength of ∼125 MPa (∼162 MPa) and strain of ∼2.9% (∼5.2%) for N-MF (P-MF) (Fig. S8†). The energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analysis of the fibers depicts a uniform elemental distribution of nitrogen on P-MF, which qualitatively proves successful functionalization of oppositely charged fibers (Fig. S9†). Any integration and instability of MXene fibers were not observed after two months of immersion in water and saline (Fig. S10 and S11†).
Ion transport measurements
To study the ions' transport properties of the prepared fibers, the MXene fibers were embedded into a hole in a plexiglass plate with 1 mm thickness using epoxy glue (Fig. S12†). Since the epoxy acts as a rigid wall surrounding the fiber, it provides physical confinement and prevents the radial swelling of the fiber. In addition, it prevents the leaking of the ions from the outside of the fibers upon exposure to the aqueous solution. To ensure that all nanochannels were open and available to the ionic solutions, both sides of the MXene fibers were carefully cleaved to provide a fresh cross-section. Then, the MXene fibers were immersed in KCl solution (0.01 M) for 24 hours (Fig. S13†). To perform ionic transport studies, a single fiber embedded in epoxy was used for the next measurements.
Results and discussion
It is well known that nanochannels' surface charge and size play an essential role in the charged species' mobility and selectivity.7,41,42 The XRD results were used to estimate the effective nanochannel's height, which is defined by the interlayer spacing of the 2D stacked sheets in N-MF and P-MF fibers. By subtracting the thickness of the single-layer MXene nanosheet (∼1 nm),27 the effective channel sizes in N-MF and P-MF were evaluated to be ∼3 Å and ∼7 Å, respectively. The interlayer distance of ∼3–7 Å shows the possibility of accommodating at least 1 layer of water molecules between MXene layers.21 Using zeta potential and Debye length data in 1 mM concentration of KCl solution, the surface charge densities of nanosheets on N-MF and P-MF samples were calculated to be −2.8 mC m−2 and +3.9 mC m−2, respectively (Fig. S14†).
The current–voltage characteristics of the MXene fibers were determined with different concentrations of KCl solutions from 10−6 to 1 M (Fig. 3a). For all KCl concentrations, the current–voltage curves were linear over a voltage range of −0.2 V to +0.2 V (Fig. 3b). As shown in Fig. 3c, when the concentration of KCl varies from 10−6 to 10−3 M, the ionic conductivities of N-MF and P-MF are constant values. As expected for high concentrations (>1 mM), the ionic conductivities approach the linear values of the bulk values. The data showed an ionic conductivity of 0.82 S m−1 and 0.74 S m−1 for N-MF and P-MF, respectively, in a low KCl concentration regime (<1 mM). We also examined the effect of the channel length on ionic transport. As shown in Fig. S15,† the ionic resistivity and length of the MXene fiber reflect an inverse linear relationship.
 Fig. 3  Transmembrane ionic transport of N-MF and P-MF membranes in a KCl electrolyte. (a) Schematic of the electrochemical setup for the measurement of ionic transport from fiber membranes. (b) The current–voltage curve of N-MF and P-MF in 10−3 M and 1 M. (c) Conductivity measurements on N-MF and P-MF samples. In the low concentration region, the ionic conductivity deviates from bulk values (dashed line), indicating the surface charge control regime. (d) and (e) The generated membrane current and potential of the N-MF and P-MF membranes at different KCl concentration gradients, while the low concentration side was fixed at 1 mM. (f) Cation transference number (t+) of the N-MF and P-MF fiber membranes under various concentration gradients. (g) SEM images and corresponding elemental distribution as EDS mapping on the cross section of different fiber membranes after soaking in KBr solution (0.1 M). The content of K+ is vastly higher than that of Br− in the N-MF fiber, showing cation-selectivity. The P-MF fiber significantly absorbs Br− ions, while expelling K+ ions, showing anion selectivity (scale bar, 2.5 μm). 
By fitting the conductivity data, the surface charge density of nanochannels for N-MF and P-MF was determined to be −1.68 mC m−2 and 3.52 mC m−2, respectively. A gentle decrease in the surface charge density of nanochannels in the fiber compared to the surface charges of the nanosheets in suspension can be attributed to mild removal of functional groups because of aging.43 The channel height was calculated to be 4.7 Å and 9.2 Å corresponding to N-MF and P-MF samples, respectively. As expected, these values are higher than the height of the channel extracted from XRD results in the dry state. This increase in the height is assigned to the intercalation of water molecules between the nanochannels and swelling of the fiber.21 Interestingly, physical confinement by the epoxy wall, capillary forces between MXene nanosheets, and the pinning points between the layers by Ca2+ ions (coming from the wet spinning process) prevent further swelling of the fibers. Hence, the heights of the channels in the MXene-based fibers touch the intriguing sub-nanometer scales.
Since nanochannels with surface charge facilitate the transport of counter ions and repel co-ions, it can be expected that N-MF presents cation selectivity and excludes anions. Similarly, P-MF presents anion selectivity and repel cations. The ion selectivity was studied using different concentration gradients of the KCl solutions on both sides of the MXene fibers. The low concentration side was set at 1 mM, while the concentration of the other side varied from 0.01 M to 1 M, and the I–V characteristics were recorded under asymmetric conditions of the electrolyte. The short-circuit current (ISC) and open-circuit voltages (VOC) are measured by reading the intercepts on the voltage and current axes, respectively. The membrane potential (Vm) and current (Im) could be acquired by deducting the contribution of redox potential (Vredox), produced from the inequality of chloride concentration at the surfaces of the electrodes (Fig. S16 and S17†).
When the salinity gradient of the KCl solutions was raised from 10 to 1000 fold, the membrane potential of N-MF increased from 54 mV to 139 mV, and the current density increased from 65 A m−2 to 205 A m−2 (Fig. 3d). In the case of P-MF for the corresponding salt gradient, the membrane potential increased from 52 mV to 125 mV, and the current density proliferated from 43 A m−2 to 194 A m−2 (Fig. 3e). These remarkable values of the current and voltage are due to abundant functional groups and the hydrophilic surface of MXene nanosheets, which cause high ion selectivity and significant water and ion transport through the well-ordered 2D nanoslits. By comparing the VOC and ISC of the MXene fibers, it can be recognized that the opposite polarity leads to anion selectivity in P-MF and the cation selectivity of the N-MF-based membranes (Fig. S18†). The ion selectivity of a membrane can be quantitatively characterized by the cation transference number, t+. Under the salinity concentration gradient of 10 to 1000, it was found that the corresponding cation transference number varied from 0.98 to 0.93 for N-MF and increased from 0.04 to 0.11 in the case of P-MF.
To demonstrate the ion-selective adsorption of the MXene fibers, the fibers were immersed in a salt solution, and then the EDS analysis was carried out. Therefore, to study elemental mapping on the cross-section of the fibers, the N-MF and P-MF fibers were dipped in 0.1 M KBr solution for 1 hour, followed by washing with DI water to remove excess ions. As can be seen in Fig. 3g, the uniform content of potassium over bromide in N-MF verifies cation selectivity. On the other hand, P-MF demonstrates a vast presence of bromide more than potassium because of anion selectivity.
As mentioned above, it has been shown that the N-MF and P-MF membranes exhibited ion selectivity due to their surface charge on the MXene sheets and their comparable inter-layer distances with the Debye length. However, to perform a detailed study on ion transport through the fibers, several chloride solutions with various cations' hydrated diameters (DH) ranging from 6.6 Å (K+) to 9.1 Å (Fe3+) have been tested. The results of ionic conductance at 0.01 M ion concentrations on both sides of the fibers versus different types of salt solutions are presented in Fig. 4a and b. In the case of N-MF, cations are predominant in conductance, and with increasing cations' DH, a reduction of cations' conductance can be observed. Meanwhile in the P-MF sample, anions play a major role, and subsequently by increasing DH, more ionic conductance has been measured. These observations on mobility behavior are consistent with the hydration energy of the cations.
 Fig. 4  Transmembrane ionic transport of a confined nanochannel in several chloride solutions. (a) and (b) The ionic conductance of the N-MF and P-MF fiber membranes for cations with different hydrated diameters. (c) and (d) Mobility ratio (μ+/μ−) of N-MF and (μ−/μ+) of P-MF. (e) and (f) Cation transference number of the N-MF and P-MF fibers under several chloride solutions with different cation's hydrated diameters. In (c) and (d) the hydration energy of cations is displayed by the empty hexagons against the right axis. 
To evaluate the effect of DH on ion mobility, both sides of the membranes were filled with different salt solution concentrations. The lower concentration and higher concentration were fixed at 1 mM and 10 mM, respectively. By increasing DH from K+ to Fe3+, the mobility ratio of cations to anions (μ+/μ−) through the N-MF sample differs from 23 to 4, while the mobility ratio of anions to cations (μ−/μ+) for the P-MF sample increases from 17 to 42 (Fig. 4c and d). These results verify selective cation and anion transport through N-MF and P-MF, respectively. In addition, ion separation decreases by increasing the hydrated diameter in N-MF, leading to a t+ drop from 0.98 to 0.61 (Fig. 4e). In the same way, due to the positive surface charge of P-MF, both charge and size exclusion increase the ion selectivity, and the cation transfer number varies from 0.04 to ∼0 for larger ions (Fig. 4f). In the cases of larger hydrated radii, their enthalpy of hydration as the partitioning barrier energy (Table S1†), growths and makes it more difficult to transport of the ions through the nanochannel, which is consistent with observed.
To investigate the effect of pH on the surface charges of the channels, ionic conductance measurements were performed under various pH. At high pH, the negative surface charge of N-MX increases, and the positive surface charge of P-MX reduces (Fig. 5a). Ionic conductance data at different pH indicate that the surface charge density of nanochannels varies from −0.88 mC m−2 to −1.86 mC m−2 for N-MF and decreases from 3.82 mC m−2 to 3.06 mC m−2 for P-MF by changing pH from 2 to 10 (Fig. S19†). Therefore, the N-MF conductivity increased at high pH, and P-MF showed lower conductivity at low pH (Fig. 5b and c). As shown in Fig. S20,† the transport of counter ions is facilitated due to electrostatic attraction, and the channel displays more repulsion to the co-ions, which causes their less mobility. When the pH changes from 2 to 10, the ratio of μ+/μ− in the case of N-MF increases from 7 to 31, while the ratio of μ−/μ+ for P-MF decreases from 22 to 10 (Fig. 5d and e). In addition, the membrane potential (current density) of the N-MF sample advances from 107 mV (149 A m−2) to 148 mV (217 A m−2). These corresponding values for the P-MF sample reduce from 127 mV (204 A m−2) to 110 mV (175 A m−2) under a salinity concentration gradient of 1000 fold (Fig. 5f and g). Apart from size sieving of the ions by MXene sheets, fibrous geometry provides assemblies of aligned channels as stacked or back-to-back nanoconduits, which should face electric charges inside the channels or at their entries. These electrostatic interactions of the ions with solid walls and pores during transport through the fibers result in a strong surface charge-dependent ionic conductance.
 Fig. 5  Transmembrane ionic transport of a confined nanochannel at several pH. (a) Schematic of the surface charge of N-MF and P-MF with changing pH. (b) and (c) The ionic conductance of N-MF and P-MF fiber membranes for various pH. (d) and (e) Mobility ratio (μ+/μ−) of N-MF and (μ−/μ+) of the P-MF fiber membranes under several pH. (f) and (g) The generated membrane potential and current of the N-MF and P-MF membranes for different pH, while the low and high concentration sides were fixed at 1 mM and 1 M, respectively. 
From an application point of view, the MXene fiber membranes with considerable ion selectivity may show remarkable potential for osmotic energy conversion processes. To check this point, one needs to implement charged fibers with a desired arrangement of ionic reservoirs. As shown in Fig. 6a, an assembly of the N-MF and P-MF pair has been utilized as an electrochemical configuration, including three reservoirs (named NP-MF cell). In this typical cell, the effective tested area, including the single fiber, was about 1200 μm2. To harvest electric energy from natural salinity gradient conditions, 0.01 M and 0.5 M concentrations of NaCl were used as the standard salinity difference between the river and seawater. Two configurations have been implemented to sort the reservoirs: (I) RW|SW|RW, which defines the seawater solution (0.5 M NaCl) in the central reservoir and river water (0.01 M NaCl) as two side-reservoirs (as shown in Fig. 6a); (II) SW|RW|SW denotes river water in the central reservoir, while the other two sides were filled with seawater solution (Fig. S21†). The current and potential of the two arrangements display opposite polarity due to the opposite ionic diffusion directions.
 Fig. 6  Osmotic energy conversion behavior of oppositely charged MXene fiber pairs and numerical simulations. (a) Schematic diagram of the NP-MF cell. The electrolyte solutions are artificial river water (0.01 M NaCl) and seawater (0.5 M NaCl). (b) The current–voltage responses of the NP-MF cell were measured under the two configurations; the blue line depicts the data of configuration I (RW|N-MF|SW|P-MF|RW), and the red line represents the results of configuration II (SW|N-MF|RW|P-MF|SW). (c) The current density and output power density of the NP-MF cell as a function of the load resistance under configuration I. The current density decreases when the resistance increases, while the power density reaches a maximum value of ∼12.3 W m−2. (d) Voltage and (e) current of the NP-MF cell during continuous operating under the concentration difference of artificial river water and seawater, without renewing the electrolyte. (f) The stability of the energy conversion in the NP-MF cell under the concentration difference of artificial river water and seawater. The fiber membranes were immersed in the testing solutions, and the testing solutions were refilled before each measurement. (g) Comparison of the power generation performance of the NP-MF cell (red star) with that of the state-of-the-art membrane-based osmotic power harvesters.17,22,44–48 The target power density of the commercial limit is shown as a dashed line. (h) Numerical simulation results depict the ion concentration profiles of cations (CNa+), anions (CCl−), and total (Ctotal: CNa+ + CCl−) based on 2D nanochannels under configuration I (RW|N-MF|SW|P-MF|RW). The surface charge and channel height parameters used in the simulation were taken from the experimental system. 
As shown in Fig. 6b, the membrane potential reached 172 mV and an osmotic current of 356 nA for configuration I, while the corresponding values in configuration II were recorded as 129 mV and 385 nA. The maximum output electric power (Pmax) can be calculated as P = VOC × ISC/4. Remarkably, the Pmax harvested from the configuration of I and II was obtained as 15.3 nW and 12.4 nW, respectively. Since the Pmax of combination I is higher than that of combination II, further experiments were carried out using configuration I (RW|SW|RW).
The harvested power is measured with an external circuit, including load resistance (RL), in which the obtained Pout can be estimated simply as I2 × RL (Fig. S22†). By increasing the external resistance, the osmotic current decreases so that the maximum output power density appears at a resistance of 490 kΩ (Fig. 6c), in close agreement with the calculated internal resistance of configuration I (rchannel = VOC/ISC ≈ 483 kΩ), while the maximum output power density reached 12.3 W m−2. In addition, energy harvesting in NP-MF cells was tested under the concentration difference of the natural seawater and river water, and a maximum power density of ∼12.1 W m−2 was reached (Fig. S23†). Next, the configuration of I was used to calculate the electrochemical parameters of oppositely charged MXene fiber pairs. Due to the high cation selectivity of N-MF and anion selectivity of P-MF, the permselectivity of these pairs is as high as 95.6%, corresponding to an electrochemical energy conversion efficiency of ∼45.7%.
To examine the long-term stability of the MXene fiber cell as an osmotic energy generator, stability tests were continuously performed under the salinity gradient of the sea and river water for 24 hours. It was observed that the initial voltage (current) of 172 mV (356 nA) sustains 92% (97%) of its initial value with no need of NaCl solution refilling in the reservoirs. This reflects that the proposed MXene fiber pairs perform as a potent candidate for durable and continuous power generation of osmotic energy (Fig. 6d and e). As a further study for long-term operation of the cell, it was tested for three months (Fig. 6f), in which the maximum power density was almost unchanged (>12 W m−2). The excellent stability of MXene fiber pairs can be attributed to their chemical stability in the solutions and the almost fixed size of the nanochannels owing to cationic pinning. In other words, physical confinement created by epoxy and bridging sites between MXene flakes by inserted ions during the wet-spinning process contributes to the stability of the MXene-based channels. The maximum power density reached as high as 12.3 W m−2, which is much more than the commercialization benchmark (5 W m−2), oppositely charged and other state-of-the-art membranes.17,22,49–52 Optimal osmotic power density occurs in the nanofluidic channel at the length scale of (400–1000 nm), and further extension in thickness increases internal resistance and decreases the output power of the membrane.53 To investigate the effect of the membrane thickness on the osmotic power generation, output power density was measured at three thicknesses of 0.5 mm, 1 mm, and 2 mm. As shown in Fig. S24,† by increasing the thickness from 0.5 mm to 2 mm, the output power density decreased from 23.4 W m−2 to 6.8 W m−2, due to increased internal resistance of the membrane. It can be expected that the NP-MF cell may provide much more output power at several micrometer membranes (Fig. S25†). Hence, the oppositely charged MXene fiber pairs present excellent electrochemical energy conversion efficiency (45.7%) and output power density (12.3 W m−2), which significantly surpass those of most recently used membranes for osmotic power generation (Fig. 6g, Table S2†).
Several simulations have been previously reported on the effect of partitioning energy and interachannel diffusion in ion transport.54,55 Their results indicated that the ions with low hydration energy remove or adjust their surrounding hydration shell easily to enter the channel, and also increasing the number of energy-favorable binding sites decreases the energy barrier. To further investigate the mechanism of ion transport in the MXene fiber membranes, numerical simulation was accomplished based on the theory of Poisson and Nernst–Planck (PNP). The nanofluidic ion transport inside the MXene fiber membranes was simplified as 2D nanochannels. The surface charge density and size of nanochannels, gradient concentration, and type of salt were set according to the experimental results. By changing the surface charge density at different pH (based on the above-mentioned experiments), the ion selectivity varies because of the modification in electrostatic interactions. As expected, by amending the surface charge density of the nanochannels, the attraction of counter ions and the repulsion of co-ions are strengthened (low pH for P-MF and high pH for N-MF), and thus the enhancement of the ion selectivity of the nanochannel can occur (Fig. S26†). Fig. 6h illustrates a numerical simulation of the ionic concentration profiles in a configuration including three reservoirs, which again demonstrates nanochannels' ion selectivity due to their surface charge and channel height. It is well known that the Debye length is a key factor in ion transport at nanoscales. When the electrical double layer (EDL) completely overlaps in the channel, all ions are placed in the EDL, and electrostatic interactions govern their transport. Since the Debye length depends on ion concentration, the simulation results show that ion selectivity is improved by reducing the number of ions (concentration) along the channel. Furthermore, the strong overlapping of the EDL in N-MF than in P-MF (due to the lower height) compensates for the lower surface charge density of N-MF, and so both channels show almost the same charge separation (Fig. S27†).
In the following, to demonstrate and prove the scalability of the connecting MXene fiber-based membranes for osmotic energy harvesting, a setup including 10 units was constructed. It contained 10 units of connected cells in series (Fig. 7a), and each unit was made of 50 fibers of N-MF and 50 fibers of P-MF (Fig. S28†). As can be seen from Fig. 7b, a perfect linear relationship between voltage and the number of units has been observed.
 Fig. 7  Scalability of the MF-RED device for generating power for electronic devices. (a) Schematic of MF-RED unit cells connected in series for the formation of a MF-RED device (RW, river water; SW, seawater). (b) The linear relationship between voltage and the different units of the MF-RED device. The voltage of each unit was measured for 30 s. (c) I–V characteristics for 10 MF-RED unit cells connected in series. (d) Photograph from the scalability of the MF-RED device. (e) MF-RED device with 10 unit cells is enabled to directly power a calculator, a watch, and an LED. Photograph of 1.7 V output voltage harvested from the MF-RED device with 10 unit cells by using a voltmeter. 
From the I–V curve of the 10 units of the MXene fiber pairs as a RED device, the output current and voltage reach 1.7 V and 16.3 μA (Fig. 7c), which can successfully power a calculator, watch, and LED (Fig. 7d and e, and Movie S1†). In addition, the operational stability of the MF-RED device was monitored by video recording from a powered watch for 2 h (Movie S2†). This facile scalability of such osmotic energy harvesting confirms the excellent application viability of the MF-based membranes and will pave a new shortcut for large-scale and sustainable generation of blue energy.
Conclusions
By improving wet spinning conditions, we could make meters-long and highly packed positively and negatively charged MXene fiber membranes with sub-nanometer height nanochannels along with high surface charge density. A nanochannel height of 4.7 Å and 9.2 Å for negatively and positively charged fibers, respectively, and a surface charge density of −1.6 mC m−2 and 3.5 mC m−2 MXene fiber membranes provide excellent ion selectivity (95.6%), high electrochemical energy conversion efficiency (45.7%), and fast ion transmissibility. The newly designed MXene fibers as a 3D network of aligned and charged nanochannels in fibrous geometry with outstanding electrochemical performance were used in a RED device to harvest osmotic power from a mixture of artificial river water and seawater. It amazingly exhibits a maximum power density of 12.3 W m−2, beyond the commercialization benchmark and is stable for three months. A simple arrangement of 10 proposed unit cells reveals an output voltage of 1.7 V with excellent long-term stability, which can directly power many electronic devices. This study suggests a facile approach for tunable and desired functionalization of MXene sheets toward easy processing, and scalable and green energy harvesting as a reliable alternative energy source from salinity gradients in nature.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
AE acknowledges support from the Research and Technology Council of the Sharif University of Technology.
Notes and references
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jia, B. Wang, S. Song and Y. Fan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 91–100 CrossRef .
A. Siria, M.-L. Bocquet and L. Bocquet, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0091 CrossRef .
P. Długołȩcki, A. Gambier, K. Nijmeijer and M. Wessling, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 6888–6894 CrossRef .
D. A. Vermaas, S. Bajracharya, B. B. Sales, M. Saakes, B. Hamelers and K. Nijmeijer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 643–651 RSC .
Y. Mei and C. Y. Tang, Desalination, 2018, 425, 156–174 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 622–639 CrossRef .
J. D. Isaacs and R. J. Seymour, Int. J. Environ. Stud., 1973, 4, 201–205 CrossRef .
R. S. Norman, Science, 1974, 186, 350–352 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Z. Ramon, B. J. Feinberg and E. M. V. Hoek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4423–4434 RSC .
J. Veerman, R. M. de Jong, M. Saakes, S. J. Metz and G. J. Harmsen, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 343, 7–15 CrossRef .
J. W. Post, C. H. Goeting, J. Valk, S. Goinga, J. Veerman, H. V. M. Hamelers and P. J. F. M. Hack, Desalin. Water Treat., 2010, 16, 182–193 CrossRef .
D. A. Vermaas, M. Saakes and K. Nijmeijer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 7089–7095 CrossRef .
W. Sparreboom, A. van den Berg and J. C. T. Eijkel, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 713–720 CrossRef .
S. Hong, F. Ming, Y. Shi, R. Li, I. S. Kim, C. Y. Tang, H. N. Alshareef and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8917–8925 CrossRef .
Y. Kang, Y. Xia, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902014 CrossRef .
J. Ji, Q. Kang, Y. Zhou, Y. Feng, X. Chen, J. Yuan, W. Guo, Y. Wei and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603623 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Y. Su, C. Chi, C. T. Cherian, K. Huang, V. G. Kravets, F. C. Wang, J. C. Zhang, A. Pratt, A. N. Grigorenko, F. Guinea, A. K. Geim and R. R. Nair, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 1198–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, D. Liu, G. Yang, Q. Han, Y. Qian, Y. Liu, L. Wang, J. M. Razal and W. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 45453–45459 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Peng, Y. Li, Y. Ban, H. Jin, W. Jiao, X. Liu and W. Yang, Science, 2014, 346, 1356–1359 CrossRef .
C. E. Ren, K. B. Hatzell, M. Alhabeb, Z. Ling, K. A. Mahmoud and Y. Gogotsi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4026–4031 CrossRef .
L. Ding, D. Xiao, Z. Lu, J. Deng, Y. Wei, J. Caro and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8720–8726 CrossRef .
L.-X. Ding, Y. Wei, L. Li, T. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Xue, L.-X. Ding, S. Wang, J. Caro and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 155 CrossRef .
J. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Ji, Q. Liu, L. Cheng, K. Guan, M. Zhang, G. Liu, J. Xiong, J. Yang and W. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801511 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, S. Uzun, S. Seyedin, P. A. Lynch, B. Akuzum, Z. Wang, S. Qin, M. Alhabeb, C. E. Shuck, W. Lei, E. C. Kumbur, W. Yang, X. Wang, G. Dion, J. M. Razal and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 254–265 CrossRef .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, P. Chen, B. Shi, W. Guo, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2018, 57, 6814–6818 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, A. Martinez, B. Senyuk, M. Tasinkevych and I. I. Smalyukh, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 71–78 CrossRef .
M. Nakayama, S. Kajiyama, A. Kumamoto, T. Nishimura, Y. Ikuhara, M. Yamato and T. Kato, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. Filatova, D. A. Strode and B. A. Purin, Polym. Sci. U.S.S.R., 1991, 33, 38–50 CrossRef .
L. Santiago-Martoral, A. Figueroa and E. Nicolau, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 17940–17946 CrossRef .
A. Akbari, P. Sheath, S. T. Martin, D. B. Shinde, M. Shaibani, P. C. Banerjee, R. Tkacz, D. Bhattacharyya and M. Majumder, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10891 CrossRef .
H. Ghanbari and A. Esfandiar, Carbon, 2020, 165, 267–274 CrossRef .
S. Li, Z. Fan, G. Wu, Y. Shao, Z. Xia, C. Wei, F. Shen, X. Tong, J. Yu, K. Chen, M. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Luo, M. Jian, J. Sun, R. B. Kaner and Y. Shao, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7821–7832 CrossRef .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef .
G. Liu, S. Liu, K. Ma, H. Wang, X. Wang, G. Liu and W. Jin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 4732–4741 CrossRef .
L. Onsager, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1949, 51, 627–659 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Z. Xu, B. Fang, T. Huang, S. Cai, H. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Gopalsamy, W. Gao and C. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22113–22119 RSC .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Esfandiar, B. Radha, F. C. Wang, Q. Yang, S. Hu, S. Garaj, R. R. Nair, A. K. Geim and K. Gopinadhan, Science, 2017, 358, 511–513 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kavokine, R. R. Netz and L. Bocquet, Annu. Rev. Fluid. Mech., 2021, 53, 377–410 CrossRef .
T. Habib, X. Zhao, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, W. Sun, H. An, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 8 CrossRef .
J. Gao, W. Guo, D. Feng, H. Wang, D. Zhao and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12265–12272 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, J. Hao, B. Bao, Y. Zhou, H. Zhang, J. Pang, Z. Jiang and L. Jiang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, S. Yang, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Chen and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2920 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, P. Ji, B. Wang, N. Sheng, M. Zhang, S. Chen and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105554 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, T. Zhang, B. Wang, P. Ji, N. Sheng, M. Zhang, Q. Liang, S. Chen and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 88, 106275 CrossRef .
W. Xin, H. Xiao, X. Y. Kong, J. Chen, L. Yang, B. Niu, Y. Qian, Y. Teng, L. Jiang and L. Wen, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 9701–9710 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu, T. Zhou, Y. Teng, L. Fu, Y. Hu, X. Lin, X.-Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. Wen, CCS Chem., 2021, 3, 1325–1335 CrossRef .
X. Lin, P. Liu, W. Xin, Y. Teng, J. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Zhao, X. Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. Wen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2105013 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, P. Ji, B. Wang, N. Sheng, M. Zhang, S. Chen and H. Wang, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105554 CrossRef .
L. Cao, F. Xiao, Y. Feng, W. Zhu, W. Geng, J. Yang, X. Zhang, N. Li, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604302 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, Z. Wang, R. Epsztein, C. Zhan, W. Li, J. D. Fortner, T. A. Pham, J.-H. Kim and M. Elimelech, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, 48 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, S. Choi, H. G. Lee, D. Jin, G. Kim, T. Kim, J. S. Lee and W. Shim, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 47 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06557fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the MXene membrane based nanofluidic osmotic energy harvesting cell. Pristine MXene flakes possess a negatively charged surface (N-MX), and positively charged MXene (P-MX) flakes can be made through surface modification. After making fibers through a wet spinning process, MF pairs were placed in an electrochemical cell with three reservoirs to investigate the nanofluidic behavior of N-MF (as cation-selective) and P-MF (as anion selective), which generate osmotic electrical power from the concentration gradient between river water and seawater.	 

 	Fig. 2  Preparation and characterization of the oppositely charged N-MF and P-MF. (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of N-MX from MAX phases. (b) Schematic of the synthesis process of P-MX from N-MX with surface modification. (c) FTIR spectra of N-MX and P-MX. (d) Zeta potential measurement of N-MX (left) and P-MX (right) solutions at a concentration of ∼0.05 mg mL−1 (pH 6). (e) Schematics of liquid crystals of N-MX (up) and P-MX (down). (f) Presentation of the wet-spinning setup, including a coagulation ice-water bath. (g) Digital images of the gel-state N-MF (up) and P-MF (down) in a coagulation bath. (h) XRD patterns of dry N-MF (up) and P-MF (down). SEM images of (i) N-MF and (j) P-MF samples.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transmembrane ionic transport of N-MF and P-MF membranes in a KCl electrolyte. (a) Schematic of the electrochemical setup for the measurement of ionic transport from fiber membranes. (b) The current–voltage curve of N-MF and P-MF in 10−3 M and 1 M. (c) Conductivity measurements on N-MF and P-MF samples. In the low concentration region, the ionic conductivity deviates from bulk values (dashed line), indicating the surface charge control regime. (d) and (e) The generated membrane current and potential of the N-MF and P-MF membranes at different KCl concentration gradients, while the low concentration side was fixed at 1 mM. (f) Cation transference number (t+) of the N-MF and P-MF fiber membranes under various concentration gradients. (g) SEM images and corresponding elemental distribution as EDS mapping on the cross section of different fiber membranes after soaking in KBr solution (0.1 M). The content of K+ is vastly higher than that of Br− in the N-MF fiber, showing cation-selectivity. The P-MF fiber significantly absorbs Br− ions, while expelling K+ ions, showing anion selectivity (scale bar, 2.5 μm).	 

 	Fig. 4  Transmembrane ionic transport of a confined nanochannel in several chloride solutions. (a) and (b) The ionic conductance of the N-MF and P-MF fiber membranes for cations with different hydrated diameters. (c) and (d) Mobility ratio (μ+/μ−) of N-MF and (μ−/μ+) of P-MF. (e) and (f) Cation transference number of the N-MF and P-MF fibers under several chloride solutions with different cation's hydrated diameters. In (c) and (d) the hydration energy of cations is displayed by the empty hexagons against the right axis.	 

 	Fig. 5  Transmembrane ionic transport of a confined nanochannel at several pH. (a) Schematic of the surface charge of N-MF and P-MF with changing pH. (b) and (c) The ionic conductance of N-MF and P-MF fiber membranes for various pH. (d) and (e) Mobility ratio (μ+/μ−) of N-MF and (μ−/μ+) of the P-MF fiber membranes under several pH. (f) and (g) The generated membrane potential and current of the N-MF and P-MF membranes for different pH, while the low and high concentration sides were fixed at 1 mM and 1 M, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Osmotic energy conversion behavior of oppositely charged MXene fiber pairs and numerical simulations. (a) Schematic diagram of the NP-MF cell. The electrolyte solutions are artificial river water (0.01 M NaCl) and seawater (0.5 M NaCl). (b) The current–voltage responses of the NP-MF cell were measured under the two configurations; the blue line depicts the data of configuration I (RW|N-MF|SW|P-MF|RW), and the red line represents the results of configuration II (SW|N-MF|RW|P-MF|SW). (c) The current density and output power density of the NP-MF cell as a function of the load resistance under configuration I. The current density decreases when the resistance increases, while the power density reaches a maximum value of ∼12.3 W m−2. (d) Voltage and (e) current of the NP-MF cell during continuous operating under the concentration difference of artificial river water and seawater, without renewing the electrolyte. (f) The stability of the energy conversion in the NP-MF cell under the concentration difference of artificial river water and seawater. The fiber membranes were immersed in the testing solutions, and the testing solutions were refilled before each measurement. (g) Comparison of the power generation performance of the NP-MF cell (red star) with that of the state-of-the-art membrane-based osmotic power harvesters.17,22,44–48 The target power density of the commercial limit is shown as a dashed line. (h) Numerical simulation results depict the ion concentration profiles of cations (CNa+), anions (CCl−), and total (Ctotal: CNa+ + CCl−) based on 2D nanochannels under configuration I (RW|N-MF|SW|P-MF|RW). The surface charge and channel height parameters used in the simulation were taken from the experimental system.	 

 	Fig. 7  Scalability of the MF-RED device for generating power for electronic devices. (a) Schematic of MF-RED unit cells connected in series for the formation of a MF-RED device (RW, river water; SW, seawater). (b) The linear relationship between voltage and the different units of the MF-RED device. The voltage of each unit was measured for 30 s. (c) I–V characteristics for 10 MF-RED unit cells connected in series. (d) Photograph from the scalability of the MF-RED device. (e) MF-RED device with 10 unit cells is enabled to directly power a calculator, a watch, and an LED. Photograph of 1.7 V output voltage harvested from the MF-RED device with 10 unit cells by using a voltmeter.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06557f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
