Charge pumping enabling Co–NC to outperform benchmark Pt catalyst for pH-universal hydrogen evolution reaction   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE00052G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE00052G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3160-3173Charge pumping enabling Co–NC to outperform benchmark Pt catalyst for pH-universal hydrogen evolution reaction†

        
          
            Ziliang 
            Chen‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Huilin 
            Qing‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Ruirui 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Renbing 
            Wu
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. E-mail: rbwu@fudan.edu.cn
bInstitute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China
Received 
      6th January 2021
    , Accepted 31st March 2021First published on 31st March 2021AbstractA transition metal (TM) coupled with the N-doped carbon (NC) nanocomposite has been regarded as an alternative electrocatalyst that shows Pt-comparable activity towards the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), but so far no examples of these have outperformed Pt in acidic, alkaline and neutral media due to the insufficient tuning of the intrinsic catalytic activity. Herein, we report an interfacial engineered VN/Co–NC electrocatalyst that can achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of only 44, 22 and 163 mV in 1.0 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M PBS solutions, respectively, which are not only superior to previously reported TM–NC examples but also surpass the commercial Pt@C catalyst. More inspiringly, the highly catalytic activity could be maintained for more than 72 h over a wide pH range. Density functional theory computations and synchrotron-based X-ray absorption fine structure investigations reveal that the exceptional catalytic performance can be traced mainly to the well-defined VN/Co heterointerfaces which have a suitable lattice mismatch, allowing the electron depletion of Co–NC via the charge pumping effect of VN and thus the optimization of adsorption free energy for hydrogen-intermediates.

Broader context
Hydrogen is a renewable and environmental-friendly energy source that has the potential to satisfy global demands. It is of vital significance to exploit effective but inexpensive electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) for sustainable hydrogen production from water splitting. Transition metals coupled with N-doped carbon composites have shown great potential as substitutes for noble platinum (Pt)-based electrocatalysts for the HER. However, most of the strategies reported for enhancing the HER performance have merely focused on morphology tuning, electrode configuration design and solid solution, which have intrinsic limitations for improving the intrinsic activity. Herein, we developed a facile zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)-driven strategy for constructing the interfacial engineering of the VN/Co heterojunction within N-doped porous carbon polyhedra (VN/Co–NC). Such interfacial engineering is beneficial for charge depletion of Co–NC and optimization of the adsorption free energy towards hydrogen-intermediates, resulting in excellent catalytic activity and long durability.

Introduction
The electrochemical splitting of molecular water driven by renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind power, has been viewed as the optimal route for sustainable hydrogen production.1,2 As a hinge process during water splitting, the cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) suffers from sluggish kinetics, which usually requires platinum (Pt)-based electrocatalysts to reduce the energy barriers and accelerate the reaction.3 Unfortunately, the scarcity and cost of precious Pt greatly restrict its industrial commercialization.4 To this end, developing novel, efficient and earth-abundant alternatives is highly desirable.
Recently, enormous endeavors have been devoted to the investigation of transition metal (TM)-based electrocatalysts (e.g., TM chalcogenides, nitrides, borides, carbides, and phosphides) because of their low usage price, unique electronic structure and high activity adaptability.5–22 Among them, TMs coupled with N-doped carbon (NC) composite materials have emerged as one of the most promising substitutes for Pt catalysts.5,7–14 In this composite, the TM can generate the electron interplay with the NC and promote its adsorption strength to hydrogen intermediates. Meanwhile, the NC is favorable for maximizing the accessible active sites and preventing the chemical corrosion of the TM, thus ensuring a favorable HER performance.12 For instance, Xu et al. have constructed a hybrid by encapsulating Ni nanoparticles within two-dimensional N-doped graphitic carbon, which exhibited an overpotential of 205 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH.13 Zou et al. entrapped ultrasmall Co nanoparticles within N-doped carbon nanotubes, and such an nanocomposite could display overpotentials of 375 and 260 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4, respectively.14 Despite the remarkable progress that has been achieved, the above-mentioned efforts have mainly focused on morphology tuning to expose and/or increase the number of the active sites rather than optimization of the intrinsic adsorption free energy of the TM–NC towards H-intermediates, thus leaving plenty of room for further enhancement of the HER performance.
In comparison with the tuning morphology of TM–NC, electronic structure regulation can effectively adjust the intrinsic catalytic activity of active sites via modulating the charge interactions, and thereby an optimization of the adsorption free energy for hydrogen intermediates could be achieved for improved catalytic performance.23–29 Taking this basic concept, many endeavors have recently been devoted to designing the composite of TM–NC to alter the electronic structure. For instance, Yang et al. synthesized FeCo alloy nanoparticles encapsulated in highly nitrogen-doped (∼8 atom%) graphene layers, which delivered a good HER activity with an overpotential of 262 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4.26 Zhao et al. found that the N-doped carbon nanotube-confined FeNi alloy hybrid showed a low overpotential of 202mV at 10mA cm−2 in 1.0M KOH.27 Zheng et al. reported that upon encapsulating CoCu nanoparticles within an N-doped carbon framework, an overpotential of 145 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4 could be achieved.28 Nevertheless, these formed TM alloy species via solid solution methods have similar electronic structures and their performance enhancement is still limited.29 In this regard, exploring new approaches to regulate the electronic structure of TM–NC for a performance superior to Pt is highly desirable.
Interfacial engineering has been demonstrated as an effective strategy to regulate the electronic structure of HER electrocatalysts.30–34 Upon bonding two phases with distinct energy states in thermodynamic equilibrium, a built-in electric field will be formed around the atomic interface of these double phases, which would induce charge transfer and thus optimize the absorption ability towards reaction intermediates.31 For instance, Fu et al. anchored the Mo2N–MoC heterojunction on graphene, delivering overpotentials of 157 and 154 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH, respectively, which are much lower than those of the corresponding individual values.24 Wu et al. synthesized MoS2–Fe5Ni4S8 heterophases on a nickel foam, which showed an excellent HER activity with a low overpotential of 120 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, demonstrating the top performance among MoS2-based HER electrocatalysts.33 Unfortunately, even with interfaical engineering, there has been rarely success in constructing TM–NC catalysts due to additional difficulities in manipulating the TM core while maintainting the original NC matrix.
Herein, we have developed a facile zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)-driven strategy to construct the interfacial engineering of VN/Co heterojunction within N-doped porous carbon polyhedra, which involves the adsorption of bimetallic Co and V salts onto the ZIF-8-derived micropores, followed by a simultaneous thermal reduction and nitridation. Impressively, the as-prepared VN/Co–NC electrocatalyst exhibits an outstanding HER performance, only requiring overpotentials as low as 44, 22 and 163 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M PBS solutions, respectively, as well as showing excellent long-term durability for at least 3 days. To the best of our knowledge, this is not only the highest activity among all the previously reported TM–NC catalysts, but its activity is also superior to that of the state-of-the-art Pt@C catalyst. Experimental and theoretical investigations unveiled that although the introduced VN was inactive to the HER, it could serve as a controllable charge-modulator and pump out the electrons from the interface-coupled Co phases, resulting in an optimized hydrogen adsorption free energy. This work not only makes a breakthrough in tuning the electronic structure of TM–NC to achieve an exceptional HER performance, but also provides a deeper insight into its structure–activity correlation.
Results and discussion
The adsorption free energy of a catalyst towards hydrogen intermediates (ΔGH*) is considered as a key indication to reflect the intrinsic catalytic activity.10,30–34 Noticeably, most previous reports have indicated that ΔGH* can be used as a universal descriptor for the intrinsic activity of TM–NC catalysts over a wide pH range, although there is debate on whether the ΔGH* descriptor proposed in acidic solution is suitable for that in alkaline solution for Pt catalysts.5–14 When ΔGH* is equal to zero, the catalyst can reversibly adsorb and desorb hydrogen in an ideal thermodynamic state, bearing the best HER performance. In previous studies, both theoretical and experimental results have revealed that a synergism of TM, N and C species could effectively optimize the ΔGH* of TM–NC.8,14 Correspondingly, various strategies including morphology tuning, electrode configuration design as well as dual-carbon confinement have been adopted to further enhance the HER activity of TM–NC catalysts.9–12 Nevertheless, the HER performance of the catalysts is still limited and is inferior to state-of-the-art Pt-based catalysts, which could be due to the insufficient tuning of ΔGH*.
Since the ΔGH* is strongly dependent on the charge distribution of the catalyst surface, dedicated charge tuning may allow an appealing HER activity of TM–NC to be reached. Enlightened by this, and taking Co–NC as a model, density functional theoretical (DFT) calculations were first conducted to acquire the reliance of ΔGH* on the number of the transferred electrons to or from Co–NC. It should be noted that previous reports have confirmed that within the TM–NC composites, the C atoms near the doped N on the graphene shell would be most active during the HER,8,12,26,35–37 which could also be demonstrated by the poisoning test and in situ Raman results in the following experimental part. Thus, we chose the carbon coordinated to the N as the active site rather than the Co-core. As displayed in Fig. 1a, it could be seen that with the depletion of electrons from Co–NC, the ΔGH* decreased gradually and an ideal HER performance with ΔGH* close to 0 eV might be achieved upon continuously donating electrons. To further probe how the electron transfer affects the ΔGH*, the charge redistributions (charge transfer between H and substrate) of Co–NC with different numbers of the transferred electrons were compared. As shown in Fig. 1b, an enforced interaction between bare Co–NC and H with a C–H bond length of 1.120 Å could be identified. After being injected with 1.0 e−, the C–H bond length was apparently elongated to 1.125 Å, signifying the decreased C–H binding strength. This alteration could be due to the weakened charge polarization on the surface of the catalyst, which was caused by the inhibition of charge transfer from Co to C upon being injected with extra charge. In contrast, once 1.0 e− was pumped from Co–NC, the charge density was redistributed, which then induced the charge accumulation around the active carbon sites, especially the atoms near to the N species, strengthening the ability to adsorb protons and shortening the C–H bond length to 1.117 Å. Therefore, the modulation of electron transfer would be a promising approach to boost the HER performance of Co–NC-based electrocatalysts, and the dependence correlation shown in Fig. 1a could serve as a guideline for the design of Co–NC-based electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 1  (a) Electron injection/depletion effect of Co–NC on the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen absorption (ΔGH*). (b) Charge density redistributions of Co–NC–H systems without electron injection/depletion (middle), with one electron injection (left) and with one electron depletion (right). (c) Charge density redistribution of the heterostructure constructed by joining an N-terminated (011) slab of VN and a Co-terminated (1–10) slab of Co. (d) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of the VN/Co–NC composite. (Atoms with orange, cyan, light blue, yellow, and pink colors represent Co, C, V, N and H atoms, respectively. The red and blue isosurfaces shown in (b) and (c) mean the electron depletion and accumulation, respectively. The light pink tetrahedra were constructed by the Zn-centered N4 coordination.) 
Based on the above findings, and considering that the charge transfer would greatly affect the catalytic performance, we therefore rationally construct and regulate the interfacial engineering of VN/Co–C composites. Herein, VN was chosen as a candidate for the construction of heterostructured Co–NC, which could be due to the following aspects. Firstly, VN and Co phases are the same crystallographic system with a relatively small lattice mismatch (<14%). Secondly, VN is a conductor with an ultrahigh electrical conductivity (1.67 × 106 Ω−1 m−1) and possesses a high chemical stability against corrosion.38 Thirdly, the properties of V are analogous to those of the late transition metal Mo based on the “diagonal rule” and readily engender interfacial charge redistribution with the early transition metal Co.39 More importantly, the stronger electronegativity of terminated N species in VN compared with that of Co is expected to grasp electrons from Co. Meanwhile, to powerfully demonstrate the positive role of charge depletion in promoting the HER activity of TM–NC, which is predicted by our DFT calculation, we chose the VN rather than other transition metal nitrides (e.g., MoN, NiN, FeN and WN) due to the fact that VN has a very low intrinsic HER activity, and thereby it just functions as a charge pump to the Co–NC system, excluding its synergistic effect on the resulting activity. Bearing these things in mind, a heterostructure of VN/Co was constructed and their charge density difference was analyzed to examine whether and how the electron transfer occurred. In view of the fact that the (111) facet for both VN and Co phases is the most thermodynamically stable and is also usually employed as the theoretical model for catalysis,40,41 we thus focused on calculating two hetero-interface models in our work. One is VN(111)/Co(111), and the other is VN(011)/Co(1−10), in which the former was the directly observed one while the latter was that corresponding to their vertical planes. As seen in Fig. 1c, near the interface between VN(011) and Co(1−10), V cations and N anions gained electrons while Co cations lost electrons, providing compelling evidence that VN served as the charge pump to grasp the electrons from Co, which is consistent with the theoretical prediction. Based on our model, the number of the transferred electrons could reach 0.46 e−. It should also be noted that the number of the transferred electrons has a positive correlation with the number of interfacial atoms in the built model (Fig. S1, ESI†). In addition, the number of the transferred electrons was dependent on the coupling of the different interfaces. For example, the charge density difference of VN(111)/Co(111) showed that the number of the electrons transferred from Co to VN could reach 8.7 e− (Fig. S2, ESI†). Taken together, we predict that the electron transfer from Co to VN would greatly boost the HER performance of Co–NC.
Based on the DFT calculation results, we conducted experiments to verify our hypothesis. We developed a modified host–guest method to fabricate the VN/Co–NC catalysts. Fig. 1d displayed the schematic illustration for the synthesis procedure of the VN/Co–NC electrocatalyst. Firstly, the well-dispersed zinc–zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8) polyhedra were obtained via a co-precipitation reaction of zinc nitrate and dimethylimidazole in the presence of methanol solution. Following that, the ZIF-8 polyhedra were pyrolyzed at 960 °C, during which the organic ligands were in situ converted into the NC framework while the Zn species were mostly vaporized, leaving abundant micro-/mesopores. Note that acid leaching was needed to further remove the residual Zn species (Table S1, ESI†), ensuring the formation of the pristine porous carbon framework. The resulting NC was then used as a scaffold to encapsulate the V3+ and Co2+ ions in its cavities by the double-solvent method.42 Finally, with a further thermal treatment towards the above bimetal ions-adsorbed NC polyhedra, the V ions were effectively bonded with the N species hosted in NC to form the VN phase while the Co ions were carbothermally-reduced to the Co phase. Owing to the appropriate lattice matching between VN and Co as well as their geometric confinement by pores, a heterophase growth occurred, generating the hybrid constructed by embedding the VN/Co heterojunction within the NC polyhedra.
The phase transition as well as the phase structure of the VN/Co–NC composite were firstly examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns. As shown in Fig. 2a and Fig. S3 (ESI†), the diffraction peaks positioned at around 37.5, 43.67, 63.48, 76.11° and 44.08, 51.42, 75.76° observed in VN/Co–NC composite could be well indexed to the lattice planes of (111), (200), (220), (311) for the VN phase (space group: Fmm) and (111), (200), (220) for the Co phase (space group: Fmm), respectively. When compared with the XRD pattern of the ZIF-8 precursor (Fig. S4, ESI†), the successful conversion from ZIF-8 to mixed VN and Co phases by our proposed host–guest strategy could be seen. This is also the first report of the formation of VN achieved via a host–guest strategy without the assistance of a corrosive gas atmosphere such as NH3. To better elucidate the crystal structures of the mixed VN and Co phases, the XRD patterns of VN–NC and Co–NC synthesized under similar conditions were also displayed in Fig. 2a for comparison. Remarkably, taking the peaks positioned ranging from 43 to 45° as an example, it could be clearly seen that the peaks belonging to the Co phase and the VN phase in VN/Co–NC shifted to lower and higher angles compared with those in Co–NC and VN–NC, respectively. Further results of the XRD patterns analyzed by the Rietveld method revealed that the lattice parameters for the VN and Co phases in VN/Co–NC were shrunk and enlarged compared with those in VN–NC and Co–NC, respectively (Fig. 2b, Fig. S5 and Table S2, ESI†). Such lattice variations demonstrated the lattice coupling between the VN and Co phases in VN/Co–NC, which made the VN cell contract while the Co cell expanded to match with each other. Furthermore, according to the Williamson–Hall method,43,44 the lattice strains for the Co and VN phases were also extracted and compared. Obviously, the absolute lattice strains shown in Fig. 2c for both the Co (1.71%) and VN (−0.29%) phases in VN/Co–NC were larger than those in Co–NC (0.52%) and VN–NC (0.21%), respectively. Furthermore, the positive strain for the Co phase in VN/Co–NC suggested the presence of tensile strain, while the negative strain for VN in VN/Co–NC suggested the presence of compressive strain, corresponding to their lattice variations. The above observations powerfully show the lattice distortion caused by the phase coupling between VN and Co in VN/Co–NC. Note that because of the relatively higher crystallinity of VN and Co, the carbon peaks observed in the barely pyrolyzed product of ZIF-8 (Fig. S6, ESI†) were submerged with the background lines in the XRD pattern of the VN/Co–NC composite. Nonetheless, the D-band and G-band peaks shown in the Raman spectra of VN/Co–NC strongly confirmed the existence of carbon (Fig. S7, ESI†). Moreover, the relative intensity ratio (1.01) of the D-band to the G-band was smaller than that of NC (1.14) and was close to those of the VN–NC (1.06) and Co–NC (1.05) composites, implying that the presence of the metal species could promote the degree of graphitization carbon. Further result determined by elemental analyzer confirmed that the carbon content in the VN/Co–NC composite was about 49 wt%.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of VN–NC, Co–NC, and VN/Co–NC composites. (b) Rietveld refinement of the observed XRD pattern for VN/Co–NC composite. (c) Lattice strains of the VN and Co phases extracted from the XRD patterns of the VN–NC, Co–NC, and VN/Co–NC composites. (d) Comparison of high-resolution (e) V 2p spectra of VN–NC and VN/Co–NC, (e) Co 2p spectra of Co–NC and VN/Co–NC, and (f) N 1s XPS spectra of VN–NC and VN/Co–NC. (g) Comparison of XANES spectra of the Co K-edges of Co–NC and VN/Co–NC; (h) Co K-edge Fourier-transformed EXAFS k3χ(k) data of the (h) VN/Co–NC and (i) Co–NC composites. 
Since the lattice coupling between VN and Co phases occurred, their electron interaction was unavoidably triggered. To clarify this point, X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) for the VN/Co–NC composite were acquired, together with those of the VN–NC and Co–NC composites for comparison. Fig. 2d–f compared the high-resolution XPS spectra of V 2p, Co 2p and N 1s in the VN/Co–NC, VN–NC, and Co–NC composites, respectively. As seen in Fig. 2d, the peaks positioned at 513.09, 513.81, 515.78 and 517.85 eV for VN–NC could be assigned to V+, V2+, V3+ and V5+, respectively, consistent with the previous reports.45,46 Once the lattice coupling between VN and Co occurred, a new and salient peak located at 517.05 eV in the V 2p XPS spectra of VN/Co–NC appeared, which could be ascribed to the formation of the V–N–Co bond, affirming the electron coupling between VN and Co.47 Further comparison of the high-resolution XPS spectra of Co 2p found that the positions of the Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2 peaks for VN/Co–NC were slightly shifted to higher energy compared with those for Co–NC (Fig. 2e), meaning that the electrons transfer from Co to VN. The electron coupling between Co and VN could also be supported by the high-resolution XPS spectra of N 1s. As displayed in Fig. 2f and Fig. S8 (ESI†), the V–N bond positioned at around 397.18 eV and the Co–N bond positioned at around 399.30 eV were identified in N 1s spectra of the VN–NC and Co–NC composites, respectively. Remarkably, the relative intensity of the V–N bond in N 1s XPS spectra of VN/Co–NC was basically unchanged, while that of the Co–N bond was appreciably augmented, which could be due to the fact that VN could provide favorable N species for chemical bonding with Co. To further corroborate the electron interaction and lattice coupling, X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra at the Co K-edge for VN/Co–NC and Co–NC were conducted and compared. Fig. 2g presented Co K-edge spectra of VN/Co–NC and Co–NC along with various references. The valence state of Co for Co–NC was slightly larger than that of metallic Co, which could be due to the formation of the Co–N bond, and it would become larger after the introduction of VN, showing good consistency with the XPS results. Fig. 2h and i displayed the least squares fitted profiles of the Co K-edge EXAFS spectra for VN/Co–NC and Co–NC, respectively. According to the fitted results presented in Table S3 (ESI†), it could be seen that the Co–Co bond length corresponding to the first coordination shell was enlarged after introducing VN, in good agreement with the XRD results. In addition, the peak intensity of the Co–N bond positioned at around 1.380 Å became more apparent after the introduction of VN (Fig. S9, ESI†). The above results strongly verified the occurrence of both lattice coupling and electron interaction between the Co and VN phases.
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterizations were further carried out to acquire details on the microstructure of the VN/Co–NC composite. The FESEM image showed that the shape of VN/Co–NC had a dodecahedral morphology with a particle size ranging from 100 to 300 nm (Fig. S10, ESI†). After careful observation, it could be known that although the morphology of VN/Co–NC matched well with that of the ZIF-8 precursors (Fig. S10a and b, ESI†) and NC (Fig. S10c and d, ESI†), their surfaces became much rougher due to thermal-induced stress and decomposition. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area and pore volume of VN/Co–NC were calculated to be as high as 890 m2 g−1 and 0.56 cm3 g−1, respectively (Fig. S11, ESI†). Such a large BET surface area and a suitable pore distribution are believed to be beneficial for exposing active sites and accelerating mass diffusion during the electrochemical reaction.48 Being in accordance with the FESEM observations, the low-magnified TEM image of VN/Co–NC also showed a dodecahedral morphology (Fig. 3a). Meanwhile, the magnified TEM images showed that many nanoparticles with an average size of 8 nm were uniformly embedded within the carbon polyhedra (Fig. 3b). It should be mentioned that the carbon matrix was doped by N, which could be proved by the high-resolution spectra of C 1s for the NC and VN/Co–NC composites (details can be seen in Fig. S12, ESI†). Furthermore, the magnified TEM images shown in Fig. 3c and d also indicated that the nanoparticle was embedded within the porous carbon. Notably, the high-resolution TEM image shown in Fig. 3e revealed lattice fringes with d-spacings of 0.236 and 0.207 nm, slightly smaller and larger than those of the corresponding (111) and (111) planes of the theoretical VN and Co phases, respectively, which shows good consistency with the XRD results. Fig. 3e also provided solid evidence for the existence of the lattice fringes of the Co and VN heterojunction, which were clearly seen with a clear interface, as schematically depicted in Fig. 3f. The high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) image (Fig. 3g) and corresponding elemental mappings (Fig. 3h–k) further indicated the well-defined spatial distribution of V, Co and N elements as well as their heterostructured nanoparticles within the porous carbon framework. Hence, the unique porous heterojunction VN/Co–NC was successfully achieved.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) TEM and (c–e) HRTEM images of the VN/Co–NC composite. (f) Schematic illustration for the VN(111) and Co(111) heterostructure. (g) STEM-HADDF image of the VN/Co–NC composite and corresponding (h) C, (i) Co, (j) V, and (k) N elemental mappings. 
Encouraged by the desirable electronic and structural information discussed above, the alkaline HER activity of the VN/Co–NC catalyst was first assessed in 1.0 M KOH by assembling a typical three-electrode system with VN/Co–NC, Hg/HgO and a graphite rod as the working, reference and counter electrodes, respectively. Additionally, NC, VN–NC, Co–NC and Pt@C were also studied as control samples for comparison. Fig. 4a presents the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of VN/Co–NC, VN–NC, Co–NC, NC and Pt@C at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Unexpectedly, VN/Co-coupling enabled the overpotential of VN/Co–NC at 10 mA cm−2 to be 44 mV, which was much lower than the values for NC (475 mV), VN–NC (387 mV) and Co–NC (185 mV), and is even smaller than that of Pt@C (58 mV). Since the Tafel slope could be used to evaluate the HER kinetics within a certain potential range,49,50 the corresponding Tafel curves of the above five catalysts are displayed in Fig. 4b. The VN/Co–NC exhibited the smallest Tafel slope (51 mV dec−1), suggesting its exceptional kinetics. To the best of our knowledge, the HER activity of VN/Co–NC may represent the best alkaline HER performance among all the TM–NC catalysts (Fig. 4c and Table S4, ESI†) and carbon-free TM catalysts (Table S9, ESI†) reported so far, showing the significant advantage of the interfacial engineering. This result also supported the DFT calculations well. In addition, the VN/Co@NC with a smaller specific surface area (310 m2 g−1) and pore volume (0.19 cm3 g−1) was obtained by a similar synthesis method except for using the ZIF-8 precursor with a larger average particle size (280 nm). As expected, it delivered an inferior HER activity including surface area-normalized and pore volume-normalized linear polarization curves compared with those of VN/Co@NC with larger specific surface area and pore volume (Fig. S13, ESI†).
 Fig. 4  (a) LSV curves and (b) Tafel slopes of NC, VN–NC, Co–NC, VN/Co–NC, and Pt@C towards the HER in 1.0 M KOH. (c) Comparison of overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of VN/Co–NC with recently reported TM–NC HER electrocatalysts in 1.0 M KOH. (d) LSV curves and (e) Tafel slopes of NC, VN–NC, Co–NC, VN/Co–NC, and Pt@C towards the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4. (f) Comparison of overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of VN/Co–NC with recently reported TM–NC HER electrocatalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4. (g) Current density–time curve of VN/Co–NC during the HER in both 1.0 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4. (h) Comparison of ΔGH* values of the NC, VN–NC, Co–NC and VN/Co–NC composites, note that the ΔGH* value for VN/Co–NC was calculated by transferring 0.92 e− from Co(1–10) to VN(011). 
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was recorded and decoupled to reveal partial fundamental for the outstanding HER activity of VN/Co–NC. On the basis of the equivalent circuit modeled with the Nyquist pattern (Fig. S14 and inset, ESI†), it could be learned that the charge transfer resistance (Rct) decreased in the order of NC (148.40 Ω) > VN–NC (85.92 Ω) > Co–NC (82.42 Ω) > VN/Co–NC (57.48 Ω) (Fig. S15, ESI†), indicating the decreased charge transfer barrier. The double-layer capacitance (Cdl), being positively associated with the electrochemical surface area (ECSA), was further extracted based on cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves along with the variation of scan rates within the non-faradaic potential region (Fig. S16, ESI†). As seen in Fig. S17 (ESI†) the Cdl values increased in the order of NC (9.8 mF cm−2) < VN–NC (11.2 mF cm−2) < Co–NC (30.6 mF cm−2) < VN/Co–NC (38.6 mF cm−2), indicating the accessibility of richly active sites in VN/Co–NC catalyst.
We next probed the acidic HER activity of VN/Co–NC in 0.5 M H2SO4, together with control samples for reference. Notably, the VN/Co–NC not only possessed the lowest overpotential (22 mV) at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 4d), but also exhibited the smallest Tafel slope (31 mV dec−1, Fig. 4e) among all the tested samples. These results showed that the VN/Co–NC catalyst had the best acidic HER performance among all of the TM–NC electrocatalysts (Fig. 4f and Table S5, ESI†) and carbon-free TM catalysts (Table S9, ESI†) reported so far. Similar to the alkaline HER performance, the VN/Co–NC catalyst also showed the smallest Rct value (32.38 Ω, Fig. S18 and S19, ESI†), and the largest Cdl value (36.6 mF cm−2, Fig. S20 and S21, ESI†) among the studied catalysts, which demonstrated the best reaction kinetics, lowest charge transfer barrier and richest potential reaction active sites, respectively. On the other hand, the long-term durability of the VN/Co–NC catalyst was assessed by controlled potential electrolysis. As shown in Fig. 4g, the catalyst delivered an outstanding operation stability without any current decay after 72 h in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes. This outstanding stability could be supported by comparing the initial and the 1000th LSV curves in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes (Fig. S22, ESI†), which showed a very slight activity decay. This admirable cycling durability in electrolytes over a wide pH range was superior to the commercial Pt/C catalyst under the same measurement conditions (Fig. S23, ESI†) and ranked in the top level among many recently reported metal-based electrocatalysts such as phosphides, nitrides and chalcogenides (Table S6–S9 ESI†). The production of H2 was further analyzed by gas chromatography, which showed a good match between the detected amount of H2 gas and the theoretical value, corresponding to a Faraday efficiency of ∼100% (Fig. S24, ESI†). The outstanding longevity of the as-fabricated electrocatalyst was further revealed to be ascribed to the high stability of the phase component, morphology, and microstructure during the wide pH scope (detailed information has been provided in Fig. S25–S27, ESI†). Note that because of the open and interconnected feature of the porous carbon derived from ZIF, very small amount of Co near to the open position suffered from the corrosion after long-term cycling in the acidic solution (Table S10, ESI†). Nevertheless, the durability was basically unaffected as the main active sites are carbon atoms (details can be seen in Fig. S28 and S29, ESI†).
Inspired by the exceptional HER activity of VN/Co–NC in both alkaline and acidic solutions, and given the fact that the HER activity of TM–NC in neutral electrolyte has rarely been reported, we thus examined our catalysts in 1.0 M PBS solution. As displayed in Fig. S30a and b (ESI†) the VN/Co–NC exhibited the lowest overpotential (163 mV) at 10 mA cm−2 and the smallest Tafel slope (117 mV dec−1) among the measured catalysts. Moreover, it also could maintain a high catalytic activity for more than 3 days without any decay (Fig. S30c, ESI†), demonstrating the superior performance of VN/Co–NC over a wide pH range. In addition, the TOF values of VN/Co–NC at an overpotential of 100 mV, which was calculated based on the previously reported method,51 were 7.07, 4.9, and 0.24 s−1 in acidic, alkaline and neutral solutions, respectively (Table S11 and Fig. S31–S33, ESI†), indicating its high intrinsic catalytic activity towards the HER. Moreover, these values also rank in the top level compared with recently reported transition metal–carbon-based electrocatalysts (Table S12, ESI†). These experimental results were well supported by the theoretical predictions, from which the VN/Co–NC held the optimal ΔGH* value (0.086 eV), which was the closest to zero (Fig. 4h).
Since the heterostructure was constructed by embedding VN and Co within NC, one may also wonder whether and/or how the charge transfer improved the intrinsic adsorption ability of VN–NC towards H-intermediates. Motivated by this, the ΔGH* for VN was first calculated by DFT. Before conducting this, in situ Raman spectra and the poisoning curve, which was used to distinguish the real catalytic active sites,52,53 were obtained to confirm the active sites of the carbon shell rather than the metal core. As shown in Fig. S34 (ESI†), even when 0.2 M of KSCN was added into the solution, only 2 mV of overpotential was increased to afford 10 mA cm−2 for the VN/Co@NC in 1.0 M KOH solution. Moreover, the in situ Raman spectra showed that with an increase in voltage, the signal for the C–H bond emerged and intensified (Fig. 5a), while that for the Co–H bond was very weak and basically invisible (Fig. 5b). These phenomena demonstrated well that the real active sites were carbon atoms. Based on these experimental observations, the calculation results were thus further displayed. As seen in Fig. 5a, the bare VN showed a large ΔGH* value (0.67 eV), implying its poor intrinsic HER activity. Even if VN was coupled with carbon or N-doped carbon (Fig. 5c), the optimal ΔGH* values were still large (1.4 eV and 0.74 eV for VN–C and VN–NC, respectively), which could be the main reason why VN–NC exhibited an unsatisfactory HER activity. Fig. 5d depicts the variation of ΔGH* for VN–NC along with the number of transferred electrons. Obviously, regardless of the electron depletion or the electron injection performed, only a very limited positive effect on the HER activity of VN–NC could be found, strongly corroborating that the activity of VN/Co–NC was mainly contributed from VN-tuned Co–NC rather than Co-tuned VN–NC. Meanwhile, considering the fact that very small parts of VN and/or Co particles might anchor on the carbon matrix or the possible adsorption of H* on metal core, the variation in ΔGH* for individual VN and Co against the number of transferred electrons was also calculated. As presented in Fig. 5e, the ΔGH* value increased with electron injection or depletion in the VN–H system. This meant that the interfacial engineering-induced charge transfer is probably not suitable for the VN system, and some other modification strategies such as defect engineering should be considered for improving its HER performance. On the other hand, in terms of the Co–H system, with the electron depletion from Co, the ΔGH* value gradually decreased (Fig. 5f). However, to achieve a favorable ΔGH*, sufficient electrons should be donated from Co. Specifically, according to the effect of charge transfer on the ΔGH* of pristine Co, we have found that the donation of an electron from Co would contribute to the approach of ΔGH* to 0. However, this optimization was relatively weak, e.g., when one electron was donated from Co, the corresponding ΔGH* only varied from −0.2 eV to −0.19 eV. Therefore, to enable Co to achieve an ideal HER activity (ΔGH* = 0 eV), more electrons thus need to be donated from Co. This meant that the naked VN and Co particles on NC also contributed little to the HER performance.
 Fig. 5  
In situ Raman spectra of the VN–Co/NC electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH under increasing voltage conditions with an amplitude of 10 mV: (a) in the region of 1000–1800 cm−1; (b) in the region of 300–900 cm−1. (c) ΔGH* values of the C, NC, VN, VN–C and VN–NC composites; ΔGH* values along with the charge variation for the (d) VN–NC, (e) VN and (f) Co systems. 
On the other hand, to exclude the effect of lattice mismatch on the ΔGH*, the lattice mismatch effect for all Co@NC, Co, VN, and VN@NC structural models on ΔGH* was calculated and compared with the charge transfer effect. As displayed in Fig. S35a (ESI†), although the lattice expansion of Co@NC played a positive role in optimizing the ΔGH* within the calculated mismatch range, the improved capability was quite limited, e.g., only a decrease of 0.015 eV for ΔGH* was seen even though the lattice was expanded from 0% to +2% (note that only a lattice expansion of about 0.16% occurred for Co in our experimental observation). The difference in charge density distributions between the Co@NC substrate and H within the lattice mismatch degree from −2% to +2% was quite similar (Fig. S35a inset, ESI†). In comparison with Co@NC, the expansion of the pristine Co lattice also played a positive role in optimizing the ΔGH*, while the improved capability was also quite limited, e.g., only an increase of 0.038 eV for ΔGH* was seen even though the lattice was expanded from 0% to +4% (Fig. S35b, ESI†). Similar optimization tendencies could also be found in the VN and VN@NC models (Fig. S35c and d, ESI†), and in which a more apparent degree of ΔGH* optimization could be achieved upon expanding their lattices. Nevertheless, the lattice of VN in VN@NC showed a shrinkage of about 1% in the experimental observation, which was opposite to improving the ΔGH*. As a result, compared with the sharp optimization tendency guided by the charge transfer, we can conclude that the activity enhancement was mainly caused by the charge transfer from Co@NC to VN rather than by the lattice mismatch. In brief, from these discussions, the striking enhancement in HER performance for Co–NC by interfacial engineering with VN has been powerfully verified.
As a continuation of this work, we also demonstrated that the host–guest strategy for the fabrication of the VN/Co–NC heterojunction as well as the pumping effect of VN was controllable. Specifically, the phase abundance, the cell volume as well as the lattice strain could be modulated by altering the atomic ratio of V to Co in metal salts, thus affecting the HER performance. For example, with an increase in the atomic ratio of Co to V from 0:1, 1:8, 1:4, 1:1 to 1:0, the relative phase abundance of Co to VN gradually increased (Fig. 6a, Fig. S36, Fig. S37 and Table S2, ESI†). Meanwhile, the cell volume for Co was apparently augmented in the presence of more VN while that for VN was apparently reduced in the presence of more Co (Fig. 6b). A similar change tendency could also be observed in the corresponding lattice strain for the Co and VN phases (Fig. 6c). These results strongly suggested the regular variation of hetero-coupling degree by changing the relative phase abundance. One can imagine that the change in the relative phase abundance of Co to VN will greatly influence the number of atoms located in the heterointerface, as schematically depicted in Fig. 6d. According to previous DFT results, more electrons could be transferred from Co to VN upon increasing the number of coupled atoms in the heterointerface, hence, an improved HER activity will be gained within a specific metal ratio range. To check this, the LSV curves of VN/Co–NC-4 and VN/Co–NC-8 were also recorded (Fig. S38a–c, ESI†) and compared with VN/Co–NC, VN–NC and Co–NC. As seen in Fig. 6d, the overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 was gradually decreased in both alkaline (Fig. 6e), acidic (Fig. 6f) and neutral (Fig. S38d, ESI†) solutions with an increase in the atomic ratio of Co to V from 0:1 to 1:1, suggesting the enhanced HER activity by tuning the coupling degree. This also strongly verified the tunability of the interfacial engineering-triggered charge transfer for HER activity.
 Fig. 6  (a) Relative phase abundance, (b) cell volume, and (c) lattice strain for Co and VN phases in the VN/Co–NC composite with different Co to VN ratios. (d) Models for the effect of relative phase abundance between Co and VN on the atom numbers of their interfaces. Comparison of overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 for VN/Co–NC electrocatalysts with different Co to VN ratios in (e) 1.0 M KOH solution and (f) 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. 
Conclusions
In summary, a VN/Co heterostructure embedded within an N-doped carbon electrocatalyst was successfully fabricated by a convenient ZIF-driven host–guest approach. The lattice coupling of Co/VN and the charge transfer from Co to VN could effectively improve the HER performance of VN/Co–NC through the enhanced intrinsic adsorption ability towards hydrogen intermediates. Moreover, the large specific surface area with hierarchical porosity was also beneficial for the acceleration of mass transfer and the exposure of active sites. Thanks to these merits, the VN/Co–NC electrocatalyst required overpotentials of as low as 44, 22 and 163 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M PBS media, respectively, not only representing a new performance level among TM–NC catalysts but also achieving better activity than Pt@C. More impressively, it showed robust durability without any activity decay for at least 3 days. The design of heterojunction electrocatalysts could offer a new strategy to enhance the performance and competitiveness of TM–NC catalysts.
Experimental section
Preparation of ZIF-8 template
In a typical synthesis process, 550 mg Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 500 mg 2-methylimidazole (2-MeIM) were dissolved in 25 mL methanol, respectively. Then, the two solutions were thoroughly mixed and kept for 24 h at room temperature. The as-prepared white products were collected by centrifugation and washed with ethanol three times. After drying at 60 °C in an oven for 12 h, the ZIF-8 templates were obtained.
Preparation of NC
A combustion boat loaded with the as-prepared ZIF-8 powders was put into a tube furnace and heated to 960 °C at a rate of 5 °C min−1 and maintained at this temperature for 6 h under flowing N2 gas. After cooling, the black NC powder was obtained which was further acid washed in 1.0 M HCl solution.
Preparation of VN/Co–NC composites
100 mg of NC powder was suspended in 15 mL n-hexane and sonicated for 1 h. Then, 0.2 mL of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution containing 24 mg VCl3 and 36 mg CoCl2·6H2O as the hydrophilic solvent was added dropwise to the above solution over a period of 30 min with constant vigorous stirring. The resulting solution was continuously sonificated for another 2 h followed by stirring for 2 h at room temperature. The impregnated mixed sample was finally centrifuged and dried overnight. The resultant black powders were VCl3 and CoCl2-adsorbed NC (VCl3/CoCl2/NC). Afterwards, a combustion boat loaded with the as-prepared VCl3/CoCl2/NC powders was put into a tube furnace and heated to 800 °C at a rate of 5 °C min−1, and were maintained at this temperature for 2 h under flowing N2 gas. After cooling, the black VN/Co–NC powder was synthesized. The fabrication procedures for VN/Co–NC-8 and VN/Co–NC-4 were also similar to that for VN/Co–NC except that the molar ratios of V to Co were set to 8:1 and 4:1 instead of 1:1, respectively. In addition, the fabrication procedures of VN–NC and Co–NC composites were similar to that for VN/Co–NC except that VCl3 and CoCl2 alone were used in the adsorption process, respectively. Note that the total molar amounts of metal species for all composites were the same.
Materials characterizations
The phase structure and abundance of the as-prepared samples were obtained by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on a D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The XRD profiles were further analyzed by the Rietveld refinement program RIETAN-FP and the lattice strain based on the Williamson–Hall method54 was also extracted by RIETAN-FP stimulation. The element chemical states of samples were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS, XSAM-800 spectrometer with a Mg Kα radiation source). It is noteworthy that prior to the XPS test, we deposited an Au foil onto the silicon substrate and then cast our sample on the surface of the Au foil by an ethanol dispersion followed by a drying process under vacuum. The XPS spectra were obtained using the above method and calibrated with the Au peak as reference. The local chemical and structural information was acquired using X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) taken on at beamline 12BM of the advanced photon source at the Argonne National Laboratory. Co K-edge XAS spectra were recorded in transmission mode, and further analyzed using Athena and Artemis software packages.55 The morphology and microstructure of the samples were investigated using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, ZEISS, Ultra-55) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F). N2 sorption measurements at 77 K and Raman spectroscopy measurements were carried out on an Autosorb IQ Gas Sorption System and a Renishaw inVia plus laser Raman spectrometer, respectively. The carbon content in the samples was determined using an elemental analyzer (Germany Elementar, VARIO ELIII).
Preparation of working electrodes
The fabrication procedure for the working electrodes is given as follows. First, 5 mg active material after manual grinding was dispersed in a mixture solution of 970 μL ethanol and 30 μL Dupont Nafion 117 (10 wt%). Then a homogeneous suspension was obtained under sonication for 30 min. Following that, 12 μL of the above suspension was placed dropwise onto the surface of a polished glass carbon (GC) electrode. Finally, the suspension-coated electrode was allowed to dry naturally at room temperature prior to testing.
Electrochemical measurements
All the electrochemical measurements were carried out on an AutoLab PGSTAT302N electrochemical workstation at 25 °C. A three-electrode cell with a graphite carbon rod as the counter electrode, reference electrode (a saturated mercuric oxide electrode) and working electrode was employed in the HER electrocatalysis measurements. In the whole process of electrochemical measurements, 1 atm H2-saturated 1.0 M KOH, H2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and H2-saturated 1.0 M PBS solutions were used as alkaline, acidic and neutral electrolytes, respectively. The H2 pressure was controlled by a pressure gauge equipped with a hydrogen generator (type: QL-300, Shandong Saikesisi Hydrogen Energy Co., Ltd). Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for the HER were carried out at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The mercuric oxide electrode was carefully calibrated with respect to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in a three-electrode system at 25 °C, in which Pt wire, a Pt plate and a mercuric oxide electrode served as the working, counter and reference electrodes, respectively. After the electrolyte was saturated with pure hydrogen, CVs were cycled until highly overlapped at a scan rate of 1mV s−1. The average of two potentials at which the zero-current-crossing points of the CV curves was calculated to be the thermodynamic potential for hydrogen electrode reactions. All potentials in 1.0 M KOH, 0.5 M H2SO4, and 1.0 M PBS solutions could be calibrated to the RHE based on following Nernst equations Evs.RHE = Evs.Hg/HgO + 0.924 + 95% iRs, Evs.RHE = Evs.Hg/HgO + 0.098 + 95% iRs, and Evs.RHE = Evs.Hg/HgO + 0.511 + 95% iRs, respectively, where Rs is the contact resistance between the electrode and solution. According to the Tafel formula (η = b·logj + a, where η, j, a and b represent the overpotential, current density, adjusted constant and Tafel slope, respectively), Tafel slopes (b) were derived and estimated from the LSV results. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests at different scan rates within appropriate potential ranges were performed to measure the double layer capacitance (Cdl). The calculation details for the turnover frequency (TOF) are provided in the ESI†. Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) for the HER in acidic and alkaline media was recorded in the frequency range of 100 kHz–0.01 Hz at a controlled overpotential of 50 mV. The cycle durability tests were carried out by the chronoamperometric response. CV at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 for 1000 cycles was performed to evaluate the HER stability. The Faraday efficiency of the as-fabricated electrodes was determined by the water drainage method.56
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations
The Vienna ab initio software package (VASP)57 with the projector augmented wave method58 was used to perform the first-principles calculations. For the simulation, we employed the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)59 within the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) parameterization as the electron exchange–correlation function.60 The valence electrons are expanded in a plane-wave basis set with an energy cutoff of 450 eV. The graphene was simulated by a slab model with a supercell of 4 × 4 units and a vacuum of 16 Å. For N-doped graphene, one carbon atom in the supercell was replaced by one nitrogen atom. The graphene/Co(111) interface was modeled by the graphene supercell and a (4 × 4) Co(111) slab with 4 atomic layers, of which 2 bottom layers were fixed and the rest were relaxed during structural optimization. The lattice parameter of the Co(111) surface matched well with that of graphene so the lattice mismatch can be neglected. The vdW interaction corrections were included to describe graphene/Co interactions. The Co(1−10)/VN(011) interface was modeled by a (21/2 × 51/2) supercell of a Co(1−10) slab with 6 atomic layers and a (2 × 1) supercell of a VN(011) slab with 8 atomic layers. Also, a Co(1−10)/VN(011) interface with double atoms was constructed. The Co(111)/VN(111) interface was modeled by a (6 × 6) supercell of a Co(111) slab with 3 atomic layers and a (5 × 5) supercell of a VN(111) slab with 3 atomic layers. For the sampling of Brillouin-zone integrals, a Gamma centered k-points grid of 3 × 3 × 1 was used. The convergence criteria of force and energy were set as 0.01 eV Å−1 and 10−4 eV, respectively. The HER rate of the catalyst was affected by the adsorption/desorption energies of the H* intermediate on its surface. It is widely accepted that the free energy value of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) on the catalyst can be used as a good descriptor for its activity toward the HER.61–63 To estimate ΔGH* at zero potential and pH = 0, we calculated the binding energies (ΔEH*) of H* and corrected them with zero-point energy (ZPE) and entropy (TS) using ΔGH* = ΔEH* + ΔZPE − TΔS. Here, ΔEH and ΔGH were calculated with respect to H2(g).
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51871060, 51672049, and 52071084), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. 2018M640337 and 2019T120304) and “Shuguang Program” supported by Shanghai Education Development Foundation and Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (20SG03). We also acknowledge Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Light Source for providing access to the XAS beamline.
References
C. T. Dinh, A. Jain, F. P. G. de Arquer, P. D. Lune, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Cai, B. Z. Gregory, O. Voznyy, B. Zhang, M. Liu, D. Sinton, E. J. Crumlin and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, M. Chen, X. Yan, H. Jia, B. Fei, Y. Ha, H. Qing, H. Yang, M. Liu and R. Wu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6968–6979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, C. Yan, A. D. Handoko, Z. W. Seh, H. Li and Z. Liu, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 749–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 430–433 CrossRef .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1919–1923 RSC .
W. Hao, R. Wu, H. Huang, X. Ou, L. Wang, D. Sun, X. Ma and Y. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 102–110 RSC .
X. Yan, M. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Xu, Y. Tang and R. Wu, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 975–982 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H. Qing, K. Zhou, D. Sun and R. Wu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 108, 100618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Ha, H. Jia, X. Yan, M. Chen, M. Liu and R. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803918 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Zheng, W. Sheng, J. Z. Xu, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Mater. Today, 2020, 36, 125 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Dai, H. Zheng, M. Chen and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705431 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, Z. Lun, G. Xia, F. Zheng, M. He and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3563–3571 RSC .
Y. Xu, W. Tu, B. Zhang, S. Yin, Y. Huang, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605957 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zou, X. Huang, A. Goswami, R. Silva, B. R. Sathe, E. Mikmekova and T. Asefa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4372–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Popczum, J. R. McKone, C. G. Read, A. J. Biacchi, A. M. Wiltrout, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9267–9270 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Callejas, J. M. McEnaney, C. G. Read, J. C. Crompton, A. J. Biacchi, E. J. Popczum, T. R. Gordon, N. S. Lewis and R. E. Schaak, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11101–11107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, K. R. Patraju, M. J. Whitaker, M. Retuerto, T. Sarkar, N. Yao, K. V. Ramanujachary, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1027–1034 RSC .
J. S. Moon, J. H. Jang, E. G. Kim, Y. H. Chung, S. J. Yoo and Y. K. Lee, J. Catal., 2015, 326, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song, K. Li, M. Tahir, T. Y. Wang, P. Lun, L. Wang, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1359–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Tan, L. Fang, X. Yang, Z. Huang, J. Lian, H. Zhang and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 568–575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahmood, H. Tabassum, R. Zhao, W. Guo, W. Aftab, Z. Liang, Z. Sun and R. Zou, Small, 2018, 14, 1803500 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, L. Yu, X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Xu, F. Huang, L. Qu, J. Li, K. A. Owusu, Z. Liu, Z. Lin, B. Xiang, X. Liu, K. Zhao, X. Liao, W. Yang, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900390 CrossRef .
Z. Xue, X. Li, Q. Liu, M. Cai, K. Liu, M. Liu, Z. Ke, X. Liu and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900430 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, H. Jia, B. Fei, Y. Ha, H. Li, Y. Guo, M. Liu and R. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118404 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Lin, S. Gao, J. Su, Z. Lun, G. Xia, J. Chen, R. Zhang and Q. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 469–479 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, J. R. J. Simke, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8921–8926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuang, Q. Wang, P. Han and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700193 CrossRef .
Y. Shen, Y. Zhou, D. Wang, X. Wu, J. Li and J. Xi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701759 CrossRef .
X. Liu, K. Ni, B. Wen, C. Niu, J. Meng, R. Guo, Q. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhu, X. Wu, D. Zhao and L. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17874–17881 RSC .
Y. Luo, L. Tang, U. Khan, Q. Yu, H. M. Cheng, X. Zou and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 269 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Fei, G. Cai, Y. Ha, J. Liu, H. Jia, J. Zhang, M. Liu and R. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, F. Li, W. Chen, Q. Xiang, Y. Ma, H. Zhu, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang, T. Deng and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803151 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhu, A. L. Wang, W. Xiao, D. Chao, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, S. Chen, J. Kang, X. Wang, J. Ding, J. Wang, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705516 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Su, Y. Yang, G. Xia, J. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. L. Chen, R. B. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Ha, Y. H. Guo, D. L. Sun, M. Liu and F. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802011 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuan, X. Hu, J. X. Chen, Y. J. Liu, T. Z. Huang and Z. H. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9289–9296 RSC .
H. Yan, Y. Xie, A. Wu, Z. Cai, L. Wang, C. Tian, X. Zhang and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901174 CrossRef PubMed .
L. L. Liu, M. T. Yu, Q. Wang, B. Hou, L. T. Jia, C. B. Chen and D. B. Li, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 187–195 RSC .
X. Yang, S. Kattel, J. Nash, X. Chang, J. H. Lee, Y. Yan, J. G. Chen and B. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13768–13772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, Y. Yang, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10744–10750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Hirthna and S. Sendhilnathan, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 15447–15453 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Williamson and W. H. Hall, Acta Metall., 1953, 1, 22–31 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, D. Chao, S. Deng, J. Zhan, R. Fang, Y. Xia, Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Xia and J. Tu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706391 CrossRef .
G. Silversmit, D. Depla, H. Poelman, G. B. Marin and R. D. Gryse, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2004, 135, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Hu, D. Huang, T. Xiong, M. Li, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 11, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Yu, B. Y. Guan, S. Song and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801211 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, Y. Luo, S. Qiu, Q. Li, Z. Cai, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Sun and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11874–11881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Nørskov, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 RSC .
J. Mahmood, F. Li, S. M. Jung, M. S. Okyay, I. Ahmad, S. J. Kim, N. Park, H. Y. Jeong and J. B. Baek, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 441–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, R. B. Wexler, M. J. Whitaker, E. J. Izett, K. U. D. Calvinho, S. Hwang, R. Rucker, H. Wang, J. Li, E. Garfunkel, M. Greenblatt, A. M. Rappe and G. C. Dismukes, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4408–4419 CrossRef CAS .
F. Izumi and K. Momma, Solid State Phenom., 2007, 130, 15–20 CAS .
B. Ravel and M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2005, 12, 537–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Fei, M. Hou, X. Yan, M. Chen, H. Qing and R. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104371 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresser and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133–A1138 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, J. A. Chevary, S. H. Vosko, K. A. Jackson, M. R. Pederson, D. J. Singh and C. Fiolhais, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 6671–6687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fei, Z. Chen, J. Liu, H. Xu, X. Yan, H. Qing, M. Chen and R. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001963 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, H. Xu, Y. Ha, X. Li, M. Liu and R. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 213–223 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Y. W. Hu, R. Liu, Y. C. Mao, M.-S. Balogun and Y. X. Tong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 11402–11410 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional Tables, FESEM images, TEM images, elemental mappings, XRD patterns, Raman spectra, BET patterns, XPS spectra, DFT calculations, electrochemical characterizations including LSV curves, CV curves and cycle durability. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee00052g‡ Z. Chen and H. Qing contributed equally in this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Hydrogen is a renewable and environmental-friendly energy source that has the potential to satisfy global demands. It is of vital significance to exploit effective but inexpensive electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) for sustainable hydrogen production from water splitting. Transition metals coupled with N-doped carbon composites have shown great potential as substitutes for noble platinum (Pt)-based electrocatalysts for the HER. However, most of the strategies reported for enhancing the HER performance have merely focused on morphology tuning, electrode configuration design and solid solution, which have intrinsic limitations for improving the intrinsic activity. Herein, we developed a facile zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF)-driven strategy for constructing the interfacial engineering of the VN/Co heterojunction within N-doped porous carbon polyhedra (VN/Co–NC). Such interfacial engineering is beneficial for charge depletion of Co–NC and optimization of the adsorption free energy towards hydrogen-intermediates, resulting in excellent catalytic activity and long durability.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Electron injection/depletion effect of Co–NC on the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen absorption (ΔGH*). (b) Charge density redistributions of Co–NC–H systems without electron injection/depletion (middle), with one electron injection (left) and with one electron depletion (right). (c) Charge density redistribution of the heterostructure constructed by joining an N-terminated (011) slab of VN and a Co-terminated (1–10) slab of Co. (d) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of the VN/Co–NC composite. (Atoms with orange, cyan, light blue, yellow, and pink colors represent Co, C, V, N and H atoms, respectively. The red and blue isosurfaces shown in (b) and (c) mean the electron depletion and accumulation, respectively. The light pink tetrahedra were constructed by the Zn-centered N4 coordination.)	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of VN–NC, Co–NC, and VN/Co–NC composites. (b) Rietveld refinement of the observed XRD pattern for VN/Co–NC composite. (c) Lattice strains of the VN and Co phases extracted from the XRD patterns of the VN–NC, Co–NC, and VN/Co–NC composites. (d) Comparison of high-resolution (e) V 2p spectra of VN–NC and VN/Co–NC, (e) Co 2p spectra of Co–NC and VN/Co–NC, and (f) N 1s XPS spectra of VN–NC and VN/Co–NC. (g) Comparison of XANES spectra of the Co K-edges of Co–NC and VN/Co–NC; (h) Co K-edge Fourier-transformed EXAFS k3χ(k) data of the (h) VN/Co–NC and (i) Co–NC composites.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) TEM and (c–e) HRTEM images of the VN/Co–NC composite. (f) Schematic illustration for the VN(111) and Co(111) heterostructure. (g) STEM-HADDF image of the VN/Co–NC composite and corresponding (h) C, (i) Co, (j) V, and (k) N elemental mappings.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) LSV curves and (b) Tafel slopes of NC, VN–NC, Co–NC, VN/Co–NC, and Pt@C towards the HER in 1.0 M KOH. (c) Comparison of overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of VN/Co–NC with recently reported TM–NC HER electrocatalysts in 1.0 M KOH. (d) LSV curves and (e) Tafel slopes of NC, VN–NC, Co–NC, VN/Co–NC, and Pt@C towards the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4. (f) Comparison of overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of VN/Co–NC with recently reported TM–NC HER electrocatalysts in 0.5 M H2SO4. (g) Current density–time curve of VN/Co–NC during the HER in both 1.0 M KOH and 0.5 M H2SO4. (h) Comparison of ΔGH* values of the NC, VN–NC, Co–NC and VN/Co–NC composites, note that the ΔGH* value for VN/Co–NC was calculated by transferring 0.92 e− from Co(1–10) to VN(011).	 

 	Fig. 5  
In situ Raman spectra of the VN–Co/NC electrocatalyst in 1.0 M KOH under increasing voltage conditions with an amplitude of 10 mV: (a) in the region of 1000–1800 cm−1; (b) in the region of 300–900 cm−1. (c) ΔGH* values of the C, NC, VN, VN–C and VN–NC composites; ΔGH* values along with the charge variation for the (d) VN–NC, (e) VN and (f) Co systems.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Relative phase abundance, (b) cell volume, and (c) lattice strain for Co and VN phases in the VN/Co–NC composite with different Co to VN ratios. (d) Models for the effect of relative phase abundance between Co and VN on the atom numbers of their interfaces. Comparison of overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 for VN/Co–NC electrocatalysts with different Co to VN ratios in (e) 1.0 M KOH solution and (f) 0.5 M H2SO4 solution.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional Tables, FESEM images, TEM images, elemental mappings, XRD patterns, Raman spectra, BET patterns, XPS spectra, DFT calculations, electrochemical characterizations including LSV curves, CV curves and cycle durability. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee00052g
‡ Z. Chen and H. Qing contributed equally in this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
