Two-dimensional WS 2 /MoS 2 heterostructures: properties and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR00455G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR00455G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5594-5619Two-dimensional WS2/MoS2 heterostructures: properties and applications

        
          
            Yichuan 
            Chen
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Mengtao 
            Sun
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Mathematics and Physics, Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing, 100083, PR China. E-mail: mengtaosun@ustb.edu.cn
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Light Manipulations and Applications, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250358, P. R. China
Received 
      22nd January 2021
    , Accepted 26th February 2021First published on 26th February 2021AbstractThe successful fabrication of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures provides more possibilities for optoelectronic and thermoelectric applications than graphene because of their direct bandgap characteristics; therefore, scientific investigations on WS2/MoS2 heterostructures are more significant and thriving. In this paper, we review the latest research progress in WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, and look forward to their properties and applications. Firstly, we analyze the crystal structure and electronic structure of WS2, MoS2, and their heterostructures. Secondly, we comprehensively present the widely used methods for preparing heterostructures. Finally, based on the unique physical characteristics of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, we focus on their properties and applications in mechanics, electronics, optoelectronics, and thermoelectronics.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been one of the most widely scientifically investigated subjects because a number of uncommon physical events arise when thermoelectric interaction is limited to a plane.1–3 van der Waals (vdWs) heterostructures composed of layered materials have attracted extensive focus due to their superb properties such as smooth heterostructure interface,4,5 ultrafast carrier transport,6 and highly gate-tunable bandgap.7–9 With the continuous development of 2D material fabrication technology, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have been studied in more detail.10–13 Although these TMDs share the same crystal structure, their physical characteristics, such as bandgap, thermoelectric conversion, and light–matter interaction, vary dramatically and the stacked heterostructures also show great differences in the photovoltaic properties, thermal transmission, elasticity, catalysis, etc. Therefore, the study of different 2D materials and different forms of heterogeneous structures is of great significance for further comprehending their physical connotations and developing more practical applications. As the earliest studied TMD materials, MoS2 and WS2 have the same low surface energy as that of graphene and have the potential to be exfoliated. Ataca et al. compared the stability of a variety of single-layer TMDs through first-principles calculations and found that only the TMD materials of W and Mo can form a stable semiconductor with considerable bandgaps, which indicates that WS2 and MoS2 are more suitable for electronic devices.14 In addition, the high abundance of W and Mo elements also enables their use in industrial production at a lower cost. Although the subject of 2D materials is a fairly new field, several years of research have confirmed its extraordinary physical impact. Fig. 1 illustrates the milestone progress of TMD materials in optics and optoelectronics, particularly monolayers.15 From the appearance to the development to the real applications of 2D materials, it highlights the progress of science and technology and lays the foundation for the popularization of microelectronic devices in the future.
 Fig. 1  History of TMD exciton optics and optoelectronics (incomplete). This figure has been adapted from ref. 15 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
1.1. Crystal structure of WS2 and MoS2
Similar to graphite, TMDs are typical layered materials with layers connected by vdWs force. Generally, MX2 (X = S, Se, Te; M = Mo, W, Ta, etc.) is used to represent the typical formula of monolayer TMDs.16Fig. 2 shows the crystal models of monolayer TMDs. By assembling the crystal lattice in different ways, two different categories of crystal structures are obtained, including an octahedral (1T) phase with metallic behavior and a trigonal prismatic (2H) phase belonging to the P63/mmc space group.17,18 For WS2 and MoS2, the lattice constants of the WS2 and MoS2 crystals are 0.315 and 0.312 nm, respectively. Compared with 2H-MoS2 and 2H-WS2, 1T-MoS2 and 1T-WS2 have higher conductivity, hydrophilicity, and a larger layer gap. However, the 2H phase is dominant and has good stability. The 1T phase is characterized by thermodynamic instability and will convert to the 2H phase even at room temperature.19 Significantly, on account of the weak interlayer vdWs force, TMDs can be easily exfoliated to single layers and be stacked to vdWs heterostructures on anticipated demand, which provides the thrilling prospect of designing 2D heterostructure devices with controllable bandgap structures and manipulable technologies.
 Fig. 2  (a) Trigonal prismatic polyhedron present in the hexagonal phases of TMDs. (b) Trigonal prismatic triangular island of WS2 (top and side views). (c) Octahedral polyhedron present in the octahedral 1T phases of TMDs. (d) Distorted octahedral phase in WS2 (top and side views). This figure has been adapted from ref. 16 with permission from Annual Reviews, copyright 2015. 
1.2. Electronic structure of monolayer WS2 and MoS2
Bulk semiconductive trigonal prismatic WS2 and MoS2 have indirect bandgaps but when used as monolayers, they show direct optical and electronic bandgaps.20 Monolayer WS2 and MoS2 are research hotspots and the matching energy bands are shown in Fig. 3(a and b). Both monolayer WS2 and MoS2 are direct band semiconducting materials with valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) sited in the K and K′ valleys, respectively, and the bandgap of WS2 is 1.50 eV and that of MoS2 is 1.58 eV. As shown in Fig. 3(d and e), associating the band diagrams of the monolayer and the bilayer reveals that when WS2 and MoS2 are exfoliated into the monolayers, the bandgap will be converted from indirect to direct, which is because the interlayer separation of the valence band at the Γ point is much powerful than that of the valence band and the conduction band at the K point. Therefore, the VBM from the K point will transfer to the Γ point, resulting in energy band structures turning to indirect gap.21 It is noteworthy that the number of layers in the TMDs significantly shapes their physical performance. For example, studying few-layer MoS2 prepared by mechanical exfoliation shows that monolayer MoS2 significantly leads to enhanced photoluminescence (PL), about 1.84 eV, while the PL is quenched for the bilayer or multilayer MoS2.22 Moreover, the thickness of the layered TMD material also affects the optical refractive index,23 friction performance,24,25 photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency,26,27 and so on.
 Fig. 3  Band structures of (a) MoS2 monolayer, (b) WS2 monolayer, (d) MoS2 bilayer, and (e) WS2 bilayer. (c) Scheme of the Brillouin zone with the line along which the band structures are calculated. Evac stands for vacuum energy. The Fermi energy lies at the intersection of the white and yellow regions. This figure has been adapted from ref. 21 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2013. 
1.3. Electronic structure of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures
It has been proved that isolated WS2 and MoS2 monolayers have wonderful physical properties and stacking them to form heterostructures has attracted more attention. Abundant experiments have been conducted to study the electronic structure of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Theoretical results reveal that the VBM of bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures is located in the W-layer and the CBM is located in the Mo-layer, which indicates that WS2/MoS2 heterostructures are an indirect bandgap semiconductor with type-II band alignment.28Fig. 4a shows the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure energy band considering spin–orbit coupling (SOC) under ab initio theory. The WS2/MoS2 heterostructures bandgap (indicated by an arrow) is 1.96 eV larger than that calculated by other methods, which is mainly due to the consideration of SOC.29
 Fig. 4  Band structure of (a) WS2/MoS2, (b) WSe2/MoSe2, and (c) WTe2/MoTe2 heterostructures. Black lines and red dots represent GGA and G0W0 calculation with SOC, respectively. The Fermi level is put to zero and the bandgap is indicated by an arrow. The vertical lines indicate the positions of high-symmetry points. GGA, gradient approximation. This figure has been adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2014. 
It is also useful to study the electronic structure of 2D materials using density functional theory (DFT).30–32 The results from DFT can also prove the type-II band alignment of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Fig. 5a shows the energy band of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures without SOC under DFT and uses different colors to represent the projection of the wave function on either layer. Interestingly, it can be found that the VBM wave function is not 100% WS2; instead, the layer projection is 90% WS2 and 10% MoS2 by analyzing the projection of the electronic wave function, revealing the existence of interlayer coupling. It can be seen more clearly by observing the changes in the VBM and CBM energy with the vertical electric field, as exhibited in Fig. 5c.33
 Fig. 5  (a) DFT band structure of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure without SOC, with the color indicating the projection of the wave function onto each layer. (b) Schematic plot showing an external electric field applied to the heterostructure. (c) The energy of the top two valence bands and bottom two conduction bands at K point as a function of the external electric field, without SOC. This figure has been adapted from ref. 33 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
In the previous study, Hill et al. probed the electronic structure of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures through scanning tunneling spectroscopy. They studied the tunneling spectra of monolayer WS2 and MoS2 and bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, and extracted the band alignment of WS2 and MoS2. The results show that the bandgap of WS2 and MoS2 is 2.38 ± 0.06 and 2.16 ± 0.04 eV, respectively, and the bandgap of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures is 1.45 ± 0.06 eV. The relevant diagram and important parameters are shown in Fig. 6.34
 Fig. 6  Experimental band alignment in the heterostructures is schematically depicted with the bandgap values measured in the heterostructure region in panel (a). A table of various important values for MoS2 and WS2 is presented in panel (b) such as the measured monolayer band gaps in the two different stacking orientations, the work function, effective mass, and K-point parallel momentum. The Eg1 and Eg2 notations represent the systems where MoS2 and WS2 are the top layer. This figure has been adapted from ref. 34 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Studying the state density of 2D layered materials is valuable for investigating the electronic structure between the layers. Yelgel et al. scrutinized the total density of states (TDOS) and partial density of states (PDOS) of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 7. The results show that the VBM is contributed to by the d-orbitals of W and Mo and the p-orbitals of S, while the CBM is predominantly ruled by the d-orbitals of Mo.35
 Fig. 7  TDOS for WS2/MoS2 and PDOS for WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. The Fermi level is at zero energy. This figure has been adapted from ref. 35 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2017. 
2. Preparation of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures
An important indicator to measure the success of the preparation of vdWs heterostructures is the occurrence of interlayer coupling.36 So far, the controllable preparation of 2D TMDs-based vertical heterostructures with alternative material categories and lattice alignment, as well as adjustable interlayer coupling strengths, have driven the enthusiasm of researchers. Due to the weak vdWs interaction between the layers, TMDs layered materials are easy to be exfoliated into monolayers.
The successful fabrication of graphene/h-BN vertical heterostructures via mechanical exfoliation for the first time has promoted an upsurge in the preparation of 2D vdWs vertical heterostructures.37 However, the expressive shortcomings of mechanical exfoliation approach are strain, unavoidable contaminations, and low yield, including water molecules and organic residuals between the layers, resulting in weak interlayer coupling.38 For WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, the use of mechanical exfoliation method for production requires further refinement. From another perspective, we have witnessed the remarkable advantages of dry transfer approach and the innovation and development of the preparation of high-quality WS2/MoS2 heterostructures by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), which have also encouraged numerous researchers to study further. Here, we have introduced some progress in the preparation of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures in the recent years and have summarized the formation, tuning, and characterization of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.
2.1. Ink-printing method
Liquid phase exfoliation is another great step forward in the preparation of monolayer materials following simple mechanical exfoliation. This exfoliation technology can adopt intercalation method or only mechanical force can be applied through sonication, followed by centrifugation to pick out the crystals that meet the preparation size criteria in the solution.39,40 Such ‘ink’-containing crystals with a size of a few microns or less can be utilized for inkjet printing to form 2D crystal groups and, on this basis, can be employed to fabricate thin layers of heterostructures. Generally, only liquid phase exfoliation is used to prepare monolayer materials rather than the further fabrication of heterostructures because the ink-printing method lacks precision and is not suitable for preparing monocrystalline TMD heterogeneous bilayers with high quality and smooth atomic interfaces.41 On a positive side, this method has its own unique principles that deserve further study.
The process of liquid phase exfoliation is shown in Fig. 8. In solution, one scenario is that the ions (yellow particles) are directly inserted in the layers, enlarging the crystal and weakening the interaction between the layers (Fig. 8a). Or, if some materials exist with layer-ions, these ions (red particles) can be replaced with other larger ions (yellow particles) in solution in order to balance the interfacial charge (Fig. 8b). After that, external forces such as agitation, ultrasound, or heat can be applied to fully detach the layers. Fig. 8c shows the criteria for solution selection. In the right solvent, the separated nanocrystals can be stabilized to prevent reaggregation, which would otherwise result in polymerization and deposition.42
 Fig. 8  Schematic description of the main liquid exfoliation mechanisms. (a) Ion intercalation. (b) Ion exchange. (c) Sonication-assisted exfoliation. Nota bene, solvent molecules are not shown in this figure. This figure has been adapted from ref. 42 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2013. 
In particular, the application of tip sonication technology to split up layered WS2 and MoS2 will achieve better results (yield of large and thin nanoscale flakes).43,44Fig. 9 shows the related spectroscopic characterization of WS2 and MoS2 monolayers prepared by liquid phase exfoliation.39 The electronic structure of the materials varies with the size and location of exciton transition. Some optical characterization methods can be employed to study the properties of layered materials and the characteristics of liquid phase exfoliation. Fig. 9a shows the relationship between the absorption spectra of size-selected WS2 in aqueous sodium cholate and the transverse size of the nanosheets. It can be seen that the absorption intensity of the WS2 nanosheets is enhanced with the increase in the transverse size. Appropriate laser focus is essential in the Raman and PL measurements of high strength dispersions. Fig. 9(e and f) demonstrates that the laser should concentrate at least 5 μm above the surface of the micro-droplet to receive the best signal. Fig. 9g shows the PL spectra of WS2 with different monolayer content, indicating that the PL intensity is enhanced as the monolayer content increases. In order to visually reflect the influence of the monolayer content in the solution on the signal, the ratio of the PL intensity to the Raman intensity was used to provide a system of measurement and to find a linear relationship between them, as shown in Fig. 9h.
 Fig. 9  Basic spectroscopic characterization. (a–d) UV-vis spectroscopy. (a) Optical extinction coefficient spectra of aqueous surfactant dispersions of size-selected WS2, showing systematic changes with the nanosheet size. (b) Second derivatives of the A-exciton plotted versus the energy for WS2 after smoothing the second derivative with adjacent averaging. (c) Plot of the peak intensity ratio at the high energy maximum/local minimum as a function of mean nanosheet length (L). (d) Plot of A-exciton peak energies (from the second derivatives) plotted as a function of layer number (N) for MoS2 and WS2. (e–h) Raman/PL measurements in high concentration dispersions. (g) Normalized Raman/PL spectra (excitation 532 nm) of size-selected WS2, showing the systematic changes in the nanosheet size and monolayer (ML) content. (h) PL/Raman intensity plotted as a function of monolayer volume fraction. This figure has been adapted from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
2.2. Dry transfer approach
Dry transfer is a heterogeneous integration method on the basis of dynamic switching between the attachment and release from solid materials through an elastic stamp, which was first proposed in 2006 by Meitl and his colleagues as a simple transfer method.45 The specific preparation process is shown in Fig. 10.45,46
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of generic process flow for transfer printing solid objects. This figure has been adapted from ref. 45 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2005. (b) Diagram of annotating the transfer process. (c) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup employed for the dry transfer process. This figure has been adapted from ref. 46 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 2014. 
PDMS, a type of silicone, is often used as the required ‘stamp’ because of its low cost, good adhesion to silicon wafers, and good chemical inertia. When preparing WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, the PDMS stamp is often used to transfer monolayer WS2 or MoS2. Optical microscopy (OM) images and Raman/PL mapping can be used to characterize the heterostructure prepared by transferring WS2 to the top of MoS2, as shown in Fig. 11(a–e). Because the vibrational frequencies of WS2 and MoS2 are vastly different, the Raman mapping signals of each layer can be easily distinguished.47,48 As provided in Fig. 11f, the monolayer WS2 and MoS2 and their heterostructure are placed in the same Raman spectrum for better comparison. It can be found that the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure has in-plane (E) and out-of-plane (A′1) modes of WS2 and MoS2, and its frequency is the same as that of monolayer WS2 and MoS2. The PL spectrum of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure is also the PL emission band of WS2 and MoS2 at 1.85 and 2.01 eV, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11g. The Raman and PL spectra confirm the high quality of the prepared WS2/MoS2 heterostructure, which also indirectly reflect the advantages of this transfer method.49
 Fig. 11  (a) Optical image taken from the monolayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructure prepared by PDMS stamping WS2 onto CVD-grown MoS2 monolayer. (b and c) Raman mapping at the A′1 mode, 408 cm−1 (MoS2) and 421 cm−1 (WS2), and (d–e) PL mapping at 1.85 (MoS2) and 2.01 eV (WS2). (f) Raman and (g) PL spectra of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers and an as-transferred WS2/MoS2 heterostructure. The laser excitation used to obtain the three PL spectra having an intensity ratio of 1:5:2. Scale bar is 10 μm in all the figures. This figure has been adapted from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
The dry transfer approach has been significantly studied due to its advantages of simplicity and convenience. However, the selectivity of layer thickness is usually challenging while exfoliating from multilayer crystals.50 Gramling et al. used gold as a medium in combination with the lithographic handle-layer during exfoliation to more efficiently transfer the monolayer region arrays that can be controlled in size and figure, as illustrated in Fig. 12.51 The process takes full advantage of the recently constructed gold-medium assisting selective monolayer-exfoliation theory52 and progressively appends a pre-exfoliation patterning step, where the wet-etching of gold and plasma-etching of layered crystals, followed by photolithography, defines the edges of the exfoliation regions. The procedure of etching does not require automatic precision, which is the principal novelty of the method. Instead, plasma-etching produces the initial crack position at the edge of the prepared material regions, while the deposition of the metallic film makes sure that these cracks occur at appropriate interlaminar locations of the two-dimensional materials. This approach provides a bigger area-density of the desired monolayer materials than simple exfoliation and can predict where it will occur so that relevant devices can be quickly and efficiently constructed.53,54
 Fig. 12  Process of producing patterned monolayers. The process of patterning and transferring van der Waals monolayers uses standard photolithography techniques. It relies on the use of a thick handle layer (here, photoresist, step 2) to pattern the gold and the underlying layered bulk material as well as to offset the adhesive transfer medium from the bulk, thus permitting the transfer of only the patterned regions. This figure has been adapted from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
2.3. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
The selective stacking of heterogeneous 2D atomic monolayers significantly develops a variety of 2D materials and widens their application fields. However, stacked 2D structures prepared by means of transfer are likely to have impurities or strain at the interface between the layers, leading to a reduction in the interlayer interactions.55 After that, a new method for the preparation of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures by CVD has been proposed. With the realization of vertical and lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructures first grown by CVD, this method is deemed to be an effective and feasible way to fabricate large-size two-dimensional heterostructures with adjustable stacking array and controllable direction.56 Therefore, it is highly desirable to control the growth of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures by the CVD method according to the requirements of researchers and is also being practiced constantly. Gong et al. reported that by means of Te-mediated sulfurization of W and MoO3 with reasonable temperature control, vertical and lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructures could be successfully grown.56 Zhang et al. designed a one-step CVD growth method and used WO3−x/MoO3−x core–shell nanowires as Mo and W resources to fabricate WS2/MoS2 vertical heterostructures.57 Yoo et al. developed a two-step CVD process approach, which selectively completed the vertical and lateral heteroepitaxy between the monolayer materials and effectively grew WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, taking advantage of hydrogen gas to regulate the heteroepitaxy from the MoS2 seed crystals.58 Chen et al. also utilized two-step CVD technology to realize the vertical stacking growth of the MoS2 monolayer on the WS2 monolayer.59
The selective positional growth of 2D vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures can be attained by sulfuring the piled metal W and Mo thin films. The growth mechanism is shown in Fig. 13. Thin films of W and Mo only occupy a fraction of the Si/SiO2 substrate and other vacant sections are used for the growth of vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. A certain quality of sulfur and the substrate with W and Mo thin films are installed in two different areas and the temperature in each area needs to be controlled. The evaporation and growth temperature of sulfur are 270 °C and 865 °C, respectively. Sulfur begins to heat up while the temperature in the growth area rises to 550 °C. After the two areas reach the target value at the same time, they are retained for about 20 minutes for the complete reaction. In this process, it is important to control the sputtering flow rate and sputtering time of argon in order to better sulfurize W and Mo.60
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthetic steps for 2D WS2-based vertical heterostructures. (b) Schematic of the synthetic equipment employed during the CVD procedure. This figure has been adapted from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
The heterostructures grown using the above method (Fig. 13) are characterized by optical microscopy images; the samples obtained in regions A to D are shown in Fig. 14. The CVD method exhibits the feature of its high efficiency because the grown flakes are all high quality and the heterostructures have a hundred percent yield. The high magnification image of OM (Fig. 14d) confirms that the pure WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have an atypical figure with an approximately equilateral triangle structure located at the center of the heterostructures, and the length of the big equilateral triangle and the smaller atypical figure is 9.5 and 2.0 μm, respectively. The edge length of the flakes in region B is greater than that in region A. Moreover, the flakes in region B also have a less conspicuous hexagonal crystal structure in the center. This is due to the fact that the ratio of W and Mo to S varies with the growth position. It is appraised that the side sizes of the big triangular flake and the smaller hexagonal crystal are 28 and 3.3 μm in region B, respectively, and the values are greater than that of the flakes attained in region A. The results are similar to previous reports.61,62Fig. 14k shows the matching atomic arrays of regions A to D. There will be a smaller and darker area in the middle of the big flakes during CVD growth, which is the grown heterogeneous layer. Commonly, the smaller monolayer grown in the middle of the large flake presents atypical figures such as an approximately equilateral triangle or hexagon. It can also be found that the side lengths of the big triangles grown from regions B to D are almost the same and that they are all bigger than the flakes in region A.
 Fig. 14  Digital photograph and schematic of the deposition substrate after the CVD process (a and b). OM images of the as-produced sample located at (c and d) region A, (e and f) region B, (g and h) region C, and (i and j) region D. (k) Corresponding atomic structures of the diverse vertical heterostructures. This figure has been adapted from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
There is no denying that CVD plays a significant role in growing efficient and high-quality WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. However, the difficulty is that CVD is mostly a method based on experience and reaction conditions always need to be explored. Moreover, it is necessary to clearly know the nature of the growth equipment used and various parameters needed for growing the samples. Even so, CVD is an extremely popular method for preparing WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, which deserves further study.
2.4. Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE)
The MBE method allows a variety of TMD materials to achieve heteroepitaxy from one MX2 crystal to another MX2 crystal without perfect lattice matching. For WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, on the one hand, the temperature of the MBE system is easy to be regulated, and the thickness and the composition of the epitaxial layer can be strictly controlled, which makes this method have a promising future in preparing heterostructures. On the other hand, it is essential to adopt electron beam evaporation due to the high melting temperature of W and Mo. Moreover, under ultra-high vacuum circumstances, S has a very weak adhesion coefficient on the surface of the materials, which significantly reduces the growth measurement and may also have a negative effect on the preparation process. To mitigate this problem, the MBE method for the preparation of TMDs is usually performed on vdWs materials.63
The schematic diagram of MBE is shown in Fig. 15. The atoms or molecules are linearly ejected from the source furnace, which reach the substrate surface in the form of molecular beams. The growth rate is relatively slow, which is about 0.01–1 nm s−1 but can realize single atom or molecular layer epitaxy and demonstrate excellent film thickness.64 However, the growth area is limited to a certain extent since the system is complicated, as well as the slow growth rate; thus, MBE is not suitable for mass production and thick film growth.65
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of MBE based on TMD materials showing the general source of delivery and the substrate heating configuration. 
3. Properties and applications of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures
Large-scale WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have been fabricated and studying their properties and applications becomes more meaningful.66 Two-dimensional vdW heterostructures play a significant role in a variety of fields on account of their fascinating physical properties. Their efficient photoelectric conversion,67,68 flexile mechanical properties,69 and attractive interface functions make them a potential candidate for future nanoscale devices. Here, we summarize the latest research progress in WS2/MoS2 heterostructures and discuss their properties in mechanical, photoelectric, thermoelectric, biological, and other aspects, as well as their potential application value and prospect.
3.1. Mechanical properties
Type-II WS2/MoS2 heterostructures are easy to fabricate and have appealing optical properties. For precise electronic devices, device performance and durability should be taken into account while constructing various optoelectronic systems. From the perspective of device performance, comprehending the impact of external strain on the interlayer coupling is essential for designing flexile devices. The calculations carried out by Kumar et al. demonstrated that strain transmission occurs between heterogeneous layers and the critical strain, which makes WS2/MoS2 heterostructures decouple between the layers by about 1.81%.70 The researchers also tried to use in situ bending trials conjoined with PL and Raman spectrum to study 2D heterostructures’ strain-induced photoelectric performance extension.71–74 On the other hand, in order to improve the device durability, grasping the mechanical properties and physical characteristics of vertically-stacked heterostructures is indispensable. Compared with monolayer WS2 and MoS2, bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have higher elastic moduli, and multilayer WS2/MoS2 have better friction performance, which is manifested in lower friction coefficient and better wear resistance.75,76 These excellent mechanical properties make WS2/MoS2 heterostructures possible materials for a variety of flexile devices.56,77–79

3.1.1. Elastic properties. 
Elastic properties are a significant groundwork for judging whether materials can be efficiently integrated in different applications. The elastic modulus of a material is the basic parameter that helps to verify the mechanical properties and plays a crucial role in flexible and stretchy devices in the fields of photonics and electronics.80 Because of the atomic thickness and ultra-high flexibility, 2D materials have been widely used as pivotal constituents of flexile devices.81–84 It has been experimentally measured that single-layer WS2 and MoS2 have quite high 2D elastic modulus of about 170 N m−1, i.e., nearly half that of graphene, which is considered to be the strongest material. The 2D elastic modulus of the double-layer WS2/MoS2 heterostructure is slightly lower than the total of the 2D elastic modulus of monolayer WS2 and MoS2. However, it is comparative to the parallel double-layer homogeneous structure, which means that the interaction between the heterogeneous monolayers is similar to that between homogeneous monolayers.85 Systematically comparing the elastic properties of different two-dimension layered structures helps to deepen the understanding of layer interaction, as shown in Fig. 16. The 2D modulus is eigen to the atomic level structures and is not suitable for comparison but a series of transformations can be employed to convert 2D modulus to 3D modulus so that the modulus of 2D micro-materials can be compared with the typical Young's modulus of 3D macro-materials.86 The relevant comparison of Young's modulus of different materials is exhibited in Fig. 16c. The study on the elastic properties of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures can not only embody the modality of interlayer interaction to comprehend the mechanical properties of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures well by quantifying the elastic modulus of the materials but also provide a convenient method to explore mechanical and electronic coupling in relation to layered 2D structures.
 Fig. 16  Comparison of elastic properties of different 2D layers. (a) Experimental data of 2D modulus and pretension for various 2D layers and heterostructures. (b) Interaction coefficients for different types of bilayers. (c) Comparison of Young's modulus of 2D monolayers with multilayers and bulk in the literature. This figure has been adapted from ref. 85 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 


3.1.2. Strain at the heterostructure interface. 
The device performance and durability of CVD-grown WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have been reported in detail.87 Nanoscale scratch tests based on scanning probe microscopy (SPM) have been applied to make it clear that the interface sliding mechanism of 2D heterogeneous layered structures and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been employed to figure out how the interface works.87Fig. 17a displays the schematic diagram of the strain engineering format and an OM image of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. The poly(methyl methacrylate) and WS2/MoS2 heterostructure were fixed with a tape, the ends of the tape were clamped tightly, and the film was pushed upward with a small spherical sapphire to cause tension. The bottom side monolayer MoS2 bottom side is defined as region A and the bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructure is formed into region B, and the two regions are respectively characterized by Raman spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 17(a–c). Raman spectra of monolayer MoS2 (region A) show that with the increase in strain, both E′ mode and A′1 peaks in the range of 400–425 cm−1 are redshifted, and the maximum displacements are about 0.5 and 2 cm−1, respectively, which attests the existence of tensile strain in monolayer MoS2 at the bottom.88 For the bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructure (region B), at zero strain, the stronger A′1 band of MoS2 and weaker A′1 mode shoulder of WS2 can be detected in the 400–425 cm−1 range. At a low strain range from 0 to 1%, the E′ and A′1 modes of MoS2 have a slight displacement, followed by a distinct displacement. It can also be found that the displacement amplitude detected in monolayer MoS2 (region A) is stronger than that in the WS2/MS2 heterostructure (region B). Fig. 17f displays the frequency shift detected in the strained WS2 mode. Similar to MoS2 (Fig. 17e), the spectra of WS2 have a distinct displacement above 1.2% strain. An apparent A′1 band strain of WS2 higher than 1.2% implies strain-induced stacking modulations between the layers.87
 Fig. 17  (a) Optical micrographs of the vertical heterostructure and schematic representation of the experimental setup. (b) In situ Raman spectra recorded from the MoS2 sheet (region A) at different strains. (c) In situ Raman spectra recorded from vertical heterostructure region (WS2 sheet, marked as B). (d) Variation in the MoS2 A′1 and E′ spectral position with strain (at region A). (e) MoS2 A′1 and E′ band position changes recorded at region B. (f) Changes in WS2 A′1 spectral position with strain. (g) Screenshots recorded from MD simulations, showing stacking changes with increasing strain. (h) Calculated stress vs. strain and the interlayer spacing variation as a function of strain. At 1.75% strain, AB to SP stacking change was observed. (i and j) Schematic representation of the interlayer spacing and Raman active modes. This figure has been adapted from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
SPM-based nanoscale scratch trials were performed to gain a better understanding of the effects of coupling on the local strain and the mechanism of sliding between the heterogeneous layers. The results of the 100 and 300 μN load are shown in Fig. 18 and 19, respectively. A force is applied from above to the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure to cause relative sliding between the layers through further MD simulations and Fig. 18d shows two orthogonal directions, namely, the x and y directions. At the beginning of WS2 sliding, the force per atom in the x direction is nearly twice that in the y direction, as demonstrated in Fig. 18e. This occurs because in order to align interfacial sulfur atoms when the top WS2 layer slides, there is a chalcogenide-metal corrugation route, which has high-roughness in the x direction. In contrast, the y direction has a route with a less roughness, which facilitates heterogeneous layer sliding, as shown in Fig. 18f.
 Fig. 18  (a) SPM micrograph of the heterostructure, showing local rippling on the WS2 scratched region, indicating plastic deformation. (b) Lateral force corresponding to 100 μN nano-scratch along the x and y directions. (c) Friction force recorded at higher normal loads (300 μN). (d) Schematic representation of layer sliding along the two directions. (e) Time evolution plot showing the variation of force per atom to slide the WS2 layer in two different directions. (f) Snapshots recorded from MD simulation showing changes in the corrugation path along the x and y directions. Direction y has a lower corrugation path, providing an easier route for sliding. Inset: Sulfur atoms considered for representation in the WS2/MoS2 interface. This figure has been adapted from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 19  (a) SPM micrograph of the high-load nanoscratch (300 μN) on the heterostructure. (b) Line profile recorded from the scratched region. (c and d) Raman maps showing the variation in the WS2 E′ and A′ band intensity for the deformed sample. (e) Raman spectra recorded at three spots across the scratch, showing variation in the in-plane and out-of-plane vibration modes. (f) Simulated Von Mises stress distribution on the deformed WS2 layer. The zoomed-in image shows the rearrangement of the layers at the scratch edge. This figure has been adapted from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Using 300 μN loads allows the indenter to pass through WS2 layer on the top, as illustrated in Fig. 19(a and b), and higher stress concentration can be observed at the scratch tip. Besides, a large number of structural deformations occur around the scratch area and the WS2 layer in the heterostructure is uplifted from the bottom MoS2 layer, making the area have greater odds of vertical oscillations. It also can be observed from the fact that the Raman spectra have a stronger A′1 mode in the scratch area, as shown in Fig. 19e.
It is of guiding significance to study the influence of various tensile strains on the energy band of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Researchers have found that 4% tensile strain unexpectedly inhibits the electron transfer (ET) on the vdWs WS2/MoS2 heterostructure interface. The indirect bandgap is significantly reduced in the case of 2% and 4% tensile strain, which is predominantly attributable to the reduction of CBM, as shown in Fig. 20b.89 The photoexcitation of WS2 results in the generation of electron–hole pairs in the K point. However, on account of weak interlayer coupling, the direct ET between WS2 and MoS2 at the K point is especially difficult. Therefore, the ET between the layers needs to be carried out in two steps and the electronic state contribution at the T point of the MoS2 conduction band plays an important role. The ET route is defined as the K point of the WS2 conduction band to the T point of the MoS2 conduction band to the K point of the MoS2 conduction band. By applying tensile strains, the energy at the K point of WS2 is reduced and the path from K to T is obstructed, causing ET to be conspicuously blocked. This study indicates that using external strain to adjust the ET has potential value, which plays a significant role in the design of efficient photonic devices based on 2D materials.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagrams of h- and e-transfer processes at the WS2/MoS2 interface. (b) Band structures of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure under 0, 2, and 4% strain calculated by DFT. The color map indicates the orbital localization (red on WS2 and blue on MoS2). The energy reference in (b) is set to be the VBM under 0% strain. This figure has been adapted from ref. 89 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 

3.2. Electronic properties
The development of solar cells has made an important contribution to reducing fossil energy consumption. A variety of solar energy conversion devices are springing up with improved performance but Si-based solar devices have, by far, the highest conversion efficiency, as shown in Fig. 21.90 Due to the high efficiency and technological maturity, Si-based solar devices occupy a major share of the whole market.91,92 The disadvantage is that the production of Si-based devices is complicated and expensive, which limits the application of this technology to a certain extent.
 Fig. 21  Efficiency chart of different types of solar cells. This figure has been adapted from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
Recently, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) have proved to be one of the most promising substitutes to Si-based solar cells due to their low cost and high efficiency.93,94 The important components of DSSC are semiconductor nanostructures that act as photoanodes and counter electrodes coated with catalysts.95Fig. 22a is the composition of the DSSC and Fig. 22b is its working schematic. Research over the years has shown that using TMD materials as the anode of Li batteries can greatly improve its performance.96–99 When WS2 is used as the electrode, a conductive agent is required due to its insufficient conductivity and poor cyclability.100,101 Compared with WS2, the nanostructured anode based on MoS2 exhibits high stability during cycling.102 In addition, WS2 and MoS2 have also been proven to be effective counter electrodes for DSSC. Because of their excellent catalytic properties, TMDs have fast reaction kinetics in the DSSC system, which can be used in the reduction process. Also, WS2 and MoS2 showed high catalytic activity when they were first introduced into the DSSC system as the catalysts for the counter electrode.103 A large number of studies have proved that carbon nanotubes have great potential to improve the performance of TMD-based counter electrodes in DSSC.104–106 Wu et al. prepared WS2/multiwall carbon nanotube (MWCNT) hybrids in the aqueous glucose solution through a hydrothermal route and employed them as the counter electrodes in DSSC, as shown in Fig. 22c.105 The synergy between MoS2 and MWCNT can lead to the excellent electrochemical performance of the MoS2/MWCNT hybrids. Tai et al. proposed for the first time that the nanocomposite of MoS2 and MWCNT could be used as the catalyst in the DSSC system. The electrocatalytic mechanism of this system is shown in Fig. 22d.107 The application of WS2 and MoS2 in DSSC fully shows its potential electronic properties; thus, it is particularly significant to study the electronic properties of TMD materials and their heterostructures.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram of the dye-sensitized solar cell. (b) DSSC scheme. This figure has been adapted from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic diagram of the DSSC with the WS2/MWCNT counter electrode. This figure has been adapted from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (d) Schematic of the electrocatalytic mechanism of the MoS2 and MWCNT counter electrode. This figure has been adapted from ref. 107 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012. 
Through experimental exploration and theoretical calculations based on DFT, the electronic properties of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have been well demonstrated. Theoretical calculations reveal that the bandgap of the bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures is smaller than that of monolayer WS2 and MoS2, and the effective mass of electrons and holes are 0.46m0 and 0.72m0, respectively, which provides a good carrier mobility (carrier mobility of electrons and holes are 155.77 and 887.39 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively) and ensures excellent electrical performance for WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.108 Moreover, WS2/MoS2 vdWs heterostructures are composed of n-type WS2 and p-type MoS2 semiconductors. Therefore, a p–n junction forms at the interface, showing good structural stability as well as ultrafast ET performance, which can meaningfully decrease the radiative recombination.109 The structure of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure determines its high conductivity; thus, it is often used in electrode materials. It has been reported that Li and WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have a higher binding energy compared with monolayer WS2 and MoS2, and Li in the layers also has high mobility. In addition, Li atoms can easily diffuse in the MoS2/WS2 heterostructures without aggregating in the charge and discharge cycle, which makes the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures promising as highly efficient cathode materials for Li batteries.110
3.3. Optoelectronic properties
Compared with GaAs and Si that have been widely studied, TMD nanostructures such as WS2 and MoS2 have greater optical absorption performance.111,112 In addition, WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have type-II band alignment, which exhibits superb quantum efficiency. The 2D TMDs can ensure the rapid extraction of photocarriers in the heterostructures and its narrow bandgap also contributes to the transport of carriers.113 These excellent characteristics enable the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures to have a high degree of photoelectric properties and also make it possess huge practical value for future photoelectric devices.

3.3.1. Photoinduced charge transfer. 
It has been known that the WS2/MoS2 bilayer structures have type-II band alignment, where the CBM and VBM are located in the MoS2 and WS2 layers, respectively. Understanding the form of charge transfer in the separation and recombination process has a cornerstone role in grasping the improvement mechanism of photoelectric properties. The process of charge separation and recombination is controlled by the electron interactions between the donor–acceptor state as well as the electron–phonon interaction. Fig. 23a shows the donor–acceptor charge transfer process, which plays a dominant role in the separation and recombination of the electron–hole pairs. The WS2 layer or MoS2 layer absorb a photon, hν, which will lead to electron transfer (①) and hole transfer (②). Following the process of charge transfer, the electron and hole combine in the layers or combine at the interface between the layers (③). Fig. 23b is the charge transfer isosurface map of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure calculated by means of the first-principles method, and the green and yellow areas represent charge depletion and accumulation, respectively.114 It is worth noting that electron–phonon interaction is also particularly crucial for the process of recombination.30 The initial phase of the transfer is equal-energy for the reason that both materials have the initial energy state. However, energy relaxation entering the phonon blocks the reverse charge transfer and allows long-term charge separation. Non-radiative electron–hole recombination comes in the energy gap of about 1 eV and this kind of energy is stored in multiple phonons. Electron–phonon interactions can be classified as elastic and inelastic. The phase randomization of the electron wave function by elastic interaction leads to the cost of quantum coherence, which is the key to the slow electron–hole recombination. Elastic interaction randomizes the phase of the electron wave function, resulting in a loss of quantum coherence, which is the key to the slow process of electron–hole recombination. Inelastic electron–phonon interaction, mainly including inelastic scattering, will cause heat cost of electron energy, which occurs in the process of charge separation and charge recombination. It has been reported that inelastic interaction in the process of photoinduced charge transfer at the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure interface results in a loss of electron energy of approximately 0.4 eV as the thermal energy.28
 Fig. 23  (a) Electronic energy levels involved in the photoinduced charge transfer and non-radiative charge recombination at the WS2/MoS2 interface. This figure has been adapted from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) The charge transfer isosurface map of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure. The green and yellow areas represent charge depletion and accumulation, respectively. This figure has been adapted from ref. 114 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 


3.3.2. Photoinduced interaction between charge-transfer (CT) excitons and plasmons. 
Most two-dimensional TMDs materials have the crystal structure of the 2H phase and the 1T phase, and the physical properties of the two phases are also very different. When the TMD monolayers form a heterostructure and absorb a certain number of photons, surface plasmons are generated in the 1T phase and excitons are present in the 2H phase. At this time, the microstructure at the interface changes and the properties of the excitons and surface plasmons change irregularly. The strong coupling of the oscillator systems of excitons and plasmons will cause a new type of optical excitation named as plexciton, which is a polaritonic mode.115 Other than this strong coupling, a relatively weaker coupling occurs between the exciton and plasmon oscillator systems, which is also called the Purcell effect.116 The weak coupling is able to arrestingly increase the exciton concentration but does not transform the exciton wave function and the mode of electromagnetic field; thus, this weak coupling effect can maintain the behavior of charge transfer.117,118 The effective mass of the holes and the electrons can determine the frequency of surface plasmons. In the knowledge of surface physical optics, the frequency of surface plasmons can be defined as: (1)
In this definition, n, e, ε0, and m* are the carrier concentration, elementary charge, vacuum dielectric constant, and the effective mass of the hole or the electron, respectively. For the 2D WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, the effective mass has two values due to its anisotropy. Fig. 24(a and b) shows the vdW WS2/MoS2 heterostructure effective mass and Fig. 24(c and d) shows the lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure's effective mass. The effective mass diagrams show that the effective masses of holes and electrons have strong anisotropy for vdW heterostructures, revealing that the plasmon frequency analogically has strong anisotropy in different directions. The comparison demonstrates that the vdW heterostructures have more opportunities to produce low-frequency surface plasmons than lateral heterostructures since greater the effective mass, stronger the electron positioning capability. The complex dielectric function of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures can well reflect the photoinduced interaction between different systems. By analyzing the complex dielectric function of the vdW heterostructures (Fig. 24e), it can be found that the dielectric function of the vdW heterostructures have a strong positive imaginary part and an obvious negative real part at about 465 nm, which is consistent with the strong optical absorption of the vdW heterostructures at about 465 nm (Fig. 24f). For lateral heterostructures, the complex dielectric function is distinct from that of the vdW heterostructures, as demonstrated in Fig. 24g. Lateral heterostructures have no distinct negative real part; thus, there is no significant interaction between the light and the heterostructures, demonstrating that there is no significant photoinduced interaction between the CT excitons and the plasmons. As shown in Fig. 24h, the lateral heterostructures have strong light absorption at 300–500 nm and weak light absorption at 500–700 nm. The analysis combining the dielectric function diagram and the absorption spectra shows that for the vdW heterostructures, the strong charge transfer phenomenon accompanied by the generation of CT excitons can be clearly observed at the wavelength of 800 nm, which is related to the vdWs interaction in the heterostructures. The CT excitons in the lateral heterostructures protrude the dielectric function at about 700 nm, which is also a good illustration of charge transfer. It is worth noting that the two forms of charge transfer are essentially different. They are present as interlayer charge transfer in vdWs heterostructures and intralayer charge transfer in lateral heterostructures.
 Fig. 24  The color map of the first Brillouin zone electron and hole effective mass of vdWs (a and b) and lateral (c and d) heterostructures. The anisotropy dielectric function (e) and absorption spectrum (f) of the vdW heterostructures of WS2/MoS2. The anisotropy dielectric function (g) and absorption spectrum (h) of lateral heterostructures that are constituted by WS2/MoS2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 119 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2020. 


3.3.3. Interfacial CT exciton enhanced by plasmon. 
WS2/MoS2 heterostructures generate CT excitons due to charge transfer but these excitons are usually weak and difficult to observe. It has been studied that metal plasmons can be used to enhance the weak CT excitons, which is of great significance for the efficient observation of weak CT excitons. Mu et al. successfully observed that plasmons could enhance the weak interlayer CT excitons for the 2D WS2/MoS2 heterostructures by combining finite element electromagnetic simulations with the first-principles method.119 When performing finite element electromagnetic analysis with Ag discs of different sizes, the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peak of the transmission spectra of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures will result in different degrees of redshift or split. For vdWs heterostructures, there is both strong coupling and weak coupling between the CT excitons and the surface plasmons.
As shown in Fig. 25a, using the Ag disc with a radius of 75 nm will shift the original SPR peak by 124.75 meV and give rise to Rabi splitting. When the radius of the Ag disc is changed to 145 nm, the SPR peak of Ag almost coincides with the exciton absorption peak of the vdW WS2/MoS2 heterostructures and the weak coupling will shift the SPR peak by 72.51 meV. Unlike the vdW heterostructures, there is no surface plasmon in the lateral heterostructures; thus, there is only a simple coupling between the surface plasmons from the Ag disc and the excitons from the heterostructures. As shown in Fig. 25b, when the Ag disc with a radius of 40 nm is employed, the SPR peaks in the transmission spectrum shift by 92.91 and 348.46 meV, respectively, and Rabi splitting occurs. The radius of the Ag disc is adjusted to 88 nm with the intention of making it exist during weak coupling. In this case, weak coupling appears at 707.07 nm in the transmission spectrum and the SPR peak will shift by 90.4 meV. The transmission spectra analysis of different heterostructures shows that the peak wavelength will show a redshift when charge transfer is present. The degree of charge transfer varies greatly for different heterostructures. It is very wide to generate interlayer CT excitons, almost involving the whole Gaussian radius of illumination. However, intralayer charge transfer merely occurs near the interface and as the distance from the interface is farther, the degree of charge transfer becomes weaker. The vdW heterostructures have more integrated charge transfer than the lateral heterostructures; thus, the degree of redshift is higher. The relevant comparison is shown in Fig. 25c. Due to the high transport ability of hot electrons, surface plasmons can observably enhance the charge transfer and cluster excitation also helps to accelerate interfacial charge transfer.120 When the heterostructure contacts with the metal, the more the charge transfer, the higher the degree of redshift of the SPR peak. Through this relationship, it can be judged whether the existence of CT excitons belongs to the intralayer or the interlayer, and the kind of heterostructures in finite element electromagnetic simulations.
 Fig. 25  Transmission spectra of the coupling between different size Ag discs and vdW heterostructures (a) and lateral heterostructures (b). (c) Relative relationship of the transmission spectra in different material configurations. This figure has been adapted from ref. 119 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2020. 


3.3.4. Charge transport and recombination. 
For WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, the coupling of two TMD materials with different physical characteristics forms the driving force for interfacial charge separation in the heterostructures, which facilitates charge transfer and recombination.121–123 During the step of charge separation, the WS2 layer generates holes and the MoS2 layer generates electrons. After that, the holes and electrons in different areas must travel a long distance to recombine at the interface. It has been proved that photoinduced charge transfer between the layers occurs on a femtosecond time scale through ultrafast spectroscopic measurements of laminar TMD crystal structures,59,78,124–126 which makes it difficult to study the charge transfer mechanism. Long-distance transport will support the interlayer recombination of holes and electrons, resulting in the extraction efficiency of photon-generated carriers being largely limited.127,128 It has been proposed that the direct carrier transport path through the selective contact of the top and bottom carriers can improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency of the heterostructures.129 Researchers have also conducted in-depth studies on the charge transport and recombination characteristics of TMD heterostructures in open-circuit and solid-state electron devices.130,131 Wang et al. investigated the charge transport and recombination properties of Schottky liquid junction solar cells based on the vdW WS2/MoS2 heterostructures and found that redox electrolytes and solid electrodes in close contact with the TMD components could perform effective direct charge separation and transfer paths in most areas of liquid junctions, suggesting that this geometric model promotes the high-efficiency collection of photon-generated carriers in the photovoltaic systems.11 Since iodide oxidation induced by the holes of TMD materials is a highly stable and efficient photoelectrochemical reaction, studying spatially resolved photocurrent of different stacked heterostructures based on TMDs under variational illumination conditions using ITO as the electrode can reveal original charge transport and recombination modes in monolayer heterostructured photoelectrodes. Fig. 26 illustrates the external quantum efficiency (EQE) distributions from the photocurrent maps of the ITO/MoS2/WS2 heterostructures and the ITO/WS2/MoS2 heterostructures under 532 nm illumination. It can be seen from Fig. 26b that the average EQE value of ITO/MoS2/WS2 is larger than the sum of WS2 and MoS2. This enhancement phenomenon indicates that the ITO/MoS2/WS2 heterostructures have a universal synergistic enhancement effect, which can be attributed to the improvement in the charge separation efficiency. In contrast, the stacking mode of ITO/WS2/MoS2 exhibits an obvious photocurrent quenching behavior under 532 nm illumination condition. The average EQE value in Fig. 26d confirms that the photocurrent produced by the photoexcited heterostructure regions is relatively low, which suggests that most of the photoexcited carriers in the heterostructures are recombined instead of undergoing iodide oxidation reactions.
 Fig. 26  EQE diagrams of monolayer heterostructures under 532 nm excitation. (a) EQE distributions and (b) average EQE values of the ITO/MoS2/WS2 electrodes. (c) EQE distributions and (d) average EQE values of the ITO/WS2/MoS2 electrodes. This figure has been adapted from ref. 11 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
In order to understand the connection between charge transport and recombination in these stacked configurations based on the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, it is meaningful to discuss the photocurrent response under different illumination conditions in depth. Fig. 27(b, c) and (h, i) are the photocurrent maps of the ITO/MoS2/WS2 heterostructures and the ITO/WS2/MoS2 heterostructures under 532 nm and 635 nm laser excitation, which also expressly reflects the quantum efficiency of different stacked configurations. For the ITO/MOS2/WS2 heterostructures, Fig. 27(e and f) shows that the type-II band alignment of WS2/MoS2 promotes the transfer of holes and electrons to the electrolyte contacts and ITO, respectively, and different laser excitation does not change the transport path of photogenerated carriers originating from MoS2. In order to form this transport mode, interlayer rapid charge separation is required, which also leads to photocurrent enhancement effect in these stacked heterostructures. For the ITO/WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, the charge transport and recombination process are mainly determined by carrier generation in TMD materials. Fig. 27j shows that the photocurrent response of the heterostructure region is unexpectedly enhanced under 635 nm illumination compared with 532 nm. As shown in Fig. 27k, 532 nm laser excitation will cause the TMD to generate excitons and then charge transfer occurs between layers on the ultrafast time scale, and the photogenerated electrons in MoS2 will also recombine with the holes in WS2. However, under 635 nm laser excitation, the ability of photogenerated holes to transfer to the iodide electrolyte may exceed the ability of hole transfer and recombination between the layers, which can explain the existence of photocurrent response in the isolated WS2 region. Significantly, the study of charge transport and recombination in different configurations will greatly promote the development of high-efficiency photoelectrocatalysts and solar energy conversion equipment based on the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.
 Fig. 27  Charge carrier transport and recombination pathways under both 532 nm and 635 nm illumination conditions. (a) Optical transmission image of the ITO/MoS2/WS2 sample. Photocurrent maps under (b) 532 nm laser excitation and (c) 635 nm laser excitation. (d) EQE versus the distance line profile measured from the yellow lines in panels b and c. Schematic energy level diagram and proposed charge recombination and transport pathways in the heterojunction region under (e) 532 nm and (f) 635 nm illumination condition. Panels (g–l) are the same as that of panels (a–f) but for ITO/WS2/MoS2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 11 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 


3.3.5. Light absorption enhanced by SPR. 
SPR is considered to be an effective and simple method of enhancing light absorption. When the oscillation frequency of electrons is consistent with the frequency of the incident light, resonance will occur. In the resonance state, the energy of the electromagnetic field is effectively transformed into the collective vibration energy of the free electrons on the metal surface, which greatly enhances the local electromagnetic field, and then, the light absorption of the materials in contact with the metal is significantly enhanced.132–134 The SPR-enhanced infrared response induced by the interlayer coupling for WS2/MoS2 heterostructures promotes the development of infrared photodetectors. The vertical few-layer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures are integrated with periodical Au nanoparticles (NPs) pattern for improving the infrared detection and a significant enhancement of 25 times light responsivity at the wavelength of 1030 nm is achieved. Fig. 28a and b are Raman spectra and PL spectra with or without Au NPs pattern covering, respectively, and the PL spectra clearly prove that the SPR effect can efficiently enhance the light absorption. Based on this effect, a type of infrared light photodetector was designed, making use of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. The schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 28c.134 Strong interlayer coupling between the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures leads to an infrared light response phenomenon, which reduces the energy interval of the heterostructure region so that the heterostructures have a greater wavelength detection capability relative to the independent components.21 Considering the weak light absorption of few-layer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures owing to the existence of indirect bandgap, the infrared responsivity should be further improved and the SPR ensures a faster response rate in the infrared range (1030 nm), as shown in Fig. 28d. This strategy of combining the infrared light response induced by interlayer coupling and light absorption enhanced by SPR paves the way for the design of high performance infrared photodetection with unlimited freedom.
 Fig. 28  (a) Comparison of Raman spectra of heterojunction area before and after Au pattern covering, left and right insets are WS2 and MoS2 Raman spectra, respectively. (b) PL spectra of the heterostructures before and after Au pattern covering. (c) Schematic of the photodetector fabricated on the heterostructures. (d) On/off cycle stability test under 1030 nm light. This figure has been adapted from ref. 134 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. 


3.3.6. Improvement of photodetector performance. 
The improvement of photodetectors based on TMD heterostructures is a broad research focus. It has been introduced that the SPR effect can enhance the light absorption efficiency of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, thereby increasing the light response and improving the performance of the device. In addition, reasonable doping and appropriate matching of 2D layered materials can also improve their photocurrent response.135 Studies have shown that integrating Au PNs between WS2/MoS2 vertical heterostructures can make them have higher photoelectric properties and the space charge areas formed by heterogeneous contact can well-restrain the dark current.136 The SPR effect generated by the contact between the TMD materials and Au NPs is able to enhance the light field and the electric field intensity near the Au NPs, thus promoting light absorption of the materials. Fig. 29 shows the schematic diagram, energy band diagram, and depletion region distribution of the heterostructures with or without doping Au PNs in the interlayer. As shown in Fig. 29b, comparing the work function value of each component, it can be concluded that electrons tend to transfer from the WS2 and MoS2 to the Au NPs, which will form an n-type barrier layer in both the regions so as to restrain the dark current. The depletion region distribution of the WS2/Au NPs/MoS2 heterostructure further confirms this phenomenon (Fig. 29c). In comparison, because the work function of WS2 is smaller than that of MoS2 in simple WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, electrons tend to transfer from WS2 to MoS2, thus forming a typical type-II band alignment, as demonstrated in Fig. 29e and f. When WS2/Au NPs/MoS2 heterostructures are exposed to light, photogenerated carriers appear in the depletion region. Just then, the influence of the photovoltaic effect will cause the thickness of the depletion region to decrease and weaken the effect of restraining the dark current. When the illumination ends, the thickness of the depletion region will be restored due to the disappearance of the photovoltaic effect, which implies that the effect of restraining dark current also be restored. The result of this method combined with the SPR effect is that the process not only restrains the dark current but also promotes the photocurrent.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of the photodetector based on WS2/Au NPs/MoS2 vertical heterostructures. (b) Band diagram and (c) depletion region distribution for WS2/Au NPs/MoS2. Panels (d–f) are the same as that of the panels (a–c) but for WS2/MoS2 vertical heterostructures. This figure has been adapted from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 

Fig. 30 presents the performance of the photodetector based on the WS2/Au NPs/MoS2 and WS2/MoS2 heterostructures under different wavelengths of light. Fig. 30a shows the linear fitting relationship between the photocurrent and the power density of the photodetector. It can be seen that as the power density increases, the photocurrent has a linear upward trend. Fig. 30(b–d) displays the relationship between responsivity, EQE, and on/off ratio with power density. The results show that with the increase in the light power density, except for responsivity and EQE, all of these increase with the light power density increasing and it can be clearly observed that the photoelectric performance of WS2/Au NPs/MoS2 is generally better than that of WS2/MoS2. Therefore, the approach of integrating Au NPs between the layers can be employed for the improvement of the photodetector performance, which greatly promotes the development of high-efficiency photodetectors based on TMD materials.
 Fig. 30  Photoelectric properties of devices. (a) Power density dependent-photocurrent and the corresponding (b) responsivity, (c) EQE, and (d) on/off ratio upon 405 nm, 520 nm, and 660 nm illumination. Source–drain voltage: 0.1 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020. 


3.3.7. Field-effect transistor (FET). 
An important goal of studying the optoelectronic properties of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures is to enable the knowledge gained from these studies to be applied in the development of effective optoelectronic devices such as FET. FET is a semiconductor device that can control the current of the output circuit by controlling the electric field effect of the input circuit and has been widely used in large-scale integrated circuits.137 In order to explore the optoelectronic properties of WS2/MoS2 heterojunction FET devices, researchers have fabricated FET arrays on the Si/SiO2 substrates on the basis of vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures using heavily doped Si as the back gates and gold as the electrodes.138Fig. 31a shows the optical image of the FET arrays and Fig. 31b displays the schematic diagram of the phototransistor device on the basis of vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Fig. 31c shows the I–V characteristic curve of the WS2/MoS2 heterojunction, which exhibits obvious rectification behavior. When TMD materials form vertical heterostructures, electrons will transfer from WS2 to MoS2 in order to maintain the electronic potential balance, thereby generating the built-in potential at the interface. As the built-in potential decreases, applying a positive bias will promote electron transfer between layers and lead to a conductive state. Conversely, applying a negative bias will increase the barrier height, which hinders the electron transfer between the layers and causes the reverse current to be much smaller. Fig. 31(d–f) shows the relevant photoelectric measurements performed with a 450 nm laser at room temperature. It can be found that the working conditions of the FET device are not affected by the presence or absence of the light source. Whether the light source exists or not under diverse source–drain voltages, the photocurrent can also be turned on or off repeatedly and rapidly, revealing that it has good repeatability and stability. Therefore, the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have great potential for application in self-driven photodetectors. More meaningfully, WS2/MoS2 heterostructures can be transferred to malleable substrates so as to efficiently manufacture flexible devices. Fig. 31g shows the FET device based on the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures on a soft PDMS substrate. Fig. 31i shows the measured photocurrent of the flexible photodetector over time under different incident power. It can also be found that the flexible device is able to be turned on or off effectually whether the light source exists or not, which proves that the flexible WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device arrays have feasible photoelectric detection performance. This method can also be transplanted for the fabrication of various 2D TMD heterostructures and might open up new possibilities for future photoelectric applications of microelectronic devices.
 Fig. 31  (a) WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device arrays on the Si/SiO2 substrate. (b) Schematic of a WS2/MoS2 heterojunction phototransistor. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of a transistor based on the vertical WS2/MoS2 heterojunction, measured without illumination. The inset in (c) shows the band alignment for few-layer WS2 and MoS2 flakes. (d) Time-dependent photocurrent of the vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures with different incident power on the Si/SiO2 substrate. (e) Dependence of photocurrent and photoresponsivity on incident light power; the green and black dots correspond to the original data. (f) Time dependence of the photocurrent based on the vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures during laser switching on/off under the positive source–drain voltage from 1 to 4 V. (g) Photo image of the WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device arrays on the PDMS substrate. (h) Optical microscope image of the single WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device on the PDMS substrate. (i) Time-dependent photocurrent of the WS2/MoS2 heterojunction with different incident power on the PMDS substrate. This figure has been adapted from ref. 138 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 

3.4. Thermal and thermoelectric properties
Due to the rapid growth of industry and population, global energy consumption is continuously increasing and energy shortages as well as environmental pollution are becoming more and more serious. Therefore, the development of renewable energy and the search for efficient thermoelectric materials are extremely urgent.139,140 The thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT) is commonly used to measure the energy conversion efficiency of thermoelectric materials, which is defined as ZT = σTS2/(ke + kp)(2)where σ is the electrical conductance, T is the thermodynamic temperature, S is the Seebeck coefficient, and ke and kp are the electronic thermal conductance and phonon thermal conductance, respectively. To date, the maximum experimental ZT reported at room temperature is about 2.4, which is achieved by employing superlattice p-type Sb2Te3/Bi2Te3 heterostructures and has low thermal conductance and good electrical transmission.141 Although devices made with Sb2Te3 and Bi2Te3 materials exhibit excellent thermoelectric properties, the trouble is that they are highly toxic and harmful to organisms. In comparison, 2D TMDs are non-toxic, harmless, and easy to prepare, which are considered to have unexpected thermal and thermoelectric properties due to direct bandgap and high carrier mobility. It has been theoretically proved that monolayer WS2 and MoS2 possess high ZT values.142–144 Therefore, the reasonably constructed WS2/MoS2 heterostructures with high ZT are deemed as one of the most promising thermoelectric materials for optimal waste heat recovery.

3.4.1. Temperature dependence. 
The temperature factor is very important for nanomaterials, and for solid materials, changes in temperature may lead to phase changes. In the CVD method, to fabricate two-dimensional WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, lattice imperfection or some defects inevitably exist in the growth process, and it is of great significance to adjust the performance of the heterostructures through the control of these defects. For example, the reaction activity of hydrogen evolution using MoS2 nanosheets is closely related to the unsaturated S atoms along the edge of Mo atoms and the defects in ultrathin MoS2, and changing the form of the defects may greatly improve the hydrogen evolution efficiency.145–148 Researchers have found that high growth temperatures (>800 °C) will promote the separation of the edge atoms from the matrix in disparate growth modes, resulting in two asymmetrical heterostructures with tassel and dendritic shapes.149 The controlled synthesis of 2D TMD heterostructures can be regulated by temperature dependence. Evolution from the monolayer MoS2, vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, WxS2/Mo1−x alloy, to bilayer WS2 can be realized by selectively adjusting the growth temperatures of two-dimensional TMD materials. As shown in Fig. 32, the resulting MoS2 triangle, vertical MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, lateral WS2/MoS2/WS2 heterostructures, vertical WS2/Mo1−xWxS2 heterostructures, and lateral WxS2/Mo1−x heterostructures are able to be obtained sequentially with the growth temperatures increasing from 750 °C to 870 °C.150
 Fig. 32  Schematic diagram of the growth mechanism of 2D TMD heterostructures obtained under various growth temperatures: (a) 750 °C, (b) 780 °C, (c) 810 °C, (d) 840 °C, (e) 870 °C, and (f) 900 °C. This figure has been adapted from ref. 150 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Temperature dependence is not only related to the preparation of heterostructures but also affects the properties of bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, which have been prepared. The results of both temperature-dependent Raman and PL spectra of the vdW bilayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructures show that the A1g and E12g modes of WS2 and MoS2 have a noticeable linear relationship as the temperature increases from 300 to 642 K.151Fig. 33a displays the Raman spectra of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures at the temperature from 300 to 642 K. It can be found that the A1g and E12g modes of the monolayer WS2 and MoS2 inherently show strong scattering intensities and all Raman modes of WS2 and MoS2 have systematic red shifts with the increase in the temperature. The correlation between the position of the peaks and the increase in temperatures is shown in Fig. 33b, from which it can be observed that they have an obvious linear relationship. Fig. 33c shows the relationship between the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the four Raman modes with variational temperatures. It can be found that the FWHM of all the four Raman modes represent an increased tendency with temperature increase. Also, in both WS2 and MoS2 materials, the FWHM of the A1g modes is generally larger than that of the E12g modes and the FWHM of WS2 is larger than that of MoS2 under the same Raman mode comparison. In addition, the temperature-dependent values of the FWHM are parallel to their corresponding single-layer materials.152
 Fig. 33  (a) Raman spectra of the vertically stacked WS2/MoS2 heterostructures at different temperatures ranging from 300 to 643 K. (b) Raman frequencies as a function of temperature for the E12g and A1g modes of WS2 and MoS2, respectively. (c) Measured values of FWHM as a function of temperature for the four Raman modes. This figure has been adapted from ref. 151 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
The PL spectra of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures at different temperatures reveal that the position and intensity of the photoluminescence peak have a strong dependence on the temperature, and the integrated photoluminescence intensity decreases as the temperature increases. Fig. 34a graphically illustrates the PL spectra with the variational temperature from 300 to 642 K. It can be seen intuitively that temperature rise will lead to a decrease in the PL peak intensity and the increase in FWHM. The main reason for this phenomenon is that the non-radiative recombination mechanism of thermal activation reduces the radiative transition probability.153,154Fig. 34b plots the data points of integrated PL intensity, which have been well fitted at different temperatures. It can be observed that the PL intensity tends to decrease when the temperature increases, which is also common in bulk semiconductors. The Arrhenius formula can be employed to fit the variation of the PL intensity with temperature: I(T) = A/[1 + Cexp(−E/kBT)].(3)
 Fig. 34  (a) The PL spectra of the vertically-stacked WS2/MoS2 heterostructures at various temperatures. Temperature dependence of (b) integrated PL intensity and (c) peak position of the vertically-stacked WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Symbols represent the experimental data. This figure has been adapted from ref. 151 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
In this fitting formula, A and C are two different constants, E is the thermal activation energy, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. According to the fitting result, the thermal activation energy is 69.6 meV and the value is equivalent to the monolayer MoS2 crystal.155 The position of the PL peak corresponds to the exciton transition energy of MoS2 in the heterostructures. Fig. 34c shows that the PL peak position is temperature-dependent and the PL peak appears to be redshifted with the increase in temperature, indicating that the bandgap of MoS2 reduces and the energy of the minimum allowable exciton state decreases. Therefore, the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have a fascinating thermoelectric effect and are promising as the next generation of thermoelectric devices.


3.4.2. Peltier–Seebeck effect. 
Peltier–Seebeck effect, also known as the thermoelectric effect, is a process whereby temperature difference and voltage are converted into each other. The principal components of typical thermoelectric devices are p–n junctions formed by different types of semiconductor materials. The p-type semiconductor contains holes and the n-type semiconductor contains electrons as the main carriers. Thermoelectric devices can produce distinct effects by providing a temperature difference or a voltage, as shown in Fig. 35. The temperature difference at the p–n junction will cause the carriers to transfer from the junction, resulting in a circuit voltage. This is called the Seebeck effect and this effect can be used in the design of thermoelectric generators. On the other hand, applying an electric current to the p–n junction will induce the carriers to transfer from the junction and take away the heat energy, thereby cooling the circumstances, which is also named the Peltier effect.156
 Fig. 35  Schematic illustration of the thermoelectric effect. (a) Thermoelectric generator (Seebeck effect). (b) Thermoelectric cooler (Peltier effect). This figure has been adapted from ref. 156 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
According to the definition formula of ZT, it can be known that the thermoelectric properties of the materials are mainly determined by the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductance, and thermal conductance. In the diffusion transport mode, the Boltzmann transport equation can be used to calculate the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductance, and electronic thermal conductance of the materials.157 In another case, if the size of the nanomaterials is less than or equal to the electrons’ mean free path, the transport mode will become ballistic instead of diffusive, which cannot be solved by the Boltzmann transport equation. In this scenario, the method of combining non-equilibrium Green's function with first-principles calculations is used to find direct solutions to the Schrodinger equation and to investigate the thermoelectric performance in the ballistic mode.158,159 For heat conduction, the dominant hot carriers are the phonons in the semiconductor materials and the molecular dynamics method is commonly applied to study the heat conduction of phonons.160 In semiconductor materials, phonon scattering greatly affects the thermoelectric properties of the materials. The forms of phonon scattering include the scattering of phonons and phonons, phonons and electrons, and phonons and boundaries, and their interaction processes are plotted in Fig. 36.161 Meaningfully, phonon-boundary scattering can effectively reduce the lattice thermal conductance.162 Studies have demonstrated that phonon scattering can bring about a significant decrease in the thermal conductance of the CoSb3/oxide nanocomposite functional interface.163
 Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of phonon scattering processes including phonon–phonon scattering, phonon–electron scattering, and phonon-boundary scattering. This figure has been adapted from ref. 161 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013. 


3.4.3. Thermoelectric properties of TMDs and heterostructures. 
Graphene, as the first two-dimension material to be discovered and studied, exhibits remarkable electronic properties. However, original graphene is a zero-bandgap Dirac semi-metal with high thermal conductance and small Seebeck coefficient, which makes it impracticable for thermoelectric devices.164 TMDs are semiconductor materials with stable crystal structure under general conditions, and have large values of ZT and thermoelectric power factor (PF); thus, they are widely expected in terms of the thermoelectric performance.143,165,166Fig. 37 displays the correlative thermoelectric parameters of four common TMD materials at different layer thicknesses as a function of the reduced Fermi level at room temperature, as well as the comparison of their maximum thermoelectric properties.167 It can be found that the number of layers has a great impact on the thermoelectric properties of the layered material, and the ultrathin layer structure of PF and ZT has a great improvement compared with the bulk structure. However, it does not mean that the thermoelectric properties of the materials with fewer layers are correspondingly better. The maximum ZT values of p-type MoS2 and WS2 correspond to 2L and 4L, respectively, while the maximum ZT values of n-type MoS2 and WS2 are both obtained at 3L. Moreover, the number of layers at the maximum ZT may not necessarily be the same as that at the maximum PF. For example, the maximum PF of p-type MoS2 is obtained at 1L, while the maximum ZT is obtained at 2L. This finding could be useful for improving the thermoelectric properties of TMD materials by varying the number of layers. Among the four TMD materials discussed, only MoS2 exhibits both n-type and p-type ZT greater than 1, which implies that MoS2 may be more valuable in thermoelectric applications. From the data, it can be found that the ZT values of the original TMD materials are not good enough to produce thermoelectric devices at a large scale. Therefore, the current problem focuses on how to improve the thermoelectric properties of TMD materials.
 Fig. 37  Seebeck coefficient at 300 K for (a) MoS2, (b) MoSe2, (c) WS2, and (d) WSe2 for 1L (blue), 2L (red), 3L (green), and 4L (purple), bulk (black) structures. The n-type Seebeck coefficients are plotted with a solid line and p-type coefficients with a broken line as a function of the reduced Fermi energy ηF. Panels (e–h) and panels (i–l) are the same as that of panels (a–d) but for PF and ZT, respectively. Maximum thermoelectric performance for 1L (blue), 2L (red), 3L (green), 4L (purple), and bulk (black) MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2 at 300 K: (m) Maximum p-type ZT, (n) Maximum n-type ZT, (o) Maximum p-type PF, (p) Maximum n-type PF. This figure has been adapted from ref. 167 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2014. 
Methods such as chemical doping,168 chemical functionalization,169 strain engineering,170 defect engineering,171–174 branching,175–177 and heterostructure formation178–180 have been reported to improve the thermoelectric properties of 2D materials. Heterostructures exhibit excellent thermoelectric properties due to the introduction of interfaces. Here, we focus on the improvement of the thermoelectric properties by the construction of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures.
Earlier, Yang et al. investigated that the thermoelectric performance of graphene/BN hybrid nanoribbons can be improved by reducing the electrical and thermal conductance and increasing the Seebeck coefficient.181 Consequently, the construction of heterostructures is regarded as an efficient means to reduce the lattice thermal conductance and build up thermoelectric properties. For TMD materials, Zhang et al. have theoretically predicted that WS2/MoS2 hybrid nanoribbons would show higher energy conversion efficiency and thus have better thermoelectric properties than pure WS2 and MoS2 nanoribbons, which is attributed to the fact that the WS2/MoS2 interface can lower the lattice thermal conductance more than electrical transmission.182 As plotted in Fig. 38a, the WS2/MoS2 hybrid nanostructure consists of two leads at the right and left and a central scattering region. The leads on both sides are semi-infinite WS2 and MoS2 nanoribbons. The central region is a finite periodic structure and each period contains a finite WS2 nanoribbon and a finite MoS2 nanoribbon, defining a total of N such periods. Fig. 38b shows the functional relationship between the chemical potential μ and ZT for different nanostructures at a temperature of 300 K. Calculating the hybrid structure with N = 1, it can be found that the maximum ZT values of the three nanoribbons are all at μ < 0 and the maximum ZT value of the WS2/MoS2 hybrid nanoribbon is approximately 1.5 times larger than that of pure WS2 and MoS2 nanoribbons. The maximum ZT of the WS2/MoS2 hybrid nanostructure can reach 2.3 at room temperature, which implies that this nanostructure may have excellent thermoelectric properties. In addition, Fig. 38c demonstrates that the maximum ZT of the hybrid structure is larger than that of the pure structure at any temperatures and the ZT value of the hybrid structure can even reach 3.5 at 600 K, which further shows that the hybridization greatly improves the thermoelectric efficiency.
 Fig. 38  (a) Atomic structures of zigzag-edge WS2/MoS2 hybrid nanoribbons. (b) ZT as a function of chemical potential for WS2/MoS2 (N = 1), MoS2, and WS2 nanoribbons, respectively, at T = 300 K. (c) The maximum ZT value as a function of temperature for WS2/MoS2 (N = 1), MoS2, and WS2 nanoribbons. This figure has been adapted from ref. 182 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
Moreover, researchers have investigated the thermoelectric properties of lateral TMD heterostructures under the framework of multiscale quantum transport and found that band alignment plays a significant role in enhancing the ZT and thermoelectric PF.183 The construction of heterostructures can boost the thermoelectric properties of materials, which has also been confirmed in conventional thermoelectric materials, such as Sb2Te3 and Bi2Te3.141,184 The monolayer lateral heterostructure based on WS2 and MoS2 materials is shown in Fig. 39a. For simplicity, the monolayer WS2 containing MoS2 is defined as WS2(MoS2) and the monolayer MoS2 containing WS2 is defined as MoS2(WS2). Fig. 39b shows the heterogeneous interface formed between monolayer WS2 and MoS2, which graphically illustrates that when the scattering centers exist, carrier transport with energy lower than −3.97 eV (MoS2) and higher than −5.89 eV (WS2) on the interface is only carried out through evanescent modes that occur in the bandgap and contribute to the scattered wave function decaying exponentially. Fig. 39c shows the relationship between the electron scattering rates (1/τe) and the energy for two different lateral heterostructures, where τe is the electron scattering time. It can be seen that MoS2(WS2) heterostructures have higher electron scattering rates than the WS2(MoS2) heterostructures, indicating that MoS2(WS2) requires less scattering time compared to WS2(MoS2). This is mainly because in the lateral MoS2(WS2) heterostructures, scattering occurs via the evanescent modes provided by the WS2 region, which will greatly reduce the scattering time. Fig. 39(d–g) and (h–k) show the functional relationships between the relevant parameters of the MoS2(WS2) and WS2(MoS2) heterostructures and ηF respectively, where ηF is the reduced Fermi level. It can be observed that σ and ke increase monotonously with ηF, and the σ of WS2(MoS2) is significantly enhanced compared with MoS2(WS2), while the Seebeck coefficients of the two heterostructures maintain the same order. From these parameters, the PF and ZT values can be easily calculated. The results show that the PF of WS2(MoS2) is significantly higher than that of MoS2(WS2), and these values increase slightly with the increase in the inclusion width. Also, it is optimal when the side length of the equilateral triangle inclusions is 8 nm. Prospectively, these studies help to improve the thermoelectric performance and develop thermoelectric devices for in-plane heterostructures.
 Fig. 39  (a) Schematic representation of triangular inclusion in 2D materials. Here, the M′X2 material is confined within the MX2 matrix. (b) The conduction and valence band near the K point for monolayer MoS2 and WS2. (c) The electron scattering rates versus energy for a K valley electron for transport in MoS2(WS2) and WS2(MoS2). (d–g) The conductance, Seebeck coefficient, power factor, and electrical-thermal conductance are plotted as a function of the reduced Fermi level ηF = (E − Ec)/kBT for monolayer lateral MoS2(WS2) heterostructures. Panels (h–k) are the same as that of panels (d–g) but for monolayer lateral WS2(MoS2) heterostructures. Here, triangular material inclusions with the side length of 4, 6, and 8 nm are considered. 


3.4.4. Improvement of the thermoelectric device. 
Excitingly, an efficient p–n junction thermoelectric generator (TEG) device has been successfully fabricated using large-area high-crystallinity WS2 and MoS2 films grown on separate substrates.185Fig. 40 shows the design schematic and manufacturing process diagrams. Compared with bulk materials, thin-layer materials have more positive temperature dependence. Therefore, the operating space of the films is wider and the larger temperature gradient is conducive for the development of efficient thermoelectric devices.186,187 As far as current thermoelectric devices are concerned, in which the metal electrode is connected with the hot side, it will cause mechanical stress and an inevitable drop in the substrate temperature, resulting in obvious shortcomings of TEG in practical applications.188 In addition, the design leads to a mismatch in the thermal expansion coefficient between the semiconductor–metal interface at high temperature, diffusion of atoms on the interface, chemical instability, and mechanically induced failure. The improvement is that the design of Fig. 40h is proposed on the basis of p–n junction TEG, in which the p-type MoS2 and n-type WS2 materials are directly connected at the hot end to form a p–n junction, while the electrical contacts are on the cold side. This design can well alleviate the above-mentioned problems and promote the generation of electron–hole pairs in the space charge regions, thereby improving the efficiency of thermoelectric devices. The experimental results show that the thermal conductance of MoS2 films under this design is very low, the Seebeck coefficient is 446.342 μV K−1, and the calculated ZT value at room temperature is as high as 1.98. This research will promote the progress of thermoelectric devices based on TMD materials and provide a reference for the development of thermoelectric devices in the future.
 Fig. 40  (a–g) Schematic for the step-by-step fabrication of the thermoelectric p–n junction device. (a) Successive arrangement of different shadow masks for various materials deposited during device design. (b) WS2 leg mask set up on the substrate prior to film deposition. (c) WS2 planar film considered as the n-leg after deposition. (d) Arrangement of the MoS2 mask for p-type planar leg onto the predisposed WS2 film. (e) Fabrication of MoS2 and WS2 film junction usually considered as the hot end. (f) Alignment of the mask for metal deposition to connect the other end of both the MoS2 and WS2 film. (g) P–n junction based planar thermoelectric device structure. (h) Schematic of p–n junction thermoelectric generator. This figure has been adapted from ref. 185 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. 

3.5. Photoelectrochemical (PEC) performance
Photoelectrochemistry is a cross-discipline of chemistry and physics that combines photochemistry and electrochemical methods to study the conversion rules and applications of light energy, electrical energy, and chemical energy. PEC analysis is booming as an emerging detection technology. As a burgeoning material based on light–matter interaction, 2D atomic-level thickness TMDs are being widely studied in photocatalysis and electrocatalysis systems. Since the first report on the utilization of TiO2 in photoelectrocatalytic water-splitting, multiple semiconductor materials have been excavated as catalysts to reduce the required overpotential in order to drive the entire reaction.189,190 Not long ago, the oxidation reaction catalyzed by WS2 and MoS2 was utilized to disinfect water and to remove the ammonium nitrogen in wastewater.191,192 Nowadays, more and more researchers are focusing on manufacturing electrochemical conversion devices driven by solar energy for efficient photoelectrocatalytic water-splitting, which have great potential for furnishing non-fossil fuels and contribute to dealing with the environmental problems caused by fossil fuel consumption. It has been demonstrated that ultrathin WS2 and MoS2 crystals can realize the oxidation of water to oxygen merely under light conditions. Solution-treated WS2 and MoS2 nanosheets exhibit oxygen evolution and a 0.45 mA cm−2 positive photocurrent density under simulated solar radiation. In addition, the efficiency of WS2 is significantly higher than that of MoS2 and compared with individual WS2 or MoS2 crystals, the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures can result in more than 10 times the PEC conversion efficiency.193 It has also been reported recently that CVD-grown large-area WS2/MoS2 heterostructures can be used as high-efficiency photoelectrocatalysts for salt-water oxidation reaction and the efficiency of water oxidation is higher than that of 2D TMDs prepared by liquid phase exfoliation. Reducing the impact of defects in the WS2/MoS2 heterostructures prepared by the CVD method and applying it to the photoelectrocatalytic oxidation reaction can achieve 1.7 mA cm−2 photocurrent density for salt-water oxidation driven by visible light and a PEC conversion efficiency of about 1.6%.194 Moreover, by degrading methylene blue, WS2/MoS2 heterostructures are verified to have excellent PEC performance.195 These aforementioned PEC applications based on WS2/MoS2 heterostructures are strongly associated with the future advancement of science and technology; thus, in-depth study of the PEC performance of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures is of great help for the development of efficient PEC devices.
The EC technology also has extensive applications in bioanalysis, especially in the detection of various biomolecules, such as myoglobin,196,197 5-hydroxymethylcytosine,198 acetylcholinesterase,199 microRNA,200,201 carcinoembryonic antigen,202 adenosine,203 and ATP.204 Excitingly, the PEC performance of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures has also been shown in the biochemistry field. 5-Formylcytosine (5fC) is regarded as a rare base involved in cell differentiation and gene regulation, and has a significant contribution to the development and growth of plants.205 Employing WS2/MoS2 nanosheet heterojunctions as photoactive materials, using SMCC and amino-functionalized Fe3O4 as linkers, adopting 4-amino-3-hydrazino-5-mercapto-1,2,4-triazole reagent to recognize 5fC, and applying black TiO2 as signal amplification units, an innovative PEC biosensor for detecting 5fC was constructed and the relevant schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 41.10 In the ideal experimental case, the low detection limit of this PEC biosensor is 2.7 pM (SNR = 3) and the linear range is wide from 0.01 to 200 nM.10 Because of the unique covalent reaction between –CHO and –NH2, this biosensor presents high detection sensitivity, and can even distinguish 5fC from 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and 5-methylcytosine. This WS2/MoS2 heterojunction biosensor as a photosensitive material shows great potential for 5fC in the detection of genomic DNA in crop tissues. Such a WS2/MoS2 heterojunction biosensor made as a photoactive material demonstrates the excellent PEC performance of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures and exhibits great potential in detecting the genomic DNA of cell tissues.
 Fig. 41  Schematic illustration of the construction process of the proposed PEC biosensor. This figure has been adapted from ref. 10 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. 
4. Conclusion and outlook
In the rapidly development of two-dimensional layered materials, the research on monolayer WS2, monolayer MoS2, and their heterogeneous structures are increasingly extensive and in-depth. Due to its high carrier mobility and other attractive physical properties, the studies of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures not only deepen the understanding of their electronic structure and microscopic property but also provide reference for other two-dimensional vdW materials and even establish a complete two-dimensional material research system. However, there are still several challenges such as the fabrication of high-quality two-dimensional heterostructures on a large scale and their reasonable application to practical production. More and more researches have focused on improving the CVD method for the preparation of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures, which is a significant advance but there seems to be a long way to go in unifying this method to facilitate the fabrication of heterostructures. Mechanic, electronic, optoelectronic, thermal, thermoelectric, and photoelectrochemical properties of WS2/MoS2 heterostructures have also been well developed. Therefore, there have been many research reports on photoelectric devices, field-effect transistors, infrared photodetectors, and biological detectors designed based on WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Fortunately, there is no denying that the research on WS2/MoS2 heterostructures and other two-dimensional materials is accelerating, and the application of such materials to practical production is within sight.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 91436102, 11374353), the NSFC-BRICS STI Framework Program (No. 51861145309), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
References
J. A. Wilson and A. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef .
Y. Kamihara, H. Hiramatsu, M. Hirano, R. Kawamura, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10012–10013 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang and A. F. Ismach, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. Liu, Y. Zhu, P. S. Goley and M. K. Hudait, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2512–2517 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hosomi, Y. Miyachi, T. Egawa and M. Miyoshi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57, 04FG12 CrossRef .
Z. Guo, Y. Wan, M. Yang, J. Snaider, K. Zhu and L. Huang, Science, 2017, 356, 59–62 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kuzmenko, I. Crassee, D. Van Der Marel, P. Blake and K. Novoselov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 165406 CrossRef .
T. Khodkov, I. Khrapach, M. F. Craciun and S. Russo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4429–4433 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xia, L. Dai, P. Yu, X. Tong, W. Song, G. Zhang and Z. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4324–4365 RSC .
F. Li, S. Wang, H. Yin, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Huang and S. Ai, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 1092–1101 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Tahir, H. Chen and J. B. Sambur, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 9084–9094 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Pak, Y.-W. Lee, Y. Park, A.-R. Jang, J. Hong, Y. Cho, B. Hou, S. Lee and H. Y. Jeong, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13047–13055 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Kong, M. C. Sekhar, J. Lin, F. Le Goualher, R. Xu, X. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou and C. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10929–10938 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ataca, H. Sahin and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8983–8999 CrossRef .
T. Mueller and E. Malic, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 1–12 CrossRef .
S. Das, J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 1–27 CrossRef .

          T. J. Wieting and M. Schlüter, Electrons and phonons in layered crystal structures, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
F. Wypych and R. Schöllhorn, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1992, 1386–1388 RSC .
S. J. Sandoval, D. Yang, R. Frindt and J. Irwin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 3955 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kośmider and J. Fernández-Rossier, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 075451 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hsu, R. Frisenda, R. Schmidt, A. Arora, S. M. de Vasconcellos, R. Bratschitsch, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900239 CrossRef .
L. Fang, D.-M. Liu, Y. Guo, Z.-M. Liao, J.-B. Luo and S.-Z. Wen, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 245703 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Gan, H. Lang, K. Yu, S. Ding, Y. Peng and W. Yi, Tribol. Int., 2019, 134, 308–316 CrossRef .
G.-J. Lai, L.-M. Lyu, Y.-S. Huang, G.-C. Lee, M.-P. Lu, T.-P. Perng, M.-Y. Lu and L.-J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105608 CrossRef .
J. R. Dunklin, H. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Liu and J. van de Lagemaat, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2223–2229 CrossRef .
L. Li, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2466–2473 CrossRef .
L. Debbichi, O. Eriksson and S. Lebègue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 205311 CrossRef .
M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 5390 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rohlfing and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 4927 CrossRef .
D. Y. Qiu, H. Felipe and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 216805 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gao, L. Yang and C. D. Spataru, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7809–7813 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, K. T. Rim, G. W. Flynn and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4831–4837 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yelgel, Ö. Yelgel and O. Gülseren, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 065303 CrossRef .
H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J. S. Kang, H. A. Bechtel, S. B. Desai, F. Kronast and A. A. Unal, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6198–6202 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim and K. L. Shepard, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kang, K.-H. Lee, Y. Han, H. Gao, S. Xie, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2017, 550, 229–233 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Backes, T. M. Higgins, A. Kelly, C. Boland, A. Harvey, D. Hanlon and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 243–255 CrossRef .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De and R. J. Smith, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Deilmann, M. Rohlfing and U. Wurstbauer, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2020, 32, 333002 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 6139 CrossRef .
A. Bayat and E. Saievar-Iranizad, J. Lumin., 2017, 185, 236–240 CrossRef .
M. Mojaddami and A. Simchi, Renewable Energy, 2020, 162, 504–512 CrossRef .
M. A. Meitl, Z.-T. Zhu, V. Kumar, K. J. Lee, X. Feng, Y. Y. Huang, I. Adesida, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 33–38 CrossRef .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V. Singh, L. Janssen, H. S. Van Der Zant and G. A. Steele, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
C. Lee, H. Yan, L. E. Brus, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and S. Ryu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2695–2700 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, L. Chu, M. Toh, C. Kloc, P.-H. Tan and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 791–797 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tongay, W. Fan, J. Kang, J. Park, U. Koldemir, J. Suh, D. S. Narang, K. Liu, J. Ji and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3185–3190 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Guddala, R. Bushati, M. Li, A. Khanikaev and V. Menon, Opt. Mater. Express, 2019, 9, 536–543 CrossRef .
H. M. Gramling, C. M. Towle, S. B. Desai, H. Sun, E. C. Lewis, V. D. Nguyen, J. W. Ager, D. Chrzan, E. M. Yeatman and A. Javey, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 407–416 CrossRef .
M. Heyl, D. Burmeister, T. Schultz, S. Pallasch, G. Ligorio, N. Koch and E. J. List-Kratochvil, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2020, 14, 2000408 CrossRef .
S. B. Desai, S. R. Madhvapathy, M. Amani, D. Kiriya, M. Hettick, M. Tosun, Y. Zhou, M. Dubey, J. W. Ager III and D. Chrzan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4053–4058 CrossRef PubMed .
M. j. Velický, G. E. Donnelly, W. R. Hendren, S. McFarland, D. Scullion, W. J. DeBenedetti, G. C. Correa, Y. Han, A. J. Wain and M. A. Hines, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10463–10472 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Jain, P. Bharadwaj, S. Heeg, M. Parzefall, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and L. Novotny, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 265203 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai and B. I. Yakobson, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, X. Xiao, R. Zhao, D. Lv, G. Xu, Z. Lu, L. Sun, S. Lin, X. Gao and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8957–8960 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yoo, Z. P. Degregorio and J. E. Johns, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14281–14287 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Wen, J. Zhang, T. Wu, Y. Gong, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, C. Yi, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
F. Chen, Y. Wang, W. Su, S. Ding and L. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 30519–30527 CrossRef .
Z. Tu, G. Li, X. Ni, L. Meng, S. Bai, X. Chen, J. Lou and Y. Qin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 223101 CrossRef .
A. G. Rajan, J. H. Warner, D. Blankschtein and M. S. Strano, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4330–4344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Vishwanath, X. Liu, S. Rouvimov, P. C. Mende, A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, R. M. Wallace, R. M. Feenstra, J. K. Furdyna and D. Jena, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 024007 CrossRef .
O. W. Kennedy, M. Zapf, J.-N. Audinot, S. Pal, S. Eswara, T. Wirtz, C. Ronning and P. A. Warburton, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 135604 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Droopad, Z. Yu, H. Li, Y. Liang, C. Overgaard, A. Demkov, X. Zhang, K. Moore, K. Eisenbeiser and M. Hu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 251, 638–644 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, A. McCreary, N. Briggs, S. Subramanian, K. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. Li, N. J. Borys, H. Yuan and S. K. Fullerton-Shirey, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 042001 CrossRef .
E. Guo and L. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13390–13401 RSC .
Z. Zheng, W. Xie, Z. S. Lim, L. You and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5721 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Jiang and H. S. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 033108 CrossRef .
S. Mahale, M. Kumar, A. Sharma, A. Babu, S. Ranjan, C. Sachidanandan and S. V. Mylavarapu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Lloyd, X. Liu, J. W. Christopher, L. Cantley, A. Wadehra, B. L. Kim, B. B. Goldberg, A. K. Swan and J. S. Bunch, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5836–5841 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Pak, J. Lee, Y.-W. Lee, A.-R. Jang, S. Ahn, K. Y. Ma, Y. Cho, J. Hong, S. Lee and H. Y. Jeong, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5634–5640 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9703–9709 CrossRef .
N. Lu, H. Guo, L. Li, J. Dai, L. Wang, W.-N. Mei, X. Wu and X. C. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2879–2886 RSC .
X. Gao, Y. Fu, D. Jiang, D. Wang, S. Xu, W. Liu, L. Weng, J. Yang, J. Sun and M. Hu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2018, 353, 8–17 CrossRef .
Z. Li-Na, W. Cheng-biao, W. Hai-dou, X. Bin-shi, Z. Da-ming, L. Jia-jun and L. Guo-lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 1944–1948 CrossRef .
S. Susarla, V. Kochat, A. Kutana, J. A. Hachtel, J. C. Idrobo, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7431–7439 CrossRef .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Hou, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600671 CrossRef .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. He, Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, H. Li, S. Wu, X. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 2994–2999 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Pu, Y. Yomogida, K.-K. Liu, L.-J. Li, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4013–4017 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Chang, S. Yang, J. Lee, L. Tao, W.-S. Hwang, D. Jena, N. Lu and D. Akinwande, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5446–5452 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Salvatore, N. Münzenrieder, C. Barraud, L. Petti, C. Zysset, L. Büthe, K. Ensslin and G. Tröster, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8809–8815 CrossRef .
K. Liu, Q. Yan, M. Chen, W. Fan, Y. Sun, J. Suh, D. Fu, S. Lee, J. Zhou and S. Tongay, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5097–5103 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Susarla, P. Manimunda, Y. M. Jaques, J. A. Hachtel, J. C. Idrobo, S. A. Syed Amnulla, D. S. Galvão, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4036–4044 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Rice, R. Young, R. Zan, U. Bangert, D. Wolverson, T. Georgiou, R. Jalil and K. Novoselov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 081307 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, Q. Zheng and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 586–590 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rashidi, S. Rashidi, R. K. Heydari, S. Esmaeili, N. Tran, D. Thangi and W. Wei, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2021, 29, 238–261 Search PubMed .
A. Pandey, V. Tyagi, A. Jeyraj, L. Selvaraj, N. Rahim and S. Tyagi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 53, 859–884 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta, E. D. Dunlop, D. H. Levi and A. W. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2017, 25, 3–13 Search PubMed .
W. Wei, D. Stacchiola, N. Akter, J. A. Boscoboinik and Y. H. Hu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1445–1451 CrossRef .
W. Wei, H. Wang and Y. H. Hu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2014, 38, 1099–1111 CrossRef .
M. S. Ahmad, A. K. Pandey and N. A. Rahim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 77, 89–108 CrossRef .
F. Chen, J. Wang, B. Li, C. Yao, H. Bao and Y. Shi, Mater. Lett., 2014, 136, 191–194 CrossRef .
J. Qian, Z. Peng, P. Wang and X. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16876–16884 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, S. Yan, L. Pan, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Shi, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 857–865 CrossRef .
S. Liu, B. Shen, Y. Niu and M. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 488, 20–25 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Wang, J. Li, L. Cao, Z. Xu and H. Wei, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 673, 60–66 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, S. Yan, Z. Lin and Y. Shi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 171, 16–21 CrossRef .
T. Stephenson, Z. Li, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 209–231 RSC .
M. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, N. Yu, L. Wang, L. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19298–19301 RSC .
L. Keawphaisan, V. Harnchana, S. Pimanpang and V. Amornkitburung, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 18765–18772 CrossRef .
J. Wu, G. Yue, Y. Xiao, M. Huang, J. Lin, L. Fan, Z. Lan and J.-Y. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6530–6536 CrossRef .
G. Yue, J. Wu, J.-Y. Lin, Y. Xiao, S.-Y. Tai, J. Lin, M. Huang and Z. Lan, Carbon, 2013, 55, 1–9 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Tai, C.-J. Liu, S.-W. Chou, F. S.-S. Chien, J.-Y. Lin and T.-W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24753–24759 RSC .
W. Liu, M. Liu, B. Liu, R. Quhe, M. Lei, S. Fang, H. Teng and Z. Wei, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 6689–6699 CrossRef .
S. Tan, J. Dong, Y. Zhao and G. Ouyang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3930–3938 CrossRef .
D. Wang, L.-M. Liu, S.-J. Zhao, Z.-Y. Hu and H. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4779–4788 CrossRef .
B. Peng, P. K. Ang and K. P. Loh, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 128–137 CrossRef .
G. Cao, A. Shang, C. Zhang, Y. Gong, S. Li, Q. Bao and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 260–266 CrossRef .
J. Wong, D. Jariwala, G. Tagliabue, K. Tat, A. R. Davoyan, M. C. Sherrott and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7230–7240 CrossRef .
C. Lu, J. Ma, K. Si, X. Xu, C. Quan, C. He and X. Xu, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900544 CrossRef .
A. E. Schlather, N. Large, A. S. Urban, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3281–3286 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Canneson, I. Mallek-Zouari, S. Buil, X. Quélin, C. Javaux, B. Mahler, B. Dubertret and J.-P. Hermier, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 245423 CrossRef .
T. Hümmer, F. García-Vidal, L. Martín-Moreno and D. Zueco, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 115419 CrossRef .
E. M. Purcell, H. C. Torrey and R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev., 1946, 69, 37 CrossRef .
X. Mu and M. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 117, 091601 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Liu, W.-H. Fang, R. Long, M. V. Tokina and O. V. Prezhdo, Chem, 2018, 4, 1112–1127 Search PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–17 Search PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
F. Ceballos, M.-G. Ju, S. D. Lane, X. C. Zeng and H. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1623–1628 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ji, H. Hong, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, T. Cao, R. Qiao, C. Liu, J. Liang and C. Jin, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12020–12026 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jin, E. Y. Ma, O. Karni, E. C. Regan, F. Wang and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 994–1003 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Lee, G.-H. Lee, A. M. Van Der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, F. Höller, L. Dobusch, D. K. Polyushkin, S. Schuler and T. Mueller, NPJ 2D Mater. Appl., 2018, 2, 1–7 CrossRef .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdörfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef PubMed .
B. W. Baugher, H. O. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262–267 CrossRef .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dong, Y. Gu, Y. Zou, J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, X. Li and H. Zeng, Small, 2016, 12, 5622–5632 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Li, W. Fan, R. Wang, S. Zhou, J. T. Lü, L. Gan and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800339 CrossRef .
D. M. Sim, M. Kim, S. Yim, M.-J. Choi, J. Choi, S. Yoo and Y. S. Jung, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12115–12123 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, P. Luo, W. Zeng, H. Lai, W. Xie, W. Deng and Z. Luo, Opt. Mater., 2020, 108, 110191 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Cheng, K. Xu, H. K. Tsang and J.-B. Xu, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 888–891 CrossRef .
Y. Xue, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Song, J. Sophia, J. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Xu and Z. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 573–580 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sundarraj, D. Maity, S. S. Roy and R. A. Taylor, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46860–46874 RSC .
W. Liu, X. Yan, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 42–56 CrossRef .
R. Venkatasubramanian, E. Siivola, T. Colpitts and B. O'quinn, Nature, 2001, 413, 597–602 CrossRef .
C. Lee, J. Hong, M.-H. Whangbo and J. H. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3745–3752 CrossRef .
D. Fan, H. Liu, L. Cheng, P. Jiang, J. Shi and X. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 133113 CrossRef .
W. Huang, H. Da and G. Liang, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 104304 CrossRef .
J. Deng, W. Yuan, P. Ren, Y. Wang, D. Deng, Z. Zhang and X. Bao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 34733–34738 RSC .
J. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ren, L. Guan, G. Chen, S. Chen, J. Tao and H. Chen, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2017, 254, 1700219 CrossRef .
F. Chen, L. Wang, X. Ji and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30821–30831 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, Y. Bao, Z. Li, Y. Gong, R. Feng, Y. Xiao, X. Wu, Z. Zhang, X. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 16–21 CrossRef .
A. Taube, J. Judek, C. Jastrzębski, A. Duzynska, K. Świtkowski and M. Zdrojek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8959–8963 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Makino, C. Chia, N. T. Tuan, Y. Segawa, M. Kawasaki, A. Ohtomo, K. Tamura and H. Koinuma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1632–1634 CrossRef .
L. Höglund, D. Ting, A. Khoshakhlagh, A. Soibel, C. Hill, A. Fisher, S. Keo and S. Gunapala, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 221908 CrossRef .
O. Salehzadeh, N. Tran, X. Liu, I. Shih and Z. Mi, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4125–4130 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7684–7698 RSC .
P. Pichanusakorn and P. Bandaru, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 67, 19–63 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Mater. Res., 2016, 31, 3179 CrossRef .
T. Takabatake, K. Suekuni, T. Nakayama and E. Kaneshita, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2014, 86, 841 CrossRef .

          Z. Gang, Nanoscale Energy Transport and Harvesting: A Computational Study, CRC Press,  2015 Search PubMed .
G. Xie, Y. Guo, B. Li, L. Yang, K. Zhang, M. Tang and G. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14647–14652 RSC .
G. Xie, D. Ding and G. Zhang, Adv. Phys.: X, 2018, 3, 1480417 Search PubMed .
A. Moure, M. Rull-Bravo, B. Abad, A. Del Campo, M. M. Rojo, M. Aguirre, A. Jacquot, J. Fernandez and M. Martin-Gonzalez, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 393–402 CrossRef .
J. H. Seol, I. Jo, A. L. Moore, L. Lindsay, Z. H. Aitken, M. T. Pettes, X. Li, Z. Yao, R. Huang and D. Broido, Science, 2010, 328, 213–216 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Babaei, J. Khodadadi and S. Sinha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 193901 CrossRef .
Z. Jin, Q. Liao, H. Fang, Z. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Ding, T. Luo and N. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. Wickramaratne, F. Zahid and R. K. Lake, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 124710 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Yang, G. Zhang and B. Li, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 276–280 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-K. Chien, Y.-T. Yang and C. o.-K. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 033107 CrossRef .
C. Yu, G. Zhang, Y.-W. Zhang and L.-M. Peng, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 104–110 CrossRef .
J.-W. Jiang, B.-S. Wang and J.-S. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113114 CrossRef .
Z. Ding, Q.-X. Pei, J.-W. Jiang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16358–16365 CrossRef .
W. Xu and G. Zhang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 175401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Krasavin and V. Osipov, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 425302 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xiong, K. Sääskilahti, Y. A. Kosevich, H. Han, D. Donadio and S. Volz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 025503 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-K. Chen, J. Liu, Z.-X. Xie, Y. Zhang, Y.-X. Deng and K.-Q. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 121906 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Liu, Y.-J. Zeng, P.-Z. Jia, X.-H. Cao, X. Jiang and K.-Q. Chen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2018, 30, 275701 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, J.-H. Bahk, T. Day, A. M. Mohammed, G. J. Snyder, A. Shakouri and Y. Wu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1349–1355 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, Q. Liu and B. Xu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5431–5439 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-K. Chen, J. Liu, Z.-H. Peng, D. Du and K.-Q. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 091907 CrossRef .
K. Yang, Y. Chen, R. D'Agosta, Y. Xie, J. Zhong and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 045425 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Y. Xie, Q. Peng and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21639 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Bharadwaj, A. Ramasubramaniam and L. Ram-Mohan,  2020, arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02056.
Y. Zhang and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 837–848 CrossRef .
G. Kogo, B. Xiao, S. Danquah, H. Lee, J. Niyogushima, K. Yarbrough, A. Candadai, A. Marconnet, S. K. Pradhan and M. Bahoura, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Chen, M. Y. Tang, R. Yang, H. Lee, D. Wang, Z. Ren, J. P. Fleurial and P. Gogna, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1043–1053 CrossRef .
M. Mizoshiri, M. Mikami and K. Ozaki, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2013, 23, 115016 CrossRef .
A. Becker, R. Chavez, N. Petermann, G. Schierning and R. Schmechel, J. Electron. Mater., 2013, 42, 2297–2300 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Boddy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1968, 115, 199 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Y. Zhou, G. Zhang, T. Liu and W. Dong, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 396–406 CrossRef .
C. Liu, D. Kong, P.-C. Hsu, H. Yuan, H.-W. Lee, Y. Liu, H. Wang, S. Wang, K. Yan and D. Lin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1098–1104 CrossRef PubMed .
F. M. Pesci, M. S. Sokolikova, C. Grotta, P. C. Sherrell, F. Reale, K. Sharda, N. Ni, P. Palczynski and C. Mattevi, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4990–4998 CrossRef .
P. C. Sherrell, P. Palczynski, M. S. Sokolikova, F. Reale, F. M. Pesci, M. Och and C. Mattevi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5877–5882 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, X. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Li and H. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 27363–27368 CrossRef .
J.-T. Cao, B. Wang, Y.-X. Dong, Q. Wang, S.-W. Ren, Y.-M. Liu and W.-W. Zhao, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1087–1092 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, L.-P. Mei, Y. Ma, Y.-T. Xu, S.-W. Ren, J.-T. Cao, Y.-M. Liu and W.-W. Zhao, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 12347–12351 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sui, F. Li, H. Wu, H. Yin, S. Zhang, G. I. Waterhouse, J. Wang, L. Zhu and S. Ai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 142, 111516 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hou, L. Zhang, X. Sun and F. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 75, 359–364 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Wang, W. Jiang and S. Ai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 95, 124–130 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hou, N. Xu, W. Wang, L. Ge and F. Li, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9591–9597 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Lin, B. Qiu and L. Guo, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5966–5972 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Tan, X. Gao, G. Jie and T. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 110, 239–245 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-J. Li, Y.-N. Zheng, W.-B. Liang, R. Yuan and Y.-Q. Chai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42111–42120 CrossRef PubMed .
E.-A. Raiber, G. Portella, S. M. Cuesta, R. Hardisty, P. Murat, Z. Li, M. Iurlaro, W. Dean, J. Spindel and D. Beraldi, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1258–1266 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  History of TMD exciton optics and optoelectronics (incomplete). This figure has been adapted from ref. 15 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Trigonal prismatic polyhedron present in the hexagonal phases of TMDs. (b) Trigonal prismatic triangular island of WS2 (top and side views). (c) Octahedral polyhedron present in the octahedral 1T phases of TMDs. (d) Distorted octahedral phase in WS2 (top and side views). This figure has been adapted from ref. 16 with permission from Annual Reviews, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 3  Band structures of (a) MoS2 monolayer, (b) WS2 monolayer, (d) MoS2 bilayer, and (e) WS2 bilayer. (c) Scheme of the Brillouin zone with the line along which the band structures are calculated. Evac stands for vacuum energy. The Fermi energy lies at the intersection of the white and yellow regions. This figure has been adapted from ref. 21 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 4  Band structure of (a) WS2/MoS2, (b) WSe2/MoSe2, and (c) WTe2/MoTe2 heterostructures. Black lines and red dots represent GGA and G0W0 calculation with SOC, respectively. The Fermi level is put to zero and the bandgap is indicated by an arrow. The vertical lines indicate the positions of high-symmetry points. GGA, gradient approximation. This figure has been adapted from ref. 29 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) DFT band structure of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure without SOC, with the color indicating the projection of the wave function onto each layer. (b) Schematic plot showing an external electric field applied to the heterostructure. (c) The energy of the top two valence bands and bottom two conduction bands at K point as a function of the external electric field, without SOC. This figure has been adapted from ref. 33 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 6  Experimental band alignment in the heterostructures is schematically depicted with the bandgap values measured in the heterostructure region in panel (a). A table of various important values for MoS2 and WS2 is presented in panel (b) such as the measured monolayer band gaps in the two different stacking orientations, the work function, effective mass, and K-point parallel momentum. The Eg1 and Eg2 notations represent the systems where MoS2 and WS2 are the top layer. This figure has been adapted from ref. 34 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  TDOS for WS2/MoS2 and PDOS for WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. The Fermi level is at zero energy. This figure has been adapted from ref. 35 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic description of the main liquid exfoliation mechanisms. (a) Ion intercalation. (b) Ion exchange. (c) Sonication-assisted exfoliation. Nota bene, solvent molecules are not shown in this figure. This figure has been adapted from ref. 42 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  Basic spectroscopic characterization. (a–d) UV-vis spectroscopy. (a) Optical extinction coefficient spectra of aqueous surfactant dispersions of size-selected WS2, showing systematic changes with the nanosheet size. (b) Second derivatives of the A-exciton plotted versus the energy for WS2 after smoothing the second derivative with adjacent averaging. (c) Plot of the peak intensity ratio at the high energy maximum/local minimum as a function of mean nanosheet length (L). (d) Plot of A-exciton peak energies (from the second derivatives) plotted as a function of layer number (N) for MoS2 and WS2. (e–h) Raman/PL measurements in high concentration dispersions. (g) Normalized Raman/PL spectra (excitation 532 nm) of size-selected WS2, showing the systematic changes in the nanosheet size and monolayer (ML) content. (h) PL/Raman intensity plotted as a function of monolayer volume fraction. This figure has been adapted from ref. 39 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of generic process flow for transfer printing solid objects. This figure has been adapted from ref. 45 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2005. (b) Diagram of annotating the transfer process. (c) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup employed for the dry transfer process. This figure has been adapted from ref. 46 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Optical image taken from the monolayer WS2/MoS2 heterostructure prepared by PDMS stamping WS2 onto CVD-grown MoS2 monolayer. (b and c) Raman mapping at the A′1 mode, 408 cm−1 (MoS2) and 421 cm−1 (WS2), and (d–e) PL mapping at 1.85 (MoS2) and 2.01 eV (WS2). (f) Raman and (g) PL spectra of MoS2 and WS2 monolayers and an as-transferred WS2/MoS2 heterostructure. The laser excitation used to obtain the three PL spectra having an intensity ratio of 1:5:2. Scale bar is 10 μm in all the figures. This figure has been adapted from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 12  Process of producing patterned monolayers. The process of patterning and transferring van der Waals monolayers uses standard photolithography techniques. It relies on the use of a thick handle layer (here, photoresist, step 2) to pattern the gold and the underlying layered bulk material as well as to offset the adhesive transfer medium from the bulk, thus permitting the transfer of only the patterned regions. This figure has been adapted from ref. 51 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthetic steps for 2D WS2-based vertical heterostructures. (b) Schematic of the synthetic equipment employed during the CVD procedure. This figure has been adapted from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 14  Digital photograph and schematic of the deposition substrate after the CVD process (a and b). OM images of the as-produced sample located at (c and d) region A, (e and f) region B, (g and h) region C, and (i and j) region D. (k) Corresponding atomic structures of the diverse vertical heterostructures. This figure has been adapted from ref. 60 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of MBE based on TMD materials showing the general source of delivery and the substrate heating configuration.	 

 	Fig. 16  Comparison of elastic properties of different 2D layers. (a) Experimental data of 2D modulus and pretension for various 2D layers and heterostructures. (b) Interaction coefficients for different types of bilayers. (c) Comparison of Young's modulus of 2D monolayers with multilayers and bulk in the literature. This figure has been adapted from ref. 85 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Optical micrographs of the vertical heterostructure and schematic representation of the experimental setup. (b) In situ Raman spectra recorded from the MoS2 sheet (region A) at different strains. (c) In situ Raman spectra recorded from vertical heterostructure region (WS2 sheet, marked as B). (d) Variation in the MoS2 A′1 and E′ spectral position with strain (at region A). (e) MoS2 A′1 and E′ band position changes recorded at region B. (f) Changes in WS2 A′1 spectral position with strain. (g) Screenshots recorded from MD simulations, showing stacking changes with increasing strain. (h) Calculated stress vs. strain and the interlayer spacing variation as a function of strain. At 1.75% strain, AB to SP stacking change was observed. (i and j) Schematic representation of the interlayer spacing and Raman active modes. This figure has been adapted from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SPM micrograph of the heterostructure, showing local rippling on the WS2 scratched region, indicating plastic deformation. (b) Lateral force corresponding to 100 μN nano-scratch along the x and y directions. (c) Friction force recorded at higher normal loads (300 μN). (d) Schematic representation of layer sliding along the two directions. (e) Time evolution plot showing the variation of force per atom to slide the WS2 layer in two different directions. (f) Snapshots recorded from MD simulation showing changes in the corrugation path along the x and y directions. Direction y has a lower corrugation path, providing an easier route for sliding. Inset: Sulfur atoms considered for representation in the WS2/MoS2 interface. This figure has been adapted from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) SPM micrograph of the high-load nanoscratch (300 μN) on the heterostructure. (b) Line profile recorded from the scratched region. (c and d) Raman maps showing the variation in the WS2 E′ and A′ band intensity for the deformed sample. (e) Raman spectra recorded at three spots across the scratch, showing variation in the in-plane and out-of-plane vibration modes. (f) Simulated Von Mises stress distribution on the deformed WS2 layer. The zoomed-in image shows the rearrangement of the layers at the scratch edge. This figure has been adapted from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic diagrams of h- and e-transfer processes at the WS2/MoS2 interface. (b) Band structures of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure under 0, 2, and 4% strain calculated by DFT. The color map indicates the orbital localization (red on WS2 and blue on MoS2). The energy reference in (b) is set to be the VBM under 0% strain. This figure has been adapted from ref. 89 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 21  Efficiency chart of different types of solar cells. This figure has been adapted from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic diagram of the dye-sensitized solar cell. (b) DSSC scheme. This figure has been adapted from ref. 90 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. (c) Schematic diagram of the DSSC with the WS2/MWCNT counter electrode. This figure has been adapted from ref. 105 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (d) Schematic of the electrocatalytic mechanism of the MoS2 and MWCNT counter electrode. This figure has been adapted from ref. 107 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Electronic energy levels involved in the photoinduced charge transfer and non-radiative charge recombination at the WS2/MoS2 interface. This figure has been adapted from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) The charge transfer isosurface map of the WS2/MoS2 heterostructure. The green and yellow areas represent charge depletion and accumulation, respectively. This figure has been adapted from ref. 114 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 24  The color map of the first Brillouin zone electron and hole effective mass of vdWs (a and b) and lateral (c and d) heterostructures. The anisotropy dielectric function (e) and absorption spectrum (f) of the vdW heterostructures of WS2/MoS2. The anisotropy dielectric function (g) and absorption spectrum (h) of lateral heterostructures that are constituted by WS2/MoS2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 119 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 25  Transmission spectra of the coupling between different size Ag discs and vdW heterostructures (a) and lateral heterostructures (b). (c) Relative relationship of the transmission spectra in different material configurations. This figure has been adapted from ref. 119 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 26  EQE diagrams of monolayer heterostructures under 532 nm excitation. (a) EQE distributions and (b) average EQE values of the ITO/MoS2/WS2 electrodes. (c) EQE distributions and (d) average EQE values of the ITO/WS2/MoS2 electrodes. This figure has been adapted from ref. 11 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 27  Charge carrier transport and recombination pathways under both 532 nm and 635 nm illumination conditions. (a) Optical transmission image of the ITO/MoS2/WS2 sample. Photocurrent maps under (b) 532 nm laser excitation and (c) 635 nm laser excitation. (d) EQE versus the distance line profile measured from the yellow lines in panels b and c. Schematic energy level diagram and proposed charge recombination and transport pathways in the heterojunction region under (e) 532 nm and (f) 635 nm illumination condition. Panels (g–l) are the same as that of panels (a–f) but for ITO/WS2/MoS2. This figure has been adapted from ref. 11 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Comparison of Raman spectra of heterojunction area before and after Au pattern covering, left and right insets are WS2 and MoS2 Raman spectra, respectively. (b) PL spectra of the heterostructures before and after Au pattern covering. (c) Schematic of the photodetector fabricated on the heterostructures. (d) On/off cycle stability test under 1030 nm light. This figure has been adapted from ref. 134 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of the photodetector based on WS2/Au NPs/MoS2 vertical heterostructures. (b) Band diagram and (c) depletion region distribution for WS2/Au NPs/MoS2. Panels (d–f) are the same as that of the panels (a–c) but for WS2/MoS2 vertical heterostructures. This figure has been adapted from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 30  Photoelectric properties of devices. (a) Power density dependent-photocurrent and the corresponding (b) responsivity, (c) EQE, and (d) on/off ratio upon 405 nm, 520 nm, and 660 nm illumination. Source–drain voltage: 0.1 V. This figure has been adapted from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device arrays on the Si/SiO2 substrate. (b) Schematic of a WS2/MoS2 heterojunction phototransistor. (c) Current–voltage characteristics of a transistor based on the vertical WS2/MoS2 heterojunction, measured without illumination. The inset in (c) shows the band alignment for few-layer WS2 and MoS2 flakes. (d) Time-dependent photocurrent of the vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures with different incident power on the Si/SiO2 substrate. (e) Dependence of photocurrent and photoresponsivity on incident light power; the green and black dots correspond to the original data. (f) Time dependence of the photocurrent based on the vertical WS2/MoS2 heterostructures during laser switching on/off under the positive source–drain voltage from 1 to 4 V. (g) Photo image of the WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device arrays on the PDMS substrate. (h) Optical microscope image of the single WS2/MoS2 heterojunction device on the PDMS substrate. (i) Time-dependent photocurrent of the WS2/MoS2 heterojunction with different incident power on the PMDS substrate. This figure has been adapted from ref. 138 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 
ZT = σTS2/(ke + kp)	(2)

 	Fig. 32  Schematic diagram of the growth mechanism of 2D TMD heterostructures obtained under various growth temperatures: (a) 750 °C, (b) 780 °C, (c) 810 °C, (d) 840 °C, (e) 870 °C, and (f) 900 °C. This figure has been adapted from ref. 150 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Raman spectra of the vertically stacked WS2/MoS2 heterostructures at different temperatures ranging from 300 to 643 K. (b) Raman frequencies as a function of temperature for the E12g and A1g modes of WS2 and MoS2, respectively. (c) Measured values of FWHM as a function of temperature for the four Raman modes. This figure has been adapted from ref. 151 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 
I(T) = A/[1 + Cexp(−E/kBT)].	(3)

 	Fig. 34  (a) The PL spectra of the vertically-stacked WS2/MoS2 heterostructures at various temperatures. Temperature dependence of (b) integrated PL intensity and (c) peak position of the vertically-stacked WS2/MoS2 heterostructures. Symbols represent the experimental data. This figure has been adapted from ref. 151 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic illustration of the thermoelectric effect. (a) Thermoelectric generator (Seebeck effect). (b) Thermoelectric cooler (Peltier effect). This figure has been adapted from ref. 156 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of phonon scattering processes including phonon–phonon scattering, phonon–electron scattering, and phonon-boundary scattering. This figure has been adapted from ref. 161 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 37  Seebeck coefficient at 300 K for (a) MoS2, (b) MoSe2, (c) WS2, and (d) WSe2 for 1L (blue), 2L (red), 3L (green), and 4L (purple), bulk (black) structures. The n-type Seebeck coefficients are plotted with a solid line and p-type coefficients with a broken line as a function of the reduced Fermi energy ηF. Panels (e–h) and panels (i–l) are the same as that of panels (a–d) but for PF and ZT, respectively. Maximum thermoelectric performance for 1L (blue), 2L (red), 3L (green), 4L (purple), and bulk (black) MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, WSe2 at 300 K: (m) Maximum p-type ZT, (n) Maximum n-type ZT, (o) Maximum p-type PF, (p) Maximum n-type PF. This figure has been adapted from ref. 167 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Atomic structures of zigzag-edge WS2/MoS2 hybrid nanoribbons. (b) ZT as a function of chemical potential for WS2/MoS2 (N = 1), MoS2, and WS2 nanoribbons, respectively, at T = 300 K. (c) The maximum ZT value as a function of temperature for WS2/MoS2 (N = 1), MoS2, and WS2 nanoribbons. This figure has been adapted from ref. 182 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Schematic representation of triangular inclusion in 2D materials. Here, the M′X2 material is confined within the MX2 matrix. (b) The conduction and valence band near the K point for monolayer MoS2 and WS2. (c) The electron scattering rates versus energy for a K valley electron for transport in MoS2(WS2) and WS2(MoS2). (d–g) The conductance, Seebeck coefficient, power factor, and electrical-thermal conductance are plotted as a function of the reduced Fermi level ηF = (E − Ec)/kBT for monolayer lateral MoS2(WS2) heterostructures. Panels (h–k) are the same as that of panels (d–g) but for monolayer lateral WS2(MoS2) heterostructures. Here, triangular material inclusions with the side length of 4, 6, and 8 nm are considered.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a–g) Schematic for the step-by-step fabrication of the thermoelectric p–n junction device. (a) Successive arrangement of different shadow masks for various materials deposited during device design. (b) WS2 leg mask set up on the substrate prior to film deposition. (c) WS2 planar film considered as the n-leg after deposition. (d) Arrangement of the MoS2 mask for p-type planar leg onto the predisposed WS2 film. (e) Fabrication of MoS2 and WS2 film junction usually considered as the hot end. (f) Alignment of the mask for metal deposition to connect the other end of both the MoS2 and WS2 film. (g) P–n junction based planar thermoelectric device structure. (h) Schematic of p–n junction thermoelectric generator. This figure has been adapted from ref. 185 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 41  Schematic illustration of the construction process of the proposed PEC biosensor. This figure has been adapted from ref. 10 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
