Challenges of non-aqueous Li–O 2 batteries: electrolytes, catalysts, and anodes  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE00053B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE00053B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1125-1141Challenges of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries: electrolytes, catalysts, and anodesFujun Li†ab, Tao Zhang†a and Haoshen Zhou*abcaInstitute of Energy Technology, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1, Umezono, Tsukuba, 305-8568, Japan. E-mail: hs.zhou@aist.go.jpbDepartment of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, JapancNational Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures & Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210093, ChinaReceived 13th November 2012, Accepted 8th February 2013First published on 11th February 2013AbstractA lot of attention has been paid to Li–O2 batteries in recent years, due to the huge potential specific energy and energy density, and they are extensively studied around the world. Much advance has been achieved, however, the fundamental understanding is still insufficient and challenges remain. Here, we provide a specific perspective on the development of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries excluding those with aqueous, ionic liquid, hybrid, and solid-state electrolytes, because non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries possess a relatively simple configuration and the research on non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries is the most active of all Li–O2 batteries. The discussion will be focused on non-aqueous electrolytes, cathode catalysts, and anodes, and corresponding perspectives are provided at the end.Fujun LiFujun Li received his MSc degree in Materials Chemistry and Physics from the Institute of New Energy Materials Chemistry of Nankai University, China, with Prof. Jun Chen in 2007 and his PhD degree from the University of Hong Kong with Prof. Kwong-Yu Chan in 2011. He is now working as a postdoc. in the University of Tokyo and AIST (Tsukuba), Japan, with Prof. Atsuo Yamada and Prof. Haoshen Zhou, respectively. His research interests include multi-scale porous materials for supercapacitors, electrocatalysts for fuel cells, electrolytes and catalysts for Li–O2 batteries, and Li-ion batteries.Tao ZhangTao Zhang received his PhD in physical chemistry in 2007 from Fudan University. In the same year he joined Shanghai University as a lecturer. From 2008 to 2011, he held a postdoctoral fellowship in Mie University. He currently holds a research fellowship in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). His research interests lie in the area of advanced energy electrochemistry, including the devices and the associated materials for energy conversion and storage such as Li–air batteries, all-solid-state polymer Li-ion batteries, and Li-ion conducting materials. He has authored more than 40 peer reviewed publications.Haoshen ZhouHaoshen Zhou graduated from the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, China, in 1985. He obtained his PhD from the Department of Chemical Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1994. He is now a prime senior researcher of the Energy Technology Research Institute (ETRI), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) and leading the Energy Interface Technology Group, ETRI, AIST, Japan. He is also an invited professor at both the University of Tokyo and Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of functional materials and their applications in lithium ion batteries, metal–air batteries, new type batteries/cells, fuel cells, dye sensitized solar cells, hydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces and electrochemical sensors.Broader contextAs the market for portable electronic devices of minimized size and electric vehicles has been growing steeply, energy storage systems with high specific energy and energy density have attracted a lot of attention in recent years. Vehicles using state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries can only drive for about 160 km per charge, which is far behind the 700 km range of a gasoline-powered vehicle. The formidable challenge is the theoretical capacity of intercalated electrode materials. New energy storage systems beyond Li-ion batteries need to be developed. Li–O2 batteries, possessing a capacity 5–8 times higher than that of Li-ion batteries, are considered promising candidates.1 IntroductionWith the expanding market for portable electronics and the expectation of the electrification of transportation, such as electric vehicles (EVs), energy storage is attracting more interest than at any time in the past. The formidable challenge for applying the current prevailing Li-ion batteries in EVs is the specific energy and energy density delivered, even they can reach the theoretical limits of the electrode materials.1–5 Beyond the intercalation chemistry in Li-ion batteries, new chemistry, especially electrochemistry, and new materials need to be explored to meet the requirement of high specific energy and energy density per discharge–charge cycle.6 In contrast to Li-ion batteries, Li–O2 batteries can store the discharge product Li2O2 in the pores of the cathode and the reactive product O2 in air, which induces an extremely large theoretical specific energy ∼3600 W h kg−1. In recent years this has attracted scientists worldwide to pursue this fascinating energy storage system.The Li–O2 battery was first introduced by Abraham and Jiang7 in 1996, and it was composed of a lithium anode, an organic-impregnated polyacrylonitrile electrolyte, and a carbon cathode. A decade later, Bruce and his coworkers8 replaced the polymer electrolyte with an organic electrolyte, used Li2O2 embedded into carbon and MnO2 as a cathode, and demonstrated the rechargeability of the Li2O2 electrode. The relatively simple configuration and huge specific capacity of the Li–O2 battery quickly received much attention around the world. This directed new research into Li–O2 batteries.Li–O2 batteries have been developed in different areas according to the electrolytes employed, such as aqueous, non-aqueous, hybrid, and solid state electrolytes.8,10–15 “Non-aqueous electrolytes” may not be an accurate way to describe this type of electrolyte in Li–O2 batteries, but here the term is exclusively used to refer to those composed of organic solvents and lithium salts to avoid confusion. Out of all of the Li–O2 batteries, non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries possess a relatively simple structure and are similar to Li-ion batteries, except that the cathode is exposed to air or oxygen. The performance of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries is governed by the cathode, the non-aqueous electrolyte, the pressure of O2 gas,16 and the CO2 content and humidity,17etc. But in the early stage of the development of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries, non-aqueous electrolytes and cathodes were the focus of investigation. Li foils are generally used as the anode and will ultimately be replaced due to safety issues before the deployment of Li–O2 batteries. The cathode functions as an oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalyst during discharge and hopefully works as an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) catalyst during charge, though its necessity has been challenged.18 The cathode should have a large surface area to offer enough active sites for both the ORR and OER. At the same time, the cathode needs a large pore volume to store the discharge product Li2O2, which determines the capacity delivered by non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries. Based on this principle, theoretical voltages are calculated for possible Li–O2 cell reactions as follows:19 2Li + O2 = Li2O2, ΔG° = −571.0 kJ mol−1 (E° = 2.96 V)(1) 4Li + O2 = 2Li2O, ΔG° = −562.1 kJ mol−1 (E° = 2.91 V)(2)Besides Li2O2, two other products could also be formed at the cathodes. The existence of O2˙− has been experimentally demonstrated in non-aqueous electrolytes in the absence of Li+ ions. The half-life of O2˙− was found to be dependent on the nature of the electrolyte cations, such as tetrabutylammonium cations (Bu4N+), present in the electrolyte solution and the organic solvents employed.20–23 LiO2 was observed as an intermediate using surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) in 0.1 M lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide (LiTFSA) in acetonitrile.23To clarify the ORR mechanism in non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries, Laoire et al.21 recorded cyclic voltammograms (CVs) with glassy carbon as a working electrode in an electrolyte consisting of 0.1 M LiPF6 in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) with various potential windows. By gradually expanding the potential limit from 2.57 to 1.35 V, the anodic peak Epa1 went from present to absent, Epa2 presented the strongest intensity when the potential limit was 2.45 V, and Epa3 became obvious when the potential limit was at 1.35 V. In the Tafel plot derived from the CVs, the 120 mV dec−1 Tafel slope was typical of a one-electron process, and the slope of 220 mV dec−1 was due to a second reduction step.21 According to these observations, the ORR processes can be described by eqn (3)–(6) in Scheme 1. O2 is first reduced to LiO2via a one-electron process, then to Li2O2, and finally to Li2O. These products are oxidized during an anodic scan as described by eqn (7)–(9) in Scheme 1. Scheme 1  ORR and OER pathways in non-aqueous electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. A recent report by McCloskey et al.22 tried to reveal the mechanism for non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries using an electrolyte consisting of 1.0 M LiTFSA in dimethoxyethane (DME). Neither ∼1e−/O2 nor 4e−/O2 processes forming LiO2 and Li2O, respectively, were found and only the ∼2e−/O2 process forming Li2O2 was observed in differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS), as depicted in Fig. 1. Based on the DEMS results, an ORR process was proposed as presented in eqn (1).22 The three peaks in the anodic scans of the CVs of Li–O2 batteries in the literature20,21 were considered to be induced by impurities in the electrolytes or on the glassy carbon electrode.22 This conflicts with the mechanism shown in Scheme 1. Although there is no general agreement on the mechanism, the extra peaks in the anodic scans of the CVs were also observed in our experiments after cycling and their existence depended on the solvent nature.20,21 In particular, the presence of O2˙− (maybe a limited amount) was considered as the origin of electrolyte decomposition during discharge,29 which will be discussed later. Detailed reaction mechanisms of the ORR and OER processes are still lacking. Fig. 1  Linear sweep voltammetry at 0.5 mV s−1 using the DEMS cell (XC72 carbon cathode). (a) The current is the solid line, and the points are the O2 (and CO2) measured by DEMS. (b) e−/O2 was determined by comparing the current to the moles of O2 consumed or evolved (by measuring the pressure change ΔP in the isolated cell head space). Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. The presence of O2, O2˙−, LiO2, and Li2O2 makes a practical Li–O2 battery more complicated than expected. The main challenges faced at the present stage are the cycling-instability of non-aqueous electrolytes and the low round-trip efficiency which could be increased by optimizing cathode catalysts and structures. Much advance has been achieved, but the challenges remain. Many reviews have been produced with the scope of metal–air or Li–air (O2) batteries.3,5,6,9,24,25 Non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries, excluding those with aqueous, ionic liquid, hybrid, and solid-state electrolytes, have a relatively simple configuration and the research on non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries is the most active of all Li–O2 batteries. However, a specific perspective on non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries is still lacking, and particularly, there exists confusion about “catalysis”. The discussion will be concentrated on the main challenges of Li–O2 batteries: non-aqueous electrolytes, cathode catalysts, and anodes.2 Non-aqueous electrolytesNon-aqueous Li–O2 batteries are composed of an anode (referred to as Li foil in most current research), a cathode embedded with catalysts, and a separator incorporated with a non-aqueous electrolyte. The structure is simple and similar to that of Li-ion batteries, except for the exposure of the cathode to an O2 atmosphere. Non-aqueous electrolytes have been studied and developed for decades and successfully employed in the present commercialized Li-ion batteries. But they cannot be directly applied in Li–O2 batteries. This makes Li–O2 batteries more challenging and generates the brand new subject of non-aqueous electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries. Although there are many publications regarding Li–O2 batteries and much progress is achieved every year, ultimate non-aqueous electrolytes have not yet been found. Based on these reports, an ideal non-aqueous electrolyte for Li–O2 batteries should meet the following criteria: (1) high chemical and electrochemical stability, especially in the presence of oxygen radicals and Li2O2; (2) low vapour pressure or no volatility to guarantee long-term operation; (3) high oxygen solubility and diffusivity; and (4) possible solubility of Li2O2. The first two requirements are the prerequisites of non-aqueous electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries, and the remaining two are not absolutely necessary but can help to improve their performance.The non-aqueous electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries in this perspective are exclusively focused on the electrolytes composed of organic solvents and lithium salts, excluding ionic liquids and solid-state electrolytes. The properties of formulated electrolytes are crucial to the interfacial structure between electrodes, O2 gas, and non-aqueous electrolytes and accordingly govern the performance of Li–O2 batteries. Their effect is the result of the individual components of the electrolytes: solvents, Li salts, and possible additives, and/or their combination.2.1 SolventsSolvent molecules can coordinate with Li+ ions and support fast Li+ ion transport through the cells. This interaction has been simulated and demonstrated to be strongly related to the cycling performance of both Li-ion and Li–O2 batteries. The failure of non-aqueous electrolytes often results in the failure of batteries. Consequently, electrolyte solvents have been becoming the research focus for the screening of suitable non-aqueous electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries.An electrolyte solvent for Li–O2 batteries is expected to have the following merits:26 (1) a high dielectric constant, able to dissolve a certain amount of Li salt; (2) low viscosity, supporting fast Li+ ion transport in cells; (3) high stability against all cell components, especially oxygen radicals during cell operation; (4) low vapour pressure, limited loss when exposed to an O2 flow; and (5) non-toxicity and economic use. Within the highly oxidative environment of Li–O2 batteries, the possible polar non-aqueous solvents coming into consideration are those organic compounds containing functional groups: carbonyl (CO), nitrile (CN), sulfonyl (SO), or ether linkages (–O–).26 Based on this concept, the use of various organic solvents such as carbonates, acetonitrile (AcN), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), glymes, etc., in Li–O2 batteries has been attempted. Their critical roles in the O2 reduction reaction (ORR) and subsequent O2 evolution reaction (OER) were studied in O2 saturated electrolytes and in the presence of Li salts.21,27,28 Possible decomposition mechanisms of the non-aqueous electrolytes while under operation have been suggested. Although an ultimate solution was not obtained, these results are valuable for the future exploration of stable electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries.In addition, computational modelling for the identification and design of stable solvents for Li–O2 batteries is powerful and meaningful. Two parameters, the free energy barriers of nucleophilic attack by the superoxide radical (O2˙−) and the C–H acidity constants, have been computed and applied as indices of the stability of solvents in Li–O2 batteries.29,30 No significant correlation between the activation free energy and simple molecular descriptors of chemical reactivity, such as atom-centred Mulliken charges, electrostatic potential derived charges, and nucleophilic Fukui functions was found.29 Based on this principle, the structures of straight-chain dialkylamides, trimethylacetonitrile, 2-methoxybenzonitrile, trialkyl phosphine oxide, 5-tert-butyl-N-methyl-2-oxazolidinone, and β-fluorinated ethers were identified as the most stable against O2˙− in the classes of N,N-disubstituted amides, aliphatic nitriles, aromatic nitriles, phosphorus(V) compounds, substituted 2-oxazolidinones, and partially and fully fluorinated ethers, respectively.30 These suggested structures need to be checked experimentally and should meet the requirements of the practical operation of Li–O2 batteries. The computational modelling can predict the solvent properties quickly and identify possibly stable electrolyte solvents for Li–O2 batteries from a large number of organic molecules.2.1.1 Organic carbonates. Organic carbonates, such as ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene carbonate (PC), possess wide electrochemical stability windows and have been extensively applied in state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries. Inspired by this success, they were the first applied as non-aqueous electrolyte solvents in Li–O2 batteries in 2006 (ref. 8) and replaced the polymer electrolyte which was used in the prototype of Li–O2 batteries built in 1996.7 This triggered the pursuit of the extremely high energy density of Li–O2 batteries. Research on Li–O2 batteries quickly became a hot topic.In the following few years, organic carbonates were almost the benchmark electrolyte solvents in Li–O2 batteries and subsequently, different research areas involving Li–O2 batteries were developed. However, in 2010, Mizuno et al.27 reported that carbonate solvents could be attacked by oxygen radicals which were generated during discharge. This led to formation of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) and other lithium alkylcarbonates (RO–(CO)–OLi), instead of the previously claimed discharge product Li2O2.A detailed study of the discharge and charge products was conducted by Bruce and his co-workers, employing nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), FT-IR, Raman spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry (MS), and a possible decomposition mechanism of a propylene carbonate based electrolyte in Li–O2 batteries was proposed.31 The decomposition of organic carbonates became more severe when a catalyst was applied, such as MnO2 and Pt or Pt based alloys, etc. A similar observation of the decomposition of organic carbonates was also obtained by other groups.32–34 The process of the attack of the PC molecules by the generated O2˙− was computationally modelled, suggesting possible decomposition mechanisms of PC upon O2 reduction in terms of the lowest energy.35Although organic carbonates cannot be applied in Li–O2 batteries, the obtained results provide a profound understanding on the operation of Li–O2 batteries and the study methods involved offer a more reliable process for exploring stable electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries. The other outcomes of Li–O2 batteries with organic carbonates, such as cathode catalysts, will undoubtedly need to be re-examined, because the claimed catalytic activities of the studied catalysts seem more related to the decomposition of organic carbonate solvents than the reversible formation and decomposition of Li2O2.2.1.2 Ethers. In the 1980s, ethers were considered to be alternative candidates in Li batteries in light of the higher cycling efficiencies of lithium anodes.36–39 But their lower stable oxidative potentials compared to those of organic carbonates restricted their application in later Li-ion batteries.37 Ether solvents came into consideration for electrolyte solvents for Li–O2 batteries again after organic carbonates were found to suffer severe decomposition.Dimethoxyethane (DME) was reported to be stable during cycling by McClosky et al., and they comparatively studied different cathode catalysts and suspected the necessity of a catalyst for the decomposition of Li2O2.18 In a following paper from the same group,22in situ quantitative gas-phase mass spectrometry (DEMS) and XRD confirmed that Li2O2 was the main discharge product. However, the amount of O2 evolved upon charging was only 60% of the consumption of O2 during discharge. It was explained that there might exist a reaction of Li2O2 and DME under the cell potential.22 DME is still actively employed in Li–O2 batteries for the evaluation of cathode catalysts and other measures of performance,40–42 until a suitable solvent is found. Another problem with ethers, such as dimethoxyethane (DME) and tetrahydrofuran (THF), is the low vapour pressure. It enables the fast evaporation of ether solvents in a few days and accordingly induces the decaying cycling performance. The solvent losses of DME and other ethers were evaluated in a dry box at 29 °C, showing that DME can completely evaporate into air in 2 to 3 days, as depicted in Fig. 2.43 Although DME is more resistant to O2 radicals than organic carbonates, its low vapour pressure will restrict its wide application in Li–O2 batteries due to issues with long-term operation. Fig. 2  Solvent evaporation rate of pure solvents inside a dry box at 29 °C over 2 months. DME, DEE, DEC, BEE, DPG, DG, EDG, PC, and BDG denote 1,2-dimethoxyethane, 1,2-diethoxyethane, diethyl carbonate, 1-tert-butoxy-2-ethoxyethane, diproglyme, diglyme, ethyl diglyme, propylene carbonate, and butyl diglyme, respectively. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2009 The Electrochemical Society. With negligible vapour pressures of 0.2 and <0.01 mmHg at 25 °C, the use of triglyme (G3) and tetraglyme (G4), respectively, was attempted in Li–O2 batteries.44–50 An oxygen reduction mechanism in the glyme based electrolytes was proposed.20,21 From the obtained results of Li–O2 batteries with G4 and LiPF6 as electrolyte and BP2000 carbon black with a loading of 5–8 mg cm−2 on carbon cloth as a cathode, the capacity decayed quickly with cycling, which was attributed to the failure of the Li anodes and increased impedance as Li2O2 was deposited in the carbon cathode.51 Bruce and coworkers52 studied Li–O2 batteries with various electrolytes containing ethers (such as THF, G4, and G3), LiPF6 and other Li salts, and cathodes with 1 mg carbon on each Al mesh. Using the characterization techniques XRD, FT-IR, and NMR, they found that the diffraction peaks of Li2O2 were perfectly presented in the first cycle and had almost disappeared in the 5th cycle, as shown in Fig. 3. Accordingly, Li2CO3 accumulated in the cathodes and was detected during cycling. The ether molecules, either THF or G4 and G3, were considered to be relatively stable in the first cycles and prone to be attacked by oxygen radicals in the following cycles.51 The other results also show a limited reactivity of G4 with oxygen radicals,51–54 which is detrimental for the cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries. Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the composite cathode (Super P/Kynar) cycled in 1 M LiPF6 in G4 under 1 atm O2 between 2 and 4.6 V versus Li/Li+, current = 70 mA gcarbon−1. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Upon choosing a different Li salt, lithium triflate (LiCF3SO3), and G4 with a molar ratio of 1 to 4 as an electrolyte, a cathode with 1 mg cm−2 of Super P carbon black supported on carbon paper, and PVDF as a binder, the Li–O2 batteries presented impressive cycling and high-rate performances.48,49 Jung et al.48 did not find any residues of Li2CO3 on a fully discharged and charged cathode by using time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). The amount of Li2CO3 generated in the cathode in one cycle may be very limited and below the detection limit of TOF-SIMS. This may be understood in the presence of strong diffraction peaks of Li2O2 on the first discharge, similar to Fig. 3. The superior performance of this electrolyte system was explained in that the lifetime of the O2˙− radicals generated in the LiCF3SO3–G4 electrolyte was very short and O2˙− radicals were quickly disproportionated to O22− ions which were moderate in their electron attraction.48 At various current densities from 50 mA gcarbon−1 to 1000 mA gcarbon−1 and at a cut-off capacity of 1000 mA h gcarbon−1, the Li–O2 batteries did not show any capacity decay over 100 cycles. Another highlight of this paper was the large capacity. With a capacity limit of 5000 mA h gcarbon−1, the Li–O2 batteries presented very stable discharge and charge voltages over 30 cycles at a current density of 500 mA gcarbon−1, as shown in Fig. 4. The generated Li2O2 particles in the cathode were estimated to be about 1 μm in size, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4.49 That the Li2O2 particles of relatively large sizes not showing the effect of electrode volume changes on discharge and charge on the cycling stabilities of Li–O2 batteries and high kinetic overpotentials deserves further investigation. The reported results are perfect in both cycling performance and specific capacity at the current stage, though a cut-off capacity method employed here has been known to promote the cycling performance. The underlying effect of the electrolyte system LiCF3SO3–G4 on the performance of Li–O2 batteries is still unknown. This may need computational simulation of the reactivity of the particular LiCF3SO3 and G4 solvates with O2˙−, and the dependence of cell performance on the specific anions (CF3SO3−) should be explored, because other Li salts (like LiTFSA and LiClO4) in the same G4 solvent cannot produce similar results, but in fact produce worse ones. Nevertheless, recent reports revealed possible instability in the described Li–O2 batteries, such as the reactivity of Li2O2 with carbon55–57 and PVDF.32,54 Fig. 4  Cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries at a current density of 500 mA gcarbon−1 with a capacity limit of 5000 mA h gcarbon−1 and TEM image of Li2O2 particles during discharge (inset). Reproduced with permission.48,49 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group & American Chemical Society. All the publications involving non-aqueous electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries have focused on searching for a solvent that is stable against oxygen radicals. No attention has been paid to the impact of the interactions between Li+ and solvent molecules on electrolyte stability. The solvation of Li+ ions by organic molecules can affect the electronic distribution throughout the solvate and hence, the redox stability.58–60 The molar ratios of lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide (LiTFSA) and G3 and G4 were varied to modify their solvate structures from solvent separated ion pairs (SSIP) to contact ion pairs (CIP).61 Raman spectra showed the dependence of the relative intensities and Raman shifts on the concentrations of LiTFSA in the glyme solvents. Over 20 cycles of discharge and charge, the Li–O2 batteries with LiTFSA–(Gx)n (x = 3 and 4 with n = 5) showed the best cycling stability over the evaluated molar ratios of 1:1, 1:3, and 1:7, which are shown in Fig. 5, taking LiTFSA–(G3)n as an example. When checking the XRD patterns of the initially discharged cathodes in all the electrolytes, characteristic diffraction peaks of Li2O2 were apparent. After 20 cycles, only in LiTFSA–(G3 or G4)5 could diffraction peaks of Li2O2 be observed. The discharged and charged cathodes were further subjected to FT-IR. Minor absorption peaks of Li2CO3 could be found in the cathode with LiTFSA–(G4)5, indicating that beyond a certain number of cycles the reaction of G4 cannot be completely avoided. While, in LiTFSA–(G3)5 absorption peaks of Li2CO3 could not be seen. Although some possibility of the reaction of carbon and PVDF with Li2O2 exists in the studied system, the dependence of the cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries on the concentrations, namely, the solvate structures, of LiTFSA in glyme solvents is meaningful and may be helpful for the understanding of the electrolyte system of LiCF3SO3–G4. Fig. 5  Discharge–charge curves of Li–O2 batteries with LiTFSA–(G3)n, n = 1 (a), 3 (b), 5 (c), and 7 (d), as the electrolyte at a current density of 500 mA gcarbon−1, a cut-off capacity of 2000 mA h gcarbon−1, and a potential window from 2.0 to 4.7 V vs. Li/Li+ over 20 cycles. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 2.1.3 Other solvents. The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in aprotic electrolytes, such as acetonitrile (AcN) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), has been studied for several dacades.62–70 Their possible applications in electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries were recognized due to the instability of traditional aprotic solvents. However, the high vapour pressure of AcN is the main drawback restricting its use in Li–O2 batteries.O2 electrochemistry in AcN and DMSO in the presence and absence of Li salts was elucidated by Abraham et al.21 The O2 reduction products in both of the two solvent based electrolytes were formed in a stepwise fashion from O2˙− to O22− and O2−. O2 was more readily reduced in DMSO than in AcN.21 The mechanism was also confirmed by Peng et al.23 It was revealed that Li2O2 decomposed to Li+ and O2 and did not pass through the intermediate LiO2 upon charging. When AcN was employed as an electrolyte solvent, the Li–O2 battery with carbon as a cathode showed the highest reversibility of OER/ORR ∼ 0.9. No dependence on Li salts was found in the reversibility of Li–O2 batteries.57DMSO was first applied in a Li–O2 battery with 0.8 mg of carbon in Ni foam as a cathode by Xu et al.71 It presented a large specific capacity based on the unit mass of carbon and a high discharge voltage. Because DMSO can react with Li metal, Li foils were pre-treated in 1 M LiClO4 in PC to permit cycling. With the treated Li foil, DMSO, and a nanoporous gold foil (NPG) as the cathode, a reversible and higher-rate Li–O2 battery was built.72 The discharge/charge capacity of the Li–O2 battery showed a little decay over 100 cycles, as shown in Fig. 6. FT-IR, Raman spectroscopy, NMR, and differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) were applied to analyze the charged and discharged cathodes, and a few weak peaks in addition to those of Li2O2 were found at the end of the discharge in the IR spectra. They were assigned to Li2CO3 and HCO2Li, which could be reversibly decomposed upon charging.72 The NPG had a rigid framework which could not be destroyed by the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 particles inside pores upon discharge and charge. The NPG was highly conductive, even when filled with insulating Li2O2 upon discharge, which could provide fast electron transport and promote the oxidation of Li2O2 on the nanoporous gold foil. In particular, when Au nanoparticles loaded on carbon black were employed in Li–O2 batteries, they showed a large capacity loss upon charging, similar to that with Super P carbon black cathodes, but a slightly lower charge voltage. From DEMS data, both the battery with Au nanoparticles loaded on carbon black and that with carbon black produced sufficient amounts of CO2 on charging, which is indicative of the decomposition of electrolyte, Li2CO3, and HCO2Li. Another route for the formation of Li2CO3 may be the reaction between Li2O2 and carbon, which can be avoided in the case of the NPG cathode. This particular demonstration may suggest: (1) carbon should be avoided in the cathode, given its reactivity with Li2O2, (2) the cathode should be highly conductive, (3) the structure should be rigid enough to keep its integrity on discharge and charge, and (4) the cathode should be porous to store the discharge product Li2O2. Also, the vapour pressure of DMSO at 25 °C was measured to 0.61 mmHg, and it will not remain for weeks or months in an open Li–O2 battery. Fig. 6  Charge/discharge curves (left) and cycling profile (right) for an Li–O2 cell with a 0.1 M LiClO4–DMSO electrolyte and a nanoporous gold cathode, at a current density of 500 mA g−1 (based on the mass of Au). Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 0.1 M LiPF6 and DMSO saturated with O2, the ORR and OER were studied on a glassy carbon electrode.73 Extremely stable CV curves over 50 cycles were obtained at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. This scan rate may be too fast to evaluate the sluggish kinetics of the ORR and OER on the glassy carbon surface and accordingly a limited carbon surface was involved. When this electrolyte was applied in Li–O2 cells, the discharge plateau was significantly higher than that in the G4–LiPF6 electrolyte at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 within a voltage window from 2 to 4.35 V. The cycling performance showed dependence on the discharge depth and decayed with cycling, similar to the observations in other reports.48,49,61 This may suggest that DMSO could be oxidized beyond 4.0 V.94 Apart from AcN and DMSO, the use of other solvents, such as dimethylformamide (DMF),74 triethyl phosphate,75N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP),76 methoxybenzene,77etc. as electrolyte solvents in Li–O2 batteries has been attempted. The reversible formation of Li2O2 could be observed in the initial few cycles, and the capacity decayed quickly with cycling. It is believed that there existed some electrolyte decomposition during discharge. The search for a stable cycling and low vapour pressure solvent is urgent for a long-term stable Li–O2 battery, and much care should be taken when investigating rechargeability.2.1.4 Mixed solvents. The most successful examples of mixed solvents for electrolytes are carbonates in Li-ion batteries. This kind of electrolyte is composed of two or more carbonates, and combines the merits of each component. In addition, the mixed solvent based electrolytes sometimes present synergistic effects, such as dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and ethylene carbonate (EC), in which the electrochemical stability is high up to 5 V vs. Li/Li+, while in the absence of EC pure DMC is liable to be oxidized at ∼4.0 V vs. Li/Li+.78,79 It is believed that mixed solvent based electrolytes may be an option for future Li–O2 batteries.The first attempt80 was made by mixing tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (G4) and the ionic liquid N-methyl-(n-butyl) pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl) imide (PYR14TFSI). The conductivity was found to improve by 4 times, and the electrochemical oxidation stable potential approached 4.8 V vs. Li/Li+. Comparing the charge overpotential of the Li–O2 battery with pure G4 and that with a solution of G4 and PYR14TFSI, the solution presented a lower charge potential by 500 mV.Mixed solvent based electrolytes have not been paid much attention. They may be a promising choice of electrolyte for Li–O2 batteries, as for Li-ion batteries.2.2 Lithium saltsAs an indispensable component of electrolytes, Li salts must meet the prerequisites before being used in Li–O2 batteries: (1) Li salts should be able to dissolve in solvents and reach a certain concentration to support fast Li+ ion transport, (2) anions must be stable under the required potentials and, especially, in the presence of Li2O2 and O2˙− radicals, (3) anions should be inert to the solvent, and (4) anions should be stable against the cell components, such as the current collectors, separators, and the package. Because of their limited availability, Li salts have not attracted much attention, compared with the interest in selecting solvents for the electrolytes of Li–O2 batteries.In the extremely rough environment of Li–O2 batteries, each component has the possibility of reacting with O2˙− radicals and Li2O2, and Li salts are not an exception. For example, lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6), which is used the most in commercialized Li-ion batteries, was found to react with Li2O281,82 and nickel foams could be oxidized at a potential beyond 3.5 V vs. Li/Li+.83 The by-products were identified by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). With the same technique, a series of Li salts (LiBF4, LiPF6, LiClO4, and LiTFSA) were tested by comparing the elemental ratios of the anions remained in the discharged cathodes. It was found that the change in the elemental ratios when using LiBF4, LiPF6, and LiTFSA was induced by anion decomposition.84 This was confirmed by the numerous unidentified F species in 19F-NMR spectra, as presented in Fig. 7. Relatively, LiClO4 was demonstrated to be the least reactive towards O2˙− radicals.84 However, a conflicting result, namely that LiClO4 was unstable in an O2 rich environment, was obtained by Shao et al.24 The use of lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB) in Li–O2 batteries was also attempted. The anion BOB− was revealed to be readily attacked by O2˙− radicals and eventually transformed into LiB3O5, which could be identified by ex situ XRD and FT-IR spectra.85 Fig. 7  19F-NMR data for the electrolyte and the electrolyte after discharge. Inset: zoom of the plot of 19F-NMR data for the electrolyte and the electrolyte after discharge, showing changes in the 19F signal due to BF4− decomposition. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. In addition, the reactivity of anions with current collectors, such as widely employed Al foils, should be considered in Li–O2 batteries. LiN(CF3SO2)2, LiC(CF3SO2)3, and LiCF3SO3 were reported to react with Al, and the resulting products, such as Al[N(CF3SO2)2]3, desorbed from the surface of the Al to allow further corrosion of the Al.86,87 These phenomena were observed in propylene carbonate containing the said Li salts in Li-ion batteries. Therefore Al foils should be avoided and replaced by other current collectors in Li–O2 batteries.Although limited attention has been paid to Li salts in Li–O2 batteries, the possible decomposition and accordingly the effect of the anions on the performance of Li–O2 batteries should not be neglected.2.3 AdditivesAdditives are the compounds which are in electrolytes with limited amounts but can greatly improve the performance of Li–O2 batteries. The functions of additives can be described as improving the dissolution of Li2O2 and O2 in electrolytes, both of which have the aim of increasing the discharge capacity. For the former, tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane (TPFPB) B(C6F5)3 was added into carbonate based electrolytes to increase the dissolution of the discharge product Li2O2 and enable further oxygen reduction reaction to occur at the released active sites.88 In order to increase the O2 solubility in propylene carbonate, perfluorotributylamine (FTBA) was added. The discharge capacity could be improved greatly compared to that with the electrolyte without FTBA.89,90 The idea of storing the discharge product Li2O2 in the electrolyte is promising for improving the specific capacity and avoiding the blockage of channels in the cathode, but the stability of this system needs careful evaluation.3 CatalystsResearch on cathode catalysts was initially performed in organic carbonate electrolytes, in which the discharge products are now known to be Li2CO3 and Li carboxylates, not the desired Li2O2.27,28,31 The claimed catalytic performance was resulted from electrolyte decomposition and needs re-evaluation. In a rechargeable Li–O2 battery, the cathode catalyst acts as both an ORR catalyst and, hopefully, an OER catalyst for the reaction O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Li2O2. Carbon has a sufficient ORR catalytic activity, and the kinetics of the ORR process is much faster than the counterpart OER process. An additional specific ORR catalyst may not be necessary in carbon based materials. The catalyst can lower activation barriers in the electrochemical reaction steps, like in the OER process, and the aim of using a catalyst is to reduce the overpotentials on discharge and, especially, charge. Otherwise, the performance only represented by a large discharge capacity is not true “catalysis”. Up to now, almost all of the research has been concentrated on carbon materials with or without the loading of additional catalysts. The discussion in this section will be focused on the efficacy of catalysts on charge and research on carbon based catalysts.3.1 Efficacy of catalysts on chargeThe thermodynamic potential (U0) of Li–O2 batteries with non-aqueous electrolytes can be calculated to be 2.96 V from the Nernst equation.90,91 Generally, Li–O2 batteries present a modest overpotential for discharging (∼0.3 V) but much higher overpotentials (∼1.0 to 1.5 V) for charging.7,8 For instance, in ether-based electrolytes, like G4 48 and G3,61 the voltage gap is over 1.0 V, as shown in Fig. 5 and 6. This large voltage gap results in a low round-trip efficiency of <70%, meaning that more energy is required to charge the battery than is released during discharge. This is in contrast with >90% in Li-ion batteries. In particular, the discharge voltage of Li–O2 batteries does not show apparent dependence on the type of ORR catalyst, and is very similar to that with carbon black. It may be possible to exclusively apply a catalyst to lower the activation energy in the OER process, promote the electrochemical decomposition of Li2O2, and reduce the OER overpotentials.Carbon has both sufficient ORR and limited OER activities on a glassy carbon electrode, as shown in the CV curves of Fig. 1.21 Understanding the catalytic behaviour of carbon materials is fundamentally important in reducing the high OER overpotentials of Li–O2 batteries on charge, because the additional OER catalysts are supported on carbon materials. However, the efficacy of catalysts on charge was challenged and the necessity of the catalysts was questioned in an influential report.18 The results are presented in Fig. 8. The relatively higher discharge and lower charge potential of Pt/XC72 in Fig. 8a was reported to be an artefact and induced by the decomposition of electrolyte with a small amount of O2 evolution on charge in Fig. 8b. The onset potential on charging the Li–O2 battery with the carbon-only electrode XC72 is almost identical to those with Au/XC72 and MnO2/XC72 and only slightly higher than its post-discharge open-circuit voltage (∼2.8 V). This indicates that there is only a small overpotential early on charge.18 As a comparison, the samples Au/XC72 and MnO2/XC72 show similar charge profiles and voltage dependencies of O2 evolution to XC72. It was concluded that there was no catalytic activity from either supported Au or supported MnO2. Adding additional catalysts to carbon black was thought to be unnecessary, and the gradually increasing charge voltage was assigned to the kinetic overpotential because of the insulating nature of Li2O2. All the discharge–charge profiles in Fig. 8a were obtained with a limited capacity (0.4 mA h vs. 3–6 mg of active material on each cathode). The profiles would be different if the discharge depth was extended. They lack obvious evidence that the catalyst on charge can lower the onset potential of the decomposition of Li2O2, which acts as an indicator of catalysis. However, from the reported results,48,61,92 the charge voltages can be reduced by selecting suitable catalysts loaded on carbon materials in comparison with carbon-only materials, when the discharge–charge process is controlled with cut-off voltages. Fig. 8  Discharge–charge curves of Li–O2 batteries with various cathode catalysts employing DME as an electrolyte at 0.18 mA cm−2 (a) and corresponding O2 evolution during charging (b). Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. In order to clarify the ambiguity over whether a catalyst is efficient for the reduction of charge voltage or not, a new decomposition process for Li2O2 on charge was proposed as depicted in Fig. 9.93 It was found that there exist three distinct stages in the charge process of Li–O2 batteries with 0.4 mg cm−2 of Vulcan carbon black in the cathode. As shown in Fig. 9, the first OER stage occurs at low overpotentials (<400 mV) with a sloping voltage profile, in which the OER kinetics are relatively insensitive to the charge rates and catalysts. It was speculated that this OER stage could be attributed to the de-lithiation of the outer part of the Li2O2 forming LiO2-like species (Li2O2 → LiO2 + Li+ + e−) via a solid-solution route, which chemically disproportionate to evolve O2 (LiO2 + LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2), yielding an overall 2e−/O2 OER process (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2e−).93 The second stage takes place at high overpotentials (400–1200 mV), where the kinetics are sensitive to charge rates and catalysts. This process can be ascribed to the oxidation of bulk Li2O2 particles. The dependence of the charge voltage on the catalyst is in agreement with the published results.48,61,92 The third stage was observed as sharply rising charge voltages. This was ascribed to the oxidation of electrolytes and carbonates, possibly generated from Li2O2 and carbon, which was predicted from the evolution of CO2 in DEMS.18,22,28 The proposed mechanism in Fig. 9 agrees with the insensitivity of the charge overpotential to the catalyst at the initial charge stage in Fig. 8a and the dependence of the charge overpotential on the catalyst beyond the initial stage in the published results. Fig. 9  Proposed reaction mechanism in Li–O2 batteries on charging. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. The stability and effect of carbon on electrolyte decomposition in Li–O2 batteries was studied in G4 and DMSO based electrolytes by Bruce et al.94 One important phenomenon observed is that carbon was relatively stable below 3.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) on discharge or charge, but was unstable on charging above 3.5 V, oxidatively decomposed to form Li2CO3 (Fig. 10).94 This suggested that there existed an intermediate such as LiO2 on charge reacting with carbon during the oxidation of Li2O2 above 3.5 V. The appearance of LiO2 agrees with Fig. 993 and conflicts with work by Peng et al.,23 in which LiO2 was not generated on charge. Another highlight is that carbon promoted electrolyte decomposition during both discharge and charge in Li–O2 batteries. The major product of electrolyte decomposition on discharge was Li2CO3, which was subsequently decomposed and formed again from electrolyte and carbon decomposition on charging. The amount of formation of Li2CO3 above 3.5 V exceeds its decomposition and hence Li2CO3 accumulates in the electrode, leading to large polarization on charging. How the electrolyte (G4 or DMSO based electrolyte) decomposition occurs on discharge is unknown and deserves further study. Fig. 10  (a) Discharge–charge curves on the first cycle with G4-based electrolyte at a carbon-only cathode. (b) The moles of CO2 evolved from the carbon cathode,removed from the cell at the discharged and charged states indicated by the green dots in (a) then treated with acid to decompose Li2CO3 and Li2CO3 and Fenton's reagent to decompose the lithium carboxylates. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Although the effect of the catalyst on reducing the OER overpotential can be observed and its possible mechanism was proposed in Fig. 9, we still lack the detailed catalysis mechanism. Investigations should be conducted by excluding parasitic reactions, such as carbon and electrolyte decomposition. In particular, carbon decomposition in carbon based materials cannot be neglected, because the instability of the catalyst itself will make the catalysis more complex.3.2 Current catalysts for Li–O2 batteriesAlthough the detailed mechanism of catalysis is still unknown, the observed dependence of the charge potential on catalysts has been widely reported. Almost all of the studies of catalysts for Li–O2 batteries, excluding nanoporous gold foil,72 are focused on carbon materials with and without loading additional catalysts. The following discussion is based on the additional catalysts on carbon materials. To avoid confusion with the word “catalyst” employed in literature, only those catalysts contributing to reducing overpotentials, typically on charge, are discussed in this section.3.3 Carbon nanotubes and grapheneCarbon black, like Super P, has been demonstrated to show excellent catalytic performance in Li–O2 batteries with the G4–triflate electrolyte.48 In addition to carbon black, carbon nanotubes and graphene are also considered as alternatives since they possess high surface areas and have exhibited catalytic activity towards oxygen reduction in fuel cells and zinc–air batteries.95–99 A binder-free vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) electrode was investigated in a Li–O2 battery with a DME-based electrolyte.56 The charge profile changed from one plateau (below ∼4.0 V) in the first cycle to two plateaus in the later cycles (one below ∼4.0 V and the other above ∼4.0 V). This was explained by the accumulation of Li2CO3-like species formed from the reaction of carbon nanotubes and Li2O2 or other reaction intermediates.The use of carbon nanofibers92 and tubular polypyrrole (PPy) with one-dimensional (1D) structures42 for Li–O2 batteries was also attempted. Hydrophilic PPy nanotubes have been reported to have intrinsic catalytic activity towards the OER.42 Their charge voltage was a little higher than that of PPy nanotubes deposited with MnO2. These results may suggest that 1D carbonaceous materials can further lower the charge overpotential in Li–O2 batteries.As 2D carbon structures, both sides of graphene nanosheets (GNSs) can be accessed by oxygen. GNSs have high electronic conductivity (103 to 104 S m−1) and high specific surface area (theoretical value 2630 m2 g−1). GNSs, exfoliated from graphite on a large scale, have many edge sites and defect sites on the surface. Such edge and defect sites serve as active sites for chemical and electrochemical reactions, like the ORR and OER. At an early stage, Zhou and Yoo utilized metal-free GNSs as air electrodes in a Li–air battery with a hybrid electrolyte.100 The GNSs showed a high discharge voltage close to that of 20 wt% Pt/carbon black. They also explored a readily pencil-traced air electrode, which contained multilayered graphene nanosheets. It could be discharged and recharged for tens of cycles.101In relatively stable non-aqueous electrolytes, such as DME, G4, and DMSO, catalytic activities of graphene towards the ORR and OER in Li–O2 batteries have been demonstrated.71,102–104 Based on the intrinsic 2D structure of graphene, graphene-based 3D air cathodes have been designed. The 3D graphene-based materials possessed a hierarchical arrangement of functionalized graphene sheets.102 Free-standing hierarchical porous carbon (FHPC) was also prepared by loading a graphene oxide gel into a nickel foam.103,104 The charge potential on charge in the FHPC air cathode was reduced remarkably with a voltage plateau at 3.7 V in a DMSO electrolyte, in contrast to the charge profile gradually increasing to 4.0 V in an acetylene black based electrode,72 where Ni oxidation was not considered beyond 3.5 V.833.4 Carbon supported precious metalsCarbon supported precious metal catalysts have been extensively studied in fuel cells, and they have also received attention in Li–O2 batteries. Pt and Pd supported on carbon were found to catalyze DME and G4 decomposition, respectively, based on DEMS results.18,105 Carbon supported Ru could significantly increase the kinetics of Li2O2 decomposition on charge, and Au supported on Vulcan carbon black showed no activity towards Li2O2 oxidation in 0.1 M LiClO4 and DME.106 Precious metals supported on carbon show efficient catalytic activity in the OER process on charge, but their possible catalytic activity towards electrolyte decomposition cannot be neglected, such as for Pt and Pd.On the other hand, the catalytic activity of precious metal catalysts towards carbon oxidation was demonstrated with carbon supported Pt nanoparticles.107,108 It became severe when the particle size of Pt was smaller and the loading was increased. Although there have been no reports on carbon oxidation catalyzed by supported precious metal particles in non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries, much care should be taken when dealing with carbon supported precious metals.3.5 Carbon supported metal oxidesThe use of carbon supported metal oxides as catalysts for Li–O2 batteries was initially motivated by studies in aqueous Zn–air or fuel cell systems, where MnO2, Co3O4, perovskite LaNiO3−δ, and pyrochlore Pb2Ru2O7−δ oxides have shown significant ORR and OER activities.109,110 The catalytic mechanisms of metal oxides in the ORR or OER in non-aqueous systems are still unknown. For this series of metal oxides supported on carbon, there are many artefacts attributed to catalysis in the literature, typically large discharge capacities without effects on the charge potentials, because carbon black has sufficient activity towards the ORR in non-aqueous electrolytes,48,49 and in almost all of the carbon based materials the discharge potential exhibits little dependence on the catalyst18 and is possibly related to the electrolyte applied in Li–O2 batteries.71 Catalysis is defined as a lowering of the activation barrier in the electrochemical process and accordingly the addition of a catalyst is to reduce the discharge or charge overpotential since ΔG = −eΔU. Unfortunately, in some reports only a large discharge capacity without a decreasing overpotential was observed, which is not the result of true “catalysis”.Cobalt oxide nanoparticles supported on reduced graphene oxide (Co3O4/RGO) were mixed with Ketjen black (KB) with a weight ratio of 3/7.111 The corresponding charge profile is shown in Fig. 11 together with KB alone in an electrolyte consisting of 1 M LiPF6 and G4. The Co3O4/RGO on KB sample exhibited a charge plateau between 3.5 and 3.75 V, about 400 mV lower than that of KB at a current density of 140 mA gcarbon−1. This was attributed to the effect of Co3O4.111 The large discharge capacity may be a result of the porous structure of the cathodes, created by dibutyl phthalate (DBP). However, the underlying reason for the decreased overpotentials on charge as presented in Fig. 11 is unknown. Fig. 11  Voltage profiles on charge for cells containing chemically deposited Li2O2 in the presence of either Co3O4/RGO/KB or KB. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. A carbon supported metallic mesoporous pyrochlore oxide Pb2Ru2O7−δ composite was reported by Nazar et al.112 and showed good catalytic activity towards the ORR/OER in 1.0 M LiPF6 and G4. The structure of the defect pyrochlore Pb2Ru2O7−δ is presented in Fig. 12 with oxygen vacancies and metallic conductivity created from the electron conduction paths via the BO6 octahedra. An ORR/OER catalytic mechanism was proposed based mainly on the oxygen vacancies and electronic conduction. According to the paper,112 on discharge the catalytic activity was initiated by the binding of O2 to the surface of the catalyst via the oxygen vacancies, followed by reduction to O2−. The weakly bound and stabilized O2− ions rapidly migrated away from the catalyst surface and combined via the disproportionation reaction of Li2O2. However, the contribution of carbon to the ORR or OER was not considered and the existence of O2− in the presence of large amounts of Li+ ions was challenged.22,23 More evidence needs to be provided to prove the proposed mechanism either for the ORR or OER. Fig. 12  The structure of the defect pyrochlore A2B2O7−δ (δ = 0.5; A = Pb, Bi; B = Ru) showing oxygen vacancies and electron conduction paths via BO6 octahedra that create metallic conductivity. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. Mesoporous cobalt oxide (Co3O4) with different porosity mixed with carbon black was employed as a cathode with a carbon loading of 1.1 mg cm−2 in Li–O2 batteries.113 It was found that the pore diameter, pore volume, and BET surface area of the Co3O4 depended on the aging temperature of the template KIT-6. Co3O4–KIT-6-40, with the largest physical parameters, showed the highest round-trip efficiency of 81.4% (the discharge and charge plateaus were at ∼2.85 and ∼3.5 V, respectively)113 and the largest specific capacity of 2250 mA h gcarbon−1, as shown in Fig. 13. Because of the insulating properties of Co3O4, the electrochemical reactions could only occur at the interface between the Co3O4 particles and the carbon black. The porous structure of the Co3O4 could contribute to fast ion or O2 transport and increase the utilization of the catalyst. Such a result suggests that it is possible to reduce the charge potential to lower than the carbon decomposition potential (i.e. 3.5 V) by introducing suitable catalysts and optimizing their structures. Fig. 13  TEM images of mesoporous Co3O4 templating against KIT-6, which was at an aging temperature of 80, 60, or 40 °C. Discharge–charge profiles of carbon black supported Co3O4 electrodes at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 in a DME-saturated O2 atmosphere.113 Copyright 2012 Elsevier. Li2O2 particles grown on the sidewalls of aligned carbon fibres (without an additional catalyst) were found to be toroids with particle sizes (up to ∼1 μm) increasing with the depth-of-discharge.92 Another study revealed that Li2O2 toroids were aggregates and comprised of nanocystalline Li2O2 rods. The dimensions of the Li2O2 rods were ∼15 nm × 80 nm, and these rods aggregated to form toroidal structures roughly 600–800 nm in size.47 From the viewpoint of a large discharge–charge capacity, mesopores may not be large enough to store the discharge product Li2O272 and macropores or larger pores may be better, such as when using DBP for large pore generation.1113.6 Carbon supported non-oxide materialsNon-precious metal carbon-based catalysts for the ORR are promising candidates for replacing precious metal catalysts in polymer electrolyte fuel cells. Their performance can be comparable with Pt and Pt based catalysts.114–118 The active sites are believed to contain transition metal cations coordinated by pyridinic nitrogen functionalities in the interstices of graphitic sheets within micropores.105 Inspired by this success, the use of this kind of carbon supported transition metal composite was also attempted in non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries.A graphene-rich composite (Co–N-MWCNTs) has been shown to exhibit substantially improved ORR activity in a DME electrolyte, as compared to carbon black and Pt/carbon catalysts.119 The Co–N-MWCNTs composite was synthesized via the graphitization of an aromatic heteroatomic polymer, polyaniline under the catalysis of a cobalt species supported on MWCNTs. The Co species was found to be indispensable during the synthesis of the graphene. The improved ORR activity was mainly attributed to a higher content of quaternary and pyridinic N atoms and extended graphene multilayer composites.119 The graphene multilayers were generated in the presence of Co species supported on MWCNTs. This led to intrinsic contact between the N-doped graphene, Co, and MWCNTs. At the same time, MWCNTs can support fast electron conduction from coordinated Co via quaternary and pyridinic N atoms to the electrode collector. The formation of intrinsic contact between the active sites and the electron conductor (i.e. MWCNTs) in the synthesis procedure may be applied in the preparation of new catalysts for non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries.A representative iron–nitrogen–carbon (Fe–N–C) catalyst, which was prepared by the pyrolysis of supported iron acetate and 1,10-phenanthroline, has demonstrated excellent activity towards the ORR in aqueous electrolytes.108,120 More recently, a modified method was used to synthesize an Fe–N–C catalyst.121 The catalytic activity of the as-synthesized Fe–N–C was compared with carbon supported α-MnO2, as shown in Fig. 14. The battery with the Fe–N–C composite showed much lower potentials in the entire charging process, compared to that with α-MnO2/XC-72. A reduction in the overpotential of ∼0.6 V was observed in the middle of the charging process for the Fe–N–C. Oxygen was monitored as the only gas released from the battery with the Fe–N–C, while both O2 and CO2 were found in the gas evolved from α-MnO2/XC-72. At the end of cycling, electrolyte decomposition could be detected.121 The improved OER activity of Fe–N–C might arise from its structural advantage: Fe–N–C active sites were atomically dispersed in the carbon matrix with a high surface density. Such a catalyst could produce more interfacial contact with lithium peroxide. Consequently, it could efficiently lower the activation barrier and reduce the overpotentials during charge. More active sites exposed to O2 and in contact with Li2O2 can benefit both the ORR and OER. Fig. 14  (a) Discharge–charge profiles of Li–O2 batteries using α-MnO2/XC-72 and Fe–N–C as cathode catalysts with a carbon loading of 0.45–1.82 mg cm−2 on carbon paper and Li triflate in G4 as an electrolyte. (b) Representative gas chromatography (GC) signals as a function of retention time for the gas effluents collected at the end of the charging processes shown in (a). Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Another series of catalysts for both the ORR and OER is metal nitrides supported on carbon black. With an electrolyte of LiTFSA in G3 with a molar ratio of 1:5, TiN nanoparticles supported on Vulcan XC-72 (n-TiN/VC) presented a similar discharge voltage as shown in Fig. 15a, but a much larger discharge capacity as shown in Fig. 15b, compared with VC and VC supported micro-sized TiN (m-TiN/VC).122 The lower onset potential of oxygen evolution from Li2O2 in n-TiN/VC (2.9 V), with respect to 3.1 V in both VC and m-TiN/VC, can be obtained from the inset in Fig. 15a, and a small discharge–recharge voltage gap of 1.05 V can be observed in Fig. 15a. This indicates the superior catalytic activity towards the ORR and OER in n-TiN/VC. The improved performance of Li–O2 batteries with n-TiN/VC could be attributed to the good contact of conductive TiN nanoparticles and VC and their intrinsic catalytic activity. Fig. 15  (a) Discharge–recharge curves of VC, m-TiN/VC, and n-TiN/VC as cathode catalysts in Li–O2 batteries and an enlarged section (inset) at ∼50 mA gcarbon−1 and (b) their discharge curves at 500 mA gcarbon−1. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 4 AnodesCurrently, Li metal is used as anodes and will ultimately be replaced by large capacity materials for the sake of safety issues before deployment. Considering the current challenges of the electrolyte and cathode, most efforts are accordingly made here and there is only one paper involving alternative anodes.123 Li anodes have been well reviewed for both Li–O2 and Li batteries many times; most reviews were based on Li batteries before the 1990s and dealt with safety issues. Here, the discussion is limited to recent advances and our perspective.Li–O2 batteries are estimated to possess large theoretical specific energy, ∼3600 W h kg−1. In order to enlarge the feasible specific energy, light-weight cathodes and anodes need to be employed. Li metal, the lightest anode, cannot be considered for a commercial battery because of safety issues, and alternative large capacity materials should be applied. There are not many options. From the known anode materials in Li-ion batteries, Si and its related materials are the most promising.The first attempt at using lithiated Si particles together with carbon as an anode for a Li–O2 battery was made by Scrosati's group.123 The SEM image of the lithiated Si anode is provided in Fig. 16a, in which Si particles are highlighted with yellow circles and the solid electrolyte interface (SEI) film can be seen. Using the lithiated Si particles, a Super P cathode, and the G4–LiCF3SO3 electrolyte, a good cycling performance for Li–O2 batteries is demonstrated in Fig. 16b. This is the first study to present a Li–O2 battery with an alternative anode. The difficulty is how to buffer the volume change and reduce the pulverization of Si particles during discharge and charge, which can induce cycling performance decay. Assuming the discharge voltage of 2.4 V as shown in Fig. 16b, the energy density of the LixSi–O2 battery was estimated to 980 W h kg−1, considerably higher than 384 W h kg−1 offered by conventional 3.6 V Li-ion batteries with a graphite anode and LiCoO2 cathode.123 Fig. 16  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the LixSi electrode formed by microsized carbon particles containing nanosized lithiated silicon particles which are highlighted with yellow circles, and (b) cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries with LixSi as the anode, Super P as the cathode, and G4–LiCF3SO3 as the electrolyte. Current: 200 mA gcarbon−1. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 5 PerspectivesLi–O2 batteries are still at the infant stage, though much important progress has been achieved. The main challenges at this moment are the instability of electrolytes and the low round-trip efficiency. On screening all the known electrolyte solvents, parasitic reactions have more or less been found. In all the claimed reversible Li–O2 batteries, the charge voltage does not increase steeply when charging is almost finished. The electrochemically stable window of electrolytes after discharge is more complicated than that in the absence of Li2O2 which may induce some unknown reactions. The electrolyte should be resistant to oxygen radicals during discharge and possible oxidation, especially in the presence of Li2O2 during charging. On the other hand, the electrolyte cannot be studied without considering the effect of the cathode materials, because the cathode materials, such as Pt18 and Pd,102 may catalyze the decomposition of the electrolyte under some potentials. Searching for and designing stable organic electrolyte solvents will be a tough task for non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries.Although the effect of Li+-solvates on electrolyte stability has not attracted much attention, it definitely contributes to the distribution of electrons throughout the Li+-solvate structure and accordingly affects its reactivity towards the active species, such as O2, O2˙−, O22−, LiO2, Li2O2, etc. inside the batteries, during discharge and charge. Modelling and computing the solvate structure and its electronic distribution will provide more insight into the design of electrolytes for non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries. Attempting the use of mixed-solvent electrolytes may also be an option, because their counterparts have been successfully applied in state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries. Last but not least, additives may be useful to improve the cell performance of non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries.Catalysis is defined as a lowering of the activation barriers in electrochemical reactions in non-aqueous Li–O2 batteries, and accordingly catalysts are applied to reduce the overpotentials on either discharge or charge. Only a large discharge capacity without a reduction in the overpotential cannot be assigned to catalysis. The large discharge capacity is more related to a large pore volume in the cathodes than catalysis itself when the discharge current is very low. There exist many reports on the catalysts of Li–O2 batteries, and unfortunately, not all of them can be called true “catalysts”.Carbon based catalysts are of great interest for Li–O2 batteries, because of their high conductivity, good mechanical properties, and easy handling. Carbon has sufficient ORR activity, and additional ORR catalysts may not be necessary. In particular, the kinetics of the OER process is much slower than that of the ORR process. The aim of applying a catalyst should be to reduce the overpotential of the OER on charge. The OER catalysts should be small-sized and highly dispersed on carbon. This will provide more active sites for the OER involving Li2O2, and the contact between them is extremely important for the oxidation reaction due to the solid and immobile state of Li2O2. Ideally, the catalyst should also be conductive and promote the OER process.Most of the published results have been obtained in Li–O2 batteries with carbon or carbon based cathodes. There exist a lot of already known and possibly unknown parasitic reactions in the interfaces between the cathode, electrolyte, and O2 gas. These parasitic reactions play a big role, especially, in the cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries. The possible reactions are schematically presented in Scheme 2. The Gibbs free energy was calculated based on the thermodynamic data at room temperature.19,124 Li2O2 is proposed to react with electrolyte solvents on charge and form Li alkylcarbonates. The solution may lie in the exploration of Li2O2 compatible electrolytes. The inevitable reaction (1) in Scheme 2 occurs between carbon and Li2O2 with a negative Gibbs free energy. Carbon corrosion at high charge voltages via (2) in Scheme 2 has not been considered and is also possible, and is well known in fuel cells. In particular, carbon corrosion could be accelerated by the addition of a catalyst.104 Although it is a molecular layer of Li2CO3 between the Li2O2 and carbon, it will be detrimental due to its covering of the active sites for further ORR or OER and accordingly induce a high overpotential upon charging. Scheme 2  Possible reactions in the interfaces between the cathode and electrolyte in Li–O2 batteries with carbon based and carbon-free cathodes. A possible solution is to apply a carbon-free cathode in a Li–O2 battery, as depicted in the right panel of Scheme 2. This will result in the avoidance of the reactions between carbon and Li2O2 on the surface of the cathodes and possible carbon corrosion under a high potential. The carbon-free cathode should have high conductivity and no catalytic activity for electrolyte solvent decomposition on either discharge or charge, and be stable against oxygen radicals generated on discharge and under high charge potential. Importantly, this carbon-free cathode should be inert to Li+ in the working potential window. It will function as both an ORR and OER catalyst like carbon based cathodes and provide void spaces for storing the discharge product Li2O2. Consequently, the carbon-free cathode should be rigid enough to tolerate the effect of the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 particles on its conducting network. To obtain a large specific discharge capacity, macroporous cathodes may be more applicable than their mesoporous counterparts. This can also promote the kinetic performance of Li–O2 batteries. Lightweight compounds or elements are desirable for carbon-free cathodes. Unfortunately, TiN,122 TiC, and TiB2 (unpublished results) are prone to oxidation below 4.2 V in the LiTFSA and G3 electrolyte in an O2 atmosphere. Other conductive materials, such as oxides, may be more promising in terms of oxidative stability. However, even if carbon-free cathodes are applied here, the possible reactions involving Li2O2 and electrolyte still exist before a stable electrolyte is found. On the other hand, the carbon-free cathode can be applied for exploring Li2O2 compatible electrolytes by excluding the parasitic reactions between Li2O2 and carbon.The capacity of a Li–O2 battery is related to the three-phase boundary of the electrolyte, cathode, and O2 gas, and the pore volume. It is not proportional to the mass of the catalyst employed in the cathode. Moreover, the efficiency of a catalyst is actually low, e.g. ∼30% as calculated by reference to a fuel cell. The unit per mass (mA h g−1 and mA g−1) may not be reasonable to describe the capacity and current density. Low carbon loadings usually lead to high values, but they are not practical. For instance, 500 mA g−1 seems to be a very large current density, but when converted to mA cm−2 (for example 0.5 mA cm−2, assuming a carbon loading of 1 mg cm−2), it is a small current density compared with those for Li-ion batteries. Therefore, it may be more plausible to use units per geometrical surface area in Li–O2 batteries.All the challenges with the current Li–O2 batteries cannot be resolved at once but step by step. In our opinion, the problems with non-aqueous electrolytes and catalysts should be solved first. Otherwise, the problems cannot be distinguished between the cathode, electrolyte, or anode. Anodes with large specific capacities have been well studied in the relatively sophisticated Li-ion batteries, though their investigation is still insufficient. At this moment, Li foils are employed and will ultimately be replaced due to safety issues. Alternative anode materials should possess large specific capacities, which are comparable to those of cathodes in Li–O2 batteries. Achieving this will involve the development of anodes in Li-ion batteries, such as Si. But the anodes cannot be simply transferred from a Li-ion battery to a Li–O2 battery, because of the compatibility of the anodes and the dissolved O2 in the electrolytes.Much advance has been achieved, but the challenges remain. The fundamental understanding of Li–O2 batteries is still insufficient. A generally accepted O2 reduction and evolution reaction mechanism in the presence of Li+ in non-aqueous electrolytes is still lacking. Whether O2˙− exists as a limited number of ions in a non-aqueous electrolyte or as transient LiO2 is important for understanding electrolyte decomposition on discharge. How the catalyst functions upon reducing the overpotential on charge is still unknown. The role of carbon (or catalyst) in the decomposition of electrolytes on charge needs further investigation. However, even if all the critical challenges for electrolytes and catalysts could be solved, Li–O2 batteries will have to face another problem: how to operate a Li–O2 battery under ambient conditions in the presence of CO2 and H2O. On the other hand, all-solid-state lithium–air batteries may be important if there are breakthroughs in increasing the conductivity of solid electrolytes.14,125Notes and referencesJ. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 770 CrossRef CAS .F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172 RSC .G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193 CrossRef CAS .K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1 CrossRef CAS .T. Ogasawara, A. Débart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390 CrossRef CAS .J. Christensen, P. Albertus, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, T. Lohmann, B. Kozinsky, R. Liedtke, J. Ahmed and A. Kojic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, R1 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 668 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Shimonishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1661 RSC .Y. Wang and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 358 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4994 CAS .H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 889 CrossRef CAS .T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11062 CrossRef CAS .X. Yang and Y. Xia, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 109 CrossRef CAS .S. Meini, M. Piana, N. Tsiouvaras, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasterger, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 15, A45 CrossRef CAS .B. D. McClosky, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby and A. C. Luntz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18038 CrossRef .M. W. Chase, Jr, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Monogr., 1998, 9, 1510 Search PubMed   & 1506.C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20127 CAS .C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178 CAS .B. D. McCloskey, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23897 CAS .Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Chen, V. Giordani, F. Bardé, P. Novák, D. Graham, J. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6351 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shao, F. Ding, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Park, J. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, Adv.
Funct. Mater., 2012, 23, 987 CrossRef .J. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. Choi, M. Liu and K. T. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34 CrossRef CAS .K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303 CrossRef CAS .F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani, S. Yokoishi and H. Iba, Electrochemistry, 2010, 78, 403 CrossRef CAS .B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1161 CrossRef CAS .V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, M. Blanco, S. Zecevic, K. Sasaki, J. Uddin, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12399 CrossRef CAS .V. S. Bryantsev, J. Uddin, V. Giordani, W. Walker, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A160 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, Z. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040 CrossRef CAS .W. Xu, K. Xu, V. V. Viswannthan, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, D. Hu, D. Wang and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9631 CrossRef CAS .J. Xiao, J. Hu, D. Wang, D. Hu, W. Xu, G. L. Graff, Z. Nie, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5674 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Veith, N. J. Dudney, J. Howe and J. Nanda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14325 CAS .V. S. Bryantsev and M. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 379 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Koch and J. H. Young, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 1371 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 181 CrossRef CAS .V. R. Koch and J. H. Young, Science, 1979, 204, 499 CAS .J. L. Goldman, R. M. Mank, J. H. Young and V. R. Koch, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 1461 CrossRef CAS .Y. Lu, D. G. Kwabi, K. P. C. Yao, J. R. Harding, J. Zhou, L. Zuin and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2999 CAS .J. R. Harding, Y. Lu, Y. Tsukada and Y. Shao-Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10540 RSC .Y. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Liang, Y. Lu, J. Jin, M. Wu and X. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7893 CAS .W. Xu, J. Xiao, J. Zhang, D. Wang and J. G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A773 CrossRef CAS .C. Ó. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A302 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8609 CrossRef CAS .W. Xu, J. Hu, M. H. Engelhard, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Ding, M. E. Gross and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 240 CrossRef CAS .R. Black, S. H. Oh, J. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902 CrossRef CAS .H. Jung, J. Hassoun, J. Park, Y. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 579 CrossRef CAS .H. Jung, H. Kim, J. Park, I. Oh, J. Hassoun, C. S. Yoon, B. Scrosati and Y. Sun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4333 CrossRef CAS .Z. Zhang, J. Lu, R. S. Assary, P. Du, H. Wang, Y. Sun, Y. Qin, K. C. Lau, J. Greeley, P. C. Redfern, H. Iddir, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C., 2011, 115, 25535 CAS .C. Ó. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A302 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8609 CrossRef CAS .W. Xu, J. Hu, M. H. Engelhard, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Ding, M. E. Gross and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 240 CrossRef CAS .R. Black, S. H. Oh, J. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902 CrossRef CAS .B. D. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. C. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. K. Nørskov and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997 CrossRef CAS .B. M. Gallant, R. R. Mitchell, D. G. Kwabi, J. Zhou, L. Zuin, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20800 CAS .B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, T. Mori, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, M. Sherwood and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3043 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Pappenfus, W. A. Henderson, B. B. Owens, K. R. Mann and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A209–A215 CrossRef CAS .T. Tamura, T. Hachida, K. Yoshida, N. Tachikawa, K. Dokko and M. J. Watanabe, Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6095–6100 CrossRef CAS .K. Yoshida, M. Nakamura, Y. Kazue, N. Tachikawa, S. Tsuzuki, S. Seki, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13121–13129 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Yamada, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201200776 .D. T. Sawyer and J. L. Robert, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1966, 12, 90 CAS .M. E. Peover and B. S. White, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1965, 183 RSC .M. E. Peover and B. S. White, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1061 CrossRef CAS .T. A. Lorenzola, B. A. López and M. C. Giordono, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1359 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Maricle and W. G. Hodgson, Reduction of oxygen to superoxide anion in aprotic solvents, Anal. Chem., 1965, 37, 1562 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Johnson, K. H. Pool and R. E. Hamm, Anal. Chem., 1966, 38, 183 CrossRef CAS .A. D. Goolsby and D. T. Sawyer, Anal. Chem., 1968, 40, 83 CrossRef CAS .D. Vasudevan and H. Wendt, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 192, 69 CrossRef .H. Yang and R. L. McCreery, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3420 CrossRef CAS .D. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Xu, L. Zhang and X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6948 RSC .Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Trahan, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A259 CrossRef CAS .Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, F. Bardé and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7952 CrossRef CAS .W. Xu, J. Hu, M. H. Engelhard, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Ding, M. E. Gross and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 240 CrossRef CAS .J. Christensen, P. Albertus, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, T. Lohmann, B. Kozinsky, R. Liedtke, J. Ahmed and A. Kojic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, R1 CrossRef CAS .O. Crowther, B. Meyer and M. Salomon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A113 CrossRef CAS .D. Guyomard and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 3071 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Tarascon and D. Guyomard, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 293 CrossRef CAS .L. Cecchetto, M. Salomon, B. Scrosati and F. Croce, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 233 CrossRef CAS .S. Oswald, D. Mikhailova, F. Scheiba, P. Reichel, A. Fiedler and H. Ehrenberg, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400, 691 CrossRef CAS .J. Hassoun, F. Croce, M. Armand and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2999 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Veith and N. J. Dudney, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A658 CrossRef CAS .G. M. Veith, J. Nanda, L. H. Delmau and N. J. Dudney, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1242 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Oh, T. Yim, E. Pomerantseva and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A185 CrossRef CAS .L. J. Krause, W. Lamanna, J. Summerfield, M. Engle, G. Korba, R. Loch and R. Atanasoski, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 320 CrossRef CAS .H. Yang, K. Kwon, T. M. Devine and J. W. Evans, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 4399 CrossRef CAS .B. Xie, H. S. Lee, H. Li, X. Q. Yang, J. McBreen and L. Q. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1195 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang, D. Zheng, X. Yang and D. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3697 CAS .S. Zhang and J. Read, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2867 CrossRef CAS .Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, M. C. Parent, V. Chiloyan and Y. Shao-Horn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A69 CrossRef CAS .R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2952 CAS .Y.-C. Lu and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 93 CrossRef CAS .M. M. O. Thotiyl, S. A. freunberger, Z. Peng and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 494 CrossRef .L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781 CrossRef CAS .S. Zhu, Z. Chen, B. Li, D. Higgins, H. Wang, H. Li and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5080 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, A. Yu, D. Higgins, H. Li, H. Wang and Z. Chen, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1946 CrossRef CAS .E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020 CrossRef CAS .Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1704 CAS .J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071 CrossRef CAS .Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699 CrossRef CAS .W. Zhang, Y. Zeng, C. Xu, H. Tan, W. Liu, J. Zhu, N. Xiao, H. H. Hng, J. Ma, H. E. Hoster, R. Yazami and Q. Yan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8508 RSC .A. A. Gewirth, Abstract on the 24th GREEN Open Seminar Held at National Institute of Materials Science, Japan,  Nov. 12, 2012 Search PubMed .J. R. Harding, Y.-C. Lu, Y. Tsukada and Y. Shao-Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10540 RSC .D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, Carbon, 2005, 43, 179 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, K. Y. Chan and H. Yung, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12139 RSC .V. Neburchilov, H. Wang, J. J. Martin and W. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1271 CrossRef CAS .J. B. Goodenough, R. Manoharan and M. Paranthaman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 2076 CrossRef CAS .R. Black, J. Lee, B. Adams, C. A. Mims and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 392 CrossRef CAS .S. H. Oh, R. Black, E. Pomerantseva, J. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 1004 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cui, Z. Wen, S. Sun, Y. Lu and J. Jin, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 598 CrossRef CAS .M. Lefevre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J. P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71 CrossRef CAS .Z. Chen, D. C. Huggins, A. Yu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167 CAS .C.-W. Tsai, M.-H. Tu, C.-J. Chen, T.-F. Hung, R.-S. Liu, W.-R. Liu, M.-Y. Lo, Y.-M. Peng, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, D.-S. Shy and X.-K. Xing, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1349 RSC .A. Velazquez-Palenzuela, L. Zhang, L. Wang, P. L. S. Cabot, E. Brillas, K. Tsay and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12929 CAS .G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443 CrossRef CAS .G. Wu, N. H. Mack, W. Gao, S. Ma, R. Zhong, J. Han, J. K. Baldwin and P. Zelenay, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9764 CrossRef CAS .E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J. P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef .J.-L. Shui, N. K. Karan, M. Balasubramanian, S.-Y. Li and D.-J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16654 CrossRef CAS .F. Li, R. Ohnishi, Y. Yamada, J. Kubota, K. Domen, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1175 RSC .J. Hassoun, H. Jung, D. Lee, J. Park, K. Amine, Y. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5775 CrossRef CAS .M. W. Chase, Jr, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Monogr., 1998, 9, 624 Search PubMed .H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9077 CAS .Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Fujun Li	Fujun Li received his MSc degree in Materials Chemistry and Physics from the Institute of New Energy Materials Chemistry of Nankai University, China, with Prof. Jun Chen in 2007 and his PhD degree from the University of Hong Kong with Prof. Kwong-Yu Chan in 2011. He is now working as a postdoc. in the University of Tokyo and AIST (Tsukuba), Japan, with Prof. Atsuo Yamada and Prof. Haoshen Zhou, respectively. His research interests include multi-scale porous materials for supercapacitors, electrocatalysts for fuel cells, electrolytes and catalysts for Li–O2 batteries, and Li-ion batteries.
Tao Zhang	Tao Zhang received his PhD in physical chemistry in 2007 from Fudan University. In the same year he joined Shanghai University as a lecturer. From 2008 to 2011, he held a postdoctoral fellowship in Mie University. He currently holds a research fellowship in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). His research interests lie in the area of advanced energy electrochemistry, including the devices and the associated materials for energy conversion and storage such as Li–air batteries, all-solid-state polymer Li-ion batteries, and Li-ion conducting materials. He has authored more than 40 peer reviewed publications.
Haoshen Zhou	Haoshen Zhou graduated from the Department of Physics, Nanjing University, China, in 1985. He obtained his PhD from the Department of Chemical Engineering, the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1994. He is now a prime senior researcher of the Energy Technology Research Institute (ETRI), National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) and leading the Energy Interface Technology Group, ETRI, AIST, Japan. He is also an invited professor at both the University of Tokyo and Nanjing University. His research interests include the synthesis of functional materials and their applications in lithium ion batteries, metal–air batteries, new type batteries/cells, fuel cells, dye sensitized solar cells, hydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces and electrochemical sensors.
Broader contextAs the market for portable electronic devices of minimized size and electric vehicles has been growing steeply, energy storage systems with high specific energy and energy density have attracted a lot of attention in recent years. Vehicles using state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries can only drive for about 160 km per charge, which is far behind the 700 km range of a gasoline-powered vehicle. The formidable challenge is the theoretical capacity of intercalated electrode materials. New energy storage systems beyond Li-ion batteries need to be developed. Li–O2 batteries, possessing a capacity 5–8 times higher than that of Li-ion batteries, are considered promising candidates.
2Li + O2 = Li2O2, ΔG° = −571.0 kJ mol−1 (E° = 2.96 V)	(1)
4Li + O2 = 2Li2O, ΔG° = −562.1 kJ mol−1 (E° = 2.91 V)	(2)

 	Scheme 1  ORR and OER pathways in non-aqueous electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 1  Linear sweep voltammetry at 0.5 mV s−1 using the DEMS cell (XC72 carbon cathode). (a) The current is the solid line, and the points are the O2 (and CO2) measured by DEMS. (b) e−/O2 was determined by comparing the current to the moles of O2 consumed or evolved (by measuring the pressure change ΔP in the isolated cell head space). Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Solvent evaporation rate of pure solvents inside a dry box at 29 °C over 2 months. DME, DEE, DEC, BEE, DPG, DG, EDG, PC, and BDG denote 1,2-dimethoxyethane, 1,2-diethoxyethane, diethyl carbonate, 1-tert-butoxy-2-ethoxyethane, diproglyme, diglyme, ethyl diglyme, propylene carbonate, and butyl diglyme, respectively. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2009 The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the composite cathode (Super P/Kynar) cycled in 1 M LiPF6 in G4 under 1 atm O2 between 2 and 4.6 V versus Li/Li+, current = 70 mA gcarbon−1. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  Cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries at a current density of 500 mA gcarbon−1 with a capacity limit of 5000 mA h gcarbon−1 and TEM image of Li2O2 particles during discharge (inset). Reproduced with permission.48,49 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group & American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Discharge–charge curves of Li–O2 batteries with LiTFSA–(G3)n, n = 1 (a), 3 (b), 5 (c), and 7 (d), as the electrolyte at a current density of 500 mA gcarbon−1, a cut-off capacity of 2000 mA h gcarbon−1, and a potential window from 2.0 to 4.7 V vs. Li/Li+ over 20 cycles. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  Charge/discharge curves (left) and cycling profile (right) for an Li–O2 cell with a 0.1 M LiClO4–DMSO electrolyte and a nanoporous gold cathode, at a current density of 500 mA g−1 (based on the mass of Au). Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  19F-NMR data for the electrolyte and the electrolyte after discharge. Inset: zoom of the plot of 19F-NMR data for the electrolyte and the electrolyte after discharge, showing changes in the 19F signal due to BF4− decomposition. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Discharge–charge curves of Li–O2 batteries with various cathode catalysts employing DME as an electrolyte at 0.18 mA cm−2 (a) and corresponding O2 evolution during charging (b). Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed reaction mechanism in Li–O2 batteries on charging. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Discharge–charge curves on the first cycle with G4-based electrolyte at a carbon-only cathode. (b) The moles of CO2 evolved from the carbon cathode,removed from the cell at the discharged and charged states indicated by the green dots in (a) then treated with acid to decompose Li2CO3 and Li2CO3 and Fenton's reagent to decompose the lithium carboxylates. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Voltage profiles on charge for cells containing chemically deposited Li2O2 in the presence of either Co3O4/RGO/KB or KB. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  The structure of the defect pyrochlore A2B2O7−δ (δ = 0.5; A = Pb, Bi; B = Ru) showing oxygen vacancies and electron conduction paths via BO6 octahedra that create metallic conductivity. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM images of mesoporous Co3O4 templating against KIT-6, which was at an aging temperature of 80, 60, or 40 °C. Discharge–charge profiles of carbon black supported Co3O4 electrodes at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2 in a DME-saturated O2 atmosphere.113 Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Discharge–charge profiles of Li–O2 batteries using α-MnO2/XC-72 and Fe–N–C as cathode catalysts with a carbon loading of 0.45–1.82 mg cm−2 on carbon paper and Li triflate in G4 as an electrolyte. (b) Representative gas chromatography (GC) signals as a function of retention time for the gas effluents collected at the end of the charging processes shown in (a). Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Discharge–recharge curves of VC, m-TiN/VC, and n-TiN/VC as cathode catalysts in Li–O2 batteries and an enlarged section (inset) at ∼50 mA gcarbon−1 and (b) their discharge curves at 500 mA gcarbon−1. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the LixSi electrode formed by microsized carbon particles containing nanosized lithiated silicon particles which are highlighted with yellow circles, and (b) cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries with LixSi as the anode, Super P as the cathode, and G4–LiCF3SO3 as the electrolyte. Current: 200 mA gcarbon−1. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Possible reactions in the interfaces between the cathode and electrolyte in Li–O2 batteries with carbon based and carbon-free cathodes.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
