Atomic Fe hetero-layered coordination between g-C 3 N 4 and graphene nanomeshes enhances the ORR electrocatalytic performance of zinc–air batteries   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09722D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09722D
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1451-1458Atomic Fe hetero-layered coordination between g-C3N4 and graphene nanomeshes enhances the ORR electrocatalytic performance of zinc–air batteries†

        
          
            Congwei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huifang 
            Zhao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Zhao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Miao 
            Cheng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoyong 
            Duan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Junying 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Junzhong 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab
aCAS Key Laboratory of Carbon Materials, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Taiyuan, 030001, P. R. China. E-mail: wangjz@sxicc.ac.cn
bCenter of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      9th October 2018
    , Accepted 23rd December 2018First published on 25th December 2018AbstractHetero-layered iron–nitrogen coordination between g-C3N4 and graphene nanomeshes was developed for superior electrocatalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reaction. Compared with the performance of g-C3N4 or atomic Fe embedded in g-C3N4 in the oxygen reduction reaction, the current density at −0.5 V of the two-dimensional hetero-hybrid of atomic Fe, g-C3N4 and graphene was enhanced 13 times, and the half-wave potential of the hybrid positively shifted to 0.278 V. The hybrid exhibited superior electrocatalytic activity with a 20 mV more positive half-wave potential, higher current density, better methanol tolerance and longer-term stability compared to commercial Pt–C. This enhancement originated from mesh-on-mesh exposed inter-layer bridged Fe–N4.1 coordination active sites between g-C3N4 and graphene, which favored a four-electron pathway accompanied by the improvement of the conductivity and mass transport. Superior performance, including a low charge–discharge voltage gap over 20 h of cyling, of the hybrid-based Zn–air battery was achieved. This strategy of the hetero-layered interfacial metal–nitrogen coordination between different 2D materials is a general approach to develop advanced electrocatalysts for sustainable energy applications.
Introduction
The electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) are the fundamental processes in a range of energy conversion and storage applications.1–3 Owing to the intrinsically distinctive mechanisms, noble metal-based catalysts are selected to achieve favourable performances. However, due to the sluggish multi-step proton-coupled electron transfer reactions, oxygen electrode exhibits inherently slow kinetics and is expensive than the counter hydrogen electrode, in addition to the limited supply and poor durability of oxygen electrodes. Therefore, numerous efforts have been made to replace noble metal catalysts with specific bonding/atomic configurations that show comparable or better performances. Among the current alternatives, catalysts with transition metal–nitrogen coordination sites (Me–N–C) are considered the most viable candidates exhibiting competitive performances.4–8 The electrocatalytic activities of these Me–N–C catalysts are strongly dependent on their coordination environments. Therefore, their atomic composition should be accurately optimized. However, the current synthetic approaches usually involve the pyrolysis of iron/cobalt, nitrogen and carbon precursors at high temperatures to achieve Me–N–C sites, during which the formation of Me–N–C are relatively random and their coordination environments are difficult to precisely control.9–11 Moreover, the by-products, such as inactive metal (oxides) nanoparticles or aggregations could inevitably compromise their activities.12,13 Therefore, it remains a grand challenge to fabricate electrocatalysts with optimized Me–N–C configurations.
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4, CN) is a two-dimensional material composed of periodic aromatic moieties of sp2-hybridized carbon and nitrogen atoms. Its appealing electronic band structure and physicochemical stability offers great potential as a visible-light-responsive photocatalyst in areas of solar energy conversion and environment remediation.14–16 Interestingly, the rich pyridine-like nitrogen and nanocavities could ideally provide plentiful electron lone pairs to capture and stabilize transition metal ions in the ligands, triggering interesting electronic modulations observed in their electrocatalytic applications.17–20 Indeed, the so-called “nitrogen pots” within g-C3N4 could offer uniform metal–nitrogen coordination sites19 and provide the ideal chemical environment for the construction of a single atom catalyst (SAC).17 The SAC is a ground-breaking concept that represents the lowest size limit to obtain full atom utility, emerging as a new frontier in heterogeneous catalysis.21–23 Therefore, owing to the ultimate high efficiency of metal atom-utilization, SACs have exhibited remarkable activity in various reactions, including electrocatalysis,24 oxidation,25 the water–gas shift26 and hydrogenation,27 due to the higher density of reactive sites and larger contact area with reactants. More significantly, SACs could provide a clear picture of atomic metal configurations, which is crucial in catalysis for the precise identification of active centres. Nevertheless, the poor conductivity of g-C3N4 requires the inclusion of conductive materials for electrocatalytic applications,19,20 among which graphene (G) is uniquely appealing for its potential in electronic modulation and electrical conductivity enhancement at the g-C3N4/graphene interface. However, the electrocatalytic performance of this kind of hybrid material is yet to be improved.
Herein, we have demonstrated an approach of synthesizing a single-(iron) atom catalyst with conceptual inter-layer structures, i.e. iron atoms coordinated between porous g-C3N4 and nitrogen-doped graphene nanomeshes to form a dual-mesh mesoporous electrochemical SAC, denoted as NGM–CN–Fe. As a bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalyst, NGM–CN–Fe outperforms commercial Pt–C in an alkaline electrolyte with a more positive half-wave potential, larger current density and better methanol tolerance. The NGM–CN–Fe catalysed zinc–air battery presents an outstanding cyclic performance. The active sites of the hybrids and a number of control samples were extensively investigated by advanced techniques, such as aberration-corrected TEM, synchrotron and Mössbauer spectroscopies. The electrocatalytic mechanism and the relationship between the special inter-layer structure and electrocatalytic properties are discussed.
Results and discussion
The procedure for the fabrication of NGM–CN–Fe SAC is illustrated in Fig. 1. The atomic Fe-coordinated g-C3N4 (CN–Fe) was synthesized by the thermal condensation of dicyandiamide (DCDA) and trivalent iron chloride precursors under an argon atmosphere. The exfoliation of CN–Fe nanomesh was obtained through the probe sonication of the as-prepared bulk CN–Fe in the mixture (v/v = 1) of water and isopropanol. Electrochemically exfoliated graphene sheets (Fig. S1†) with an average ∼20 μm lateral size were thermally etched via the solid reaction between carbon atoms on graphene and the etching agent ferrous sulphate, as reported previously.3 Then, the exfoliated CN–Fe nanomesh and graphene nanomesh (GM) were self-assembled through a hydrothermal process with the introduction of DCDA as an additional nitrogen dopant. Further calcination at 600 °C led to the nitrogen doping and thermal reduction of graphene nanomesh, resulting in the consolidation of mesh-on-mesh architecture and atomic Fe coordinated/bridged interfacial enhancement. The annealing temperature was about 200 °C lower than most of the current Fe–N–C electrocatalysts synthesized,4,5 which might have resulted from the lower energy band for the forming of inter-layered Fe–N coordinated active sites.19,20
 Fig. 1  Scheme showing the synthesis of an atomic Fe/g-C3N4/graphene nanomesh hybrid electrocatalyst (yellow ball is Fe atom). 
Electron microscopy was used to characterize the samples obtained at different stages. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, both the thermally etched graphene nanomesh and exfoliated CN–Fe nanosheets exhibited planar structures and homogeneous distribution of high density nanopores, ranging from 2–4 nm for GM and 10–20 nm for iron-coordinated CN–Fe, respectively. After the hydrothermal self-assembly and calcination, the microporous graphene nanomesh and mesoporous CN–Fe were combined into a dual-mesh microstructure, NGM–CN–Fe, as shown in Fig. 2c. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of NGM–CN–Fe in Fig. 2d exhibits a three-dimensional framework structure with ample constructed macropores. Therefore, the abundance of micro-/nano-pores in different dimensions could potentially facilitate the mass transport during catalytic reactions. To further verify the structure and composition of as-produced NGM–CN–Fe, in situ energy-dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) mapping was performed, as shown in Fig. 2e–i. The resultant chemical map confirmed that the bright spots correspond to the presence of carbon, nitrogen and iron elements, respectively. This result, together with the TEM observation show that there were no iron-based nanoparticles in either CN–Fe or NGM–CN–Fe, which indicated the homogeneous distribution of the iron–nitrogen coordination sites on the two dimensional g-C3N4 sheets and NGM–CN–Fe.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of (a) graphene nanomesh, (b) exfoliated g-C3N4 and (c) obtained NGM–CN–Fe, (d) SEM image of NGM–CN–Fe, (e) STEM image of NGM–CN–Fe, energy-dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) colour mapping of (f) mixed, (g) carbon, (h) nitrogen and (i) iron elements, respectively. 
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern in Fig. S2a† shows the spectra of CN–Fe with different Fe feedings. For CN–Fe samples, the (002) diffraction peak was slightly shifted from 27.46° to 27.32° after Fe doping. This subtle movement could be attributed to the increased iron atoms coordinated around the “nitrogen pot” in g-C3N4, leading to a detectable increase in the inter-layer spacing. Moreover, slight broadening of peak width and a decreasing intensity with the increase in iron feeding indicates that the coordination of iron could lower the crystallinity of g-C3N4 and more edge defects could be introduced. It is noted that the following electrochemical measurement (Fig. S5†) determined that CN–Fe-5 exhibited the most appealing performance, thus was used in any further NGM–CN–Fe fabrication. In Fig. S2b,† the typical (002) plane peak at 25° for graphitic material could be observed in GM, in which the broad peak reflects the compromised crystallinity attributed to the “pore-punching”. It is noted that there was no trace of iron-based peaks (metallic iron or iron oxides), indicating the successful coordination between atomic Fe and g-C3N4. Notably, the inter-layer distance of the quasi-2D hybrid material NGM–CN–Fe is 0.331 nm, which is different from the individual components. It is larger than that of CN–Fe (0.324 nm) but smaller than that of graphene nanomesh (∼0.357 nm). This inter-layer rearrangement probably resulted from the interlayer metal-coordination hybridization between CN–Fe and N-doped graphene nanomesh. Under nitrogen heteroatom doping and thermal pyrolysis, the coordination environment of atomic irons possibly changed from the in-plane Fe–N coordination of CN–Fe to out-of-plane and inter-layered Fe–Nx between g-C3N4 and nitrogen-doped graphene nanomesh, as schematically shown in Fig. S2.† This optimization of coordination environment was further confirmed by synchrotron spectroscopy. The hybridization of graphene nanomesh with CN–Fe could also greatly improve the surface area and porosity, as shown in Fig. S2c,† where the surface area of NGM–CN–Fe was about eight times larger (160.86 m2 g−1) than sonicated CN–Fe (19.73 m2 g−1) and almost twice as large as GM (98.15 m2 g−1). This hierarchical mesoporous structure is illustrated in the inset, in which the two distinctive peaks originate from the nanopores in both graphene nanomesh and CN–Fe. The hybridization could also greatly enhance the materials' electrical conductivity, as both CN and CN–Fe exhibit insulating features (>50 MΩ), while after hybridizing with NGM the resistance was improved to around 20 Ω, validating an enhancement of more than six orders of magnitude.
To provide direct evidence of atomic iron coordination in NGM–CN–Fe, we performed sub-angstrom-resolution, high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) imaging in an aberration-corrected STEM (AC-STEM). As shown in Fig. 3, the abundant bright dots, corresponding to atoms with a larger molecular weight than carbon (Fe in this case), are isolated in CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe. The measured sizes of these bright dots were around 1.5–3.0 Å, corresponding to the size of a single Fe atom.24 Interestingly, in the CN–Fe sample (Fig. 3a), Fe atoms were uniformly distributed in each layer of g-C3N4. In contrast, in the NGM–CN–Fe sample, Fe atoms were preferentially dispersed with much higher density at the interface between CN–Fe and graphene sheet (Fig. 3b). It is also observed that there were g-C3N4 clusters or fragments embedded with atomic Fe on the graphene surface, as highlighted in Fig. 3c and d. The hetero-layer hybridization between g-C3N4 and nitrogen-doped graphene was different in each component, which favoured the inter-layered Fe–N configuration. The abundant edges/interfaces of CN–Fe fragments and graphene nanomeshes could supply many more active sites than each singular component in electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 3  HAADF-STEM images of (a) CN–Fe, (b–d) NGM–CN–Fe. 
To investigate and verify the atomic environment and bonding configuration of Fe in NGM–CN–Fe, synchrotron X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) at the Fe K-edge for a range of iron-based materials, including Fe foil, Fe2O3, iron phthalocyanine (FePc) references and atomic Fe coordinated intermediate CN–Fe and final catalyst NGM–CN–Fe are shown in Fig. 4a. The XANES curve of both CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe in Fig. 4a shows the near-edge absorption energy between those of Fe2O3 and Fe foil, implying isolated Fe atoms with positive charges. In Fig. 4b, the corresponding Fourier-transformed (FT) k3-weighted EXAFS curves were further extracted to probe the atomic iron-based local structures.
 Fig. 4  Fe K-edge XANES spectra of NGM–CN–Fe and reference samples, (b) corresponding Fourier transform k3-weighted χ(k)-function of the EXAFS spectra, the inset shows the magnified dash region of the first shell fitting of CN–Fe/NGM–CN–Fe and corresponding EXAFS fitting curves at (c) R space, inset shows the schematic for EXAFS fitting, and (d) k space. 
The FT-EXAFS curve of the Fe K-edge shows that Fe atoms in both intermediate CN–Fe and the final NGM–CN–Fe displayed a different local atomic structure that is neither metallic Fe, nor Fe2O3. Compared with references of Fe foil and Fe2O3, the atomic Fe-coordinated CN–Fe did not present any prominent peaks with bond lengths corresponding to Fe–Fe (2.2 Å) or Fe–O (1.4 Å). Remarkably, the distinctively transformed first coordination shell scattering peak at 1.63–1.68 Å for potential Fe–N bonding could be identified, which resembled the FePc reference sample, as shown in the inset of Fig. 4b. This similarity between the first coordination shell scattering peak in CN–Fe and FePc indicates that the dispersed iron atoms were evenly coordinated with the adjacent nitrogen atoms by taking the advantage of pyridine-like nitrogen of g-C3N4 to capture and stabilize iron ions in the ligands, as schematically shown in the central part of Fig. 1. More significantly, after adding graphene nanomeshes and nitrogen doping, the scattering peak of Fe coordination in NGM–CN–Fe shifted towards a shorter length, as shown in the inset. This unexpected subtle change could be attributed to the potential inter-layer bridging between the original Fe coordination in CN–Fe and doped nitrogen atoms in the added graphene nanomeshes, as schematically shown in the bottom right of Fig. 1, in which the isolated Fe atoms acted as the bridge to link the adjacent nanosheets. EXAFS fitting was further performed to extract the structural parameters and to obtain the quantitative chemical configuration of Fe atoms, as shown in Fig. 4c and d. The obtained coordination number of the Fe atom was about 3.61 for intermediate CN–Fe and 4.12 for NGM–CN–Fe, as listed in Table S2.† The increment of coordination number provided further evidence for the bond formation between Fe atoms in CN–Fe and N/O atoms in graphene nanomeshes. Additional EXAFS curves and the corresponding fittings of reference Fe foil and Fe2O3 are shown in Fig. S4.† Moreover, the absence of Fe–Fe in NGM–CN–Fe is in good agreement with the above TEM, XRD and HAADF-STEM results, in which all the Fe species were atomically coordinated without any particle aggregation. The overlap between experimental EXAFS spectra and the corresponding fitting curves shown in Fig. 4c and d, therefore, confirm our proposed atomic iron bonding configurations.
The chemical state of atomic Fe as well as its local environment holds the key to evaluate and understand their catalytic performances, and was further measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In Fig. 5a, the survey spectra of CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe portray the presence of C, N, O and Fe, in which a fine scan of Fe 2p was still detectable. The content of Fe species in CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe were measured to be 1.38 at% and 1.01 at%, respectively. The peaks of O might be attributed to some O2 or H2O absorbed on the sample surface. It is noted that additional O–N bonding could be observed in NGM–CN–Fe, as shown in Fig. S5.† It is noted that the doped N atoms in the graphene nanomesh accounted for additional inter-layer linking between g-C3N4 and graphene nanomesh via the bridging of atomic irons, validated by the increase in coordination number in EXAFS spectra. The full details of the elemental composition are listed in Table S1.†
 Fig. 5  (a) Survey XPS spectra of NGM, CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe, XPS spectra of (b) N 1s and (c) Fe 2p with peak fitting to deconvolute overlapping features, (d) Mössbauer absorption spectrum of NGM–CN–Fe. 
The nitrogen peak could be deconvoluted into three typical subpeaks centred at 398.6 eV, 399.8 eV and 401.0 eV, respectively, which can be assigned to sp2-hybridized aromatic N bonded to C (C–NC) in triazine rings, tertiary N bonded to C atoms in the form of N–(C)3 and amino functional groups (N–H structure), respectively.28,29 It is noted that the binding energy for the dominating C–NC peak for CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe is higher than that of pure g-C3N4, implying the formation of Fe–N coordination.5 It is noted that without the addition of Fe content, C–NC (pyridinic N) peaks were observed in similar positions in NGM and pure CN. After the successful Fe–N coordination in CN–Fe, the C–NC peak moved to higher binding energy. This “blue shift” tendency was also observed in NGM–CN–Fe, as further verified by the additional inter-layered Fe–N coordination. Specifically, the N atoms of g-C3N4 supplied plenty of electron lone pairs, while the central Fe ion provided unoccupied molecular orbitals for bonding. Following the atomic Fe–N coordination in g-C3N4 nanosheets, the electron density of the N atom was decreased; therefore, the binding capacities of the nucleus were improved for electrons, which led to the increase in the binding energy. The Fe 2p spectra in Fig. 5c has peaks at 711.0 eV and 724.1 eV, assigned to Fe (2p3/2) and Fe (2p1/2) of Fe3+, respectively. The measured binding energy of 711.0 eV is close to the previous reports, in which the Fe ions were seized and stabilized in a g-C3N4 structure through the Fe–N–C bond.18,30 This result is in good agreement with atomic and structural information obtained via HAADF-STEM images, XRD and XANES analysis. Therefore, the atomic irons were successfully coordinated between g-C3N4 and nitrogen-doped graphene nanomesh to build a dual-mesh SAC. The atomic iron coordination environment was further investigated by Fe57 Mössbauer spectroscopy, a technique based on the recoil-free absorption of γ-rays by Fe57 nuclei. The only distinctive doublets seen in the Mössbauer spectrum of NGM–CN–Fe indicates the absence of metallic iron or iron oxide structures, validating the successful coordination of atomic irons. Moreover, the two doublets feature could be indeed assigned to square-planar FeIIN4 or FeIIIN4 moieties in low- and medium-spin states,5,10,31 which further confirmed the Fe–N4.1 coordination environment examined by EXAFS. Therefore, based on the above comprehensive characterizations, the Fe–N coordination could be identified in both CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe.
Electrocatalytic performances of the as-synthesized SACs were investigated comprehensively using an Autolab electrochemical analyser (PGSTAT204). The intermediate CN–Fe with different Fe loadings was first examined by recording the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) using the rotating disk electrode (RDE) approach, as exhibited in Fig. S6.† All CN–Fe samples exhibited ORR activity to some extent, among which CN–Fe-5 showed the most positive onset potential, indicating CN–Fe-5 was the optimal doping level. This Fe loading dependency could be attributed to the excessive Fe content that could break the laminated structure of CN–Fe, which resulted in the aggregation of iron-based nanoparticles and decreasing the surface area.19 Therefore, CN–Fe-5 was employed for making NGM–CN–Fe SAC. It is noted that though there are plenty of pyrrolic/pyridinic-N in g-C3N4 and Fe-pyrrolic/pyridinic-N (Me–N–C) units in CN–Fe, which were well-documented as effective active sites for ORR,32 their electrical conductivities are too limited to be employed in real applications.18 After the introduction of graphene nanomeshes to construct dual-mesh hybridization, which provided both an improved inter-layered Fe–N4.1 coordination environment as the active centre and interfacial enhancement for electron transfer, the hybridized SAC indeed presented a significant performance enhancement.
The resultant cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves of NGM–CN–Fe are presented in Fig. 6a. It shows that a prominent cathodic peak centred at −0.23 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) can be identified in the O2-saturated electrolyte, indicating its pronounced ORR activity. To comparatively investigate and probe the kinetics of the catalytic performances of NGM–CN–Fe along with reference samples, detailed LSV curves are shown in Fig. 6b, in which the ORR activity can be ranked as NGM–CN–Fe > Pt–C > NGM > GM > GM–CN > CN–Fe > pure CN, based on their half-wave potentials. Both pure CN and CN–Fe exhibited the poorest ORR activity as indicated by the most negative onset/half-wave potential and limited current densities (<1 mA cm−2) due to the limited surface areas and poor conductivity. Graphene nanomeshes exhibited an onset/half-wave potential of −0.15 V/−0.28 V, respectively. It is noted that GM–CN presented a similar onset potential with GM but smaller current density, which could be attributed to poor conductivity with the similar potential active sites (edge defects in GM). NGM exhibited improved activity with more positive onset/half-wave potentials, of which the nitrogen doping has been well-documented for enhancing the ORR performance.13,33 The NGM–CN–Fe exhibited a comparable onset potential with commercial Pt–C (20 wt%), while demonstrating better half-wave potentials with a 20 mV improvement and large current density. The onset potential of both pure CN and CN–Fe was around −0.26 V and the current density was −0.45 mA cm−2 at −0.5 V. After hybridization with NGM, the onset potential was improved to nearly 0.00 V and an enhanced current density of −6.42 mA cm−2, 13 times larger than that of CN–Fe was observed. This superior activity illustrates that our strategy for constructing Fe–N4.1 coordination sites via atomic Fe-bridged coordination between g-C3N4 and nitrogen-doped graphene nanomesh could significantly benefit the material's ORR performance, as shown in Fig. 6b and S7.† Indeed, the integration via Fe–N coordination between CN–Fe and NGM could greatly improve the electrode conductivity and charge transfer resistance, as featured by the much smaller semicircle diameter at high frequencies in the characteristic impedance curves (Nyquist plots) of CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe in Fig. S8.† The sole enhancement of the conductivity in which CN–Fe/SP and NGM–CN–Fe exhibited similar electrode conductivity and charge-transfer resistance could not benefit the material's catalytic activity due to the lack of active sites, as the limited onset/half-wave potential improvement of CN–Fe and CN–Fe/SP demonstrate, as shown in Fig. S9.† More significantly, the employment of CN–Fe provided a much clearer bonding configuration for probing the catalytic active sites, in which the inter-layer bridged Fe–N4.1 coordination sites served as the active centre, while the nitrogen-doped graphene nanomesh provided conductivity networks for electron transfer. Interestingly, their mesh-on-mesh architecture could further enhance the interfacial coupling and provide abundant porous channels for mass transport.34 Though the enhancement of specific surface area of NGM–CN–Fe with the CN–Fe component greatly facilitated the mass transport, the constructed inter-layered Fe–N coordination sites played a more decisive role as active sites in impacting the ORR catalytic performance with much improved conductivity and synergetic effects between CN–Fe and NGM. Therefore, our fabricated NGM–CN–Fe is among the best reported Fe–N–C or Fe-based SACs for the ORR, as summarized in Table S3.†
 Fig. 6  (a) CV curves of NGM–CN–Fe SAC in O2- and N2-saturated electrolyte, (b) polarization curves of pure CN, CN–Fe-5, NGM–CN–Fe, GM, GM-CN and Pt–C at 1600 rpm rotation speed, (c) LSV curves of NGM–CN–Fe in different rotation speeds in the range from 400 rpm to 2500 rpm, inset: K–L plot of NGM–CN–Fe, (d) the potential versus current density ratio of CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe to that of Pt–C (20 wt%) in mass unit of metals for the determination of relative activity of anode metal from the polarization curve of (b), (e) the durability of electrodes, (f) LSV curves of pure CN, CN–Fe-5, NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C in O2-saturated electrolyte for OER and the inset shows the corresponding Tafel plot of Pt–C and NGM–CN–Fe catalysts. 
Koutecky–Levich (K–L) plots were further introduced to reveal the catalytic mechanism and the number of electrons transferred (n) during the ORR process in alkaline medium. As shown in Fig. 6c and S10,† a set of LSV curves for NGM–CN–Fe were recorded from 400 rpm to 2500 rpm, with current densities gradually increasing with the increase in the rotation speed due to the shortening of the diffusion distance at higher speed. The K–L plot for NGM–CN–Fe is shown in the inset, wherein a good linearity and parallelism of the plot suggest first-order reaction kinetics toward the electrochemical reduction of O2. The calculated n number was 4.07 at potentials from −0.25 V to −0.40 V, suggesting a more favoured four-electron pathway and the direct formation of water. To directly compare the activity and efficiency of iron and platinum on an atomic scale, we compared current densities of intermediate CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe with Pt–C (20 wt%) at Fe/Pt mass units, as shown in Fig. 6d. The measured activities of NGM–CN–Fe were considerably higher than that of Pt–C, above 26 times in mass. At 0.50 V, the current activity of NGM–CN–Fe was 39.7 A g−1, which was 26 times higher than Pt–C (1.52 A g−1 at 0.50 V) and 35 times higher than CN–Fe (1.12 A g−1 at 0.50 V).
The stability and resistance to the crossover effect are important considerations for practical applications. The stability of NGM–CN–Fe with respect to Pt–C was assessed through chronoamperometric (CA) measurements. As illustrated in Fig. 6e, the CA response for NGM–CN–Fe exhibited slow attenuation with a high current retention of 81.6% after 15000 seconds, whereas Pt–C showed a much faster degradation with 73.7% retention, demonstrating a much better stability of Fe–N4.1 coordination sites. To further investigate the NGM–CN–Fe as an OER catalyst, the corresponding activity of NGM–CN–Fe together with the reference samples was evaluated, as shown in Fig. 6f and S11.† Only NGM–CN–Fe exhibited a prominent OER activity, as a rapid increase in the current density in the high potential range was observed, demonstrating NGM–CN–Fe was also functional in catalysing the OER process. It is noted that though the ability to collect electrons was lacking in CN–Fe, it also presented a certain amount of OER activity compared with pure CN. The stability of NGM–CN–Fe should be verified as exhibiting stronger oxidative stability compared with NGM in OER, which could be attributed to the inter-layer bridged Fe–N bonding for stabilizing these quasi-2D hybrid structures, as shown in Fig. S12.† Combining the results of NGM–CN–Fe and CN–Fe, we can conclude that the constructed inter-layer bridged Fe–N4.1 coordination sites should be the main active sites even in OER catalysis.
Based on the exceptional electrocatalytic activity of NGM–CN–Fe as the air electrode, a rechargeable zinc–air battery (ZAB) composed of an air electrode, a separator and a zinc anode was constructed and evaluated, as shown in Fig. S13.† A Pt–C-based ZAB with the same catalyst loading was tested for comparison. An open-circuit voltage around 1.40 V was measured for both NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C powered batteries, which is consistent with values reported in such cells, as shown in Fig. 7a. Long-term galvanostatic discharge measurements were conducted and the resulting specific capacities of batteries were normalized to the mass of consumed Zn. The ZAB catalysed by NGM–CN–Fe SAC delivered a stable discharge voltage around 1.27 V without any obvious degradation. The NGM–CN–Fe SAC ZAB showed a specific capacity of 677 mA h g−1 at a cutoff voltage of 0.9 V and a discharge density of 10 mA cm−2, which is higher than that of a commercial Pt–C ZAB of 654 mA h g−1. Therefore, the efficiency of a catalyst-loaded electrode could be accompanied by various effects on the zinc electrode, such as dendrite growth, shape change, passivation and internal resistance, affecting the battery's specific capacity.35 Moreover, the chemical stability of metallic Zn in 0.1 M KOH aqueous electrolyte was evaluated by measuring its Tafel plot, as shown in Fig. S14.† The cyclic durability is critical for the practical employment of ZABs. When cycled at a constant current density of 5.0 mA cm−2, the NGM–CN–Fe-based ZAB delivered an initial charge–discharge voltage gap around 0.63 V, while after more than 20 hours cycling, the battery performance did not show any serious decrement as this voltage gap still remarkably maintained at about 0.68 V, with only a small overpotential of 50 mV. In contrast, the Pt–C-based ZAB suffered from apparent performance decay after 10 hours of cycling, which could be attributed to the potential loss of precious metals under the positive charge potential and the evaporation/loss of aqueous electrolyte. It is noted that the degradation difference between charging and discharging could be attributed to the Pt–C durability deference on ORR and OER, as shown in Fig. S15.† Therefore, the outstanding cycling performance of a NGM–CN–Fe powered ZAB exhibited an exceptional electrocatalytic activity of a fabricated mesh-on-mesh SAC.
 Fig. 7  (a) Open-circuit voltage of NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C based Zn–air battery, (b) long-term galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries based on NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C, respectively, (c) galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves, current density 5 mA cm−2, the inset shows potential gap of cycles at the first hour and after 20 hours. 
Conclusions
In summary, a nanohybrid with hetero-layered coordination of atomic Fe–Nx between g-C3N4 and graphene was fabricated through the hydrothermal treatment of exfoliated atomic Fe/g-C3N4 and graphene nanomesh following annealing at 600 °C. The electrocatalytic activity in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) of the hybrid NGM–CN–Fe was enhanced by 14 times the current density at −0.5 V over the component of CN–Fe. The key factor for the ORR enhancement is likely the optimization of active sites of the atomic Fe coordination environments from in-plane Fe–N3.6 in CN–Fe to out-of-plane Fe–N4.1 in NGM–CN–Fe through hetero-layer Fe–N coordination, which is based on advanced technique analysis including HAADF-STEM, XPS and synchrotron and Mössbauer spectroscopies. The 6-order magnitude of electrical conductivity and dual-mesh porosity allowed for fast four-electron mode transfer and mass transport. Compared to commercial Pt–C, the atomic Fe–N4.1 hybrid exhibited superior performance in both the ORR and a zinc–air battery. Particularly, the nanohybrid-based ORR and OER bi-electrocatalyst resulted in a Zn–air battery with an outstanding smaller overpotential over long-term cycling. The hetero-layer hybridization of 2D materials through interfacial metal coordination may provide an alternative way to design advanced electrocatalysts with the synergistic effect of each component.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51502320, U1662102, 21503259), Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province (201601D021060) and Shanxi Scholarship Council of China (2016-142).
Notes and references
H. Cui, Z. Zhou and D. Jia, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 7 RSC .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404 RSC .
C. Wang, Z. Zhao, X. Li, R. Yan, J. Wang, A. Li, X. Duan, J. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, X. Liu, X. Yue, J. Jia and S. Guo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. B. Bezerra, L. Zhang, K. Lee, H. Liu, A. L. B. Marques, E. P. Marques, H. Wang and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4937 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, F. Cheng, S. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, B. Tian, J. Lu and C. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18933 RSC .
J. Zhou, P. N. Duchesne, Y. Hu, J. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Li, T. Regier and H. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15787 RSC .
Y. Zhu, B. Zhang, X. Liu, D.-W. Wang and D. S. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 10849 CrossRef .
Z. Jiang, Z.-J. Jiang, T. Maiyalagan and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5877 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Liu, Z. Pu, Z. Kou, P. Zhu and S. Mu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7641 RSC .
J. Liang, R. F. Zhou, X. M. Chen, Y. H. Tang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, N. Chen, J. Zhang and L. Qu, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 832 RSC .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3092 RSC .
Y. Oh, J. O. Hwang, E.-S. Lee, M. Yoon, V.-D. Le, Y.-H. Kim, D. H. Kim and S. O. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Zhang, X. Fu, M. Antonietti and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, Q. Cai, A. Vasileff, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu and J. Zhang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Yu, S. Wang, D. Deng and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 353 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liang, C. Hao and Y. Shi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2559 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Cheng, H. Zhao and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9915 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mitchell, J. M. Thomas and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4248 RSC .
L. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, A. Patlolla, J. Shan, H. Yoshida, S. Takeda, A. I. Frenkel and F. Tao, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1011 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, H. Fei, X. Zou, W. Zhou, S. Yang, G. Ye, Z. Liu, Z. Peng, J. Lou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. M. Tour and P. M. Ajayan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Y. Wang, S. Zhou, W. Lin and Y. Kong, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1708 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Ghoshal, W. Liang, M.-T. Sougrati, F. Jaouen, B. Halevi, S. McKinney, G. McCool, C. Ma and X. Yuan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2418 RSC .
L. Yang, D. Cheng, H. Xu, X. Zeng, X. Wan, J. Shui, Z. Xiang and D. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 201800771 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Wang, C. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Lu and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2107 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, Z. Cheng, J. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, L. Dai and L. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606352 CrossRef .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1604685 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, material characterizations, electrocatalytic evaluations, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09722dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Scheme showing the synthesis of an atomic Fe/g-C3N4/graphene nanomesh hybrid electrocatalyst (yellow ball is Fe atom).	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of (a) graphene nanomesh, (b) exfoliated g-C3N4 and (c) obtained NGM–CN–Fe, (d) SEM image of NGM–CN–Fe, (e) STEM image of NGM–CN–Fe, energy-dispersive spectroscopic (EDS) colour mapping of (f) mixed, (g) carbon, (h) nitrogen and (i) iron elements, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  HAADF-STEM images of (a) CN–Fe, (b–d) NGM–CN–Fe.	 

 	Fig. 4  Fe K-edge XANES spectra of NGM–CN–Fe and reference samples, (b) corresponding Fourier transform k3-weighted χ(k)-function of the EXAFS spectra, the inset shows the magnified dash region of the first shell fitting of CN–Fe/NGM–CN–Fe and corresponding EXAFS fitting curves at (c) R space, inset shows the schematic for EXAFS fitting, and (d) k space.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Survey XPS spectra of NGM, CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe, XPS spectra of (b) N 1s and (c) Fe 2p with peak fitting to deconvolute overlapping features, (d) Mössbauer absorption spectrum of NGM–CN–Fe.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) CV curves of NGM–CN–Fe SAC in O2- and N2-saturated electrolyte, (b) polarization curves of pure CN, CN–Fe-5, NGM–CN–Fe, GM, GM-CN and Pt–C at 1600 rpm rotation speed, (c) LSV curves of NGM–CN–Fe in different rotation speeds in the range from 400 rpm to 2500 rpm, inset: K–L plot of NGM–CN–Fe, (d) the potential versus current density ratio of CN–Fe and NGM–CN–Fe to that of Pt–C (20 wt%) in mass unit of metals for the determination of relative activity of anode metal from the polarization curve of (b), (e) the durability of electrodes, (f) LSV curves of pure CN, CN–Fe-5, NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C in O2-saturated electrolyte for OER and the inset shows the corresponding Tafel plot of Pt–C and NGM–CN–Fe catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Open-circuit voltage of NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C based Zn–air battery, (b) long-term galvanostatic discharge curves of Zn–air batteries based on NGM–CN–Fe and Pt–C, respectively, (c) galvanostatic discharge–charge cycling curves, current density 5 mA cm−2, the inset shows potential gap of cycles at the first hour and after 20 hours.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental section, material characterizations, electrocatalytic evaluations, etc. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09722d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
