Kagome metal KV 3 Sb 5 : an excellent material for surface plasmon and plasmon-mediated hot carrier applications in the infrared region  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC03942G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC03942G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 18393-18403Kagome metal KV3Sb5: an excellent material for surface plasmon and plasmon-mediated hot carrier applications in the infrared region

        
          
            Weiming 
            He
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiangchao 
            Ma
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Jiali 
            Jiang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Wu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jianqi 
            Zhang
          
        
      
School of Optoelectronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi'an, 710071, China. E-mail: xcma@xidian.edu.cn
Received 
      19th September 2022
    , Accepted 22nd November 2022First published on 23rd November 2022AbstractKV3Sb5 has attracted considerable attention because of its superconductivity, which is an unconventional electronic transport property. This transport property can facilitate an excellent surface plasmon (SP) resonance effect. Herein, based on many-body first-principles methods, we studied the electronic structures and SP properties of KV3Sb5 and the generation and transport properties of plasmon-mediated hot carriers. It was concluded that the surface plasmon polariton (SPP) propagation length of KV3Sb5 can reach the centimeter-length scale in the infrared region and the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) absorption efficiency and near-field enhancement are much higher for KV3Sb5 than Au. These results suggest promising SP applications of KV3Sb5 in the infrared range. In addition, the direct interband and phonon-assisted intraband electronic transitions in the SP energy range are very efficient in KV3Sb5, indicating its significant plasmon-mediated hot carrier generation ability through Landau damping. Furthermore, the mean free paths and mean free times of hot carriers were the at nanometer-length and femtosecond-time scales, respectively, which are comparable with that of Au. These results indicate the potential of KV3Sb5 for plasmon-mediated hot carrier applications.
Introduction
Metals can effectively capture light and generate energetic hot carriers through surface plasmon (SP) resonance. These plasmon-mediated hot carriers can be used to improve the chemical reaction efficiency or transfer through the metal-semiconductor interface in solar power generation and photodetection applications.1–3 These applications require not only hot carrier extraction with high probability4,5 but also efficient transformation of incident light into energetic hot carriers.6,7 However, only a few materials can satisfy these requirements. Therefore, exploring new SP materials for plasmon-mediated hot carrier applications has become a research hotspot, which is a big challenge.
The recently discovered Kagome metal KV3Sb5 has been proposed as a next-generation material for future technologies.8,9 Typically, it is characterized by Dirac electronic states and giant anomalous Hall effect,10,11 leading to superconducting properties.12,13 The topologically protected surface states can sustain excellent carrier conduction,14 resulting in high conductivity and imaginary part of dielectric function. Therefore, the loss of the optical field in the material will increase. Also, the high conductivity of KV3Sb5 indicates that it may have excellent SP properties. However, there is a lack of research on the SP properties of KV3Sb5. Therefore, an in-depth understanding of the optoelectronic response and SP properties (including surface plasmon polariton (SPP) and localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)) of KV3Sb5 is important for its practical applications. Alternatively, the intriguing Kagome structure of KV3Sb5 may allow superior carrier transport properties, which are essential for optoelectronic devices ranging from solar cells to touchscreens, photodetectors, and ultrafast laser imaging.14–16 However, the carrier dynamics of KV3Sb5 has not been analyzed systematically.
Therefore, herein, the optical response and carrier properties of KV3Sb5 were systematically investigated with the aim to gain insight into its plasmon-mediated carrier generation and carrier transport processes. Specifically, based on many-body first-principles calculations, we firstly evaluate the complex dielectric functions of KV3Sb5. Then, we discuss the SPP properties of KV3Sb5, including its plasmon dispersion, propagation length and confinement ratio. Next, the LSPR properties of KV3Sb5 were investigated and compared with that of Au. Finally, we present the electron–electron (e–e) and electron–phonon (e–ph) scattering rates, mean free paths and mean free times of hot carriers. These studies lay a theoretical foundation for the SP and plasmon-mediated hot carrier applications of KV3Sb5.
Computational method
Computational details
The band structure, phonon spectrum and electron phonon matrix were calculated using the JDFTX code.17 Full-relativistic norm-conserving pseudopotentials were used to simulate the ionic potential.18 The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) functional by Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof was used to describe the exchange-correlation energy.19 The k-point sampling was set to (8 × 8 × 4) and (16 × 16 × 8) for accurate band structure and density of state (DOS) calculations, respectively. We tested all these parameters to obtain converged results. We calculated the phonon dispersion and electron–phonon matrix element with a 2 × 2 × 1 supercell using the same electronic DFT parameters as above in JDFTx. Next, all the electron, phonon, and electron–phonon matrix elements were converted to the maximally localized Wannier function (MLWF) basis representation. Specifically, we used 37 Wannier bands to exactly reproduce the orbital energies, phonon energies, and electron–phonon matrix elements. We set the Wannier windows that capture the band structure of KV3Sb5 for ±8 eV surrounding the Fermi level. The initial guesses for constructing the 37 MLWFs were the Gaussian orbitals located randomly in the supercell. All the above-mentioned parameters ensure the convergence of the all the results. Finally, we calculated the optical response and transport properties of KV3Sb5 by Monte Carlo Brillouin-zone integration as follows.
Optical responses
The optical responses of metal materials are mainly determined by the interband electronic transitions, phonon-assisted intraband electronic transitions, and Drude resistance. The optical response can be expressed by complex conductivity σ(ω), where the real part is determined as follows:20,21 (1)where the first term is the contribution of the phonon-assisted intraband transitions and Drude resistance and the second term represents the contribution of direct interband electronic transitions. The frequency-dependent momentum relaxation rate τD−1 (ω) can be expressed as follows:22,23 (2)where bT (ε) and Gpqα are the same as that in our previous work.24
For the Drude resistance effect in the first term of eqn (1), the ratio of DC conductivity to the average Drude momentum relaxation time was determined as follows:20 (3)
The real part of conductivity due to direct interband transitions, Reσinter, can be calculated as follows:25 (4)where fnk is the Fermi occupation (with kBT ∼ 0.00094 Hartrees) of the electrons in band n with wave-vector k; vknn′ is the eigenvector of the velocity operator; and ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant. Finally, the Brillouin-zone integration was calculated using Monte Carlo sampling with ∼106 k points for convergence.
Transport properties
The effects of both electron–electron and electron–phonon interactions on the transport properties of hot carriers were considered. For the electron–electron scattering rate, we calculated the imaginary part of the quasiparticle self-energy as follows:26 (5)where nkr′k′(G) are density matrices in plane-wave basis and εGG′−1 is the RPA dielectric matrix for reciprocal lattice vectors G and G′.
For the electron–phonon scattering rate, we calculated the imaginary part of the lowest order electron–phonon self-energy as follows:24,27 (6)where η = 25 meV is the Lorentzian broadening considering thermal oscillation; nk′−k,α is the Bose occupation of the phonon state with wave vector k′ − k and polarization index α, and the other terms are the same as that in eqn (4).
Correspondingly, the mean free time was calculated as follows: (7)
The mean free path was calculated using λnk = vnk × τnk, where τnk and vnk are the mean free time and group velocity of the carrier in the electronic state nk, respectively.28
Results and discussion
Structure and stability
KV3Sb5 has a layered hexagonal crystal structure with its V–Sb sheets stacked between K layers. A kagome network of V atoms and a hexagonal lattice of Sb interlace with each other to form the V–Sb sheet, as shown in Fig. 1(a).29 The experimental lattice parameters of KV3Sb5 are: a = b = 5.4 Å, c = 8.9 Å.30
 Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structures of KV3Sb5 from the side view (left) and the top view (right). (b) First Brillouin zone enclosed by the blue lines and the reduced Brillouin zone surrounded by red lines. Cartesian coordinate system and lattice vector are shown in the figure. 
Our research first focused on the band structure, total density of states (DOS) and phonon dispersion of KV3Sb5, as shown in Fig. 2. According to Fig. 2(a), it can seen that some bands cross the Fermi level (EF), indicating that KV3Sb5 presented here is metallic. The band crossing the EF originates from the dispersive bands near G and A and Dirac-like bands near and at K and H. In addition, there are some saddle points near EF at M. These results are consistent with the previous studies.31 In our calculation, the effect of all the bands on the electron transport and optical properties was calculated. As shown in Fig. 2(a), the Dirac bands are coupled with other bands. Therefore, it was difficult to isolate the effect of the Dirac electronic states on the electron transport and optical properties. The phonon dispersion gives the wave vector dependence of the quantum of lattice vibration. It is a necessary and sufficient condition for the mechanical stability of a perfect crystal that its phonon modes are zero at G. Therefore, the phonon dispersion in Fig. 2(b) shows the stability of KV3Sb5. Examining the DOS of KV3Sb5 in Fig. 2(c), it can be found that there is a relatively large DOS of around −1.1 and 1.1 eV, whereas that near the Fermi level is relatively small.
 Fig. 2  (a) Band structure of KV3Sb5, where the solid arrow at M marks the saddle points and dashed arrows mark the Dirac points. The black scatters represent the band structures calculated by DFT calculations and the red lines were obtained through interpolation of MLWFs. (b) Phonon dispersion and (c) density of states (DOS) of KV3Sb5. 
Surface plasmon (SP) properties
Depending on the dimension of metals, surface plasmon can be divided into SPP and LSPR. The efficiency of surface plasmon-based devices such as solar cells and photodetectors significantly depends on the surface plasmon (SP) properties of materials. From the perspective of classical electrodynamics, the SP properties of a metal are mainly determined by its imaginary part of dielectric function, which is related to the real part of conductivity as follows: (8)where Reσ(ω) is the real part of complex conductivity (eqn (1)). Also, the corresponding real part of dielectric function can be calculated using the Kramers-Kronig transformation.32
The calculated real part of optical conductivity and complex dielectric functions of KV3Sb5 are shown in Fig. 3. For comparison, the imaginary part of the dielectric function of Au from the experimental results of Johnson33 is shown in Fig. 3(b). According to Fig. 3(a), it can be seen that our calculated optical conductivity in the energy range of 0.2 to 1 eV is in good agreement with the experimental results,31 indicating the accuracy of our theoretical methods. The imaginary part of the dielectric function of KV3Sb5 is further divided into contributions from the intraband and interband electronic transitions, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The imaginary parts of the dielectric function can be expressed by complex conductivity, which has two terms, as shown in eqn (1). In our calculation, these two parts were calculated separately, and the results are shown in Fig. 3(b). In the energy range below 1 eV, the contribution of the intraband transitions dominates. Alternatively, the interband transitions dominates in the energy range above 1 eV. Overall, the imaginary part of the dielectric function of KV3Sb5 is much larger than that of Au across the examined energy range. Given that the imaginary part represents energy dissipation of the electric field, this indicates stronger transformation of the incident light into electron and hole pairs in KV3Sb5, which will be further discussed in the next section. According to Fig. 3(c), it can be noted that the real part of the dielectric function of KV3Sb5 becomes negative for energies below ∼1 eV, which is an essential condition for the observation of surface plasmon in KV3Sb5. Fig. 3(d and e) show the real parts of the optical conductivity and the imaginary parts of dielectric function along different directions. Due to the hexagonal structure of KV3Sb5, the dielectric function along the X and Y directions is slightly different and greater than that in the Z direction. This result is consistent with the hexagonal structure of KV3Sb5, as shown in Fig. 1. Considering that the difference in dielectric functions along the X, Y and Z directions in the energy range of 0–1 eV is moderate, the plasmon dispersion along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions should not be very different.
 Fig. 3  (a) Real part of the optical conductivity of KV3Sb5. (b) Imaginary and (c) real part of dielectric function of KV3Sb5. The imaginary part of dielectric function of Au from experiment is also shown in (b) for comparison. (d) Real parts of the optical conductivity along the X, Y and Z directions. (e) Imaginary parts of dielectric functions along the X, Y and Z directions. 
Because it is possible to induce surface plasmon with light in the energy range below 1 eV, we then conducted research on the SPP dispersion of KV3Sb5. The dispersion relation can be expressed as follows:34,35 (9)where  is the free space wave vector c is the light speed in vacuum, and εm is the dielectric constant of the surrounding dielectric. To show the effects of different dielectrics, the SPP dispersion relationship between KV3Sb5 and air or SiO2 is shown in Fig. 4. For comparison, the SPP dispersion of Au was also calculated and shown in Fig. 4. We used the dielectric constants εm(air) = 1, εm(SiO2) = 2.25 to define the surrounding dielectrics as air and SiO2, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Dispersion relation of SPP for (a) Au/air, (b) KV3Sb5/air and (c) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. Effective propagation length  of SPP for (d) Au/air, (e) KV3Sb5/air and (f) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. The absolute propagation length of SPP for (g) Au/air, (h) KV3Sb5/air and (i) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. Confinement ratio  of SPP for (j) Au/air, (k) KV3Sb5/air and (l) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. 

Fig. 4(a) shows that the SPP response frequency of Au expands to the ultraviolet range (∼6 eV) and the wavevector approaches 0.035 nm−1. These results are consistent with previous results,36 indicating the accuracy of our methods. As can be seen in Fig. 4(b and c), the SPP response frequency of KV3Sb5 is in the infrared range and the surrounding medium has weak effects on the SPP response range. The SP wavelength (ωsp) of KV3Sb5 is about 1300 nm in the infrared region. Due to damping, the wave vector approaches a maximum at ωsp of the system, which is about 0.009 nm−1 on air and about 0.016 nm−1 on SiO2. The ωsp shown in Fig. 4(a) is an ideal value for lossless metal, and thus there is a certain deviation from the real material.
For the application-relevant figures of merit of a plasmonic material, we quantified the SPP effective propagation length, which is defined as the ratio  and the absolute propagation length defined as L = (2Im(β))−1, which measures the SPP propagation length before the SPP loses most of its energy, where large values indicate low loss. According to Fig. 4(d), the SPP effective propagation length of Au is in the order of 104 with slight dispersion across the examined energy range. Alternatively, the SPP effective propagation length of KV3Sb5 shows strong dependence on the energy and approaches 103 with an increase in energy. In addition, the SPP effective propagation length of KV3Sb5 only slightly depends on the interfacing media, as is reflected by the slight difference in the values in Fig. 4(e and f). Alternatively, because the SPP wave vector of KV3Sb5/air interface is much smaller than that of Au/air interface, the absolute SPP propagation lengths of Au/air (Fig. 4(g)) and KV3Sb5/air (Fig. 4(h)) are very similar, which are both in the order of hundreds of μm. In addition, according to Fig. 4(h and i), the absolute SPP propagation length of KV3Sb5 significantly decreases with an increase in the polarizability of the interfacing medium, which is due to the larger polarization loss. Overall, it can be concluded that the SPP propagation lengths for the Au/air and KV3Sb5/air interfaces are comparable in the examined energy range.
Another important figure of merit of a plasmonic material is the confinement ratio  (λair = 2πc/ω and λsp = 2π/Re(β)), which reflects the degree of localization for incident light by SPP. According to Fig. 4(j and k), the confinement ratios of both Au/air and KV3Sb5/air are close to 1. Also, the confinement ratio of KV3Sb5 almost doubles when interfacing with SiO2, suggesting stronger confinement. This facilitates the improved collection of electric field energy and better spatial resolution imaging.
For real metal with loss, Re(β) reaches the maximum near ωsp. Therefore, according to the definition of the confinement ratio, it should increase significantly near the maximum of Re(β). Alternatively, above the energy corresponding to the maximum of Re(β) no SPP can occur. Overall, the results indicate that KV3Sb5 is an excellent low-loss SPP material in the infrared range, which is comparable with Au.
The localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is another important SP effect, which generally induces strong optical absorption and near-field enhancement and shows promising applications in optoelectronic conversion and surface enhanced spectroscopy.37–39 Therefore, in this part, we explore the LSPR absorption and near-field enhancement properties of KV3Sb5. For comparison, the corresponding LSPR properties for Au were also examined. The LSPR properties of KV3Sb5 and Au nanospheres with the representative radius of 10 nm were calculated using the discrete dipole approximation (DDA) method using the DDSCAT software,40–42 and the results are shown in Fig. 5. The LSPR absorption efficiency Qabs is defined as , where Cabs is the absorption cross-section and αeff is the radius of the nanosphere.
 Fig. 5  Absorption efficiency versus wavelength for the Au and KV3Sb5 nanospheres in (a) air and SiO2. Distribution of near field intensity (E2/E20) for (c) Au (d) KV3Sb5 nanospheres in air and for (e) Au and (f) KV3Sb5 nanospheres in SiO2. The color bars indicate the near field intensity values. 
As shown in Fig. 5(a), there is a relatively weak LSPR absorption peak at around 500 nm for the Au nanosphere in air, which is consistent with previous results.37,43 In contrast, the KV3Sb5 nanosphere in air shows a strong LSPR absorption peak at around 1400 nm. Alternatively, as shown in Fig. 5(b), the LSPR absorption peaks for the Au and KV3Sb5 nanospheres are significantly redshifted in SiO2, and the LSPR absorption is still stronger for KV3Sb5 than Au. As show in Fig. 5(c–f), the near field enhancement under the LSPR wavelength, which is defined as E2/E20 (E and E0 denote amplitude of excited and incident electric field, respectively), is also much stronger for KV3Sb5 than for Au. Moreover, the near-field enhancement can be greatly improved by SiO2. Overall, it can be concluded that KV3Sb5 has excellent LSPR properties in the infrared region, which are much better than that of Au in the visible region.
Hot carrier generation and distribution
Metal materials can effectively absorb light energy through SP. Meanwhile, the inevitable nonradiative decay of SP through Landau damping, which can generate a large amount of hot electrons and holes, has recently been intensively studied for optoelectronic and photocatalytic applications.44,45 Physically, there are mainly two mechanisms contributing to the Landau damping of SP, i.e., direct interband and phonon-assisted intraband electronic transitions. Therefore, we systematically studied the contributions of direct interband and phonon-assisted intraband electronic transitions to hot carrier generation. As shown in Fig. 6, for KV3Sb5, both interband and intraband electronic transitions contribute to the generation of hot carriers in the energy range of 0.5 and 2 eV, and only interband transitions contribute to that in the energy range above 2 eV. In comparison, the Au intraband electronic transitions contribute mostly to the generation of hot carriers in the energy range below 1.7 eV, whereas interband electronic transitions contribute mostly in the energy range above 1.7 eV. In addition, the absorption coefficients of KV3Sb5 are as high as 106 cm−1 and notably higher than that of Au across the whole energy range examined. This suggests that KV3Sb5 can generate plasmon-mediated hot carriers more efficiently than Au.
 Fig. 6  Optical absorption coefficients as a function of photon energy for (a) KV3Sb5 and (b) Au. The color scale indicates the relative contributions of phonon-assisted (red) and direct (blue) electronic transition to hot carrier generation. The energy distribution of hot carriers generated by (c) phonon-assisted intraband and (d) direct interband electronic transition. The color bar indicates the distribution probability of hot carriers, and the probability increases from blue to red. The Fermi energy is set to 0 eV. (e) Reflectance as a function of photon energy for KV3Sb5 and Au. 
The energy distributions of hot carriers determine their transport and optoelectronic properties. As can be seen in Fig. 6(c and d), in the energy range of ∼0–1.5 eV, the phonon-assisted intraband electronic transitions mainly generate high-energy hot holes, while direct interband electronic transitions generate both high-energy hot holes and electrons. In the energy range above 1.5 eV, the dominant contribution for hot carrier generation is interband transitions (Fig. 6(a)), which mainly generate high-energy hot holes (Fig. 6(d)). These results indicate that KV3Sb5 is especially suitable for p-type collection/oxidation optoelectronics and photochemistry.
Alternatively, as shown in Fig. 6(e), it can be noted that the reflectance of KV3Sb5 is less than 80% in the energy range of ∼0.7–1.6 eV, suggesting that a notable portion of the incident light in this the energy range can be directly absorbed and induce single-particle excitations in KV3Sb5. This is very different from Au, whose reflectance is almost 100% in the energy range of ∼0–2.2 eV, as shown in Fig. 6(e). According to the electrodynamic theory, the volume plasma is related to surface plasma resonance as follows: . Therefore, for KV3Sb5, the volume plasma frequency should be at about 1.2 eV. In the vicinity of the volume plasma frequency, the reflectance for a material generally drops due to plasma absorption, which has also been reported in Al.46 It should be noted that the calculated reflectance results for Au are consistent with the experimental results,47 indicating the accuracy of our methods.
Hot carrier transport
In practical applications, to effectively collect or detect hot carriers, they should have enough mean free paths and times. Therefore, in this part, we quantify these properties of the hot carriers in KV3Sb5 by studying the electron–electron and electron–phonon scattering processes. As shown in Fig. 7, the electron–electron scattering rates show a parabolic shape with the minimum near Fermi level, which is consistent with the Fermi liquid theory.48 Alternatively, the overall shape of the electron–phonon scattering rate as a function of energy follows that of the electronic DOS (Fig. 2(c)). This is because the available phase space of electron–phonon scattering is determined by the DOS.24,49 Therefore, the electron–phonon rates exhibit two peaks at energies corresponding to the peaks in the DOS, which are near −1.1 and 1.1 eV, as shown in Fig. 2(c). In addition, the strengths of electron–phonon and electron–electron scattering are rather low and comparable with each other near the Fermi level. As the energy becomes farther away from the Fermi level, the electron–electron scattering rates increase steadily and become higher than the electron–phonon scattering rates, leading to decreased transport ability of hot carriers.
 Fig. 7  Scattering rates for the electron–electron (e–e) and electron–phonon (e–ph) interactions in KV3Sb5. 
The mean free path (MFP) and mean free time (MFT) of hot carriers are shown in Fig. 8. As can be seen, the MFP of both hot electrons and holes are at the nanometer-length scale, which is comparable with that of Au.28 Moreover, the MFP of hot electrons and holes near the EF is generally the largest, where the MFP of hot holes is significantly larger than that of hot electrons. Similarly, the MFT of both hot electrons and holes near the EF is the largest and gradually decreases as the energy becomes farther away from the EF. In addition, the MFT of hot holes is larger than that of hot electrons and is at the femtosecond-time scale, which is also comparable with that of Au.28 The large MFP and MFT of hot holes, combined with their high energies, further indicate that KV3Sb5 is very suitable for p-type collection/oxidation optoelectronics and photochemistry. Furthermore, we also investigated the distribution of hot carriers in momentum space, which shows that the momentum of hot carriers does not have direction-selectivity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Mean free paths and (b) mean free times of hot carriers as a function of energy considering both e–e and e–ph scatterings. 
Conclusions
In summary, we systematically studied the electronic structures, dielectric function, SP, hot carrier generation and transport properties of KV3Sb5. The calculated real and imaginary parts of dielectric function of KV3Sb5 agree excellently with the experimental results, which shows the accuracy of our theoretical methods. Regarding SPP properties in the infrared range, the absolute propagation length of KV3Sb5 can reach the centimeter-length scale, and KV3Sb5 has stronger SPP confinement than Au. Moreover, the LSPR optical absorption and near-field enhancement is much stronger for KV3Sb5 than for Au. In addition, the direct interband and phonon-assisted intraband electronic transitions are more efficient in KV3Sb5 than in Au, facilitating stronger plasmon-mediated hot carrier generations. The mean free path and mean free time of hot carriers are at the nanometer-length and femtosecond time-scales, respectively, which are comparable with that of Au. Consequently, it is proposed that KV3Sb5 is an excellent material for surface plasmon and plasmon-mediated hot carrier applications in the infrared region.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Natural Science Basic Research Program of Shaanxi (Program No. 2022JZ-04), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (11704298, 61904138), and the Special Scientific Research Program of Shaanxi Provincial Education Department (No. 20JK0928).
References
N. Fan, S. Ding, M. Liang, Z. Q. Cheng and Q. Wang, Plasmon resonance energy transfer and plexcitonic solar cell, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15071 RSC .
H. Tang, C. J. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Bright and N. Wu, Plasmonic hot electrons for sensing, photodetection, and solar energy applications: A perspective, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 220901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Jian, J. Zhang and X. Ma, Cu–Ag alloy for engineering properties and applications based on the LSPR of metal nanoparticles, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 13277–13285 RSC .
Q. Xu, J. Zhou, T. H. Liu and G. Chen, Effect of electron-phonon interaction on lattice thermal conductivity of SiGe alloys, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 023903 CrossRef .
J. Y. Yang, W. Zhang, C. Xu, J. Liu and M. Hu, Strong electron-phonon coupling induced anomalous phonon transport in ultrahigh temperature ceramics ZrB2 and TiB2, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2020, 152, 119481 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, X. Huang, X. Ma and J. Zhang, Significant temperature effect on the LSPR properties of noble metal nanoparticles, J. Opt., 2021, 51, 142–153 CrossRef .
S. Saeed, E. De Jong, K. Dohnalova and T. Gregorkiewicz, Efficient optical extraction of hot-carrier energy, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–5 Search PubMed .
E. Uykur, B. Ortiz, O. Iakutkina, M. Wenzel, S. Wilson, M. Dressel and A. Tsirlin, Low-energy optical properties of the nonmagnetic kagome metal CsV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 104, 045130 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Christensen, T. Birol, B. M. Andersen and R. M. Fernandes, Theory of the charge density wave in A V3Sb5 kagome metals, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 104, 214513 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Ortiz, S. Teicher, L. Kautzsch, P. M. Sarte and S. D. Wilson, Fermi surface mapping and the nature of charge density wave order in the kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. X, 2021, 11, 041030 CAS .
N. Ratcliff, L. Hallett, B. R. Ortiz, S. D. Wilson and J. W. Harter, Coherent phonon spectroscopy and interlayer modulation of charge density wave order in the kagome metal CsV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2021, 5, 111801 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, X. Wu, B. R. Ortiz, S. Ju, X. Han, J. Ma, N. C. Plumb, M. Radovic, R. Thomale and S. D. Wilson, Rich nature of Van Hove singularities in kagome superconductor CsV3Sb5, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, W. Wu, Y. Wang and S. A. Yang, Electronic correlations in the normal state of the kagome superconductor KV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 103, 241117 CrossRef .
B. R. Ortiz, P. M. Sarte and E. M. Kenney, Superconductivity in the Z2 kagome metal KV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2021, 5, 034081 Search PubMed .
P. Sang, Q. Wang, W. Wei, F. Wang, Y. Li and J. Chen, Semiconducting silicene: A two-dimensional silicon allotrope with hybrid honeycomb-kagome lattice, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1181–1188 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wu, Y. Q. Xu, J. J. Xu, X. M. Wei, A. Chan, A. H. Tang, A. K. Lau, B. M. Chung, H. Cheung Shum and E. Y. Lam, Ultrafast laser-scanning time-stretch imaging at visible wavelengths, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16196–e16196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sundararaman, K. Letchworth-Weaver, K. A. Schwarz, D. Gunceler, Y. Ozhabes and T. Arias, JDFTx: Software for joint density-functional theory, SoftwareX, 2017, 6, 278–284 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Jian, J. Zhang, W. He and X. Ma, Au-Al intermetallic compounds: A series of more efficient LSPR materials for hot carriers-based applications than noble metal Au, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105763 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sundararaman and T. Arias, Regularization of the Coulomb singularity in exact exchange by Wigner-Seitz truncated interactions: Towards chemical accuracy in nontrivial systems, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 165122 CrossRef .
R. Sundararaman, T. Christensen, Y. Ping, N. Rivera, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljačić and P. Narang, Plasmonics in argentene, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2020, 4, 074011 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vakil and N. Engheta, Transformation optics using graphene, Science, 2011, 332, 1291–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Garcia, J. Coulter and P. Narang, Optoelectronic response of the type-I Weyl semimetals TaAs and NbAs from first principles, Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2, 013073 CrossRef CAS .
A. Habib, F. Florio and R. Sundararaman, Hot carrier dynamics in plasmonic transition metal nitrides, J. Opt., 2018, 20, 064001 CrossRef .
C. C. Jian, X. Ma, J. Zhang and X. Yong, Strained MoSi2N4 monolayers with excellent solar energy absorption and carrier transport properties., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 15185–15193 CrossRef CAS .
P. Narang, R. Sundararaman, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Cubic nonlinearity driven up-conversion in high-field plasmonic hot carrier systems, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21056–21062 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. Iii and H. A. Atwater, Nonradiative plasmon decay and hot carrier dynamics: effects of phonons, aurfaces, and geometry, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, D. Vigil-Fowler, C. S. Ong, J. B. Neaton and S. G. Louie, Ab initio study of hot electrons in GaAs, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5291–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Nonradiative plasmon decay and hot carrier dynamics: effects of phonons, surfaces, and geometry, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 957–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Jiang, J. X. Yin, M. M. Denner, N. Shumiya, B. R. Ortiz, G. Xu, Z. Guguchia, J. He, M. S. Hossain and X. Liu, Unconventional chiral charge order in kagome superconductor KV3Sb5, Nat. Mater., 2021, 20, 1353–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Ortiz, L. C. Gomes, J. R. Morey, M. Winiarski, M. Bordelon, J. S. Mangum, I. W. Ostwald, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera, J. R. Neilson and S. D. Wilson, New kagome prototype materials: discovery of KV3Sb5, RbV3Sb5, and CsV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 094407 CrossRef CAS .
E. Uykur, B. R. Ortiz, S. D. Wilson, M. Dressel and A. A. Tsirlin, Optical detection of the density-wave instability in the kagome metal KV3Sb5, npj Quantum Mater., 2022, 7, 1–8 CrossRef .
Z. Szabo, G. H. Park, R. Hedge and E. P. Li, A unique extraction of metamaterial parameters based on Kramers–Kronig relationship, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., 2010, 58, 2646–2653 Search PubMed .
P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Optical constants of the noble metals, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 6, 4370 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jablan, M. Soljacic and H. Buljan, Plasmons in graphene: fundamental properties and potential applications, Proc. IEEE, 2013, 101, 1689–1704 CAS .
Z. Y. Zhang, H. Y. Wang, J. L. Du, X. L. Zhang, Y. W. Hao, Q. D. Chen and H. B. Sun, Surface plasmon-modulated fluorescence on 2D metallic silver gratings, IEEE Photonics J., 2015, 27, 821–823 CAS .
K. Kolwas and A. Derkachova, Impact of the interband transitions in gold and silver on the dynamics of propagating and localized surface plasmons, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu and B. B. Huang, Energy transfer in plasmonic photocatalytic composites, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, 16017 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Han, L. Chen, S. Jin, S. Guo, J. Park, H. S. Yoo, J. H. Park, B. Zhao and Y. M. Jung, Modulating mechanism of the LSPR and SERS in Ag/ITO Film: carrier density effect, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 7612–7618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tan, C. Tian, Z. Ren, J. Yang, Y. Chen, L. Sun, Z. Li, A. Wu, J. Yin and H. Fu, LSPR-dependent SERS performance of silver nanoplates with highly stable and broad tunable LSPRs prepared through an improved seed-mediated strategy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 21034–21042 RSC .
B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, Discrete-dipole approximation for scattering calculations, Josa a, 1994, 11, 1491–1499 CrossRef .
P. Flatau and B. T. Draine, Light scattering by hexagonal columns in the discrete dipole approximation, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 21834–21846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Flatau and B. T. Draine, Fast near field calculations in the discrete dipole approximation for regular rectilinear grids, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 1247–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Dai, L. Yu and B. Huang, Noble-metal-free plasmonic photocatalyst: hydrogen doped semiconductors, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Kumar, A. Habib and R. Sundararaman, Plasmonic hot carriers scratch the surface, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 902–910 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Lou and B. Li, Nanostructured materials with localized surface plasmon resonance for photocatalysis, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 33, 1154–1168 CrossRef .
A. D. Rakić, Algorithm for the determination of intrinsic optical constants of metal films: application to aluminum, Appl. Opt., 1995, 34, 4755–4767 CrossRef PubMed .

          C. A. D. O. Henriques, Study of atomic energy shifts induced by Casimir cavities. Master Dissertation, University of Coimbra; Coimbra, Portugal,  2014 Search PubMed .
P. Echenique, J. Pitarke, E. Chulkov and A. Rubio, Theory of inelastic lifetimes of low-energy electrons in metals, Chem. Phys., 2000, 251, 1–35 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jian, X. Ma, J. Zhang and J. Jiang, The anisotropic broadband surface plasmon polariton and hot carrier properties of borophene monolayer, Nanophotonics, 2022, 11, 531–541 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Crystal structures of KV3Sb5 from the side view (left) and the top view (right). (b) First Brillouin zone enclosed by the blue lines and the reduced Brillouin zone surrounded by red lines. Cartesian coordinate system and lattice vector are shown in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Band structure of KV3Sb5, where the solid arrow at M marks the saddle points and dashed arrows mark the Dirac points. The black scatters represent the band structures calculated by DFT calculations and the red lines were obtained through interpolation of MLWFs. (b) Phonon dispersion and (c) density of states (DOS) of KV3Sb5.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Real part of the optical conductivity of KV3Sb5. (b) Imaginary and (c) real part of dielectric function of KV3Sb5. The imaginary part of dielectric function of Au from experiment is also shown in (b) for comparison. (d) Real parts of the optical conductivity along the X, Y and Z directions. (e) Imaginary parts of dielectric functions along the X, Y and Z directions.	 
	(9)

 	Fig. 4  Dispersion relation of SPP for (a) Au/air, (b) KV3Sb5/air and (c) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. Effective propagation length  of SPP for (d) Au/air, (e) KV3Sb5/air and (f) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. The absolute propagation length of SPP for (g) Au/air, (h) KV3Sb5/air and (i) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface. Confinement ratio  of SPP for (j) Au/air, (k) KV3Sb5/air and (l) KV3Sb5/SiO2 interface.	 

 	Fig. 5  Absorption efficiency versus wavelength for the Au and KV3Sb5 nanospheres in (a) air and SiO2. Distribution of near field intensity (E2/E20) for (c) Au (d) KV3Sb5 nanospheres in air and for (e) Au and (f) KV3Sb5 nanospheres in SiO2. The color bars indicate the near field intensity values.	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical absorption coefficients as a function of photon energy for (a) KV3Sb5 and (b) Au. The color scale indicates the relative contributions of phonon-assisted (red) and direct (blue) electronic transition to hot carrier generation. The energy distribution of hot carriers generated by (c) phonon-assisted intraband and (d) direct interband electronic transition. The color bar indicates the distribution probability of hot carriers, and the probability increases from blue to red. The Fermi energy is set to 0 eV. (e) Reflectance as a function of photon energy for KV3Sb5 and Au.	 

 	Fig. 7  Scattering rates for the electron–electron (e–e) and electron–phonon (e–ph) interactions in KV3Sb5.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Mean free paths and (b) mean free times of hot carriers as a function of energy considering both e–e and e–ph scatterings.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
