Local-interaction-field-coupled semiconductor photocatalysis: recent progress and future challenges  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA09059J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09059J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2491-2525Local-interaction-field-coupled semiconductor photocatalysis: recent progress and future challenges

        
          
            Qin 
            Lei
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengjiong 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dahu 
            Ding
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jihua 
            Tan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingfu 
            Liu
          
        
      ad and 

        
          
            Rongzhi 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ad
aCollege of Resources and Environment, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Yuquan Road 19A, Beijing 100049, China. E-mail: crz0718@ucas.ac.cn
bKey Laboratory of Environmental Engineering, Xi'an University of Architecture and Technology, No. 13, Yanta Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710055, China
cCollege of Resources and Environmental Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China
dState Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China
Received 
      15th September 2020
    , Accepted 23rd November 2020First published on 24th November 2020AbstractPhotocatalytic solar-energy conversion is of great interest because of its tremendous potential to address the global energy crisis and environmental issues. Many strategies have been developed in the past few years to address the serious drawback of sluggish separation and migration kinetics of charge carriers. One of the most useful strategies in recent years has been the introduction of a local interaction field into the system due to its significant capacity toward separating photogenerated electron–hole pairs and some other advantages (i.e., promoting mass transfer, affecting reaction pathways, etc.). This review attempts to summarize the recent progress made in the rational design and construction of the local field in the photocatalysis community, mainly including the electric field, thermal field, magnetic field, ultrasonic field, and multifield coupling. The photocatalytic properties and charge transfer pathways of these systems are presented based on environmental and energy applications, for instance, water splitting, degradation of pollutants, small-molecule activation, and other semiconductor-induced chemical transformations. Finally, we discuss the existing challenges and prospects in utilizing the local field to improve the solar-energy conversion efficiency.Qin LeiQin Lei received her BS in 2013 and is currently studying at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Rongzhi Chen. She focuses on the design of nanometer functional materials and applications in photocatalytic and environmental fields. Her current research interests are on the construction of local interaction fields and their mechanism in improving photocatalytic reactions.Rongzhi ChenRongzhi Chen received his PhD at Tsukuba University, Japan (2011). After that, he joined Kyushu University, Japan, as a postdoc. In 2014, he received the Fellowship of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) and worked in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). Since 2016, he moved to the University of Queensland and took the position of Lecturer. Currently, he is an Associate Professor, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on materials science and technology for environmental remediation or energy conversion by nanomaterials, such as metal–organic frameworks and coordinated polymer composites.
1. Introduction
Since the first industrial revolution, the use of fossil fuels has brought tremendous convenience to modern society; however, the consequent environmental issues and energy crisis have become increasingly prominent in recent years.1–3 As a potential solution to these problems, semiconductor photocatalysis has received tremendous attention because it is a really “green” technology in solar energy conversion and environmental remediation, such as solar-driven water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen, degradation of pollutants, conversion of CO2 into chemical fuels, nitrogen fixation.4–9 However, poor charge separation is still the primary roadblock for achieving high conversion efficiency. To date, a variety of advanced strategies have been employed to address this issue, for example, loading a cocatalyst, doping, morphology control, exposed facet regulation, defects engineering, forming a heterojunction by combining with other hetero-semiconductors, and constructing a local interaction field.10–17 Among these, applying a local field to improve the efficiency of photoinduced charge separation has recently garnered more comprehensive investigations since the local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect was confirmed to be beneficial towards the photoinduced charge separation and light absorption.18 This is mainly due to its significant capacity in separating photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The applied local interaction fields were demonstrated to play an essential role in promoting mass transfer, affecting the reaction path, and so on.
In the past few years, some local interaction fields (Fig. 1) have been reported, which could be primarily divided into five types, namely, electric field, thermal field, magnetic field, ultrasonic field, and multifield coupling; they have been considered to be effective strategies for enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency.19–24 However, some apparent drawbacks hinder their practical application, such as limited visible-light absorption, ambiguous charge transfer pathways, and imprecise regulation for fields. Therefore, it is still a challenge to design an effective outfield-assisted photocatalytic system to improve the photocatalytic efficiencies for future requirements of environmental and energy technologies.
 Fig. 1  Local-interaction-field-promoted photoinduced charge separation to afford higher activity and improved stability. 
This review attempts to summarize the recent progress made in the rational design and construction of the outer field in photocatalysis, such as water splitting, degradation of pollutants, and small-molecule reduction, while aiming to provide certain stimulating perspectives on future developments. Many significant findings have been reported on the local-field-assisted photocatalytic systems during the past few years, such as the electric field, thermal field, magnetic field, ultrasonic field, and multifield coupling. We also presented the understanding of the outer-field-assisted photocatalytic system based on these encouraging works. We believe that a comprehensive review of this subject can be timely to promote further developments in this exciting and still emerging research area.
2. Fundamental principles of semiconductor photocatalysis
2.1 Fundamental principles of semiconductor photocatalysts
From the perspective of semiconductor photochemistry, the role of photocatalysis is to initiate or accelerate specific reduction and oxidation (redox) reactions based on semiconductor materials under light illumination.25 When the semiconductor photocatalyst is illuminated with photons whose energy matches or exceeds its bandgap, as shown in Fig. 2, electrons (e−) in the valence band (VB) jump into the conduction band (CB), leaving behind holes (h+) in the VB. The excited electrons and holes migrate to the surface of the photocatalyst. Subsequently, the electrons in the CB should have a chemical potential of +0.5 to −1.5 V versus a normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) and exhibit a substantial reduction capacity; in comparison, the holes in the VB should have a chemical potential of +1.0 to +3.5 V versus the NHE, and they should demonstrate a robust oxidative ability. Electrons and holes can act as the reductant and oxidant to react with electron donors (D; e.g., H2O and organics) and electron acceptors (A; e.g., H2O, CO2, and N2) adsorbed on the semiconductor surface or within the surrounding electrical double layer of the charged particles, respectively.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the primary photocatalytic mechanism over a semiconductor photocatalyst. 
It should be noted that the excited states of electrons and holes are easy to recombine and the input energy can be dissipated in the form of heat or emitted light. Therefore, electron–hole recombinations are detrimental to the solar-energy conversion efficiency. The electron–hole pairs should be efficiently separated to obtain a higher photocatalytic efficiency, and the charges should be rapidly transferred across the surface/interface. In this regard, the approach that has generally been applied is to load cocatalysts (as active sites) such as Pt, CoP, CoOx, and RuO2 on the semiconductor surface.26–29 The heterojunctions formed between the host semiconductor and the cocatalyst provide an internal electric field that facilitates the separation of electron–hole pairs and induce faster carrier migration.30 Recently, there have been some other strategies to improve the efficiency of charge separation, such as doping, morphology control, exposed facet control, defect engineering, and forming a heterojunction by combining with other hetero-semiconductors. In this review, we mainly presented the recent research progress in the local interaction field for improving the photocatalytic performance, which will be discussed in detail in the following section.
2.2 Categories of local interaction fields
In recent years, tremendous efforts have been devoted toward the design and fabrication of local fields for improving the photocatalytic activity. Overall, there are five specific categories of local interaction fields, namely, (1) local electric field, (2) local thermal field, (3) local magnetic field, (4) ultrasonic field, and (5) multifield coupling. The design principle, charge transfer pathway, and corresponding performance in the local-field-assisted photocatalytic system will be discussed in the following sections.
3. Constructing a local-electric-field-assisted photocatalytic system
3.1 Design principle of the local electric field
The photocatalytic performance of semiconductor materials is mainly limited by the separation efficiency of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. One effective strategy is to build a local electric field in a photocatalytic system, whose behavior is more like photoelectrochemical cells that can be used to mitigate recombination losses. Currently, the best-known examples of such local electric fields in photocatalysts are associated with interfaces, including the solution/photocatalysts interfaces, metal cocatalyst–semiconductor junctions, and semiconductor–semiconductor junctions (e.g., p–n junction).31
In particular, the local electric field at the solution/photocatalyst interfaces can be modified via different surface structures.32 The local electric field can also arise from step functions in the electrochemical levels associated with phase boundaries that are simpler to engineer than heterostructure junctions.33 The polymorph boundaries and ferroelectric phenomena of materials are also demonstrated to promote the formation of a local electric field.34,35 Although all these constructed local electric fields are conducive to charge separation, the involved mechanisms are slightly different. This can be divided into four types, as shown in Fig. 3, namely, p–n junction, polar interfaces, polymorph junctions, and ferroelectric.
 Fig. 3  Mechanism of internal electric field formation under different conditions. (a) p–n junctions, (b) polar surfaces, (c) polymorph junctions, and (d) ferroelectric polarization. (PC: photocatalyst). 
3.2 Using a p–n junction to improve photocatalytic activity
One of the most common methods to achieve highly efficient performance in the design of photocatalytic systems is by the combination of p-type and n-type semiconductor components.36 In particular, after the p-type and n-type semiconductors come into contact with each other, the potential difference leads to the transfer of charge to equilibrate the Fermi levels. As a result, the near region in the n-type semiconductor has a net positive charge owing to the loss of electrons; on the contrary, the near region in the p-type semiconductor has a net positive charge due to the fact that it accepts electrons, and subsequently, it forms a space-charge region that leads to the bending of energy bands at the interface of these semiconductors. Among them, charge redistribution creates a local electric field with a direction from the n-type side to the p-type side in the space-charge region. This local electric field formed between the p-type and n-type semiconductor can be used to separate the photogenerated charge carriers and improve the efficiency of photocatalytic water splitting or other photochemical reactions.
As a representative example, Yang and his co-workers constructed a p-Ag2S/n-PDI (perylene bisimide) heterojunction with an efficient full-spectrum response for photocatalytic phenol degradation and oxygen evolution.37 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) results (Fig. 4a and b) revealed the sizes of PDI and Ag2S as 100–300 nm and 7–10 nm, respectively; more importantly, the formed Ag2S quantum dots (QDs) were in close contact with the PDI surface and therefore provided a contact interface for creating p–n junctions between PDI and Ag2S. Owing to the presence of the local electric field pointing from n-PDI to p-Ag2S, the generated electrons in the CB of p-Ag2S could effectively transfer to the CB of n-PDI. Simultaneously, the remaining holes in n-PDI VB could migrate to the VB of p-Ag2S (Fig. 4c). Therefore, there are more free electrons and holes to take part in the redox reactions. As a result, the performances of the p-Ag2S/n-PDI system toward phenol degradation and O2 evolution were 5.13 and 1.79 times higher than those obtainable using pure PDI, respectively (Fig. 4d and e).
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of Ag2S/PDI and (b) HRTEM image of Ag2S/PDI (1:0.6). (c) The separation process of photogenerated carriers and the photocatalytic process. (d) Amount of evolved oxygen in photocatalytic water oxidation with PDI and Ag2S/PDI (1:0.6) under full-spectrum irradiation (inset shows the rate of oxygen production). (e) Effects of different scavengers on phenol degradation in the presence of Ag2S/PDI (1:0.6) under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another case, Wang et al. fabricated heterogenous p–n junction CdS/Cu2O nanorod (NR) arrays by using a facile successive ionic layer adsorption method to grow Cu2O nanoparticles (NPs) on the surface of ordered CdS NR arrays.38 After the deposition of Cu2O NPs, both the top and lateral surfaces of CdS NRs became rough and were coated with uniform Cu2O NPs (Fig. 5a). Moreover, the interface of CdS and Cu2O were visible and the two components were in intimate contact, which provided the direct evidence for the formation of a p–n heterojunction between Cu2O NPs and CdS NRs (Fig. 5b). As shown in Fig. 5c, the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance achieved significant enhancement compared with pure CdS NRs (57.1 μmol h−1) due to the formation of the local electric field in the CdS/Cu2O system (161.2 μmol h−1). The p–n junctions formed in the interface between the n-type CdS NRs and p-type Cu2O NPs are favorable for the transport and separation of photoinduced charges in the photoelectrode based on heterogenous NR arrays. The detailed charge transfer pathways are shown in Fig. 5d; after the formation of the p–n junctions, the energy level of Cu2O increases.
 Fig. 5  TEM images of (a) pure CdS NR arrays and (b) heterogenous CdS/Cu2O NR arrays. (c) Time-dependent amounts of photocatalytic H2 production over pure CdS and CdS–10Cu2O photoelectrodes at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl. (d) Energy band schematic for heterogenous p–n junction CdS/Cu2O NR arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In contrast, the energy level of CdS decreases, resulting in an equilibrium state for the Fermi levels between CdS and Cu2O. Then, a local electric field at the interface of CdS and Cu2O is formed under thermodynamic equilibrium. Both CdS and Cu2O can be excited to generate electrons and holes under visible-light illumination. The electrons excited to the CB of Cu2O migrate to that of CdS, and the holes transfer from the VB of CdS to that of Cu2O. The formed local electric field via p–n junctions can significantly facilitate the migration and separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs, resulting in an enhanced hydrogen evolution performance. Furthermore, Weiss's group fabricated layered p-type tin sulfide (SnS) on n-type molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) by pulsed metal–organic chemical vapor deposition at 180 °C.39 Kelvin probe force microscopy showed the formation of a built-in electric field (as high as 0.95 eV) under light illumination in the SnS/MoS2 heterostructure, which showed promising potential in photochemistry chemical transformations.
Except for these traditional p–n heterojunction composite structures, some novel photocatalytic systems based on p–n junctions have also been recently reported. For instance, Wang's group designed a new class of twin-junction photocatalysts with MnxCd1−xS solid-solution interface according to the definite solubility limit (Fig. 6a).40 The appropriate band alignment and graded solid-solution interface between Cd-rich and Mn-rich sulfides provide a gradient local electric field and a facilitated channel for efficient charge separation and transfer. As a result, the obtained twin-junction photocatalyst exhibits an excellent photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production without any cocatalyst. The hydrogen evolution rate of the photocatalyst is as high as 82.4 μmol h−1 under visible-light irradiation, which is about 48 times higher than that of pristine CdS.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing the formation of MnxCd1−xS (MCS) twin-junction photocatalyst based on thermodynamics and kinetics-dominated crystal growth process. (b) Illustration of the band structure evolution and charge transfer in Mn0.5 twin p–n junction. DL: donor level. AL: acceptor level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 

Fig. 6b shows the energy-level diagrams of the Mn0.5-based photocatalytic system with the presence of both n- and p-type conductivity. In general, it is difficult for the integrated CB and VB to split water due to the arresting potential shift induced by the alignment of the Fermi level if there is direct contact between pristine CdS and MnS. However, in this system, a more moderate p–n junction with a marginal band shift is formed as the Fermi levels of the Cd-rich and Mn-rich parts come closer to each other. This provides a sufficient redox potential for water splitting and allows the formation of a built-in electric field for charge separation that is simultaneously met in this twin-junction photocatalyst. These excellent features can significantly facilitate the photocatalytic activity of solar-driven water splitting or other redox reactions. Some other advanced photocatalytic systems based on novel p–n junctions, including p–n homojunction of defect-modified g-C3N4, ultrathin p–n junction of NiO/CNO, 2D BiOBr with a sandwich structure, and C3N4–Pd–Cu2O stack nanostructure also achieved a significant enhancement in the photocatalytic performance.41–44
Similar to the charge transfer mechanism of p–n junctions, type-II heterostructures have also attracted great attention. As a representative, Hsu's group has garnered several achievements in this field by constructing binary and ternary catalysts.45–47 For example, his research group developed a novel NiWO4–WO3 heteroepitaxy via the pulsed laser deposition technique.48 As shown in Fig. 7a–d, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and TEM results showed a remarkable heteroepitaxy structure in the NiWO4-WO3 system. Furthermore, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) revealed that the formed electrons in the CB of NiWO4 would transfer to the CB of WO3, and the holes from the VB of WO3 to the VB of NiWO4 after photoexcitation (Fig. 7e and f) and therefore led to high-efficiency charge separation. A similar effect and phenomenon were also observed in the ternary system built by the same group and other research groups.49–51
 Fig. 7  (a) XRD ϕ-scan of NiWO4{202} and WO3{220} reflections for the NiWO4–WO3 heterostructure. (b) Schematic of the domain structure of NiWO4–WO3 heteroepitaxy grown on the STO(111) substrate. (c) Cross-sectional TEM image taken along the [110]STO zone axis of the NiWO4–WO3 heterostructure. (d) Cross-sectional HRTEM image of NiWO4–WO3 interface with the corresponding FFT patterns in the insets. (e) XPS spectra for W 4f7/2 of NiWO4, WO3, and NiWO4–WO3 heterostructures. The inset shows the VB maxima representation for the pure epitaxial NiWO4 and WO3 films. (f) Energy band alignment of the NiWO4–WO3 heterostructure, where EVBM is the VB maxima, ECBM is the CB minima, and Ef is the equilibrium Fermi level (the energy band structure is not represented in the exact energy scale). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
3.3 Polar interfaces to improve photocatalytic activity
It is known that the surface polarity of photocatalysts depends on the surface composition and arrangement of materials. In detail, the surface can be polar or nonpolar depending on the final plane of the atoms. For instance, NaCl(100) shows nonpolarity due to the equal amounts of Na cations and Cl anions. However, the NaCl(111) plane exhibits polarity due to the imbalance of Na cations and Cl anions.52 Polar surface terminations—even when they are local occurrences—can easily form local electric fields that influence the charge separation in a photocatalytic reaction. For example, Li et al. reported that the local electric field induced by MgO(111) polarizations could dramatically suppress electron–hole pairs recombination on the surface of Au/N-doped TiO2 photocatalysts during the photolysis of water at elevated temperatures.53 As a result, the built system could produce O2 and H2 at a molar ratio of 1:2 with an H2 evolution rate of over 11000 μmol g−1 h−1 without any sacrificial reagents at 270 °C.
As shown in Fig. 8a and b, the strong surface polarity of crystalline MgO(111) facets is first confirmed via HRTEM, 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and trimethylphosphine-oxide-assisted 31P magic-angle spinning NMR spectroscopy, which shows that the surface polarity of MgO(111) creates substantial chemical shifts to 1H and 31P. Hence, polar MgO(111) nanocrystals (NCRs) induce a strong local electric field near the catalyst particles (Fig. 8c). Accordingly, the photocatalytic activity at 270 °C over N–P25-620/MgO(111) provides a much enhanced and stable hydrogen evolution rate of 11092 μmol g−1 h−1 with O2 to H2 at a ratio of 1:2. At the same time, nonpolar Au/N–P25-620/MgO(100) or (110) shows no rate promotion compared with that without the MgO support. An exceptional range of apparent quantum efficiency (AQE) from 81.8% at 437 nm to 3.2% at 1000 nm could be achieved in the N–P25-620/MgO(111) system. By comparison, MgO(111) prolongs the exciton lifetime from 2.56 to 5.76 ns, whereas nonpolar MgO(100) or (110) shows no apparent influence. More interestingly, this type of local electric field can be controlled by regulating the size of N–TiO2: the smaller the particle size of N–TiO2 used, the more pronounced is the local electric effect. Furthermore, the local electric effects of different support materials (such as CeO2(100) and ZnO(0001)) were further studied and used to replace MgO(111). The results showed that the photocatalytic water-splitting activities varied with different supports: all the polar-faceted materials showed a dramatic enhancement in the photocatalytic activities, whereas the nonpolar oxides hardly showed any influence. Therefore, although the local electric field is local, it still has a distinctly significant role in separating the photoinduced charge. This formation of the local electric field from the facet polarization is also achieved in other systems, such as Zn(0001), CoO(111), NiO(111), BiOIO3(010), CdTe(111), etc.54–58
 Fig. 8  (a) HRTEM images of the (111), (110), and (100) planes of MgO. The scale bar is 2 nm. (b) 1H NMR and trimethylphosphine-oxide-assisted 31P magic-angle spinning NMR measurements of the (111), (110), and (100) planes of MgO, respectively, which show that the surface polarity of MgO(111) creates substantial chemical shifts to 1H and 31P. (c) Schematic of the local electric field of polar MgO(111) NCRs with negative and positive ion-terminated surfaces can assist the photocatalytic water splitting to H2/O2via H+ and OH− surrounding the N-doped TiO2 catalyst particle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
3.4 Using polymorph junctions to improve photocatalytic activity
Besides the contact with different semiconductors, two different polymorphs of phases with the same composition (i.e., various plane junctions and out-of-phase junctions) can also form a built-in electric field. Because of the other structures, the polymorphs show different electronic properties. The interaction between these phases can promote the separation of the photoinduced charge carriers, thereby increasing the photocatalytic performance. The differences in the bandgap energies and structure are the main reason for the formation of a local electric field that can accelerate the separation efficiency of the photoinduced charge carriers. The charge separation mechanism is similar to that observed in p–n junctions.
For example, Zhang and co-workers constructed a local electric field derived from the anatase/rutile TiO2 phase junction.59 Further, by regulating the size of anatase TiO2 NPs on the rutile TiO2 surface, the local electric field was effectively regulated based on the interfacial contact area between the anatase and rutile phases (Fig. 9a), thereby achieving effective spatial-charge separation in the photocatalytic system. Wang et al. prepared C3N4 homogeneous junctions by the polymerization of different monomers such as urea and dicyandiamide.60 Li et al. built a local electric field inhomogeneous junctions via the regulation of the relative sizes of the same materials.61 In addition to two-phase junctions, Xiong et al. synthesized multiphasic titanium dioxide junctions (anatase, rutile, and brookite) via a versatile polymer-assisted coordination-mediated self-assembly strategy.62 Recently, the local electric field based on the surface facet heterojunctions of photocatalysts were also reported, such as the {101}/{001} facets of Ta3N5, {010}/{110} facets of BiVO4, {111}/{110} facets of ZnGa2O4, {001} and {110} facets of BiOCl, etc.63–67 In particular, Li's group independently developed spatially resolved surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SRSPS), which provided a method to deepen the understanding of the surface charge dynamics.68,69 For example, the BiVO4{011} facet exhibited a much firmer surface photovoltage (SPV) signal intensity than the {010} facet. These results suggest that the surface band bending in the space-charge region of the {011} facet is significantly different than that for the {010} facet that resulted in the formation of another local electric field between these facets, consequently achieving spatial transfer of the photogenerated electrons and holes to different facets (Fig. 9b and c). Furthermore, the local electric field introduced by the surface gradient diffusion doping was also obtained in the doped CdS system.70
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the controllable contact areas and built-in electric field between the anatase (A) and rutile (R) forms of the A/R TiO2 photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2019. The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Spatially resolved SPV spectra obtained at different locations on a single BiVO4 crystal (BV02). The thick solid and dashed lines refer to data for the {011} and {010} facets, respectively. The thinner solid and dashed lines refer to data for the {011} and {010} facets of BV01, respectively. (c) Schematic of the built-in electric field with a relative strength in the space-charge region of the different facets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
3.5 Ferro-/piezoelectric effect to enhance photocatalytic activity
The piezo-phototronic effect involves the use of the piezoelectric potential that is generated by applying a strain to a semiconductor with piezoelectricity to control the carrier generation, transport, separation, and/or recombination at the metal–semiconductor junction or p–n junction for improving the performance of materials or devices.71,72 In recent years, combining piezoelectric materials with semiconductors as composite photocatalysts has attracted tremendous attention. Piezoelectricity can produce polarized positive charges on one end and negative charges on the other end under the effects of stress or strain. Driven by the piezoelectric polarization field, the photoinduced electrons and holes can be efficiently separated and impelled to migrate in opposite directions, which benefits the migration of bulk charges to the surface active sites for participating in various photocatalytic reactions.73
In this field, many encouraging studies have been reported in the past few years; for instance, Shi and co-workers fabricated a piezo-potential-assisted photocatalyst by coating BiVO4 QDs on the surface of ZnO NRs (Fig. 10a and b).74 The formed electric field plays two roles in photocatalytic reaction. On one hand, the formation of a negative electric field generated in the ZnO NRs is beneficial to elevate the CB of BiVO4 and therefore improve the reduction ability of the photogenerated electrons of BiVO4 (Fig. 10c). On the other hand, the photogenerated electrons and holes can be promptly driven to be transferred in the opposite direction before recombination by the piezoelectric field. These promotions lead to a remarkably enhanced charge separation rate, which is directly responsible for the improved photocatalytic activity of the BiVO4 QDs (Fig. 10d). As a result, the concentration of formaldehyde was decreased from 1 to ∼0.2 ppm in 1 h, which is about 2.5 times that without piezo-potential assistance. In another study, Lu and his co-workers doped Cu2+ into ZnO NCRs to extend the light-harvesting capacity of ZnO.75 More interestingly, the doped Cu2+ was demonstrated to act as the trapped centers of photoexcited electrons, thereby leading to a significant enhancement in the photocatalytic water oxidation.
 Fig. 10  (a and b) TEM images of 15BQD@ZnO-RA at different magnifications. (c) Schematic of the charge transfer, separation, and reaction of BiVO4 QD under the influence of piezo-potential from ZnO NRs. (d) Degradation activity of formaldehyde when the windmill is blown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
You et al. used a single piezoelectric material, BiFeO3, as the photocatalyst and obtained a high hydrogen production rate of ∼124.1 μmol g−1 h−1 and rhodamine B (RhB) decomposition ratio of ∼94.1% (50 min) under mechanical vibration (100 W; Fig. 11a and b).76 As shown in Fig. 11c and d, the piezoelectric property of BiFeO3 nanosheets (NSs) was characterized by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM), which is a very useful tool to confirm the piezoelectricity of piezoelectric materials. The detailed mechanism of photocatalysis over piezoelectric materials (BiFeO3 NSs) is shown in Fig. 11e; under the action of mechanical vibration, the BiFeO3 NSs show a slight bend and therefore lead to the formation of positive and negative charges on the surface of the catalyst. The formed negative charges (q−) on the surface of BiFeO3 NS can effectively attract the dissociated hydrogen ions in the solution to produce H2 owing to the coulombic force, and the positive charges react with the sacrificial reagent. In the general case, the photogenerated electrons from BiFeO3 NSs do not have sufficient capacity to reduce H2O to produce H2. However, with assistance from the internal electric field formed due to the piezoelectric effect, the CB of BiFeO3 NSs shows a significant tilt, thereby enabling catalytic hydrogen evolution (Fig. 11f). To further improve the ability of light absorption and charge transfer of BiFeO3, Huang et al. loaded AuNCs on the surface of BiFeO3.77 Owing to the spontaneous polarization of BiFeO3 and the SPR effect of AuNCs, the fabricated AuNCs/BiFeO3 photocatalysts achieved additional light absorption and effective charge separation. After the optimization of the ferroelectric polarization effect and AuNC distribution in AuNCs/BiFeO3, a significantly enhanced photocurrent density could be achieved under visible-light illumination.
 Fig. 11  (a) Piezo-catalytic hydrogen production from water splitting under vibration by BiFeO3 NSs at different vibration frequencies. (b) Piezo-catalytic RhB dye decomposition ratio as a function of vibration time. The inset shows the photographs of the piezo-catalytically decomposed RhB dye solution after different vibration times. (c) Hysteresis loop and (d) PFM phase image of BiFeO3 NSs. (e) Generation of piezoelectric surface charges under mechanical vibration and the participation of the piezo-catalytic hydrogen evolution reaction. (f) Tilting of the energy bands under the strong piezoelectric field induced by mechanical vibration and the accompanied redox reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
In another study, Dai et al. constructed a self-healing local electric field via compositing helical structural composite microfiber polyvinylidene fluoride/g-C3N4 (PVDF/g-C3N4) based on bioinspired simple harmonic vibration, where PVDF served as a piezoelectric functional material and a photocatalyst supporter and g-C3N4 acted as a representative of photocatalysts to combine with PVDF.78 As the composite helical microfibers exhibit the characteristic of a self-healing internal electric field, a sustainably promoted charge separation and improved photocatalytic performance could be achieved (Fig. 12a and b). In detail, when additional strain is applied to the helical fiber, positive or negative piezoelectric potentials are formed and then distributed on the surface of PVDF (Fig. 12c). Under light excitation, electrons and holes are formed in g-C3N4, which exhibit random migration without a piezoelectric field and therefore affording a higher recombination rate; fortunately, the formed piezoelectric field from the PVDF provided a driving force for the separation of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs. However, the piezoelectric potential may be saturated by the photogenerated charge carriers as well as other ions, resulting in a halted enhancement effect. In this case, the self-healing feature of PVDF can effectively overcome this issue. In brief, as shown in Fig. 12d, when a saturated potential is rebuilt to achieve the opposite potential via deformation again, the absorbed charges would be repelled, and the opposite charges would be attracted. As a consequence, the recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs can be sustainably inhibited by the self-healing piezoelectric potential. More examples of piezoelectric-polarization-promoted photoinduced charge separation can be achieved in lead zirconate titanate, NbN, and SrBi4Ti4O15 systems.79–84
 Fig. 12  (a) Formation of the internal electric field in helical microfibers under simple harmonic vibrations. (b) Promoted separation of electrons and holes in the presence of a piezoelectric potential was distributed on the helical microfiber's surface. (c) Deformation, piezoelectric potential, energy band bending, and photogenerated carrier behavior of PVDF/g-C3N4 composite helical microfiber with and without strain. (d) Schematic of the process of piezoelectric potential being saturated, self-renewed, and the corresponding carrier transfer behavior. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
Different from piezoelectrics, ferroelectric materials have spontaneous dipole moments without applying stress, which generates a local electric field under spontaneous polarization that can drive the separation and transfer of the photoinduced charge carriers, affording significantly enhanced performance. For instance, Liu et al. demonstrated that the depolarization field in single-domain ferroelectric PbTiO3 (PTO) nanoplates is the main driving force for photoinduced charge separation via SRSPS.85 As shown in Fig. 13, PFM was used to confirm the built-in voltage Vbi.
 Fig. 13  PFM local piezoelectric hysteresis loops. (a) Schematic of polarization and built-in voltage in a single-domain ferroelectric particle. Built-in voltages at negative and positive polarization surfaces are marked as VbiP− and VbiP+, respectively. (b) Hysteresis loop measurement of the PTO particle with negative polarization. (c) Hysteresis loop measurement of the PTO particle with positive polarization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
Among them, the tested built-in voltages at the negative and positive polarization surfaces are named as VbiP− and VbiP+, respectively (VbiP− is positive and VbiP+ is negative for a single PTO particle; Fig. 13a). The value of +1.3 V of VbiP− suggested a negative polarization; in this situation, SPV and PFM were measured from the left-hand side of the PTO particle (Fig. 13a). The SPV showed the hole signal, indicating a downward polarization; further, the polarization-induced depolarization field was upward (Fig. 13b, upper part). Therefore, the depolarization field and the measured built-in field should be along the same direction. On the contrary, VbiP+ measured from the surface of positive polarization was exactly the opposite, as shown in Fig. 13c. Therefore, the polarization-direction-dependent built-in field demonstrates that the depolarization field has the same direction as the built-in field and is mainly responsible for charge separation in PTO NPs. Other composite photocatalysts comprising ferroelectric materials and semiconductors were also widely studied, such as BaTiO3/MoO3, TiO2/BaTiO3, BaTiO3/α-Fe2O3, Ag10Si4O13, M2B5O9Cl (M = Ca, Sr, Ba, Pb), 2D M2X3 (M = Al, Ga, In; X = S, Se, Te), etc.86–91 Furthermore, with the rapid development in materials science, it can be understood that the local electric field can be formed via other types, such as triboelectric and pyroelectric.92–94
Based on these outstanding works, it can be understood that the construction of a local electric field in a photocatalytic system is a feasible method to enhance the photoinduced charge separation and therefore achieve significantly improved photocatalytic performance. However, the stability and of a built-in electric field (affected by many factors, such as the electric field intensity, stability of the photocatalysts, electrostatic screening effect, etc.) are still the main reasons for the unsatisfactory photocatalytic performance. Therefore, the development of highly stable photocatalysts and high-intensity local electric fields (i.e., by increasing the contact area to enhance the intensity of the electric field) or local electric field with variable directions is still the main mission or a feasible strategy in this field.
4. Constructing a local-thermal-field-assisted photocatalytic system
As a catalytic reaction, the photocatalytic performance is subject to many factors. In general, the light intensity, concentrations of photocatalysts and sacrificial reagent, pH value of the solution, and reaction temperature should be taken into account. However, in most of the studies, the effect of reaction temperature on the photocatalytic performances has been rarely mentioned. The main reasons can be attributed to, on one hand, the fact that the photocatalytic reactions were generally conducted at room temperature (20–25 °C) by controlling the reaction temperature via condensate water. On the other hand, at present, more than 90% Xe lamps—the most commonly used light source for simulating sunlight—use infrared (IR) light reflectors to remove the heating effect of IR light for easily maintaining the reaction temperature. For a practical photocatalytic reaction, about 50% of the IR light in the full solar spectrum inevitably induces additional thermal effects into the system, which has been demonstrated to affect the photocatalytic performances. Therefore, the way in which the reaction temperature affects the photocatalytic reactions should be comprehensively studied to guide the design of photocatalytic systems. In addition, owing to the needs of photochemical conversion, the local thermal field was introduced to enhance the solar-energy conversion efficiency.95 Recent pioneering works from several groups have demonstrated that the coupling of solar energy and thermal energy serves as a novel and promising strategy to improve the photocatalysis performance.96–100 We classify the local-thermal-field-assisted photocatalysis into three types according to the enhanced mechanism: (1) improve the surface reaction rate; (2) increasing the charge transfer and/or the excitation of low-grade photons in the bandgap; and (3) the activation of intermedium species.
4.1 Improvement in surface reaction rate
The local thermal field is an effective method to enhance the photocatalytic performance by improving the surface reaction rate, which has attracted some attention. For example, photothermal catalysis drives the solar-energy conversion reaction under mild reaction conditions; in this process, the strong absorption of solar photons by the catalyst results in the heating of the catalyst to temperatures up to hundreds of degrees, thereby allowing traditional thermal catalytic processes to occur at reasonable rates. As an example, Jia et al. fabricated a novel self-heating Nb2O5-NR-supported Pd NCR for catalyzing the reverse water–gas shift (RWGS) reaction under visible- and near-IR (NIR)-light illumination.101
The nanostructured Pd@Nb2O5 catalyst was synthesized via a two-step hydrothermal and straightforward microwave-assisted hydrothermal reduction reaction (Fig. 14a). With the use of ethanol as a mild reducing agent, the reaction rate could be effectively controlled to minimize the self-nucleation of Pd NCRs unattached to the Nb2O5 NRs (Fig. 14b). Fig. 14c shows the diffuse reflectance spectra; accordingly, the diffuse reflectance of the Pd@Nb2O5 sample is much less than that of the Nb3O7(OH) and Nb2O5 samples throughout the visible and NIR spectral regions because the Pd NCRs absorb a significant amount of light. In order to determine the photothermal catalytic activity of nanostructured Pd@Nb2O5 toward the RWGS reaction, photothermally catalyzed conversion experiments were carried out. Fig. 14d shows a CO2-to-CO hydrogenation rate as high as 4.9 mmol gcat−1 h−1 over the Pd@Nb2O5 hybrid, which is ∼5 times the rate in the dark under thermal heating, demonstrating that the RWGS reaction can be efficiently driven solely by light over the nanostructured Pd@Nb2O5 catalysts.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the Nb3O7(OH) and Pd@Nb2O5 NRs samples. (b) TEM images of the Pd@Nb2O5 nanocrystal-NR sample. (c) CO production rates over Pd@Nb2O5 in the dark at room temperature under irradiation from a 300 W Xe lamp and in the dark at a reaction temperature of 160 °C. (d) Diffuse reflectance spectra of Nb3O7(OH), Nb2O5, and Pd@Nb2O5 films dispersed on a borosilicate filter. (e) Estimated temperatures for Pd@Nb2O5 and Nb2O5 at different power levels based on the Raman spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. 
Furthermore, the Raman spectra were employed to study the light-induced photothermal effect of Pd NPs, and the results reveal the temperatures of Pd@Nb2O5 and Nb2O5 at the other 5 power levels using the linear dependence of the band shift with the temperature based on the Bell's findings (Fig. 14e). Notably, the temperature of Pd@Nb2O5 at the highest laser power level of 12 mW (laser power density is 2388 kW cm−2) is estimated to be 777 K, while the temperature of Nb2O5 at the same power level is estimated to be 368 K. The measurements provide direct evidence that this optical absorption is the underlying physicochemical phenomenon driving the RWGS reaction over the nanostructured Pd@Nb2O5. A similar photodriven thermal catalytic reaction was also studied in some other systems, such as FeO–CeO2,102 core–shell-structured AuNRs@Cu2−xS,103 Fe–Zn-based catalyst,104 and some other photothermal systems.105–110
In particular, Zhou et al. quantified the hot carrier and thermal contributions in the plasmon photocatalysis system by introducing the concept of a light-dependent activation barrier to account for the effect of light illumination on electronic and thermal excitations in a single unified picture.111 They achieved a 75% reduction in the energy needed to convert reactants (ammonia) into products (hydrogen and nitrogen) when excited at the plasmon resonance of their plasmonic photocatalyst (CuRu alloy) relative to the energy required for the same conversion achieved through external heating to the same surface temperature. This result suggests that the plasmonic photocatalysis enables a shift to considerably milder reaction conditions while still obtaining the same quantity of products. That is, a light-induced reduction in the activation barrier enables the use of the same reaction conditions between the light- and temperature-driven processes with far higher efficiencies for the illuminated case.112
4.2 Accelerating electron transfer and excitation of low-grade photons
In addition to the improved surface reaction rate, the local heat was also found to facilitate the excitation of low-grade photons in the bandgap and electron transfer during photoreaction.113 For example, Li et al. revealed that the local thermal process can effectively accelerate the detrapping of electrons at the oxygen vacancy (Ov) surface and promote electrons to reduce CO2, which clearly explained the higher photothermal catalytic activity of Ov-TiO2.114 Furthermore, Song and co-workers found that with the help of a thermal process, the bound electrons in Pt can be excited, which can easily overcome the energy barrier between Pt and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the adsorbed reactants (Fig. 15).115 As a result, the activity of the photothermal reaction is not a simple sum of the photo and thermal effects, but their synergetic coupling and hydrogen production activity are 8.1 and 4.2 times those under the photo and thermal conditions singly at 90 °C, respectively.
 Fig. 15  Proposed mechanism of the photothermal catalytic reaction with Pt/TiO2 nanocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
In another case, Jan et al. fabricated a hybrid photothermal catalyst comprising Bi4TaO8Cl NSs and nanosized W18O49via molten salt and solvothermal method, achieving markedly enhanced performance by a simple integration of the photocatalytic process with external heating.116 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and TEM results reveal that the prepared Bi4TaO8Cl possesses an NS shape with a length of ∼1.2 μm and a thickness of ∼200 nm (Fig. 16a–c), and W18O49 shows an NP shape with a diameter of 2–5 nm (Fig. 16d–f). To elaborate on the role of the thermal process on enhancing the photocatalytic activity, the photothermal catalytic performance was determined by comparing the thermal catalytic activity before and after the photothermal catalysis. In detail, the thermal catalytic reduction of CO2 was initially performed for 2 h (0–2 h). Then, solar light was turned on, and the photothermal catalytic reduction reaction was continued for another 2 h (2–4 h). Finally, when the solar light was turned off, the thermal catalytic test was maintained in the dark for the last 2 h (4–6 h).
 Fig. 16  (a–c) SEM, TEM, and HRTEM images of Bi4TaO8Cl NSs. (d–f) BiW–H heterostructure. (g) Time curves of CO production in thermal catalytic CO2 conversion at 120 °C (0–2 h), photothermocatalytic CO2 conversion (2–4 h), and thermal catalytic CO2 conversion at 120 °C (4–6 h). (h) Schematic illustrating the photoexcited electron–hole separation process of BiW heterostructures in photothermal catalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
As shown in Fig. 16g, in the initial 2 h, there is no obvious catalytic activity in the dark; however, the Bi4TaO8Cl/W18O49 samples show significantly enhanced CO production activity under light illumination. Interestingly, continuous CO activity can be observed on the Bi4TaO8Cl/W18O49 catalyst even if the light source is turned off (4–6 h). Since Bi4TaO8Cl/W18O49 is inactive for the thermal reduction of CO2 in the dark, researchers have concluded that many photogenerated electrons can be stored at the Ov defects in the intermediate 2 h of photothermal catalysis. When the light source is turned off, heating on W18O49 can induce the release of stored electrons and even excite them to the CB of Bi4TaO8Cl, thereby contributing to considerable CO evolution via CO2 reduction in dark photothermal catalysis (Fig. 16h). Similar thermal-excitation-assisted photocatalytic reactions were also observed in other systems.117–119 Further, an increase in the reaction temperature was also revealed to promote the hydrogen generation rate over β-Ga2O3 photocatalysts by facilitating the migration of photoinduced charge carriers.120
Integrating semiconductors with upconversion materials to fabricate NIR-light-active photocatalytic systems can effectively convert low-energy incident light into high-energy radiation, which has recently attracted great attention.121,122 In particular, the local thermal effect, induced by NIR-light irradiation, can effectively promote the energy transfer among doped rare-earth ions (e.g., Yb, Nd, Tm, Er) and therefore afford enhanced photocatalytic performance. For example, Bao and co-workers reported a NIR-light-responsive NaYF4:Yb,Er/W18O49 heterostructure as the photocatalyst for H2 evolution from BH3NH3.123 With the assistance of energy transfer from Er to Nd ions by the thermal effect, the NaYF4:Yb,Er, Nd/W18O49 quasi-core–shell heterostructure achieved a higher H2 production capacity, which exhibited 1.5-fold enhancement in photocatalytic activity for H2 evolution compared with that of the NaYF4:Yb,Er/W18O49 heterostructure. In this or some similar systems, the energy transfer process from the Er ions (acting as a sensitizer for Nd ions) to Nd ions occurred at a high temperature. The upconversion luminescence (UCL) intensity of 521 and 540 nm was reversed at the high temperature; this can be attributed to the fact that the 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels are thermally coupled energy levels, which can result in a variation in the transitions of 2H11/2 → 4I15/2 and 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 at an increased temperature.

Fig. 17a shows the UCL spectra of the NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd NPs in a temperature range of ∼350–650 K excited at 980 nm; the intensity of the green UC emissions (521 and 540 nm) and red emission (654 nm) that originate from 2H11/2, 4S3/2 → 4I15/2, and 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 level transitions of Er ions, respectively, decrease with an increase in temperature. However, the intensities of the UC emissions that originate from the 4F7/2, 4F5/2, and 4F3/2 → 4I9/2 level transitions of Nd ions are 741, 804, and 863 nm, respectively, which gradually increase with an increase in temperature. Fig. 17b shows the spectra of the NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd/W18O49 heterostructure with 980 nm laser excitation at room temperature, which reveals that the green UC emission intensity at 521 and 540 nm of the Er ions is reversed. This can be explained by the fact that the photothermal effect is produced on the W18O49 nanowires (NWs) surfaces, which can influence the population of 2H11/2 and 4S3/2 levels of Er ions. A similar process was also confirmed in the NaYF4:Yb-Er/W18O49 system reported by the same group.124
 Fig. 17  (a) UCL spectra of the NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd NPs at a different temperature range of 350–650 K. (b) The UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd/W18O49 heterostructure calcined in the temperature range of 300–700 K; the inset shows the color change in the NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd/W18O49 heterostructure at an increased temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2019. The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.3 Activation of intermedium species
In general, multistep elementary reactions are involved in the photocatalytic reaction (including hydrogen evolution, small-molecule conversion, photocatalytic degradation reaction, etc.), and all these elementary reactions are affected by kinetic and thermodynamics factors.125 Among them, an increase in surface temperature is crucial for accelerating the adsorption/desorption of the reactant on the photocatalyst and affecting the activation of intermedium species and reaction pathways. For example, Low et al. synthesized TiO2 photonic crystals (PCs) through a template-free anodization–calcination method for photocatalytic solar-fuel production.126 In brief, the surface temperature increase in the TiO2 PCs can reach up to 2 °C after 3 min of IR-light irradiation (3 W, 760 nm LED), whereas no noticeable temperature change in the TiO2 nanotubes is observed. To explain this, when the wavelength of the IR light matches with the photonic bandgap of the TiO2 PCs, the photothermal effect becomes evident. Therefore, the incident IR light can be trapped within the TiO2 PCs, producing a local thermal impact on the TiO2 PCs to increase the surface temperature of the TiO2 PCs. The increased temperature facilitates the adsorption and desorption of the reactant and subsequently affording enhanced performances.
For the activation of the intermedium species, Zhang et al. found that the local thermal effect induced by the LSPR effect of Ag NPs provided an efficient supply of activated H species to the bicarbonate species, combined with the separated electrons and holes above the ZrO2, consequently generating CO at a rate of 0.66 μmol h−1 gcat−1 with approximately zero-order kinetics.127 In particular, the surface temperature of Ag (5.0 wt%)–ZrO2 catalyst increased to 363 K from the initial temperature (286 K) after 90 min of ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis)-light irradiation and quickly dropped to 297 K once the light irradiation was turned off. Analogous to the extended X-ray absorption fine structure method, the temperature of the NPs was also monitored according to the surface-enhanced Raman scattering for the NC stretching vibration of the adsorbed probe molecules. These results indicated that the ZrO2 sites were primarily responsible for CO2 reduction and were assisted by the heated neighboring Ag sites via the LSPR effect that activated and supplied H to react with CO2 (Fig. 18a). Owing to the high solar-light absorption and significant self-heating effect, Liu et al. used elemental boron for reducing the carbon dioxide under light irradiation.128 They found that the boron particles could be heated up to 462 °C at a light intensity of 456 mW cm−2 and directly and efficiently catalyzed CO2 into CO and CH4, with the reaction rates outperforming those obtainable from most reported state-of-the-art photocatalysis systems.129–136 This could be attributed to the following reasons.
 Fig. 18  (a) Proposed intermediate species starting from CO2 and H2 to CO during CO2 exchange and photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Gas evolution (CO and CH4) over the amorphous boron catalyst under full arc irradiation with a Xe lamp. (c) Gas evolution rates under different conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
First, a local high temperature on boron NPs is beneficial to CO2 activation. Second, the formation of B(OH)3 can produce H2 as the active proton source and electron donor for CO2 reduction. Third, the large number of base sites on the surface of boron oxides enhanced the adsorption for CO2. As expected, the full-spectrum irradiation of the amorphous boron material led to the continuous formation of CO and CH4 by CO2 photoreduction, with reaction rates of 1.0 and 2.5 μmol h−1, respectively (Fig. 18b and c). Even under visible-light irradiation (λ > 400 nm), the use of an amorphous boron catalyst still led to the formation of CO at 0.8 μmol h−1 and CH4 at 1.9 μmol h−1. A similar role for H dissociation induced under local heat was also observed in some other photocatalytic systems.137,138 In addition, the introduction of additional heat was also good for improving the hydrogen production activity from the methanol–water solution. Here, the higher reaction temperature was found to promote the dehydrogenation of intermediate HCOOH species and therefore affording enhanced hydrogen evolution performance.139
In short, although recent pioneering works from several groups have demonstrated that the coupling of solar energy and local thermal field serves as a novel and promising strategy to promote the activity and/or manipulate the selectivity in the photocatalytic reaction, the scientific research in this field is still in its infancy. In particular, the mechanism for enhanced activity is still ambiguous; therefore, the use of in situ characterization techniques, which have been emerging in recent years, is highly desirable. Simultaneously, it also brings tremendous opportunities for photocatalytic systems, particularly in the field of small-molecule activation (i.e., CO2 reduction and nitrogen fixation), which involve the requirement of a considerable amount of energy to break the CO and NN bonds. On one hand, the photocatalysts (i.e., Pd, B) with the photothermal effect provide active sites for catalytic reactions; on the other hand, the temperature of the system can be significantly increased, which accelerates the reaction rates with regard to kinetics and thermodynamics.
5. Constructing a local-magnetic-field-assisted photocatalytic system
Since the first report in 1929 that confirmed that an external magnetic field affects a catalytic reaction, how the catalytic reaction can be affected by the magnetic field has long been a research focus.140 Although extensive research works have been reported, the mechanism of enhanced catalytic performance under a magnetic field is still highly controversial. Here, we take photocatalytic reactions as an example to summarize the use of an external magnetic field to enhance the photocatalytic performance. Furthermore, the design of a photocatalytic system and the mechanism of increasing the activity are summarized in detail. To the best of our knowledge, the mechanism of enhanced photocatalytic activity via an external magnetic field can be divided into three categories as follows: (1) enhancing the mass transfer, (2) improving the separation efficiency of the photoinduced charge carrier, and (3) affecting the spin state of the intermediate species.
5.1 Enhancing mass transfer in photocatalytic reactions
The essence of improving the mass transfer efficiency via an external magnetic field in a photocatalytic reaction originated from the Lorentz force, which provides an additional driving force to accelerate the reactants attached to the surface of the photocatalysts, thereby affording enhanced photocatalytic activity. For instance, Zhao et al. fabricated an Mn2O3/g-C3N4 hybrid photocatalyst with a 3D/2D structure to thoroughly achieve the concurrent removal of nitrate (NO3−–N) and ammonia (NH4+–N) from water under the assistance of an external magnetic field.141 At first, the Mn2O3/g-C3N4 composite photocatalyst was obtained via a two-step thermolysis method; then, with the assistance of an external magnetic field, high removal efficiencies of 94.5% and 97.4% for NO3−–N and NH4+–N, respectively, could be achieved. Among them, the applied magnetic field provided a driving force (Lorentz force) to accelerate NO3−-N and NH4+-N adsorbed to the surface of the catalysts as well as facilitate the separation of photoinduced charge carriers in the formed heterojunction. As shown in Fig. 19a, the electrons in the CB of g-C3N4 can drive NO3−-N conversion into NO2−-N, N2, and NH4+-N. Subsequently, the produced NO2−–N was further reduced to N2 and NH4+–N. Simultaneously, NH4+–N was oxidized via the holes on the VB of Mn2O3 to form N2, which made a dominant contribution to the high N2 recovery (93.2%) during photocatalysis. A similar magnetically induced mass transfer has been observed in the electro-/photoelectrocatalytic system.142–145
 Fig. 19  (a) Enhanced photocatalytic mechanism for the concurrent removal of NO3−-N and NH4+-N. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of α-Fe2O3/rGO hybrid nanostructures through a facile hydrothermal method. (c) Schematic of the V3 model of the α-Fe2O3 surface and the side view of the charge difference density for graphene on the top of the α-Fe2O3 surface. The isosurface value is 0.001 e Å−3. The yellow and blue regions represent the gain and loss in the net charge, respectively. The dark brown, red, and golden-brown spheres represent C, Fe, and O atoms, respectively. (d) Total DOS of the V3 heterostructure and partial DOS of the interfacial atoms. The Fermi level is indicated by the vertical line and set to zero. (e) Profiles of time versus transient photocurrent density of α-Fe2O3/rGO under Xe-light irradiation with or without a magnetic field. (f) Magnetotransport properties of α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3/rGO composites at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Enhancing the separation of photoinduced charge
The use of a magnetic field on a perovskite solar cell has been demonstrated to afford enhanced photoelectron conversion efficiency,146,147 which provides a new strategy for improving the separation efficiency of the photogenerated charge carriers in a photocatalytic process. Currently, there are two mechanisms to enhance the separation efficiency of the photoinduced charge carriers via the magnetic field effect. First, an external magnetic field can regulate the resistance of charge transfer on the surface of some materials under the magnetoresistance effect, and therefore, the photoinduced charge carriers can effectively migrate to the reactive sites. Therefore, more carriers take part in the surface reactions per unit time, which is beneficial toward improving the photocatalytic performance.
For example, Li et al. proposed a magnetoresistance-related strategy to accelerate the carrier transfer of the photocatalytic process and took the α-Fe2O3/reduced graphene oxide (α-Fe2O3/G) composite photocatalyst as a model to explain the role of the magnetic field in improving the photocatalytic performance.148 In detail, the nanostructured α-Fe2O3/G composite was prepared by a facile hydrothermal reaction, as shown in the schematic in Fig. 19b. Furthermore, the TEM results show that α-Fe2O3 NPs with sizes of about 50–80 nm inlaid and distributed in the matrixes of the G sheets and a coated structure together with an interface between the α-Fe2O3 NPs and G sheets can be observed, which provide the possibility for inducing magnetic moments into G due to the magnetic proximity effect.149 First-principles calculations further confirm the strong interfacial hybridization (strong peak of polarization Fe I↑-d state get hybridized with the C I-p orbital) between α-Fe2O3 and G (Fig. 19c and d), leading to the magnetic moment in G. During the photocatalytic process, the photogenerated carriers of α-Fe2O3 migrate to G through the interface between them. Since both α-Fe2O3 and G possess magnetic moments, the transport property of the carriers would be affected by the arrangement of the magnetic moments at the interface. Therefore, with the application of a magnetic field, the magnetic moments of both α-Fe2O3 and G become aligned in a parallel arrangement along the field direction and then increase the injection rate of the transfer of polarized carriers from α-Fe2O3 to G. As a result, more carriers can transfer through the interface per unit time, leading to an increase in the current density and decrease in resistivity (Fig. 19e and f). A similar conclusion is also demonstrated in our previous study.150
Another example is that the Lorentz force generated by the magnetic field directly induces the photoinduced electron–hole pairs to migrate in the opposite direction, thereby achieving the enhanced separation efficiency of the charge carriers. For example, Gao and co-workers reported a Lorentz-force-assisted charge carrier separation strategy to improve the photocatalytic efficiency under an external magnetic field.151 The photocatalytic efficiency can be improved by 26% just by placing a permanent magnet beneath the normal photocatalytic system without any additional power supply (Fig. 20a). The detailed mechanism of charge separation via the magnetic field can be described as follows. The authors used an equivalent interaction to replace the interaction between the photocatalysts and the magnetic field due to the difficulty in describing by the first-principles theory. As shown in Fig. 20b, under light illumination, the electron–hole pairs are first formed in the photocatalyst, which then migrate along opposite directions under the action of an external magnetic field based on the left-hand rule (“as a charged catalyst moves along a liquid flow and crosses the magnetic induction lines, the Lorentz force acts on the electrons and holes”). Here, we can compare the Lorentz force with the electric force; therefore, the effects of the magnetic field on the electron–hole pairs can refer to the effects of the electric field on the charge carriers. The charge density differences (Fig. 20c) shows an apparent spatial-charge transfer from the O 2p to Ti 3d orbitals with the help of an external electric field. Fig. 20d shows, in a more intuitive manner, that this effect induces the spatial separation of the photoinduced charge carriers under the effect of the electric field on them. As an analogy, in a system under the influence of an external magnetic field, the photogenerated electrons and holes experience the Lorentz force in the opposite direction, thereby accelerating their spatial separation and inhibiting recombinations. Furthermore, the magnetic-field-enhanced charge separation was also observed in other systems, such as core–shell-structured Au–CdS, radial Ag NWs, and Ag–BiVO4–MnOx.152–154
 Fig. 20  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange with no magnetic field or with a magnetic field in the presence of TiO2 nanobelts under 20 mW cm−2 UV illumination. The inset shows a schematic of the magnetic field photocatalytic setup. (b) Schematic of the interaction between the magnetic field and moving photocatalyst under illumination. (c) Charge density differences in the TiO2(101) surface with/without an external electric field (0.01 V Å−1). The charge density difference is defined as CE − CnoE, where CE and CnoE denote the charge density of the system with and without an external electric field, respectively. The (1 × 1) supercells used in the calculation are replicated in the in-plane direction for ease of viewing. (d) Schematic of the proposed influence of the magnetic field on the photoinduced charge carrier separation in the TiO2 nanobelts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
5.3 Tuning the spin state of intermediate species via external magnetic field
The spin state of an electron determines the properties of matter, and therefore, achieving control over the spin opens up avenues for manipulating the properties of molecules and materials.155 In general, two electrons in a single spatial eigenstate have opposite spins based on the Pauli exclusion principle, which determines the basic features of the atomic states and chemical bond formation. The energy associated with the interacting electron clouds changes with the relative spin state, thereby providing the possibilities to control chemical transformations by manipulating the spin directions. In particular, in some molecular catalysis, such as photosystem II, the ferromagnetic alignment of the active material results in spin-oriented electrons, which are selected and accumulated at the interface, leading to a considerable enhancement in the reaction activity.156
For example, Pan and co-workers reported a controllable method to manipulate the spin polarization of titanium dioxide by tuning the concentration of Ti vacancies and therefore achieving efficient charge separation and surface reaction via the parallel alignment of electron spin orientation.157 In particular, a series of TiO2 with metal vacancies were synthesized by adjusting the numbers of glycerol groups in glycerolates. As shown in Fig. 21a, the XRD patterns were initially obtained to confirm that the synthesized samples were metal-based glycerolates. The Ti L-edge X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) results suggested the complementary electronic properties of the Ti compounds, which reflected the transition from Ti 2p orbitals into Ti 3d and 4s orbitals in the CB. More importantly, the Ti L-edge spectra show two sets of peaks (L3 and L2); this is consistent with the spin–orbit coupling splitting of the initial 2p states into 2p3/2 (L3) and 2p1/2 (L2), directly referring to the electrons in the spin-up and spin-down states, respectively. Furthermore, the similar L3 peak and different L2 peak intensities (which initially increase and then decrease) in TiO2-based samples (Fig. 21b and c) indicate that the spin state can be tuned by the amount of Ti vacancies. As a result, the spin polarization properties of Ti-defected Ti15O32 are similar to TiO2-10 (defect concentration is similar). As shown in Fig. 21d and e, the density of states (DOS) calculation was also carried out to further explain the electron spin state that affects charge separation. According to these results, the existence of metal-vacancy-dependent spin polarization can be confirmed, and the parallel alignment of electron spin polarization can promote the efficiencies of charge separation and surface reaction for efficient photocatalysis. It is worth noting that an external magnetic field can further enhance the above spin-restricted merits. As shown in Fig. 21f, it is evident that the magnetic field strengthens the activities of TiO2-5, TiO2-10, and TiO2-20, which may be attributed to the inhibition of the combination between the ˙OH species with antiparallel spin directions. The same group also achieved a significantly improved overall water-splitting performance by tuning the spin state (e.g., orbital filling) of Mn centers in the Mn3+-modified C3N4 system.158 Benefiting from the rapid spin-state-mediated oxygen evolution reaction kinetics, as well as the extended optical absorption (to 600 nm) and accelerated charge separation by intercalated metal-to-ligand state, Mn–C3N4 stoichiometrically splits pure water with an H2 production rate of up to 695.1 μmol g−1 h−1 under simulated sunlight irradiation (AM1.5), affording an AQE of 4.0% at 420 nm.
 Fig. 21  (a) Enlarged XRD patterns of titanium glycerolates (G-5, G-10, G-20, and G-30). Spin-dependent electronic structures of metal-defected TiO2: (b) Ti L-edge and (c) high-resolution L2 XAS spectra. (d) Calculated total DOS and (e) (001)-plane 3D spatial distributions of spin polarization (with an energy interval of [EF −0.2 eV, EF]) of the metal-defected Ti15O32 model (6.25% VTi). The specific isosurface spatial spin polarization value for (e) is −95%. (f) Increasing percentage of the photodegradation rates of Ti-defected samples under an external magnetic field of 8000 Oe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature. 
Furthermore, owing to the much larger dissociation probability of the triplet radical pair than the singlet radical pair,159,160 the oxygen evolution complex is found to be an exchange-coupled mixed-valence electron spin acceptor, where its orbital physics determine the unique activity of PSII. The two unpaired electrons needed in the triplet O2 molecule interact with the high spin state of the catalyst via exchange interactions; the optimal ferromagnetic catalyst and the resulting radical intermediates are spin-paired. As a result, the active center of the CaMn4O5 cofactor, stimulated by the driving potential provided by photons, works as a spin valve to accelerate the formation and release of O2 from diamagnetic H2O.161 In addition, recent advances in room-temperature spin polarization using nanometric chiral molecular assemblies have suggested that chemically modified surfaces or interfaces can be used for optical spin conversion by exploiting photoinduced charge separation and injection from well-coupled organic chromophores or QDs.155 Using light to drive the photoexcited charge transfer processes mediated by molecules with central or helical chirality enables indirect measurements of spin polarization that can be attributed to the chiral-induced spin selectivity effect and the efficiency of spin-dependent electron transfer relative to the competitive relaxation pathways.162 For example, Naaman's group reported a series of chiral-molecule-coated semiconductor materials for improving the water-splitting performance based on the chiral-induced spin selectivity effect.163–168
In summary, on one hand, based on a large number of experiments, an external magnetic field has been confirmed to be beneficial to mass transport, which mainly arises from the drive of Lorentz forces. However, the improved reaction rate is still unsatisfactory due to the limitation of the left-hand rule. On the other hand, experimental and theoretical studies have indicated that the intrinsic excited states and related charge transport are sensitive to the magnetic field due to electron-spin multiplicities and spin–spin interactions, which provide a new strategy to significantly enhance the catalytic performance. Recently, with a more comprehensive study of the magnetic field effect, an external magnetic field was also revealed to affect the band structure of the photocatalysts and the reaction pathway.169–171
6. Local-ultrasonic-field-assisted photocatalytic system
In general, ultrasonic-wave-assisted reactions possess several advantages, namely, shorter reaction time, possibility to obtain higher yields, different selectivities, and potential to accomplish reactions/chemistries that generally do not take place under conventional heating conditions.172 According to the reactive mechanism, we can primarily divide ultrasonic-wave-assisted reactions into two categories: (1) directly involved in the reaction and (2) inducing other mechanical waves to improve the photocatalytic performance.
6.1 Directly improving photocatalytic efficiency
Ultrasonic photocatalysis is a technique of applying ultrasonic waves to assist the photoreaction and achieving the target of improving the conversion efficiency. Due to its high efficiency and time-saving characteristics, ultrasonic photocatalysis has attracted wide attention in recent years, particularly in the field of pollutant degradation.173 The mechanism of an ultrasonic wave in ultrasonic photocatalysis reactions mainly involves the cavitation effect. In particular, when a certain frequency and intensity of ultrasonic wave is applied to a reactive system, a myriad of bubbles are generated. These bubbles subsequently induce a series of physical and chemical changes during their formation, oscillation, growth, and contraction to collapse. This is the so-called cavitation effect. In particular, when the intensity of the ultrasonic waves is sufficiently large, the average distance between the molecules changes, exceeding the critical value of the liquid molecular distance as well as the destruction of gravity between the liquid molecules and the formation of cavitation bubbles.
As a result, an instantaneous high temperature (∼5000 K) and high pressure (up to 100 atm) can be formed in the very small space inside and around the cavitation bubble in a very short period of time based on the “hot spot” theory. These cavities are, therefore, capable of functioning like high-energy microreactors that can effectively cleave water into various free radicals. Currently, the enhanced mechanism of ultrasonic photocatalysis can be mainly attributed to the formation of free radicals (such as ˙OH, H2O2, and ˙O2−) via ultrasonic waves. In addition, an ultrasonic wave can continuously refresh the surface of the photocatalyst and create fresh active sites for further reaction, thereby leading to the destruction of organic compounds, as per eqn (1)–(8):174 H2O + > → ˙OH + ˙H(1) H2O + ˙H → ˙OH + H2(2) O2 + ˙H → HO2˙(3) HO2˙ + HO2˙ → H2O2 + O2(4) HO˙ + HO˙ → H2O2(5) HO˙ + H2O2 → H2O + HO2˙(6) H2O2 + > → 2˙OH(7) Organic compound + ˙OH/O2−˙/HO2˙ →oxidant products + H2O + CO2(8)
Based on this mechanism, the degradation efficiency can be significantly enhanced in many photocatalytic systems. For example, Elshafei et al. fabricated a series of metal oxychlorides as robust photocatalysts for the degradation of 2-nitrophenol with the assistance of ultrasonic waves.175 The rate constant of degradation using the sonophotocatalytic system was even higher than the sum of the rates of individual systems due to its synergistic performance. The detailed degradation mechanism is shown in Fig. 22; on one hand, the generated hydroxyl radical attacks 2-nitrophenol to form 3-nitrocatechol, which further undergoes a ring-opening reaction to form carbon dioxide, nitrate, and water. On the other hand, 2-nitrophenol is oxidized to form 2-nitrobenzoquinone. Subsequently, with the further oxidation of ˙OH, the aromatic compound undergoes a ring-opening reaction to generate different aliphatic intermediates. The nitrite ions are then oxidized via hydroxyl radicals to produce nitrate ions. The work also points out that the efficiency of ultrasonic waves can be affected by the difference in the bandgap energy. Babu et al. introduced ultrasonic waves to the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange, and a significant synergistic effect (3.7 fold) could be achieved by combining the sonolysis and photocatalysis processes.176 Further experiments suggested that the H2O2 and ˙OH generated by the sonolysis of water play a crucial role in improving the photocatalytic degradation efficiency. The enhanced photocatalytic performance via the free radicals generated by ultrasonic waves was also achieved in other systems.177–181
 Fig. 22  Proposed degradation pathway for 2-nitrophenol and possible intermediates with the structures optimized at the B3LYP/6-31++G(d) level using the density functional theory method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
6.2 Induced mechanical waves
In addition to the cavitation effect of the reaction liquid, the enhanced photocatalytic performance was also revealed to be related to the changes in the catalyst under ultrasonic-wave irradiation. For example, the photocatalysts of ultrasound-assisted synthesis generally show a larger specific surface area, excellent conductivity, and more defects, which are beneficial to adsorption and conversion for the reactants.182–186 For instance, the applied ultrasonic waves into the photocatalytic reaction induce particle deaggregation, thereby achieving a significantly enhanced surface area of the photocatalyst; as a result, the photocatalytic performance shows a noticeable improvement.
In particular, as a special class of semiconductors, piezoelectric materials afford low conductivity and limited concentration of free carriers, which mainly restrict the transportation of charge carriers and result in low photocatalytic reactivity; however, the polarization field engineering of piezoelectric materials caused by the external field can be considered as a worthwhile strategy to fine-tune the photocatalytic performance.187 In particular, when external stress (i.e., ultrasonic waves) is applied to piezoelectric materials, a significant separation is generated between the positive and negative charge centers and therefore results in the formation of a built-in electric field.188 In short, this electric field originates from a break in the inversion symmetry, which leads to electric dipoles within the material; further, the strength of the electric field varies with the applied stress. Therefore, by introducing a piezoelectric field into the photocatalytic system, the migration of the photoinduced carriers can be affected by the piezo-potential formed in the piezoelectric field, subsequently showing significantly enhanced photocatalytic performance. This conclusion has been demonstrated by many state-of-art works.
As an example, Liu's group's groundbreaking investigation involved a combination of the piezoelectric effect and photocatalyst in order to realize enhanced photocatalytic activity by adjusting the built-in field of the piezoelectrics–semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts.189 In detail, they combined ferroelectric BaTiO3 nanocubes (NCs) and Ag2O NPs to form an Ag2O–BaTiO3 hybrid photocatalyst. As shown in Fig. 23a and b, these Ag2O NPs with a size of 5–10 nm were uniformly grown on the surface of the BaTiO3 NCs with the preferred crystalline orientation to form the hybrid photocatalysts. Based on the theoretical simulation, the piezoelectric potential driven by an ultrasonic wave can be up to ∼0.36 V. Therefore, a periodical absorption and release process of free charge in water occurs on the surface of the BaTiO3 NCs. Although the BaTiO3 NCs themselves show poor catalytic activity, they can act as voltage suppliers for driving the photocatalytic reactions that are similar to an electrochemical catalytic process. More importantly, these Ag2O NPs are tightly attached to BaTiO3 NCs and cannot be detached even under long-term ultrasonic treatment, which is crucial for the stability of the photocatalytic reaction (Fig. 23c). The elaborate reaction process over Ag2O–BaTiO3 is shown in Fig. 23d. A polarization electric field is generated inside the BaTiO3 NCs along the spontaneous polarization direction (solid line) changed under the effect of mechanical vibration. It should be noted that the use of ultrasonic waves can effectively eliminate the electrostatic shielding caused by the limit of the electrostatic field. Besides BaTiO3, other piezoelectric materials (such as ZnO, PbTiO3, BaFeO3, etc.) have recently become widely used for improving the photocatalytic performance by applying external ultrasonic stress.190–193
 Fig. 23  TEM images of (a) BaTiO3 and (b) Ag2O–BaTiO3 NCs. (c) Stability of sonophotocatalytic degradation of RhB under UV-ultrasonic irradiation. (d) Schematic of the photocatalytic charge separation mechanism in the reaction. The solid line indicates the bands with the presence of spontaneous polarization charges at the two surfaces of the BaTiO3 NCs, and the dashed line indicates the decrease in the piezoelectric polarization under a mechanical strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
In summary, although the use of an external ultrasonic field can effectively improve the photocatalytic performances, particularly in the field of pollutant degradation, the detailed mechanism is still unclear. With the rapid development in instrumental science, improvements in the in situ characterization technology in recent years may bring about the possibilities of a breakthrough in this field. In particular, useful information involving changes in the photocatalysts in the solution (i.e., morphologies, chemical bonds, free radicals, etc.) can be determined under the action of ultrasonic waves. All these play an important role in the study of photocatalytic mechanisms, guiding the design of a highly effective photocatalytic system.
7. Multifield coupling for improving photocatalytic performance
In addition, some reports have recently confirmed that other local fields such as X-rays, microwaves, and nuclear radiation can also promote the photocatalytic performance.194–197 Although significant progress has been achieved in photocatalytic systems assisted by the abovementioned single local interaction fields, till date, the best reported solar-energy conversion efficiency is still limited (e.g., for water splitting, it is ∼1–2% or lower). The main obstruction is still the low separation efficiency of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs.198–200 In this regard, scientists have proposed to couple two or more local fields in order to further improve the separation efficiency of the electron–hole pairs in the photocatalytic reaction. According to the type of the coupled local field, there can be two categories, namely, same-field coupling and different-field coupling.
7.1 Same-field coupling
As a typical representative, the strategy of multi-electric-field coupling was demonstrated to be feasible for improving the photocatalytic performance. For example, Wang and co-workers fabricated a quadruple-band metal-nitride-NW-based artificial photosynthesis system for high-efficiency photocatalytic overall solar water splitting, which exhibited a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of ∼5.2% with relatively stable operation due to the highly efficient charge carrier separation of the formed built-in electric field.201 In detail, Fig. 24a shows the monolithically integrated quadruple band of the In0.35Ga0.65N/In0.27Ga0.73N/In0.20Ga0.80N/GaN NW structure used for the photocatalytic overall water splitting. Among them, due to the use of a nonplanar Si wafer and the formation of NWs vertically aligned to the local surfaces, only one side of the NWs was directly exposed to the Mg-doping flux during the epitaxial growth of NWs. As such, an Mg-doping gradient is spontaneously formed along the lateral dimension of the NWs, resulting in a broad built-in electric field (Fig. 24b). Evidently, the photogenerated electrons migrate toward the lightly Mg-doped side for initiating the proton reduction reaction, whereas the photogenerated holes drift to the more heavily Mg-doped surface for the water oxidation reaction. As a result, the hydrogen production rate was up to ∼1840 μmol cm−2 h−1 corresponding to a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of ∼5.2% (Fig. 24c).
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of quadruple-band InGaN NWs. (b) Efficient charge carrier separation and extraction for water redox reactions in the InGaN system. (c) Photocatalytic H2 and O2 gas generation as a function of time measured in multiple experiment cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the double-electric-field-assisted charge separation in ZnO/BiVO4 heterostructures for water splitting. (e) Photocatalytic water oxidation over BiVO4, ZnO/BiVO4, and Vo-ZnO/BiVO4 under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Furthermore, Wei et al. reported a multi-electric-field-assisted system by coupling oxygen vacancies with faceted heterostructures for improving the photocatalytic oxygen evolution.202 Such an integration of the built-in fields in faceted BiVO4 and anisotropic ZnO NRs, together with the possible Z scheme at the interfaces, resulted in 1.36 mmol h−1 g−1 O2 produced under visible-light irradiation as well as more than one order of magnitude enhanced apparent quantum yield at 450 nm. A schematic of the multi-electric-field-assisted photocatalytic water oxidation is shown in Fig. 24d. At first, an internal electric field was formed due to the energy band offset between the {010} and {110} facets of BiVO4; upon visible-light irradiation, this spontaneous field potentials provide a preliminary driving force for the transfer and separation of charge carriers from the bulk to different surfaces after excitation, with electrons accumulated on the {010} facets and holes on the {110} facets in faceted BiVO4. After ZnO NRs are assembled onto BiVO4, an additional electric field was generated in defective ZnO NRs, further pushing electrons moving to the bottom of the rods and holes to the lateral sides and improving the separation of interfacial charge carriers. As a result, the long-lived holes accumulated on ZnO could efficiently oxidize water into O2 (Fig. 24e). In contrast, different charge transfer behaviors were achieved between electron-dominated {010}-BiVO4 and ZnO NRs. As such, similar multi-electric fields were also fabricated in photocatalysts with a multijunction structure; for example, Li et al. reported an Mo-WO3/Fe-WO3/Bi2S3 system, Ai et al. reported a CdS@Ti3C2@CoO system, and Guo et al. reported a bismuth oxyiodide with various crystal structures (BiOI, Bi4O5I2, and Bi5O7I).203–205
In addition to multi-electric-field coupling, plasmonic coupling was also studied. For example, Dong's group reported an IR-driven plasmonic coupling on Ag/W18O49 heterostructures for synergistic photo/thermal enhancement of H2 production from ammonia borane.206 Song et al. achieved enhanced carbon dioxide activation and conversion by the effective plasmonic coupling effect of Pt and Au NPs.207 Ma et al. controlled the growth of CdS–Cu2−xS lateral heteroshells on Au NPs to improve the photocatalytic activity and photothermal efficiency.208
7.2 Different-field coupling
The LSPR effect is an effective method and has been widely used for improving the photocatalytic performance. The improved mechanism can be attributed to the synergistic effect of multiple fields (i.e., optical near-field, far-field scattering light, and thermal field).209–212 There have been many studies and advanced systematic reviews in this area; therefore, we will not investigate this too deeply in this review. As a representative of the LSPR effect, noble metal AuNCs have been widely incorporated into the photocatalytic system to improve the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors, such as TiO2, CdS, ZnO, Cu2O, etc.213–216
Apart from noble metals, the LSPR effect of nonnoble metals has also attracted significant attention in the past few years. In particular, Halas et al. reported a novel plasmon photocatalyst comprising Cu NPs (as the antenna) and single-atom Ru (as the reactor), which can effectively inhibit the strong damping caused by the higher load.217 The photocatalyst achieves high selectivity (∼100%) and long-term stability (50 h) under irradiation at room temperature. In another outstanding work, Marimuthu and his co-workers first used Cu NPs with the LSPR effect to catalyze propylene's transformation into propylene oxide (PO).218 Owing to the LSPR effect of Cu NPs, the constructed Cu/SiO2 system preferred to produce PO instead of complete combustion products (CO2 and H2O) under visible-light irradiation. More importantly, the LSPR effect of Cu NPs led to a weakening of the Cu–O bonds, which essentially reduced the Cu2O shell and the Cu surface remained in the zero-oxidation state under the high-temperature condition (473 K), thereby affording high activity and stability in the transformation of propylene to PO (Fig. 25a and b). Further, Zhou et al. achieved effective hydrogen dissociation in chemical production and pollutant removal by utilizing the LSPR effect of Al NCRs.219 In addition, Weiss's group also combined the metal of the LSPR effect with QDs to improve the photochemistry performance of chemical transformations.220
 Fig. 25  (a) Rate of propylene consumption (left axis, red squares) and the selectivity to PO (right axis, blue diamonds) under photothermal conditions (light on) at 473 K as a function of light intensity. The rate and selectivity data shown in (a) represent the average values of the data obtained from five independent experiments, and the error bars represent SD. (b) Selectivity to PO for thermal (light off) and photothermal (light on) processes as a function of the reaction rate. The light intensity used for the photothermal studies was 550 mW cm−2. The reaction rate and selectivity data shown in (b) represent the average values of the data obtained from three independent experiments, and the error bars represent SD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2013 Science. (c) Time courses of C3H6 production over the as-synthesized MoO3−x ultrathin nanobelts under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and in the dark at 50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the energy band structure, plasmonic resonance, and electron transfer pathway in the MoS2@TiO2 heterojunction. (e) Modulated H2 yield rate as a function of the wavelength of monochromatic-light irradiation. (f) Recycling photocatalytic H2 evolution test of MoS2(10)@TiO2 over 21 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Illustration of the two pathways used to fabricate composite photoanodes and the corresponding charge transfer process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Beyond that, the LSPR effect of nonmetals (e.g., WO3−x, MoO3−x, Cu2−xS) has also attracted significant attention. Compared with the traditional LSPR effect, this type of indirect LSPR effect is mainly derived from charge collective oscillation on the metal chalcogenide surface propagated by anion (O or S) vacancies within its crystal lattice.221 For example, Liu's group demonstrated that the LSPR effect of MoO3−x could effectively promote the transformation of isopropyl alcohol into propylene under visible-light illumination (Fig. 25c).222 Bao et al. reported a C-doped WO3−x ultrathin NS to oxidate various amines into imines at room temperature under visible-light irradiation.223 Furthermore, Guo et al. incorporated MoS2 (with the LSPR effect) with TiO2 as photocatalysts to obtain highly efficient hydrogen production (Fig. 25d–f).224 Although the rapid development of noble-metal-free photocatalysts for chemical transformations is at a rudimentary level, further expansion of this field shows great promise.
In order to further improve the effect of field increase, Liu's group proposed the concept of the collective excitation of embedded metal NPs.225 The enhancement in the photoconversion rate in the Au-nanochain system is 3.5 times higher compared with that of isolated Au NPs. Experimental characterization and theoretical simulation show that the strongly coupled plasmonic nanostructure of the Au nanochain induces a highly intensive electromagnetic field. The enhanced strength of the electromagnetic field significantly enhances the formation rate and separation efficiency of the electron–hole pairs, ultimately improving the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activity. Furthermore, Feldmann et al. unidirectionally seeded core–shell Au@Nb NPs in the cavity of the semiconducting HxK1−xNbO3 nanoscrolls to achieve the full-spectrum utilization of diffusive solar energy.226 The constructed biomimetic structure can effectively promote the near-field plasmon–plasmon coupling between bimetallic Au@Nb NPs (peas), endowing the UV-active HxK1−xNbO3 semiconductor (pods) with strong light-harvesting abilities from visible light to NIR. Moreover, the characteristic 3D metal–semiconductor junction of the Au@Nb@HxK1−xNbO3 NPPs favors the transfer of plasmonic hot carriers to trigger dye photodegradation and water photoelectrolysis as proofs of concept.
Furthermore, Yan's group coupled the LSPR effect and electric field by fabricating a hybrid system consisting of Au NPs, layered double hydroxide (LDH), SiO2, and BiVO4 for effective water oxidation (as shown in Fig. 25g).227 They found that the different growth orders of the LDH NSs and Au@SiO2 layers (I: LDH/Au@SiO2, II: Au@SiO2/LDH) on the BiVO4 surface led to a different photocurrent density. In particular, the I system showed a 52% increase compared with the II system; the performance of the I system was 1.3 times higher than that of II toward water oxidation. Researchers revealed that this phenomenon was mainly attributed to the different light absorption by Au@SiO2 in the I and II systems, leading to different LSPR effects, which was beneficial to promote charge separation in BiVO4.
In addition, a large number of pioneering works have suggested that the coupling of the LSPR and piezoelectric effects is feasible in improving the photocatalytic performance. For example, Xu et al. fabricated Aux/BaTiO3 photocatalysts by precipitating Au NPs on piezoelectric BaTiO3 NCs via a chemical approach (Fig. 26a).228 The results showed that the Au content, piezoelectric potential of the BaTiO3 substrate, and LSPR are vital toward improving the photocatalytic activity. Further, Au4/BaTiO3 shows an optimum photocatalytic activity for degrading methyl orange with the assistance of the LSPR effect and ultrasonic field. In particular, as shown in Fig. 26b (left panel), a Schottky barrier is initially formed at the interface between the Au NPs and BaTiO3 NCs owing to the different Fermi levels of Au and BaTiO3, leading to the diffusion of electrons from BaTiO3 to the Au NPs. This structure can efficiently increase the separation efficiency of the electron–hole pairs. Under light irradiation (Fig. 26b, middle panel), the high-energy electrons induced by LSPR can transfer across the Schottky barrier to BaTiO3; then, the surplus holes are captured by the donors in the solution, initiating the oxidation reactions for methyl orange. Additionally, with the help of ultrasonics (Fig. 26b, right panel), the piezoelectric polarization of BaTiO3 induces a built-in piezoelectric field (Pf) inside the NCs, which can further improve the separation efficiency of the hot electron–hole pairs induced by LSPR, subsequently driving more excited holes toward the Au NPs/solution interface and leading to more radicals to oxidize the methyl orange; methyl orange could be completely degraded within 75 min under full-spectrum light irradiation under an auxiliary ultrasonic field.
 Fig. 26  (a) Fabrication process of Aux/BaTiO3 heterostructures. (b) Schematic of the piezotronic-enhanced photocatalysis mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
A similar coupling of the LSPR and piezoelectric effects was also reported by the same group and other groups for enhancing the photocatalytic activity.229–231 Other different-field-coupling-assisted photocatalytic systems that include the coupling of magnetic and thermal fields and the coupling of local electromagnetic fields have also been recently reported.169,232
In short, multifield coupling has been demonstrated to be a useful strategy for improving the separation efficiency of the photogenerated charge carriers based on a lot of encouraging studies. Consequently, the highest record of the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (∼5.2%) is a good representation. Although good performance can be obtained, there are still some key points that need to be taken into account when constructing photocatalytic systems with the assistance of multifield coupling. Here, we take multi-electric-field coupling as an example. First, we should consider the contact surface area between the components (it is common in other multifield-coupled systems), which determines the intensity of the built-in electric field. It also provides a strategy for tuning the built-in electric field. Further, the direction of the electric field should be considered to achieve the target of improving the electric field intensity. Last but not least, the stability of the system is also essential, which decides its further applications.
8. Conclusions and outlook
In summary, introducing a local field into a photocatalytic system has been demonstrated to be an effective strategy to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency by extending the light-harvesting region, improving mass transfer, tuning the band structure, increasing the charge excitation process, affecting the formation of intermediates or reactive pathways, and promoting the separation of the photogenerated charge carriers in the photocatalysts. Therefore, enhanced photocatalytic performances (including activity, stability, selectivity, and recyclability) were observed over various photocatalytic systems in multiple applications, including water splitting, pollutants degradation, CO2 reduction, nitrogen fixation, and other semiconductor-induced chemical transformations. Although remarkable progress in various photocatalytic applications has been achieved by the incorporation of various local fields into the photocatalytic system, there still exist several urgent challenges, which—on the other hand—serve as great opportunities for future works.
First, the photocatalytic performance, including activity, stability, and/or selectivity, of these reactions (water splitting, pollutants degradation, CO2 reduction, nitrogen fixation, etc.) still needs improvement. To date, in most of the reported photocatalytic systems, the efficiency of converting solar to chemical energy is still considerably lower than 10%, which is the fundamental aspect toward realizing industrial applications. Therefore, great work should be devoted toward the screening and designing of local-field-assisted photocatalytic systems. In particular, for an electric-field-assisted photocatalytic system, the presence of a local electric field alters the status of the energy band between the interfaces and provides an extra driving force to accelerate the separation of the photoinduced charge carriers. Therefore, the formed electric field plays a significant role in the separation of electron–hole pairs. Generally, a stronger electric field is more effective toward charge separation; therefore, some useful strategies can be employed to improve the intensity of the local electric field. For example, increasing the contacted interface and improving the interaction between materials in the heterostructure inducing the local electric field are conducive to charge separation. Furthermore, for surface polarity and ferro-/piezoelectric-effect-induced local electric field, the plane polarity and size of the photocatalysts have been demonstrated to significantly affect the formed local electric field. On one hand, we can further tune the polarity of the crystal plane of the photocatalyst by some strategies (e.g., doping, defecting, and surface modification). On the other hand, the crystal size of the photocatalyst with the ferroelectric polarization effect should be controlled above 100 nm, because a smaller size leads to a substantial decrease in the local electric field.31
For the local-thermal-field-assisted photocatalytic system, the introduction of a thermal effect is conducive to accelerate the surface reaction rate, promote electron transfer and excitation of low-grade photons, and activate the intermedium species, thereby leading to enhanced photocatalytic performance. To further improve the performance, some fundamental issues should be addressed in the near future. For example, it should be noted that the introduction of the thermal effect generally accelerates the rate of other elemental steps instead of the rate-limiting step, which decides the reactive activation energy.95 Further, apart from an external thermal source, the thermal effect of NIR and IR light (about 50%) in the solar spectrum has gradually attracted great attention of researchers in the past few years. It not only decreases the input of extra energy and increases the utilization efficiency of solar energy but also dramatically reduces the requirement for a photocatalytic reactor. To make full use of solar energy, the development of low-cost and stable materials with high solar-light absorption coefficient, e.g., metal carbide, is incredibly important. It not only can serve as a light and/or thermal absorber but also may play the role of an active site for accelerating photocatalytic reactions. Meanwhile, the monitoring of the temperature of the catalyst surface during the reaction is a challenge. Fortunately, the rapid development of in situ characterization technology provides a solution.
For the local-magnetic-field-assisted photocatalytic system, the incorporated magnetic field has been demonstrated to play the role of accelerating the mass transfer, improving the charge transfer and separation, and affecting the spin state of the intermediate species in photocatalytic reactions. However, many problems still need to be addressed; in the last century, however, the extra magnetic field was disclosed to affect the catalytic performance. For example, due to the specificity of the magnetic field, it is difficult to study the charge transfer pathway in a magnetic field. Fortunately, the introduction of some photocatalysts with the magnetic effect (i.e., magnetoresistive effect) can simplify this issue.148,150 In addition, it has been found that nonmagnetic organic semiconducting materials can have a significant response to a low magnetic field to improve the photoinduced charge transfer, migration, and separation due to the electron–spin multiplicities and spin–spin interactions.233 It also provides an effective strategy to further improve the photocatalytic conversion efficiency.
The use of an ultrasonic field, on one hand, leads to the formation of abundant activated oxygen species (˙OH, H2O2, and ˙O2−), which can directly oxidize organic pollutants. On the other hand, the ultrasonic wave serves as external stress to trigger the ferro-/piezoelectric effect of the photocatalysts, thereby leading to effective charge separation and eventually enhancing the photocatalytic performance. To further improve the photocatalytic performance, some strategies may be useful in the near future. For example, one is the selection of ultrasound frequency and energy densities. It may be used to achieve the selective removal of some specific pollutants or microorganisms in wastewater.234 Then, dual-frequency ultrasound can be used; in brief, the nonlinear dynamics of microbubbles upon dual-frequency ultrasound exposure results in some different frequencies, such as ultraharmonics, subharmonics, harmonics, and combination frequencies, which can improve the efficiency of bubble collapse and therefore form more activated oxygen species for higher photocatalytic conversion efficiency.235
The synergistic effect of multifield coupling has demonstrated to endow the photocatalytic system with higher solar-energy conversion efficiency. For example, Wang's group obtained the highest solar-to-hydrogen efficiency in a multi-electric-field tandem system of quadruple band In0.35Ga0.65N/In0.27Ga0.73N/In0.20Ga0.80N/GaN.201 Although high photocatalytic efficiency was obtained, some challenges remain for the fabrication of photocatalysts in this field. The most important point is good contact between the components, which decides the interaction between the multiple fields.
Furthermore, it should be noted that it is the regulation for the direction of various local fields, which decides the final synergistic effect and ultimately the photocatalytic efficiency. In addition, to the best of our knowledge, the constructed field-assisted photocatalytic system is mainly applied in solar water splitting and elimination of pollutants, while the report of the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 and N2 into useful chemical fuels with local field assistance is rare. In particular, the coupled local electric field, on one hand, can effectively accelerate the separation of photoinduced charge, which is vital to multielectron reduction reactions. On the other hand, the coupling of local fields (i.e., LSPR and local thermal field) provides high-energy electrons or extra energy that facilitates the breakage of the CO and NN bonds. In addition, the coupling of local fields generally means a multicomponent system that may provide more active sites. Therefore, we can also control the composition of the photocatalytic system to tune the selectivity of the products.
Second, similar to the most reported photocatalytic systems, studying the long-term stability of the local-field-assisted photocatalysts is limited. Most stability experiments are carried out for only dozens of hours and deactivation analyses are prevalently insufficient. In a local-field-assisted photocatalytic system, the stability of the photocatalyst is more critical due to the formation of some extreme environments caused by these local fields, i.e., ultrasonic field and thermal field (the surface of the catalysts can reach temperatures up to hundreds of degrees). To this end, more innovation in a highly stable catalyst design is required. As a candidate, two-dimensional (2D) materials may show tremendous potential. Besides the standard merits of 2D materials, on one hand, they possess large surface areas, which provide the possibility of large contact surfaces between the components. On the other hand, 2D materials are less likely to agglomerate under ultrasonic conditions compared with other materials (particles, bulk, rods, etc.). In addition, the excellent interaction between the components is also essential for fabricating a highly stable photocatalytic system.
Last but not least, the chemical and physical mechanisms underlying the local-field-assisted photocatalytic system should be further investigated. To date, various local-field-assisted photocatalytic systems have been constructed, and a significant understanding of the role of the local field in promoting photocatalytic efficiency has been acquired. However, the following critical issues still need to be addressed in future studies. (i) Local-field-induced effect and intrinsic photocatalytic effect should be clearly distinguished. For example, the photothermal effect in the thermal-field-assisted photocatalytic system should be understood. For this, real-time temperature-monitoring technology is highly desirable. (ii) The transfer pathways of the charge carriers or reactive pathways are ambiguous due to the system (especially in multifield coupling). In this regard, in situ characterization techniques need to urgently developed, which can provide the most direct information of the intermediate species or charge transfer during photocatalytic reactions. (iii) Owing to the system complexity, the synergetic cooperation between both theoretical calculations and experimental results is indispensable to be analyzed so that a logical framework can be formulated to further advance the current state of knowledge. Meanwhile, reasonable references and simplifications are essential for theoretical calculations of the local-field-assisted photocatalytic system.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Contract No. 21806166), Guangdong Foundation for Program of Science and Technology Research (Grant No. 2017B030314057), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (No. 2184128), and the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
References
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, L. S. Zhang, Z. G. Chen, J. Q. Hu, S. J. Li, Z. H. Wang, J. S. Liu and X. C. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, L. Schmidt-Mende and J. K. Stolarczyk, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7372–7408 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hirakawa, M. Hashimoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10929–10936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Chiu, T. H. Lai, M. Y. Kuo, P. Y. Hsieh and Y. J. Hsu, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 080901 CrossRef .
M. J. Fang, C. W. Tsao and Y. J. Hsu, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 143001 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, Z. Li, W. L. Zhen and G. X. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6409–6415 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS .
A. McLaren, T. Valdes-Solis, G. Q. Li and S. C. Tsang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12540–12541 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, W. L. Zhen, H. B. Gao, X. Q. Zhang, Z. Li and G. X. Lu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2017, 203, 789–797 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Guan, C. Xiao, J. Zhang, S. J. Fan, R. An, Q. M. Cheng, J. F. Xie, M. Zhou, B. J. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10411–10417 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Cao, J. X. Low, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Lei, T. T. Zhang, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, G. Liu and M. H. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8009–8020 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boerigter, R. Campana, M. Morabito and S. Linic, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, W. Yan, X. F. Wang, P. Li, W. Y. Gao, H. H. Zou, S. M. Wu and K. J. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705060 CrossRef .
H. M. Liu, M. Li, T. D. Dao, Y. Y. Liu, W. Zhou, L. Q. Liu, X. G. Meng, T. Nagao and J. H. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 398–404 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Zhang, C. Kong and G. X. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10158–10161 RSC .
D. F. Yu, Z. H. Liu, J. M. Zhang, S. Li, Z. C. Zhao, L. F. Zhu, W. S. Liu, Y. H. Lin, H. Liu and Z. T. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 695–705 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, J. Zhang, Z. H. Zhao, W. B. Guo, J. C. Qiu, X. N. Mou, A. X. Li, J. P. Claverie and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 207–217 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lei, R. Z. Chen, J. H. Tan, X. X. Long, H. Y. Chen, X. M. Wang, J. F. Liu, Z. F. Lei and Z. Y. Zhang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2164–2173 RSC .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernandez-Garcia and G. Colon, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lei, R. Chen, Y. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Long, J. Tan and X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3605–3613 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Pan, Y. Zheng, F. S. Guo, P. P. Niu and X. C. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Chen, S. Shen, G. J. Liu, Y. Qi, F. X. Zhang and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3047–3051 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lin, D. G. Wang, Z. X. Jiang, Y. Ma, J. Li, R. G. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6400–6406 RSC .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. A. Salvador and G. S. Rohrer, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 24–42 RSC .
J. G. Yu, J. X. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Low, J. G. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Wang and J. M. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907619 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Li, Y. Zhou, W. G. Tu, J. H. Ye and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 998–1013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Miao, W. L. Li, H. Q. Li and Y. F. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6482–6490 RSC .
L. J. Wang, W. Z. Wang, Y. L. Chen, L. Z. Yao, X. Zhao, H. L. Shi, M. S. Cao and Y. J. Liang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11652–11662 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Olding, A. Henning, J. T. Dong, Q. F. Zhou, M. J. Moody, P. J. M. Smeets, P. Darancet, E. A. Weiss and L. J. Lauhon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40543–40550 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Huang, Z. L. Wang, B. Luo, P. Chen, T. E. Lin, M. Xiao, S. C. Wang, B. Y. Dai, W. Wang, J. H. Kou, C. H. Lu, Z. Z. Xu and L. Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104410 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Liu, G. X. Zhao, W. Zhou, Y. Y. Liu, H. Pang, H. B. Zhang, D. Hao, X. G. Meng, P. Li, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6822–6829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ida, A. Takashiba, S. Koga, H. Hagiwara and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1872–1878 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, W. T. Bi, Y. Y. Wan, X. G. Li, M. C. Huang, R. L. Yuan, H. X. Ju, W. S. Chu, X. J. Wu, L. H. He, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, Sci. China Chem., 2018, 61, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, L. J. Bai, Y. Z. Zhu, S. X. Zhong, L. H. Zhao, Z. Q. Li and S. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23133–23142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, Y. C. Pu and Y. J. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2967–2975 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Chen and Y. J. Hsu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 363–368 RSC .
Y. S. Chang, M. Choi, M. Baek, P. Y. Hsieh, K. Yong and Y. J. Hsu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2018, 225, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Do, C. N. Van, K. A. Tsai, L. T. Quynh, J. W. Chen, Y. C. Lin, Y. C. Chen, W. C. Chou, C. L. Wu, Y. J. Hsu and Y. H. Chu, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Zhou, S. S. Ding, Y. Wang, X. R. Wang, W. Q. Huang, K. Li and G. F. Huang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6037–6046 RSC .
M. Q. Wang, Y. S. Chang, C. W. Tsao, M. J. Fang, Y. J. Hsu and K. L. Choy, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2465–2468 RSC .
Y. S. Chang, P. Y. Hsieh, T. F. M. Chang, C. Y. Chen, M. Sone and Y. J. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13971–13979 RSC .
W. Hebenstreit, M. Schmid, J. Redinger, R. Podloucky and P. Varga, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 5376–5379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Li, Y. K. Peng, L. S. Hu, J. W. Zheng, D. Prabhakaran, S. Wu, T. J. Puchtler, M. Li, K. Y. Wong, R. A. Taylor and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
X. W. Wang, L. C. Yin, G. Liu, L. Z. Wang, R. Saito, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3976–3979 RSC .
B. Liu, L. Ma, L. C. Ning, C. J. Zhang, G. P. Han, C. J. Pei, H. Zhao, S. Z. Liu and H. Q. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6109–6117 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Q. Yang, A. H. Wei, H. Zhao, L. C. Ning, C. J. Zhang and S. Z. Liu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2015, 172, 165–173 CrossRef .
F. Chen, Z. Y. Ma, L. Q. Ye, T. Y. Ma, T. R. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang and H. W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908350 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Han, W. N. Wang, B. Liu, C. J. Pei, H. Zhao, J. F. Liu and H. Q. Yang, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2017, 208, 94–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. B. Chen, Y. Bai, C. Li, Y. Gao and R. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10264–10272 RSC .
J. H. Wang, Y. L. Chen, Y. F. Shen, S. Q. Liu and Y. J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2978–2981 RSC .
Y. Bai, Y. E. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. B. Chen, Y. H. Zhang, J. F. Liu, J. Wang, F. F. Wang, C. D. Chen, C. Li and R. G. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3242–3252 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Xiong, L. L. Wu, Y. Liu, T. N. Gao, K. Q. O. Li, Y. Long, R. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. A. Qiao, Q. S. Huo, X. Ge, S. Y. Song and H. J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901634 CrossRef .
C. G. Zhou, J. K. Zhou, L. Lu, J. J. Wang, Z. Shi, B. Wang, L. Pei, S. C. Yan, Z. T. Yu and Z. G. Zou, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2018, 237, 742–752 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Shan, C. H. Lu, L. M. Dong and J. Suriyaprakash, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 804, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Zheng, Y. G. Xia, X. L. Jiao, T. Wang and D. R. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3206–3211 RSC .
L. Zhang, W. Z. Wang, S. M. Sun, D. Jiang and E. P. Gao, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2015, 162, 470–474 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Wang, G. Liu and L. Z. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5192–5247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, F. T. Fan, R. T. Chen, H. Y. An, Z. C. Feng and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9111–9114 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Chen, S. Pang, H. Y. An, J. Zhu, S. Ye, Y. Y. Gao, F. T. Fan and C. Li, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 655–663 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Huang, B. Y. Dai, W. Wang, C. H. Lu, J. H. Kou, Y. R. Ni, L. Z. Wang and Z. Z. Xu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3803–3808 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Damodaran, E. Breckenfeld, Z. H. Chen, S. Lee and L. W. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6341–6347 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Yang and M. Alexe, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704908 CrossRef .
H. W. Huang, S. C. Tu, C. Zeng, T. R. Zhang, A. H. Reshak and Y. H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11860–11864 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Shi, M. Zhang, Z. M. Zhang, Y. X. Li, Y. Qu, Z. Q. Liu, J. L. Yang, M. Z. Xie and W. H. Han, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104448 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lu, W. H. Lin, C. Y. Yang, Y. H. Chiu, Y. C. Pu, M. H. Lee, Y. C. Tseng and Y. J. Hsu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8796–8803 RSC .
H. L. You, Z. Wu, L. H. Zhang, Y. R. Ying, Y. Liu, L. F. Fei, X. X. Chen, Y. M. Jia, Y. J. Wang, F. F. Wang, S. Ju, J. L. Qiao, C. H. Lam and H. T. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11779–11784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Huang, W. S. Chang, C. N. Van, H. J. Liu, K. A. Tsai, J. W. Chen, H. H. Kuo, W. Y. Tzeng, Y. C. Chen, C. L. Wu, C. W. Luo, Y. J. Hsu and Y. H. Chu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15795–15801 RSC .
B. Y. Dai, Y. R. Yu, Y. K. Chen, H. M. Huang, C. H. Lu, J. H. Kou, Y. J. Zhao and Z. Z. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807934 CrossRef .
Y. H. Yu and X. D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800154 CrossRef .
S. C. Tu, Y. H. Zhang, A. H. Reshak, S. Auluck, L. Q. Ye, X. P. Han, T. Y. Ma and H. W. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 840–850 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Feng, L. L. Ling, Y. X. Wang, Z. M. Xu, F. L. Cao, H. X. Li and Z. F. Bian, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 481–486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anand, K. Thekkepat and U. V. Waghmare, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 126–131 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, C. F. Yan, S. Rtimi and J. Bandara, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 241, 256–269 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, H. W. Huang, L. Guo, Y. H. Zhang and T. Y. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10061–10073 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Ye, H. C. Xie, J. Zhu, Q. Shi, N. Ta, R. T. Chen, Y. Y. Gao, H. Y. An, W. Nie, H. W. Jing, F. T. Fan and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906513 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Alex, A. Prabhakaran, A. R. Jayakrishnan, K. Kamakshi, J. P. B. Silva and K. C. Sekhar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40114–40124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu and J. M. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Cui, J. Briscoe, Y. Q. Wang, N. V. Tarakina and S. Dunn, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24518–24526 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Keisy, L. Ren, D. D. Cui, Z. F. Xu, X. Xu, X. D. Su, W. C. Hao, S. X. Dou and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10992–10999 RSC .
X. Y. Fan, Z. P. Wu, L. C. Wang and C. Y. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 639–647 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Feng, L. L. Ling, J. H. Nie, K. Han, X. Y. Chen, Z. F. Bian, H. X. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12411–12418 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Fu, J. Y. Sun, Q. Q. Luo, X. X. Li, W. Hu and J. L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6312–6317 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Xu, L. B. Xiao, Y. M. Jia, Z. Wu, F. F. Wang, Y. J. Wang, N. O. Haugen and H. T. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2198–2207 RSC .
B. Y. Dai, J. J. Fang, Y. R. Yu, M. L. Sun, H. M. Huang, C. H. Lu, J. H. Kou, Y. J. Zhao and Z. Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906361 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, H. Song, H. M. Liu and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8016–8035 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Q. Li, D. Zhang, N. Q. Su, W. T. Yang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef .
D. Mateo, A. M. Asiri, J. Albero and H. Garcia, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2018, 17, 829–834 RSC .
H. B. Zhang, T. Wang, J. J. Wang, H. M. Liu, T. D. Dao, M. Li, G. G. Liu, X. G. Meng, K. Chang, L. Shi, T. Nagao and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Ghuman, T. E. Wood, L. B. Hoch, C. A. Mims, G. A. Ozin and C. V. Singh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 14623–14635 RSC .
C. Y. Xu, W. H. Huang, Z. Li, B. W. Deng, Y. W. Zhang, M. J. Ni and K. F. Cen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6582–6593 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, P. G. O'Brien, L. He, Q. Qiao, T. Fei, L. M. Reyes, T. E. Burrow, Y. C. Dong, K. Liao, M. Varela, S. J. Pennycook, M. Hmadeh, A. S. Helmy, N. P. Kherani, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600189 CrossRef .
J. Q. Zhao, Q. Yang, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, X. Zhang, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. R. Zhang, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 1–9 CrossRef .
B. Wang, R. R. Li, G. Guo and Y. S. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8996–8999 RSC .
Y. F. Zhao, Z. H. Li, M. Z. Li, J. J. Liu, X. W. Liu, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Y. S. Wang, J. Q. Zhao, W. Gao, Z. S. Zhang, R. Long, Q. H. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Liu, X. D. Wen, D. Ma, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803127 CrossRef .
L. K. Zhao, Y. H. Qi, L. Z. Song, S. B. Ning, S. X. Ouyang, H. Xu and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7708–7712 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, S. X. Ouyang, H. Xu, X. G. Meng, T. Wang, D. F. Wang and J. H. Ye, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601657 CrossRef .
Y. H. Qi, L. Z. Song, S. X. Ouyang, X. C. Liang, S. B. Ning, Q. Q. Zhang and J. H. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903915 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Luo, H. Song, D. Philo, M. Oshikiri, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2020, 272, 118965 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Liu, H. Song, W. Zhou, X. G. Meng and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16781–16784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li, J. C. Hao, H. Song, F. Y. Zhang, X. H. Bai, X. G. Meng, H. Y. Zhang, S. F. Wang, Y. Hu and J. H. Ye, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
L. A. Zhou, D. F. Swearer, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, H. Q. Zhao, L. Henderson, L. L. Dong, P. Christopher, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2018, 362, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cortes, Science, 2018, 362, 28–29 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Tang, X. L. Xing, W. Yu, J. Sun, Y. M. Xuan, L. Wang, Y. F. Xu, H. Hong and H. G. Jin, iScience, 2020, 23, 101012 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Li, Y. Huang, S. M. Li, C. H. Wang, Y. Y. Li, X. T. Zhang and Y. C. Liu, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
R. Song, B. Luo, M. C. Liu, J. F. Geng, D. W. Jing and H. Liu, AIChE J., 2017, 63, 2916–2925 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Yan, C. H. Wang, H. Ma, Y. Y. Li, Y. C. Liu, N. Suzuki, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima and X. T. Zhang, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2020, 268, 118401 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsushita, A. Tsuruoka, E. Kobayashi, T. Isobe and A. Nakajima, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 649–656 RSC .
J. X. Low, L. Y. Zhang, T. Tong, B. J. Shen and J. G. Yu, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 255–266 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Liu, Y. Xu, M. Y. Sun, Y. Huang, Y. F. Yu and B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1077–1083 RSC .
K. Shimura, K. Maeda and H. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9041–9047 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Xu, Q. F. Cheng, S. X. Dou and Y. Du, Small, 2019, 1904107 CrossRef .
W. Gao, B. Tian, W. Y. Zhang, X. Q. Zhang, Y. Q. Wu and G. X. Lu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 257, 117908 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Bao, Z. Y. Zhang, B. S. Cao, Y. Liu, J. Y. Shang, Y. Yang and B. Dong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7433–7439 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. R. Fang, B. S. Cao, J. D. Huang, K. C. Liu and B. Dong, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800748 CrossRef .
S. S. Chen, T. Takata and K. Domen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
J. X. Low, L. Y. Zhang, B. C. Zhu, Z. Y. Liu and J. G. Yu, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15653–15661 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Zhang, T. Itoi, T. Konishi and Y. Izumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6292–6301 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Liu, X. G. Meng, H. B. Zhang, G. X. Zhao, H. Pang, T. Wang, P. Li, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5570–5574 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mahvelati-Shamsabadi and B. K. Lee, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2020, 230, 109957 CrossRef .
Z. F. Jiang, W. M. Wan, H. M. Li, S. Q. Yuan, H. J. Zhao and P. K. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706108 CrossRef .
S. W. Cao, B. J. Shen, T. Tong, J. W. Fu and J. G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .
J. X. Low, B. Z. Dai, T. Tong, C. J. Jiang and J. G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802981 CrossRef .
F. Chen, H. W. Huang, L. Q. Ye, T. R. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, X. P. Han and T. Y. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804284 CrossRef .
H. J. Yu, J. Y. Li, Y. H. Zhang, S. Q. Yang, K. L. Han, F. Dong, T. Y. Ma and H. W. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3880–3884 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Q. Ye, R. Wang, J. F. Yang, Y. X. Zhang, R. Guan, L. H. Tian and X. B. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4001–4009 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Xing, Y. Zhou, C. Y. Dong, L. J. Cai, L. X. Zeng, B. Shen, L. H. Pan, C. C. Dong, Y. Chai, J. L. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3384–3390 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, C. H. Wang, H. Ma, M. Song, D. S. Li, Y. Y. Li, S. M. Li, X. T. Zhang and Y. C. Liu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7000–7010 RSC .
Y. Y. Li, C. H. Wang, M. Song, D. S. Li, X. T. Zhang and Y. C. Liu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 243, 760–770 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Ye, K. H. Chu, B. Wang, D. Wu, H. Q. Xie, G. C. Huang, H. Y. Yip and P. K. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11657–11660 RSC .
U. E. Steiner and T. Ulrich, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 51–147 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Zhao, N. Li, R. X. Yu, Z. W. Zhao and J. Nan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 530–538 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Tufa, K. J. Jeong, V. T. Tran and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6598–6606 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ngamchuea, K. Tschulik and R. G. Compton, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3293–3306 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, Y. Tian, J. H. Zhao, W. Zhan, J. Y. Du, L. C. Kong, J. Zhang and W. Zuo, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 341, 289–297 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. A. Monzon, K. Rode, M. Venkatesan and J. M. D. Coey, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3878–3885 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. Sun, C. X. Sheng, Y. X. Zhai, K. Mielczarek, A. Zakhidov and Z. V. Vardeny, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 428–435 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Hsiao, T. Wu, M. X. Li and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2899–2906 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Q. Pei, R. Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. M. Zhang, Q. Q. Cao, D. H. Wang, W. B. Mi and Y. W. Du, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3351–3359 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, C. Tang, R. Sachs, Y. Barlas and J. Shi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 016603 CrossRef .
Q. Lei, X. X. Long, H. Y. Chen, J. H. Tan, X. M. Wang and R. Z. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14478–14481 RSC .
W. Q. Gao, J. B. Lu, S. Zhang, X. F. Zhang, Z. X. Wang, W. Qin, J. J. Wang, W. J. Zhou, H. Liu and Y. H. Sang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901244 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, H. J. Jiang, Z. He, J. W. Liu, R. Wang, W. R. Huang, L. T. Feng, X. F. Ren, Z. H. Hou and S. H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2763–2769 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, G. Q. Tan, M. Wang, D. Zhang, M. Y. Dang, L. Lv, H. J. Ren, A. Xia, Y. Liu and W. L. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 511, 145534 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Gao, Q. L. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Y. Yang, X. F. Zhang, H. Zhao, W. Qin, W. J. Zhou, X. N. Wang, H. Liu and Y. H. Sang, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104624 CrossRef CAS .
R. Naaman, Y. Paltiel and D. H. Waldeck, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2004, 67, 1915–1993 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, M. H. Ai, C. Y. Huang, L. Yin, X. Liu, R. R. Zhang, S. B. Wang, Z. Jiang, X. W. Zhang, J. J. Zou and W. B. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S. C. Sun, G. Q. Shen, J. W. Jiang, W. B. Mi, X. L. Liu, L. Pan, X. W. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901505 CrossRef .
H. P. Pan, M. K. Wang, Y. Shen and B. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 19880–19885 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gracia, R. Sharpe and J. Munarriz, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Jiao, R. Sharpe, T. Lim, J. W. H. Niemantsverdriet and J. Gracia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16604–16608 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Abendroth, D. M. Stemer, B. P. Bloom, P. Roy, R. Naaman, D. H. Waldeck, P. S. Weiss and P. C. Mondal, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4928–4946 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tassinari, K. Banerjee-Ghosh, F. Parenti, V. Kiran, A. Mucci and R. Naaman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15777–15783 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mtangi, F. Tassinari, K. Vankayala, A. V. Jentzsch, B. Adelizzi, A. R. A. Palmans, C. Fontanesi, E. W. Meijer and R. Naaman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2794–2798 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mtangi, V. Kiran, C. Fontanesi and R. Naaman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4916–4922 CrossRef CAS .
K. Michaeli, N. Kantor-Uriel, R. Naaman and D. H. Waldeck, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6478–6487 RSC .
P. C. Mondal, C. Fontanesi, D. H. Waldeck and R. Naaman, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2560–2568 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, S. Mishra, E. Avigad, B. P. Bloom, L. T. Baczewski, S. Yochelis, Y. Paltiel, R. Naaman and D. H. Waldeck, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1550–1557 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, X. Z. Wang, Y. W. Hu and Y. R. He, Sol. Energy, 2020, 196, 505–512 CrossRef CAS .
D. MacNeill, C. Heikes, K. F. Mak, Z. Anderson, A. Kormanyos, V. Zolyomi, J. Park and D. C. Ralph, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 037401 CrossRef .
F. A. Garces-Pineda, M. Blasco-Ahicart, D. Nieto-Castro, N. Lopez and J. R. Galan-Mascaros, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 519–525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. J. Wang, C. L. Z. Vieira, J. M. Wolfson, G. Y. Pingtian and S. D. Huang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 55, 273–278 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Teh, T. Y. Wu and J. C. Juan, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 586–612 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hayati, A. A. Isari, B. Anvaripour, M. Fattahi and B. Kakavandi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122636 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. S. ElShafei, A. M. Al-Sabagh, F. Z. Yehia, C. A. Philip, N. A. Moussa, G. Eshaq and A. E. ElMetwally, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2018, 224, 681–691 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Babu, P. Karthik, M. C. John, S. K. Lakhera, M. Ashokkumar, J. Khim and B. Neppolian, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 50, 218–223 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sajjadi, A. Khataee and M. Kamali, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 39, 676–685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Hunge, A. A. Yadav, S. Liu and V. L. Mathe, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 56, 284–289 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, M. Bhaumik, S. Giri and A. Maity, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 37, 600–613 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eshaq and A. E. ElMetwally, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 53, 99–109 CrossRef CAS .
D. Panda and S. Manickam, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 36, 481–496 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Xiao, D. Q. Zhang, D. L. Pan, W. Zhu, P. J. Liu, Y. Cai, G. S. Li and H. X. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Huang, F. W. Yan and G. Q. Yuan, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 3187–3195 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Y. Zhang, X. C. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jing, M. Z. You, S. S. Yi, T. Li, H. P. Ji, Y. Wang, Z. T. Zhang, R. Zhang, D. L. Chen and H. M. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 827–837 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Lu, Y. Wang, X. Y. Zhang, G. Q. Xu, D. M. Wang, J. Lv, Z. X. Zheng and Y. C. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 341, 10–19 CrossRef .
J. G. Wu, Z. Fan, D. Q. Xiao, J. G. Zhu and J. Wang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 84, 335–402 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh and N. Khare, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Li, Y. H. Sang, S. J. Chang, X. Huang, Y. Zhang, R. S. Yang, H. D. Jiang, H. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2372–2379 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhou, F. Yan, S. H. Wu, B. Shen, H. R. Zeng and J. W. Zhai, Small, 2020, 16, 2001573 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Xiang, Z. R. Liu, M. Q. Wu, H. H. Liu, X. D. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. L. Wang and L. L. Li, Small, 2020, 16, 1907603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu and J. M. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 74–81 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Xu, X. Liu, S. L. Wang and L. Li, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 37 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Yu, J. Y. Wang, B. B. Du and X. D. Zhang, Chem. Eng.
J., 2019, 368, 115–128 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Maitani, T. Yamada, H. Mashiko, K. Yoshimatsu, T. Shim, A. Ohtomo and Y. Wada, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 10349–10354 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Higgins, A. Banu, S. Pendleton and J. V. Rojas, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2020, 173, 108871 CrossRef .
S. Kavadiya and P. Biswas, J. Nucl. Med., 2019, 60, 702–709 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. X. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Z. Wang, Z. H. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. B. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Y. Liu, Y. Z. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. H. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
Y. J. Wang, Y. P. Wu, K. Sun and Z. T. Mi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1454–1462 RSC .
T. C. Wei, Y. N. Zhu, Z. N. Gu, X. Q. An, L. M. Liu, Y. X. Wu, H. J. Liu, J. W. Tang and J. H. Qu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 764–773 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Ai, K. Zhang, B. Chang, Y. L. Shao, L. Zhang, Y. Z. Wu and X. P. Hao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Li, Z. F. Liu, J. W. Li, M. N. Ruan and Z. G. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6256–6267 RSC .
Y. Guo, W. X. Shi, Y. F. Zhu, Y. P. Xu and F. Y. Cui, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2020, 262, 118262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. R. Fang, B. K. Liu, J. D. Huang, F. J. Miao, Y. A. Bao and B. Dong, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 252, 164–173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, X. G. Meng, T. D. Dao, W. Zhou, H. M. Liu, L. Shi, H. B. Zhang, T. Nagao, T. Kako and J. H. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 408–416 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, K. Chen, Y. H. Qiu, L. L. Gong, G. M. Pan, Y. J. Lin, Z. H. Hao, L. Zhou and Q. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3408–3414 RSC .
J. H. Chen, C. S. Bailey, Y. L. Hong, L. Wang, Z. Cai, L. Shen, B. Y. Hou, Y. Wang, H. T. Shi, J. Sambur, W. C. Ren, E. Pop and S. B. Cronin, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Meng, Z. Y. Chen, Z. Y. Ma, S. He, Y. D. Hou, H. H. Li, R. S. Yuan, X. H. Huang, X. X. Wang, X. C. Wang and J. L. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 294–298 RSC .
W. K. Liang, Y. H. Sun, Z. Q. Liang, D. Li, Y. W. Wang, W. Qin and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 16753–16761 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Zhang, N. Ding, L. C. Lou, K. Iwasaki, H. J. Wu, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li, K. Nakata, A. Fujishima and Q. B. Meng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806774 CrossRef .
Y. C. Pu, G. M. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. H. Lu, Y. X. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Li, H. Y. Cheng, Y. H. Chiu and Y. J. Hsu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15720–15729 RSC .
Y. H. Chiu, K. D. Chang and Y. J. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4286–4296 RSC .
Y. H. Chiu, S. B. Naghadeh, S. A. Lindley, T. H. Lai, M. Y. Kuo, K. D. Chang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. J. Hsu, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 289–298 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Zhou, J. M. P. Martirez, J. Finzel, C. Zhang, D. F. Swearer, S. Tian, H. Robatjazi, M. H. Lou, L. L. Dong, L. Henderson, P. Christopher, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marimuthu, J. W. Zhang and S. Linic, Science, 2013, 339, 1590–1593 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, C. Zhang, M. J. McClain, A. Manavacas, C. M. Krauter, S. Tian, F. Berg, H. O. Everitt, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1478–1484 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Westmoreland, K. P. McClelland, K. A. Perez, J. C. Schwabacher, Z. Y. Zhang and E. A. Weiss, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 210901 CrossRef .
B. Tian, Y. Wu and G. X. Lu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2021, 280, 119410 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, W. C. Yi, J. F. Li, G. C. Xi, Y. H. Li, H. F. Yang and J. Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1566–1571 RSC .
K. Y. Bao, S. J. Zhang, P. Ni, Z. X. Zhang, K. L. Zhang, L. B. Wang, L. Sun, W. T. Mao, Q. F. Zhou and Y. T. Qian, Catal. Today, 2020, 340, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, Z. Yang, K. Marcus, Z. Li, B. Luo, L. Zhou, X. Wang, Y. Du and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 106–114 RSC .
G. Y. Yu, J. Qian, P. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. X. Zhang, W. F. Yan and G. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chen, Y. K. Hsu, R. Popescu, D. Gerthsen, Y. G. Lin and C. Feldmann, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef .
R. R. Wang, L. Luo, X. L. Zhu, Y. Yan, B. Zhang, X. Xiang and J. He, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3577–3586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Xu, L. M. Guo, Q. J. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808737 CrossRef .
L. M. Guo, C. F. Zhong, J. Q. Cao, Y. N. Hao, M. Lei, K. Bi, Q. J. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 513–520 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, Y. J. Zhang and Y. P. Bi, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 542–548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Xu, Z. H. Liu, M. L. Zhang and L. M. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 801, 483–488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, G. Q. Tan, D. Zhang, B. Li, L. Lv, Y. Wang, H. J. Ren, X. L. Zhang, A. Xia and Y. Liu, Appl. Catal. B Environ., 2019, 254, 98–112 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, L. A. Yan and M. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1500–1516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Huang, L. Li, X. M. Wei, H. Z. Li, J. Y. Zeng and R. Kuang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2020, 69, 105278 CrossRef CAS .
G. Matafonova and V. Batoev, Water Res., 2020, 182, 116016 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Qin Lei	Qin Lei received her BS in 2013 and is currently studying at the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences under the supervision of Prof. Rongzhi Chen. She focuses on the design of nanometer functional materials and applications in photocatalytic and environmental fields. Her current research interests are on the construction of local interaction fields and their mechanism in improving photocatalytic reactions.
Rongzhi Chen	Rongzhi Chen received his PhD at Tsukuba University, Japan (2011). After that, he joined Kyushu University, Japan, as a postdoc. In 2014, he received the Fellowship of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) and worked in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). Since 2016, he moved to the University of Queensland and took the position of Lecturer. Currently, he is an Associate Professor, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research focuses on materials science and technology for environmental remediation or energy conversion by nanomaterials, such as metal–organic frameworks and coordinated polymer composites.

 	Fig. 1  Local-interaction-field-promoted photoinduced charge separation to afford higher activity and improved stability.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the primary photocatalytic mechanism over a semiconductor photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism of internal electric field formation under different conditions. (a) p–n junctions, (b) polar surfaces, (c) polymorph junctions, and (d) ferroelectric polarization. (PC: photocatalyst).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of Ag2S/PDI and (b) HRTEM image of Ag2S/PDI (1:0.6). (c) The separation process of photogenerated carriers and the photocatalytic process. (d) Amount of evolved oxygen in photocatalytic water oxidation with PDI and Ag2S/PDI (1:0.6) under full-spectrum irradiation (inset shows the rate of oxygen production). (e) Effects of different scavengers on phenol degradation in the presence of Ag2S/PDI (1:0.6) under visible-light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of (a) pure CdS NR arrays and (b) heterogenous CdS/Cu2O NR arrays. (c) Time-dependent amounts of photocatalytic H2 production over pure CdS and CdS–10Cu2O photoelectrodes at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl. (d) Energy band schematic for heterogenous p–n junction CdS/Cu2O NR arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing the formation of MnxCd1−xS (MCS) twin-junction photocatalyst based on thermodynamics and kinetics-dominated crystal growth process. (b) Illustration of the band structure evolution and charge transfer in Mn0.5 twin p–n junction. DL: donor level. AL: acceptor level. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) XRD ϕ-scan of NiWO4{202} and WO3{220} reflections for the NiWO4–WO3 heterostructure. (b) Schematic of the domain structure of NiWO4–WO3 heteroepitaxy grown on the STO(111) substrate. (c) Cross-sectional TEM image taken along the [110]STO zone axis of the NiWO4–WO3 heterostructure. (d) Cross-sectional HRTEM image of NiWO4–WO3 interface with the corresponding FFT patterns in the insets. (e) XPS spectra for W 4f7/2 of NiWO4, WO3, and NiWO4–WO3 heterostructures. The inset shows the VB maxima representation for the pure epitaxial NiWO4 and WO3 films. (f) Energy band alignment of the NiWO4–WO3 heterostructure, where EVBM is the VB maxima, ECBM is the CB minima, and Ef is the equilibrium Fermi level (the energy band structure is not represented in the exact energy scale). Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) HRTEM images of the (111), (110), and (100) planes of MgO. The scale bar is 2 nm. (b) 1H NMR and trimethylphosphine-oxide-assisted 31P magic-angle spinning NMR measurements of the (111), (110), and (100) planes of MgO, respectively, which show that the surface polarity of MgO(111) creates substantial chemical shifts to 1H and 31P. (c) Schematic of the local electric field of polar MgO(111) NCRs with negative and positive ion-terminated surfaces can assist the photocatalytic water splitting to H2/O2via H+ and OH− surrounding the N-doped TiO2 catalyst particle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the controllable contact areas and built-in electric field between the anatase (A) and rutile (R) forms of the A/R TiO2 photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2019. The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Spatially resolved SPV spectra obtained at different locations on a single BiVO4 crystal (BV02). The thick solid and dashed lines refer to data for the {011} and {010} facets, respectively. The thinner solid and dashed lines refer to data for the {011} and {010} facets of BV01, respectively. (c) Schematic of the built-in electric field with a relative strength in the space-charge region of the different facets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) TEM images of 15BQD@ZnO-RA at different magnifications. (c) Schematic of the charge transfer, separation, and reaction of BiVO4 QD under the influence of piezo-potential from ZnO NRs. (d) Degradation activity of formaldehyde when the windmill is blown. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Piezo-catalytic hydrogen production from water splitting under vibration by BiFeO3 NSs at different vibration frequencies. (b) Piezo-catalytic RhB dye decomposition ratio as a function of vibration time. The inset shows the photographs of the piezo-catalytically decomposed RhB dye solution after different vibration times. (c) Hysteresis loop and (d) PFM phase image of BiFeO3 NSs. (e) Generation of piezoelectric surface charges under mechanical vibration and the participation of the piezo-catalytic hydrogen evolution reaction. (f) Tilting of the energy bands under the strong piezoelectric field induced by mechanical vibration and the accompanied redox reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Formation of the internal electric field in helical microfibers under simple harmonic vibrations. (b) Promoted separation of electrons and holes in the presence of a piezoelectric potential was distributed on the helical microfiber's surface. (c) Deformation, piezoelectric potential, energy band bending, and photogenerated carrier behavior of PVDF/g-C3N4 composite helical microfiber with and without strain. (d) Schematic of the process of piezoelectric potential being saturated, self-renewed, and the corresponding carrier transfer behavior. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  PFM local piezoelectric hysteresis loops. (a) Schematic of polarization and built-in voltage in a single-domain ferroelectric particle. Built-in voltages at negative and positive polarization surfaces are marked as VbiP− and VbiP+, respectively. (b) Hysteresis loop measurement of the PTO particle with negative polarization. (c) Hysteresis loop measurement of the PTO particle with positive polarization. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the Nb3O7(OH) and Pd@Nb2O5 NRs samples. (b) TEM images of the Pd@Nb2O5 nanocrystal-NR sample. (c) CO production rates over Pd@Nb2O5 in the dark at room temperature under irradiation from a 300 W Xe lamp and in the dark at a reaction temperature of 160 °C. (d) Diffuse reflectance spectra of Nb3O7(OH), Nb2O5, and Pd@Nb2O5 films dispersed on a borosilicate filter. (e) Estimated temperatures for Pd@Nb2O5 and Nb2O5 at different power levels based on the Raman spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  Proposed mechanism of the photothermal catalytic reaction with Pt/TiO2 nanocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a–c) SEM, TEM, and HRTEM images of Bi4TaO8Cl NSs. (d–f) BiW–H heterostructure. (g) Time curves of CO production in thermal catalytic CO2 conversion at 120 °C (0–2 h), photothermocatalytic CO2 conversion (2–4 h), and thermal catalytic CO2 conversion at 120 °C (4–6 h). (h) Schematic illustrating the photoexcited electron–hole separation process of BiW heterostructures in photothermal catalysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) UCL spectra of the NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd NPs at a different temperature range of 350–650 K. (b) The UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd/W18O49 heterostructure calcined in the temperature range of 300–700 K; the inset shows the color change in the NaYF4:Yb,Er,Nd/W18O49 heterostructure at an increased temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2019. The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Proposed intermediate species starting from CO2 and H2 to CO during CO2 exchange and photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) Gas evolution (CO and CH4) over the amorphous boron catalyst under full arc irradiation with a Xe lamp. (c) Gas evolution rates under different conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Enhanced photocatalytic mechanism for the concurrent removal of NO3−-N and NH4+-N. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of α-Fe2O3/rGO hybrid nanostructures through a facile hydrothermal method. (c) Schematic of the V3 model of the α-Fe2O3 surface and the side view of the charge difference density for graphene on the top of the α-Fe2O3 surface. The isosurface value is 0.001 e Å−3. The yellow and blue regions represent the gain and loss in the net charge, respectively. The dark brown, red, and golden-brown spheres represent C, Fe, and O atoms, respectively. (d) Total DOS of the V3 heterostructure and partial DOS of the interfacial atoms. The Fermi level is indicated by the vertical line and set to zero. (e) Profiles of time versus transient photocurrent density of α-Fe2O3/rGO under Xe-light irradiation with or without a magnetic field. (f) Magnetotransport properties of α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3/rGO composites at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange with no magnetic field or with a magnetic field in the presence of TiO2 nanobelts under 20 mW cm−2 UV illumination. The inset shows a schematic of the magnetic field photocatalytic setup. (b) Schematic of the interaction between the magnetic field and moving photocatalyst under illumination. (c) Charge density differences in the TiO2(101) surface with/without an external electric field (0.01 V Å−1). The charge density difference is defined as CE − CnoE, where CE and CnoE denote the charge density of the system with and without an external electric field, respectively. The (1 × 1) supercells used in the calculation are replicated in the in-plane direction for ease of viewing. (d) Schematic of the proposed influence of the magnetic field on the photoinduced charge carrier separation in the TiO2 nanobelts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Enlarged XRD patterns of titanium glycerolates (G-5, G-10, G-20, and G-30). Spin-dependent electronic structures of metal-defected TiO2: (b) Ti L-edge and (c) high-resolution L2 XAS spectra. (d) Calculated total DOS and (e) (001)-plane 3D spatial distributions of spin polarization (with an energy interval of [EF −0.2 eV, EF]) of the metal-defected Ti15O32 model (6.25% VTi). The specific isosurface spatial spin polarization value for (e) is −95%. (f) Increasing percentage of the photodegradation rates of Ti-defected samples under an external magnetic field of 8000 Oe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2020 Springer Nature.	 
H2O + > → ˙OH + ˙H	(1)
H2O + ˙H → ˙OH + H2	(2)
O2 + ˙H → HO2˙	(3)
HO2˙ + HO2˙ → H2O2 + O2	(4)
HO˙ + HO˙ → H2O2	(5)
HO˙ + H2O2 → H2O + HO2˙	(6)
H2O2 + > → 2˙OH	(7)
Organic compound + ˙OH/O2−˙/HO2˙ →oxidant products + H2O + CO2	(8)

 	Fig. 22  Proposed degradation pathway for 2-nitrophenol and possible intermediates with the structures optimized at the B3LYP/6-31++G(d) level using the density functional theory method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  TEM images of (a) BaTiO3 and (b) Ag2O–BaTiO3 NCs. (c) Stability of sonophotocatalytic degradation of RhB under UV-ultrasonic irradiation. (d) Schematic of the photocatalytic charge separation mechanism in the reaction. The solid line indicates the bands with the presence of spontaneous polarization charges at the two surfaces of the BaTiO3 NCs, and the dashed line indicates the decrease in the piezoelectric polarization under a mechanical strain. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of quadruple-band InGaN NWs. (b) Efficient charge carrier separation and extraction for water redox reactions in the InGaN system. (c) Photocatalytic H2 and O2 gas generation as a function of time measured in multiple experiment cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the double-electric-field-assisted charge separation in ZnO/BiVO4 heterostructures for water splitting. (e) Photocatalytic water oxidation over BiVO4, ZnO/BiVO4, and Vo-ZnO/BiVO4 under visible-light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Rate of propylene consumption (left axis, red squares) and the selectivity to PO (right axis, blue diamonds) under photothermal conditions (light on) at 473 K as a function of light intensity. The rate and selectivity data shown in (a) represent the average values of the data obtained from five independent experiments, and the error bars represent SD. (b) Selectivity to PO for thermal (light off) and photothermal (light on) processes as a function of the reaction rate. The light intensity used for the photothermal studies was 550 mW cm−2. The reaction rate and selectivity data shown in (b) represent the average values of the data obtained from three independent experiments, and the error bars represent SD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. Copyright 2013 Science. (c) Time courses of C3H6 production over the as-synthesized MoO3−x ultrathin nanobelts under visible light (λ > 420 nm) and in the dark at 50 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 222. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the energy band structure, plasmonic resonance, and electron transfer pathway in the MoS2@TiO2 heterojunction. (e) Modulated H2 yield rate as a function of the wavelength of monochromatic-light irradiation. (f) Recycling photocatalytic H2 evolution test of MoS2(10)@TiO2 over 21 h. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Illustration of the two pathways used to fabricate composite photoanodes and the corresponding charge transfer process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Fabrication process of Aux/BaTiO3 heterostructures. (b) Schematic of the piezotronic-enhanced photocatalysis mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
