Amorphous materials for elementary-gas-involved electrocatalysis: an overview  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR06764H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR06764H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 19783-19811Amorphous materials for elementary-gas-involved electrocatalysis: an overview

        
          
            Wenfang 
            Zhai†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Thangavel 
            Sakthivel†
b, 
      
        
          
            Fuyi 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chengfeng 
            Du
          
          
        
      *cd, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Zhengfei 
            Dai
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Electrical Engineering and Automation, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541000, PR China
bState Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, Shaanxi, PR China. E-mail: sensdai@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
cState Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710129, China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an 710129, China. E-mail: cfdu@nwpu.edu.cn; yh@nwpu.edu.cn
Received 
      13th October 2021
    , Accepted 15th November 2021First published on 15th November 2021AbstractGiven the critical demands on energy conversion, storage, and transportation, tremendous interest has been devoted to the field of material development related to energy harvesting, recently. As the only route towards energy utilization, the carriers with the characteristics of low carbon are regarded as the future choice, e.g., hydrogen and ammonia. To this end, electrocatalysis provides a green way to access these substances. However, the unfulfilled conversion efficiency is the bottleneck for practical application. In this review, the promising characteristics of amorphous materials and the amorphous-induced electrocatalytic enhancement (AIEE) were emphasized. In the beginning, the characteristics of amorphous materials are briefly summarized. The basic mechanism of heterogeneous electrocatalytic reactions is illustrated, including the hydrogen/oxygen evolution and oxygen/nitrogen reduction. In the third part, the electrocatalytic performance of amorphous materials is discussed in detail, and the mechanism of AIEE is highlighted. In the last section of this review, the challenges and outlook for the development of amorphous enhanced electrocatalysis are presented.Wenfang ZhaiWenfang Zhai received her B.S. from the School of Materials Science and Engineering from Xi'an Shiyou University in 2014. Now she is a doctoral candidate of Xi'an Jiaotong University and an exchange student of Guilin University of Electronic Technology, and she is working on bifunctional catalysts for overall water splitting and other new energy applications.Chengfeng DuCheng-Feng Du is currently an associate professor at Northwestern Polytechnical University. He received his B.S. degree from Ocean University of China in 2011 and Ph.D. degree from the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2016. He worked at Nanyang Technological University as a research fellow from 2016 to 2018. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and surface modification of 2D hybrid materials and their applications in energy conversion and storage.Hong YuHong Yu is currently an associate professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University. She received both her B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in materials science and engineering from Nanyang Technological University in 2011 and 2016, respectively. She continued her research as a postdoctoral research fellow in Nanyang Technological University prior to joining Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2017. Her research focuses on the design and synthesis of advanced functional materials for energy conversion and storage.Zhengfei DaiZhengfei Dai received his Ph.D. from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in July 2013. Then, he worked at Korea University, Kyoto University, and Nanyang Technological University as a postdoctoral research fellow. Since December 2017, he joined the School of Material Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University as a research professor, and as an adjunct professor of Guilin University of Electronic Technology. His current research interests focus on energy & environmental materials for gas sensors, secondary batteries, and electrocatalysts.
1. Introduction
Energy has already become one of the cornerstones of modern society, especially since the world economy dramatically depends on the cost of energy production. However, the continuous exploitation and consumption of fossil fuels during the past century has raised a series of environmental concerns, including the greenhouse effect, ocean pollution, and haze.1 Additionally, as a non-renewable energy resource, fossil fuels are suffering from their limited stock. Therefore, the identification of new eco-friendly energy sources with advantages of high energy density, chemical stability, and low cost like fossil fuel becomes an urgent task at this moment.1
On the other hand, people never stop their steps towards the exploration and utilization of new energy resources such as wind, solar, tide, and geothermal. This kind of energy cannot be stored as such.2 One of the most promising ways to utilize this intermittent energy is to store them in different carriers like hydrogen (H2), ammonia (NH3), and hydrocarbons, in which the discontinuous energy is stocked in chemical bonding and can be feasibly extracted later.3 In industry, H2 is mainly obtained by methane steam reforming and coal gasification, but both of these methods produce large amounts of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide byproducts, which in turn lead to environmental problems and are not conducive to sustainable development.4 Therefore, the production of high purity H2 by water electrolysis using electricity generated from renewable sources is one of the most important solutions to fuel depletion and environmental problems. NH3 is used in all aspects of human life, but the predominant method of producing ammonia today is Haber–Bosch ammonia synthesis, which uses high purity nitrogen (N2) and H2 at high temperatures and pressure.5 This has also led to an energy crisis and environmental pollution. Zinc–air batteries (ZABs) are known as the most promising energy storage devices because of their high specific energy density, which involves oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).6 Therefore, a summary of the elementary-gas-involved electrocatalysis will be of great help for our future research, and the electrocatalytic method has been regarded as a promising candidate in recent years due to its moderate reaction conditions and high efficiency. However, with the thermodynamic barrier of the reaction process, usually, the high-active noble-metal-based catalysts are applied. Recent researches have demonstrated that the efficiency of the electrocatalytic process highly depends on the binding strength between the surface atoms from the electrocatalyst and the intermediate products. With an example of Pt, its suitable surface d-electronic structure offers a moderate binding strength, and thus a dynamic balance between adsorption and desorption of intermediate products is achieved. The moderate adsorption/desorption of intermediate products is ascribed to be the dominant reason for the outstanding electrocatalytic activity.
Beyond the chemical composition, enhanced electrocatalytic performance is also observed on atoms under nonequilibrium/unsaturated coordinated environments (e.g., point defect, grain boundary, and interface), or known as non-crystalline region. In order to interpret this phenomenon, various concepts have been introduced, for instance, defect engineering, grain boundary effects, or interfacial engineering.7 However, the intrinsic relation between these early researches is usually neglected, that is, the disordered atomic arrangement and the resulting nonequilibrium ligand field affect the electronic structure of involved atoms, thereby regulating the adsorption/desorption of electrocatalytic intermediate products. In consideration of the above-mentioned mechanism, herein, the concept of amorphous-induced electrocatalytic enhancement (AIEE) was proposed. There are many research studies on the electrocatalytic properties of crystalline materials.8–12 Thus, we believe that a comprehensive review of amorphous electrochemical catalysts is urgent for an intensive understanding of the recent advances in this field. In this review, the definition of crystalline and amorphous electrocatalysts is illustrated in the first section. In the following sections, recent developments of AIEE on hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are briefly summarized. The underlying mechanism of AIEE is also highlighted. Finally, the challenges and prospects of AIEE are proposed based on its current developments.
2. Crystalline and amorphous materials
In the studies of electrocatalysts, principles derived from solid-state chemistry are widely used towards understanding the interaction mechanisms at the atomic level. Particularly, the crystalline solids consisting of atoms, ions, or molecules were believed to be the electrocatalytic active species and have been taken as model structures for mechanism investigation in the past century. In crystalline solids, the basic constituents are arranged repetitively in three dimensions, forming a well-defined and long-range ordered microscopic structure.13
However, due to thermal motion, the atoms, ions, or molecules in a crystal lattice sometimes deviate from the ideal position, resulting in the disorder at the atomic level, which is the so-called “defect”. As shown in Fig. 1a, given the dimensions, there are mainly four kinds of defects in the catalyst: point defects (e.g., doping and vacancy); line defects (e.g., dislocation and steps); planar defects (e.g., boundary, twining, and stacking faults); and bulk defects (e.g., pores, cracks, and inclusions, or even a spatial lattice disorder).14,15 Typically, the stepped structure is a one-dimensional (1D) dislocation formed in the process of crystal growth. The coordination of the atoms at step sites is incomplete. The atoms at the step edge possess more unsaturated dangling chemical bonds than the atoms on the flat surface or in the bulk, which results in distinct differences in physical and chemical properties. Therefore, the stepped structure is often desired in the preparation of various advanced catalysts.16–18 Moreover, defects play an important role in electrocatalysis since they have a non-equilibrium bonding environment as well as a distinctive local electron density of state and are often the active sites during the catalytic process. Additionally, defects can also affect the local electronic structure around them and generate more catalytic sites on the surface.19,20 Thus, defect engineering represents the most effective technique to precisely control the electrocatalytic performance.21
 Fig. 1  (a) The types of defects. (b) Comparison of main characteristics of amorphous and crystalline materials for electrocatalysis. 
Notably, in an extreme situation, the entire lattice constituents deviate from their position, which means the long-range ordered microscopic structure is totally disrupted. Due to the random and disorderly arrangement of constituents, the amorphous solids usually present some unique physicochemical properties when compared with the crystalline counterpart (Fig. 1b). Generally, it is believed that higher catalytic activity can be released by disordered atomic arrangements in amorphous catalysts than the ordered crystalline lattices.22 Thereby, amorphous materials have shown satisfactory performance as advanced electrocatalysts. For instance, the composition of amorphous materials can be adjusted more casually due to the unfixed atomic ratio and bonding, greatly expanding the range of designing catalysts with the best content.23 In addition, amorphous materials produce plenty of coordination unsaturated surface sites and act as catalytically active centers, and we can combine experimental results with calculations to investigate the mechanism in more depth.24,25 Besides, the manufacturing of amorphous materials usually requires low-cost precursors under mild conditions, which will greatly reduce the manufacturing cost.26
3. Basics of typical heterogeneous electrocatalytic reactions
3.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction
As an anodic half-cell reaction of the electrochemical water-splitting process,27 the HER involves two-electron transportation, in which the reaction pathways of hydrogen intermediate (H*) can be divided into Volmer–Heyrovsky process (electrochemical desorption mechanism) or Volmer–Tafel process (recombinant desorption mechanism). As summarized below and shown in Fig. 2, the generation of hydrogen intermediate (H*) will strongly depend on the pH of the electrolyte:
In acidic media:H+ + e− → H* (1, Volmer step)H+ + e− + H* → H2 (2, Heyrovsky step)H* + H* → H2 (3, Tafel step)
In alkaline media:H2O + e− → H* + OH− (4, Volmer step)H2O + e− + H* → H2 + OH− (5, Heyrovsky step)H* + H* → H2 (6, Tafel step)
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of HER reaction pathways. 
In fact, the energy barrier of each step affects the overall HER process. Particularly, the HER process in an alkaline medium involves the cleavage of the H–O bond from the water molecule, which requires much more energy than the reaction in acid. For example, for the precious metal Pt, the HER activity in the alkaline medium is dramatically decreased to less than one percent of that in acid. However, although the electrocatalytic process of HER has been studied for nearly one century, the underlying mechanisms are still under debate.
In the past decades, various theories have been proposed to quantitatively explain the underlying relationship between elementary composition, phase, and HER activity. Sabatier first qualitatively proposed the “volcanic” diagram in heterogeneous catalysis and pointed out that there must be appropriate chemical interactions between the catalyst and reactant. With either a too weak or too strong interaction, the HER kinetics will be slowed down.28 Concerning electrocatalytic HER, Parson proposed a volcanic type diagram linking the exchange current density J0 to the thermodynamically derived ΔGH*.29 At the top of the volcano, ΔGH* = 0, corresponding to the maximum J0. Only metals showing moderate hydrogen adsorption have high J0 values, such as Pt, Pd, and Rh. More simply, according to Sabatier's principle, from a physicochemical point of view, the change of ΔGH* on the catalyst surface can be evaluated by HER free energy diagram to intuitively judge the difficulty of H* adsorption and H2 desorption.30 Therefore, in order to achieve the maximum HER rate, ΔGH* should be zero. Besides, the d-band theory is another earliest and most important electronic descriptor, where a higher (lower) d-band center position would yield a stronger (weaker) affinity toward adsorbates.31 Therefore, the regulation of intrinsic HER activity should be based on the optimization of intermediate adsorption energy. The unique coordination environment on the surface of amorphous materials meets the diversified control requirements.
3.2 Oxygen evolution reaction
For the cathodic half-cell reaction of electrochemical water-splitting, the OER, consisting of four-electron transfer steps, shows much more sluggish kinetics than the HER counterpart. Therefore, the OER process usually plays a critical role in the rate of the overall water-splitting process, which is known as the rate-determining reaction. Similar to HER, the OER also presents different reaction mechanisms under acidic or alkaline conditions. Fig. 3 illustrates the possible reaction pathways for OER under acidic and alkaline conditions, which can be summarized in eqn (7)–(15):
In acidic media: H2O → OH* + H+ + e−(7) OH* → O* + H+ + e−(8) O* + H2O → OOH* + H+ + e−(9) OOH* → O2 + H+ + e−(10)
In alkaline media: OH− → OH* + e−(11) OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−(12) O* + OH− → OOH* + e−(13) OOH* + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−(14)
Under both conditions: O* + O* → O2(15)
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of OER reaction pathways. 
As presented, it can be found that O2 can also be generated via the recombinant desorption mechanism (eqn (15)). On the other hand, the OER process in either acidic or alkaline media involves the transformation of oxygen-containing intermediates (OH*, O*, and OOH*). Unfortunately, the reactivity of these oxygen-containing intermediates and the possible side reactions make the exploration of the exact OER reaction mechanism rather difficult. In recent years, various in situ techniques, including Mössbauer spectrum, X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS), and Raman spectroscopy, have been applied to the characterization of the detailed OER mechanism.32–35 Particularly, it is nearly a basic consensus that the OOH* intermediate can strongly bind with the surface metal atoms of catalysts, which contribute to a thin layer of metal oxyhydroxide (M-OOH) cover on the catalysts.36–39 Interestingly, due to the continuity of the OER process, the generated M-OOH layer is in dynamic equilibrium, which is hard to crystallize. Great progress has been made in the study of the catalytic mechanism of amorphous catalysts for OER. Lian and his colleagues found that the performance of amorphous Ni-rich NiCo alloy is better than that of the crystalline alloy, which is the first report in history showing that amorphous materials are more dominant than crystalline materials in the process of electrocatalytic decomposition of water.40 They later revealed that the mechanism of OER for amorphous NiCo alloy in alkaline solution changed from low overpotential to high overpotential.41 In addition, a suitable amount of Fe and Ni-doped Co-based catalyst can produce higher OER activity and lower overpotential, which is related to the decrease in catalyst surface adsorption energy; under OER conditions, Ni substitution can promote the surface reconstruction to active CoOOH.42,43 Yan et al. proposed that the doping of Ni improved the cooperative work under OER, promoted the surface reconstruction, and evolved into active hydroxyl sites.44 Another study on the catalytic mechanism utilized the operando Mössbauer spectrum to acquire direct evidence towards the formation of Fe4+ during the steady-state catalytic turnover of NiFe oxide catalyst.45 The existence of Fe4+ in NiFe catalyst is mainly due to the stabilization of the NiOOH lattice. It is considered that OER occurs in the active Fe4+ species produced at the edges, corners, or surface defect sites of the NiOOH matrix. Consequently, amorphous materials tend to have more defects than crystalline materials, which are often catalytically active sites and play an important role in the OER process.
3.3 Nitrogen reduction reaction
Except for the electrocatalytic water-splitting process, in recent years, the NRR has received increasing attention as well. As a competitive reaction with HER, the NRR also occurs under electroreduction conditions. However, six electrons are involved during the NRR process, which makes the NRR much unfavorable on the traditional water-splitting electrocatalysts. More importantly, the cleavage of the NN triple bond from the N2 molecule will occur during the NRR process, which requires much higher energy than the HER. From the thermodynamic point of view, for example, the first hydrogenation step of NRR in acidic conditions requires an equilibrium potential lower than −3 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), which is much more negative than the reduction potential of H+ (0 V vs. RHE). Therefore, under the reduction potential, most of the protons or water molecules are consumed for the generation of H2 rather than NH3, resulting in a serious selectivity issue. As shown in Fig. 4, depending on the hydrogenation mechanism, the NRR process in either acidic or alkaline media can be divided into three reaction routes: the distal route, the alternating path, or the dissociative route. For the distal and alternating pathways, the N2 molecule was adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst with a “side-on” configuration, and the NH3 products were released in turn. Therefore, these two mechanisms were also called “associative paths”. On the contrary, the NN triple bond was broken before adsorption, and the hydrogenation process was started on each single adsorbed N atom on the surface of the catalyst, which is named the “dissociative path”.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of NRR reaction pathways. 
Luckily, it was found that the energy barriers of succeeding hydrogenation steps are much lower than the first hydrogenation step. Therefore, the major bottleneck on the improvement of NRR selectivity might depend on the first hydrogenation step. For example, Yu et al. prepared amorphous precious metal-free Bi4V2O11/CeO2 hybrid material (BVC-A) by single spinneret electrospinning combined with calcination as the cathode of electrocatalytic NRR.46 CeO2 not only induces the transition of Bi4V2O11 to an amorphous state, but also participates in the energy band arrangement of the catalyst, realizes the rapid transfer of interfacial charge, and produces rich defects as active centers. BVC-A showed a higher average NH3 yield (23.21 μg h−1 mg−1cat). Herein, a typical work highlights the excellent selectivity of amorphous catalysts. Yan et al. served PdCu amorphous nanoclusters on reduced graphene oxide (RGO) as an NRR catalyst, and the optimized Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO owns the best performance.47 Generally, Pd is considered to be more capable of binding to hydrogen atoms than nitrogen atoms, so Pd is often covered by hydrogen molecules (H2).48 The introduction of Cu accelerates the hydrogen desorption on the surface of Cu metal. Facile hydrogen dissociation on Pd atoms and weak binding with Cu makes the hydrogenation reaction highly selective. Compared with pure metal Pd or Cu, on the one hand, the electron conversion between bimetals produces new catalytic sites, which helps to activate gas molecules. On the other hand, the dangling bonds on amorphous materials provide active sites with higher activity than crystalline catalysts. These factors increase the possibility of NRR. In addition, in the amorphous sulfur multilayered modified gold NWs (S/Au-NWS) prepared by a two-step method, the chemically adsorbed sulfur multilayers are conducive to the selective hydrogenation of nitrogen to ammonia and provide sufficient exposed active sites for NRR.49
3.4 Oxygen reduction reaction
As another classical electrocatalytic reaction that has been studied for a long time, the ORR is also essential, especially in fuel cells. In acidic media, the mechanism of ORR can be summarized as in Fig. 5, which shows similar pathways to the NRR process: the dissociative path and the associative path, including the distal route and the alternating route. In examples of the ORR process on Pt surface, the dissociative path can be described as the direct four-electron pathway, which starts from adsorption of an O2 molecule, followed by O–O bond breaking and forming two adsorbed reactive oxygen species (O*). The O* further gains two electrons and two protons to directly form the final product.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of ORR reaction pathways. 
Dissociative path in acidic media: O2 → 2O*(16) 2O* + 2e− + 2H+ → 2OH*(17) 2OH* + 2e− + 2H+ → 2H2O(18)
Compared with the clear ORR mechanism under acidic conditions, the reaction process under alkaline conditions is more complex, involving a variety of intermediates, which is also the focus of current research.50–52 For amorphous catalysts, Cho et al. synthesized a composite electrode composed of amorphous manganese oxide (MnOx) NWs supported by carbon black (KB) by polyol method. The large surface area with high defect density on the amorphous MnOx NWs facilitates oxygen adsorption, which significantly enhances the ORR activity when assembled in a zinc–air battery (peak power density ∼190 mW cm−2).53 Besides, Lu et al. successfully prepared Pd modified amorphous Ni–B/C catalyst (Pd@Ni–B/C), which showed a significant increase in ORR activity.54 Partial discharge modification significantly increased the half-wave potential and limited the current. Pd@Ni–B/C catalyst also showed impressive methanol tolerance. It has the advantages of high performance, strong methanol resistance, and ultra-low palladium load.
4. Amorphous materials and the electrocatalytic enhancements
4.1 Amorphous carbon-based electrocatalysts
Given the energy and environmental crisis, the mass production and utilization of novel clean and renewable power resources has become more important in modern society. In this regard, hydrogen as a promising energy carrier has raised increasing attention. Meanwhile, the electrocatalytic HER technique, which provides an efficient and clean pathway for hydrogen, has motivated the exploration of cheap and highly active HER electrocatalysts. In addition to HER catalysts, amorphous carbon-based materials have also been used to study OER, ORR, and NRR. In particular, carbon-based electrocatalysts (carbon cloths (CC),55–57 carbon nanotube (CNT),58 porous carbons,59,60 carbon nanofiber (CNF),61–63 graphene,64,65 graphdiyne,66,67etc.) commonly show outstanding HER performance, which can be ascribed to their distinctive huge surface area, chemical stability, and enhanced conductivity. However, carbon materials are mostly used as carriers, and there are relatively few metal-free carbon-based catalysts.
A large number of amorphous carbon-based catalysts compounded with metal materials are used to enhance HER and OER performance and stability. Amorphous carbon materials have more defects and dangling bonds than crystalline carbon, increasing the active sites and intrinsic activity for electrochemical reactions.68 Fan et al. prepared amorphous carbon-coated Co/Co9S8–MoS2 and demonstrated excellent HER and OER performance and stability. The preparation process is shown in Fig. 6a. The carbon-coated Co/Co9S8–MoS2 shows a low overpotential of 128 mV for HER and 325 mV for OER in 1 M KOH solution (Fig. 6b and c). The amorphous carbon layer protects Co from corrosion and also exhibits excellent stability.69 Amorphous metal–organic framework (aMOFs) is an OER catalyst material with large application potential. Amorphous metal–organic framework-dominated nanocomposites (aMOF-NC) were prepared using a simple method by Yu et al. The aMOF-NC possesses a core–shell nanorod@nanosheet architecture, including a Fe rich Fe–Co-aMOF core and a Co-rich Fe–Co-aMOF shell in the core–shell structured nanorod, and amorphous Co(OH)2 nanosheets as the outer layer (Fig. 6d). As shown in Fig. 6e and f, aMOF-NC possesses enhanced OER activity with an overpotential of 249 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Amorphous framework, three-dimensional hierarchical structure, and abundant Fe and Co bimetallic centers contribute to the excellent OER activity of aMOF-NC.70 Amorphous metal-free carbon materials are also widely studied because of their effective cost. Peng et al. synthesized scalable N-doped giant carbon nanotubes (N-GCTs) with homogeneous thickness and length (Fig. 6g). In Fig. 6h–j, N-GCTs has lower overpotential, faster kinetics, and smaller impedance than GCTs and MWCNTs.
 Fig. 6  (a) The synthetic process for the carbon-coated Co/CoSx–MoS2 composite. (b and c) HER and OER polarization curves in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Vertical long axis cutting surface of aMOF-NC. (e and f) OER polarization curves and corresponding overpotential. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (g) The FESEM images of Quartz wires. (h and i) OER polarization curves and corresponding Tafel slopes. (j) Nyquist plots at 0.5 V overpotential. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Amorphous carbon materials are also used as ORR and NRR electrocatalysts due to their excellent properties. Fig. 7a schematically shows the preparation of hollow N-doped carbon spheres (HNCSs) by an amorphous coordination polymer template-assisted route. As shown in Fig. 7b, the PXRD pattern of the HNCSs shows two broad peaks, which are indexed to graphitic carbon. In Fig. 7c, HNCSs demonstrates ORR performance comparable to commercial Pt/C. The excellent properties of HNCSs result from the hollow structure, large specific surface area, high degree of graphitization, and the synergistic effect of the abundant graphite/pyridine nitrogen content.72 The electrochemical NRR produces ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen and water under external conditions and is a pathway of great interest for mitigating environmental pollution. Yu et al. prepared metal-free polymeric carbon nitride (PCN-NV) containing nitrogen defects by defect engineering strategy. A series of PCN with different nitrogen defects (denoted PCN-NVx, with x representing the recalcination time in Ar gas) was used to investigate the effect of defect engineering strategies on NRR. The PCN-NV4 has a two-dimensional (2D) sheet-like morphology (Fig. 7d). As shown in Fig. 7e and f, the NH3 yield of PCN-NV4 reaches 8.09 μg h−1 mg−1cat. at −0.2 V vs. RHE, and the PCN-NV4 after 8 cycles of continuous testing, there is no significant decay, showing excellent stability.73
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic preparation of hollow N-doped carbon spheres. (b) PXRD patterns. (c) ORR polarization curves. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. The performance of PCN-NV4. (d) TEM image. (e) NRR performance at various potentials. (f) Cycling test. (g) Electrocatalytic NRR at different temperatures. (h) Linear sweep voltammetric (LSV) curves at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.2 Amorphous metal and alloy electrocatalysts
Benefitting from the favorable vacant or partial-occupied d-orbitals, metals and alloys exhibit high HER activity. Amorphous metals and alloys have been recently reported as a promising family for the HER electrocatalyst. Investigation of the amorphous metal and alloy on electrocatalysis has made many considerable achievements in recent years. For example, dozens of different amorphous metals and alloy nanosheets (NSs) with thickness less than 10 nm were facilely prepared by Li et al. (Fig. 8a).74 Meanwhile, the OER performance of these catalysts can be optimized by tuning the atomic composition. Approximately 7.2 nm thick amorphous Ir NSs with uniform distribution of each element are shown in Fig. 8b and c. Amorphous RhFe bimetallic NSs were also successfully obtained with a 7.6 nm thick nanosheet (Fig. 8d and e). Many other bimetallic and even trimetallic nanosheets with a homogeneous distribution of elements were also prepared, such as amorphous IrFe (IrNi, IrCo, IrRu) NSs, RhNi (RhCo, RhRu) NSs, RuNi (RuCo) NSs, and IrRhRu NSs. This general synthesis of amorphous bimetallic and even trimetallic nanosheets offers the possibility of excellent catalysts to produce hydrogen. Due to a large number of samples, the researchers tested the OER performance of amorphous Ir NSs, demonstrating excellent activity and fast reaction kinetics (Fig. 8f and g).
 Fig. 8  (a) The general synthetic process for amorphous noble metal NSs. s. (b) AFM and (c) elemental mapping images of amorphous Ir NSs. (d) AFM and (e) elemental mapping images of amorphous RhFe NSs. (f) OER LSV curves and (g) Tafel slope curves of amorphous Ir NSs and crystalline Ir NSs in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Apart from amorphous metal materials, many amorphous alloy materials are used to improve their electrocatalytic performance. A NiRu@N–C nanohybrid with low Ru-content was fabricated by Wang's group. The Ru-doping and pyrolysis of a Ni-based MOF resulted in carbon-wrapped alloy particles (Fig. 9a).75 Benefiting from the doped structure and surface effect, the NiRu@N–C presents a high HER catalytic activity in a wide pH range. Meanwhile, the optimized S-2 sample delivered a comparable HER activity with commercialized Pt/C catalysts under both acidic and alkaline conditions. The optimal overpotentials to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 were only 50 mV and 32 mV with Tafel slopes of 36 and 64 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH, respectively (Fig. 9b–i).
 Fig. 9  (a) Preparation of NiRu@N–C nanohybrids. (b–i) Electrocatalytic HER performances of the NiRu@N–C nanohybrids in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH solution, respectively. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, L. Mihailov and colleagues studied the electrocatalytic HER activity of nanocrystalline Zr–Ni amorphous alloys. They found that nanocrystalline alloys manifest high catalytic performance over amorphous and crystalline counterparts due to the large density of defects and infirm hydrogen adsorption.76 Later, Müller et al. studied Fe-based amorphous melt-spun alloys (Fe82B18, Fe80Si10B10, and Fe60Co20Si10B10) for cathode materials via changing the metal-metalloid configuration, in which the Co contain sample demonstrated high HER activity.77 Besides, in recent years, increasing attention has been drawn on S-contained amorphous alloys for HER catalyst. Xu and co-workers analyzed the sulfur-containing amorphous Pd–Cu–S materials, and the catalyst demonstrates a small overpotential of 58 mV with a Tafel slope of 35 mV dec−1. The efficiency improvement was ascribed to the presence of S22− and apical S2− species in the amorphous phase.78 Afterward, an effort has been put into studying the effectiveness between amorphous-crystalline interface alloys for HER catalyst. In this sector, the synergistic effect of crystalline Ni(Cu) alloy and amorphous NiFeP-derivatives were analyzed for the superior HER catalyst. The HER enhancement of Ni(Cu)@NiFeP/NM could be explained by the synergistic effect expressed by 54 times increment of ECSA and a large amount of exposed active sites.79 To reduce the utilization of precious metals, transition metals and nonmetallic elements are used as alloys. In this scenario, a nanoporous amorphous Pd10Fe70P5C17 catalyst was tested for HER and exhibited high activity and excellent stability. In amorphous Pd10Fe70P5C17, more coordination defects around Pd atoms result in a higher concentration of active sites, which produces improved HER. Besides, the amorphous structure is still reserved after the long-term operation.80
Moreover, Shi et al. demonstrated the preparation of PdCu amorphous nanocluster on reduced graphene oxide (Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO) for highly efficient NRR electrolysis (Fig. 10).81 In Fig. 10b–d, the Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO has a high ammonia yield, high Faraday efficiency, and long-lasting stability at various potentials. Very lately, it has been found that an organic ligand (1,3,4-thiadiazole-2,5-dithiol, namely bismuthiol I) can induce the face-centered cubic (FCC) Pd NPs phase to amorphous phase without altering the integrity.82 In oleylamine solutions, bismuthiol I induced an amorphization of the outer atoms of FCC Pd NPs at an early stage, leading to a lattice expansion of the inner atoms and the transformation of Pd NPs into an amorphous phase. For HER, the Pd NPs-bis-24 h sample demonstrated lower overpotential (below 60 mV) and smaller Tafel slope (30 mV dec−1). Based on a series of characterization analyses, it is revealed that the increased bond length in the amorphous structure of Pd weakens the interaction between Pd and hydrogen, thus improving the HER activity and stability. This work provides a facile and effective method for preparing amorphous Pd nanomaterials, which might also be applicable in the preparation of amorphized alloy catalysts.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of PdxCu1−x/rGO. (b) Yield rate of ammonia formation and the corresponding FE uses Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO composite as the catalyst at each given potential. (c) Chronoamperometry results at the corresponding potentials. (d) Catalytic activities for NRR at −0.2 V versus RHE at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
4.3 Amorphous oxide and hydroxide electrocatalysts
Oxides and hydroxides are the most widely researched compounds in electrocatalytic OER, and a small part of them are used to study HER, ORR, and NRR. Amorphous oxides and hydroxides have been contributed considerably in this research area, in which the bifunctional oxygen catalysts for zinc–air batteries (ZABs) are recently under the spotlight.
Amorphous oxide as an oxygen electrode in ZABs has a lower overpotential and can be assembled to obtain a battery with a higher energy density. As shown in Fig. 11a–c, the freestanding NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH@carbon cloth (CC) electrode containing an amorphous trimetallic hydroxide component (NiCoFe-OH) exhibited excellent bifunctional activities for both OER and ORR processes. The potential difference between these two reactions is only 695 mV, thereby giving high energy efficiency and volumetric energy density (38.1 mW h cm−3) in flexible ZABs.83 For Co/Co3O4@NHCS used only as an ORR electrocatalyst, amorphous Co3O4 as a shell could effectively prevent the electrochemical oxidation/dissolution of metal Co core in strongly alkaline solution (Fig. 11d and e). It could also create an abundant interface that provides sufficient electron supply and reaction sites and thus make it promising for high efficiency of electron transfer. As shown in Fig. 11f, Co3O4@NHCS exhibits a half-wave potential of 0.82 V, and there was merely a negative shift (∼3 mV) of E1/2 for the Co/Co3O4@NHCS catalyst after 3500 potential cycles.84 In addition, iridium-based oxides are considered to be the most promising OER electrocatalysts. The amorphous IrOx nanosheets prepared by Yamachi et al. exhibited high catalytic activity and stability under both acidic and basic conditions and were closer to commercial OER electrocatalysts.85
 Fig. 11  (a) The ORR and OER curves of NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH. (b) Structural diagram of cable-type ZABs based on the NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH oxygen electrode. (c) Power density and charging/discharging curves of the cable-type ZAB. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The synthetic strategy of Co/Co3O4@NHCS catalysts; (e) XRD patterns of Co/Co3O4@NHCS. (f) LSV curves of the Co/Co3O4@NHCS catalyst before and after 3500 cycles in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (g) XRD patterns of A-MoO3−x. (h) The NH3 yields and FEs of A-MoO3−x NSs at different potentials. (i) The free energy profile for the NRR processes of A-MoO3−x from first-principles calculations. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
In recent years, nitrogen reduction has been paid more attention, and amorphous oxides and hydroxides have also been used as NRR catalysts. Jia et al. synthesized 2D amorphous semiconductor MoO3−x (A-MoO3−x) monolayer material that enhanced the electrochemical NRR significantly (Fig. 11g). The NH3 yield and faradaic efficiency (FE) reach up to 35.83 μg h−1 mg−1cat at −0.40 V and 12.01% at −0.20 V vs. RHE, respectively (Fig. 11h). Density functional theory (DFT) was applied to reveal the stronger Anderson tail states in the band gap of 2D A-MoO3−x monolayer due to the electron confinement (Fig. 11i), which enable to resonate with the states of intermediate HNNH, thus achieving high yield and FE of NH3 in the NRR.86
Most of the overall water-splitting bifunctional catalysts are transition metal-based oxides or hydroxides, and a few are noble metal-based oxides. As shown in Fig. 12a, Liu et al. obtained a bifunctional electrocatalyst (CoFeO@BP) by growing amorphous metal oxide-containing Co/Fe on 2D black phosphorus (BP) nanosheets (CoFeO@BP). The chronopotentiometry curve showed excellent stability after 24 h with negligible attenuation (Fig. 12b). The strong affinity between BP and transition-metal ions contributes to the uniform growth of amorphous CoFe oxide on the surface of BP and enhances the electrocatalytic activity and stability.87 Oxides and hydroxides such as NiOx,88 Ni(OH)2,89 NiFe-OH,90 NiCo2O491 and NiCo-LDH91 are prepared by defect engineering, interface engineering, and so on to prepare bifunctional water-splitting catalysts. Fig. 12c presents another amorphous metal oxide-based HER electrocatalyst: the amorphous CoMoO4 NWs grown on the Ti substrate (CoMoO4 NWA/Ti) via a two-step hydrothermal route. The CoMoO4 NWA/Ti has achieved an overpotential of 243 mV at 100 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH.92 Likewise, HER properties of amorphous Ru/Y(OH3) nanohybrids were studied in an alkaline medium. A dual enhancement on the water-splitting kinetics of Ru/Y(OH)3 was realized by amorphous Y(OH)3. In Fig. 12d, Ru/Y(OH)3 nanohybrid has an overpotential of 100 mV, whereas high durability over 20000 cycles was delivered as well.93 In addition to precious metals with amorphous hydroxide nanocomposites, such as Ru/Y(OH)393 and Pt-SA/a-MoOx,94 transition metal oxide hydroxides, such as CoMoO4,92 Ni(OH)2-NiMoOx/NF,95 MoO3−x/MoS2,96 W4MoO3,97 CoW(OH)x98 and other amorphous oxides and hydroxides were also used to improve the HER activity and stability.
 Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism of the adaptive bifunctional amorphous CoFeO@BP electrocatalyst for overall water-splitting. (b) Stability test of CoFeO@BP. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) LSV curves of initial and after 1000 cycle cyclic voltammetry scans recorded for CoMoO4 NWA/Ti and chronoamperometry curve without iR-compensation (inset). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Durability of Ru/Y(OH)3 and the sole Ru catalysts. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Cyclic voltammograms of Zn-NiFeOxHy at various scan rates. (f) Micrographs of Zn-NiFeOxHy taken under ambient conditions to monitor color changes after the electrochemical activation of as-deposited Zn-NiFeOxHy. (g) Raman spectra collected for brownish-gray Zn-NiFeOxHy (brown line) and black Zn-NiFeOxHy (black line). Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Large quantities of amorphous oxides and hydroxides have been studied for designing and fabricating highly efficient and stable OER electrocatalysts. Diversified OER catalysts have been intensively investigated, including precious metals (e.g., Ir and Ru) and oxides,99,100 transition metal (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Mo, and V) oxides, layer hydroxides,101–104etc. Most OER catalysts for amorphous oxide hydroxides use strategies such as metal doping, anion doping, heterogeneous interface formation with other materials, or preparation of polymetallic oxide hydroxides to improve their activity and stability. The metal doping strategy can change the charge distribution of the material itself, introduce new active sites, and change the performance of the catalyst. Nam et al. prepared Zn-doped NiFeOxHy with excellent activity and stability by a two-step method of chemical bath deposition followed by electrochemical activation. As shown in Fig. 12e–g, the improvement with Zn-NiFeOxHy is due to the Zn2+ dopant, which is a strong Lewis acid and can modulate the electronic structure of the NiFeOxHy matrix for more moderate intermediate binding, thereby resulting in the stabilization of the OER-active phase.38 Metal doping can improve catalyst performance. By interfacial engineering of composite materials and metals, doping works together to not only improve the charge transfer of materials, but also increase the active site of the interface, creating a path for a more efficient OER catalyst. The ultra-fine amorphous FeOOH film prepared by Liu et al. was electrodeposited on a V-doped NiS NWs with nickel foam as substrate (eFe/NiVS/NF), exposing more active sites and showing strong OER activity.105 A variety of catalyst enhancement strategies applied to synthetic catalysts can produce more excellent electrocatalysts for various electrocatalyst reactions.
4.4 Amorphous sulfide electrocatalysts
Amorphous metal sulfides have been used to study OER, HER, NRR, and other electrocatalytic reactions due to their high catalytic activity, abundant defects, and strong activity. First, amorphous sulfides exhibited robust HER catalytic activity and are competent with precious benchmark Pt catalysts. In this sulfide composition, MoSx (here x = 2, 3) has been studied widely as an HER catalyst that showed superior activity than other non-noble metals and is also comparable with Pt under certain conditions.
Benck et al. investigated the HER catalytic properties by wet chemical synthesis of amorphous MoS3 (Fig. 13a and b). It is interesting to note that the amorphous domain of MoS3 has reduced into a MoS2 amorphous structure during the catalytic process.106 There has been a strong debate about the real active sites in amorphous MoSx. In situ and ex situ sophisticated instrumental studies proved that sulfur atoms were the active site for the HER process, and also the concentration of S22− ligands directly correlate with HER performance.108 In addition to MoSx, RuSx, NiSx, CoSx,109etc., the amorphous sulfides obtained by composite or doping were also used to show excellent HER activity. For example, in the sulfide-based compound, another type of material such as CoNiSx had its HER behavior studied. As shown in Fig. 13c, CoNiSx/NF-25 was synthesized by the sulfurization of NF-supported bimetallic Co–Ni carbonate hydroxide hydrate precursor (CoNiCHH/NF). In Fig. 13d–f, CoNiSx/NF-25 shows an overpotential of 123 mV along with a Tafel slope of 89 mV dec−1, and also demonstrates a higher double layer capacitance (Cdl) of 132 mF cm−2.107 The MOF-derived materials have shown high catalytic activity for HER. For example, MOF (ZIF-67) converted amorphous CoSx was synthesized by the facile electrochemical method.109
 Fig. 13  (a) Molybdenum sulfide wet chemical synthesis; (b) electrochemical activity of the molybdenum sulfide catalyst. Polarization curves. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Preparation of CoNiSx/NF-25. (d–f) The electrochemical performances of CoNiSx/NF-25. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Amorphous metal sulfides and hydroxide composites have been used as OER catalysts as well. Fig. 14a shows an O-incorporated amorphous Co–S porous nanocube (a-CoS4.6O0.6 PNC), which was successfully prepared by Wen et al. through a galvanic replacement reaction. In 1 M KOH solution, the overpotential of a-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs at 10 mA cm−2 is 290 mV (Fig. 14b), comparable to the benchmark RuO2 catalyst. The a-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs have an appropriate oxygen adsorption energy, and the synergistic effect of amorphous structure and oxygen doping makes them have outstanding electrocatalytic activity.110 Amorphous sulfides have also been used to study NRR and successfully synthesize low-value products into high-value products. Liu et al. synthesized amorphous MoS3 with sulfur vacancies as an efficient NRR electrocatalyst in neutral media. As shown in Fig. 14c and d, abundant S vacancies make it have a higher NH3 production rate (51.7 μg h−1 mg−1cat.) and higher Faraday efficiency (FE, 12.8%) than MoS2 (NH3 yield 11.3 μg h−1 mg−1cat with a FE of 3.9%) in 0.5 M LiClO4 solution. In Fig. 14e, NH3 yields and FEs of MoS3 in chronoamperometry tests are given for seven cycles and still showed high activity.111 Amorphous sulfur multilayer decorated gold NWs (S/Au NWs) were prepared to study the NH3 production (Fig. 14f). In Fig. 14g, the chemisorbed sulfur multilayers are favorable for selective hydrogenation of nitrogen to ammonia and provide sufficient exposed active sites for NRR. The NH3 yield of S/Au NWs is 21.04 μg h−1 mg−1cat. and FE is 15.34%, and the durability is excellent.49 With respect to a non-electroactive crystalline Pd3P2S8, Zhang et al. developed a novel lithiation-induced amorphization strategy to obtain ultrafine (∼2 nm) amorphous lithium-incorporated Pd3P2S8 (Li-PPS) nanodots for HER electrocatalysis.112 The amorphous Li-PPS nanodots with abundant vacancies showed superior HER activity with a low onset-potential of −52 mV, a small Tafel slope (29 mV dec−1), and long-term stability. It is revealed that the tuning of morphology and structure of Pd3P2S8 (for instance, size, vacancy, crystallinity, and Li-incorporation) contribute to the activation of its intrinsically inert electrocatalytic property.
 Fig. 14  (a) Preparation of A-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs. (b) Polarization curves of A-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs for OER in 1 M KOH (pH 13.7). Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (c–e) NRR performances of MoS2 and MoS3. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Preparation of S/Au NWs. (g) NRR performance of S/Au NWs at each potential. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4.5 Amorphous boride electrocatalysts
Amorphization engineering is deemed as an operational methodology to modify the structure of catalysts to achieve propitious electrochemical properties. Because the amorphous structure occupies plentiful unsaturated coordination sites and surface-exposed defects, it is able to act as active sites to advocate the electrocatalytic reaction energetics and kinetics.113 Lately, transition-metal borides (TMBs) are deemed to serve as excellent electrocatalysts, which can indeed replace noble metal catalysts.114,115 The boride family mostly includes mono-metal borides, poly-metal borides (bimetallic borides, trimetallic borides), and metal boride composites.116 To verify the supremacy of the boride family in electrocatalysis, a range of amorphous Co–M–B ternary metal borides (M = Fe, Ni, Cu, Mo, Mn, W, or Cr) were studied for HER by Fernandes et al.117 They reported that, apart from Co–Cr–B, all other variations displayed better HER activity than bare Co–B. In Fig. 15a–h, Co-xM–B samples show diffused rings, confirming their amorphous nature, whereas for Co–3Mo–B, nano-sized crystalline domains are visible, and the lattice fringes (0.21 nm) correspond to the Co2B phase. Fig. 15i–l illustrates the electrocatalytic performances of the samples. Among all, the Co–Mo–B catalyst presented the lowest overpotential of 95 mV in a neutral electrolyte and 67 mV in an electrolyte with a pH of 14 to reach 10 mA cm−2. The explanations for the facilitated electrocatalytic rate, caused by the presence of second metal in Co–B, were examined by reflecting on factors like surface area, turn-over frequency (TOF), surface composition and chemical states, and charge-transfer resistance.117 The work presented harmonized experimental results and computational calculations to recognize the appropriate sites for H-adsorption and decide their free energies. Indeed, the crucial industrial possibility of amorphous boride-based catalysts can be confirmed through the examples and results.
 Fig. 15  (a–h) HRTEM images and SAED pattern (inset) of Co–B, Co–30Ni–B, Co–15Fe–B, Co–7Cu–B, Co–3Mo–B, Co–4W–B, Co–4Mn–B, and Co–1Cr–B powders. (i) LSV curves, (j) Tafel plots, (k) Cdl, and (l) Nyquist plots of amorphous Co–M–B catalysts at pH 7 (0.5 M KPi solution) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Among all the metal-based borides, Co- and Ni-based borides particularly hold an unusual dominance and have been widely studied. The B-included electrocatalysts were reported to function as a stabilizer to prevent the crystalline metallic core from being grown and prevent oxidation.118 For instance, Co–Ni–B ternary boride deposited on NF through electroless plating method displayed good stability in alkaline solutions, and an excellent electrocatalytic activity was delivered on the subject of both OER and HER processes.118 Doping small elements of iron or nickel to dicobalt boride is yet another usually established strategy. For instance, S. Klemenz et al. tried the incorporation of iron into Co2B.119 Interestingly, such extra addition of elements causes a rearrangement in the electronic contribution, which leads to enhanced OER activity. In contrast to conventional high-temperature synthetic routes for boride materials, they introduced a low-temperature solution, which could yield highly reactive powders. Following this work, Schuch et al. tried the integration of nickel into nanoscale Co2B to achieve an enhanced activity and stability in alkaline electrolytes.120 The addition of such a small amount of Ni can increase the electrochemical activity, which is independent of the different surface areas. Combined with the discussed work, an electrocatalyst of bimetallic Fe–Ni boride (Fe–Ni–B NSs) on NF was also reported, which exhibited a higher OER activity with a low overpotential of 237 mV as well as fast kinetics (Tafel slope of 38 mV dec−1).121 The electrode operating stability was explored and ascribed to the covalent character of metal boride. Similarly, a sequence of amorphous NiFeB NPs with controllable Fe/Ni atomic ratios was obtained through a facile chemical-reduction route. Interestingly, the formation of a borate-enriched surface layer on NiFeOOH NPs played a critical role in OER performance. The presence of borate in electrolyte facilitated the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process and moreover gifted catalysts with the capability to self-assemble, encouraging the OER activity.122
Other than metallic elements, non-metallic elements were also reported in tailoring the chemical composition of metal borides. For example, metal borides doped with hetero P atoms were used as a facile protocol to design OER/HER bifunctional catalysts to result in the synergic effects.123 Similarly, amorphous N-doped cobalt borophosphate catalyst synthesized via calcination of zeolite-type cobalt borophosphate precursor with NH3 molecule was reported, in which the N-dopant accelerated the electron transfer by modifying the electronic structure of this borophosphate. Additionally, the amorphous phase along with zeolite-like porous structures increased the active site density and advanced the electron and mass transfer.124 Amorphous metal borides are materials that can spontaneously oxidize while exposed to air and water, which indeed lead to a surface intermediate layer of oxides/hydroxides.125 Noble metal incorporation stands next in this line. Pd-Decoration can modify the surface of amorphous Ni–B/C particles via a simple chemical replacement method (Pd@Ni–B/C) that results in improved oxygen reduction reaction performance. An improved electrocatalytic performance was observed in 1.5 wt% Pd@Ni–B/C, which was as good as that of commercially available 40 wt% Pd/C or Pt/C catalysts. Quite similarly, a case of 2D amorphous Ni–B NSs encapsulated Pd NCs was also reported.126Fig. 16 shows the transformation process from Pd NCs to PdH0.43 NCs and PdH0.706@Ni–B composites. The amorphous Ni–B NSs arranged on the Pd hydride surface advanced the activity and stability drastically. The ORR studies of PdHx @Ni–B and similar samples are shown in Fig. 16b–e.
 Fig. 16  (a) Graphic representation of the conversion process from Pd NCs to PdH0.43 NCs and PdH0.706 @Ni–B composites. (b) Cyclic voltammogram curves (c and d) ORR polarization curves and (e) TEM image of PdH0.706 @Ni–B/C after 10000 potential cycles. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Similarly, crystalline PtPd mesoporous truncated octahedral nanocages (c-PtPd MTONs) were also encapsulated in an amorphous NiB (a-NiB) NS shell (c-PtPd@a-NiB CSHs) to further regulate their surface electronic structure.127 Meanwhile, a simple amorphous trimetallic boride (Fe–Co–2.3Ni–B) also demonstrated an overpotential of 274 mV at 10 mA cm−2 current density. The remarkable electrocatalytic activity was then ascribed to the exceptional complex nanostructure of the amorphous multimetal-metalloid.128 Zeng et al. synthesized nickel boride (NiB) material towards electrocatalytic HER activity.129 They analysed that the boride material has an excellent HER ability. Additionally, given the electron donor–acceptor interactions in NiB, the materials show excellent oxygen tolerance and are corrosion-resistant. Therein, the boron turned into electron-deficient since the B0 donates electron density to Ni0. Such electron donor–acceptor interactions caused an increase in the oxygen affinity. The performance also depended on the size of the catalyst. For instance, for larger size thick amorphous NiB films, an inferior performance was observed, which can be mainly attributed to the smaller sized NiB particles shared out intermittently on the surface of the electrode and the more difficult charge transfer along with the increased film thickness.
Despite these advantages, notably, it has to be stated that the borides, usually observed in powder form, suffer mechanical stability issues. However, such problems can be solved with the help of conducting support.130 From this thought, Tanveer ul Haq et al. synthesized electrodeposited cobalt boride (CoB) NSs with the conjoined effect of gadolinium dopant and gold thin film as prudent support.130 The formation of the boride layer assisted in enhancing the corrosion resistance, chemical stability, and robustness of the OER. Similarly, B in amorphous Co–B NSs influences the electronic structure, which enriches the charge density distribution inside the lattice, thereby resulting in the chemisorption/desorption balance of the intermediates.131 Another work on amorphous Co–Ni–B–O NSs was performed by chemically reducing Co–Ni bimetallic Prussian blue analogs (PBAs) using sodium borohydride. The study proved that the formation of a metal–boron bond depends on the charge transfer impedance and would affect the conductivity and thereby catalytic activities of Co–Ni–B–O-NS.132 Similarly, amorphous Ni–Co–B NSs arrays on macroporous NF (NiCo-B/NF) was reported as excellent for water oxidation in near-neutral media. The NiCo-Bi/NF necessitates an overpotential 430 mV in 0.1 M potassium borate. Additionally, it also displays enduring electrochemical durability.133 Such formation of heterostructures is a unique approach involved with synergistic interactions between different structural components that can facilitate the charge transfer and increase the eventual electrocatalytic performance. Besides the usual crystalline–crystalline heterostructures, amorphous materials possess beneficial qualities of speedy cation diffusion and lower energy barriers for vacancy formation. From this idea, Sun et al. constructed Ni3(BO3)2-Ni3S2 amorphous-crystalline heterostructures (Fig. 17a).134 The amorphous Ni3(BO3)2 as Lewis acid was uncovered to boost the Lewis base adsorption alongside the S vacancies and accelerated the chemisorption of catalytic intermediates. The electrocatalytic measurements of HER and OER characteristics and their corresponding overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 are shown in Fig. 17b–e.
 Fig. 17  (a) Construction of the Ni3S2/NF, Ni3(BO3)2-Ni3S2/NF, and Ni3(BO3)2/NF electrodes. (b and c) HER characteristics and corresponding overpotential. (d and e) OER characteristics and the corresponding overpotential. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, a new 2D transition metal boride family, named as MBenes, was obtained with excellent electronic conductivity, impressive stability, and exceptional Young's modulus by Guo et al.135 Surprisingly, the anisotropic and low diffusion energy barrier for Li atoms was found in Mo2B2 and Fe2B2 MBenes, which is recommended as anode materials for LIBs. The Fe2B2 MBene also displayed outstanding catalytic activity towards HER with ΔGH* close to 0, implying the superiority in the electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution application. In recent times, transition-metal diborides (TMB2) were theoretically foretold as a new family with potential NRR catalysts. In order to prove it experimentally, Chu et al. validated that amorphous porous FeB2 NSs (a-FeB2 PNSs) as a favorably capable NRR catalyst, with an NH3 yield of 39.8 μg h−1 mg−1 (−0.3 V) plus the faradaic efficiency of 16.7% (−0.2 V), pointedly overtaking their crystalline equivalent (Fig. 18d–f).136 The theoretical calculations divulged that the amorphization of a-FeB2 results in an elevated d-band center, thereby enhancing the d–2p coupling of *N2H intermediate on the a-FeB2 and lessened reaction barrier. The amorphous a-FeB2 slab was constructed from relaxing the crystalline FeB2 (c-FeB2) slab at a higher temperature, causing a disturbance in the atomic assembly of c-FeB2 (Fig. 18g–i). Fig. 18a–c illustrates a pictorial representation of a-FeB2 towards NRR and phase transformation from a-FeB2 to c-FeB2 PNSs with the corresponding XRD pattern of a-FeB2 and c-FeB2. New hybrid catalyst, namely Co2B/CoSe2 with amorphous Co2B grown on the surface of CoSe2/DETA NSs (DETA = diethylenetriamine), displayed an overpotential of 320 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline medium, accompanied by a Tafel slope of 56.0 mV dec−1.137 The CoSe2/DETA NSs acts as a conductive substrate, resulting in notable electrocatalytic activity, and offer abundant sites for Co2B nucleation and dispersion, providing necessary electrocatalytic active sites. In the interim, the combined influences of Co2B and CoSe2/DETA endorsed the hybrid as a robust mechanical property. Amorphous Co–Fe–Bi directly grown on 3D NF exhibits a low overpotential of about 307 mV, a low Tafel slope of 68.6 mV dec−1, and outstanding durability for 40 h. The copious defects resulting from several under-coordinated metal atoms in amorphous Co–Fe–Bi/NF electrocatalysts bestowed abundant active sites accelerating the binding of hydroxyls stemming the OER performance.138
 Fig. 18  (a) Graphic representation of the phase transformation from a-FeB2 to c-FeB2 PNSs. (b) XRD pattern of the a-FeB2. (c) XRD pattern of the c-FeB2. The performance of a-FeB2 and c-FeB2. (d) Chronoamperometry test at various potentials. (e) NH3 yields and FEs. (f) NH3 yields at various potentials. (g) PDOS. (h) Average potential profiles for determining the work functions. (i) N2-TPD spectra. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
4.6 Amorphous phosphide electrocatalysts
Unlike the oxides and hydroxides, which usually exhibit semiconducting or insulating behavior, amorphous metal phosphides are another alternative electrocatalyst due to their high conductivity.139,140 The theoretical DFT studies also support the strength of phosphate-based catalysts in electrocatalysis.141 For example, Hu et al. have reported an amorphous metallic NiFeP (a-NiFeP) OER catalyst, which presented high catalytic performance either in acidic or alkaline media. Specifically, a-NiFeP represents a perfect combination of high macroscopic conductivity and surface activity: a-NiFeP delivered a low overpotential of 219 mV under alkaline conditions, accompanied by a low Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1. Meanwhile, an overpotential of 540 mV is attained in an acidic electrolyte.142 Besides, Huang et al. have prepared amorphous bimetallic phosphides (a-CoMoPx/CF) with effective catalytic ability for water-splitting. Porous Co-MOF/CF and defective CoMoO4/CF were used as structure-directing templates to form a-CoMoPx/CF with rich defects and large voids. Thus, it can provide a superior mass transfer capacity and fully exposed atoms, increasing the electrochemically active surface area. The a-CoMoPx/CF shows high HER activity, displaying an ultra-low overpotential of 59 mV under alkaline conditions. When it was used as an overall water splitting catalyst, a low voltage of 1.581 V was operated to achieve 10 mA cm−2, and a stable operation at 100 mA cm−2 was done for more than 100 h.143
An interesting transformation of NiFe double hydroxide into metallic NiFeP was reported through PH3 plasma treatment.103 Therein, as soon as the conversion happened into NiFeP from NiFe double hydroxide, the material exhibited distinguishable OER functioning mainly because of porous and amorphous structures. Another such experimental proof where it validates the amorphous nature of the material outperforming the crystalline counterpart was done by Beltrán-Suito et al.144 From both the electronic properties and surface characteristics, the amorphous CoP here presented superior performance compared to the crystalline CoP with NF or fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) as substrates. Throughout OER, rigorous oxidation of CoP to Co-oxy(hydroxides)/oxides with losing P atoms was testified as fundamental to upsurge the concentration of CoOx active sites. Fascinatingly, the whole escape of surface P atoms of CoP lattice also happened during HER, which accompanied the amelioration of surface Co species. A similar interesting case was that of CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2 on CC composite OER catalyst, which consisted of amorphous CoFe phosphate decorating on crystalline Ni(PO3)2.145 The step-wise construction of CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2 is shown in Fig. 19. As shown in Fig. 19b–e, the composite holds adequate active sites, good stability, and decent electrical conductivity, resulting in a better electrocatalytic OER activity.145
 Fig. 19  (a) Pictorial representation of a three-stage synthetic approach of the CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2 hybrid, (b) LSV curves, (c) Tafel plots of CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2/CC, CoFe-PBA/Ni(OH)2/CC, Ni(PO3)2/CC, and IrO2/CC recorded at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH, (d) durability of samples at 10 mA cm−2, (e) LSV curves of CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2/CC before and after the OER for 20 h. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Phosphide-based amorphous materials are worth discussing at this point. The quaternary FeNiCoP amorphous materials were synthesized through melt-spinning technique, and the material revealed an overpotential of 497 mV. Here the synergism between Fe (Ni or Co) oxide/hydroxide and phosphate species is subsidized in accelerating the OER process.146 When electrodeposited in a chemical bath, the highly concentrated P and B elements seem to facilitate the materialization of an amorphous Co–P–B structure. The B/P ratio in the Co–P–B catalyst can be facilely controlled by varying the starting material composition in the electrolyte.147
Nanostructures accompanying a crystalline core and amorphous shell are acknowledged as guaranteeing catalysts towards ORR. Owing to the strong interfacial interactions, such combinations can not only improve the intrinsic activity but also electroconductivity. Amorphous FePO4 shell with implanted crystalline Co2P core (Co2P@am-FePO4) exhibited first-rate ORR activity with a half-wave potential of 0.91 V. Fig. 20 shows the graphical representation of the synthesis and ORR activities of Co2P@am-FePO4. Significantly, such admirable ORR performance can additionally transform into ZABs with the verified specific energy density of 923 W h kg−1 based on Zn and maximum discharge power density of 152 mW cm−2.148 Similarly, amorphous Fe–Co–P–C films supported on CFP also exhibited a low Tafel slope of approximately 31 mV dec−1. Here, the reason attributed to the electrocatalytic activity was its amorphous structure and electrical conductivity of the carbon fiber paper.149
 Fig. 20  (a) Preparation of Co2P@am-FePO4 core–shell electrocatalyst. (b–f) LSV curves and Tafel plots for ORR process. (e) Calculated electron transfer number (n) and HO2-yield derived from the LSV curves on RRDE; (f and g) chronoamperometric results and crossover effect at 0.7 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH solution and at 1600 rpm. The crossover effect was triggered by the addition of 3 M methanol in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
5. Summary and outlook
Electrocatalysis is the green process to convert renewable energy such as wind, solar, etc. As an important family of eletrocatalysts, tremendous and continuous efforts have been devoted to studying the electrocatalytic properties of amorphous materials. In this review, we summarized the basic aspects of the amorphous phase in different types of electrocatalysis. We also have highlighted the amorphous and amorphous-crystalline interface electrocatalysis enhancing their performance in various electrochemical reactions, including HER, OER, total water-splitting, NRR, and ORR. Table 1 compares the performances of various amorphous electrocatalysts in different reactions. In recent years, many breakthrough research studies have been made from amorphous electrocatalysts. However, the existing research is still in the early stages, especially ORR and NRR. There are more opportunities available in this field, but challenges are also associated with it. The primary problem of amorphous catalysis is studying the intrinsic properties because in the amorphous phase, we cannot use existing techniques like diffractometer, electron microscopy, and Raman spectroscopy, which analyze the properties of crystalline rather than amorphous materials. Without such instruments, we could not understand the reaction mechanisms and efficiency improvement. The second issue is the lack of preparation techniques for amorphous materials. Innovative synthesis techniques are highly recommended to prepare a series of amorphous materials. Presently available methods are used for the preparation of crystalline materials frequently. Last but not the least problem is electrocatalytic performance analysis. Few reports have shown the use of operando measurements to investigate the catalyst performance. Most of the reports used conventional instruments to measure and analyze catalyst efficiency. We believe that the upcoming researchers can overcome the problem with suitable, scalable, and novel strategies to design state-of-the-art electrocatalysts (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  The future challenges of amorphous electrocatalysts. 
Table 1 The performances of amorphous electrocatalysts at elementary-gas-involved electrocatalysis




Catalyst
Electrolyte/reaction
Overpotential (mV)@mA cm−2
Tafel slope (mV per decade)
Stability (mA cm−2@h)
Ref.




GCE: glassy carbon electrode, CFP: carbon fiber paper, PBA: Prussian blue analogs, NF: Ni foam, MWCNT: multi-walled carbon nanotube, PBS: phosphate buffered saline.




Amorphous RuO2
0.1 M HClO4/OER
—
33
—

99



NSWANs
1 M KOH/HER/OER
174/295@10
85.2/53.4
20@24

88



a-NiFe-OH/NiFeP/NF
1 M KOH/OER
258/300
39
10@24

103



CoMoO4NWA/Ti
1 M KOH/HER
81@10
63
20@20

92



a-CoVOx
1 M KOH/OER
347@10
35
10@14

102



Ru/Y(OH)3
0.1 M KOH/HER
100@10
66
20000 cycles

93



CoW(OH)x
1.0 M PBS/HER
73.6@10
149.59
20@70 h

98



Ni(OH)2-NiMoOx/NF
1 M KOH/HER
36@10
38
2000 cycles

95



Co-MoOx
1 M KOH/OER
340@10
49
1000 cycles

101



NiCo2O4@NixCoyLDH/NF
1 M KOH/HER/OER
115/193@10
—
25@22

91



CoNiSx/NF-25
1 M KOH/HER
123@10
89
100@24

107



Co0.8Fe0.2OOH @ C
1 M KOH/OER
254@10
33
100@15 days

104



NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH
1 M KOH/OER
235@10
65.7
10@35

83



CoFeO@BP
1 M KOH/HER/OER
88/266@10
51/42
10@24

87



Zn;NiFeOxHy
1 M KOH/OER
250@10
28.3
10@24

38



NiFe-OH/Ni–Cu–P/SSEGS
1 M KOH/HER/OER
75/240@10
—
10@12

90



IrOx/Ir
0.1 M HClO4/OER
250@10
—
150@5

100



CTAB-D-W4 MoO3
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
286@100
71.2
285 mV@12

97



Co/Co3O4@NHCS
0.1 M KOH/ORR

E
1/2 = 0.82V
76.6
3500 cycles

84



Pt-SA/a-MoOx
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
19@10
123
10@20

94



NiS/NiP/Ni(OH)2
1 M KOH/HER/OER
120/219@10
71/82
10@160

89



Amorphous MoS3
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
200@10
60
10000 cycles

106



Amorphous MoSx
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
66@−0.3 V
50.5
0.2 V@14000 s

108



A-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs
1 M KOH/OER
290@10
67
—

110



eFe/NiVS/NF-15s
1 M KOH/OER
210@100
61.5
1000 cycles

105



A-MoO3−x/MoS2
0.1 M KOH/HER
146@10
138.9
1050 cycles

96



CoSx-120 °C
1 M KOH/HER/OER
178/246@10
101/99.7
—

109



CoP/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
168@10
57
—

150



MoS2/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
180@10
41
—

151



NiCoP/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
42@10
45
80@18 h

152



FeP/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
150@10
65
10@8 h

153



N,P-Doped G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
213@10
79
10@20 h

154



CoS2/CNT/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
142@10
51
—

155



Co/CNT/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
87@10
55
20@100 h

156



MoS2/CNF/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
150@10
49.6
16@10 h

157



MoS2/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
220@10
41
—

158



MoS2/G/CC
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
78@10
53
90@20

159



Pt/G/CC
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
60@10
29
—

160



Mo2C/G
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
141@10
56
—

161



Ru2P@PNC/CC-900
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
15@10
28
10@10

56



Pt-CoS2/CC
1 M KOH/HER
24@10
82
10@50

57



PtRu@RFCS-6 h
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
19.7@10
27.2
10@48 h

162



RuCo@NC(S-4)
1 M KOH/HER
28@10
31
—

163



NiRu@NC(S-2)
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
50@10
36
10@10 h

75



a-RuTe2 PNRs
0.5 M H2SO4, 1 M KOH/OER
245, 285@10
47, 62
—

22



Mo@Ru-3
0.5 M H2SO4/HER
30.5@10
36.4
20@10 h

164



Pd@Ru NRs
1 M KOH/HER
30@10
30
10@12 h

165



CoRu alloy
1 M KOH/HER
13@10
29
—

166



Co–Ni–B@NF
1 M KOH/HER, OER
205, 313@10
279, 120
20@12, 30@12

118



Fe–Ni–B NSs/NF
1 M KOH/OER
237@10
38
1000 cycles

121



Gd-CoB@Au
1 M KOH/OER
230@10
42
4000@—

130



Co–B/NF
1 M KOH/OER
265@20
55.6
20@10

131



Co–Ni PBAs
1 M KOH/HER, OER
140, 300@10
116, 60
10@24

132



NiCo-Bi/NF
0.1 M K–Bi/OER
430@10
92
500 cycles

133



Co–Fe–Bi/NF
1 M KOH/OER
307@10
∼68.6
10@40

138



Co–B@Co–Bi
1 M KOH/OER
291@10
1.5
5000 cycles

167



Ni–B@Ni–Bi
1 M KOH/OER
310@10
150
5000 cycles

167



Co2 B-500
0.1 M KOH/OER
380@10
45
10@60

168



Co–P–B-5
1 M NaOH/OER
290@10
42
500 cycles

169



Co2–Fe–B
1 M KOH/OER
298@10
62.6
—

170



Ni–Co–B
1 M KOH/OER
300@10
113
40@50

171



Co–B@CoO
1 M KOH/HER, OER
102, 290@10
48, 78
50@20

172



s Ni–B/Ni foam
1 M KOH/HER, OER
360@100, 125@20
93, 76
1.69 V@10

173



Co–P–B/rGO
0.1 M PBS/HER
639, 400@10
82, 68
1000 cycles

174



Ni3B/rGO
1 M KOH/OER
290@10
88.4
10@12

175



FeNi@FeNiB-700
1 M KOH/OER
272@10
89.2
10@12

176



NixB/f-MWCNT
1 M KOH/HER, OER
286, 116@10
70.4, 71.2
20@100

177



NiFeP
1 M NaOH/OER, 0.05 M H2SO4/OER
219@10, 540@10
32, —
10@12, 10@30

142



a-CoMoPx
1 M KOH/HER, 0.5 M H2SO4/HER
59@10, 85@10
55, 52
100@50, —

143



FeNiCoP
0.5 M H2SO4/OER, 1 M NaOH/OER
497@10, 281@10
79, 38
10@20, 10@30

146



Ni-CoPi
1 M KOH/OER
320@10
44.5
∼20@20

178



p-Ni-Ni2P
1 M KOH/HER
69@10
76
10@10

179



CoP
1 M KOH/HER, OER
143@10, 284@10
63, 45
10@24, 10@24

180





Author contributions
Wenfang Zhai: validation, investigation, writing – original draft. Thangavel Sakthivel: formal analysis, visualization, writing – original draft. Fuyi Chen: resources, investigation. Chengfeng Du: supervision, writing – review & editing. Hong Yu: supervision, writing – review & editing. Zhengfei Dai: conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was jointly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 51802252, 61965005 and 51802265), National Science and Technology Major Project (no. 2017ZX02101007-003), Natural Science Foundation of Shaanxi Province (no. 2020JM-032 and 2020JQ-165), Natural Science Foundation of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (no. 2018JJA160261 and 2019GXNSFDA185010), the fund of the State Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing in NPU (grant no. SKLSP202116), and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (no. 2019M663698).
References
H. Chen, X. Liang, Y. Liu, X. Ai, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002435 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Liu, X. Liang, X. Ren, W. Guan, M. Gao, Y. Yang, Q. Yang, L. Gao, Y. Li and T. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003437 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, C. Andronescu and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15298–15312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Schlogl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 2004–2008 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Liu, B. Ren, W. Zhang, M. Zhang, G. Li, M. Xiao, J. Zhu, A. Yu, L. Ricardez-Sandoval and Z. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, 1903610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, G. Chen, Y. Zhu, Z. Liang, A. Pei, C.-L. Wu, H. Wang, H. R. Lee, K. Liu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 592–600 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Tan, J. Lin, X. Luo, S. Wang, J. You, Y.-M. Kang, Y. Bando, Y. Yamauchi and J. Kim, Nano Today, 2018, 21, 91–105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, J. Kim, J. Lin, C. Li, S. M. Alsheri, T. Ahamad, N. Alhokbany, Y. Bando, M. Zaman, M. S. A. Hossain, S. Wang and Y. Yamauchi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 280, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, J. Tang, J. Kim, Y. V. Kaneti, Y.-M. Kang, Y. Sugahara and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1380–1393 RSC .
H. Tan, Y. Li, J. Kim, T. Takei, Z. Wang, X. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Bando, Y. M. Kang, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800120 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Cao, L. Zhao, A. Wang, L. Yang, L. Lai, Z. L. Wang, J. Kim, W. Zhou, Y. Yamauchi and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1700–1709 RSC .

          S. R. Elliott, Physics of amorphous materials, Longman, London,  1983 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Han, X. Lv, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2551–2582 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7628–7658 RSC .
C. Choi, S. Kwon, T. Cheng, M. Xu, P. Tieu, C. Lee, J. Cai, H. M. Lee, X. Pan, X. Duan, W. A. Goddard and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 804–812 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, K. Hu, Y. Liu, R. Li, C. Ye, Z. Yi and K. Yan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 6573–6581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, B. Huang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. An, D. Zhou, H. Lin, M. K. H. Leung and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 593–603 RSC .
D. Yan, Y. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. Dai and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606459 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604103 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Han, B. Huang, Q. Shao, H. L. Xin and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu and H. Wang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 991–1005 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, H. Bao, Y. Li and F. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 7080–7087 RSC .
L. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 3943–3960 CAS .
Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 96–104 RSC .
L. Liao, J. Sun, D. Li, F. Yu, Y. Zhu, Y. Yang, J. Wang, W. Zhou, D. Tang, S. Chen and H. Zhou, Small, 2020, 16, 1906629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bligaard, J. K. Nørskov, S. Dahl, J. Matthiesen, C. H. Christensen and J. Sehested, J. Catal., 2004, 224, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1958, 54, 1053–1063 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, A. Logadottir, J. Kitchin, J. G. Chen, S. Pandelov and U. Stimming, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, J23 CrossRef .
B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71–129 CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Tan, W. Wang, L. Cao and B. Dong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4704–4712 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Han, Y. Xi, H. You, X. Hao, Z. Li, J. Zhou, D. Song, D. Wang and F. Gao, Small, 2019, 15, 1805435 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, S. Chen, J. Tian, M. Gong, H. Xu and L. Song, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3629–3637 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. C. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090–15093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kwon, H. Jang, J.-S. Lee, A. Mane, D. J. Mandia, S. R. Soltau, L. M. Utschig, A. B. F. Martinson, D. M. Tiede, H. Kim and J. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10710–10720 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Wang, C. Zhu, Y. Jing, Q. Song, C. Guan and C.-F. Du, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2001310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lim, S. Park, S. W. Im, H. Ha, H. Seo and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 235–244 CrossRef CAS .
B. Konkena, J. Masa, A. J. R. Botz, I. Sinev, W. Xia, J. Kossmann, R. Drautz, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lian, S. J. Thorpe and D. W. Kirk, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 169–175 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lian, D. Kirk and S. Thorpe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3704 CrossRef CAS .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng and R. Alonso-Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, S. Sun, J. Song, S. Xi, Y. Du, B. Chen, W. A. Sasangka, H. Liao, C. L. Gan and G. G. Scherer, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 763–772 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Ren, Q. Liang, K. N. Dinh, R. Dangol and Q. Yan, Small, 2020, 16, 1906766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090–15093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Lv, C. S. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. X. Sun, Y. S. Zhou and G. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6073–6076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Shi, D. Bao, S. J. Li, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800124 CrossRef .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
H. Wang, D. Yang, S. Liu, S. Yin, H. Yu, Y. Xu, X. Li, Z. Wang and L. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19969–19974 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M. G. White and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15288–15298 CrossRef CAS .
I. Roche, E. Chaînet, M. Chatenet and J. Vondrák, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1434–1443 CrossRef CAS .
H. Erikson, A. Sarapuu and K. Tammeveski, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 73–86 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, G. S. Park, H. I. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, M. Liu and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5362–5366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Wang, D. Cao, Y. Xiang, D. W. Liang and S. F. Lu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 51126–51132 RSC .
Y. Huang, Z. Guo, H. Liu, S. Zhang, P. Wang, J. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903490 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, B. Feng, X. Wu, Y. Niu, W. Hu and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3143–3150 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, X. Wu, Y. Deng, J. Liu, J. Lu, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800935 CrossRef .
D. J. Li, U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, D. S. Choi, W. J. Lee, Y. Oh, G. Y. Lee and S. O. Kim, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kuang, Q. Wang, P. Han and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700193 CrossRef .
H. W. Liang, S. Bruller, R. Dong, J. Zhang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, Z. Xiao, D. Kong, R. Iqbal, Q.-H. Yang and L. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103879 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Sun and T. You, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9528–9531 RSC .
S. Maldonado and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4707–4716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tang, W.-J. Jiang, L.-P. Yuan, S. Niu, J.-S. Hu and L.-J. Wan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11573–11581 RSC .
X. Han, C. Yu, S. Zhou, C. Zhao, H. Huang, J. Yang, Z. Liu, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602148 CrossRef .
Z. Zuo, D. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Lu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1803762 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Xue, L. Hui, H. Yu, Y. Liu, C. Xing, F. Lu, F. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 591–597 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou and H. J. Fan, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 136–147 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, J. Liang, J. Liu, Q. Zhang, W. Peng, Y. Li, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 23093–23098 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, J. Wang, J. Wan, Y. Cheng, R. Huang, C. Zhang, W. Hu, G. Wei and C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3630–3637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Shen, Y. Pan, C. Liu, S. Y. Hwang, Q. Xu and Z. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3996–4002 RSC .
L. Chai, L. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Xu, C. Han, T.-T. Li, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Carbon, 2019, 146, 248–256 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lv, Y. Qian, C. Yan, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, G. Chen and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10246–10250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, X. Zheng, P. Cui, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Y. Qu, W. Chen, Y. Lin, H. Li, X. Han, Y. Hu, P. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Ge, Y. Yao, R. Sun, Y. Wu, L. Gu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4855 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, S. Yin, C. Li, K. Deng, H. Xue, X. Li, H. Wang and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1376–1381 RSC .
L. Mihailov, T. Spassov and M. Bojinov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 10499–10506 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Müller, T. Rauscher, A. Schmidt, T. Schubert, T. Weißgärber, B. Kieback and L. Röntzsch, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 8926–8937 CrossRef .
W. Xu, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Cui, X. Yang, A. Inoue and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18793–18800 RSC .
Q. Sun, M. Zhou, Y. Shen, L. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Li, X. Bo, Z. Wang and C. Zhao, J. Catal., 2019, 373, 180–189 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, Z. Cui, W. Xu, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Li, S. Wu, C. Chang and A. Inoue, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 328, 135082 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Shi, D. Bao, S.-J. Li, B.-R. Wulan, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800124 CrossRef .
H. Cheng, N. Yang, G. Liu, Y. Ge, J. Huang, Q. Yun, Y. Du, C. J. Sun, B. Chen, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, X. Yang, S. Yang, Q. Gao, S. Zhang, X. Yu, Y. Fang, S. Yang and X. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5601–5611 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Gai, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, B. Zhao, A. Toghan and M. Huang, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100497 CrossRef .
B. Jiang, J. Kim, Y. Guo, K. C. W. Wu, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, N. Alhokbany, J. Henzie and Y. Yamachi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 3697–3702 RSC .
W. Liu, C. Li, Q. Xu, P. F. Yan, C. Y. Niu, Y. L. Shen, P. F. Yuan and Y. Jia, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5412–5416 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Li, L. P. Xiao, L. Zhou, Q. C. Xu, J. Weng, J. Xu and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21106–21113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, S. Chen, H. Lin, X. Xu, H. Yang, L. Song and X. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701487 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xu, W. Gao, M. Wang, G. Yuan, X. Ren, R. Zhao, S. Zhao and Q. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 2546–2556 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, P. Tian, S. Zhou, H. Gao, J. Su, X. Tian and J. Zang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 30387–30395 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Tao, X. Xiao, X. Jiang, M. Wang and Y. Shen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 4784–4791 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Ren, H. Ma, X. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Yan, Q. Wei and D. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10093–10098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Lu, Z. Che, C. Zhang, M. Han, J. Bao and Z. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12202–12205 RSC .
J. Xu, C. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Sun, R. Xie, Y. Qiu, F. Lü, Y. Liu, L. Zhuo, X. Liu and J. Luo, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104529 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, F. Lin, Y. Yao and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902703 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, C. Niu, Q. Tian, W. Liu, G. Niu, X. Zheng, C. Li, Y. Jia, C. Wei and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14701–14704 RSC .
X. Tang, J. Liu, K. Zhan, H. Sun, B. Zhao and Y. Yan, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 2984–2991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, P. F. Liu, Y. H. Li, C. W. Wang, M. Y. Zu, H. Q. Fu, X. H. Yang and H. G. Yang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5200–5205 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tsuji, A. Imanishi, K.-i. Fukui and Y. Nakato, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2009–2016 CrossRef CAS .
P. Salimi and M. M. Najafpour, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 17063–17068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, X. Sun, X. Kuang, L. Gao, M. Zhao, L. Qu, Y. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Ren and Q. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1005–1012 RSC .
L. Liardet and X. Hu, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 644–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, C. Xia, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum, U. Schwingenschlogl and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1035–1042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, C. Yu, Y. Niu, Z. Wang, Y. Kang, Y. Ren, H. Wang, H. S. Park and J. Qiu, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000546 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shang, K. L. Yan, S. S. Lu, B. Dong, W. K. Gao, J. Q. Chi, Z. Z. Liu, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 44–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Benck, Z. Chen, L. Y. Kuritzky, A. J. Forman and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1916–1923 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, X. Li, F. Wei, K. Cheng, W. Li, Y. Zhou, W. Zheng, L. Pan and G. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12501–12509 CAS .
C.-L. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, T.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Tseng, K.-H. Wei and L.-J. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 4788–4793 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, B.-Q. Hu, X. Xiong, W.-T. Lu and B. Li, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 36, 1873–1880 CAS .
P. W. Cai, J. H. Huang, J. X. Chen and Z. H. Wen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4858–4861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chu, H. Nan, Q. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Tian and W. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 53, 132–138 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Luo, P. Yu, Y. Cai, Y. Du, D. Wu, S. Gao, C. Tan, Z. Li, M. Ren, T. Osipowicz, S. Chen, Z. Jiang, J. Li, Y. Huang, J. Yang, Y. Chen, C. Y. Ang, Y. Zhao, P. Wang, L. Song, X. Wu, Z. Liu, A. Borgna and H. Zhang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 460–468 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Cheng, X. Li, Y. Guo and K. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 13009–13012 RSC .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, N. Patel, A. Miotello and D. Kothari, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Song, H. Zhang, X. Yan and J. Guo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 861, 113953 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fernandes, A. Chunduri, S. Gupta, R. Kadrekar, A. Arya, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 354, 136738 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, G. Cao, Z. Chen, Q. Kang, H. Dai and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12379–12384 RSC .
S. Klemenz, J. Schuch, S. Hawel, A. M. Zieschang, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann and B. Albert, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3150–3156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schuch, S. Klemenz, P. Schuldt, A. M. Zieschang, S. Dolique, P. Connor, B. Kaiser, U. I. Kramm, B. Albert and W. Jaegermann, ChemCatChem, 2021, 13, 1772–1780 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, V. Reddu, Y. Peng, Z. Huang, C. Wang and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18502–18511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, D. He, R. Yao, Y. Zhao and J. Li, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1664–1675 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, D. Nie, M. Song, T. Jiao, G. Fu and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7506–7512 RSC .
B. Wang, W. Lu, Z. Huang, W. Chen, J. Xie, D. Pan, L. Zhou and J. Song, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 13981–13988 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, I. Sinev, H. Mistry, E. Ventosa, M. De La Mata, J. Arbiol, M. Muhler, B. R. Cuenya and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700381 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Peng, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700919 CrossRef .
K. Deng, T. Ren, Y. Xu, S. Liu, Z. Dai, Z. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8927–8933 RSC .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, Y. Peng, Y. Y. Xu, L. Thia, C. Wang, B. Y. Xia and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701475 CrossRef .
M. Zeng, H. Wang, C. Zhao, J. Wei, K. Qi, W. Wang and X. Bai, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 708–712 CrossRef CAS .
T. ul Haq, S. A. Mansour, A. Munir and Y. Haik, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Fang, C. Chen, P. Ni, B. Kong, Z. Song, Y. Lu and L. Niu, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3684–3689 CrossRef CAS .
T. He, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, R. Qi, J.-Y. Zhang, M. Miao, Y. Yan, K. Qi, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23289–23294 RSC .
L. Chen, X. Ren, W. Teng and P. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 9741–9745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, X. Wang, M. Yuan, H. Yang, Y. Su, K. Shi, C. Nan, H. Li, G. Sun and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23896–23903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23530–23535 RSC .
K. Chu, W. Gu, Q. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Tian and W. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 53, 82–89 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Z. Yao, C. Shang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39312–39317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. P. Suryawanshi, M. P. Suryawanshi, U. V. Ghorpade, S. W. Shin, J. Kim and J. H. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 495, 143462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, W. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500985 CrossRef .
Y. Tong, L. Chen, P. J. Dyson and Z. Fei, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 17709–17720 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Dong and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902104 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, S. Zhu, S. Chen, Y. Li, L. Ma, T. Wu, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, C. Liu, X. Yang, L. Song, X. Yang and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606570 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, A. Cho, S. Kim, H. Jun, A. Lee, J. W. Han and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003889 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beltrán-Suito, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15749–15756 RSC .
D.-C. Liu, L.-M. Cao, Z.-M. Luo, D.-C. Zhong, J.-B. Tan and T.-B. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24920–24927 RSC .
S. Jiang, L. Zhu, Z. Yang and Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137618 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Kim, S.-K. Kim and S. H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6282–6288 RSC .
D. Cheng, Z. Wang, C. Chen and K. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8026–8034 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lian, F. Zhang, S. Lu, W. Jiang, Q. Hu, D. Li and B. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3976–3981 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, R. Ding, X. Cui, L. Qin, J. Wang, G. Wu, L. Wang and B. Lv, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 534–541 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, J. Xu, K. Yan, H. Wang, Z. Wang and S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2344–2353 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Yan, X. Zhou, Z. Q. Huang, Z. Xia, C. R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6785–6796 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. N. Kumar, Y. Li, H. Yu, S. Yin, H. Xue, Y. Xu, X. Li, H. Wang and L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 292, 107–114 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, Y. Zhu, Y. Su, Y. Yao, Y. Liu, X. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12642–12645 RSC .
S. Peng, L. Li, X. Han, W. Sun, M. Srinivasan, S. G. Mhaisalkar, F. Cheng, Q. Yan, J. Chen and S. Ramakrishna, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 12594–12599 CAS .
G. Chen, Z. Hu, Y. Zhu, B. Gu, Y. Zhong, H.-J. Lin, C.-T. Chen, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804333 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gu, Y. Huang, L. Zuo, W. Fan and T. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 604–613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Chen, D. H. Seo, Z. J. Han, J. I. Wong, K. K. Ostrikov, H. Zhang and H. Y. Yang, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e268 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, W. Li, M. F. Yuen, T.-W. Ng, Y. Tang, C.-S. Lee, X. Chen and W. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 196–204 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Ren, C. Guan and C. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22004–22011 RSC .
Y. Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, W. J. Jiang, X. Zhang, Z. Dai, L. J. Wan and J. S. Hu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8851–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1232–1239 RSC .
J. Su, Y. Yang, G. Xia, J. Chen, P. Jiang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14969 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Feng, Y. Tao, J. Xu, C. Jiang, X. Lu, J. Fan, M. Gu, H. Li and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2780–2786 RSC .
Y. Luo, X. Luo, G. Wu, Z. Li, G. Wang, B. Jiang, Y. Hu, T. Chao, H. Ju, J. Zhu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34147–34152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mao, C. T. He, J. Pei, W. Chen, D. He, Y. He, Z. Zhuang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4958 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tan, P. Han, H. Cong, G. Cheng and W. Luo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5620–5625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502313 CrossRef .
A. Chunduri, S. Gupta, O. Bapat, A. Bhide, R. Fernandes, M. Patel, V. Bambole, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118051 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Ouyang, M. Zhao, Y. Li and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40333–40343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, P. He, Z. Xie, L. Jia, M. He, X. Zhang, F. Dong, H. Liu, Y. Zhang and C. Li, Electrochim.
Acta, 2019, 296, 644–652 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, T. Liu, L. Xie, C. Tang, D. Liu, S. Hao, F. Qu, G. Du, Y. Ma and A. M. Asiri, Small, 2017, 13, 1700805 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liang, X. Sun, A. M. Asiri and Y. He, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 12LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, Z. Jin and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18420–18427 RSC .
M. Arivu, J. Masud, S. Umapathi and M. Nath, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 86, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, S. Wang, X. Gu, B. Tang, J. Li and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19554–19564 RSC .
X. Chen, Z. Yu, L. Wei, Z. Zhou, S. Zhai, J. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, H. E. Karahan and X. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 764–774 RSC .
L. Yang, H. Ren, Q. Liang, K. N. Dinh, R. Dangol and Q. Yan, Small, 2020, 16, 1906766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xiong, Y. Gao, J. Chen, Y. Shen and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 611–614 RSC .
R. Beltran-Suito, P. W. Menezes and M. Driess, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15749–15756 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Wenfang Zhai	Wenfang Zhai received her B.S. from the School of Materials Science and Engineering from Xi'an Shiyou University in 2014. Now she is a doctoral candidate of Xi'an Jiaotong University and an exchange student of Guilin University of Electronic Technology, and she is working on bifunctional catalysts for overall water splitting and other new energy applications.
Chengfeng Du	Cheng-Feng Du is currently an associate professor at Northwestern Polytechnical University. He received his B.S. degree from Ocean University of China in 2011 and Ph.D. degree from the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2016. He worked at Nanyang Technological University as a research fellow from 2016 to 2018. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and surface modification of 2D hybrid materials and their applications in energy conversion and storage.
Hong Yu	Hong Yu is currently an associate professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern Polytechnical University. She received both her B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in materials science and engineering from Nanyang Technological University in 2011 and 2016, respectively. She continued her research as a postdoctoral research fellow in Nanyang Technological University prior to joining Northwestern Polytechnical University in 2017. Her research focuses on the design and synthesis of advanced functional materials for energy conversion and storage.
Zhengfei Dai	Zhengfei Dai received his Ph.D. from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in July 2013. Then, he worked at Korea University, Kyoto University, and Nanyang Technological University as a postdoctoral research fellow. Since December 2017, he joined the School of Material Science and Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University as a research professor, and as an adjunct professor of Guilin University of Electronic Technology. His current research interests focus on energy & environmental materials for gas sensors, secondary batteries, and electrocatalysts.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The types of defects. (b) Comparison of main characteristics of amorphous and crystalline materials for electrocatalysis.	 
H+ + e− → H* (1, Volmer step)
H+ + e− + H* → H2 (2, Heyrovsky step)
H* + H* → H2 (3, Tafel step)
H2O + e− → H* + OH− (4, Volmer step)
H2O + e− + H* → H2 + OH− (5, Heyrovsky step)
H* + H* → H2 (6, Tafel step)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of HER reaction pathways.	 
H2O → OH* + H+ + e−	(7)
OH* → O* + H+ + e−	(8)
O* + H2O → OOH* + H+ + e−	(9)
OOH* → O2 + H+ + e−	(10)
OH− → OH* + e−	(11)
OH* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−	(12)
O* + OH− → OOH* + e−	(13)
OOH* + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−	(14)
O* + O* → O2	(15)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of OER reaction pathways.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of NRR reaction pathways.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of ORR reaction pathways.	 
O2 → 2O*	(16)
2O* + 2e− + 2H+ → 2OH*	(17)
2OH* + 2e− + 2H+ → 2H2O	(18)

 	Fig. 6  (a) The synthetic process for the carbon-coated Co/CoSx–MoS2 composite. (b and c) HER and OER polarization curves in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Vertical long axis cutting surface of aMOF-NC. (e and f) OER polarization curves and corresponding overpotential. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (g) The FESEM images of Quartz wires. (h and i) OER polarization curves and corresponding Tafel slopes. (j) Nyquist plots at 0.5 V overpotential. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic preparation of hollow N-doped carbon spheres. (b) PXRD patterns. (c) ORR polarization curves. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. The performance of PCN-NV4. (d) TEM image. (e) NRR performance at various potentials. (f) Cycling test. (g) Electrocatalytic NRR at different temperatures. (h) Linear sweep voltammetric (LSV) curves at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The general synthetic process for amorphous noble metal NSs. s. (b) AFM and (c) elemental mapping images of amorphous Ir NSs. (d) AFM and (e) elemental mapping images of amorphous RhFe NSs. (f) OER LSV curves and (g) Tafel slope curves of amorphous Ir NSs and crystalline Ir NSs in O2-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 solution. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Preparation of NiRu@N–C nanohybrids. (b–i) Electrocatalytic HER performances of the NiRu@N–C nanohybrids in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1 M KOH solution, respectively. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of PdxCu1−x/rGO. (b) Yield rate of ammonia formation and the corresponding FE uses Pd0.2Cu0.8/rGO composite as the catalyst at each given potential. (c) Chronoamperometry results at the corresponding potentials. (d) Catalytic activities for NRR at −0.2 V versus RHE at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The ORR and OER curves of NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH. (b) Structural diagram of cable-type ZABs based on the NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH oxygen electrode. (c) Power density and charging/discharging curves of the cable-type ZAB. Reproduced with permission.83 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The synthetic strategy of Co/Co3O4@NHCS catalysts; (e) XRD patterns of Co/Co3O4@NHCS. (f) LSV curves of the Co/Co3O4@NHCS catalyst before and after 3500 cycles in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (g) XRD patterns of A-MoO3−x. (h) The NH3 yields and FEs of A-MoO3−x NSs at different potentials. (i) The free energy profile for the NRR processes of A-MoO3−x from first-principles calculations. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism of the adaptive bifunctional amorphous CoFeO@BP electrocatalyst for overall water-splitting. (b) Stability test of CoFeO@BP. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) LSV curves of initial and after 1000 cycle cyclic voltammetry scans recorded for CoMoO4 NWA/Ti and chronoamperometry curve without iR-compensation (inset). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Durability of Ru/Y(OH)3 and the sole Ru catalysts. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Cyclic voltammograms of Zn-NiFeOxHy at various scan rates. (f) Micrographs of Zn-NiFeOxHy taken under ambient conditions to monitor color changes after the electrochemical activation of as-deposited Zn-NiFeOxHy. (g) Raman spectra collected for brownish-gray Zn-NiFeOxHy (brown line) and black Zn-NiFeOxHy (black line). Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Molybdenum sulfide wet chemical synthesis; (b) electrochemical activity of the molybdenum sulfide catalyst. Polarization curves. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Preparation of CoNiSx/NF-25. (d–f) The electrochemical performances of CoNiSx/NF-25. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Preparation of A-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs. (b) Polarization curves of A-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs for OER in 1 M KOH (pH 13.7). Reproduced with permission.110 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (c–e) NRR performances of MoS2 and MoS3. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f) Preparation of S/Au NWs. (g) NRR performance of S/Au NWs at each potential. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a–h) HRTEM images and SAED pattern (inset) of Co–B, Co–30Ni–B, Co–15Fe–B, Co–7Cu–B, Co–3Mo–B, Co–4W–B, Co–4Mn–B, and Co–1Cr–B powders. (i) LSV curves, (j) Tafel plots, (k) Cdl, and (l) Nyquist plots of amorphous Co–M–B catalysts at pH 7 (0.5 M KPi solution) Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Graphic representation of the conversion process from Pd NCs to PdH0.43 NCs and PdH0.706 @Ni–B composites. (b) Cyclic voltammogram curves (c and d) ORR polarization curves and (e) TEM image of PdH0.706 @Ni–B/C after 10000 potential cycles. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Construction of the Ni3S2/NF, Ni3(BO3)2-Ni3S2/NF, and Ni3(BO3)2/NF electrodes. (b and c) HER characteristics and corresponding overpotential. (d and e) OER characteristics and the corresponding overpotential. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Graphic representation of the phase transformation from a-FeB2 to c-FeB2 PNSs. (b) XRD pattern of the a-FeB2. (c) XRD pattern of the c-FeB2. The performance of a-FeB2 and c-FeB2. (d) Chronoamperometry test at various potentials. (e) NH3 yields and FEs. (f) NH3 yields at various potentials. (g) PDOS. (h) Average potential profiles for determining the work functions. (i) N2-TPD spectra. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Pictorial representation of a three-stage synthetic approach of the CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2 hybrid, (b) LSV curves, (c) Tafel plots of CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2/CC, CoFe-PBA/Ni(OH)2/CC, Ni(PO3)2/CC, and IrO2/CC recorded at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 in 1.0 M KOH, (d) durability of samples at 10 mA cm−2, (e) LSV curves of CoFePi/Ni(PO3)2/CC before and after the OER for 20 h. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Preparation of Co2P@am-FePO4 core–shell electrocatalyst. (b–f) LSV curves and Tafel plots for ORR process. (e) Calculated electron transfer number (n) and HO2-yield derived from the LSV curves on RRDE; (f and g) chronoamperometric results and crossover effect at 0.7 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH solution and at 1600 rpm. The crossover effect was triggered by the addition of 3 M methanol in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  The future challenges of amorphous electrocatalysts.	 


Amorphous RuO2	0.1 M HClO4/OER	—	33	—	
99

NSWANs	1 M KOH/HER/OER	174/295@10	85.2/53.4	20@24	
88

a-NiFe-OH/NiFeP/NF	1 M KOH/OER	258/300	39	10@24	
103

CoMoO4NWA/Ti	1 M KOH/HER	81@10	63	20@20	
92

a-CoVOx	1 M KOH/OER	347@10	35	10@14	
102

Ru/Y(OH)3	0.1 M KOH/HER	100@10	66	20000 cycles	
93

CoW(OH)x	1.0 M PBS/HER	73.6@10	149.59	20@70 h	
98

Ni(OH)2-NiMoOx/NF	1 M KOH/HER	36@10	38	2000 cycles	
95

Co-MoOx	1 M KOH/OER	340@10	49	1000 cycles	
101

NiCo2O4@NixCoyLDH/NF	1 M KOH/HER/OER	115/193@10	—	25@22	
91

CoNiSx/NF-25	1 M KOH/HER	123@10	89	100@24	
107

Co0.8Fe0.2OOH @ C	1 M KOH/OER	254@10	33	100@15 days	
104

NiCo2O4@NiCoFe-OH	1 M KOH/OER	235@10	65.7	10@35	
83

CoFeO@BP	1 M KOH/HER/OER	88/266@10	51/42	10@24	
87

Zn;NiFeOxHy	1 M KOH/OER	250@10	28.3	10@24	
38

NiFe-OH/Ni–Cu–P/SSEGS	1 M KOH/HER/OER	75/240@10	—	10@12	
90

IrOx/Ir	0.1 M HClO4/OER	250@10	—	150@5	
100

CTAB-D-W4 MoO3	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	286@100	71.2	285 mV@12	
97

Co/Co3O4@NHCS	0.1 M KOH/ORR	
E
1/2 = 0.82V	76.6	3500 cycles	
84

Pt-SA/a-MoOx	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	19@10	123	10@20	
94

NiS/NiP/Ni(OH)2	1 M KOH/HER/OER	120/219@10	71/82	10@160	
89

Amorphous MoS3	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	200@10	60	10000 cycles	
106

Amorphous MoSx	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	66@−0.3 V	50.5	0.2 V@14000 s	
108

A-CoS4.6O0.6 PNCs	1 M KOH/OER	290@10	67	—	
110

eFe/NiVS/NF-15s	1 M KOH/OER	210@100	61.5	1000 cycles	
105

A-MoO3−x/MoS2	0.1 M KOH/HER	146@10	138.9	1050 cycles	
96

CoSx-120 °C	1 M KOH/HER/OER	178/246@10	101/99.7	—	
109

CoP/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	168@10	57	—	
150

MoS2/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	180@10	41	—	
151

NiCoP/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	42@10	45	80@18 h	
152

FeP/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	150@10	65	10@8 h	
153

N,P-Doped G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	213@10	79	10@20 h	
154

CoS2/CNT/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	142@10	51	—	
155

Co/CNT/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	87@10	55	20@100 h	
156

MoS2/CNF/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	150@10	49.6	16@10 h	
157

MoS2/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	220@10	41	—	
158

MoS2/G/CC	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	78@10	53	90@20	
159

Pt/G/CC	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	60@10	29	—	
160

Mo2C/G	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	141@10	56	—	
161

Ru2P@PNC/CC-900	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	15@10	28	10@10	
56

Pt-CoS2/CC	1 M KOH/HER	24@10	82	10@50	
57

PtRu@RFCS-6 h	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	19.7@10	27.2	10@48 h	
162

RuCo@NC(S-4)	1 M KOH/HER	28@10	31	—	
163

NiRu@NC(S-2)	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	50@10	36	10@10 h	
75

a-RuTe2 PNRs	0.5 M H2SO4, 1 M KOH/OER	245, 285@10	47, 62	—	
22

Mo@Ru-3	0.5 M H2SO4/HER	30.5@10	36.4	20@10 h	
164

Pd@Ru NRs	1 M KOH/HER	30@10	30	10@12 h	
165

CoRu alloy	1 M KOH/HER	13@10	29	—	
166

Co–Ni–B@NF	1 M KOH/HER, OER	205, 313@10	279, 120	20@12, 30@12	
118

Fe–Ni–B NSs/NF	1 M KOH/OER	237@10	38	1000 cycles	
121

Gd-CoB@Au	1 M KOH/OER	230@10	42	4000@—	
130

Co–B/NF	1 M KOH/OER	265@20	55.6	20@10	
131

Co–Ni PBAs	1 M KOH/HER, OER	140, 300@10	116, 60	10@24	
132

NiCo-Bi/NF	0.1 M K–Bi/OER	430@10	92	500 cycles	
133

Co–Fe–Bi/NF	1 M KOH/OER	307@10	∼68.6	10@40	
138

Co–B@Co–Bi	1 M KOH/OER	291@10	1.5	5000 cycles	
167

Ni–B@Ni–Bi	1 M KOH/OER	310@10	150	5000 cycles	
167

Co2 B-500	0.1 M KOH/OER	380@10	45	10@60	
168

Co–P–B-5	1 M NaOH/OER	290@10	42	500 cycles	
169

Co2–Fe–B	1 M KOH/OER	298@10	62.6	—	
170

Ni–Co–B	1 M KOH/OER	300@10	113	40@50	
171

Co–B@CoO	1 M KOH/HER, OER	102, 290@10	48, 78	50@20	
172

s Ni–B/Ni foam	1 M KOH/HER, OER	360@100, 125@20	93, 76	1.69 V@10	
173

Co–P–B/rGO	0.1 M PBS/HER	639, 400@10	82, 68	1000 cycles	
174

Ni3B/rGO	1 M KOH/OER	290@10	88.4	10@12	
175

FeNi@FeNiB-700	1 M KOH/OER	272@10	89.2	10@12	
176

NixB/f-MWCNT	1 M KOH/HER, OER	286, 116@10	70.4, 71.2	20@100	
177

NiFeP	1 M NaOH/OER, 0.05 M H2SO4/OER	219@10, 540@10	32, —	10@12, 10@30	
142

a-CoMoPx	1 M KOH/HER, 0.5 M H2SO4/HER	59@10, 85@10	55, 52	100@50, —	
143

FeNiCoP	0.5 M H2SO4/OER, 1 M NaOH/OER	497@10, 281@10	79, 38	10@20, 10@30	
146

Ni-CoPi	1 M KOH/OER	320@10	44.5	∼20@20	
178

p-Ni-Ni2P	1 M KOH/HER	69@10	76	10@10	
179

CoP	1 M KOH/HER, OER	143@10, 284@10	63, 45	10@24, 10@24	
180

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
