Carbon neutrality strategies for sustainable batteries: from structure, recycling, and properties to applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE03257K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE03257K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 745-791Carbon neutrality strategies for sustainable batteries: from structure, recycling, and properties to applications

        
          
            Jiao 
            Lin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ersha 
            Fan
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Renjie 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Wu
          
          
        
      abc and 

        
          
            Li 
            Li
          
          
        
      *abc
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Environmental Science and Engineering, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: lily863@bit.edu.cn; chenrj@bit.edu.c
bAdvanced Technology Research Institute, Beijing Institute of Technology, Jinan 250300, China
cCollaborative Innovation Center of Electric Vehicles in Beijing, Beijing 100081, China
Received 
      7th October 2022
    , Accepted 3rd January 2023First published on 4th January 2023AbstractResearch on new energy storage technologies has been sparked by the energy crisis, greenhouse effect, and air pollution, leading to the continuous development and commercialization of electrochemical energy storage batteries. Accordingly, as lithium secondary batteries gradually enter their retirement period, achieving their efficient and green recycling is not only a strategic requirement for the development of an ecological civilization but also a practical assurance for the secure supply of resources. Herein, we provide a comprehensive explanation of the current lithium secondary battery recycling techniques using the organic tetrahedron of structure–recycle–property–application. In addition, we evaluate the highly promising new generation of future energy storage batteries from multiple dimensions and propose possible recycling technologies based on the current state of lithium-ion battery recycling and recycling theory. Finally, the challenges and future directions for the advancement of key material recycling technologies for lithium secondary batteries and highly promising next-generation batteries with applications are outlined, geared toward initiatives to shift to carbon neutrality.
Jiao Lin
Dr Jiao Lin is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.
Xiaodong Zhang
Dr Xiaodong Zhang is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests focus on the failure analysis of electrode materials and the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).
Ersha Fan
Dr Ersha Fan obtained her D.S. Degree under the supervision of Prof. Li Li at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) in 2020. Her research interests mainly focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.
Renjie Chen
Feng Wu is the Director of the Professor Commission of the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT). As the Chief Scientist, he has hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China (973 projects), Basic Research on New Rechargeable Batteries and Related Materials. His major research interests are functional materials for energy storage devices.
Feng Wu
Dr Renjie Chen is a Full Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research focuses on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University and a Visiting Professor at the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy at the University of Cambridge. As the Principal Investigator, Prof. Chen successfully hosted the National Key Research and Development Program of China, National Natural Science Foundation of China, and National High Tech.
Li Li
Dr Li Li is a Full Professor in Beijing Key Laboratory of Environmental Science and Engineering, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her research interests focus on recycling technique and life-cycle analysis for spent secondary batteries, electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. As the Principal Investigator, Dr Li successfully hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China, National High Tech 863 project, National Natural Science Foundation.

Broader context
To achieve carbon neutrality in electrochemical energy storage, lithium secondary battery recycling has advanced beyond fundamental resource recycling research and toward the development of industrially scalable recycling processes that can sustainably produce high-value products. This work constructs an organic tetrahedron of battery material recycle at the atomic level, exploring in detail the relationship between waste structure, recycle, property, and application, in contrast to previous work that has focused on compartmentalizing recycle technologies. The process of connecting macroscopic applications to microstructure is crucial, but it is frequently undervalued and understudied. The extent to which the intrinsic energy of the waste material affects the choice of recycling technology and the amount of emissions and energy used throughout the recycling process are important. Therefore, recycling technology can only be optimized for application in next-generation rechargeable batteries by thoroughly comprehending the intrinsic relationship between the material structure and recycling technology. The analysis and review in this work led to the development of a recycling theory that encompasses three lines. For carbon neutral considerations, the next-generation rechargeable batteries are assessed in terms of a variety of factors, such as feedstock abundance and technological maturity, and potential recycling methods are suggested based on the insightful recycling theory. To more effectively accomplish scaled-up recycling and industrial carbon neutral upgrading, this work provides a novel interpretation of energy storage battery recycling for recycling technology developers and recycling firms.

1. Introduction
Energy is one of the essential factors for the proper functioning and development of human society. The development of human society has been accompanied by innovation and effective energy utilization. However, with the development of civilization and science and technology, the reserves of fossil fuel are being rapidly depleted. The intensive consumption of fossil energy by human beings has also been accompanied by serious environmental issues. The environmental catastrophe is the responsibility of all mankind given that it threatens all aspects of human life and the sustainability of the global ecosystem. Thus, due to the co-existing energy and environment crises, it is urgent to find new energy sources, which are currently being actively investigated by many nations.1 Various energy sources such as wind, water, tidal, and geothermal energy have limitless reserves, which originate from the energy generated by earthly natural phenomena, while being harmless to the environment. However, the majority of new energy sources cannot be directly utilized and need to be converted into electrical energy and stored in energy storage devices, such as chemical energy storage devices, to achieve reversible charging and discharging, volume control, portability and other usage requirements. Currently, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are the most widely used chemical power source.
To attain net zero emission, energy generation must be completely decarbonized and electricity use must be considerably increased, electrifying as much of the economy as possible. The goal of carbon neutrality is to switch to clean energy while reducing the reliance on fossil fuels, where the magnitude of this transition varies significantly across nations, models, and scenarios. The use of rechargeable batteries in future energy decarbonization involves the multi-scenario integration of grid storage, transit mobility, household electricity, and industrial energy, as shown in Fig. 1. Also, it will be necessary for retired batteries to be fitted with efficient recycling technologies to ensure the sustainability and integrity of the supply chain. Realizing the objective of carbon neutrality in the field of rechargeable batteries demands effective recycling of decommissioned batteries considering the worldwide movement toward carbon neutrality. The recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries is of great significance to cope with the resource crisis and protect the environment, where the research in this field has gained increasing attention in recent years. On the one hand, due to the presence of toxic metals and electrolytes in spent LIBs, their recycling can prevent environmental pollution. On the other hand, the amount of valuable metals in LIBs far exceeds the proportion in many minerals, and thus recycling can help to significantly reduce the strain on mineral supplies, while also having positive economic effects.2 Countries are also actively supporting the lithium-ion battery recycling industry at the policy level to stimulate the lithium industry to actively recycle and reuse used batteries and support economic strategies at the national level.3
 Fig. 1  Energy application scenarios under the carbon neutral vision: rechargeable battery utilization in future energy decarbonization is mostly comprised of grid storage, transit mobility, household electricity, and industrial energy integration across multiple scenarios. With the progress of energy storage technologies, virtual power plants and other ways can ensure power supply dependability, while seamlessly transitioning to a new energy-based power system. The energy storage system is used to achieve energy/power conversion in a land transportation energy aggregation system consisting of a hybrid network of renewable energy generation, transportation power, and energy storage. Solar panels are mounted on the roof and equipped with a lithium-ion battery energy storage system in the future smart house scenario, which may be sold to the grid and used by the homeowner. For industries with historically high emissions, electrochemical energy storage can automate the development of the power resource application structure of the power resource supply system. 
In addition, the development and application of energy storage batteries require both extended cycle life and sustainability of key materials. The former relies on the excellent electrochemical performance of battery materials, while the latter relies on their recyclability.4 The recycling and resource recovery of next-generation batteries with high safety and low cost for energy storage will attract much attention worldwide after their retirement. The purpose of resource recycling is to recycle waste into materials for reuse, which makes it critical to evaluate the entire recycling process from the perspective of high-value reuse of waste. Unlike recycling, upcycling is an innovative way of transforming battery materials to allow for new efficiencies, which can result in significant energy savings and carbon emission reductions. Upcycling is the process of converting scrap electrode materials into new materials or products that are considered to have greater quality or substantially improved performance, with good environmental benefits. According to the degree of retention of the intrinsic energy of the waste and whether the product can be used at a high value, the existing recycling technologies are divided into three processes herein, i.e., complete energy retention (mainly in situ repair process), partial energy retention (mainly solid-phase conversion process), and net energy destruction (mainly leaching process). The first two steps can be considered as upgrading processes according to the current analysis.
Herein, a brief assessment of the whole life cycle of secondary batteries is initially provided to demonstrate the significance of recycling spent batteries in the transition of carbon neutrality. Section 3 summarizes a revised categorization of existing recycling technologies based on the degree of energy retention and whether the product can be used at high value and outlines the recycling theory with a view to applying it to future commercially available rechargeable batteries. In Section 4, considering carbon neutrality, we evaluate the next generation of rechargeable batteries in terms of various factors such as feedstock abundance and technology maturity, and we propose viable recycling solutions based on insightful recycling theories. In Section 5, this work provides a perspective and challenges on recycling technology development and recycling enterprises for energy storage battery recycling to accomplish more efficient scaled-up recycling and industrial carbon neutral upgrading.
2. Environmental impact of rechargeable batteries
The manufacturing phase of rechargeable batteries dominates the environmental impacts throughout the life cycle of the pack (first use in a vehicle plus reuse in a stationary application).5 The electrode, assembly, and shaping sections of the cell manufacturing process are the main sources of carbon emissions. The high-power production link includes baking after coating, drying after liquid injection, and the stage of fractionation. The cathode material consumes the greatest energy in the manufacturing of electrode materials for LIBs, followed by the anode material. The environmental friendliness of an electrode material is inversely proportional to the environmental friendliness of a single element. In this case, the processes associated with Fe smelting are environmentally favorable, and thus LiFePO4 emits the least amount of carbon. Similarly, the carbon emissions of LiNixCoyMnzO2 (0 < x, y, z < 1) materials grow as the fraction of Ni increases, whereas the carbon emissions of LiNixCoyAlzO2-related production processes are exceptionally high. Furthermore, solid-state synthesis is more environmentally friendly than hydrothermal synthesis, with solid-state LiFePO4 carbon emissions reduced by about 46% and LiCoO2 emissions lowered by about 10% compared to the latter synthesis. During the battery manufacturing phase, the creation of battery management systems (BMS) and battery assembly procedures are the largest carbon emitters, generating the most carbon dioxide across the entire life cycle of rechargeable batteries. The degree of decarbonization of the grid will have a significant impact on carbon emissions in the battery manufacturing and assembly processes when using the same battery material system. The best possible way to reduce carbon emissions is to manufacture battery cells with electricity from a cleaner energy mix, which includes green electricity for cell production as well as green power for the fabrication of necessary components upstream of the battery. Increasing the specific energy of a cell may indirectly improve the environmental performance throughout manufacturing processes. Optimizing the battery material production techniques and increasing the energy use efficiency will significantly improve the environmental performance of batteries.6
Both for initial usage and step-up use, the CO2 benefits of rechargeable batteries strongly rely on the source of electricity. It is crucial to guarantee the green supply of resources for power batteries and to increase the proportion of renewable energy in the charging chain. In terms of the source of electricity for battery charging, the environmental impact of using renewable energy sources such as biomass, wind, solar, and geothermal for battery charging is partially negligible compared to other energy sources. The usage and reuse of consumed clean energy can help alleviate global and local environmental stress. By prolonging the life of batteries and allowing better utilization of off-peak, low-cost clean electricity and intermittent renewable energy capacity, the greenhouse emission benefits of rechargeable batteries can be doubled. A heat engine is used in standard vehicle combustion, which produces energy inefficiently from gasoline or diesel sources. Presently, the average global electric car emits less CO2 than a petrol or diesel car, and by 2030, owing to a grid that is increasingly dependent on renewable energy, CO2 emissions from electric cars may be cut in half.7 The automotive industry is about to shift from inefficient, heat-engine powered vehicles to more energy efficient batteries; however, the transition from standard internal combustion engines to electric vehicles has challenges and limitations, such as static batteries that take up a lot of physical space, the range that can be driven, and the upfront cost of the car. Nevertheless, electric vehicles are becoming more prevalent in contemporary society.
Recycling has the potential to minimize CO2 emissions by extracting materials that would be used in the manufacture of fresh batteries, thus eliminating the processing of new raw materials.8 Recycling is critical for dealing with the spent battery stream and reducing the environmental effects associated with cell manufacturing and the resulting possible resource constraints. The recycling of electrode materials, which is a major part of carbon neutrality in rechargeable batteries, should be given special attention. Materials prepared from recycled materials can reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (Fig. 2a) and reduce the energy consumption (Fig. 2b) compared to the process of producing battery materials from virgin materials (V). The degree of GHG emission reduction and energy consumption reduction varies slightly for different battery materials. For example, pyrometallurgical (P), hydrometallurgical (H), and direct (D) repair technologies can reduce the emissions of LiCoO2 (LCO) materials by 8%, 12%, and 35%, while reducing the energy consumption by 21%, 16%, and 37%, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Greenhouse gas emissions of total emissions and (b) energy consumption of different ways of preparing battery materials. (c) Assessment of the economic efficiency of different recycling processes. V, P, H and D indicate the preparation of battery materials by virgin materials, pyrometallurgical process, hydrometallurgical process and direct repair process, respectively. LCO, 111, 523, 622, 811, and NCA represent LiCoO2, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2, LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2, LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2, LiNixCoyAlzO2 (x + y + z = 1), respectively. The data for Fig. 2 is calculated from the EverBatt (Software Name: SF-18-022 EverBatt) model developed by Argonne Laboratories, USA. Copyright © 2018, UChicago Argonne, LLC, All Rights Reserved.10 
Although several recycling processes exist (elemental extraction and direct regeneration), the impacts of GHG emissions, energy consumption, and economic prospects of these processes vary depending on the battery chemistry. Evaluation results may vary with the evaluation model. However, in general, the hydrometallurgical process requires twice as much energy as the pyrometallurgical process, with over 80% of the energy coming from chemicals required on the production side, while the high-temperature smelting process occupies roughly 55% of the overall pyrometallurgical process energy.9 Therefore, the consumption of chemicals needs to be minimized in hydrometallurgical recycling technology, while the heat consumption process should be replaced by renewable energy to enhance the sustainability of the pyrometallurgical recycling process. The recycling of spent LCO batteries is the most beneficial from an economic perspective. The higher the nickel content of the ternary material, the worse its recycling economics. For different systems of battery materials, the economic benefits of using pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy are similar, and direct repair technology has obvious economic benefits (Fig. 2c).
Recycling can significantly reduce the total environmental impact of the entire battery cycle, particularly in the case of resource depletion, resulting in lower “net impact” cells made mostly of plentiful and affordable ingredients (e.g., LFP and LMO), which function better without recycling.11 Hence, innovations in sustainable electrode materials and detachable battery designs are needed to decrease recycling costs and environmental impacts, while optimizing material recovery compared to disposal. The purpose of recycling is to recycle with less energy consumption and to recover all critical materials effectively without leaving a net environmental impact. Generally, recycling techniques are focused on recovering cobalt, rather than lithium, due to its lower value. However, considering the price, availability, and safety issues of the former, battery chemistries are also moving away from cobalt, causing recycling solutions to leg behind the development of battery technology. Pyrometallurgy, for example, can only recover cobalt and nickel from LIBs containing cobalt- and nickel-containing active materials, but not lithium itself. Li-containing materials can be recovered via hydrometallurgical recycling processes, but these materials must be further processed to produce viable active materials. The worth of lithium is gaining increasing attention as the price of lithium goods continues to rise. Several investigations on selective lithium recovery techniques have been carried out; however, they are still only the lab scale.
3. Available recycling technologies for LIBs
Over 20 years ago, the focus on the recovery of LIBs increased. Prior to 2008, the recycling research was mainly focused on LiCoO2 materials due to their high value and high market penetration. The objective of this phase was to effectively extract valuable metal ions, while using only a few recycling methods.12 From 2009–2018, with the emphasis on environmental protection, green and environmentally friendly technologies were pursued to efficiently recycle key materials. After 2018, the recycling of key materials also aimed to enable the further high-value utilization of recycled products. At this stage, many material scientists are also engaged in recycling research. Consequently, various recycling systems have been developed that focus on reuse in multiple contexts rather than metal extraction. In this section, we summarize the existing recycling technologies (Fig. 3) and discuss the recycling theory with the view to apply it to the upcoming battery generation.
 Fig. 3  Overview diagram of the recycling process of key materials for current lithium-ion batteries. 
3.1 Battery disassembly
The safe and efficient disassembly of power batteries is the first step to realize recycling. To save costs and maximise vehicle space, traditional battery integration technology, cell to pack (CTP) technology, and cell to car (CTC)/cell to body (CTB) technology have all evolved in the structural design of power batteries. Therefore, due to the diversity of retired battery pack brands and models, the instability of the retired state and other considerations, the current disassembly is primarily manual.13 In this case, firstly, the positive and negative diaphragms are manually separated, followed by the manual separation of the positive and negative electrodes. Manual disassembly often involves using a cutting machine to split the shell to remove the coil core. The high purity of positive powder, aluminium powder, copper powder impurities, both positive and negative powder, or copper and aluminium powder can have a greater recovery value, which is an advantage of manual disassembly. However, it is associated with safety and environmental issues, including the danger of electrocution from high voltage, groundwater contamination from the disposal of residual electrolyte, and air pollution from the incineration of the diaphragm.14 To enable the faster disassembly of battery packs, identification and detection of the remaining energy in the cells in the packs, and efficient recovery of materials from the batteries, it is necessary to use artificial intelligence,15 Internet of Things and big data algorithms16 to transform manual disassembly and mechanized disassembly to automated and intelligent disassembly methods. Battery pack data collection systems, multi-robot collaborative disassembly top cover screw systems, top cover handling systems, module handling systems, intelligent sorting systems for disassembly products, and module/cell milling systems are all included in a complete set of intelligent disassembly systems.17–19
At present, the following technical problems need to be solved urgently to achieve intelligent disassembly systems, including the design of module/battery and disassembly systems. The difficulty in removing the glue from between cells and between the module and the shell is the main technical issue with batteries. The most glue is found on the bottom of the cells or bottom of the large module in the CTP battery system, and the soft pack cells and even individual cells have strong structural or thermal conductive glue holding them together. Therefore, the removal of glue from battery packs is a major challenge in their recycling. Depending on the composition and characteristics of the adhesive, it can be roughly divided into two treatment methods, i.e., physical and chemical. Physical techniques such as low-temperature (generally below −30 °C) storage for more than 48 h to weaken or loosen the hold of the glue, and then disassembling the item to remove the battery cells. This approach is safe and causes little pollution, but it is expensive and needs substantial machinery to disassemble. The alternative is to use organic reagents to soak the internal structure of the glue to make it change, and thus lose its stickiness. This chemical method is thorough, but it consumes a lot of organic reagents and easily produces waste gas and waste liquid. Also, there are certain safety risks. Thus, the debinding of battery packs requires an effective physical or chemical removal method depending on the type of adhesive in a particular location.
Because the modification of the battery module design has a significant impact on the architecture of intelligent disassembly systems, it must be very flexible and adaptable. For example, the multi-robot collaborative disassembly system for top cover screws needs to develop a closed-loop flexible control strategy for the disassembly action of non-standard screws (those with varying degrees of grey staining, masking, etc.), and the torque and position angle during the screw removal process can be dynamically adjusted. The end-effector of the top cover handling process needs to be designed with adaptability to different types of battery packs, as well as the ability to be dynamically modified by tracking the changes in the grippe state in real-time during handling. There are great differences in the specifications, shapes and sizes of disassembled products, and thus dynamic intelligent sorting based on 3D vision is necessary. In addition, improving the compatibility between electric spindles for milling and industrial robots to ensure processing efficiency and accuracy is also a technical challenge worth considering. Front-end technology is endless, whereas the back-end lags behind. Therefore, the importance of disassembly designs is recommended as a key to improving the recyclability of the LIB supply chain to ensure that greater value is retained in the system.
3.2 Cathode
The main commercially available cathode materials are LiCoO2 (LCO), LiNixCoyMnzO2 (x + y + z = 1, 0 ≤ x, y, z, ≤ 1, NCM), LiNixCoyAlzO2 (x + y + z = 1, 0 ≤ x, y, z, ≤ 1, NCA), LiFePO4 (LFP), and LiMn2O4 (LMO), with crystal structures including layered, olivine and spinel (Fig. 4). Li is present in other materials and occupies the octahedral central site, with the exception of LMO, where it occupies the tetrahedral central site. According to the degree of metal ion polyhedron retention and the degree of material intrinsic energy retention, the recovery process can be classified as follows: complete metal ion polyhedron retention (i.e., complete material intrinsic energy retention), partial metal ion polyhedron retention (i.e., partial material intrinsic energy retention), and complete metal ion polyhedron destruction (i.e., complete material intrinsic energy loss). There are various recycling processes associated with each of these by physical, chemical and combined physical–chemical processes.
 Fig. 4  (a) Generalized conceptual diagram of recycling technology for (a) LiCoO2 material, (b) LiFePO4 material, (c) LiNixCoyMnzO2 material, and (d) LiMn2O4 material. 

Direct repair and upcycling for full energy retention strategies. 
The structure and composition of the degraded cathode materials significantly change compared to their pristine form. In addition to the Jahn–teller effect leading to Mn deficiency in LMO, both layered and olivine-structured materials exhibit a large amount of Li deficiencies. The direct repair method does not destroy the material structure, but completely retains the energy stored in the metal polyhedron. The missing components of the material are directly replenished and repaired at the molecular scale. The components and structure of the degraded cathode material are recovered, and the following heat treatment techniques are applied to encourage a phase change, leading to full recovery of its electrochemical characteristics. The content of the missing component in the material is determined in advance, and the corresponding compound (usually one Li-containing substance) is added and mixed in the solid state before high-temperature sintering, which corresponds to solid-phase sintering repair technology. Alternatively, the degraded material is mixed with various lithium salts and heated at low temperature to form a uniform molten salt system, and then sintered at high temperature, which is the molten salt sintering repair technique. Also, the material is placed in a pre-formulated Li-containing solution under pressure to replenish the missing components, filtered and dried, and then roasted at high temperature, corresponding to the hydrothermal annealing repair technique. The scrap and lithium-containing solution are used as the working electrode and electrolyte, respectively. Furthermore, waste is supplemented with lithium under electrochemical driving, followed by high-temperature solid-phase transformation, which corresponds to electrochemical annealing repair technology. The techniques and characteristics of these four repair processes are summarized in Table 1. Some representative processes are discussed in detail below.
Table 1 Summary of the repair process reported in the literature




Cathode
Optimized conditions
Test conditions
Performance




— indicates ‘not specified’ in the literature.




LCO20
1:1.05 in molar ratio of Li/Co, Li2CO3, 900 °C for 12 h in air atmosphere
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 30 mA g−1 at 25 °C
152.4 mA h g−1


LFP23
Scrap LiFePO4 with doping of new LiFePO4 at the ratio of 3:7, 700 °C for 12 h in N2
2.5–4.1 V vs. Li+/Li, 0.1C
144 mA h g−1


NCM62241
1:1.05 in molar ratio of Li/(Ni + Co + Mn), Li2CO3, 200 °C and 500 °C for 3 h under air atmosphere, and 900 °C for 10 h under air atmosphere
2.7–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —
162 mA h g−1 and maintain 150 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2C


NCM62226
Spent cathode material powder was mixed with LiOH·H2O in the ratio of (Ni + Co + Mn)/Li = 1:1.03 and calcined at 850 °C in an oxygen-rich atmosphere for 5 h
2.8–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 180 mA h g−1
153.82 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 97.74 after 200 cycles at 1C


LCO42
LiCl and CH4N2O were mixed in a molar ratio of 3:1 to form a DES after heating at 100 °C for 1 h, DES:LiCoO2 mass ratio of 22.25:1, 850 °C in air for 2 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
134.4 mA h g−1 at 0.1C,


NCM52329
0.84:0.16 in molar ratio of LiOH and Li2CO3, 440 °C for 5 h, 850 °C for 12 h
2.8–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 180 mA h g−1
146.3 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 89.06 after 200 cycles at 1C


NCM52328
3:2 in molar ratio of LiNO3 and LiOH, 300 °C for 2 or 4 h for relithiation, and 850 °C in oxygen for 4 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
149.3 mA h g−1 in the first cycle at 1C, 134.6 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1C.


NCM52330
A molar ratio of LiNO3, LiOH, and CH3COOLi = 9:6:10, 400 °C for 45 min under air atmosphere, 850 °C for 4 h under O2 atmosphere
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
160 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, capacity retention rate of 93.7% after 100 cycles at 0.5C


LCO36
5 M LiOH, 200 °C for 20 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
124.3 mA h g−1 for the 40th cycle at 0.2C


LCO43
4 M LiOH, hydro 220 °C for 45 min, 800 °C for 4 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
141.7 mA h g−1 at 5C, capacity retention rate of 95.5% after 100 cycles at 1C


LCO32
4 M LiOH or 1 M LiOH + 1.5 M Li2SO4, hydro 220 °C for 2 h + 800 °C for 4 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
153.1 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 135.1 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1C


NCM52325
4 M LiOH, hydro 220 °C for 2 h, 850 °C for 4 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
146.6 mA h g−1 in the first cycle at 1C and 130.4 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles


NCM11133
0.1 M LiOH + 3.9 M KOH, hydro 220 °C for 2 h, and 850 °C for 4 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
156.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 93.2% after 50 cycles at 1C.


LFP9
0.2 M LiOH + 0.08 M citric acid, 400 °C to 800 °C for 2 h in nitrogen
2.5–3.8 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 170 mA h g−1
An initial capacity of 156 mA h g−1 and maintained at 155 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5C


LCO44
Li:Co = 1.03, DMSO-LiBr system, 500 °C for 12 h
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
155.384 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 90.79% after 100 cycles at 1C


NCM11135
Stoichiometric amounts of NCM black powder and LiBr were mixed in ionic liquids, 150–250 °C for 6–24 h, 300 °C and annealed in oxygen with Li2CO3 at 850 °C
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
173.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C


LCO39
0.3 M Li2SO4, 0.42 mA cm−2, 700 °C for 2 h in air
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —
136 mA h g−1 at 0.2C


LCO38
1.5 M Li2SO4 + 0.5 M LiOH, 0.12 mA cm−2, 700 °C for 6 h in air
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —
140 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 93% after 100 cycles at 0.1C


LFP37
Li2SO4, 1 mA cm−1 500 °C for 2 h in Ar
2.5–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —
135.2 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 95.3% after 500 cycles at 1C






Solid-phase sintering repair process. 
The solid-phase sintering method is the simplest among the four repair methods. Following the principle of “filling the gap”, a single lithium-containing substance is added quantitatively, and then the structural transformation of the material is completed by heat treatment. The main sources of lithium include Li2CO3, LiOH, and LiNO3. Nie20et al. controlled the Li/Co molar ratio of 1.05 in the mixture by adding a certain amount of Li2CO3 based on the determination of the Li/Co molar ratio in the scrap LCO powder. The electrochemical properties of LiCoO2 regenerated at 900 °C for 12 h were comparable to that of commercial LiCoO2 (140–155 mA h g−1, coin cell) and satisfy the commercial requirements for reuse. The Li/Co molar ratios of the regenerated LiCoO2 cathodes were >0.9 for the pre-controlled Li/Co molar ratios of 1, 1.05 and 1.1, indicating that the solid-phase restoration effectively converted the Co3O4 heterogeneous phase formed in the material due to the decomposition of LixCoO2 (0 < x < 1).21 The repaired LiCoO2 cathode material exhibited better cycling stability, lower electrochemical impedance and faster Li+ diffusion rate. Notably, the repaired materials with an Li/Co molar ratio of 1.05 had a higher Li recharge efficiency and electrochemical cycling stability. Small amounts of Al and Cu residues can improve the electrochemical properties of the repaired cathode materials. However, elemental Al needs to be controlled to less than 0.4 wt% and elemental Cu to less than 0.6 wt%.22 These findings have significant reference value for researchers looking into how impurities affect the electrochemical performance of materials used in restored cathodes. Compared to recovery processes based on net energy destruction, such as pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy, the solid-phase sintering repair method produces LiCoO2 cathodes with significantly lower energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Song23et al. reported the direct repair of spent LiFePO4 (LFP) with new LFP by solid-phase sintering. The pure-phase homogeneous morphology of the recycled LiFePO4 cells met the basic requirements for reuse in all properties.
Unlike LCO, the cycled NCM cathode requires the conversion of local rock salt MO (M = Ni, Co, and Mn) to layered LiMO2. Prior to disassembly, the spent battery is over-discharged to 2.0 V. The Li content in the spent LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NCM111) material shows a considerable increase after pretreatment due to Li+ insertion. The residual lithium salts (e.g., Li2CO3 and LiOH) on the material surface can act as a lithium source to supply the lacking lithium in the lattice. The integrity of the layered structure of the NCM111 material can be improved without the additional consumption of other lithium salts during the solid-phase sintering repair process under an oxygen atmosphere.24 This novel method without additional lithium supplementation provides new insight as a direct repair strategy for spent cathode materials. Chen25et al. mixed degraded NCM111 and LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 (NCM523) particles with a predetermined amount of Li+ salt for direct sintering to achieve a target molar ratio between Li and transition metal ions in an air and oxygen atmosphere, respectively (Fig. 5a). The results showed that both materials are insensitive to the O2 partial pressure and the electrochemical performance of the waste was recovered (Fig. 5b).25 Roasting of LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 (NCM622) in a pure oxygen atmosphere is required because a higher nickel content requires an increased oxygen partial pressure.26 The higher the nickel content, the lower the sintering temperature.27 The melting point of Li2CO3 is 720 °C, which is higher than that of LiOH of 462 °C. The repair of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 (NCM811) by solid-phase sintering has not been reported to date, but it can be foreseen that the repair of NCM811 should be supplemented by LiOH and roasted in a pure oxygen atmosphere.
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the crystal structure change of NCM523 after cycling and repaired by solid-phase sintering method. (b) Cycling performance of pristine, non-treated, and regenerated NCM111 samples at 1C; HT-SA: hydrothermal treatment at 220 °C for 4 h, followed by annealing at 850 °C for 4 h; SS-air: sintering at 850 °C for 12 h in air; and SS-oxygen: sintering at 850 °C for 12 h in oxygen. Reprinted from ref. 25. Copyright © 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the ternary molten salt approach to regenerate S-NCM and the microscopic evolution of the NCM cathode structure. Reprinted from ref. 30. Copyright © 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic illustration of the solution relithiation process. (e) The Evolution of LFP composition during relithiation at different temperatures. (f) Saturation vapor pressure of water under various temperatures associated with the equipment (schematic) of choice for high pressure (>1 bar) and low pressure (<1 bar). Reprinted from ref. 9. Copyright © 2020, Elsevier Inc. (g) Schematic diagram of resting-output current lithiation for regenerating retired LiFePO4 battery. (h) Long cycle performance of regenerated LiFePO4 obtained from the applied current of −1 mA at 1C and 5C. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Molten salt repair process. 
The molten salt repair method generally uses waste NCM523 as a raw material and an excess of Li salt as the molten salt (Fig. 5c). A uniform molten salt system is formed after heating at low temperature for a certain period. Then, the molten salt system is sintered in a high temperature environment to complete the transformation of the material structure. The rapid reaction process of heating at low temperatures provides more heat, while also facilitating the rapid phase formation of the feedstock and increasing the utilization of the heat of the low temperature eutectic. Chen28et al. mixed degraded NCM523 materials with an excess eutectic Li salt mixture composed of LiNO3 and LiOH in a molar ratio of 3:2. This mixture was heated at 300 °C for 2 or 4 h for relithiation, and then washed with deionized water to remove the residual Li salts. The relithiated NCM523 was sintered with 5% excess of Li2CO3 (to compensate for the Li loss at high temperature) at 850 °C in oxygen for 4 h. The NCM523 cathode particles with significant Li loss (≈40%) and capacity degradation (≈50%) could be successfully regenerated to achieve their original composition and crystal structures, leading to the effective recovery of their capacity, cycling stability, and rate capability to the levels of the pristine materials. In addition to eutectic solvents composed of LiNO3 and LiOH, eutectic solvent systems of LiOH and Li2CO329 as well as LiNO3, LiOH and CH3COOLi30 have also been shown to successfully repair degraded NCM523 materials. The electrochemical performance of the repaired NCM523 cathode was comparable to that of the commercial NCM523 cathode, which demonstrates the feasibility of the direct repair of spent NCM523 cathodes by the molten salt method. Chen31et al. showed that NCM523 repaired by solid-phase sintering method still showed inhomogeneous crystal sizes. The molten salt repair method was effective in removing F-containing impurities from the scrap surface. The better electrochemical performance of the repaired material by the molten salt method was attributed to the efficient regeneration of the spent cathode material in the molten salt liquid medium. However, the molten salt repair method has still obvious shortcomings. After a period of low-temperature roasting, the samples have to be cleaned with deionized water to remove the excess Li salts. If the excess Li salts added during the repair process cannot be recycled, it will waste resources and increase the cost. Therefore, this technique is complex and costly compared to the solid-phase repair process.


Hydrothermal annealing repair process. 
The hydrothermal annealing method can be used for the repair of spent LCO,32 NCM,33 LMO,34 and LFP9 materials (Fig. 5d). In a sealed pressure vessel, the lithium-containing solution is used as the solvent and the hydrothermal reaction is carried out under high temperature and pressure conditions for lithium replenishment (Fig. 5e). After separation and drying, the material phase conversion is completed by roasting at high temperature. The lithium-containing solution can be a soluble single salt or a mixture of multiple salts, or a substance that is soluble in other solvents (e.g., ionic liquids).35 The single-step separation and repair of spent LiCoO2 from pressure vessels was reported in 2004.36 The hydrothermal experiments were performed at 200 °C for 20 h in a 5.0 M LiOH solution. No external pressure or gas injection was added during the hydrothermal reaction. The pressure in the autoclave was only attributed to the evaporation of water at 200 °C. Distilled water and ultrasonic cleaners were used to eliminate residual LiOH from the solids. The repaired LiCoO2 phase exhibited the initial discharge specific capacity of 144.0 mA h g−1 and 92.2% discharge capacity retention after 40 cycles. Impurities were still present in the repaired material due to the lack of high temperature transformation. Subsequent processes for annealing LCO32 and NCM52325 at 800 °C and 850 °C, respectively, after hydrothermal heating were reported. The spinel phase and rock salt phase can be effectively transformed into a layered structure. Compared with the conventional solid-state repair process, the annealing temperature was reduced and the annealing time decreased. However, research on how to manage the nucleation process or the variables that affect crystal formation in the context of hydrothermal lithium replenishment is scarce. The hydrothermal lithium replenishment process requires high-temperature and high-pressure steps, making it very dependent on the production equipment and energy intensive, which also affects and hinders the practical large-scale application of the hydrothermal annealing repair method. Therefore, researchers have developed a low-temperature, low-pressure hydrothermal repair process, i.e., hydrothermal conditions with temperature below 100 °C and pressure close to 1 standard atmosphere (Fig. 5f).9


Electrochemical repair process. 
Electrochemical annealing repair methods for waste LCO38 and LFP37 have been reported. The entire recovery system consists of the spent cathode material electrode as the cathode (also the working electrode for Li+ insertion), a platinum plate as the anode electrode, and Ag/AgCl reference electrode saturated with KCl (0.199 V vs. NHE) mounted near the cathode. All three electrodes are immersed in a certain concentration of Li2SO4 solution, and a constant cathodic current is applied to insert Li+ until the cathodic potential reaches the steady state. The electrode material after lithium replenishment needs to be annealed in a certain atmosphere to fully restore the crystal structure of the material, and thus the Li element can be more tightly arranged in the structure. Peng37et al. developed a process for spontaneous lithium intercalation and electrochemically driven intercalation to achieve spent LFP restoration. The reactions occurring in the process are as follows: initially, Li2SO4 is electrolyzed into Li+ and SO42− in aqueous solution, and then Li(4H2O)+ tetrahydrate is formed due to the instability of Li+. When no current is applied, Li+ is intercalated in the LFP material spontaneously. With a current input, Li+ rapidly diffuses in the defective structure of the lattice (Fig. 5g). These two combined processes achieve lithium replenishment of the retired cathode material. On the one hand, the resting process provides a buffer time for the permeation process between the electrode and electrolyte and reduces the interfacial resistance. This contributes to the efficiency of current utilization. On the other hand, due to the concentration gradient in the quiescence process, Li+ in the solution can spontaneously migrate to the lithium-deficient LFP, thus reducing the subsequent application current time. The repaired LFP was consistent with the original LFP cathode composition in terms of structure, composition, and electrochemical properties. It exhibited an excellent discharge capacity of 135.2 mA h g−1 at 1C and a capacity retention rate of 95.30% after 500 cycles (Fig. 5h). Given that more Li+ ions will diffuse more easily into the defective structure of the LixCoO2 lattice, the higher the Li2SO4 concentration, the shorter the time for the spent LixCoO2 electrode to reach the stabilization potential of 1.05 V. The Li to Co molar ratio of the sample after electrochemical lithium replenishment was 1:1, confirming the successful insertion of Li in the spent LixCoO2 electrode.39 The whole process requires a lower concentration of Li2SO4 solution, which can be recycled. With further optimization of the power system, this may improve the economic and environmental benefits of recycling campaigns.
Furthermore, a new in situ electrochemical repair strategy based on a novel functionalized pre-lithiated separator (FPS) was proposed by Guo et al. to achieve the direct reuse of Li-deficient LFP electrodes in new cells.40 A thin layer of lithium-rich (lithium oxalate, Li2C2O4) material was coated on a commercial separator to prepare the FPS. The FPS replaced the traditional commercial separator and was reassembled into a new cell with the degraded LFP electrode and a fresh graphite anode. After electrochemical cycle activation, the regenerated cells exhibited considerable capacity recovery and excellent long-cycle stability. The irreversible electrochemical decomposition of Li2C2O4 on the FPS provides additional Li+ to compensate for the Li-deficient LFP in the initial cycle. In this case, the Li-deficient LFP electrodes can be directly repaired by an in situ electrochemical recycling process. The direct repair of Li-deficient LFP electrode materials using this in situ repair approach opens new possibilities for the recycling of LIBs and eliminates the need for high-temperature thermally driven conversion.


Upcycling process. 
Upcycling, also known as creative reuse, is the process of converting scrap into products with higher electrochemical properties (or higher quality), while fully retaining its intrinsic energy. Upcycled materials include functional products and energy storage materials. Spent LFP and LMO powder scraped from Al foil can be directly used as adsorbents,45 and LCO46 materials can be used to activate S(IV) to drive the effective degradation of organic pollutants without additional treatment. Both adsorbents have stable adsorption capacity and potential for heavy metal removal in water. Current methods of upcycling to energy storage materials include single crystallization, bulk doping, surface coating, and cation disorder of the scrap material.47–49 The upcycled products are mostly used as cathodes for lithium-ion or sodium-ion batteries (SIBs). A summary of the relevant recovery processes is presented in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the upcycling process reported in the literature




Cathode
Optimized conditions
Product
Test conditions
Performance




— indicates ‘not specified’ in the literature.




NCM62250
2:3 molar ratio of LiOH:LiNO3, the molar ratio of 1:5.7 for NCM622 to lithium molten salts, 500 °C for 5 h, and then 850 °C for 11 h
Single-crystal NCM 622
2.8–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 170 mA h g−1
155.1 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 94.3% after 240 cycles at 1C


NCM11152
NCM111 mixed with NiO and LiOH, 20 mol% excess of LiOH and 10 mol% of Li2SO4 were added as fluxing agents. 900 °C for 10 h under O2
Single-crystal NCM111
2.5–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 175 mA h g−1
150 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, capacity retention rate of 93.7% after 100 cycles at 0.5C


NCM52351
Li:TM = 1.1.05, Li2CO3, ball-milling to activate the recycled materials (400 rpm, 12 h, ethanol), 950 °C for 2 min in air
Single-crystal NCM523
3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —
140 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, capacity retention rate of 97% after 50 cycles at 0.2C


LCO53
Li2CO3 + Na2CO3, 850 °C for 12 h in air
Na doped Li1−xNaxCoO2
3.0–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1
151.5 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 87.6% after 100 cycles at 1C


LCO54
Li2CO3 + MgO, 900 °C for 12 h
Mg doped Li1−2xMgxCoO2
2.8–4.6 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 270 mA h g−1
202.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, capacity retention rate of 82.7% after 50 cycles at 0.2C


LFP60
Li2CO3 + V2O5 + NH4H2PO4 + 15 wt% glucose, 450 °C for 4 h, and then 7000 °C for 9 h in Ar
V doped LFP
2.5–4.2 V vs. Li+/Li, —
134.3 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 99.1% after 200 cycles at 1C


LCO61
Li:M = 1.03 (M = Co + Mg + Ti), ball milling of 1 h, and then calcined at 1000 °C for 10 h in air atmosphere
Mg/Ti co-doped
3.0–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, —
177.5 mA h g−1 for initial capacity, capacity retention rate of 96% after 100 cycles


LCO62
Li:M = 1.03 (M = Co + Mg + Ti), ball milling for 1 h, calcined at 1000 °C for 10 h, and then the obtained powder stirred in C9H21AlO3 solution for 6 h, 650 °C for 10 h under and air atmosphere
Mg/Ti doped and Al coated LiCoO2
3.0–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, —
174.29 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 96.77% after 200 cycles at 1C


LCO63
Nickel and manganese acetates (Mn:Ni = 3:1) in DI water, 3.0 M LiOH and 3.0 M KOH, hydrothermally treated at 190 °C for 16 h, 900 °C for 4 h in air
Ni–Mn co-doped LCO
3.0–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 140 mA h g−1
160.23 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 91.2% after 100 cycles at 1C


NCM52359
The spent cathode material, LiOH, NiO, MnO2 and NH4H2PO4 were dissolved in deionized (DI) water, 450 °C for 5 h, and then heated to 850 °C and kept for 15 h under O2 atmosphere
PO43− polyanion doped NCM523
2.7–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —
189.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C


LFP64
Na2CO3, NaF, and Li1−xFePO4 were ball-milled under an Ar atmosphere at a speed of 300 rpm for 10 h, pre-sintered at 350 °C under Ar atmosphere for 4 h, ball-milled again for 20 h at a speed of 600 rpm, and then heated for 10 h at 700 °C in an Ar atmosphere.
Carbon-coated Na2FePO4F
2–4.2 V vs. Na+/Na, 1C = 124 mA h g−1
116.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C


LCO65
Li2CO3, n(Li):n(Co) = 1:1, 800 °C, Al2O3 and the regenerated LCO and in a mole ratio of n(Al):n(Co) = 0.01:1, 800 °C for 5 h in air
Al2O3-coated LCO
3–4.2 V vs. Li+/Li, 20 mA g−1
136.8 mA h g−1, 90.1% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 20 mA g−1


NCM47
NH4VO3, 350 °C for 4 h
V2O5-coated NCM
2.5–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 278 mA h g−1
156.3 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.1C with the capacity retention of 90.6%


LFP66
Cathode and anode materials were ground and dried
Recycled LFP/graphite
2–5 V vs. Li+/Li
117.4 mA h g−1 at 25 mA g−1, 78% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 100 mA g−1


LMO67
800 °C for 10 h
Recycled LiMn2O4
1.6–4.2 V vs. Na+/Na
163.2 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1, 176.3 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1


LMO68
Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O and LiOH·H2O, 700 °C for 15 h in air
Li/Mn disordered LMO
1–4.7 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 148 mA h g−1
207.8 mA h g−1 after the activation cycles at 0.1C (1C = 148 mA h g−1), 196.1 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles at 1C, corresponding to a capacity retention of 94.37%.




The current ternary cathode materials are secondary particles formed by the agglomeration of primary particles with a low compaction density. It is easy to rupture when the battery pole piece is under high-pressure working conditions. Consequently, this increases the contact and reaction between the internal primary particles and the electrolyte, thus accelerating the capacity decay and triggering gas production problems. It is possible to intentionally develop single crystals by regulating the reaction parameters during the direct repair process, which will enhance the compaction density as well as the cycling performance and safety of the material. The common methods for the direct repair of waste to single crystals include molten salt annealing, solid-phase sintering and flux method. For example, initially, isolated NCM powder was mechanically crushed to obtain primary particles. Subsequently, the LiOH–LiNO3 molten salt strategy was used to regenerate the spent NCM cathode material into a brand-new single crystal cathode material (Fig. 6a). The regenerated NCM622 cathode material was composed of plate-like single-crystal particles with exposed (010) planes. This process is also applicable to the mono-crystallization of NCM523, NCM622, NCM811 and mixed scrap with appropriate changes in roasting conditions.50 The collected NCM523 cathode material was ground with additional Li2CO3 according to an Li/TM molar ratio of 1:1.05 to activate the recycled material by high energy ball milling (400 rpm, 12 h, ethanol).51 Subsequent sintering at high temperature was performed to complete the single-crystal conversion. The degree of cation mixing in the single crystal material was reduced and the coordination structure of the recycled material was nearly identical to that of the commercial material. Ma52et al. added NiO and LiOH to control the molar ratio of the elements in the feedstock and used Li2SO4 as a flux. The transformed material was washed and dried with deionized water. Subsequently, a high-speed planetary mill was employed to produce materials with a more uniform particle size distribution. The commercially available NCM111 was successfully converted into single-crystal NCM622 and NCM811 materials. This method can also convert mixed LMO and NCM11, and mixed LMO and LCO materials into single-crystal NCM622. The resulting single-crystalline material exhibited higher capacity and a cycling performance comparable to its commercial polycrystalline counterparts. This method also converts spent NCM111 to single-crystal NCM622; however, there are currently no studies on its improved electrochemical properties. The single-crystal material obtained by conversion showed excellent characteristics in terms of cycling stability and capacity retention. However, the experimental parameters are difficult to control to obtain a single-crystal pure phase. Also, due to the small particle size of single crystals, the discharge specific capacity is still challenging to meet the practical requirements. Therefore, further research into the revolutionary idea of obtaining single-crystal materials directly from retired cathode materials is still required.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the polycrystalline NCM622 crystal structure and morphology evolution during the degradation and regeneration processes. Reproduced from ref. 50. with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the recovery mechanism of the spent NCM523 during cycling process by bulk doping. Reprinted from ref. 59. Copyright © 2020, Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic illustration of synthesis process of c-rhSG and NFPF-BM@xC from spent LIBs and their configuration for the SIB. Reproduced from ref. 64. Copyright © 2022, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic illustration of the upcycling strategy constructed for degraded LMO materials. Reproduced from ref. 68. Copyright © 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Furthermore, considering the poor structural stability of active materials during cycling, researchers have modified the retired materials by bulk doping for upgrading and repairing. Different doping elements can be selected to play different roles in the materials. In the case of LCO materials, mainly cation doping is employed to stabilize the material layered structure and improve the cyclic stability of the material. Low valence cations (e.g., Na+ and Mg2+) are preferentially doped into the Li sites to stabilize the lattice structure.53 Li2CO3 and MgO were used to control the element ratio, and high-temperature solid-phase transformation was used to upgrade and fix the Mn2+ doping of used LMO materials.54 Mg2+-doped LCO materials can be upgraded to high-voltage materials. The upcycled materials with 5% Mg2+ doping exhibit a high discharge capacity of 202.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2C (1C = 270 mA h g−1) in the voltage window of 3.0–4.6 V.54 This is because the scrap supplemented with different metal ions was repaired at high temperature, eliminating cracks and nano-impurity particles on the surface of the waste material, and thereby restoring the layered structure and electrochemical performance. The incorporation of Mg2+ can inhibit the release of lattice oxygen and stabilize the surface structure. Similarly, the upcycling of scrap by Na+ doping can be achieved by adding Na2CO3. The Li1-xNaxCoO2 cathodes showed an ordered layered structure, and good discharge capacity and cycling stability, especially at a high current density (10C, 3–4.3 V) and high voltage (1C, 3–4.5 V).53 In addition to single cation doping, cation mixed co-doping including Mg/Ti doping and Ni/Mn doping, is also possible. Mg/Ti-doped LCO on the Co site showed the best high-voltage performance due to the suppression of phase transition, enhanced structural stability, and enhanced Li+ diffusion. The Ni/Mn co-doped LCO materials obtained by hydrothermal annealing method exhibited excellent electrochemical properties. Anion doping is used to increase the bonding strength between transition metal elements and anions by replacing oxygen elements with more electronegative elements. The commonly used doping anions in the material development process are F−, Br−, BO33− and poly anions.55–58 They can effectively inhibit the dissolution of transition metal elements, prevent the corrosion of HF as a by-product of the electrolyte reaction, stabilize the cathode–electrolyte interface, and improve the cycle performance of the material. In terms of recycling study, anion doping (such as PO43− polyanions) enhances the thermal stability of the H3 phase of the NCM523 material in terms of its microstructure, thereby improving the electrochemical performance of the material under long-term cycling and high current density (Fig. 6b). The rock salt and spinel phases could be transformed back to the original layer structure with the oxidation of Ni2+ to Ni3+, while eliminating the surface passivation layer. The reconstructed materials exhibited excellent electrochemical properties. The specific discharge capacity at 0.1C rate was as high as 189.8 mA h g−1, and the capacity retention after 1C cycles at 25 °C and 55 °C was 83.2% (300 cycles) and 85.3% (200 cycles), respectively.59 In comparison, the upcycling process by doping maximizes the utilization of the scrap material and results in excellent electrochemical properties at high voltage or high multiplicity, which provides a new perspective on the non-structural damage recycling of scrap materials. The bulk doping procedure is a readily implemented modification method given that it is simple to operate and the modification effect is obvious. The use of upcycling of scrap via bulk phase doping is highly likely given the growth potential of this technique.
To physically or chemically isolate the cathode material from the electrolyte and prevent it from coming into contact with the electrolyte directly, surface coating is applied to the surface of the cathode material. Simultaneously, it protects the structure of the cathode material and prevents the lattice of the active material from being destroyed during the charging and discharging process. Furthermore, the electrochemical properties such as dispersibility, thermal stability and discharge rate of the cathode material are improved. The surface coating materials applied in the development of new materials include carbon materials, phosphates, fluorides, and metal oxides.69–71 Alternatively, in the case of recycling, it is mainly coated with carbon materials and metal oxides.47 The electrochemical properties of LiCoO2 were improved by coating the surface of the repaired LCO materials with Al2O3 particles.65 Also, Na2FePO4F was prepared from Li-deficient Li1−xFePO4, and the carbon-coated Na2FePO4F material was prepared using different ball milling routes. The material exhibited excellent reversibility and ultra-long cycle stability for sodium-ion batteries (Fig. 6c). It exhibited excellent sodium storage performance when assembled with a full battery of graphene oxide prepared from waste graphite.64 This material was also modified by elemental doping and surface coating. The co-modified LCO material contributed a discharge specific capacity of 174.29 mA h g−1 in the voltage range of 3–4.5 V.62 Direct surface coating of the scrap was achieved without traditional leaching and resynthesis procedures, completely retaining the energy of the bulk waste, and thus reducing the energy consumption and contributing to environmental protection.
In addition to the introduction of other atoms, the structural stability can be altered by changing the arrangement of the waste intrinsic atoms. Cation disorder (excess Li at Mn sites and Li/Mn exchange) can essentially suppress the Jahn–Teller distortion in Mn3+ octahedra. This activates the pristine octahedral vacancies in spinel LMO to serve as additional Li+ storage sites. Double capacity with good reversible cycling stability was obtained in micro-sized LMO.72 For the first time, we found Mn deficiency and cation disorder in degraded LMO materials. The degraded crystal structure was repaired by an in situ upgrading process using low carbon and economical technologies (Fig. 6d). This process enhanced the disorder of Li/Mn atoms, effectively suppressed Jahn–Teller distortion and two-phase phase transition, and activated the activity of the disordered Li. The repaired disordered LMO material exhibited a higher capacity and stability than the ordered LMO material.68 The atomic disorder structure also provides guidance for the design of battery materials and promotes the sustainable development of future green Li-ion batteries. In addition to upcycling scrap for reuse in battery systems, LCO powder can also be used as a lubricant additive. This new novel solid lubricant reduces the coefficient of friction between two steel surfaces by 85%.73
The bulk doping and surface coating strategies are simpler and easier to control processes among the various direct modification and repair methods for waste cathode materials. This is also the approach currently used in industry to produce electrode feedstock. However, a single modification does not produce ideal results. Accordingly, both methods can be developed in the future to achieve co-modification to enhance the structural stability and electrochemical performance of the repair materials.


Partial energy retention for selective transformation strategies. 
Based on the selective retention transformation technique shown in Fig. 4, the TM-O bond can be retained. The partial intrinsic energy retention technique of the material mainly refers to the selective destruction of the Li tetrahedral or Li octahedral structure to release the energy stored in it. Simultaneously, the energy stored in the transition metal octahedra is preserved. The separated product can be used directly without any other chemical or physical treatment. In addition to the main body of the material, a certain amount of heterogeneous phase is present in the aged cathode material. Based on the principle of maximizing the energy retention to reduce the energy consumption, the transition metal oxide heterogeneous phases should also be retained in the recycling process. Previously, we reported a selective recycling process based on co-octahedral retention conversion for the selective conversion of layered and spinel structures. The key reactions are shown in the following two reaction equations. (1) (2)where TM denotes transition metals and x is a specific value related to the type of transition metal element in the cathode material. When NiSO4 is used as the conversion agent, the energy of the TM octahedra in NCM523 can be retained. The remaining material after lithium extraction can be further synthesized into high-performance high nickel ternary materials.74 LCO was converted to Li2SO4 and nano-Co3O4 at high temperature using CoSO4 as the conversion agent. Nano-octahedral Co3O4 shows good cycling stability and rate capability when used as an anode electrode for LIBs. Li2SO4 solution can be precipitated to prepare Li2CO3, and the nano-octahedral Co3O4 obtained by the high-temperature solid-phase regeneration of LCO (Fig. 7a), which has a significantly reduced particle size and excellent layered structure. It shows better electrochemical properties than commercial LCO.75 Furthermore, different metal oxides can be obtained by using transition metal sulfate as the transforming agent, which exhibits excellent Li storage performance as the anode of LIBs.76 This process also preserves the energy stored in the transition metal octahedron when it is used to selectively transform NCM materials.77 Economic and environmental assessments indicate that this one-step recycling process for the direct conversion of waste into usable materials has significant environmental benefits and reduced energy consumption compared to battery materials obtained from raw ore. By drastically lowering the energy consumption and CO2 emissions in comparison to traditional hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes, it offers further economic and environmental benefits (Fig. 7b).76 This work not only provides a one-step method for recycling aged lithium-ion battery materials, but also offers new possibilities for the preparation and application of anode materials. The environmental impact of the smelting and recycling process of raw Mn-based materials is less than that of Co-based materials. It requires less energy consumption and produces lower exhaust emissions, which can be effectively converted to a more environmentally friendly manganese-based material. This also points to the direction for the research on the design of green battery materials.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the intrinsic recycling concept of scrap Li1−xCoO2 powder, where red, green, and purple spheres represent O, Co, and Li atoms, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Conversion mechanism of the selective recycling process based on co-octahedral retention conversion. Reproduced from ref. 76. Copyright © 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. Electrochemical (c) lithium storage (2.5–4.2 V, 1C = 170 mA g−1) and (d) sodium storage (1.5–4.0 V, 1C= 154 mA g−1) performances of the recycled samples at 1C. Reproduced from ref. 78 © 2022, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (e) Schematic of an aqueous Zn-air battery, charging and discharging curves and calculated power density of the Zn–air batteries. Reproduced from ref. 79. Copyright © 2022, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature. 
In addition, Zeng78et al. reported the oxidative recovery of LFP with complete retention of energy within P tetrahedra and Fe octahedra. The mixture of LFP and graphene was stirred in an aqueous solution of Na2S2O8 for 23 h, and the graphene-coated oxide (FePO4-GO) was obtained after filtration and separation. The in situ introduced graphene could maintain the hybridization stability with FePO4, which greatly improved the electrochemical properties of the recovered products. Its nanostructure not only facilitated the exchange of Li+ or Na+ between the FePO4 interfaces, but also withstood large changes in the electrode volume during desorption and insertion, thus enhancing the kinetic and structural stability of Li+ or Na+ storage (Fig. 7c and d). This work provides a simple one-pot method to recycle spent battery materials, retaining some of the energy in the scrap material, while obtaining high performance Li+ and Na+ storage materials in situ.
The reduction heat treatment can selectively convert the waste cathode material into lithium salts and transition metal oxides. Transition metals are excellent catalysts and energy storage devices. Ultrafast carbon thermal shock treatment selectively converts NCM811 into Ni/Ni–Mn–Co–O (N/NMCO) composites.79 Similarly, the energy stored in the transition metal octahedra is retained. N/NMCO composites can also be used as both cathodes and anodes in an overall water-splitting system, and as a cathode in zinc–air batteries (Fig. 7e). Based on a suitable reduction heat treatment, the recycled transition metal oxides can be directly used as catalysts for the selective hydrogenation of bio-based furfural and other biomass-derived aldehydes and ketones.80


Net energy loss for element extraction strategies. 
Lithium (Li), nickel (Ni), cobalt (Co), manganese (Mn), copper (Cu), aluminum (Al), iron (Fe), and other valuable metals used in cathodes are smelted from a limited number of minerals. The most critical step of the elemental extraction strategy based on net energy loss is the extraction of valuable metals from the cathode material through solvent conversion to aqueous solution or high temperature conversion to alloys or/and metal elements. It is presumed that the chemical bond between the metal and oxygen in the waste material will be completely destroyed chemically. The methods adopted include a combination of one or more methods of pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, and biological metallurgy, such as combined pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy. The commonality of the three main recovery technologies is the need to convert high-valent transition metal ions to low-valent states. The primary chemical processes of pyrometallurgy can be determined from a thermodynamic perspective, together with the theoretical reaction temperature.77,81–83 The redox capacity of additives is usually considered in hydrometallurgy, while the rationality of the recovery technology is analyzed from the perspective of reaction kinetics.84–86 Biological metallurgy, which can be classified as hydrometallurgy in nature, is technology involving the separation and extraction of some insoluble components from cathode materials by oxidation, reduction, complexation, adsorption or dissolution of specific microorganisms or their metabolites.87–92 The leaching reaction kinetic permit model includes chemical reaction control, diffusion process control and mixing control models, which are described by eqn (3), (4) and (5), respectively. The activation energy of leaching reaction of metal ions can be calculated using eqn (6). (3) (4) (5) k = Ae−Ea/RT(6)where x is the leaching efficiency of metals, A is the frequency factor, k stands for the reaction rate constant, R denotes the universal gas constant, T is the thermodynamic temperature, and Ea is the apparent activation energy (kJ mol−1). The product preparation process involves the transfer of the valuable metal of the waste LIBs to other products, including single metal/metal salt, recombined electrode materials and other functional materials, such as magnetic materials, electro-catalytic materials, photocatalytic materials and other functional materials.93–95 A detailed analysis and discussion of the above-mentioned recycling technologies will be presented below.


Solution leaching-dominated hydrometallurgy recycling process. 
Hydrometallurgy involves the transfer of the valuable metals of the cathode into the liquid phase through chemical reaction and their recovery in the form of metals or other compounds after separation and enrichment. It mainly includes the processes of leaching, solid–liquid separation, solution purification, metal extraction and product preparation. The research focus of the hydrometallurgical process for processing lithium-ion batteries has gone through 3 stages, as shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the intrinsic concept of solution leaching-dominated hydrometallurgical recycling technology. 
The early stages of recycling R&D focused on how to effectively dissolve the spent cathode material. The leaching process controls the extraction efficiency of metal ions. Researchers in this stage developed various acid, alkaline, and salt leaching systems. The employed inorganic acids include H2SO4,96–101 HCl,102–105 HNO3106–108 and H3PO4.109–111 Among them, H2SO4 is the most widely used acid leaching agent in non-ferrous metallurgy because of its high boiling point, abundant source, low price and weak corrosiveness. Alternatively, HCl has strong reactivity, but it and the resulting chlorides are more corrosive, and thus require higher equipment corrosion resistance. Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) is a thermoplastic material that releases large amounts of chlorine under hydrothermal subcritical conditions at temperatures above 150 °C, which can be converted to HCl by reaction with subcritical water. Therefore, Nshizirungu et al. used waste CPVC as a source of HCl in subcritical water, avoiding the use of any corrosive chemicals.112 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) can also dissolve the cathode material in subcritical water, but the leaching efficiency is lower than that of CPVC.113 HNO3 is a strong, expensive oxidizer and its reaction results in the precipitation of toxic nitrogen oxides. Organic acids including malic acid,114 oxalic acid,115–117 ascorbic acid,118–120 tartaric acid,121–123 citric acid,124–127 methanesulfonic acid,128 formic acid,129,130 succinic acid,131 and acetic acid132,133 are used to effectively dissolve LCO, NCM, LMO and various mixed cathodes. In addition to the effective dissolution of the material, rapid separation can be achieved due to the unique chelating and precipitation functions of organic acids. Moreover, a mixed leaching system based on organic and inorganic acids can also extract metals from spent cathode materials. By applying Box–Behnken design and response surface method optimization techniques, a global optimal solution for the maximum leaching rate of metals from spent LIBs was achieved. Specifically, 99.79% Li, 99.46% Ni, 97.24% Co and 96.88% Mn were recovered in 81 min under the optimal conditions of 0.93 M H2SO4, 0.85 M malonic acid, liquid/solid ratio of 61 g L−1, 70 °C, and 5 vol% of 30% H2O2, respectively.134 The leaching process was influenced by the synergistic effect of interfacial mass transfer and diffusion of solid product layers.
The alkalis commonly used in the alkali leaching process are NaOH135 and NH4OH. NaOH solution extracted Li and Fe from LFP as Na3PO4 and Fe(OH)3, respectively, within 30 min. Also, 89.1% and 99.2% of Fe and P were leached, respectively.136 The dissolution of the materials was also achieved with weakly basic substances such as NH4OH and NH4HCO3. In this case, 99.28%, 99.63%, and 99.76% of Li, Ni, and Co were leached in a combined leaching system of 3.1 M NH4OH, 15 M NH4HCO3 and 5 vol% H2O2 with continuous heating and stirring at 60–80 °C for 2 h, respectively.137 The process of leaching with alkaline solutions is much more selective and the leachate is purer. It is less corrosive to the equipment and does not require special corrosion protection. Also, the materials for the fabrication of the equipment are more readily available.
Salt leaching is the process of leaching valuable metals using salt as the solvent. Ammonium salts are the most widely studied leaching agents,138 such as ammonium sulfate ((NH4)2SO4),85 ammonium oxalate ((NH4)2C2O4),139 and ammonium carbonate ((NH4)2CO3).140 The use of (NH4)2SO4 as a reducing agent and ammonium carbonate as a pH buffer can reduce the consumption of NaOH. Co and Cu can be completely leached, while Mn and Al are almost not leached and Ni shows moderate leaching efficiency. The ammonium salt leaching method has a competitive advantage over the conventional acid leaching method for the recovery of Co.141 Oxalate is used as both leaching and precipitating agent. Specifically, 1.0 M oxalate solution leached and precipitated cobalt directly from LiCoO2 and CoO as Co2O4·2H2O at 80 °C, in 120 min with a solid/liquid ratio of 50 g L−1. The effective separation of cobalt and lithium was achieved with a reaction efficiency of more than 98%.142 Water-soluble NH4Fe(SO4)2 as a redox intermediate can be used to synergistically recover precious metals from spent NCM and LFP. More than 97% of Li, Mn, Co and Ni in the mixed cathode was leached under mild conditions (50 °C, 30 min), with 100% of PO43− retained in the residue. The first step in the reaction between Fe3+ and LFP to release Fe2+ progresses rapidly, and thus the slower reaction between Fe2+ and NCM is a rate-controlled process.143 Using an electro-oxidation strategy, Li was selectively leached into the Na2CO3 solution under an applied electric field to achieve the highly selective leaching of Li+ and in situ modification of de-lithiation material.144 The salt solution-based leaching process has the potential to achieve high efficiency and selectivity, which is beneficial for the protection of the environment.
To achieve the dissolution of spent cathode materials, a certain amount of reducing agent needs to be added. The addition of reducing agents reduces the transition metal ions in the material, such as Co3+ to Co2+, making it easier for them to combine with the anions in solution to form stable compounds. Therefore, various reducing agents have been reported, including H2O2,121,145,146 antibiotic residues,147 Fe in LFP,148,149 glucose,150 ethanol,151 NH4Cl,152,153 Na2SO3,85 NaHSO3,154 and ginkgo biloba.155 H2O2 is the most widely studied reducing agent because it does not introduce any impurity ions. H2O2 can also be used for the oxidative leaching of LFP by properly adjusting or controlling the leaching parameters. The leaching rates of Li of up to 97.6% have been achieved, facilitating the conversion of high-purity lithium carbonate and ferric phosphate. The oxidation leaching reaction is controlled by both internal diffusion and chemical reaction.156 Ethanol can reduce Co3+ to Co2+, while ethanol is oxidized to acetic acid.151 In dilute H2SO4 medium, the Fe(II) in LFP can be used as a reducing agent for the direct leaching of LiCoO2. In the presence of Co(III), Fe(II) is rapidly released as the leachate, and then slowly oxidized to Fe(III), resulting in the synergistic leaching of Co and Fe. Specifically, 99.9% of Li, Fe, and P and 92.4% of Co could be dissolved and existed as Fe3+, Li+, PO43− and Co2+, respectively, under the optimized conditions. This process reduced the consumption of acid by 80% and contributed to the reduction of chemical consumption in the environmental footprint.148 The consumption of the reducing chemicals in the leaching process was achieved by Wu et al. through a “waste-for-waste” approach.157 Because of the thermal conversion of cellulose to reducing sugars and the presence of naturally occurring antioxidants (e.g., flavonoids and phenolic acids), orange peel powder (OP), a common peel waste, has reducing potential. The addition of OP significantly improved the leaching performance of citric acid. This “waste-for-waste” approach may also be extended to other types of cellulose-rich and other lithium-ion battery types to achieve a new circular economy for e-waste.
Filtration is typically used to separate the leachate into liquid and solid phases after leaching. Subsequently, a porous medium is used to intercept the solid particles in the leachate, where a pressure difference or other external force is used as the driving force to pass the liquid through the micropores. This method is simple, efficient and easy to operate. Subsequently, for the separation of a variety of ions in the leachate, the commonly used techniques include precipitation,101,158,159 solvent extraction,160,161 adsorption,162–164 electrolysis,165–167 and membrane separation.168 Ammonium oxalate co-precipitation effectively recovered transition metal ions from the bioleach solution as metal oxalates.89 Highly efficient adsorbents synthesized by the functionalization of cross-linked chitosan through a pristine sulfonation process allow for the selective recovery of recovered Li from acidic solutions (pH ≈ 2).162 During the electrolysis process, an electrochemical pH gradient is generated. This drives the leaching of LCO in the anodic chamber at low pH and the precipitation of solid Co(OH)2 in the cathodic chamber at high pH. Li+ is recovered as Li2CO3 after enrichment by electrolysis. The in situ electrochemical pH gradient generated by neutral water electrolysis enabled simultaneous LiCoO2 leaching and Co(OH)2 precipitation in separate chambers.165 Unlike conventional hydrometallurgical processes and other aqueous electrochemical processes, the use of external acids and bases, extractants and ion-selective polymer electrolyte membranes is avoided. This green recycling method can be extended to recycle spent LMO and NCM materials. In a system with molten carbonate as the electrolyte, LiFePO4 acts as both the cathode and anode. The paired electrolysis converted LiFePO4 to Fe at the cathode and Fe3O4 at the anode to release Li+ and PO43− in the molten salt. The lithium recovery rate reached more than 95.2%, which paved the way for a greener environment.169 The extractant and the extracted metal were separated in the organic phase through a cooperative chemical reaction to generate an extract. Subsequent chemical reactions were used to reversely extract the extracted metals from the organic phase to the aqueous phase, achieving metal purification and enrichment. The class of chemical compounds known as extractants has the greatest impact on the extraction process, which is usually divided into neutral extractants, acidic extractants, and alkaline extractants according to the proton theory.170 In addition, there is a class of extractants, mostly protonic acids, usually with chelating properties, and therefore classified as chelating extractants. D2EHPA,171–173 Versatic 10,174 Cyphos IL-101,175 and Cyanex272176,177 are excellent extractants with high extraction efficiency for Co, Ni and Mn ions. A mixture of more than two extractants can improve the recovery efficiency of Mn, Co, Ni and Li with significant synergistic effects due to the enhanced binding ability difference for cationic complexes of different sizes.172,178
In the mid-term, researchers were focused on how to extract and dissolve materials efficiently. Therefore, various auxiliary means to achieve rapid dissolution of cathode materials have been reported, such as mechanochemical activation,109,152,179,180 ultrasound assisted,145,181–183 and deep eutectic solvent.106,184–187 Mechanochemical activation affects the physicochemical properties of the cathode material to improve the leaching efficiency of metal ions. The activated cathode powder shows a decrease in grain size, increase in specific surface area and appearance of mesoporous structure. Grain refinement reflects changes in the crystalline phase structure, leading to lattice distortions, lattice dislocations and storage and increase in internal energy. The surface properties include chemical shifts of electrons of lithium element, decrease in Co3+ concentration and increase in surface hydroxyl oxygen concentration. These physicochemical properties and structural changes enhance the hydrophilicity and interfacial reactivity of the activated LiCoO2 powder and significantly improve the leaching efficiency of Li and Co in organic acid solutions. The rate-limiting step of metal leaching also changes from surface chemical reaction control prior to mechanical activation to gray layer diffusion control.180 Compared with the traditional acid leaching method, the leaching efficiencies of Li and Co increased from 66.38% and 32.96% to 100% and 99.22%, respectively, following the leaching of LCO via mechanochemical activation in extremely low solubility NH4Cl and an acid solution for 120 min.152 The ultrasound-assisted citric acid leaching process is mild and environmentally friendly. Also, the unique cavitation effect of ultrasound allows 96% of Co and nearly 100% of Li to be extracted efficiently.181 Compared to conventional leaching, ultrasound-assisted leaching has a higher leaching efficiency under the same conditions, and this process is controlled by diffusion.182 Recently, deep eutectic solvents (DES) have been used as solvent phases in solvent metallurgy.184,188 DES typically consists of two or three inexpensive and safe components formed by hydrogen bonding of eutectic mixtures with melting points below that of each component.189 Researchers have found that DES have excellent solubility for metal oxides even without reducing or extracting agents, leading to increasing enthusiasm for DES in the field of spent LIB recycling.190 The recovery of precious metals from spent LIBs by DES consisting of H2C2O4 and ChCl was presented by Lu et al.191 The extraction efficiencies of Li and Co were 96.1% and 96.3%, respectively. The formation of low-solubility metal oxalates at low temperature did not destroy the composition and structure of the DES, which facilitated the metal separation process of Li and Co. The purity of the obtained LiHC2O4·4H2O and CoC2O4·2H2O was 99% and 98%, respectively. The DES could be repeatedly recovered and used for metal extraction. After five cycles, the extraction efficiency of Li and Co could be maintained above 92.9% and 74.5%, respectively. A closed-loop efficient method based on choline chloride:oxalic acid (ChCl:OA)-type DES allowed ultra-fast leaching of LCO (180 °C, 10 s).106 The solubility of cobalt ions could be reversibly adjusted by simply adding/evaporating deionized water, thus avoiding the addition of precipitants and allowing easy recovery of the DES leaching solvent for a closed-loop recovery process.
Currently, more attention is paid to whether/how the recovered material can be further utilized to enhance the added value of the recycled product. The advantage of the metal ion leaching solution is that the liquid phase can regulate the morphology and structural homogeneity of the product to well meet the diverse application scenarios. The recovered products can be used in multi-scenario rechargeable batteries, catalysts, bifunctional air electrodes, supercapacitors, etc., as shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of high-value reuse scenarios of recycled products reported in the literature




Cathode
Resynthesis method
Recycled product
Application scenarios
Performance




LFP192
Lithium iodide solution re-lithiation
LiFePO4
Cathode for LIBs
145 mA h g−1 at 1C, 96% capacity retention at 5C for 300 cycles (2.5–4.0 V, 1C = 167 mA g−1)


LFP193
Hydrothermal synthesis
LiFePO4
Cathode for LIBs
136 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention ratio of 98.6% after 300 cycles (2.0–4.0 V)


LCO194
Solid-state synthesis
LiCoO2
Cathode for LIBs
137.9–162.5 mA h g−1 upon being charged to 4.2–4.4 V


LMO195
Sol–gel method
LiFe0.6Mn0.4PO4/C
High-voltage cathode for LIBs
141.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 104.9 mA h g−1 at 10C (2.0–4.4 V)


NCM133
Spray pyrolysis
NCM111
Cathode for LIBs
Initial capacities of 157.1 and 154.3 mA h g−1 for half and full batteries (2.6–4.3 V)


NCM119
Co-precipitation followed by hydrothermal synthesis
Li1.2Co0.13Ni0.13Mn0.54O2
Cathode for LIBs
225.1 mA h g−1 at a 0.1C after 50 cycles (2–4.8 V, 1C = 150 mA g−1)


NCM111196
Co-precipitation followed by solid-state synthesis
Mg-doped NCM111
Cathode for LIBs
152.7 mA h g−1 at 0.2C (2.7–4.03 V)


NCM111197
Sol–gel method
Al-doped NCM111
Cathode for LIBs
148.1 mA h g−1 at a 0.2C after 100 cycles (2.7–4.3 V, 1C = 150 mA g−1)


NCM198
Solid-phase synthesis after coprecipitation
Ni-rich layered material
Cathode for LIBs
231.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C cycles (2.7–4.3 V, 1C = 180 mA g−1)


NCM137
Hydrothermal annealing
NCM111
Cathode for LIBs
246.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1C


NCM111186
Prepared by coprecipitation after extraction
NCM111
Cathode for LIBs
184.8 mA h g−1 in the 50th cycle at 1C (2.5–4.6 V)


NCM89
Solid-phase synthesis
NCM111 or NCM 622
Cathode for LIBs
85% of capacity retention after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1


LFP199
Solid-phase synthesis
Fe2P2O7/C
Anode for LIBs
208.6 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at 0.2 A g−1 (0.1–3.0 V)


NCM, NCA200
Gas sulfidation method
Carbon–metal sulfide composites (NCMS/C and NCAS/C)
Anode for LIBs
NCMS/C: 900.4 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles, NCAS/C: 830.5 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles (0–3.0 V)


LFP192
Sodium iodide solution re-sodiation
NaFePO4
Cathode for SIBs
138 mA h g−1 at C/15 (2.0–4.0 V, 1C = 167 mA g−1)


LCO201
Solution mixing
Recycled Co2+-doped TiO2
Photocatalysts
Degradation rates of 95% under 180 min


LCO202
Hydrothermal synthesis
Sea-urchin-like cobalt nitride-graphene
Hybrid catalyst for water splitting
Under a high current density of 10 mA cm−2, the 3D sea-urchin-like CoN-Gr-2 delivered low overpotential of 128.9 and 280 mV for the HER and OER, respectively,


LFP203
Wetness impregnation method
Ni-LiFePO4
Catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction
A low overpotential of 285 mV at 10 mA cm−2


NCM523, NCM811204
Boriding process
Borides
Catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction
318 mV at 100 mA cm−2, 372 mV at 500 mA cm−2


NCM205
Sintering
Spinel Ni–Co–Mn oxides
Bifunctional air electrodes
Energy efficiency was 75% at a current density of 10 mA cm−2


NCM144
Drying after electrolytic separation
De-lithiation materials
Catalysts for the degradation rate of sulfamethoxazole
Degradation rate of sulfamethoxazole reached 100% within 30 min


LMO206
Hydrothermal synthesis
MnO2/Fe(0)
Fenton reaction catalyst
Sulfadiazine degradation by 0.2 g L−1 MnO2-40Fe, 6 mM H2O2 in pH 3 was almost 98.6%


LFP207
Hydrothermal synthesis
Sea urchin-like material
Fenton reaction catalyst
Degradation rate exceeded 97% within 30 min


NCM208
Hydrothermal synthesis
CoMnNiOx catalyst
Catalysts for propane oxidation
Conversion of 90% at 200 °C


LMO209
Hydrothermal synthesis
α-MnO2
Catalytic oxidation of volatile organic compounds
More than 90% conversion within 8 h


LCO127
Oxalate precipitation
CoFe2O4
Catalytic degradation of bisphenol A
94% of bisphenol A is removed within 25 min at 25 °C


NCM124
Sol–gel synthesis
MnFe2O4
Catalytic degradation of bisphenol A
Completely removed in 15 min, 85.5% of bisphenol A molecules were simultaneously mineralized in 25 min


LCO + LMO121
Hydrothermal synthesis
MnCo2O4-RGO
Asymmetric supercapacitor
Maximum energy density of 23.9 W h kg−1 and 8000 cycles along with 94.4% capacitance retention


LMO210
Hydrothermal synthesis
γ-MnO2
Co removal adsorbent
Distribution coefficient 2.5 × 105 mL g−1 at pH ∼ 6 in room temperature




For the leachate without pre-separation of Li+ after solution conversion, the cathode material can be re-synthesized by sol–gel, hydrothermal regeneration and solid-state synthesis methods, and then reapplied to LIBs. This is the most common and mature process. Yan Wang211et al. obtained regenerated NCM111 materials by hydrometallurgy with heat treatment. Different types of batteries assembled with recycled materials, including button cells, single-layer soft pack batteries, 1 A h soft pack batteries, and 11 A h soft pack batteries, have demonstrated excellent cycle performances and capacity retention. The recycled material has a larger specific surface area and larger internal pore structure, which provide a higher Li+ diffusion coefficient and relieve the strain during cycling, thus reducing the phase change during cycling and improving the battery performance. This reliable testing and comprehensive comparison demonstrate that the regenerated materials can be successfully applied in new batteries on a large scale with economic benefits, creating a bridge between academia and industry. By regulating the molar ratio of metal ions in the solution, it is possible to obtain cathode materials different from the original components of the waste, such as regenerating LMO waste into high-voltage LiFe0.6Mn0.4PO4/C.195 High-nickel materials synthesized from NCM leachate by hydrothermal synthesis can reach a discharge specific capacity of 225.1 mA g−1 at 2–4.8 V.119 In addition, regeneration can be accompanied by in situ modification to improve the electrochemical properties of the resynthesized materials, such as Mg-doped196 and Al-doped197 NCM111 cathode materials.
For the pre-separated Li+ leachate, the leachate contains only transition metal ions. After modulating different cation molar ratios, a series of transition metal oxides can be obtained by heat treatment. The theoretical specific capacity of some transition metal oxides (i.e., Co3O4 and ZnMn2O4) is more than twice as that of commercial graphite materials, making it a widely studied material for lithium-ion battery anodes. Transition metal oxide anodes prepared by recycling have excellent Li storage capacity.199,200 The process of preparing transition metal anode materials from scrap is economically efficient, but the large-scale development of this recycling process is limited due to defects such as the large volumetric strain of the materials. Benefiting from the consistency of the electrode structure of SIBs with that of LIBs, the recycling strategy of existing LIBs can also be used for SIBs. With the supplementation of the sodium source in the leachate after lithium extraction, olivine-type NaFePO4 can also be obtained, which can contribute 138 mA h g−1 capacity when used as the anode of SIBs.192 Non-noble metal transition metal oxides (TMOs) are also attractive catalysts. Studies have shown that the recycled products can be used to catalyze various reactions, such as the oxygen evolution reaction,202 photocatalysis,201 organic degradation reaction,124 and Fenton reaction.206 On the one hand, modulating the composition of the leachate can improve the activity of TMOs.206 On the other hand, a hierarchical porous electrode structure is employed in the recycling synthesis to enhance the catalytic efficiency of TMOs.202 The effectiveness of the recycled TMOs as adsorbents210 and asymmetric supercapacitor121 was also confirmed. TMOs recycled from waste cathode materials are used to catalyze the degradation of organic pollutants such as bisphenol A,124 in line with the win–win strategy of “treating waste with waste”.


Solid-phase transformation-dominated recycling process. 
The solid-phase conversion-dominated recycling process can be divided into dry mechanical chemical conversion and thermal reduction conversion processes. During the milling process, mechanical forces act on the reactants to induce changes in their structure and physicochemical properties, thus promoting chemical reactions. Mechanical forces such as shear, impact and squeezing exerted by ball milling will deliver energy to the powder, reducing the powder particles and destroying the crystal structure.212 The ball milling process can also reduce the specific surface energy of the reaction products, thereby promoting unlikely solid-state reactions and increasing the reaction efficiency. Mechanochemical reactions are driven by mechanical energy rather than thermal energy, and therefore can occur at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure.213 This can significantly reduce the energy and cost. In addition, solid-state reactions do not rely on liquids as the medium, and thus the process does not generate liquid waste.
Recently, many research groups have devoted their efforts to the mechanochemical recovery of metals from batteries. The recovery process mainly occurs via chelation, substitution, and reduction reactions. Disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (Na2EDTA) and EDTA are important chelating reagents, which can form stable metal complexes with various metals.214 When LCO was ground in combination with Na2EDTA powder, 71% of Co and 74% of Li were recovered, and 98% of Co and 99% of Li were recovered from the EDTA-LiCoO2 ball milling system.215 During the ball milling process, the dispersed mixture of LiCoO2 and EDTA was ground uniformly. The collision of crystalline grains with high-speed grinding balls and steel tank walls is minimized, resulting in a rapid increase in their specific surface area and energy. Consequently, the crystal lattices of LiCoO2 and EDTA produce lattice deformation and local damage and form surface defects and high-density dislocations, which increase the internal energy and enhance the reactant activity. In the co-milling system of NaCl/SiO2, Li+ in LiCoO2 is replaced by Na+. NaCl and SiO2 have obvious technical advantages of low cost, safety and non-toxicity, and can also be used for NCM, LFP and mixed wastes.216 When LiCoO2/PVC/Fe were co-ground, the mechanical force led to many defects and deformations in the ground material. The presence of these defects promoted the local atomic rearrangement, triggering Li and Na atomic ion substitution reactions, which eventually caused the release of Li+ from LiCoO2 crystals and the combination of Li+ with Cl− to form LiCl.217 Dry ice as a co-milling reagent induced the reductive conversion of LCO to Li2CO3 and Co3O4.218 No corrosive acids or bases were involved in the mechanochemical recovery process, and lithium could be selectively extracted from different types of spent LIB cathode materials according to green chemistry principles. More importantly, the employed method shows universality in recycling valuable metals from different types of spent LIB cathode materials.
The thermal reduction conversion process, which is mainly used for the recovery of layered and spinel materials, has also undergone a significant shift in three research priorities (Table 4). The core of the thermal reduction method is to selectively transfer most of the lithium into carbonate, while other elements are converted to insoluble oxides or metallic elements.219 The first period mainly focuses on how to effectively reduce and convert battery materials. The graphite, electrolyte, and Al foil in the battery are used as reducing agents and partial heat donors.220–223 At a certain temperature, the cathode material decomposes unstably into single metal oxides or multi-metal oxides. Subsequently, these oxides are reduced to monomers or lower valence substances in the presence of a reducing agent. In the system with graphite as the main reducing agent, the reduction products are usually Li2CO3, Co, Ni and MnO.81,224 In the system with Al foil as the reducing agent, Li2O, CoO and Al2O3 are the main products.225 Water leaching is commonly used to separate Li and transition metal elements without the addition of reducing agents. A carbonated water leaching process was developed to convert Li2CO3 to the more soluble LiHCO3, which was used to prepare highly concentrated lithium solutions.226 The hydrometallurgy leaching process was used to separate single transition metal elements from the material after Li extraction, which is consistent with the solution conversion process described above.219 This process was also used by some recycling companies. The carbothermic reduction resulted in the loss of about 30% of the mass of Li2CO3.227 Therefore, the drawbacks of this process are high reduction conversion temperatures, severe metal losses and low product recovery (Table 4).
Table 4 Summary of the thermal reduction process reported in the literature




Cathode
Reducing agent
Reduction conditions
Separation conditions
Reduction products
Reuse conditions
Re-use products




LCO81
Spent graphite
1000 °C in N2 for 30 min
Wet magnetic separation method
Li2CO3, Co, C






LMO224
Spent graphite
800 °C in N2 for 45 min
Water leaching
Li2CO3, MnO






NCM811219
30 wt% commercial graphite
800 °C in CO2 for 180 min
2M H2SO4, 40 °C, 1 h
Li2CO3, Ni/Co, MnO






NCM523228
NCM523:graphitic carbon = 5:1 (wt%)
700 °C in N2 for 45 min
Distilled water, room temperature, 2 h
Li2CO3
Li2CO3 and SiO2 were mixed in a molar ratio of 2.05:1
CO2 adsorbent: Li4SiO4


NCA226
20 wt% spent graphite
700 °C in N2 for 6 h
Carbonated water
Li2CO3
Solid state regeneration
Resynthesized NCA


LCO225
Al foil
600 °C for 60 min
NaOH leaching
Li2O, CoO, Al2O3






NCM229
Spent graphite, Al foil, and electrolyte
Vacuum reduction process
Gasification–condensation process
Mn






LCO230
20% spent graphite, 20% NaOH
520 °C for 3 h
Water leaching
Li2O, Li2CO3, CoO, and Co






LFP231
Molar ratio of LFP:Na2CO3 = 1:1, molar ratio of LFP:graphite = 1:2
900 °C for 4 h
Water leaching
Fe3O4, NaLi2PO4, LiNa5(PO4)2






NCM232
18% spent graphite
Microwave heating to promote a carbothermal reduction reaction, 600 °C for 60 min










NCM, LCO, LMO233
Spent graphite
Microwave carbothermal reduction
Water leaching
Co, MnO, Li2CO3, CoO, Ni, C






LCO234
Al foil
Mechanochemical activation
Water leaching
LiAlO2, Co






NCM111235
Macadamia shells
350 °C for 25 min
Carbon dioxide aqueous solution leaching
Li2CO3, Ni, Co, MnO
Coprecipitation
NCM111


NCM236
Antibiotic bacteria residues
650 °C for 60 min in Ar
H2SO4 leaching
Ni, Co, C, MnO, Li2CO3, Ca






LCO237
Mass ratio of pine sawdust:LCO = 1:1
400 °C for 120 min in vacuum
Water leaching
Li2CO3, Co
Solid state regeneration
LCO


LCO238
NH4Cl
350 °C for 20 min, LiCoO2/NH4Cl mass ratio of 1:2
Water leaching
Li-chlorides, Co-chlorides






NCM111239
CaCl2
800 °C for 30 min
Water leaching
LiCl, Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O1.5






LCO240
Mass ratio of SiCl4:LCO = 0.7:1
500 °C for 5 min
Water leaching
LiCl, CoCl2
Solid state regeneration
LCO


NCM622241
Mass ratio of (NH4)2SO4:NCM622 = 4:1
350 °C for 120 min
Water leaching
Li2Co(SO4)2, NiSO4, CoSO4, MnSO4
Solid state regeneration
NCM622


LCO83
Molar ratio of LCO:H2SO4 = 2:1
800 °C for 120 min in vacuum
Water leaching
Li2SO4, Co3O4






LCO242
Molar ratio of LCO:CoSO4 = 2:1, 20% carbon
600 °C for 120 min
Water leaching
Li2SO4, CoO






NCM243
Molar ratio of Na2SO4:NCM = 0.75:1, carbon
750 °C for 90 min
Water leaching
LiNaSO4, (NiO)m(MnO)n and CoO






NCM244
HNO3:NCM = 30 mmol g−1
250 °C for 60 min
Water leaching
LiNO3, TMOs






LCO245
(CO(NH2))2
550 °C for 20 min
Water leaching
Li2CO3, Co






NCM246
H2
500 °C for 15 min
Water leaching
LiOH, TMOs
Solid-state regeneration
NCM811




The second stage naturally focuses on how to reduce the heat conversion temperature and energy consumption. Researchers lowered the reduction temperature and reduced the conversion time by adding reduction aids, microwave heating assistance, and mechanical activation. The addition of reaction aids to catalyze the carbothermal reduction reaction can substantially reduce the reduction temperature. With the high catalytic activity of the alkali metal, the reduction temperature can be reduced to 550 °C. LiCoO2 is reduced to Li2O and CoO in a reduction-controlled manner. Li2O can be effectively leached by water to LiOH to obtain a highly concentrated solution of Li, which facilitates subsequent precipitation and evaporation for the production of Li.230 Thermodynamically, iron oxide can be reduced to iron by carbon. However, due to the thermodynamic stability of the olivine structure, LFP cannot be reduced to Fe by carbon. Zhang et al. used Na2CO3 or NaOH as additives to Fe-PO4 bond breakers to achieve the carbon thermal reduction of LFP. Initially, LFP reacts with Na2CO3 or NaOH to form iron oxide, and then the resulting iron oxide is reduced to Fe, which can be separated by a magnetic separation process from the separation from the roasted product.231 This carbothermal process enriches the current LFP recovery technology and allows large-scale recovery of spent LFP. Microwave heating is a heating process that starts from inside of the material and is caused by the direct absorption of microwave energy by the medium placed in the microwave field. Zhao232et al. systematically studied the microwave absorption properties of NCM materials. The cathode material has good microwave absorption properties in the studied temperature range (25–900 °C), especially when mixed with carbon. The dielectric properties of the materials increased rapidly from 600 °C as the reduction reaction proceeded, implying that microwave heating can promote the carbon-thermal reduction reaction. The microwave reduction process for the recovery of mixed cathode materials is a simple, economical, energy- and time-saving process.233 In addition, mechanochemical activation induction can substantially reduce the temperature of the in situ aluminum thermal reduction process to 500 °C in 15 min. The mechanochemical activation-induced aluminum thermal reduction process can achieve partial reduction of transition metals and affect the physical properties and surface characteristics of the material. Both the cyclic stability and the catalytic effect of the recycled material are greatly enhanced.234
Given that the value of graphite as an anode is appreciated, its recycling is also progressively attracting more attention. Graphite is totally consumed throughout the reduction process at a lower cost. In addition, the carbon thermal reduction process dominated by graphite in the early stage has the issue of CO2 emission. Therefore, the current stage of research focuses on finding alternatives to graphite reductants to reduce or eliminate CO2 emissions. Recycling technologies such as biomass reduction, chlorination roasting, sulfidation roasting, nitration roasting, and hydrogen reduction have been explored (Fig. 9). Based on the concept of “treating waste with waste”, researchers have efficiently utilized the reduction capacity and heat donor of carbon-based biomass waste, and creatively used it for the recycling of lithium-ion batteries. Carbon-based biomass reduction processes such as the microwave pyrolysis reduction process of nut shells,235 the reduction and transformation process of antibiotic bacterial residues,236 and the vacuum pyrolysis process of pine sawdust237 have been successively developed. These processes can reduce the reduction temperature and reduction time to a certain extent, but their mechanism of action still need to be further studied. The chlorination roasting process converts the cathode material into water-soluble chlorides. The developed efficient fluxes include NH4Cl,238 SiCl4,240 and CaCl4.239 Selective lithium extraction is possible employing the CaCl4-based chlorination roasting process, which selectively transforms metals into water-soluble LiCl and water-insoluble oxides (Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O1.5). Similarly, sulfur roasting converts all the Li in the cathode material to water-soluble lithium sulfate, and transition metals can be selectively converted into water-soluble sulfate241 or transition metal oxides.243 The latter can be selectively extracted from lithium by water leaching. Nitration roasting can also transform cathode materials at lower temperatures to achieve selective lithium extraction.244 However, the emission of polluting gases such as SO2, NO2, CO, and CO2 generated in the above-mentioned process is a major problem. In addition, the roasting kinetics of these methods are usually relatively slow, where the roasting time for fully converted cathode materials is more than 120 min. In this regard, Liu246et al. developed a hydrogen reduction roasting technique. Almost all the lithium could be selectively converted to water-soluble LiOH within 15 min, while Ni, Co, and Mn still exist as insoluble stable metals or oxides. No noxious gases were produced during this reduction roasting process, and the separation of Li did not consume any acid and alkali.
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the intrinsic concept of thermal reduction conversion recycling technology. 

3.3 Anode
The most commonly used anode materials include carbon-based compounds and lithium-alloys, whose microstructure, texture, crystallinity and morphology directly influence its performance.247 During the charging and discharging cycles of LIBs, the failure of anode materials is mainly caused by a variety of failure mechanisms such as the failure of the active material and interface reaction.248 For LIBs with graphite as the anode electrode, the volume effect of graphite does not change significantly during Li+ insertion and extraction (depending on the material, usually 10% or less), and thus Li+ deintercalation has little effect on its reversibility. However, changes in the graphite crystal structure may result in defects and mechanical stresses, which may destroy the crystal structure or form microcracks. A solvent co-intercalation layer will form in graphite as a result of the interface reaction between graphite and electrolyte, causing the graphite layer to fracture and detach. Together with the cracks formed by the graphite fracture, the electrolyte continues to react within the graphite, leading to the rapid collapse of its structure. In addition, the degraded anode material contains a large amount of elements with recycling value such as Li and Cu. Due to the increasing demand for graphite in energy storage devices (especially in electric vehicles), spent graphite (SG) electrodes must be recycled to prevent them from becoming a “key material of the future” like Li and Cu.249 The recycling of graphite from spent batteries will be an inevitable choice, but this has been largely neglected.
The recycling of graphite not only reduces the cost of raw materials and brings higher economic benefits for the synthesis of raw materials, but also contributes to the goal of sustainable development of rechargeable batteries. Metal elements such as Li, Ni, CO, and Mn are inevitably introduced into spent graphite due to the dissolution of the cathode active materials. A certain amount of Cu is also introduced during battery disassembly. Depending on the degree of retention of the material structure of the waste graphite and metal elements, current recycling technology can be divided into full-component retention recycling process, material separation recycling process, and energy migration conversion recycling process (Fig. 10). Energy migration conversion recycling mainly refers to the use of graphite as a reducing agent for the recycling of lithium-ion battery cathodes, where the energy stored in the graphite is completely consumed, as detailed above. Therefore, the graphite recycling technologies related to the first two processes are summarized in Table 5.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the intrinsic concept of the relationship between waste graphite recovery technology and the intrinsic energy of the material. 
Table 5 Summary of existing graphite recycling technologies reported in the literature




Extractant
Extraction conditions
Li Product
Re-use material
Reprocessing conditions
Re-use conditions
Performance




None250




SG
800 °C for 5 h in Ar
0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li
250 mA h g−1 at 372 mA g−1


None251




SG
800 °C for 3 h in Ar
Si/SG composite, 0.01–1.5 V vs. Li+/Li
131.8 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1


None252




SG
800 °C for 1 h in N2 atmosphere
10.02–2.5 V vs. K+/K
382 mA h g−1 at 0.1C


None253




SG
SG pure sulfur = 1:4, 155 °C for 12 h under Ar atmosphere
Sulfur–carbon composite cathodes for Li–S batteries: 1.7–2.8 V vs. Li+/Li
1377 mA h g−1 0.2 C


None254




SG
Synthesis
Phase-change materials
High latent enthalpy


None255




SG
Freeze–thaw ultrasonic assisted circulation method
Two-dimensional low-layer graphite flakes application in nanofluids
Enhanced thermal conductivity and thermal conductivity


None256




SG and Cu foil
450 °C for 3 h
Catalyst
90% degradation rate in 60 min


None257




SG and Cu foil
Carbothermal reduction
Catalyst
Degradation of 4-chlorophenol in aqueous phase


Deionized water258
Water leaching, 800 °C for 2 h in Ar
Li2CO3
Lithiated SG
Modified Hummers’ method to prepare graphene oxide
Anode and cathode catalyst for LIBs and lithium oxygen batteries (LOB)
280 mA h g−1 1C


Deionized water259
Microwave stripping
Li2CO3
RG


0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA h g−1
438.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 96.6% after 100 cycles at 0.5C


Deionized water260
De-ionized water sonication, 2 h


RG
800 °C for 2 h in Ar
0.1–2.6 V vs. Al3+/Al
55 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 150 cycles


H2SO4261
2 M H2SO4, 35 °C


Acid leaching graphite (AG)
900 °C for 4 h in N2
0–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA h g−1
245.4 mA h g−1 at 1C after 500 cycles


H2SO4262
80 °C for 5 h


AG
800 °C for 8 h in N2
AG/Fe3O4@Fe, 0.01–3 V vs. Na+/Na
121.6 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 150 cycles


HCl263
1.5 M HCl, 60 min, 100 g L−1
Li2CO3
AG


0.005–2 V vs. Li+/Li
591 mA h g−1 at 37.2 mA g−1


HNO3264
5% HNO3, ultrasonic cleaning for 30 min.


AG


2D graphene oxide




Citric acid265
0.2 M citric acid, 90 °C, S/L = 1:50 g mL−1, 50 min


AG


0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA g−1
330 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 80 cycles


(NH4)2SO4266
0.8 M (NH4)2SO4,
Cu2+
RG


0.001–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 0.17 A h g−1
365.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles


NaOH267
NaOH:graphite = 2:1, 350 °C in N2 for 120 min
LiOH
RG


0.01–2.5 V vs. Li+/Li
287.4 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1


NaOH + KOH268
NaOH + KOH:SG > 0.5, 250 °C for 120 min


RG
Coating, heat treatment
0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li
122 mA h g−1 at 1C for full cell


NH4F269
200 °C for 60min in Ar, water leaching, 60 °C, S/L = 10:1, 60 min


RG


0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li
340.9 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, capacity retention rate of 96% after 100 cycles at 1C


None270
1400 °C for 4 h in N2
Volatile lithium
RG


0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li,
306.8 mA h g−1


None271
Vacuum pyrolysis at 1400 °C


Sucrose coating graphite
800 °C for 1 h in N2
0.005–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA h g−1
200 mA h g−1 at 2C





Upcycling for full energy retention strategies. 
The upcycling process of directly modifying waste graphite without extraction completely retains the energy of graphite and the metal components. The cycling process imparts waste graphite with unique physical and chemical properties. The repeated extraction–intercalation process of Li+ can form porous structures and defects. Meanwhile, due to the decomposition of the electrolyte, more oxygen-containing groups are present on the surface of graphite, resulting in an expanded layer spacing in graphite.272 Abundant oxygen groups can improve the wettability of the electrode material and react with more Li+, resulting in a higher cathode capacity.273 In this case, the application scenarios of upcycled products can be regenerated into LIB anode materials, potassium-ion batteries, catalysts, supercapacitor electrode materials, adsorbents, etc.274–276 Heat treatment induces carbonization of the SEI layer on the surface of SG and improves the electrical conductivity of graphite. The recycled graphite (RG) heat treated at 800 °C exhibited a specific capacity of 250 mA h g−1 at 372 mA g−1 as an LIB anode.250 This anode not only provided a high reversible capacity but also exhibited excellent long-term cycling stability when used as an anode for potassium-ion batteries.252
Xu251et al. prepared an Si/SG composite by exploiting the inherent properties of SG. Compared with conventional graphite, SG has unique physicochemical properties. The SG matrix can better integrate silicon (Si) nanoparticles by electrostatic forces, which can suppress the volume change of Si nanoparticles during lithiation/desulfurization. Meanwhile, defect-enriched and exfoliated graphite can effectively improve the electrical conductivity and facilitate the electron and Li+ transport in the electrode. Moreover, the oxygen-containing functional groups on SG can induce the formation of organic SEI components, thus providing mechanical toughness and accommodating the expansion of the electrode during long-term charge/discharge cycles. The Si/SG composite electrode prepared with SG as the matrix and carbonized at 800 °C exhibited a high initial discharge capacity of 1321.8 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1. In addition, Zhang253et al. prepared an SG/S cathode for lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries by directly using SG from spent LIBs as a substrate. The charge/discharge cycles not only introduced abundant functional polar groups to the surface of SG, but also metal elements through the dissolution of the active cathode material. These factors increased the electrical conductivity and effectively promoted the conversion kinetics of lithium polysulfide (LiPS). SG effectively adsorbs and immobilizes LiPS to reduce the shuttle effect in Li–S batteries. The SG/S cathode with a sulfur content as high as 78.4% achieved an initial discharge capacity of 1377 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.2C with excellent cycling stability. The proposed composite can provide some guidance for the interfacial stability of the anode and also for the high value application of waste graphite.
Phase change materials have been widely investigated for solar thermal applications due to their advantages of maintaining a constant temperature during heat absorption and release, as well as high energy storage density and thermal efficiency. Graphite foam (GF) was prepared using SG powder as a raw material using a template method. The GF-PW composite phase change material was fabricated by encapsulating paraffin wax (PW) in GF through a vacuum impregnation process. The GF-PW composite phase change materials had high photo/thermal conversion efficiency, large phase change enthalpy, thermal stability and cycling capability.254 This method is not only promising for solar and electrical energy utilization, as well as energy saving in buildings and air conditioners, but also provides a new way to recycle battery waste graphite powder. Compared to commercial graphite, SG has the characteristics of large interlayer spacing and easy interlayer exfoliation due to the reduction of the interlayer force after repeated charge–discharge cycles. Qiao255et al. proposed a facile freeze–thaw ultrasound-assisted cycling method to fabricate two-dimensional low-layer graphite flakes (GFs) using SG. The GFs prepared from graphite of SG had better morphology than that prepared with purchased graphite. In addition, the GF-filled ethylene glycol nanofluid exhibited higher thermal conductivity and conduction heat transfer coefficient than the base fluid.
In addition to the upcycling of the stripped SG powder, researchers also developed a creative recycling process based on the negative electrode as a whole. Specifically, the graphite powder and the negative electrode collector Cu foil were not pre-separated. Cu foil can be used as a donor to provide Cu ions, participate in the synthesis of catalysts and improve the catalytic activity.277 Two catalysts with different graphite C contents were prepared using the roasting process of anode materials from spent LIBs. The catalysts consisting of CuO and graphite C could effectively activate peroxymonosulfate (PMS) and degrade ciprofloxacin in water. The methods of action of the catalysts synthesized at various temperatures varied dramatically. The surface electron transfer non-radical channel is the main channel for the degradation of ciprofloxacin in the catalysts synthesized at 450 °C (Fig. 11a). In contrast, the radical degradation channel played a crucial role in the catalyst system synthesized at 850 °C. However, both catalysts showed high degradation efficiency for ciprofloxacin.256 Furthermore, the CuO/C heterogeneous catalyst prepared by Zhao et al. at 850 °C could effectively activate PMS to degrade various organic contaminants (Fig. 11b).278 The CuO/C catalyst showed high efficiency in a wide pH range (3–10) and in real aqueous matrices. The redox cycle of Cu(II)/Cu(I) in the CuO/C heterogeneous catalyst is considered to be dominant force in promoting the activation of PMS to form oxygen. Zero-valent iron–copper bimetallic catalysts supported on graphite with high stability were prepared from LIB anodes and mill-scale waste. It exhibited remarkable activity when used for the degradation of 4-chlorophenol in the aqueous phase.257
 Fig. 11  (a) Proposed mechanism for the degradation of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride (CIP) in the anode material/PMS system. Reproduced from ref. 256 © 2022, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Proposed reaction mechanism of PMS activation and RhB degradation in anode material/PMS system. Reproduced from ref. 278 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (c) Schematic illustration of the purification and regeneration process of SG: (i) SG incorporated with several impurities; (ii) leaching process for binder removal; (iii) sieving process for improper size particle removal; (iv) roasting process for acid-insoluble compound removal; (v) acid leaching process for residual metal compounds removal; and (vi) regeneration process with pitch coating under calcination treatment. (d) Schematic illustration of the structural evolution of SG regeneration and (e) epitaxial growth mechanism during repairment for surface structures. Reproduced from ref. 268. Copyright © 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Scheme of the synthesis process and the formation mechanism of holey graphite. Reproduced from ref. 258 © 2022 Elsevier, B.V. All rights reserved. 


Partial energy retention strategies. 
The composition of the failed negative electrode is complex, containing a variety of metallic impurities and organic substances. The contaminants on the graphite surface are LiF residues at the interface of polyvinylidene fluoride binder, LiPF6 electrolyte and solid electrolyte, while residual lithium (Li2CO3) and CuO can invade the crystal structure of graphite.264 The internal and external surfaces of spent graphite are contaminated with various organic and inorganic impurities, which severely limit its high-value utilization. To meet the high-purity requirements of recycled graphite (RG) application scenarios, researchers developed technology for the deep purification of anode materials. Hydrometallurgy extraction is commonly used to recover valuable metals, volatilize metals by pyrometallurgy, or leach them with water after adding alkali or salt for low temperature conversion.267,279,280 Due to the good solubility of Li salts and the low valence of transition metals, the metals of the SG powder can be extracted without reducing agents. Deionized water, inorganic acids, organic acids, salts, etc. are all effective solvents. The leachate of deionized water can be directly and simply evaporated to obtain Li2CO3.258,281 The good microwave absorption ability of the LIB anodes can make the binder and electrolyte in SG volatilize rapidly in the microwave field, thus making the SG powder effectively separated from the copper foil. In addition, microwave radiation also makes the remaining lithium in SG form Li2CO3, which can be leached with water under CO2, and then heated for extraction, and lithium-containing wastewater can also be recycled to leach lithium.259
The leaching process using inorganic acids such as H2SO4,96,282,283 HCl263 and organic acids such as citric acid265 not only improved the purity of the SG, but also restored the structural defects of graphite, thus improving its rate performance and cycling stability. Benefiting from the acidity and oxidizing properties of ammonium persulfate, recycled graphite with expanded layer spacing was successfully obtained.266
Hazardous hydrofluoric acid (HF) is inevitably generated due to the reaction of acids with LiF.281 Alternatively, in the NaOH roasting method, LiF is converted to NaF and LiOH at 350 °C, thus avoiding the production of HF. After roasting, lithium and graphite can be separated by a water leaching process without using acids. The leaching efficiency of Li is close to 100%.267 A novel deep purification process of KOH-NaOH complex alkali etching can eliminate impurities in SG. Residual acid-insoluble impurities, such as compounds related to Al and Fe, can be effectively removed by alkaline roasting treatment at 180–300 °C (Fig. 11c).268 The alkaline roasting method does not use acids, thus avoiding the generation of toxic HF and waste acids, and is expected to be a green method for recovering anode materials from various waste LIBs. The environmentally friendly process of low-temperature fluorination roasting and water leaching technology can also be used to achieve the optimal purification of SG powder. The ionic bonds between the F and NH4 groups in NH4F break during fluorination roasting instead of forming stable covalent bonds with metal ions.269 The exhaust gases generated during the process are absorbed in the fluorinated leachate and the ammonium fluoride product is recovered by evaporation and crystallization. Purified graphite can also be obtained by vacuum pyrolysis and sieving at 1400 °C to remove organic materials such as binders and volatilize lithium elements.270,271 However, this process is characterized by complete metal loss, high energy consumption and serious exhaust gas pollution.
The purified graphite retains an ordered layered structure and can be used in LIBs, lithium oxygen batteries (LOBs), SIBs, and Al-ion batteries (AIBs). After microwave separation water leaching and heating, the purity of RG was improved and the content of fluorine impurities was reduced from 15.87% to 0.28%. RG showed excellent cycling stability and rate performance comparable to commercial graphite.259 The optimal performance of recycled graphite anodes can be achieved when using subcritical carbon dioxide for electrolyte extraction.284 By introducing an oxygen functional region during the leaching process, the graphite morphologies, Raman spectra, and XPS C/O ratios were similar to that previously reported for reduced graphite oxide. Asymmetric supercapacitors assembled using recycled nanowire-based cathodes and graphite as anodes showed an electrochemical performance close to the optimal values of Co–Ni and graphene-based supercapacitors.285 The graphite was heat-treated by ultrasonic water leaching in the presence of argon at 800 °C for 2 h to remove any residual contaminants. The recovered graphite, with expanded interlayer spacing, effectively improved the Al3+ insertion/detachment during charge/discharge. The assembled AIB exhibited a capacity of 124 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1, with high rate performance and long-term cycling stability.260 The acid-purified graphite could be directly used as an anode material for SIBs, exhibiting a high reversible capacity of 127 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 and an excellent long cycle life.262 The purified graphite was successfully repaired in volume and surface structure during regeneration from ambient temperature to high temperature coating at 1100 °C (Fig. 11d). The surface morphology of the purified graphite can be improved by coating modification, which is beneficial for the penetration of the electrolyte.271,283,286 In addition, the coaxial structure of the modified graphite surface realigned the Li+ diffusion channels and reconstructed the Li+ transport paths, resulting in a stable structure and effective restoration of the electrochemical performance (Fig. 11e). The improved Hummers' method and mechanical exfoliation method were employed to prepare two-dimensional graphene oxide by breaking the molecular bond connections between graphite layers, opening the channels between graphite layers and splicing them into flake graphite (Fig. 11f).264,287 The prepared graphene could be used as a cathode catalyst for rechargeable lithium–oxygen batteries with a maximum discharge capacity of 7084 mA h g−1 and long cycle stability for over 80 cycles.258 Due to the presence of some oxygen-containing groups and structural defects in the anode graphite, the consumption of concentrated H2SO4 and KMnO4 is 40% and about 28.6% less than that of graphene prepared from natural graphite, respectively.288 Graphene oxides have good prospects to be prepared as efficient catalysts by modification or can be reduced to graphene.289,290 Therefore, the preparation of graphene oxides from spent LIB anode materials is a very promising strategy for high-value utilization.


Net energy loss for metal resource recovery strategies. 
Spent anode graphite powder as an energy donor and reducing agent can convert the cathode material of LIBs at high temperature. The research progress of laboratory-scale graphite recycling technologies was thoroughly discussed above. The complete consumption of graphite as a reducing agent is also the only treatment for graphite in the industrial recycling of LIBs. For example, Umicore uses the battery shell, cathode material, plastic diaphragm, and other parts to provide the reducing agent and energy to directly reduce the cathode material at high temperature. Subsequently, the final metal is recycled in the form of an alloy. However, this process consumes a lot of energy and there are concerns about the CO2 gas produced when graphite is oxidized. Accordingly, it is encouraging to see indications that industry is taking notice of the graphite recycling/reuse process. Ascend Elements, a lithium-ion battery recycling and engineered materials company, announced a partnership with Koura, a fluorine products and technology provider owned by Orbia, to extract battery-grade graphite material from spent LIBs. This proposed technology enables consistent yields of over 99.9% pure graphite with energy capacity and cycle life comparable to virgin battery-grade graphite cathode materials. Recycling graphite from batteries can address key material challenge in the battery supply chain and minimize the need to extract new materials.

3.4 Collector
Al foil and Cu foil are the collectors for the cathode and anode electrodes of commercial LIBs, respectively. The main function of the collector is to connect the active material by coating, collect and output the current generated by the active material, and input the electrode current to the active material. It requires high purity and good electrical conductivity, good chemical and electrochemical stability, high mechanical strength, and firm bonding with the active material. Given that Cu foil is easily oxidized at higher potentials, it is mainly used as the negative electrode with lower potentials, and its thickness is usually 6–12 μm. Alternatively, Al foil corrodes more seriously at lower potentials, and is mainly used as the positive collector, and its thickness is usually 10–16 μm. Thus, an impure collector composition can lead to opposing corrosion due to incompatible oxide film on the surface, and even the formation of LiAl alloy. An oxide film can be formed on both copper and aluminum surfaces. Although the oxide layer on the copper surface is a semiconductor and can conduct electrons, a thick oxide layer will result in high impedance. The aluminum surface oxide layer is an insulator and cannot conduct electricity. However, the oxide layer is extremely thin due to the tunnelling effect, and it becomes thicker when the conductivity is very low. Currently, polyvinyl fluoride (PVDF) is one of the most important and common adhesives owing to its good mechanical, chemical, and electrochemical properties.291 In addition, PVDF can affect the mechanical properties of electrodes and the electrochemical properties of active materials.292 Therefore, understanding the binding mechanism of PVDF with active materials and collectors is very important for developing separation processes for active material stripping and collector recovery.
Liu293et al. proposed a competitive binding model to simulate the binding force between the active materials C and PVDF, and electrochemical tests were performed on different electrode formulations suitable for the competitive binding model. The active material (AM) particles and acetylene black (AB) particles compete for the polymer binder, resulting in the formation of a fixed polymer layer on the electrode surface (Fig. 12a). The observed variations in electrode shape and performance of various electrode formulations were the result of this competition (Fig. 12b). However, the binding interaction among the active material, binder, and Al foil has not been thoroughly examined, despite the fact that this model works well for the binding interaction between the particles and binder. Zhong294et al. found that the binding interaction between LFP and PVDF was much stronger than that between PVDF and Al in LFP cells. In contrast, the binding interaction between NCM and PVDF was weaker than that between PVDF and Al in NCM cells. Although PVDF was evenly distributed between Al and NCM in the NCM cell, it was mostly distributed on the LFP surface of the LFP cell. Moreover, there was no chemical interaction between the surfaces of the active materials PVDF and Al in the LFP and NCM cells (Fig. 12c). The possible binding mechanism of PVDF in LIBs is the physical interaction among PVDF, the active material and Al. In the LFP cell, PVDF is mainly distributed on the surface of the active material, while it is uniformly distributed in the NCM cell (Fig. 12d). Furthermore, Widijatmoko295et al. showed that the interaction between graphite and PVDF is weaker than that between lithium metal oxide and PVDF. As the LIB cell ages, the mechanical strength and adhesion of the current collector and adhesive deteriorate.296,297 These results show that the physical bond between PVDF and collectors is a key factor affecting the recycling of the current collectors.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the formation of fixed polymer layers ba and bc on AM and AB, respectively, and the polymer binder redistribution when combining AM particles with the AB/PVDF composite. (b) Schematic of binder distributions between AB and AM at different electrode compositions. Reproduced from ref. 293 ©2012, ECS – The Electrochemical Society. (c) Simulated binding models of NCM batteries and LFP batteries. (d) Possible binding mechanisms of PVDF in lithium-ion batteries. Reproduced from ref. 294 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

Released in solid media. 
Most of the existing technologies are directed to the separation of the Al foil, which is due to the higher recovery value of Al foil-loaded oxide compared to the negative graphite. Currently, the current collectors can be recovered through their release in solid and liquid media. Solid-state separation methods are primarily driven thermally and mechanically. After pyrolysis at 550 °C for 2 h under N2, the active material can be efficiently separated from the current collector.298 The Al foil can also be separated and recovered by the controlled pyrolysis separation of mixed-type deficient LIBs, with purity of 99.92% (Fig. 13a).299 Heat treatment of the cathode sheets obtained by disassembly under CO2 atmosphere allowed the recovery of intact Al foils with a distinct metallic luster.300 However, excessive temperatures increased the corrosion (oxidation) of the Al foil and led to brittle behavior. Fine particles are produced during separation and lead to contamination of the active material and a certain degree of loss of Al foil. The organic binders encapsulated in the electrode particles are the main reason for the electrode materials being difficult to release from the foil and liberated from each other. Zhang301et al. found that the optimum pyrolysis temperature of the organic binder in the electrode material is 500 °C and the main pyrolysis products are fluorinated benzene and ester electrolytes. By pyrolysis, the release efficiency of the cathode increased from 82.88% to 99.78%, while that of the anode increased from 88.08% to 99.60%.
 Fig. 13  (a) Efficient separation of aluminum foil from mixed-type spent lithium-ion power batteries by pyrolysis. Reproduced from ref. 299 © 2021, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Schematic of LIB composition and example of liberation degree for an Al foil. Reproduced from ref. 303 © 2021, The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. (c) Illustration of the possible peeling off mechanism by ultrasonic-assisted acid scrubbing in facile acidic media (sulfuric and oxalic acidic). Reproduced from ref. 309 © 2020, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (d) Decomposition mechanism of PVDF in LiOH–LiNO3 eutectic system. Reproduced from ref. 311 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (e) Scheme showing the molecular structure of TEP and the dissolution of PVDF binder to release cathode particles from the Al foil substrate. Reproduced from ref. 312. Copyright © 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of comprehensive recycling of Al foil and active materials from the spent LIBs by electrolytic separation. Reproduced from ref. 313 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
The mechanical recycling process aims to separate particles according to their physical properties (such as size, shape and density) as well as physicochemical surface properties (such as wettability).302 The release process of the active substance from each LIB component under mechanical actuation was monitored and diagnosed by Vanderbruggen303et al. using automated mineralogy as an analytical tool. The selective liberation of copper foil was achieved compared to Al foil (i.e., 54.7% vs. 31.8%). This was related to the presence of residual PVDF binder on the surface of the metallic LIBs and the Al foil (Fig. 13b). Pneumatic separation also separates the valuable current collector and the hazardous separator in waste LIBs to avoid plastic contamination caused by the separators. The turbulence in the pneumatic separator and the variation in the high-speed zone facilitate the separation of the current collector and separator. The current recycling rates of the collectors and separators are about 99.23% and 98.64%, respectively.304 Abrasive scrubbing also achieved selective liberation of Al and Cu; however, with lower recoveries of 7.0 wt% and 6.1 wt%, respectively.305 Froth flotation is a physicochemical process that separates fine particles based on their surface properties.306 Mechanical forces break the adhesion between the ferrous material and the collector.307 The isohydrophobic particles can be selectively attached to the bubbles and separated from the hydrophilic particles after release. Therefore, Recovery of Cu foil and Al foil from spent LIBs by froth flotation is found to be a sustainable method.


Released in liquid media. 
Separation of the active material from the current collector can also be achieved in liquid media to recover the collector. The medium can be inorganic and organic phases, such as water and inorganic salts, which are commonly used separation media. Localized in situ base formation is achieved in the electrode by taking advantage of the increase in residual lithium compounds on the surface of the degraded particles and employing water as the dispersion medium. In a short time, Al foil was successfully separated from the cathode active material.308 Even fairly diluted solutions can greatly increase the stripping efficiency and aluminum purity compared to pure aqueous ultrasonic washing in acidic solutions (i.e., sulfuric and oxalic acid media). Approximately 99%, 100% and 46% of the coating material could be separated in sulfuric acid, oxalic acid and pure water media, giving a corresponding purity of 98%, 99% and 15% for Al foils, respectively. The formation of HO· radicals and strong oxidation were enhanced in the acidic ultrasonic solution, causing the rapid degradation of the adhesive (Fig. 13c).309 The –OH generated by ultrasonically enhanced Fenton's reagent also effectively degraded the PVDF binder, scrubbing about 97% of the cathode material from the Al foil.310 In Na2S solution, the crystal structure of LFP is firstly destroyed by sulfide and therefore LFP particles are separated from the matrix of PVDF binder. The reduced mechanical strength of the PVDF binder results in a greater susceptibility of brittle exfoliation caused by the hydrogen microburst force produced by the reaction of Al foil with water.84 This process allows for the selective stripping of LFP from a variety of hybrid systems.
The recovery efficiency of alkaline solutions and organic solvent methods currently used to separate Al foil from the cathode material still needs to be improved. Therefore, other reaction media have been investigated. Deep eutectic solvents such as AlCl3–NaCl molten salt and chlorocholine–glycerol were used to strip the cathode material from Al foil, but this treatment introduced impurities of aluminum and sodium.314 Eutectic mixtures of lithium compounds have been investigated as an efficient and environmentally friendly method for separating and recovering active cathode materials and Al foils. The LiOH–LiNO3 eutectic system promoted the decomposition of polyvinylidene fluoride binders and captured the released HF (Fig. 13d).311 Processes based on lithium compound eutectic systems offer an alternative to organic solvents for binder removal, potentially facilitating the sustainable recycling of spent LIBs.
Based on the principle of “similar solubility”, PVDF can be dissolved in a range of organic solvents with similar properties, such as N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solvents.315 However, these two solvents are highly toxic and harmful to the operator, demanding more environmentally friendly and safer alternatives. Triethyl phosphate (TEP) is considered to be a good alternative to highly toxic solvents. TEP allows the recovery of the cathode material from spent LIBs as well as Al foil. The recovered cathode material exhibited no morphological or crystalline changes, and the Al foil is completely recovered without any corrosion (Fig. 13e).312 Similarly, ethylene glycol was used to instantly delaminate the electrode material at low temperatures. The recovered current collector was intact and free of corrosion. The solvent could be continuously reused and the ultra-fast delamination was driven by competitive inhibition of binding by weakening the hydrogen bonds. Thus, glycol-based separation is a sustainable electrode recycling process that paves the way for battery recycling.316
Electrochemical methods are considered to be green environmental and easily controlled strategy for the electrolytic leaching of metals from spent LIB electrodes. In the designed electrolysis cell, the gas species generated by the oxidation of the solvent molecules at the interface between the electrode/cathode material and active particles/binder exert forces that separate the bound particles from the current collector. Generally, the spent cathode is set up as an anode in a weak acidic environment and the current collector of the Al foil is well preserved under cathodic protection during the electrolysis process and recycled in the form of uninterrupted foil.317 The positive active material and the Al foil can be entirely separated by utilizing sodium sulfate as the electrolyte, Al foil as the anode, and Al plate as the cathode (Fig. 13f).313

3.5 Electrolyte
The composition of a commercial electrolyte consists of three main parts, i.e., solvent, Li salt and additives. Considering the cost of battery materials, electrolyte accounts for about 10% of the overall battery cost. From the viewpoint of environmental pollution, the electrolyte can form organophosphates and corrosive fluorine-containing substances in the natural environment. Thus, considering the price and type of pollution of the electrolyte, its recycling is a matter of concern. However, the recycling of the electrolyte is currently not taken seriously because of the slow processing and low added value of the product. In the pyrometallurgy recycling process, the electrolyte is cracked in the atmosphere.318 In liquid-phase treatment, the electrolyte enters the solution, and finally needs to be treated. Therefore, electrolyte recovery is the last and the most important step in the closed-loop recycling of spent LIBs.

Electrolyte recycling techniques for LIBs. 
Given that the processes of intercalation, de-lithiation, and circulation of the electrode materials always involve interaction with the electrolyte, even though the electrode material is a prerequisite for determining the specific capacity of LIBs, it also significantly influences the reversible capacity of the electrode materials. The influence of the electrolyte on the battery performance is shown in the following aspects: reduction reaction of the electrolyte, oxidation reaction of the electrolyte, and generation of impurities in the electrolyte.319–321 After long-term charge–discharge aging, the electrolyte is severely decomposed, the structure of the active material is degraded, and the anode electrode impedance increases sharply. Consequently, the lithium dendrites are continuously induced to deposit and react with the electrolyte, forming a thick interfacial blocking layer (IBL) and consuming a large amount of electrolyte. Therefore, researchers tried to repair the failed LIBs by adding electrolytes.322 The capacity recovery must fulfil two requirements, i.e., sufficient Li+ addition to restore the offset of the state of charge of the cathode and the electrochemical dissolution of IBL on the surface of anode electrode to reopen the Li+ deintercalation channel.
The electrolyte recovery techniques for LIBs include organic solvent extraction,323 carbon dioxide supercritical extraction,324 and pyrolysis.325 Among them, the former two methods retain the intrinsic material structure and energy of the electrolyte to a greater extent. Alternatively, the pyrolysis method uses the electrolyte as an energy donor for the high-temperature solid-phase transformation of the electrode materials to achieve the recovery of valuable metals. The energy of the electrolyte is completely consumed in this process. Extraction is one of the most efficient separation methods for recovering electrolytes from spent LIBs. Organic solvents such as ethanol can extract LiPF6, and the ethanol can be reused by distillation. The recovered electrolyte can be cost-effectively used to prepare Li2SiF6.323 Compared to organic solvent extraction, supercritical CO2 extraction avoids the introduction of solvent impurities in the electrolyte and simplifies the purification process of the extracted product. The electrolyte recovered by supercritical CO2 extraction exhibited a high ionic conductivity of 0.19 mS cm−1 at 20 °C, which is close to that of a commercial electrolyte having the same composition. However, the initial discharge specific capacity of the assembled Li/LiCoO2 cells was only 115 mA h g−1, and the capacity decayed rapidly in the initial cycles.324 Although the results of this study provide ideas for the purification and reuse of electrolytes, the electrolyte used in the experiments was not obtained from the disassembly of spent batteries. Before considering practical implementation, there are still issues to be resolved. Due to the volatility of the electrolyte, it is extremely difficult to separate and retain it after dismantling batteries. Also, collecting the electrolyte is a challenge in recycling the electrolyte from spent batteries at present. About 99.91% of the organic electrolyte in spent LIBs could be volatilized by low temperature, and the exhaust gas was cleaned by NaOH solution at the end of the process. After the volatilization process, the lithium electrolyte salt (LiPF6) dissolved in the organic electrolyte was treated by pyrolysis.298 However, the active materials adsorb electrolyte residues on their surface and in their pores.325 Therefore, the cathode and anode materials attached to the electrolyte are usually mixed and calcined together for solvent extraction to recover lithium salts (e.g., fluoride, and phosphate) in high yield (90 wt%).318 The CO2-assisted pyrolysis of LiPF6 in carbonate solvents was found to have mainly liquid (carbonate, cyclic and aliphatic hydrocarbons) and gaseous products (H2, CO, CH4, C2H4 and CO2). The complex mixture of pyrolysis products requires additional separation processes to recover each compound. Catalytic pyrolysis allows the conversion of complex mixture samples into valuable chemicals.326


Available recycling technologies for electrolyte in next-generation rechargeable batteries. 
Solid-state lithium batteries (SSLBs) have been regarded as the successor of LIBs in recent years due to their high energy density, small size, flexibility, and high safety.327,328 Therefore, the recycling of SSLBs has become a current concern for batteries that have not yet experienced widespread commercialization, especially the recycling of solid-state electrolytes (SSE). SSLBs use a glass compound made of lithium as the conducting substance to replace the electrolyte of conventional LIBs. Solid-state electrolytes such as anti-calcite electrolytes composed of Li (or Na), O, Cl (or Br)329 and porous crystalline inorganic–organic materials based on metal–organic backbone (MOF)330 have been widely developed.331 The efficient, green and pollution-free recycling of solid-state electrolytes, which are the core components of SSLBs, will show great application value and significance in environmental protection and energy saving. Moreover, waste SSE recycling is considered a technically feasible, environmentally friendly and sustainable solution to reduce the negative environmental impact of solid hazardous waste end-of-life and disposal.332
Similarly, current recycling techniques for SSE are based on the complete retention of intrinsic energy and loss of intrinsic energy. The former maximizes the recycling of SSE, while the latter recovers lithium salts from SSE to reduce the cost of SSLBs. Among the solid-state electrolytes, inorganic garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) electrolyte is considered a promising candidate due to its high mechanical strength, good electrochemical stability to the lithium metal cathode, and high ionic conductivity.333,334 To address the short-circuiting problem of LLZO caused by lithium dendrite penetration at a lower critical current density (CCD),335,336 Wang337et al. achieved direct reuse of the short-circuited LLZO electrolyte by rapidly restoring the electrochemical properties of LLZO via the in situ reaction of lithium dendrites and their oxidized derivatives with LLZO grains at 900 °C (Fig. 14a). The electrochemical properties of LLZO could be well recovered even after multiple short circuits (Fig. 14b), considerably extending the service life of the LLZO solid electrolyte. In addition, Qin332et al. proposed a deformation-driven re-sintering (DDR) method to recycle garnet-type SSE (Fig. 14c). DDR is a derived metal powder sintering technology. The strong deformation effect totally splits the electrolyte particles338 and produces a prime embryo with a high pre-compaction density by applying a strong torsional force and high pressure in a short period. The completely crushed electrolyte particles possess high sintering activity, which facilitates grain fusion and promotes the absorption of the lithium source. Meanwhile, the strong deformation facilitates the transition from tetragonal to cubic phase of garnet-type solid electrolytes and suppresses the lithium/hydrogen substitution process (Fig. 14d). The obtained pure cubic solid electrolyte had a continuous, uniform and stable intergranular interface. Moreover, the Li-symmetric battery assembled with the solid electrolyte recycled by the DDR technology still achieved a capacity retention rate of 89.7% (0.5C) after 400 cycles. DDR technology has high application value in recycling SSE and is an effective way to improve the environmental affinity and economic feasibility of the battery industry.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of targeted recovery process. (b) Cycling performances of LiAl|garnet|LFP full cell. Reproduced from ref. 337 © 2022, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (c) DDR route with completely broken particles enabled by severe deformation process. (d) Crystal structure evolution with high temperature. Reproduced from ref. 332 © 2022, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (e) Recycling routes for thermally depolymerizable polyether electrolytes. (f) Charge–discharge voltage profiles and cycling performance of all-solid-state Li/LiFePO4 cell using the PEO-R-LiTFSI as the SPE with a loading of 3.2 mg cm−2 at 0.15C and 62 °C. Reproduced from ref. 339 © 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (g) Proposed solvation structure of the designed liquefied gas electrolyte. (h) Schematic of the practical process of liquefied gas solvent collection and recycling. (i) Comparison of the electrochemical performance of Li/NMC622 system for the initial cell and the cell using recycled solvents. Reproduced from ref. 340 Copyright © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Limited. 
Currently, the Li+ in polymer electrolytes is mainly derived from the applied lithium salts, with lithium bis-trifluoromethanesulfonimide (LiTFSI) being the most widely used owing to its high thermal stability and stability in water/oxygen.341 However, LiTFSI is more than twice as expensive as LiPF6,342 limiting its large-scale applications in SSLBs. Therefore, the recycling of LiTFSI will help reduce both the cost of SSLBs and the burden on the environment. Li339et al. found that the strong interaction between polyethylene oxide (PEO) long chains and Li+ in conventional PEO electrolytes under Lewis acid-catalyzed conditions promoted the dissociation of lithium salts and Li+ transport, but also hindered their efficient recycling (Fig. 14e). The strong interaction between polymer long chains and LiTFSI is weakened by the thermal decomposition driven by polyethers such as PEO, which helps to reduce the difficulties of recycling LiTFSI. Considering this, our research team proposed a method to recycle LiTFSI via the high-temperature pyrolysis of polymer electrolytes, achieving a recycling rate of 80% of LiTFSI. When the recycled LiTFSI was used as the electrolyte lithium source, the assembled Li/LiFePO4 cell had a flat charge/discharge voltage profile at 3.4–3.5 V with an average discharge capacity of 135 mA h g−1 (Fig. 14f). This research will contribute to the rapid progress in the large-scale applications of SSLBs. The researchers designed a liquefied gas electrolyte by adding liquefied ether to a mixture of nonflammable, low-solvated hydrofluorocarbons (Fig. 14g).340 The formed liquefied gas electrolyte was not only nonflammable, but also had fire extinguishing capabilities. In addition, the liquefied gas electrolyte could be efficiently recycled by means of the vapor pressure difference of the liquefied gas at different temperatures (Fig. 14h). The 1 M LiFSI-Me2O-TFE-PFE solvent from the recycled Li/NMC button cell was successfully transferred to the newly assembled Li/NMC cell without adding any additional solvent. The performance of the recycled battery was almost identical to that of the original battery, with almost the same capacity, efficiency and voltage distributions (Fig. 14i). This study provides insight into the design of multifunctional electrolytes and its feasible recycling process is anticipated to result in safer batteries.

3.6 Separator
Various organic separators in batteries are derived from fossil resources,343 and thus it is important to recover these materials from end-of-life electric vehicle batteries. Jung344et al. showed that the distribution of the pyrolysis products of organic separators in LIBs is highly dependent on the pyrolysis unit and temperature. Single-stage pyrolysis mainly produces C9–15 aliphatic liquid hydrocarbons, but dual-stage pyrolysis further converts them to benzene derivatives, H2, and C1–2 hydrocarbons. In addition, organic separators are also converted into energy-intensive products and platform chemicals through the pyrolysis process. Liquid hydrocarbons and gaseous C2 hydrocarbons are further decomposed to produce H2 when the NCM811 cathode material is used as a catalyst for catalytic pyrolysis.
The energy of matter itself is present in the microstructure of materials, where different materials have different microstructures. For example, in scrap cathode materials, usually Li occupies the octahedral positions (or Li occupies the tetrahedral positions in the case of LMO materials) and transition metals occupy the octahedral positions, relying on ionic bonds to hold them in place. Thus, the energy of the stationary scrap itself is stored in these metal-polyhedra. When the scrap material is recycled, its motion is altered and the energy stored in the metal polyhedra can be converted into other forms of energy, such as thermal energy. Therefore, the different microstructures of waste materials lead to different recycling techniques. Diverse recycling methods result from electrode materials with different structures and components, and the characteristics of the products ultimately determine how they are used. These elements organically form the tetrahedron of electrode material recycle technology (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Tetrahedron of material recycle technology is depicted. The interrelationships among structure, properties, processing, and performance have an impact on behavior in all recycle systems. 
4. Full lifecycle carbon neutrality for next-generation rechargeable batteries
Current state-of-the-art lithium-ion batteries are almost ubiquitous, appearing in every electronic device from calculators to electric automobiles, and even functioning as grid-scale energy storage devices. However, they are still rather expensive because of the limited availability of lithium metal sources and the sophisticated internal preventive measures they deploy to prevent dangerous overcharging and combustion. Therefore, LIBs are neither the last energy storage solution nor the answer to a carbon-free economy. The next generation of batteries must discover a means to boost the energy density, shorten the charging times, and extend the battery life, while avoiding the potentially dangerous spontaneous combustion that plagues current lithium-ion batteries. Consequently, much research and development have focused on finding low-cost, dependable, and long-lasting energy solutions that also employ plentiful, safe, reusable, and sustainable materials (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of next-generation rechargeable batteries to help carbon neutrality. 
4.1 Crystal structure of next-generation rechargeable batteries
The energy density of LIBs is still being optimized by scientists. Li+ moves back and forth across the electrolyte, filling the vacancies in the crystal structures of the anode and cathode. The capacity of LIBs is defined by the physical volume of the two electrodes. On the cathode side, high nickel ternary compounds are still being explored. However, the issues such as poor stability and safety of high nickel materials must be addressed immediately.345 Thus, LFP and LMO cathode materials with greater stability and safety are expected to occupy market share in the future.346,347 Anodes usually made of carbon, are being phased out in favour of silicon anodes. The theoretical specific capacity of silicon is more than ten times that of graphite, but its application as an anode in post-Li-ion batteries faces significant challenges.348 Silicon has the potential to damage batteries given that its volume can change by up to 300% between charging and discharging. Thus, to keep the silicon controllable under pressure, a sophisticated method is required to assemble the cell components. The amount of energy that silicon anode batteries can store is roughly half that of other commercial batteries. This suggests that gadgets will have a longer battery life and weigh less in the near future. Silicon anodes for high energy density and low-cost LIBs will also be implemented on a large scale to promote the greater implementation of electric vehicles.
Although scientists have been interested in lithium metal since the late 1960s, its industrial applications have only just started to appear. Pure lithium is the pinnacle of anode technology. A pure metal electrode with an extremely high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) serves as the only means of storing lithium.349 This enables batteries to retain more energy by raising them to new heights.350 For the practical incorporation of lithium metal anodes in rechargeable lithium metal batteries, a number of obstacles must be overcome. Given that they have the ability to pierce the cell and short-circuit, the formation of the lithium dendrites can pose major safety problems. Lithium is a highly reactive metal that will overheat and catch fire if exposed to water or oxygen. In addition, lithium metal is thermodynamically unstable due to its high Fermi energy level, which may lead to irreversible and continuous reactions between it and the electrolyte. A thick solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer is generated on the surface of the lithium metal, consuming lithium and the electrolyte and increasing the internal resistance, thus shortening the cycle life.351 Thus, currently, interface engineering to inhibit lithium dendrite growth has been developed.352 The chemically stable solid-state electrolyte forms a protective barrier around the lithium metal, preventing it from dissolving or reacting with other materials.353,354 Solid-state batteries have generated a lot of interest and financial investment, but it is doubtful that this technology will be commercially available until later this century considering how slowly batteries have improved in the past, i.e., only 4% to 5% annually.
SIBs are resource-abundant, cost-effective and secure options, especially in large-scale grid decarbonization.355 Commercial SIBs have the potential to share the same engineering and manufacturing processes as LIBs, which is part of the attractiveness of their cost advantages. Furthermore, Na is 1000 times more abundant than lithium in the Earth's crust. This translates to a 30-fold reduction in feedstock cost of $150 per ton compared to $5000 for Li. SIBs have good safety performance, showing no fire and no explosion in pinprick, extrusion, overcharge and over-discharge tests. SIBs with better stability of Al foil as the negative current collector can achieve 0 V transport to reduce the safety risk of battery transportation. Researchers have been working on bringing SIBs to the market alongside LIBs. Ford engineers developed a sodium-sulfur battery for electric automobiles in 1968.356 It was basically made by dipping one tube of metallic sodium into another tube of liquid sulfur. Working only at high temperatures caused safety and longevity problems. It also explains why molten salt batteries are not yet widely used in mobile electronics. However, they may be used to power missile guiding systems and are also suitable for use in harsh settings. The cathode is also crucial to the overall viability of LIBs. The most common and most carefully studied class of cathode materials is sodium layered oxides, given that their crystal structure is very similar to that of lithium cobalt oxide, the first legally acceptable material in lithium-ion batteries. They have a crystal structure consisting of metal oxide sheets sandwiched by Na+, distinguished by the symbols P2, O3 and P3.357 Contemporary improved sodium ion batteries may be able to achieve a realistic specific energy comparable to the current lithium iron phosphate batteries of roughly 160 W h kg−1. However, the ionization potential or ionization energy of Na is lower than that of Li, and Na+ is larger and heavier than Li+, which tends to cause a large volume change of the electrode material when embedded in the positive and negative electrodes. Therefore, the energy density, rate capability, cycle life and operating voltage of SIBs will be lower than that of LIBs. In some applications, such as mobile phones and other electronic devices, SIBs will never be able to replace LIBs. However, short-range electric cars show promise, especially when coupled with fixed power networks. Thus, their lower energy density is not a complicating factor and solar and wind energy stations should be located in areas where space is less of an issue.358 Also, the cost savings are particularly advantageous in these expansive operational areas.
One of the most accessible and abundant elements on Earth is iron. Iron-air batteries are technology that have existed for a long time, but until recently there has not been a significant market force to draw funding for research and development. This is partly because of the size and weight of these batteries.359 Alternatively, iron-air technology may be a suitable option for stationary, utility-scale, long-duration energy storage. Unlike Li-ion technology, the electrochemistry of iron is limited to surface reactions, leading to the formation of redox layers on the surface of iron electrodes, especially in concentrated alkaline electrolytes.360 However, finding a water-resistant cathode material that can still breathe oxygen is one of the most difficult tasks. Iron-air batteries have a much higher potential energy density given that their capacity is only limited by the electrode surface area, which causes rust to build up on them. Theoretically, iron-air batteries have an energy density that is many times greater than that of lithium-ion batteries, at about 764 W h kg−1. Existing lithium-ion batteries cost $50 to $80 per kW h due to the use of nickel, cobalt, lithium, and manganese materials. A fraction of the price of lithium-ion batteries may be used to store energy in iron-air batteries. Iron-air batteries can replace lithium-ion batteries by offering about 150 hours of continuous discharge for short-term frequency management and grid stability. The natural gas generation of the grid may be completely replaced by this combination, allowing wind and solar to supply low-cost renewable energy that can combined with existing nuclear and hydro facilities to give reliable, carbon-free power throughout the year. Affordability, dependability, and carbon-free energy are the three fundamental factors of allocating energy resources. With the help of iron-air batteries, renewable energy sources such as wind and solar may be able to meet all three of these requirements, advancing the world closer to a carbon-neutral future.
Aluminum contributes to the construction of a battery that is long-lasting, lightweight, cost-effective, recyclable, and properly sourced. Aluminum–air batteries have the potential to be a critical battery solution for a more sustainable and ecologically friendly future.361 Aluminum–air batteries have existed since the 1960s, but due to the severely corrosive and poisonous electrolytes available at that time, they were declared inappropriate for commercial use. As research progressed, engineers were able to develop solutions to these initial challenges, leading to some promising results. Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the Earth's crust compared to lithium. Furthermore, aluminum is already processed, refined, and recycled by a well-established industry. It is already routinely recycled globally and its hydroxide, a byproduct, may be recycled to 100% Al. This predicts lower battery production costs, which will result in cheaper electric car pricing in the future. Aluminum–air batteries produce energy by making use of a process that occurs naturally when aluminum is exposed to air, rather than holding an electrical charge. Aluminum is consumed in the oxidation reaction, which creates aluminum hydroxide ions and releases electrons, which is a pure source of energy. An aluminum–air battery has nearly nine times the energy density of a lithium-ion battery of the same weight.362 However, due to the inherent deterioration of the aluminum anode, they cannot be recharged in the same manner as lithium-ion batteries. Another significant drawback is that the sludge accumulation during the oxidation process obstructs the electrochemical process, thus lowering the battery efficiency. Most corrosion mitigation methods are inadequate or compromise the power and energy density. High power and energy density can be achieved by replacing the oil with an electrolyte as the battery discharges.363 In addition, the recyclability of aluminum hydroxide helps in reducing some of the costs and consequences.
Various technologies strive to greatly increase the energy density, which will require several years to scale up to the point where they are cost competitive with lithium-ion batteries. This may occur in 2027 or 2028. Electric cars using lithium batteries will be cheaper than that with lithium-ion batteries by 2030, owing to their higher energy density, which will result in lower production costs across the board. By increasing the energy density, the total vehicle design may be simplified significantly with fewer production procedures per kilowatt-hour and less material, labor, and energy input. However, when used in a vehicle, simpler designs, more attractive vehicle structures, and more cost-effective automobiles may be employed. Thus, overall cost savings are the most important factor.
4.2 Full lifecycle carbon neutrality strategies for next-generation rechargeable batteries
Rechargeable batteries are the key to driving the revolution in electricity and transportation. The ability to achieve zero carbon in the manufacturing and life cycle of batteries is the most important prerequisite for their involvement in the revolution. However, low-carbon changes are needed in the battery production and manufacturing chain as well as in the use chain to benefit the carbon neutral strategy. When considering batteries and their carbon footprint, it is essential to mention that the batteries are powered by energy generated by coal-fired or natural gas-fired combined cycle power plants. What we may not realize is that other aspects of the battery lifecycle, such as mining and refining of battery materials, manufacturing of cells, modules and pack, and even waste disposal, all contribute to significant CO2 emissions (Fig. 17a). Throughout the life cycle of a battery, its assembly and use phases are the main contributors to CO2 emissions. Thus, a significant impact can be made when all these aspects are considered. When the energy source is optimized, the carbon impact for lithium-ion battery ranges from 61 to 106 kg CO2e per kW per h, while the upstream of cell production (mining, conversion and refining) is 59–70 kg CO2e per kW per h, and the carbon emissions from battery production and assembly is 2–47 kg CO2e per kW per h.364 Lithium, nickel, cobalt, manganese, copper, aluminum, iron, and other valuable metals used in cathodes are smelted from a limited number of minerals. The majority of the global cobalt production typically arises as a by-product of nickel and copper mining because few cobalt mines are concentrated enough to be worth mining.365 Nevertheless, the blasting and power consumption involved in cobalt mining are detrimental to the environment. Nickel can partially replace cobalt in cathode materials. However it is worth mentioning that nickel extraction is the most energy-intensive process, leading to eutrophication, global warming, and eco-toxicity, much beyond the role of cobalt and copper.366 Thus, long-term sustainability is impossible with this strategy. Copper and iron are now the most promising possibilities for environmentally friendly minerals. However, when utilized as battery materials, difficulties of stability, charging speed, and manufacturing must be addressed. CO2 emissions are higher for aluminum foil used as a cathode current collector than for copper foil used as an anode collector (Fig. 17b, calculated from the Greet model developed by Argonne Laboratories, USA367). Thus, to lessen the environmental impact and meet the criteria in the future, new low-CO2-emitting current collector materials should be developed. The environmental impact of lithium production is dominated by the leaching process, and the impact of rock is much greater than that of brine owing to the fact that rock-based mining technology requires considerable amounts of fossil fuel and chemicals to melt it.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of CO2 emissions during the battery life cycle. (b) CO2 emissions, GHG emissions and total energy consumption of raw materials used for battery production. (c) CO2 emissions, GHG emissions and total energy consumption of different lithium-ion battery cathode material production processes. The data for Fig. 17 is calculated from the Greet model developed by Argonne Laboratories, USA.367 
Next-generation energy storage batteries have cell material structures and assembly processes that are significantly different from existing LIBs. To solve the problem of recycling existing LIBs, it is first necessary to consider recycling aspects while developing new battery materials, such as simple disassembly and safe recycling. For example, binders that are easy to separate from the active materials after disassembly and electrolytes with high safety and stability. In addition, according to the current status of research on the recycling of LIBs, recycling technology based on the destruction of the intrinsic structure of material has problems of high energy consumption, high pollution, and high chemical consumption. When dealing with next-generation batteries, direct repair or upcycling processes should be chosen as much as possible. This is often based on solid-state (SS) synthesis and hydrothermal (HR) synthesis. However, it is worth noting that both feedstock-based production processes and resynthesis processes for recycled products have superior environmental advantages with solid-state synthesis for specific components, although there are slight differences (Fig. 17c).
5. Perspectives and challenges
The recycling of key battery materials is gradually becoming a key topic in the field of energy storage, which is also highly relevant to human life and social development. Combined with the current development and practical application of lithium-ion battery recovery technologies, it can be found that recovery technologies with severe intrinsic energy loss for waste materials often completely destroy the material structure, making the recovery process non-selective, and thus resulting in low metal recovery rates. In the future, we need to vigorously research and develop full intrinsic energy retention strategies and gradually realize the landing and industrialization of direct waste remediation and upgrading technologies. Here, we present some of our own ideas and prospects (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Summary and future outlook on recycling technologies for lithium-ion batteries and next-generation energy storage batteries. 
(1) How can the electrochemical characteristics of repair materials be improved using direct repair technology? Short-range direct material repair technology can achieve short-range clean cycle of scrap electrode materials, but the repaired electrode materials have low electrochemical activity. The following factors can be used to fix this issue in the future. On the one hand, the introduction of impurity elements needs to be reduced or avoided during the disassembly of the single cell and the separation of the active material from the current collector. Carrying out safe and effective automated disassembly is the main challenge. Especially for the large number of power batteries that will appear in the near future, the dismantling process needs to avoid fire and explosion and other safety accidents, while considering the automation efficiency and impurity threshold control issues. On the other hand, it is necessary to deeply study the influence of impurity element content on the electrochemistry of the repaired materials and optimize the screening of impurity elements with positive feedback to improve the electrochemical performance of the repaired materials. In addition, for complex situations such as mixed types of degraded lithium-ion batteries, various raw material compositions and different degrees of failure, the repair effect remains to be verified. In this case, it is necessary to consider the short-range cycle repair of mixed material systems and further study the coupling repair mechanism in depth. The development trend is to create a low-energy, environmentally benign direct repair process by combining the process design with green chemistry principles to realize the short-range repair of the hybrid system of spent LIBs.
(2) Where is the path for upcycling technology? When electrode waste is upcycled, the material structure is preserved to the maximum degree possible, giving the waste a second, dazzling life and products with superior performance and quality. Today, in addition to creating novel battery systems, one strategy for achieving high energy density energy storage batteries is to refine and advance the existing widely used electrode materials. This is what researchers are currently concentrating on. To keep up with the development trend, the upcycling process and the subsequent use of upcycled products for energy storage batteries should be tightly connected with material development technology. For example, it can be considered to modify the electrode material in situ, while repairing to improve the transport efficiency and electrochemical stability of Li+. In addition, for scrap with severe structural damage and low purity, it is no longer feasible to upcycle them for reuse in battery systems. In this case, the upcycled materials can be used in less demanding fields, with catalysis being the primary application currently. Multiple reuse scenarios will need to be created in the future to allow for the recycling of various electrode wastes.
(3) How can the selective conversion process for high-value products be made environmentally friendly? Solid-phase selective conversion recycling technology can realize the high-value reuse of recycled products in multiple scenarios. Although the conversion techniques developed by scholars have reduced the roasting temperature to a certain extent, there is still the problem of high energy consumption. In addition, the roasting conditions are challenging due to the need to control the product morphology and particle size. It is necessary to adopt effective strengthening means to reduce the solid-phase transformation temperature to reduce the energy consumption. This is an important research direction for future selective recycling methods to efficiently recover LIBs and achieve high value utilization of the recycled products. Toxic and harmful gases will be generated in the selective conversion process, and thus avoiding secondary pollution is also a key issue that needs to be considered in recycling process. In contrast, the advanced oxidation liquid-phase conversion technique is less selective and is currently only applicable to olivine-type crystalline materials. Also, the conversion products cannot be directly utilized and need to be pre-modified before their reuse. There are problems such as secondary pollution in wastewater and low treatment efficiency. In the future, we need to develop liquid-phase selective conversion recycling technologies for layered crystals and spinel crystal structure.
(4) How can the current LIB recycling technique be used to help the future generation of energy storage batteries? The raw materials for next-generation energy storage batteries will be abundant, but there is no end to the amount employed, and thus the sustainability of their key materials still needs to be the focus. According to the existing LIB recycling strategy, the structure and failure mechanism of key electrode materials need to be comprehensively analyzed to adopt the corresponding recycling technology. The process of complete structural destruction into atoms or molecules often has high energy consumption, high chemical consumption, high equipment requirements, certain environmental problems, and technical barriers. Thus, the recycling treatment of next-generation energy storage batteries should try to avoid the development of such technologies. For materials with serious crystal structure damage, selective conversion technologies should be adopted to achieve high-value recycling of resources. Further optimization is needed for both solid-phase and liquid-phase conversions. For example, the energy consumption of the solid-phase conversion process should be reduced, and the conversion parameters should be finely controlled to regulate the structure and morphology of the products. When liquid-phase conversion is adopted, the introduction of impurity ions should be avoided externally to significantly shorten the recycle process. In the case of wastes with high feedstock abundance and low economic value, short-range direct remediation or upcycling technologies should be used to obtain maximum economy after assessing the failure mechanism. However, these processes need to be optimized, such as the control of raw material impurity content and the regulation of product homogeneity. In the future, direct repair and upcycling of key materials for next-generation energy storage batteries will be the focus of research.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51972030), Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Z220021), the National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFB3800300), the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U2130204) and Beijing Outstanding Young Scientists Program (BJJWZYJH01201910007023).
Notes and references
P. Ruan, S. Liang, B. Lu, H. J. Fan and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Zheng, T. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Nai, L. Zhang, S. Zhang and X. Tao, Energy Storage Mater., 2023, 54, 120–134 CrossRef .
R. Bird, Z. J. Baum, X. Yu and J. Ma, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 736–740 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bai, X. Tang, C. Sun, Y. Zhang, W. Wu, S. Li, S. Liu, W. Zhao and Y. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12563–12573 CAS .
X. Zhu, F. Meng, Q. Zhang, L. Xue, H. Zhu, S. Lan, Q. Liu, J. Zhao, Y. Zhuang, Q. Guo, B. Liu, L. Gu, X. Lu, Y. Ren and H. Xia, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 392–401 CrossRef .
Q. Lu, P. F. Wu, W. X. Shen, X. C. Wang, B. Zhang and C. Wang, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2016, 847, 403–410 Search PubMed .
E. T. a. E. Consortium, How clean are electric cars?, accessed 2021.8.23, 2021.

          H. E. Melin, Analysis of the climate impact of lithium-ion batteries and how to measure it Transport & Environment, 2019.
P. Xu, Q. Dai, H. Gao, H. Liu, M. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Chen, K. An, Y. S. Meng, P. Liu, Y. Li, J. S. Spangenberger, L. Gaines, J. Lu and Z. Chen, Joule, 2020, 4, 2609–2626 CrossRef CAS .
Software Name: SF-18-022 EverBatt by Argonne National Laboratory,Copyright © 2018, UChicago Argonne, LLC, All Rights Reserved, https://www.anl.gov/amd/everbatt-download.
M. Mohr, J. F. Peters, M. Baumann and M. Weil, J. Ind. Ecol., 2020, 24, 1310–1322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, X. Zhang, L. Cai, E. Fan, S. Wu, S. Ma, F. Wu, R. Chen and L. Li, Adv. Energy Sustain. Res., 2022, 3, 2100153 CrossRef .
S. Baazouzi, F. P. Rist, M. Weeber and K. P. Birke, Batteries, 2021, 7, 74 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Q. Ding, Y. Zhao, J. Ai, Y. Li and Y.-C. Cao, Waste Manage. Res., 2020, 38, 1295–1300 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Meng, G. Xu, X. Peng, K. Youcef-Toumi and J. Li, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2022, 182, 106207 CrossRef .
J. Xiao, N. Anwer, W. Li, B. Eynard and C. Zheng, CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol., 2022, 38, 824–835 CrossRef .
M. Zorn, C. Ionescu, D. Klohs, K. Zähl, N. Kisseler, A. Daldrup, S. Hams, Y. Zheng, C. Offermanns, S. Flamme, C. Henke, A. Kampker and B. Friedrich, Recycling, 2022, 7, 48 CrossRef .
L. Li, P. Zheng, T. Yang, R. Sturges, M. W. Ellis and Z. Li, JOM, 2019, 71, 4457–4464 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marshall, D. Gastol, R. Sommerville, B. Middleton, V. Goodship and E. Kendrick, Metals, 2020, 10, 773 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nie, L. Xu, D. Song, J. Song, X. Shi, X. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. Yuan, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1276–1280 RSC .
J. Lin, J. Wu, E. Fan, X. Zhang, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, Int. J. Miner., Metall. Mater., 2022, 29, 942–952 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, T. He, Y. Lu, Y. Su, J. Tian, N. Li, G. Chen, L. Bao and F. Wu, J. Energy Storage, 2016, 8, 262–273 CrossRef .
T. H. X. Song, C. Liang, H. L. Long, L. Zhou, W. Song, L. You, Z. S. Wu and J. W. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4783–4790 RSC .
Z. Chi, J. Li, L. Wang, T. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Tao, M. Zhang, Y. Xiao and Y. Chen, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 9099–9108 RSC .
Y. Shi, G. Chen, F. Liu, X. Yue and Z. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1683–1692 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. Xiao, Y. Zhang, P. Dong, Q. Meng and M. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 16997–17006 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Liow, H. Kang, S. Kim, M. Na, Y. Lee, A. Baucour, K. Bang, Y. Shim, J. Choe, G. Hwang, S. Cho, G. Park, J. Yeom, J. C. Agar, J. M. Yuk, J. Shin, H. M. Lee, H. R. Byon, E. Cho and S. Hong, Nano Energy, 2022, 98, 107214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, M. Zhang, Y. S. Meng and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900454 CrossRef .
G. Jiang, Y. Zhang, Q. Meng, Y. Zhang, P. Dong, M. Zhang and X. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 18138–18147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin, Z. Wen, Y. Xu, Z. Zheng, M. Bai, N. Zhang, C. Jia, H. B. Wu and G. Chen, Small, 2022, e2106719,  DOI:10.1002/smll.202106719 .
X. Chen, Y. Feng, S. Zhang, W. Kou, H. Ji and G. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 900, 163308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, G. Chen and Z. Chen, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 851–862 RSC .
P. Xu, Z. Yang, X. Yu, J. Holoubek, H. Gao, M. Li, G. Cai, I. Bloom, H. Liu, Y. Chen, K. An, K. Z. Pupek, P. Liu and Z. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4543–4553 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, Q. Yan, P. Xu, H. Liu, M. Li, P. Liu, J. Luo and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51546–51554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, H. Luo, Y. Bai, J. Li, I. Belharouak and S. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001204 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Kim, J.-S. Sohn, C.-K. Lee, J.-H. Lee, K.-S. Han and Y.-I. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 145–149 CrossRef CAS .
D. Peng, X. Wang, S. Wang, B. Zhang, X. Lu, W. Hu, J. Zou, P. Li, Y. Wen and J. Zhang, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 4544–4556 RSC .
T. Yang, Y. Lu, L. Li, D. Ge, H. Yang, W. Leng, H. Zhou, X. Han, N. Schmidt, M. Ellis and Z. Li, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2019, 4, 1900088 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Z. Xu and Z. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11596–11605 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fan, Q. Meng, X. Chang, C.-F. Gu, X.-H. Meng, Y.-X. Yin, H. Li, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103630 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Z. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, J. C.-Y. Jung, J. Zhang and S. Xu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 4981–4991 RSC .
J. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Sheng, Z. Liang, J. Ma, Y. Chen, G. Zhou and H.-M. Cheng, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2022, 9, nwac097 CrossRef PubMed .

          Q. Dai, L. Gaines, J. Spangenberger, J. C. Kelly, S. Ahmed and M. Wang, EverBatt: Argonne's closed-loop battery recycling model clears path to clean transportation.
Z. Fei, Y. Zhang, Q. Meng, P. Dong, Y. Li, J. Fei, H. Qi and J. Yan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 432, 128664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Zhang and W. Zhang, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 156, 104688 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Y.-L. Zhao, X. Lou, T. Zhou, Z. Wang, C. Fang, J. Guan, S. Chen, X. Xu and R.-Q. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 399, 123090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, H. Cao, J. Hao, P. Ning, G. Xu and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5797–5805 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, K. Du, G. Hu, Z. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(6), 3235–3241 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, K. Wu, M. Chen, Y. Lee, D. Chen, M. Wu, F. Li, X. Xiao and Z. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, X. Xia, Z. Chi, Z. Yang, H. Huang, Z. Chen, W. Tang, G. Wu, H. Chen and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 9724–9735 RSC .
Y. Han, Y. You, C. Hou, X. Xiao, Y. Xing and Y. Zhao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 040525 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. Hou, P. Vanaphuti, Z. Yao, J. Fu, L. Azhari, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem, 2022, 8, 1944–1955 CAS .
J. Wu, J. Lin, E. Fan, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 2607–2615 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fan, J. Lin, X. Zhang, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, C. Liu, G. Xu, C. Miao, M. Wen, M. Xu, C. Wang and W. Xiao, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 438, 135537 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Q. Zhang, S. Dai, W. Li, X. Liu, F. Ding and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34153–34162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, A. Wei, W. Li, X. Bai, L. Zhang, X. Li, R. He, L. Yang and Z. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 362–373 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Tian, X. Ma, Q. Ping, B. Wang and Y. Xia, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 363, 285–291 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, C. Tan, Y. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Huang, Q. Pan, F. Zheng, H. Wang and Q. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 410, 124610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Zhang, P. Dong, Y. Zhang, Q. Meng, S. Zhou, X. Yang, M. Zhang and X. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 860, 157909 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, Z. Fei, Q. Meng, P. Dong, Y. Zhang and M. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 12677–12687 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fei, S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Meng, P. Dong, Y. Li, J. Fei, H. Qi, J. Yan and X. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 6853–6862 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, W. Deng, Z. Xu and X. Wang, Carbon Energy, 2023, 5, e231 CAS .
Y. Lei, J. Zhang, X. Chen, W. Min, R. Wang, M. Yan and J. Xu, Mater. Today Energy, 2022, 26, 100997 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Li, J. Li, H. Xie and Y. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 845, 156234 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Meng, H.-J. Liang, C.-D. Zhao, W.-H. Li, Z.-Y. Gu, M.-X. Yu, B. Zhao, X.-K. Hou and X.-L. Wu, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 64, 166–171 CrossRef CAS .
X.-J. Nie, X.-T. Xi, Y. Yang, Q.-L. Ning, J.-Z. Guo, M.-Y. Wang, Z.-Y. Gu and X.-L. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, E. Fan, X. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Dai, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang and G. Ceder, Joule, 2019, 3, 1252–1275 CrossRef CAS .
M. Aykol, S. Kim, V. I. Hegde, D. Snydacker, Z. Lu, S. Hao, S. Kirklin, D. Morgan and C. Wolverton, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kalluri, M. Yoon, M. Jo, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou, J. Cho and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605807 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zuo, Z. Hu, R. Qi, J. Liu, Z. Li, J. Lu, C. Dong, K. Yang, W. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Song, S. Song, Y. Yu, J. Zheng and F. Pan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000363 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Parikh, A. Ahmadi, M. H. Parekh, F. Sadeghi and V. G. Pol, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 3757–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Cui, X. Zhang, E. Fan, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, E. Fan, X. Zhang, R. Huang, X. Zhang, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 18623–18631 RSC .
J. Lin, E. Fan, X. Zhang, R. Chen, F. Wu and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, L. Li, E. Fan, C. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Cao, Z. Sun and R. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18482–18489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, Q. Xu, H. Jin, L. Zeng, Y. Wang, W. Lai, Q. Yao, J. Zhang, Q. Chen and Q. Qian, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2022, 913, 116287 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, X. Zhao, J. Lu, J. Li, Z. Miao, W. Xu, Y. Deng and A. L. Rogach, Sci. China Mater., 2022, 65, 2393–2400 CrossRef CAS .
E. Paone, M. Miceli, A. Malara, G. Ye, E. Mousa, E. Bontempi, P. Frontera and F. Mauriello, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 2275–2281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, G. Wang and Z. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 302, 97–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, D. Wang, H. Chen, L. Yang, Y. Yu and L. Xu, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 339, 114983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, C. Liu, H. Cao, R. Chen, Y. Yang, L. Li and Z. Sun, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5904–5913 RSC .
K. He, Z. Y. Zhang and F. S. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 386, 121633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, W. Gao, X. Zhang, M. He, X. Lin, H. Cao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Waste Manag., 2017, 60, 680–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Bian, X. Zhang, Y. Guan, E. Fan, F. Wu and R. Chen, Waste Manag., 2018, 71, 362–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Horeh, S. M. Mousavi and S. A. Shojaosadati, J. Power Sources, 2016, 320, 257–266 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Kumar, U. U. Jadhav, M. Munusamy, L. Ji, E. H. Yang and B. Cao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12343–12352 CrossRef .
M. P. Do, J. Jegan Roy, B. Cao and M. Srinivasan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 2634–2644 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, M. Ye, J. Liang, Z. Guan, S. Li, Y. Deng, Q. Gan, Z. Liu, X. Fang and S. Sun, Sci. Total Environ., 2022, 830, 154577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mishra, D. J. Kim, D. E. Ralph, J. G. Ahn and Y. H. Rhee, Waste Manag., 2008, 28, 333–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Biswal, U. U. Jadhav, M. Madhaiyan, L. Ji, E.-H. Yang and B. Cao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12343–12352 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guan, Y. Li, Y. Guo, R. Su, G. Gao, H. Song, H. Yuan, B. Liang and Z. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 5, 1026–1032 CrossRef .
S. Natarajan, S. Anantharaj, R. J. Tayade, H. C. Bajaj and S. Kundu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 14382–14392 RSC .
I. L. Santana, T. F. M. Moreira, M. F. F. Lelis and M. B. J. G. Freitas, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 190, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chang, K. Sun, Y. Liu, H. Wang and F. Li, Ionics, 2022, 28, 2239–2246 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, Z. Ding, Y. Ling, J. Li, X. Zhuge, Z. Luo, Y. Ren and K. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 440, 135880 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, K. Zhou, X. Zhang, C. Peng, Y. Jiang and W. Chen, Waste Manag., 2022, 144, 303–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Waste Manag., 2015, 45, 306–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Chen, T. Zhou, D. Liu, H. Hu and S. Fan, Waste Manag., 2015, 38, 349–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yan, R. Wang, C. Shao, Z. Tong, T. Li, L. Yuan, G. Sheng and K. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 440, 227140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Joulié, R. Laucournet and E. Billy, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 551–555 CrossRef .
C. Kyoung and L.-I. Rhee, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 17–21 CrossRef .
K. H. Chan, J. Anawati, M. Malik and G. Azimi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4398–4410 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xuan, A. de Souza Braga and A. Chagnes, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 10, 582–593 CrossRef .
T. Li, Y. Xiong, X. Yan, T. Hu, S. Jing, Z. Wang and X. Ge, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 72, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, Y. Feng, C. Wang, D. Fang, G. Yi, Z. Gao, P. Shao, C. Liu, X. Luo and S. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133232 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Gu, Y. Guo, X. Dai, L. Zeng, K. Wang, C. He, G. Dodbiba, Y. Wei and T. Fujita, Hydrometallurgy, 2021, 205, 105746 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Zheng, H. Cao, C. Zhao, X. Lin, P. Ning, Y. Zhang, W. Jin and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9972–9980 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, Y. Zhang and P. Dong, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Cao, D. Kang, J. Li, T. Zhou and H. Ma, Waste Manag., 2018, 80, 198–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nshizirungu, A. Agarwal, Y. T. Jo, M. Rana, D. Shin and J. H. Park, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 393, 122367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nshizirungu, M. Rana, Y. T. Jo and J. H. Park, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 414, 125575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Ge, R. Chen, F. Wu, S. Chen and X. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2010, 30, 2615–2621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Li and B. Shen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 295, 112–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Bian, S. Xu, E. Fan, Q. Xue, Y. Guan, F. Wu, L. Li and R. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5959–5968 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Meng, H. Cao, X. Lin, C. Liu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 3121–3133 RSC .
L. Li, J. Lu, Y. Ren, X. X. Zhang, R. J. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2012, 218, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Zhang, R. Chen, T. Zhao, J. Lu, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2014, 249, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Nayaka, K. V. Pai, G. Santhosh and J. Manjanna, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2378–2383 CrossRef CAS .
S. Natarajan, K. Krishnamoorthy and S. J. Kim, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 430, 128496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-P. He, S.-Y. Sun, Y.-Y. Mu, X.-F. Song and J.-G. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 5, 714–721 CrossRef .
X. Chen, D. Kang, J. Li, T. Zhou and H. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 389, 121887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, M. Guo, Y. Xue, J.-N. Gu, J. Li, F. Shi, X. Guo, X. Min, J. Jia, K. Li and T. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 135000 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Ge, F. Wu, R. Chen, S. Chen and B. Wu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 176, 288–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Z. Zhang, F. Xue, B. Yang, G. Guo and J. Qiu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2019, 215, 398–402 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Xue, J. N. Gu, J. Li, F. Shi, X. Guo, M. Guo, X. Min, K. Li, T. Sun and J. Jia, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 427, 127910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X.-Y. Lin, Y. Tang, Q. Wang, M. K. H. Leung and X.-Y. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 436, 226828 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, W. Song, W. T. Mo, L. Zhou and J. W. Liu, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 8990–8998 RSC .
H. Mahandra and A. Ghahreman, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2021, 175, 105883 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, W. Qu, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 544–551 CrossRef CAS .
S. Natarajan, H. C. Bajaj and R. J. Tayade, Waste Manage., 2018, 77, 455–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, S. Wang, Y. Gao, T. Yang, Q. Zhou, W. Song, C. Zeng, H. Wu, C. Feng and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6952–6959 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, S. H. Luo, F. Su, L. Zhang, S. Yan, X. Lei, W. Mu, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and P. Hou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 11359–11374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, C. Liu, G.-S. Ha, Y.-K. Park, M. Ali Khan, M. Jang, S.-H. Kim, M. A. Amin, A. Gacem and B.-H. Jeon, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 447, 137597 CrossRef .
M.-C. Fan, Y. Zhao, Y.-Q. Kang, J. Wozny, Z. Liang, J.-X. Wang, G.-M. Zhou, B.-H. Li, N. Tavajohi and F.-Y. Kang, Rare Met., 2022, 41, 1595–1604 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, B. Zhang, L. Ye, Z. Xiao, L. Ming and X. Ou, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 349, 131373 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, K. Huang, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, W. Jin, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang and P. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11489–11495 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Meng, Y. Zhang and P. Dong, Waste Manag., 2018, 71, 372–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, S. Wang, F. Yan, Z. Zhang, X. Shen and Z. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2020, 114, 253–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ku, Y. Jung, M. Jo, S. Park, S. Kim, D. Yang, K. Rhee, E. M. An, J. Sohn and K. Kwon, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 313, 138–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun and K. Qiu, Waste Manag., 2012, 32, 1575–1582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hua, Z. Xu, B. Zhao and Z. Zhang, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 3723–3735 RSC .
S. Dang, W. Hou, Y. Min, J. Wu, Q. Xu and P. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 135169 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, Z. Lu and W. Zhang, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2021, 167, 105416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, R. Wang, Y. Qi, Y. Han, R. Wang, J. Fu, F. Meng, X. Yi, J. Huang and J. Shu, J. Power Sources, 2021, 482, 228942 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, X. Zhou, J. Tang, X. Liu, H. Gan and J. Yang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 417, 126032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Chen, S. Yan, S. Li and T. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 131637 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Dai, D. Hua, H. Gu and N. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 3979–3984 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi, J. Kim, S. K. Kim and Y. S. Yun, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, B. Zhang, H. Xie, J. Qu, X. Qu, P. Xing and H. Yin, Environ. Res., 2020, 181, 108803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Zhang, X. Zhang and E. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 5611–5620 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, Z. Wang, H. Cao, X. Zheng, W. Jin, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Waste Manag., 2018, 79, 545–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Meshram, B. D. Pandey and T. R. Mankhand, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 281, 418–427 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zou, Z. Yang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. Zhang, Q. Meng and P. Dong, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 300, 113710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qiu, B. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. Hu, W. Deng, G. Zou, H. Hou, Y. Yang, W. Sun, Y. Hu, X. Cao and X. Ji, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 2506–2515 RSC .
Z. Wu, T. Soh, J. J. Chan, S. Meng, D. Meyer, M. Srinivasan and C. Y. Tay, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 9681–9692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, X. Cao, G. Huang, Q. Tian and H. Sun, J. Environ. Manage., 2017, 198, 84–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song and Z. Zhao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2018, 206, 335–342 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Joo, D. Shin, C. Oh, J.-P. Wang and S. M. Shin, J. Power Sources, 2016, 305, 175–181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Xu and Y. He, Waste Manag., 2017, 64, 219–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Hamza, H. Mira, Y. Wei, S. M. Aboelenin, E. Guibal and W. M. Salem, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 441, 135941 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, G. He, G. Zhao, J. Niu, L. Li, J. Bi, H. Mu, C. Zhu, Z. Chen, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Wang and Y. Wang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 277, 119519 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Purnomo, E. P. Kesuma, I. Perdana and M. Aziz, Waste Manag., 2018, 79, 454–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ni, J. Zhou, J. Bing and X. Guan, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 278, 119485 CrossRef .
W. Lv, D. Ruan, X. Zheng, L. Li, H. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 129908 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, F. Liu, F. Zhang, M. Tan, H. Jiang, Y. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132924 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Guo, X. Wang, P. Li, W. Ying, D. Chen, X. Ma, Z. Deng and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34039–34045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, X. Qu, J. Qu, X. Chen, H. Xie, P. Xing, D. Wang and H. Yin, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 8633–8641 RSC .
R. Torkaman, M. Asadollahzadeh, M. Torab-Mostaedi and M. Ghanadi Maragheh, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 186, 318–325 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pagnanelli, E. Moscardini, P. Altimari, T. Abo Atia and L. Toro, Waste Manage., 2016, 51, 214–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Zeng, J. Du, G. Zhang, Z. Cao and S. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 4312–4322 CrossRef CAS .
A. Keller, M. W. Hlawitschka and H. J. Bart, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 275, 119166 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shuya, C. Yang, C. Xuefeng, S. Wei, W. Yaqing and Y. Yue, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 250, 117258 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, C. Chen and M.-L. Fu, Hydrometallurgy, 2020, 197, 105439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Virolainen, M. Fallah Fini, A. Laitinen and T. Sainio, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 179, 274–282 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jing, Z. Wu, D. Zhao, S. Li, F. Kong and Y. Chu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 2475–2485 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Li, H. Rui, D. Shi, X. Peng, L. Ji and X. Song, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 398, 122840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fan, L. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Bian, Q. Xue, J. Wu, F. Wu and R. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11029–11035 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Tan and J. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 13136–13143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Zhai, X. Zhang, J. Lu, R. Chen, F. Wu and K. Amine, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 380–385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, Y. Chen, S. Ju, Q. Zhu, L. Zhang, J. Peng, X. Wang and J. D. Miller, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 48, 88–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ning, Q. Meng, P. Dong, J. Duan, M. Xu, Y. Lin and Y. Zhang, Waste Manag., 2020, 103, 52–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Tran, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kato, G. Babu and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Chao, X. Li, G. Zhou, Q. Lu, M. Hua, H. Li, X. Ni, P. Wu and W. Zhu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2177–2184 RSC .
K. Wang, T. Hu, P. Shi, Y. Min, J. Wu and Q. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 10, 1149–1159 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, W. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Chen, R. Shi, S. Liu, Z. Zhang and T. Mu, ChemSusChem, 2022, 15, e202200524 CAS .
M. J. Roldán-Ruiz, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez and F. D. Monte, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5437–5445 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, K. De Oliveira Vigier, S. Royer and F. Jérôme, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7108–7146 RSC .
S. Tang, M. Zhang and M. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 975–985 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, L. Chen, X. Li, Y. Chao, J. Sun, H. Ji and W. Zhu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 13851–13861 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gangaja, S. Nair and D. Santhanagopalan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4711–4721 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, B. Xie, S. Song, S. Lei, W. Sun, R. Xu and Y. Yang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3963–3971 RSC .
X. Shen, B. Li, X. Hu, C.-F. Sun, Y.-S. Hu, C. Yang, H. Liu and J. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 10196–10204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J.-Z. Guo, Z.-Y. Gu, Z.-H. Sun, B.-H. Hou, A.-B. Yang, Q.-L. Ning, W.-H. Li and X.-L. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12014–12022 CAS .
Y. Weng, S. Xu, G. Huang and C. Jiang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 246–247, 163–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Yu, B. Yang, C. Jin, G. Guo and J. Qiu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2020, 126, 110855 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, B. Zhang, J. Zou, P. Li, Z. Liu, L. Cheng, X. Ou and J. Zhang, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 45, 103512 CrossRef .
G. Ji, X. Ou, R. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Zou, P. Li, D. Peng, L. Ye, B. Zhang and D. He, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2021, 174, 105802 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, L. Gao, S. Su, D. Li, L. Cao, L. Ye, B. Zhang, L. Ming and X. Ou, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 21, 100821 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, T. Lu, S. Huang, G. Li, J. Wang, F. Kong, Q. Cheng and Y. Zhang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 316, 128279 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, S. Cai, G. Zhao, Z. Gao, S. Liu, H. Li, L. Chen, M. Li, X. Yang and H. Guo, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 62, 440–450 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cui, C. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Lu, S. Liu, F. Chen, W. Zhou, G. Qian, Z. Wang, Y. Deng, Y. Chen and W. Hu, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 2710–2718 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Zou, R. Zheng, W. Wei, W. Wei, B.-J. Ni and H. Chen, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 6538–6547 RSC .
J. Wei, S. Zhao, L. Ji, T. Zhou, Y. Miao, K. Scott, D. Li, J. Yang and X. Wu, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2018, 129, 135–142 CrossRef .
X. Chen, F. Deng, X. Liu, K.-P. Cui and R. Weerasooriya, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 774, 145776 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zou, J. Li, R. Wang, J. Ma, Z. Chen, L. Duan, H. Mi and H. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 431, 128590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, K. He, F. Zhang, G. Jiang, Z. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Cheng and Z. Hao, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 309, 121231 CrossRef CAS .
X. Min, M. Guo, K. Li, J.-N. Gu, X. Hu, J. Jia and T. Sun, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 295, 121316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, X. Chen, R. Koivula and J. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 425, 127957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, M. Chen, Z. Zheng, D. Bullen, J. Wang, C. Harrison, E. Gratz, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang, F. Wang, D. Robertson, S.-B. Son, I. Bloom, J. Wen, M. Ge, X. Xiao, W.-K. Lee, M. Tang, Q. Wang, J. Fu, Y. Zhang, B. C. Sousa, R. Arsenault, P. Karlson, N. Simon and Y. Wang, Joule, 2021, 5, 2955–2970 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. James, C. J. Adams, C. Bolm, D. Braga, P. Collier, T. Friščić, F. Grepioni, K. D. M. Harris, G. Hyett, W. Jones, A. Krebs, J. Mack, L. Maini, A. G. Orpen, I. P. Parkin, W. C. Shearouse, J. W. Steed and D. C. Waddell, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 413–447 RSC .
X. Guo, D. Xiang, G. Duan and P. Mou, Waste Manage., 2010, 30, 4–10 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Iizuka, Y. Yamashita, H. Nagasawa, A. Yamasaki and Y. Yanagisawa, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 113, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Wang, C.-C. Zhang and F.-S. Zhang, Waste Manage., 2016, 51, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Q. Tan, L. Liu and J. Li, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 279, 123612 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Wang, C.-C. Zhang and F.-S. Zhang, Waste Manage., 2017, 67, 232–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, Q. Tan, Q. Huang, L. Liu, J. F. Chiang and J. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 125222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. Jung, D. Kwon, M. Beak, E. E. Kwon and K. Kwon, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 135165 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tao, P. Xing, H. Li, Z. Sun and Y. Wu, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2022, 176, 105921 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tao, P. Xing, H. Li, Y. Wu, S. Li and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 6318–6328 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, G. Liang, C. Yang, J. Hu, Y. Chen and C. Wang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 8434–8440 RSC .
G. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Yuan, Y. He, N. Wei, H. Wang and B. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 430, 128374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, J. Li and Z. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 338, 124–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and S. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12222–12230 CAS .
A. Jumari, C. S. Yudha, E. R. Dyartanti, M. Nizam, Suranto and A. Purwanto, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2022, 18, 3640–3651 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Kim and H.-G. Lee, Metall. Mater. Trans. B, 2001, 32, 17–24 CrossRef .
Y. Tong, C. Qin, L. Zhu, S. Chen, Z. Lv and J. Ran, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2022, 56, 5734–5742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yao, Z. Huang, Q. Song, Y. Tang, R. Qiu and J. Ruan, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 278, 123867 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Han, T. Zhang, L. Zhang and S. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16729–16737 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Qu, X. Chen, D. Liu, Z. Zhao, H. Xie, D. Wang and H. Yin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, B. Liu, L. Zhang and S. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pindar and N. Dhawan, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, 25, e00157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dang, P. Zhou, P. Shi, Y. Min and Q. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 15375–15385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Liu, L. Zhang and S. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 396, 122740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, X. Liu, X. Zhou, J. Tang, H. Gan and J. Yang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 331, 129902 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, X. Qu, Y. Wu, J. Zhao, S. Gao, D. Wang and H. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 1287–1297 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fan, L. Li, J. Lin, J. Wu, J. Yang, F. Wu and R. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16144–16150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, P. Shao, L. Yang, Y. Zheng, Z. Sun, L. Fang, W. Lv, Z. Yao, L. Wang and X. Luo, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2021, 174, 105757 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, B. Zhang, X. Qu, M. Cai, D. Liu, F. Zhou, H. Xie, S. Gao and H. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 8305–8313 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, X. Qu, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Xie, J. Zhao, Z. Ning, P. Xing and H. Yin, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 279, 123633 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, C. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, W. Lv, F. Rao, P. Yao, J. Wang and Z. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 2271–2279 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chang, S. Yang, P. Shi, Y. Jie, F. Hu, G. Fang and Y. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 449, 137752 CrossRef CAS .
C. Peng, F. Liu, Z. Wang, B. P. Wilson and M. Lundström, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, B. Niu and Z. Xu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 418, 126319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, C. Peng, Q. Ma, J. Wang, S. Zhou, Z. Chen, B. P. Wilson and M. Lundström, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 259, 118181 CrossRef CAS .
M. Endo, C. Kim, K. Nishimura, T. Fujino and K. Miyashita, Carbon, 2000, 38, 183–197 CrossRef CAS .
V. Agubra and J. Fergus, Materials, 2013, 6(4), 1310–1325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Natarajan and V. Aravindan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002238 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Kayakool, B. Gangaja, S. Nair and D. Santhanagopalan, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2021, 28, e00262 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Q. Wang, D. Chen, Y. Zhong, Z. Wu, Y. Song, G. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Zhong and X. Guo, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4531–4539 RSC .
H. Duc Pham, C. Padwal, J. F. S. Fernando, T. Wang, T. Kim, D. Golberg and D. P. Dubal, Batteries Supercaps, 2022, 5, e202100335 CAS .
X. Yang, R. Li, J. Yang, H. Liu, T. Luo, X. Wang and L. Yang, Carbon, 2022, 199, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Wu, X. Ye, J. Qiao, Z. Sun, X. Zhu and Z. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 8051–8063 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, W. Sheng, C. He, B. Yang, H. Xu, C. Liu and Z. Rao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 4882–4894 RSC .
Y. Zhao, H. Wang, J. Ji, X. Li, X. Yuan, L. Jiang, J. Yang, Y. Shao and X. Guan, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 362, 132442 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, F. Long, G. Gao, C. Belver, Z. Li, Z. Li, J. Guan, Y. Guo and J. Bedia, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 286, 120466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Lei, Z. Lin, P. Xie, H. Lu and J. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 436, 135011 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuwen, B. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Tian, L. Zhang, S. Guo and B. Zhou, J. Cleaner Prod., 2022, 333, 130197 CrossRef .
H. D. Pham, M. Horn, J. F. S. Fernando, R. Patil, M. Phadatare, D. Golberg, H. Olin and D. P. Dubal, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, 26, e00230 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, L. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Luo and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2022, 189, 293–304 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, S. Yang, L. Luo, Q. Pan, P. Zhang, Y. Huang, F. Zheng, H. Wang and Q. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 356, 135856 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Song, S. Lei, W. Sun, H. Hou, F. Jiang, X. Ji, W. Zhao and Y. Hu, Waste Manag., 2019, 85, 529–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, M. Lin, Q. Tan and J. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 401, 123715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, E. Fan, J. Lin, F. Arshad, X. Zhang, H. Wang, F. Wu, R. Chen and L. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 6261–6268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiao, G. Ji, L. Ye, Y. Li, J. Zhang, L. Ming, B. Zhang and X. Ou, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 888, 161593 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, X. Qu, B. Zhang, J. Zhao, H. Xie and H. Yin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 5739–5747 CrossRef CAS .
H. Da, M. Gan, D. Jiang, C. Xing, Z. Zhang, L. Fei, Y. Cai, H. Zhang and S. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 16192–16202 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, J. Xiao, Q. Mao, Z. Zhang, Z. You, L. Tang and Q. Zhong, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132703 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yi, Y. Yang, T. Zhang, X. Wu, W. Sun and L. Yi, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 277, 123585 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yi, P. Ge, X. Wu, W. Sun and Y. Yang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 72, 97–107 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, T. Lei, W. Lv, Y. Hu, Y. Yan, Y. Jiao, W. He, Z. Li, C. Yan and J. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804084 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Zhao, S. Yuan, F. Jiang, X. Chen, Y. Yang, P. Ge, W. Sun and X. Ji, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 60, 531–545 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Li, D. Song, Y. Miao, J. Song and L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Natarajan, S. Rao Ede, H. C. Bajaj and S. Kundu, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 543, 98–108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Natarajan, H. C. Bajaj and V. Aravindan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3244–3252 RSC .
Y. Yu, Z. Huang, D. Deng, Y. Ju, L. Ren, M. Xiang, L. Li and H. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 325, 279–288 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Wang, X. Li, X. Yuan, L. Jiang and X. Chen, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 420, 126552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, F. Li, H. Zhu, G. Li, J. Huang and W. He, Waste Manag., 2016, 51, 227–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. Lin, H. Cao, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 228, 801–813 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. He, Y. Fu, W. Xie, Y. Feng and K. Alejandro, Waste Manag., 2021, 126, 517–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, H. Dai, Y. Zhu, H. Hu, R. Zhao, B. Wu and D. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 229159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, J. Zhang, Y. Chen and C. Wang, Surf. Interfaces, 2021, 24, 101089 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rothermel, M. Evertz, J. Kasnatscheew, X. Qi, M. Grützke, M. Winter and S. Nowak, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3473–3484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Schiavi, P. Altimari, R. Zanoni and F. Pagnanelli, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 58, 336–344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, Y. Zhuang, Y. Deng, X. Song, X. Zuo, X. Xiao and J. Nan, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. Song, J. He, R. Chen and X. Li, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 512–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Z. Liu, J. Xia, F. Li, W. He, G. Li and J. Huang, Front. Environ. Sci. Eng., 2017, 11, 6 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Xu, W. He, G. Li, J. Huang and H. Zhu, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 5075–5089 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Yang, G. Xu, Q. Feng and X. Li, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 9823 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Costa, E. Lizundia and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2020, 79, 100846 CrossRef .
B. Lestriez, C. R. Chim, 2010, 13, 1341–1350 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, H. Zheng, X. Song and V. S. Battaglia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A214–A221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, J. Han, L. Chen, W. Liu, F. Jiao, H. Zhu and W. Qin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 553, 149564 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Widijatmoko, F. Gu, Z. Wang and P. Hall, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, 23, e00134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, Z. Wang, K. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Liao, X. Chen and Y. Pan, Eng. Failure Anal., 2019, 101, 193–205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, J. Yang and W. Lu, Extreme Mech. Lett., 2016, 6, 37–44 CrossRef .
X. Zhong, W. Liu, J. Han, F. Jiao, W. Qin, T. Liu and C. Zhao, Waste Manag., 2019, 89, 83–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, N. Zhu, X. Wei, S. Zhang, F. Li, P. Wu and Y. Chen, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 298, 113500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Deng, Z. Xu, M. Wang, H. Shentu, X. Liu, J. Xiong, Y.-J. Cheng, C. Wang, M. Zhou, J. Gao and Y. Xia, Green Chem., 2022, 24, 779–789 RSC .
G. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Feng, H. Wang, T. Zhang, W. Xie and X. Zhu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 199, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Liu, X. Bai, S. Wang, D. Yang, Y. Fu and Y. He, Waste Manag., 2019, 91, 89–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vanderbruggen, E. Gugala, R. Blannin, K. Bachmann, R. Serna-Guerrero and M. Rudolph, Miner. Eng., 2021, 169, 106924 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, W. Liu, J. Han, F. Jiao, H. Zhu and W. Qin, Waste Manag., 2020, 118, 331–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Widijatmoko, G. Fu, Z. Wang and P. Hall, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 260, 120829 CrossRef .
R. Saneie, H. Abdollahi, S. Ghassa, D. Azizi and S. Chehreh Chelgani, J. Sustain. Metall., 2022, 8, 386–397 CrossRef .
Y. He, X. Yuan, G. Zhang, H. Wang, T. Zhang, W. Xie and L. Li, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 766, 142382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fan, X. Chang, Y.-J. Guo, W.-P. Chen, Y.-X. Yin, X. Yang, Q. Meng, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1461–1468 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Li, X. Wu, T. Zhou and H. Ma, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 258, 120943 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Tan, W. Han and S. Wang, Waste Manag., 2021, 136, 67–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, C. T. Jafvert and F. Zhao, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2021, 170, 105551 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, R. Essehli, C. J. Jafta, K. M. Livingston and I. Belharouak, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 6048–6055 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chu, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, K. Wu, Y. Huang and Y. Jia, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 269, 118704 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Tan, L. Liu and J. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8287–8294 CrossRef CAS .
L.-P. He, S.-Y. Sun, X.-F. Song and J.-G. Yu, Waste Manage., 2015, 46, 523–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, N. Muralidharan, J. Li, R. Essehli and I. Belharouak, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5664–5670 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, S. Yang, F. Lai, H. Wang, Y. Huang, F. Zheng, S. Wang, X. Zhang and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4767–4776 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Paulino, N. G. Busnardo and J. C. Afonso, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 150, 843–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Castaing, Y. Reynier, N. Dupré, D. Schleich, S. Jouanneau Si Larbi, D. Guyomard and P. Moreau, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 744–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Tang, R. Li, G. Liang, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1579–1586 RSC .
S. K. Heiskanen, J. Kim and B. L. Lucht, Joule, 2019, 3, 2322–2333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, C. Du, Y. Gao, J. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Guan, L. Yang, X. Cheng, P. Zuo, Y. Ma and G. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5234–5242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. E. Bankole and L. Lei, J. Solid Waste Technol. Manage., 2014, 39, 254–259 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, D. Mu, R. Li, Q. Ma, R. Zheng and C. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4181–4187 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, C. Liu and Z. Sun, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 435, 128974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jung, D. Kwon, S. Park, K. Kwon, Y. F. Tsang and E. E. Kwon, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 50, 101591 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lee, J. Han, K. Lee, Y. J. Lee, B. G. Kim, K.-N. Jung, B. J. Kim and S. W. Lee, Nature, 2022, 601, 217–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, K. Adair, R. Zhao, S. Li, R. Zou, Y. Zhao and X. Sun, Chem. Rev., 2022, 122, 3763–3819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhao, Y. Wu, Z. Liang, L. Gao, W. Xia, Y. Zhao and R. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2386–2403 RSC .
J. Liang, J. Luo, Q. Sun, X. Yang, R. Li and X. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 308–334 CrossRef .
Z. Qin, Y. Xie, X. Meng, D. Qian, D. Mao, X. Ma, C. Shan, J. Chen, L. Wan and Y. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 49, 360–369 CrossRef .
R. Murugan, V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7778–7781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shi, Z. Wan, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, S. Su, H. Xia, K. Jiang, L. Shen, Y. Hu, S. Zhang, J. Yu, F. Ren, Y.-B. He and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11784–11788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Cheng, A. Sharafi and J. Sakamoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 223, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, F. Shen, J. Liu, Q. Zhang, H. Guo, Y. Yin, J. Gao, Z. Sun, X. Han and Y. Hu, Energy Storage
Mater., 2021, 41, 791–797 CrossRef .
T. Wang, Z. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, L. Huang, S. Lin and W. Luo, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 52, 365–370 CrossRef .
Y. Xie, X. Meng, Y. Li, D. Mao, L. Wan and Y. Huang, Compos. Commun., 2021, 26, 100776 CrossRef .
W. Li, L. Ma, S. Liu, X. Li, J. Gao, S.-M. Hao and W. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202209169 CAS .
Y. Yin, Y. Yang, D. Cheng, M. Mayer, J. Holoubek, W. Li, G. Raghavendran, A. Liu, B. Lu, D. M. Davies, Z. Chen, O. Borodin and Y. S. Meng, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 548–559 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Ji, J. Zhang, C. Yang, P. Wang, S. Liu, K. Ludwig, F. Chen, P. Kofinas and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 186–193 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schmuch, R. Wagner, G. Hörpel, T. Placke and M. Winter, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 267–278 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Harding, J. S. Dennis, H. von Blottnitz and S. T. L. Harrison, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 130, 57–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jung, S. Lee, S. Park, K. Kwon, Y. F. Tsang, W.-H. Chen, Y.-K. Park and E. E. Kwon, Energy, 2022, 242, 122552 CrossRef CAS .
J. Langdon and A. Manthiram, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010267 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray and K. Amine, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 566 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, F. C. Strobridge, O. J. Borkiewicz, K. M. Wiaderek, K. W. Chapman, P. J. Chupas and C. P. Grey, Science, 2014, 344, 1252817 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 995–996 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 833–845 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-W. Li, Y. Shi, Y.-X. Yin, X.-X. Zeng, J.-Y. Li, C.-J. Li, L.-J. Wan, R. Wen and Y.-G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fang, J. Li, M. Zhang, Y. Zhang, F. Yang, J. Z. Lee, M. H. Lee, J. Alvarado, M. A. Schroeder, Y. Yang, B. Lu, N. Williams, M. Ceja, L. Yang, M. Cai, J. Gu, K. Xu, X. Wang and Y. S. Meng, Nature, 2019, 572, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Christoph Vaalma, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18013 CrossRef .

          J. T. Kummer and N. Weber, A Sodium-Sulfur Secondary Battery, SAE Technical Paper 670179,  1967 DOI:10.4271/670179.
Y. Xiao, Y.-F. Zhu, H.-R. Yao, P.-F. Wang, X.-D. Zhang, H. Li, X. Yang, L. Gu, Y.-C. Li, T. Wang, Y.-X. Yin, X.-D. Guo, B.-H. Zhong and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803978 CrossRef .
H. S. Hirsh, Y. Li, D. H. S. Tan, M. Zhang, E. Zhao and Y. S. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001274 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. McKerracher, C. Ponce de Leon, R. G. A. Wills, A. A. Shah and F. C. Walsh, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 323–335 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Schrebler Guzmán, J. R. Vilche and A. J. Arvía, Electrochim. Acta, 1979, 24, 395–403 CrossRef .
P. Goel, D. Dobhal and R. C. Sharma, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 28, 101287 CrossRef .
J. Ryu, M. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804784 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. S.-H. Brandon, J. Hopkins and D. P. Hart, Science, 2018, 362, 658–661 CrossRef PubMed .
Transport & Environment (2020), How clean are electric cars? T&E's analysis of electric car lifecycle CO2 emissions, 2020.
Q. Dehaine, L. T. Tijsseling, H. J. Glass, T. Törmänen and A. R. Butcher, Miner. Eng., 2021, 160, 106656 CrossRef CAS .
W.-P. Schill, Joule, 2020, 4, 2059–2064 CrossRef .

          M. Wang, A. Elgowainy, Z. Lu, K. Baek, A. Bafana, P. Benavides, A. Burnham, H. Cai, V. Cappello, P. Chen, Y. Gan, U. Gracida-Alvarez, T. Hawkins, R. Iyer, J. Kelly, T. Kim, S. Kumar, H. Kwon, K. Lee, U. Lee, X. Liu, F. Masum, C. Ng, L. Ou, K. Reddi, N. Siddique, P. Sun, P. Vyawahare, H. Xu and G. Zaimes, Computer Software, USDOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE),  2022 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Jiao Lin
	Dr Jiao Lin is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research interests focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.

Xiaodong Zhang
	Dr Xiaodong Zhang is currently a PhD candidate at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests focus on the failure analysis of electrode materials and the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs).

Ersha Fan
	Dr Ersha Fan obtained her D.S. Degree under the supervision of Prof. Li Li at Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT) in 2020. Her research interests mainly focus on the recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and the synthesis of electrode materials for LIBs.

Renjie Chen
	Feng Wu is the Director of the Professor Commission of the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT). As the Chief Scientist, he has hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China (973 projects), Basic Research on New Rechargeable Batteries and Related Materials. His major research interests are functional materials for energy storage devices.

Feng Wu
	Dr Renjie Chen is a Full Professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research focuses on electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. He was a Post-Doctoral Fellow at the Department of Chemistry at Tsinghua University and a Visiting Professor at the Department of Materials Science and Metallurgy at the University of Cambridge. As the Principal Investigator, Prof. Chen successfully hosted the National Key Research and Development Program of China, National Natural Science Foundation of China, and National High Tech.

Li Li
	Dr Li Li is a Full Professor in Beijing Key Laboratory of Environmental Science and Engineering, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her research interests focus on recycling technique and life-cycle analysis for spent secondary batteries, electrochemical energy storage and conversion technology. As the Principal Investigator, Dr Li successfully hosted the National Key Program for Basic Research of China, National High Tech 863 project, National Natural Science Foundation.

Broader context
To achieve carbon neutrality in electrochemical energy storage, lithium secondary battery recycling has advanced beyond fundamental resource recycling research and toward the development of industrially scalable recycling processes that can sustainably produce high-value products. This work constructs an organic tetrahedron of battery material recycle at the atomic level, exploring in detail the relationship between waste structure, recycle, property, and application, in contrast to previous work that has focused on compartmentalizing recycle technologies. The process of connecting macroscopic applications to microstructure is crucial, but it is frequently undervalued and understudied. The extent to which the intrinsic energy of the waste material affects the choice of recycling technology and the amount of emissions and energy used throughout the recycling process are important. Therefore, recycling technology can only be optimized for application in next-generation rechargeable batteries by thoroughly comprehending the intrinsic relationship between the material structure and recycling technology. The analysis and review in this work led to the development of a recycling theory that encompasses three lines. For carbon neutral considerations, the next-generation rechargeable batteries are assessed in terms of a variety of factors, such as feedstock abundance and technological maturity, and potential recycling methods are suggested based on the insightful recycling theory. To more effectively accomplish scaled-up recycling and industrial carbon neutral upgrading, this work provides a novel interpretation of energy storage battery recycling for recycling technology developers and recycling firms.


 	Fig. 1  Energy application scenarios under the carbon neutral vision: rechargeable battery utilization in future energy decarbonization is mostly comprised of grid storage, transit mobility, household electricity, and industrial energy integration across multiple scenarios. With the progress of energy storage technologies, virtual power plants and other ways can ensure power supply dependability, while seamlessly transitioning to a new energy-based power system. The energy storage system is used to achieve energy/power conversion in a land transportation energy aggregation system consisting of a hybrid network of renewable energy generation, transportation power, and energy storage. Solar panels are mounted on the roof and equipped with a lithium-ion battery energy storage system in the future smart house scenario, which may be sold to the grid and used by the homeowner. For industries with historically high emissions, electrochemical energy storage can automate the development of the power resource application structure of the power resource supply system.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Greenhouse gas emissions of total emissions and (b) energy consumption of different ways of preparing battery materials. (c) Assessment of the economic efficiency of different recycling processes. V, P, H and D indicate the preparation of battery materials by virgin materials, pyrometallurgical process, hydrometallurgical process and direct repair process, respectively. LCO, 111, 523, 622, 811, and NCA represent LiCoO2, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2, LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2, LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2, LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2, LiNixCoyAlzO2 (x + y + z = 1), respectively. The data for Fig. 2 is calculated from the EverBatt (Software Name: SF-18-022 EverBatt) model developed by Argonne Laboratories, USA. Copyright © 2018, UChicago Argonne, LLC, All Rights Reserved.10	 

 	Fig. 3  Overview diagram of the recycling process of key materials for current lithium-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Generalized conceptual diagram of recycling technology for (a) LiCoO2 material, (b) LiFePO4 material, (c) LiNixCoyMnzO2 material, and (d) LiMn2O4 material.	 


LCO20	1:1.05 in molar ratio of Li/Co, Li2CO3, 900 °C for 12 h in air atmosphere	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 30 mA g−1 at 25 °C	152.4 mA h g−1
LFP23	Scrap LiFePO4 with doping of new LiFePO4 at the ratio of 3:7, 700 °C for 12 h in N2	2.5–4.1 V vs. Li+/Li, 0.1C	144 mA h g−1
NCM62241	1:1.05 in molar ratio of Li/(Ni + Co + Mn), Li2CO3, 200 °C and 500 °C for 3 h under air atmosphere, and 900 °C for 10 h under air atmosphere	2.7–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —	162 mA h g−1 and maintain 150 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2C
NCM62226	Spent cathode material powder was mixed with LiOH·H2O in the ratio of (Ni + Co + Mn)/Li = 1:1.03 and calcined at 850 °C in an oxygen-rich atmosphere for 5 h	2.8–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 180 mA h g−1	153.82 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 97.74 after 200 cycles at 1C
LCO42	LiCl and CH4N2O were mixed in a molar ratio of 3:1 to form a DES after heating at 100 °C for 1 h, DES:LiCoO2 mass ratio of 22.25:1, 850 °C in air for 2 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	134.4 mA h g−1 at 0.1C,
NCM52329	0.84:0.16 in molar ratio of LiOH and Li2CO3, 440 °C for 5 h, 850 °C for 12 h	2.8–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 180 mA h g−1	146.3 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 89.06 after 200 cycles at 1C
NCM52328	3:2 in molar ratio of LiNO3 and LiOH, 300 °C for 2 or 4 h for relithiation, and 850 °C in oxygen for 4 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	149.3 mA h g−1 in the first cycle at 1C, 134.6 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1C.
NCM52330	A molar ratio of LiNO3, LiOH, and CH3COOLi = 9:6:10, 400 °C for 45 min under air atmosphere, 850 °C for 4 h under O2 atmosphere	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	160 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, capacity retention rate of 93.7% after 100 cycles at 0.5C
LCO36	5 M LiOH, 200 °C for 20 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	124.3 mA h g−1 for the 40th cycle at 0.2C
LCO43	4 M LiOH, hydro 220 °C for 45 min, 800 °C for 4 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	141.7 mA h g−1 at 5C, capacity retention rate of 95.5% after 100 cycles at 1C
LCO32	4 M LiOH or 1 M LiOH + 1.5 M Li2SO4, hydro 220 °C for 2 h + 800 °C for 4 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	153.1 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, 135.1 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 1C
NCM52325	4 M LiOH, hydro 220 °C for 2 h, 850 °C for 4 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	146.6 mA h g−1 in the first cycle at 1C and 130.4 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles
NCM11133	0.1 M LiOH + 3.9 M KOH, hydro 220 °C for 2 h, and 850 °C for 4 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	156.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 93.2% after 50 cycles at 1C.
LFP9	0.2 M LiOH + 0.08 M citric acid, 400 °C to 800 °C for 2 h in nitrogen	2.5–3.8 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 170 mA h g−1	An initial capacity of 156 mA h g−1 and maintained at 155 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5C
LCO44	Li:Co = 1.03, DMSO-LiBr system, 500 °C for 12 h	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	155.384 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 90.79% after 100 cycles at 1C
NCM11135	Stoichiometric amounts of NCM black powder and LiBr were mixed in ionic liquids, 150–250 °C for 6–24 h, 300 °C and annealed in oxygen with Li2CO3 at 850 °C	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	173.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
LCO39	0.3 M Li2SO4, 0.42 mA cm−2, 700 °C for 2 h in air	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —	136 mA h g−1 at 0.2C
LCO38	1.5 M Li2SO4 + 0.5 M LiOH, 0.12 mA cm−2, 700 °C for 6 h in air	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —	140 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 93% after 100 cycles at 0.1C
LFP37	Li2SO4, 1 mA cm−1 500 °C for 2 h in Ar	2.5–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —	135.2 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 95.3% after 500 cycles at 1C

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the crystal structure change of NCM523 after cycling and repaired by solid-phase sintering method. (b) Cycling performance of pristine, non-treated, and regenerated NCM111 samples at 1C; HT-SA: hydrothermal treatment at 220 °C for 4 h, followed by annealing at 850 °C for 4 h; SS-air: sintering at 850 °C for 12 h in air; and SS-oxygen: sintering at 850 °C for 12 h in oxygen. Reprinted from ref. 25. Copyright © 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of the ternary molten salt approach to regenerate S-NCM and the microscopic evolution of the NCM cathode structure. Reprinted from ref. 30. Copyright © 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Schematic illustration of the solution relithiation process. (e) The Evolution of LFP composition during relithiation at different temperatures. (f) Saturation vapor pressure of water under various temperatures associated with the equipment (schematic) of choice for high pressure (>1 bar) and low pressure (<1 bar). Reprinted from ref. 9. Copyright © 2020, Elsevier Inc. (g) Schematic diagram of resting-output current lithiation for regenerating retired LiFePO4 battery. (h) Long cycle performance of regenerated LiFePO4 obtained from the applied current of −1 mA at 1C and 5C. Reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


NCM62250	2:3 molar ratio of LiOH:LiNO3, the molar ratio of 1:5.7 for NCM622 to lithium molten salts, 500 °C for 5 h, and then 850 °C for 11 h	Single-crystal NCM 622	2.8–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 170 mA h g−1	155.1 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 94.3% after 240 cycles at 1C
NCM11152	NCM111 mixed with NiO and LiOH, 20 mol% excess of LiOH and 10 mol% of Li2SO4 were added as fluxing agents. 900 °C for 10 h under O2	Single-crystal NCM111	2.5–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 175 mA h g−1	150 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, capacity retention rate of 93.7% after 100 cycles at 0.5C
NCM52351	Li:TM = 1.1.05, Li2CO3, ball-milling to activate the recycled materials (400 rpm, 12 h, ethanol), 950 °C for 2 min in air	Single-crystal NCM523	3–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —	140 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, capacity retention rate of 97% after 50 cycles at 0.2C
LCO53	Li2CO3 + Na2CO3, 850 °C for 12 h in air	Na doped Li1−xNaxCoO2	3.0–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 150 mA h g−1	151.5 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 87.6% after 100 cycles at 1C
LCO54	Li2CO3 + MgO, 900 °C for 12 h	Mg doped Li1−2xMgxCoO2	2.8–4.6 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 270 mA h g−1	202.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, capacity retention rate of 82.7% after 50 cycles at 0.2C
LFP60	Li2CO3 + V2O5 + NH4H2PO4 + 15 wt% glucose, 450 °C for 4 h, and then 7000 °C for 9 h in Ar	V doped LFP	2.5–4.2 V vs. Li+/Li, —	134.3 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 99.1% after 200 cycles at 1C
LCO61	Li:M = 1.03 (M = Co + Mg + Ti), ball milling of 1 h, and then calcined at 1000 °C for 10 h in air atmosphere	Mg/Ti co-doped	3.0–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, —	177.5 mA h g−1 for initial capacity, capacity retention rate of 96% after 100 cycles
LCO62	Li:M = 1.03 (M = Co + Mg + Ti), ball milling for 1 h, calcined at 1000 °C for 10 h, and then the obtained powder stirred in C9H21AlO3 solution for 6 h, 650 °C for 10 h under and air atmosphere	Mg/Ti doped and Al coated LiCoO2	3.0–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, —	174.29 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 96.77% after 200 cycles at 1C
LCO63	Nickel and manganese acetates (Mn:Ni = 3:1) in DI water, 3.0 M LiOH and 3.0 M KOH, hydrothermally treated at 190 °C for 16 h, 900 °C for 4 h in air	Ni–Mn co-doped LCO	3.0–4.5 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 140 mA h g−1	160.23 mA h g−1 at 1C, capacity retention rate of 91.2% after 100 cycles at 1C
NCM52359	The spent cathode material, LiOH, NiO, MnO2 and NH4H2PO4 were dissolved in deionized (DI) water, 450 °C for 5 h, and then heated to 850 °C and kept for 15 h under O2 atmosphere	PO43− polyanion doped NCM523	2.7–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, —	189.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
LFP64	Na2CO3, NaF, and Li1−xFePO4 were ball-milled under an Ar atmosphere at a speed of 300 rpm for 10 h, pre-sintered at 350 °C under Ar atmosphere for 4 h, ball-milled again for 20 h at a speed of 600 rpm, and then heated for 10 h at 700 °C in an Ar atmosphere.	Carbon-coated Na2FePO4F	2–4.2 V vs. Na+/Na, 1C = 124 mA h g−1	116.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
LCO65	Li2CO3, n(Li):n(Co) = 1:1, 800 °C, Al2O3 and the regenerated LCO and in a mole ratio of n(Al):n(Co) = 0.01:1, 800 °C for 5 h in air	Al2O3-coated LCO	3–4.2 V vs. Li+/Li, 20 mA g−1	136.8 mA h g−1, 90.1% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 20 mA g−1
NCM47	NH4VO3, 350 °C for 4 h	V2O5-coated NCM	2.5–4.3 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 278 mA h g−1	156.3 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.1C with the capacity retention of 90.6%
LFP66	Cathode and anode materials were ground and dried	Recycled LFP/graphite	2–5 V vs. Li+/Li	117.4 mA h g−1 at 25 mA g−1, 78% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 100 mA g−1
LMO67	800 °C for 10 h	Recycled LiMn2O4	1.6–4.2 V vs. Na+/Na	163.2 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1, 176.3 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1
LMO68	Mn(CH3COO)2·4H2O and LiOH·H2O, 700 °C for 15 h in air	Li/Mn disordered LMO	1–4.7 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 148 mA h g−1	207.8 mA h g−1 after the activation cycles at 0.1C (1C = 148 mA h g−1), 196.1 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles at 1C, corresponding to a capacity retention of 94.37%.

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the polycrystalline NCM622 crystal structure and morphology evolution during the degradation and regeneration processes. Reproduced from ref. 50. with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the recovery mechanism of the spent NCM523 during cycling process by bulk doping. Reprinted from ref. 59. Copyright © 2020, Elsevier B.V. (c) Schematic illustration of synthesis process of c-rhSG and NFPF-BM@xC from spent LIBs and their configuration for the SIB. Reproduced from ref. 64. Copyright © 2022, Elsevier Ltd. (d) Schematic illustration of the upcycling strategy constructed for degraded LMO materials. Reproduced from ref. 68. Copyright © 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the intrinsic recycling concept of scrap Li1−xCoO2 powder, where red, green, and purple spheres represent O, Co, and Li atoms, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Conversion mechanism of the selective recycling process based on co-octahedral retention conversion. Reproduced from ref. 76. Copyright © 2021, Wiley-VCH GmbH. Electrochemical (c) lithium storage (2.5–4.2 V, 1C = 170 mA g−1) and (d) sodium storage (1.5–4.0 V, 1C= 154 mA g−1) performances of the recycled samples at 1C. Reproduced from ref. 78 © 2022, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (e) Schematic of an aqueous Zn-air battery, charging and discharging curves and calculated power density of the Zn–air batteries. Reproduced from ref. 79. Copyright © 2022, Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
k = Ae−Ea/RT	(6)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the intrinsic concept of solution leaching-dominated hydrometallurgical recycling technology.	 

LFP192	Lithium iodide solution re-lithiation	LiFePO4	Cathode for LIBs	145 mA h g−1 at 1C, 96% capacity retention at 5C for 300 cycles (2.5–4.0 V, 1C = 167 mA g−1)
LFP193	Hydrothermal synthesis	LiFePO4	Cathode for LIBs	136 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention ratio of 98.6% after 300 cycles (2.0–4.0 V)
LCO194	Solid-state synthesis	LiCoO2	Cathode for LIBs	137.9–162.5 mA h g−1 upon being charged to 4.2–4.4 V
LMO195	Sol–gel method	LiFe0.6Mn0.4PO4/C	High-voltage cathode for LIBs	141.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 104.9 mA h g−1 at 10C (2.0–4.4 V)
NCM133	Spray pyrolysis	NCM111	Cathode for LIBs	Initial capacities of 157.1 and 154.3 mA h g−1 for half and full batteries (2.6–4.3 V)
NCM119	Co-precipitation followed by hydrothermal synthesis	Li1.2Co0.13Ni0.13Mn0.54O2	Cathode for LIBs	225.1 mA h g−1 at a 0.1C after 50 cycles (2–4.8 V, 1C = 150 mA g−1)
NCM111196	Co-precipitation followed by solid-state synthesis	Mg-doped NCM111	Cathode for LIBs	152.7 mA h g−1 at 0.2C (2.7–4.03 V)
NCM111197	Sol–gel method	Al-doped NCM111	Cathode for LIBs	148.1 mA h g−1 at a 0.2C after 100 cycles (2.7–4.3 V, 1C = 150 mA g−1)
NCM198	Solid-phase synthesis after coprecipitation	Ni-rich layered material	Cathode for LIBs	231.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C cycles (2.7–4.3 V, 1C = 180 mA g−1)
NCM137	Hydrothermal annealing	NCM111	Cathode for LIBs	246.5 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
NCM111186	Prepared by coprecipitation after extraction	NCM111	Cathode for LIBs	184.8 mA h g−1 in the 50th cycle at 1C (2.5–4.6 V)
NCM89	Solid-phase synthesis	NCM111 or NCM 622	Cathode for LIBs	85% of capacity retention after 50 cycles at 100 mA g−1
LFP199	Solid-phase synthesis	Fe2P2O7/C	Anode for LIBs	208.6 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at 0.2 A g−1 (0.1–3.0 V)
NCM, NCA200	Gas sulfidation method	Carbon–metal sulfide composites (NCMS/C and NCAS/C)	Anode for LIBs	NCMS/C: 900.4 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles, NCAS/C: 830.5 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 200 cycles (0–3.0 V)
LFP192	Sodium iodide solution re-sodiation	NaFePO4	Cathode for SIBs	138 mA h g−1 at C/15 (2.0–4.0 V, 1C = 167 mA g−1)
LCO201	Solution mixing	Recycled Co2+-doped TiO2	Photocatalysts	Degradation rates of 95% under 180 min
LCO202	Hydrothermal synthesis	Sea-urchin-like cobalt nitride-graphene	Hybrid catalyst for water splitting	Under a high current density of 10 mA cm−2, the 3D sea-urchin-like CoN-Gr-2 delivered low overpotential of 128.9 and 280 mV for the HER and OER, respectively,
LFP203	Wetness impregnation method	Ni-LiFePO4	Catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction	A low overpotential of 285 mV at 10 mA cm−2
NCM523, NCM811204	Boriding process	Borides	Catalysts for oxygen evolution reaction	318 mV at 100 mA cm−2, 372 mV at 500 mA cm−2
NCM205	Sintering	Spinel Ni–Co–Mn oxides	Bifunctional air electrodes	Energy efficiency was 75% at a current density of 10 mA cm−2
NCM144	Drying after electrolytic separation	De-lithiation materials	Catalysts for the degradation rate of sulfamethoxazole	Degradation rate of sulfamethoxazole reached 100% within 30 min
LMO206	Hydrothermal synthesis	MnO2/Fe(0)	Fenton reaction catalyst	Sulfadiazine degradation by 0.2 g L−1 MnO2-40Fe, 6 mM H2O2 in pH 3 was almost 98.6%
LFP207	Hydrothermal synthesis	Sea urchin-like material	Fenton reaction catalyst	Degradation rate exceeded 97% within 30 min
NCM208	Hydrothermal synthesis	CoMnNiOx catalyst	Catalysts for propane oxidation	Conversion of 90% at 200 °C
LMO209	Hydrothermal synthesis	α-MnO2	Catalytic oxidation of volatile organic compounds	More than 90% conversion within 8 h
LCO127	Oxalate precipitation	CoFe2O4	Catalytic degradation of bisphenol A	94% of bisphenol A is removed within 25 min at 25 °C
NCM124	Sol–gel synthesis	MnFe2O4	Catalytic degradation of bisphenol A	Completely removed in 15 min, 85.5% of bisphenol A molecules were simultaneously mineralized in 25 min
LCO + LMO121	Hydrothermal synthesis	MnCo2O4-RGO	Asymmetric supercapacitor	Maximum energy density of 23.9 W h kg−1 and 8000 cycles along with 94.4% capacitance retention
LMO210	Hydrothermal synthesis	γ-MnO2	Co removal adsorbent	Distribution coefficient 2.5 × 105 mL g−1 at pH ∼ 6 in room temperature

LCO81	Spent graphite	1000 °C in N2 for 30 min	Wet magnetic separation method	Li2CO3, Co, C	
	

LMO224	Spent graphite	800 °C in N2 for 45 min	Water leaching	Li2CO3, MnO	
	

NCM811219	30 wt% commercial graphite	800 °C in CO2 for 180 min	2M H2SO4, 40 °C, 1 h	Li2CO3, Ni/Co, MnO	
	

NCM523228	NCM523:graphitic carbon = 5:1 (wt%)	700 °C in N2 for 45 min	Distilled water, room temperature, 2 h	Li2CO3	Li2CO3 and SiO2 were mixed in a molar ratio of 2.05:1	CO2 adsorbent: Li4SiO4
NCA226	20 wt% spent graphite	700 °C in N2 for 6 h	Carbonated water	Li2CO3	Solid state regeneration	Resynthesized NCA
LCO225	Al foil	600 °C for 60 min	NaOH leaching	Li2O, CoO, Al2O3	
	

NCM229	Spent graphite, Al foil, and electrolyte	Vacuum reduction process	Gasification–condensation process	Mn	
	

LCO230	20% spent graphite, 20% NaOH	520 °C for 3 h	Water leaching	Li2O, Li2CO3, CoO, and Co	
	

LFP231	Molar ratio of LFP:Na2CO3 = 1:1, molar ratio of LFP:graphite = 1:2	900 °C for 4 h	Water leaching	Fe3O4, NaLi2PO4, LiNa5(PO4)2	
	

NCM232	18% spent graphite	Microwave heating to promote a carbothermal reduction reaction, 600 °C for 60 min	
	
	
	

NCM, LCO, LMO233	Spent graphite	Microwave carbothermal reduction	Water leaching	Co, MnO, Li2CO3, CoO, Ni, C	
	

LCO234	Al foil	Mechanochemical activation	Water leaching	LiAlO2, Co	
	

NCM111235	Macadamia shells	350 °C for 25 min	Carbon dioxide aqueous solution leaching	Li2CO3, Ni, Co, MnO	Coprecipitation	NCM111
NCM236	Antibiotic bacteria residues	650 °C for 60 min in Ar	H2SO4 leaching	Ni, Co, C, MnO, Li2CO3, Ca	
	

LCO237	Mass ratio of pine sawdust:LCO = 1:1	400 °C for 120 min in vacuum	Water leaching	Li2CO3, Co	Solid state regeneration	LCO
LCO238	NH4Cl	350 °C for 20 min, LiCoO2/NH4Cl mass ratio of 1:2	Water leaching	Li-chlorides, Co-chlorides	
	

NCM111239	CaCl2	800 °C for 30 min	Water leaching	LiCl, Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O1.5	
	

LCO240	Mass ratio of SiCl4:LCO = 0.7:1	500 °C for 5 min	Water leaching	LiCl, CoCl2	Solid state regeneration	LCO
NCM622241	Mass ratio of (NH4)2SO4:NCM622 = 4:1	350 °C for 120 min	Water leaching	Li2Co(SO4)2, NiSO4, CoSO4, MnSO4	Solid state regeneration	NCM622
LCO83	Molar ratio of LCO:H2SO4 = 2:1	800 °C for 120 min in vacuum	Water leaching	Li2SO4, Co3O4	
	

LCO242	Molar ratio of LCO:CoSO4 = 2:1, 20% carbon	600 °C for 120 min	Water leaching	Li2SO4, CoO	
	

NCM243	Molar ratio of Na2SO4:NCM = 0.75:1, carbon	750 °C for 90 min	Water leaching	LiNaSO4, (NiO)m(MnO)n and CoO	
	

NCM244	HNO3:NCM = 30 mmol g−1	250 °C for 60 min	Water leaching	LiNO3, TMOs	
	

LCO245	(CO(NH2))2	550 °C for 20 min	Water leaching	Li2CO3, Co	
	

NCM246	H2	500 °C for 15 min	Water leaching	LiOH, TMOs	Solid-state regeneration	NCM811

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the intrinsic concept of thermal reduction conversion recycling technology.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagram of the intrinsic concept of the relationship between waste graphite recovery technology and the intrinsic energy of the material.	 

None250	
	
	SG	800 °C for 5 h in Ar	0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li	250 mA h g−1 at 372 mA g−1
None251	
	
	SG	800 °C for 3 h in Ar	Si/SG composite, 0.01–1.5 V vs. Li+/Li	131.8 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1
None252	
	
	SG	800 °C for 1 h in N2 atmosphere	10.02–2.5 V vs. K+/K	382 mA h g−1 at 0.1C
None253	
	
	SG	SG pure sulfur = 1:4, 155 °C for 12 h under Ar atmosphere	Sulfur–carbon composite cathodes for Li–S batteries: 1.7–2.8 V vs. Li+/Li	1377 mA h g−1 0.2 C
None254	
	
	SG	Synthesis	Phase-change materials	High latent enthalpy
None255	
	
	SG	Freeze–thaw ultrasonic assisted circulation method	Two-dimensional low-layer graphite flakes application in nanofluids	Enhanced thermal conductivity and thermal conductivity
None256	
	
	SG and Cu foil	450 °C for 3 h	Catalyst	90% degradation rate in 60 min
None257	
	
	SG and Cu foil	Carbothermal reduction	Catalyst	Degradation of 4-chlorophenol in aqueous phase
Deionized water258	Water leaching, 800 °C for 2 h in Ar	Li2CO3	Lithiated SG	Modified Hummers’ method to prepare graphene oxide	Anode and cathode catalyst for LIBs and lithium oxygen batteries (LOB)	280 mA h g−1 1C
Deionized water259	Microwave stripping	Li2CO3	RG	
	0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA h g−1	438.6 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, capacity retention rate of 96.6% after 100 cycles at 0.5C
Deionized water260	De-ionized water sonication, 2 h	
	RG	800 °C for 2 h in Ar	0.1–2.6 V vs. Al3+/Al	55 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 150 cycles
H2SO4261	2 M H2SO4, 35 °C	
	Acid leaching graphite (AG)	900 °C for 4 h in N2	0–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA h g−1	245.4 mA h g−1 at 1C after 500 cycles
H2SO4262	80 °C for 5 h	
	AG	800 °C for 8 h in N2	AG/Fe3O4@Fe, 0.01–3 V vs. Na+/Na	121.6 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 150 cycles
HCl263	1.5 M HCl, 60 min, 100 g L−1	Li2CO3	AG	
	0.005–2 V vs. Li+/Li	591 mA h g−1 at 37.2 mA g−1
HNO3264	5% HNO3, ultrasonic cleaning for 30 min.	
	AG	
	2D graphene oxide	

Citric acid265	0.2 M citric acid, 90 °C, S/L = 1:50 g mL−1, 50 min	
	AG	
	0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA g−1	330 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 80 cycles
(NH4)2SO4266	0.8 M (NH4)2SO4,	Cu2+	RG	
	0.001–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 0.17 A h g−1	365.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles
NaOH267	NaOH:graphite = 2:1, 350 °C in N2 for 120 min	LiOH	RG	
	0.01–2.5 V vs. Li+/Li	287.4 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
NaOH + KOH268	NaOH + KOH:SG > 0.5, 250 °C for 120 min	
	RG	Coating, heat treatment	0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li	122 mA h g−1 at 1C for full cell
NH4F269	200 °C for 60min in Ar, water leaching, 60 °C, S/L = 10:1, 60 min	
	RG	
	0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li	340.9 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, capacity retention rate of 96% after 100 cycles at 1C
None270	1400 °C for 4 h in N2	Volatile lithium	RG	
	0.01–2 V vs. Li+/Li,	306.8 mA h g−1
None271	Vacuum pyrolysis at 1400 °C	
	Sucrose coating graphite	800 °C for 1 h in N2	0.005–2 V vs. Li+/Li, 1C = 372 mA h g−1	200 mA h g−1 at 2C

 	Fig. 11  (a) Proposed mechanism for the degradation of ciprofloxacin hydrochloride (CIP) in the anode material/PMS system. Reproduced from ref. 256 © 2022, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Proposed reaction mechanism of PMS activation and RhB degradation in anode material/PMS system. Reproduced from ref. 278 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (c) Schematic illustration of the purification and regeneration process of SG: (i) SG incorporated with several impurities; (ii) leaching process for binder removal; (iii) sieving process for improper size particle removal; (iv) roasting process for acid-insoluble compound removal; (v) acid leaching process for residual metal compounds removal; and (vi) regeneration process with pitch coating under calcination treatment. (d) Schematic illustration of the structural evolution of SG regeneration and (e) epitaxial growth mechanism during repairment for surface structures. Reproduced from ref. 268. Copyright © 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Scheme of the synthesis process and the formation mechanism of holey graphite. Reproduced from ref. 258 © 2022 Elsevier, B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the formation of fixed polymer layers ba and bc on AM and AB, respectively, and the polymer binder redistribution when combining AM particles with the AB/PVDF composite. (b) Schematic of binder distributions between AB and AM at different electrode compositions. Reproduced from ref. 293 ©2012, ECS – The Electrochemical Society. (c) Simulated binding models of NCM batteries and LFP batteries. (d) Possible binding mechanisms of PVDF in lithium-ion batteries. Reproduced from ref. 294 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Efficient separation of aluminum foil from mixed-type spent lithium-ion power batteries by pyrolysis. Reproduced from ref. 299 © 2021, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Schematic of LIB composition and example of liberation degree for an Al foil. Reproduced from ref. 303 © 2021, The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. (c) Illustration of the possible peeling off mechanism by ultrasonic-assisted acid scrubbing in facile acidic media (sulfuric and oxalic acidic). Reproduced from ref. 309 © 2020, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (d) Decomposition mechanism of PVDF in LiOH–LiNO3 eutectic system. Reproduced from ref. 311 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (e) Scheme showing the molecular structure of TEP and the dissolution of PVDF binder to release cathode particles from the Al foil substrate. Reproduced from ref. 312. Copyright © 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of comprehensive recycling of Al foil and active materials from the spent LIBs by electrolytic separation. Reproduced from ref. 313 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of targeted recovery process. (b) Cycling performances of LiAl|garnet|LFP full cell. Reproduced from ref. 337 © 2022, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (c) DDR route with completely broken particles enabled by severe deformation process. (d) Crystal structure evolution with high temperature. Reproduced from ref. 332 © 2022, Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (e) Recycling routes for thermally depolymerizable polyether electrolytes. (f) Charge–discharge voltage profiles and cycling performance of all-solid-state Li/LiFePO4 cell using the PEO-R-LiTFSI as the SPE with a loading of 3.2 mg cm−2 at 0.15C and 62 °C. Reproduced from ref. 339 © 2022, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (g) Proposed solvation structure of the designed liquefied gas electrolyte. (h) Schematic of the practical process of liquefied gas solvent collection and recycling. (i) Comparison of the electrochemical performance of Li/NMC622 system for the initial cell and the cell using recycled solvents. Reproduced from ref. 340 Copyright © 2022, The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 15  Tetrahedron of material recycle technology is depicted. The interrelationships among structure, properties, processing, and performance have an impact on behavior in all recycle systems.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of next-generation rechargeable batteries to help carbon neutrality.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of CO2 emissions during the battery life cycle. (b) CO2 emissions, GHG emissions and total energy consumption of raw materials used for battery production. (c) CO2 emissions, GHG emissions and total energy consumption of different lithium-ion battery cathode material production processes. The data for Fig. 17 is calculated from the Greet model developed by Argonne Laboratories, USA.367	 

 	Fig. 18  Summary and future outlook on recycling technologies for lithium-ion batteries and next-generation energy storage batteries.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
