Photo- Kelvin probe force microscopy for photocatalytic performance characterization of single filament of TiO 2 nanofiber photocatalysts   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA01011B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA01011B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5715-5720Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhoto-Kelvin probe force microscopy for photocatalytic performance characterization of single filament of TiO2 nanofiber photocatalysts†

        
          
            Ming-Chung 
            Wu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hseuh-Chung 
            Liao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Cheng 
            Cho
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Géza 
            Tóth
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yang-Fang 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wei-Fang 
            Su
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Krisztián 
            Kordás
          
        
      de
aDepartment of Chemical and Materials Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33302, Taiwan. E-mail: mingchungwu@mail.cgu.edu.tw;   Tel: +886 3 2118800 ext. 3545
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
cDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan
dMicroelectronics and Materials Physics Laboratories, Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Oulu, Oulu FIN-90014, Finland
eTechnical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Chemical-Biological Center, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden
Received 
      7th November 2012
    , Accepted 30th January 2013First published on 1st February 2013AbstractThis is an in-depth study on the photocatalytic performance characterization for single filament of TiO2 nanofiber photocatalysts by the novel photo-Kelvin probe force microscopy technique (photo-KPFM) and first principles calculations. Three kinds of TiO2 nanofibers: anatase TiO2 nanofibers (anatase TiO2 NFs), nitrogen doped TiO2 nanofibers (N-TiO2 NFs), and nitrogen doped TiO2 nanofibers decorated with platinum nanoparticles (N-TiO2-Pt NFs) were investigated. The N-TiO2-Pt NFs exhibit the largest negative photo surface potential shift (−182 mV) as compared to anatase TiO2 NFs (−29 mV). The first-principles calculations based on density functional theory (CASTEP simulation software) indicate that the significant photo surface potential shift obtained by adding nitrogen and platinum into TiO2 NFs is induced by two mechanisms: (1) enhancement in absorbance to increase exciton generation and (2) decreased charge recombination to increase surface charge. These changes in the photo surface potential of various TiO2 nanofibers are closely correlated with their photocatalytic activity. Thus, this novel photo-KPFM provides a useful technique to easily monitor the photocatalytic capability of materials in the development of high performance photocatalysts.
Introduction
TiO2 and its derivatives are very important materials due to their availability, low cost, chemical stability, etc. Their applications in dye-sensitized solar cells,1,2 polymer hybrid solar cells,3,4 photocatalytic hydrogen production and photocatalytic degradation of organics5–8 have been widely studied. Nitrogen doped n-type TiO2 exhibits decreased band gap due to the mixing of N 2p states with O 2p states, and shows photodegradation capability toward methylene blue and gaseous acetaldehyde by visible light.9 In addition, a Schottky interface is formed between metal nanoparticles with large work function (such as Pt, Pd, and Au) and n-type TiO2, while p-type semiconductors in contact with TiO2 result in p–n junctions at the interface. Since both types of junctions have a rectifying electrical transport behaviour, an efficient charge separation of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs is achieved, which prevents the undesired electron–hole recombination.10–12 Hydrothermal synthesis of various types of titanate nanomaterials opened up new possibilities for large scale and simple production of self-similar TiO2 photocatalytic materials. This process is robust and enables the synthesis of various titania derivatives via the combination of different post-processing methods of titanates including ion-exchange, calcination, doping and surface decoration.13–17 Additionally, among the titanate and titania nanomaterials, nanofiber-based TiO2 attracts great attention due to the versatility of post-processing, enabling the formation of large area films, coatings, and porous membranes as well as composites with polymers.17–19
Recently, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) has been used to obtain simultaneous mapping of structural and electronic properties of conjugated polymer based photovoltaic materials. The KPFM technique adopts a non-contacting tip with a conductive coating to measure the surface potential difference between the tip and the local surface.20,21 Previously, Samorì et al. reported that KPFM has the ability to obtain quantitative mappings in a non-contacting and non-destructive manner, which is quite suitable for sensitive organic materials.22 Su et al. demonstrated the utilization of KPFM to correlate the surface potential shifts with the power conversion efficiency of a P3HT–TiO2 nanorod hybrid bulk heterojunction.23 Spadafora et al. adopted a KPFM technique under ultrahigh vacuum to study P3HT/PCBM photovoltaic devices, and the spatial resolution achieved representing ten times improvement over previous study.24 As demonstrated by the above examples, KPFM is a robust technique which can provide information on the evolution of carrier distribution and on the change of band structure of thin films. While the technique has been widely used in the investigation of electronic properties of photovoltaic materials, the adoption for characterizing inorganics, particularly photocatalytic materials, is still rare. Therefore, in this study, we implement photo-KPFM, which combines illumination with the KPFM technique, to measure the photo surface potential shift of single filament of TiO2-based nanofibers. By analyzing the surface potential shift of individual TiO2-based nanofibers with and without illumination, we found that the photo surface potential shifts of TiO2-based nanofibers are proportional to the photocatalytic activity, which can serve as an index to indicate the photocatalytic activity.
Furthermore, simulation by first-principles calculations is a useful tool to predict electron transfer and exciton dissociation at the atomic level. Previously, Varley et al. used such models to study the controversial mechanism of enhanced photocatalytic activity of nitrogen doped TiO2 and demonstrated the importance of impurity level-to-band transitions.25 Sun et al. adopted first-principles calculations to determine the reaction mechanism of water splitting on GaN, and showed that the first hydrogen splitting is catalysed by the GaN surface.26 Diebold and co-workers reported that the degrees of hydroxylation are important to catechol diffusion over the TiO2 (110) surface. Accordingly, first-principles calculations are proved to be a useful tool to examine the mechanism behind impurities and reduction in surface potential.27 In the present study, we also perform first-principles calculations to clarify the photocatalytic mechanism of TiO2 nanofibers. The results show considerable consistency with those obtained using the photo-KPFM analysis (and photocatalytic activity measurements reported earlier).
Experimental section
Preparation of TiO2 NFs
TiO2 NFs used in this work were the same as those reported earlier.28 First, sodium titanate (Na2TiyO2y+1) nanofibers were synthesized by the hydrothermal method from anatase in 10 M NaOH (aq.) at 175 °C for 24 h in a rotating autoclave with 120 rpm revolving around its short axis. The product was washed in 0.1 M HCl to replace Na+ ions with protons and was then rinsed in deionized water followed by filtering and drying in air at 70 °C. The as-obtained product is H2−xNaxTiyO2y+1 (Na concentration of 8.54 at% by XPS). TiO2 NFs were obtained by calcination of the sodium hydrogen nanofibers at 600 °C for 12 h to form TiO2 anatase nanofibers. N-TiO2 NFs were also synthesized from Na2TiyO2y+1 nanofibers but in two subsequent calcination steps: first, calcination in air at 600 °C for 12 h to form TiO2 anatase nanofibers, followed by a second calcination step in ammonia gas (50 mL min−1, 2% NH3 in N2 buffer) at the same temperature for 3 h. The as-prepared N-TiO2 NFs were subsequently decorated with Pt nanoparticles. In a typical process, 20.4 mg of platinum(II) acetylacetonate (Aldrich, 99.99%) was dissolved in 100 mL of acetone and mixed with 1.0 g of N-TiO2 NFs by ultrasonic agitation for 3 h and stirring for 6 h. After evaporating the solvent (at ∼80 °C hotplate temperature) under a N2 flow, the samples were calcined in air at 300 °C for 2 h, and then reduced in a 15% H2 (in Ar buffer) flow at 500 °C for 4 h to obtain N-TiO2-Pt NFs with ∼1.0 wt% Pt metal load.
Characterization of TiO2 NFs
The microstructures of diameter/structure of anatase TiO2 NFs, N-TiO2 NFs, and N-TiO2-Pt NFs were studied by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (JEOL 2000FX, 200 kV, LaB6 gun) as well as by synchrotron X-ray spectroscopy (λ ∼ 1.025 Å) on beam line 13A1 of the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC) in Taiwan.
Photo-KPFM analysis
The surface potential mapping was measured using a photo-KPFM (Kelvin probe force microscope, Digital Instruments, Nanoscopes III). The TiO2 nanofibers were dispersed in ethanol and then spin-coated on an Au substrate. The experimental setup of photo-KPFM (ESI, Fig. S1†) was constructed by placing a UV-B light (λmax ∼ 312 nm, 8 watts) next to the KPFM (Digital Instrument, Nanoscopes III). The surface potential maps of samples were taken by this photo-KPFM with and without illumination at room temperature. N-type silicon cantilever (Nanosensors) with high softness (average force constant of ∼2.8 N m−1) and with a resonance frequency of 75 kHz on average is coated with chromium, as a buffering layer, and a platinum–iridium5 alloy, as a conductive layer, was used. Anatase TiO2 NFs, N-TiO2 NFs, and N-TiO2-Pt NFs were dispersed in ethanol and spin-coated on a 100 nm thick gold-coated silicon wafer. After drying, the samples were measured by photo-KPFM. With this method, the height variation and contact potential by electrostatic force between the conductive tip and the surface of the samples are measured simultaneously. A line is scanned using AFM in tapping mode to acquire the topographic information of the material, then the same line is rescanned with the tip lifted to a height of 20 nm. During the second scan, VDC is applied at the tip to nullify the electrostatic oscillations, position by position, and the contact potential difference is observed and measured. The surface potential distribution of the TiO2-based NFs was mapped in the dark or under the illumination of a UV-B lamp (Sankyo Denki, G8T5E, 8 W). In addition, the function of the cross-section analysis was used to get detailed information on the topographic height and the surface potential across the selected line. After analyzing these data, the surface potential in the dark or under UV-B illumination was obtained. The surface potential difference is then denoted as the photo surface potential shift.
Computational simulation
Computational simulation used in this paper is based on density functional theory with a GGA-PBE (Generalized Gradient Approximation Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof) functional implemented in CASTEP (Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package) which uses a plane wave basis set to expand the election wave function. As for the pseudopotential, two different setups are adopted depending on the characteristic we are simulating. This is because that different pseudopotential will have better accuracy in predicting the properties they suit. In the simulations of band gap, density of states (DOS) and absorption spectrum, TiO2 is modeled by a (2 × 3 × 1) supercell doped with different impurities (N and Pt) (ESI, Fig. S2†). In this case, a norm-conserving pseudopotential is used due to its accuracy in predicting optical properties, and the calculations are conducted with an energy cutoff of 450.0 eV and a k-point set of 1 × 1 × 2. In the simulations of electron density difference, a supercell of (3 × 1 × 1) TiO2 crystal is used to simulate the electronic behavior. An ultrasoft pseudopotential is chosen in this simulation and calculations are conducted with an energy cutoff of 300.0 eV and a k-point set of 1 × 1 × 2.
Results and discussion
High resolution TEM images and synchrotron X-ray spectra of various TiO2-based NFs show a highly crystalline anatase phase as shown in Fig. 1. The as-prepared anatase TiO2 NFs have lengths of up to a few micrometers and diameters of ∼50 to 100 nm (the inset of Fig. 1(a)). N-TiO2 NFs prepared by the two-step calcination are shown in Fig. 1(b). The (101) spacing of both anatase TiO2 NFs and N-TiO2 NFs is about 3.40 Å, indicating that the two-step calcination method did not cause considerable expansion of the lattice. Based on TEM analysis, the Pt nanoparticles are homogeneously distributed on the surface of N-TiO2-Pt NFs with an average particle diameter of 1.9 ± 0.3 nm as shown in Fig. 1(c). The synchrotron X-ray spectra (λ ∼ 1.025 Å) show that TiO2-based nanofibers are still in the anatase phase with negligible effect of N-doping on the structure (Fig. 1(d)). The weak and broadened XRD reflections found at 2θ ∼ 26.4° for N-TiO2-Pt NFs can be assigned to metallic Pt(111), and suggest that very small size Pt nanoparticles are present (Fig. 1(e)).
 Fig. 1  High resolution TEM images of (a) anatase TiO2 NFs, (b) N-TiO2 NFs and (c) N-TiO2-Pt NFs. Synchrotron X-ray spectra of TiO2-based NFs with different scanning rates: (d) fast scanning rate of 0.04 degree per second and (e) slow scanning rate of 0.004 degree per second. 
Topographic images and surface potential mappings of single filament of anatase TiO2 NFs, N-TiO2 NFs and N-TiO2-Pt NFs with/without illumination were investigated by KPFM as shown in Fig. 2. These TiO2-based NFs were dispersed in ethanol and then deposited on a 100 nm thick gold coated silicon wafer by spin coating in order to obtain well-separated individual filaments of the nanofibers. Fig. 2(a), (d) and (g) show the topographic images, Fig. 2(b), (e) and (h) are the surface potential maps without illumination, Fig. 2(c), (f) and (i) are the surface potential maps under UV-B irradiation of individual filaments of anatase TiO2, N-TiO2 and N-TiO2-Pt, respectively. The Fermi energy (Ef) of the Au substrate (∼5.2 eV relative to vacuum) served as a reference in order to examine Ef of the different types of nanowires. Ideally, Ef of TiO2-based nanofibers and Au substrates without illumination should match thus leading to uniform surface potentials across the mapping images. Consequently, equal surface potential between Au/N-TiO2 NFs and Au/N-TiO2-Pt NFs can be observed in Fig. 2(e) and (h) respectively. However, it can be observed that the surface potential of anatase TiO2 NFs (Fig. 2(b)) without illumination is slightly lower than that of the Au substrate by approximately 15 mV, indicating the partially residual negative charges remaining on the surface of anatase TiO2 NFs.
 Fig. 2  Surface topographic images (a, d and g) and surface potential mappings in the dark (b, e and h) or under UV-B illumination (c, f and i) of three kinds of TiO2-based nanofibers: anatase TiO2 NFs (a–c), N-TiO2 NFs (d–f) and N-TiO2-Pt NFs (g–i). The white scale bar indicates 100 nm. 
TiO2 is considered as an n-type semiconductor and electron–hole pairs can be generated under ultraviolet light irradiation. In the present work, UV-B light with a λmax of 312 nm was used to irradiate the TiO2-based nanofibers. It results in the splitting of Ef into quasi-Fermi energy, Efn and Efp, for electrons and holes respectively. Efn is usually considered in TiO2 because of its characteristic as an n-type semiconductor with electrons being the majority carriers. When TiO2-based nanofibers are illuminated by UV-B, the generated electron–hole pairs can be dissociated in the presence of a redox couple leaving holes on the TiO2 surfaces for further oxidation and generation of OH radicals. The processes of carrier generation, carrier dissociation and carrier transfer directly determine the photocatalytic performance. Moreover, the presence of the redox couple Au substrates facilitates the electron–hole pair dissociation, i.e. the electrons can transfer from TiO2-based nanofibers to Au substrates. Fig. 2(c), (f) and (i) show the surface potential mapping for anatase TiO2 NFs, N-TiO2 NFs and N-TiO2-Pt NFs with UV-B illumination respectively. Generally, for all TiO2-based nanofibers, the average surface potential with illumination shows a negative shift compared to those without illumination. It suggests that the electron–hole pairs can be generated under UV-B light leading to an upward shift of Fermi energy from Ef to Efn and thus the detected negative shift of surface potential. Above all, the most significant shift in N-TiO2-Pt NF (∼−180 mV) mapping was obtained indicating the largest population of accumulated photo-generated carriers. Additionally, the non-equilibrated Fermi energy between TiO2-based nanofibers and Au substrates further implies the occurrence of a carrier transfer process (electron–hole pair dissociation) between the redox couple under UV-B illumination. From Fig. 2, we find that anatase TiO2 NFs and N-TiO2 NFs have a larger photo surface potential shift than N-TiO2-Pt NFs due to the presence of Pt nanoparticles decorating the TiO2 nanofibers. Namely, the Pt nanoparticles provide an alternative center for electron–hole pair dissociation, competing with the Au substrate. As a consequence, besides electron injection to the gold (Au) substrate, the separated electrons can also be trapped by Pt nanoparticles and remain close to the TiO2 surface, leading to a lowered surface potential difference between the redox couple.
In order to visualize the photo surface potential variation even better, the UV-B light was switched on then off during scanning. The obtained photo surface potential mappings (Fig. 3(a), (c) and (e)) clearly show the significant negative surface potential shifts of the Au substrate upon illumination due to the accumulation of electrons injected from the nanofibers. Considering the surface potential variation of nanofibers as shown in the surface potential profile across the nanofibers (Fig. 3(b), (d) and (f)), all the three kinds of TiO2 nanofibers reveal a dropped surface potential upon illumination based on the same reason of Fermi energy splitting. A considerable drop of surface potential (∼−182 mV) was observed in the case of N-TiO2-Pt nanofibers, presenting the larger shift of Efn relative to Ef than that of anatase TiO2 NFs (photo surface potential shift ∼ −29 mV) and N-TiO2 NFs (photo surface potential shift ∼ −31 mV). The accumulated electrons in Pt nanoparticles hence caused the decreased surface potential and shifted Efn closer to the TiO2 conduction band. Correlating with the photocatalytic property, it is known that the transfer of electrons to noble metal nanoparticles can greatly reduce the opportunity of electron–hole recombination and hence significantly improve the photocatalytic property. Therefore, the surface potential shift depicted here can serve as an index to evaluate the photocatalytic property. The rapid redistribution of charge carriers react quickly to switching on and off the UV light, as shown by the sharp steps of surface potential between light and dark conditions (Fig. 3(f)). In conclusion, the correlation between photocatalytic property and the dynamic process of carrier generation, carrier transfer, and carrier accumulation performed by photo-KPFM measurement is demonstrated here for the first time. The photo surface potential mapping of nanomaterials with high resolution can further provide useful information of the photocatalysis process for evaluating the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 3  Photo surface potential mappings (a, c and e) and the cross-section profiles (b, d and f) of nanofiber's surface potential of three kinds of TiO2-based nanofibers: (a and b) anatase TiO2 NFs, (c and d) N-TiO2 NFs and (e and f) N-TiO2-Pt NFs. 
Computer simulation is used to examine the mechanism of photo surface potential shift caused by nitrogen doping with/without platinum decoration. All simulations are based on CASTEP module in Materials Studio developed by Accelrys Software Inc. The theoretical calculations of the band gap and the absorption spectrum of TiO2-based materials are presented in the ESI, Table S1 and Fig. S3.† The calculated theoretical band gap of anatase TiO2 is 2.441 eV which is smaller than the experimental value of 3.20 eV.29 The difference of band gap values originates from the Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional which is well known to underestimate the band gap of semiconductors.30 Despite the underestimated value, the calculations are sufficient to compare the variation of band gap in N-TiO2 and N-TiO2-Pt. For N-TiO2, nitrogen doping in interstitial sites was considered (ESI, Fig. S2†) and the band gap of 1.514 eV is obtained, which is significantly smaller than that of anatase TiO2 (2.441 eV). The doping of nitrogen impurities gives rise to the generation of impurity bands located above the maximum of valence band and hence narrows the band gap (ESI, Fig. S4†). Therefore, enhancement in absorbance can be clearly observed in N-TiO2. However, in N-TiO2-Pt we can observe that an even stronger absorbance occurs with a bandgap similar to N-TiO2. This may be due to the strong Pt resonant surface plasmon coupling and Pt nanoparticle scattering effect to improve the light absorption other than the formation of impurity band alone.31 From the experimental results and simulation, nitrogen doping and platinum decoration are beneficial to increase the absorbance of TiO2 materials in the visible region. However, in the case of N-TiO2-Pt, the increased absorbance alone is not sufficient to contribute to the huge photo surface potential shift in Table 1 (approximately half an order increase compared with N-TiO2).
Table 1 Average surface potential of three kinds of TiO2-based nanofibers




Sample
Photo surface potential shift (mV)
H2 production rate (μmol g−1 h−1)28




Anatase TiO2 NFs
−29
150


N-TiO2 NFs
−31
300


N-TiO2-Pt NFs
−182
22500




In Fig. 4, electron density differences of TiO2-based materials are considered which reveal the way how electrons re-distribute before and after the impurities are added to anatase TiO2. The difference in electron densities is shown in Fig. 4 by dots; and the loss/enrichment of electron density is indicated in blue/red, respectively. When doping with nitrogen, the nitrogen attracts the electrons nearby causing a locally electron rich environment. In contrast, platinum decorated N-TiO2 NFs strongly exclude electrons from their surrounding and increase further the local charge density in the interstitial site. These local positive or negative charges are considered to attract and separate the electrons and holes after electron–hole-pairs generation. Therefore, the added dopant increases the attractive sites and reduces the probability of electron–hole recombination. Consequently, more electrons diffuse to the surface of TiO2, leading to a larger surface potential shift as also shown by KPFM. On the other hand, when platinum is on the surface of the semiconductor, the decreased opportunity of the electron–hole pair recombination should be the main reason for the large negative photo surface potential shift (instead of the band gap reduction).
 Fig. 4  Structures and images of electron density difference for (a) TiO2, (b) N-TiO2 and (c) N-TiO2-Pt. (a1, b1 and c1) General view of the structure with Ti and oxygen indicated as gray and red balls, (a2, b2 and c2) top view of the respective structure, and (a3, b3 and c3) side view of the respective structure. In (b) and (c) nitrogen dopant is arbitrarily built in the interstitial site of oxygen due to the periodic properties of CASTEP. The “electron density difference” is the difference of total electron densities between “after” and “before” the dopant is introduced to this TiO2 set and it indicates how the electrons will be distributed after TiO2 is doped. 
Conclusions
In summary, we have shown that UV-light photo Kelvin probe force microscopy is a useful technique to study light-induced surface charge variation in TiO2-based materials. Anatase TiO2 NFs doped with nitrogen and then decorated with Pt nanoparticles have the largest negative surface potential shift (−182 mV) compared to other TiO2-based NFs, in agreement with the greatest photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production we reported earlier.28 Simulation data suggest that the significant surface potential shift is due to the red shift of the absorption spectrum and because of the decreased possibility for electron–hole pair recombination.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr András Sápi, Prof. Zoltán Kónya, and Prof. Ákos Kukovecz at University of Szeged for providing titanate nanofibers, Prof. Jyri-Pekka Mikkola, Dr Andrey Shchukarev and Dr William Larsson at Umeå University for XPS analysis and nitrogen doping, Jussi Hiltunen, Anna Avila, Dr Mika Huuhtanen, Prof. Riitta Keiski, and Prof. Heli Jantunen at University of Oulu for the hydrogen production measurement and material analysis, Mr Bo-Ming Huang at National Taiwan University for TEM images taken, and Dr Ming-Tao Lee group (BL-13A1) at National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (BL-13A1) for Synchrotron X-ray spectroscopy measurement. The authors are grateful for financial support received from the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation (TEKES) (projects no. 52423 and 52433), Academy of Finland (projects no. 120853, 124357, 128626, and 128908), National Science Council of Taiwan (projects no. 98-3114-E-002-001, 99-2120-M-002-011, and 101-2218-E-182-001), and Chang Gung University Research Project (CGURP, project no. UERPD2B0111).
Notes and references
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef CAS .
K.-M. Lee, V. Suryanarayanan and K.-C. Ho, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1416 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Wu, C.-H. Chang, H.-H. Lo, Y.-S. Lin, W.-C. Yen, W.-F. Su, Y.-F. Chen and C.-W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4097 RSC .
T.-W. Zeng, Y.-Y. Lin, H.-H. Lo, C.-W. Chen, C.-H. Chen, S.-C. Liou, H.-Y. Huang and W.-F. Su, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5387 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2807 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3995 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, G. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, C. H. Sun, Y. G. Jin, S. C. Smith, J. Zou, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4078 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uosaki, R. Yoneda and H. Kita, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 4042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370 RSC .
E. Horváth, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya and I. Kiricsi, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 927 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, S. Yin, V. Petrykin, M. Kakihana and T. Sato, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 309, 50 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Feist and P. K. Davies, J. Solid State Chem., 1992, 101, 275 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Wu, A. Sápi, A. Avila, M. Szabó, J. Hiltunen, M. Huuhtanen, G. Tóth, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya, R. Keiski, W.-F. Su, H. Jantunen and K. Kordás, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 360 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, A. Cogbill, T. Zhang, S. Ghosh and Z. R. Tian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16819 CrossRef CAS .
K. Woan, G. Pyrgiotakis and W. Sigmund, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2233 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palermo, M. Palma and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 145 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe, T. Glatzel, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch, M. C. Lux-Steiner and N. S. Sariciftci, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liscio, G. D. Luca, F. Nolde, V. Palermo, K. Müllen and P. Samorì, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 780 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Wu, Y.-J. Wu, W.-C. Yen, H.-H. Lo, C.-F. Lin and W.-F. Su, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1448 RSC .
E. J. Spadafora, R. Demadrille, B. Ratier and B. Grévin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3337 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Varley, A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2343 CrossRef CAS .
P.-T. Chen, C.-L. Sun and M. Hayashi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18228 CAS .
S.-C. Li, L.-N. Chu, X.-Q. Gong and U. Diebold, Science, 2010, 328, 882 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Wu, J. Hiltunen, A. Sápi, A. Avila, W. Larsson, H.-C. Liao, M. Huuhtanen, G. Tóth, A. Shchukarev, N. Laufer, Á. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya, J.-P. Mikkola, R. Keiski, W.-F. Su, Y.-F. Chen, H. Jantunen, P. M. Ajayan, R. Vajtai and K. Kordás, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5025 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, X. Huang, B. Tian, S. Zhou, Y. Li and Z. Dua, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 162107 CrossRef .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 219 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lin, H. Y. Lin, C. L. Cheng and Y. F. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4391 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic illustration of photo-KPFM measurement. Theoretical band gap for TiO2-based materials. Structure of TiO2 NFs in a 2 × 3 × 1 supercell. Theoretical absorption spectrum of TiO2, N-TiO2 NFs and N-TiO2-Pt NFs. Density of states of TiO2, N-TiO2 and N-TiO2-Pt NFs. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta01011bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  High resolution TEM images of (a) anatase TiO2 NFs, (b) N-TiO2 NFs and (c) N-TiO2-Pt NFs. Synchrotron X-ray spectra of TiO2-based NFs with different scanning rates: (d) fast scanning rate of 0.04 degree per second and (e) slow scanning rate of 0.004 degree per second.	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface topographic images (a, d and g) and surface potential mappings in the dark (b, e and h) or under UV-B illumination (c, f and i) of three kinds of TiO2-based nanofibers: anatase TiO2 NFs (a–c), N-TiO2 NFs (d–f) and N-TiO2-Pt NFs (g–i). The white scale bar indicates 100 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photo surface potential mappings (a, c and e) and the cross-section profiles (b, d and f) of nanofiber's surface potential of three kinds of TiO2-based nanofibers: (a and b) anatase TiO2 NFs, (c and d) N-TiO2 NFs and (e and f) N-TiO2-Pt NFs.	 

Anatase TiO2 NFs	−29	150
N-TiO2 NFs	−31	300
N-TiO2-Pt NFs	−182	22500

 	Fig. 4  Structures and images of electron density difference for (a) TiO2, (b) N-TiO2 and (c) N-TiO2-Pt. (a1, b1 and c1) General view of the structure with Ti and oxygen indicated as gray and red balls, (a2, b2 and c2) top view of the respective structure, and (a3, b3 and c3) side view of the respective structure. In (b) and (c) nitrogen dopant is arbitrarily built in the interstitial site of oxygen due to the periodic properties of CASTEP. The “electron density difference” is the difference of total electron densities between “after” and “before” the dopant is introduced to this TiO2 set and it indicates how the electrons will be distributed after TiO2 is doped.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Schematic illustration of photo-KPFM measurement. Theoretical band gap for TiO2-based materials. Structure of TiO2 NFs in a 2 × 3 × 1 supercell. Theoretical absorption spectrum of TiO2, N-TiO2 NFs and N-TiO2-Pt NFs. Density of states of TiO2, N-TiO2 and N-TiO2-Pt NFs. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta01011b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
