Viologen-inspired functional materials: synthetic strategies and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA01724K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA01724K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23337-23360Viologen-inspired functional materials: synthetic strategies and applications

        
          
            Junjie 
            Ding
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Caini 
            Zheng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Luxin 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chenbao 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Chen
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Mingqiang 
            Li
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Guangqun 
            Zhai
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Zhuang
          
        
      *ae
aState Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Electrical Insulation and Thermal Ageing, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: zhuang@sjtu.edu.cn
bKey Lab for Advanced Materials, Institute of Applied Chemistry, School of Chemical and Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: chentangyu@yahoo.com
cZhiyuan College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China
dInstrumental Analysis Center and School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: limingqiang@sjtu.edu.cn
eJiangsu Key Laboratory of Environmentally Friendly Polymeric Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Changzhou University, Changzhou 213164, China
Received 
      15th February 2019
    , Accepted 18th March 2019First published on 18th March 2019AbstractViologens, functional organic materials composed of conjugated bi-/multi-pyridyl groups, have attracted much attention for decades owing to their properties such as unique electrochromic and radical-rich features under redox manipulation, biosensitive properties, and ionic and localized conjugation. Considerable efforts have been devoted to synthesizing novel viologen-based functional materials to study their properties and develop applications. So far, viologens and viologen-based materials have been widely applied in many fields, including electrochromism, molecular machines, memory devices, gas storage and separation, energy storage, and biochemistry. The rapid development of functional materials in the 21st century has inspired extensive integration of viologens into many types of novel and famous materials (e.g., host–guest supramolecules, porous polymers, and metal–organic frameworks), and therefore, viologens seem to no longer be a key player. However, the features of viologens (or bi-/multi-pyridyl-based materials) have always dominated the properties of target functional materials and long been neglected by researchers. In order to provide an overview of this field, this perspective paper focuses on reasonable design and synthesis of viologen-based functional materials and their representative applications. The remaining challenges and future potential applications are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Quaternary pyridinium salts (QPSs) have attracted abundant attention owing to their large-scale applications.1–6 Viologens, a type of QPS, are functional organic materials composed of conjugated bi-/multi-pyridyl groups; their unique properties make them one of the most promising candidates for optoelectronic and energy applications. Typically, viologen is the common name of a series of QPSs derived from 4,4′-bipyridine, which was first named by Michaelis7 in 1932 because of the unique purple color of the reductive state of this quaternary base. Since then, viologens have been widely used as an antibacterial agent or herbicide. Nowadays, novel viologens and their derivatives continue to find versatile applications in the form of various functional materials; they are used, for example, as an active component in electrochromic display devices,8–11 diodes and transistors,12–20 memory devices,21–25 and molecular machines;2,26,27 as antibacterial agents;28–34 as electrodes for supercapacitors35–37 and batteries;38–45 as catalysts for hydrogen generation46–50 and gas storage and separation;51,52 and as dyes to sensitize solar cells.53–55 Besides, viologen Zincke salts can be used as the starting materials reacting with cyclopentadiene ions to synthesize azulene.56 The key features of viologens that make them such notable and crucial building blocks for many functional materials can be summarized as follows:
(i) Reduction of viologens to cation radicals and then to neutral species occurs sequentially and reversibly within a very accessible potential. The three reductive states of viologens—di-cation, radical cation, and neutral—are all thermodynamically stable (Fig. 1a).
 Fig. 1  (a) Three reversible redox states of methyl viologen (MV); (b) cyclic voltammograms of methyl viologen in 0.1 M TBAPF6/MeCN solution (vs. Ag/Ag+). Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons; (c) computed UV-Vis absorption spectra of methyl viologen. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Springer Nature. 
(ii) Through a one-electron chemically or electrochemically reversible reduction, viologens can exist in a relatively stable radical-cation state with an intensive dark blue or purple color.
(iii) Viologens can serve as a strong electron acceptor to form viologen/electron-donor-based charge transfer complexes.
(iv) The synthetic methods of normal viologens are absolutely simple, and diverse modifications of the methods can be achieved. The properties of viologens can be easily tuned by integrating them with other functional materials via covalent or coordination bonding.
(v) Viologens and their derivatives can readily form a desirable specific morphology through self-assembly by taking advantage of strong intermolecular p–p interaction or host–guest interaction.
The reversible redox behavior of viologens can be confirmed via cyclic voltammetry (CV). Fig. 1b shows the CV curve of methyl viologen (MV). Two pairs of redox peaks indicate that methyl viologen can undergo two steps of reversible reductions, forming a radical cation (MV+˙) and a neutral species (MV0).57 The peaks at −0.78 and −1.19 V are assigned to the processes of MV2+ → MV+˙ and MV+˙ → MV0, respectively. With the reductions, the color of MV2+ turned from colorless to brilliant violet-blue (MV+˙), and then to yellow-brown (MV0). MV2+ exhibits an absorption at 261 nm. When it is reduced to MV+˙, two peaks appear at 397 nm and 608 nm. The absorption of M0 is at 401 nm.58 Thomas et al.59 investigated the solid-state electrical conductivity of a phenyl viologen radical cation and neutral species. They found that the contact resistance of the radical cation was 54 kΩ, which is much lower than that of the neutral species (650 MΩ). Jun-ichi et al.60 calculated the energy level of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of MV2+ by density functional theory (DFT), which were −14.7 and −11.2 eV, respectively. The deep LUMO level was consistent with the good electron-accepting ability of MV2+.
Thus far, several synthesis methods have been developed to prepare viologens. Substitution reactions between substituted halogenated alkanes and pyridine-based compounds and the Zincke reaction are the most popular methods for viologen synthesis. The Zincke reaction can be used to synthesize conjugated substituted viologens, which could well compensate for the limitation of non-conjugated structures using substitution reactions. Other viologen synthesis methods include N-acylation substitution between pyridinium compounds and acylating agents, reactions between quinone-based compounds and pyridinium compounds, reactions between oxonium ion salts and primary amino groups, and oxidation of tetrahydropyrene. The details of these approaches will be discussed in the following sections. Notably, all the viologen synthesis methods can be applied to the synthesis of viologen-based functional nanomaterials that can be used for optoelectronic- and energy-related applications.
The specific properties of viologens can be investigated by a series of new characterization technologies. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) can be used to study unpaired electrons in viologens.61 Because a viologen can be reduced to form a stable radical cation, it is easily detected by EPR with a sharp signal. As a guest component in molecular machines, the conformational change of viologens can be identified by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy.62 CV can reveal the reversible redox behaviour of viologens, with the appearance of two pairs of reduction peaks (Fig. 1b). UV-Vis absorption spectra can be used to study the electron transition behaviour of viologens (Fig. 1c). IR spectroscopy can characterize the functional groups of viologens. The absorption bands of CN and C–N stretching vibration in the pyridine ring are at 1654 and 1178 cm−1.21
Initially, the design of most viologens used 4,4′-bipyridines as the core, especially for the viologens containing small molecules. With the constant development of synthesis methods and the revolution in functional materials in the 21st century, properties beyond those of viologens have been revealed for an increasing number of novel viologen-based functional materials. Both small molecules and macromolecules have been continuously designed and reported. In this review, we discuss the original synthesis methods, design principles of functional materials, and versatile applications of viologens, their analogs, and derivatives. Regarding new viologens, starting from the raw material of 4,4′-bipyridines, we can obtain the following: (i) viologens with different N-substituted functional groups; (ii) viologen-linked dendrimers and cross-linked polymers; and (iii) conjugated or nonconjugated viologen-based linear polymers, in which the moiety of bipyridines is in the main chain or side chain. Regarding extended viologens, we can obtain the following: (i) fused viologens with heteroatoms or acene bridged between two QPSs; (ii) viologen-based cyclophanes or cages with QPSs serving as the basic components to form macrocycles or cages; (iii) non-4,4′-connected bipyridyl salts; and (iv) multiarmed QPSs.
The perspective of the studies that discuss viologen-based optoelectronic and energy materials is limited. In 2003, Sliwa et al.63 reviewed the synthesis of QPSs and related compounds and discussed a few selected examples to demonstrate their physicochemical properties and applications. In 2014, Kathiresan et al.64 reviewed the synthesis, properties, and applications of benzylic viologen dendrimers. In 2017, Thomas et al.65 reviewed a few applications of viologens and their derivatives. Although these reviews extensively summarized previous work, they only focused on very specific aspects and failed to explain the connection between viologens' synthesis, functional materials, and applications. Most importantly, a lot of important research about the synthesis, properties, and applications of viologens and their analogs and derivatives has been reported in the last few years. In this review, the synthesis methods of viologens and their diverse structures as well as their comprehensive applications are summarized.
2. Synthesis of viologens
Until now, great efforts have been made towards the synthesis of viologens and their derivatives. As shown in Scheme 1, six typical methods have been developed, namely the N-alkylation reaction, N-arylation reaction, Zincke reaction, reductive coupling reaction, N-acylation reaction, and oxonium ion substitution reaction. (1) The reaction between halogenated alkanes and pyridinium compounds is the most common, convenient, and high-yield method to directly prepare alkyl N-substituted viologens.7 The viologen's properties can be easily modulated by replacing the substituted alkyl chain (length of the alkyl chain or the peripheral ending group) or by altering the counter anion category. This method is the earliest discovered one and has wide application. (2) N-arylation substitution of 4,4′-bipiridines66 has also been widely used for viologen synthesis. Quinone-based compounds are used to react with 4,4′-bipiridines to directly synthesize hydroquinone N-substituted viologens. Phenolic hydroxyl can be used as the active reaction anchor for further modification. (3) The Zincke reaction67 has also been widely used for the design and synthesis of fully conjugated viologens. Similarly, pyridinium compounds are used as the raw reagent to react with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene to synthesize the Zincke salt. Then, the compounds with a primary amino react with the Zincke salt to replace the N-substituted groups and produce target products. If the compound has a primary amino in the aromatic ring, conjugated N-substituted salts can be successfully obtained. Due to the limitation of nonconjugation of alkyl substitution, the Zincke reaction offers another favorable opportunity to design new viologen structures, and greatly extends the scope of viologen-based materials. Using the Zincke reaction, the structural design of viologens automatically changes into the structural design of the compounds with amino groups. Similarly, the counter anion category can also be varied. (4) Another notable method to synthesize viologens is the reduction coupling reaction of 4-cyanopyridine-based quaternary pyridinium salts. It was first demonstration by Kosower et al.68 in 1964 and since then has been widely used owing to its convenient synthetic routine. Sodium dithionite was used as the chemical reduction reagent to reduce the 1-methyl-4-carbamidopyridinium ion in alkaline aqueous solution to obtain methyl viologen. Kosower et al. also proposed the reaction mechanism. Typically, the pyridinium quaternary salt is reduced by receiving an electron from the reduction reagent to form a radical intermediate. Then, two radical intermediates self-dimerize to form a precursor. This precursor eliminates two cyano groups to synthesize the target viologen. According to the synthetic routine, the fundamental purpose of the design of a new viologen is to design and synthesize new 4-cyanopyridine-based QPSs through the above reaction. (5) N-acylation substitution69 uses pyridinium compounds and a powerful acylating agent to synthesize highly reactive acyl N-substituted viologens; the viologen thus synthesized can be used in further reactions. Trifluoromethanesulfonate has been widely used in this reaction. Quaternary salts are finally obtained through the O-alternation of oxonium ion salts with the compounds having primary amino groups.70 (6) The oxonium ion salt opens its loop to react with the primary amino to form an intermediate, and then one equivalent of H2O is withdrawn to form the target QPSs. Similar to the case of the Zincke reaction, in this reaction, compounds with primary amino groups are used to form conjugated N-substituted quaternary salts. The aforementioned synthesis methods of QPSs can be used to obtain the desirable viologen and extended viologens.
 Scheme 1  Synthesis methods of viologens and their derivatives. 
3. Viologens and their derivatives
Methyl viologen, a first generation viologen, was obtained through N-alkylation substitution using iodomethane and 4,4′-bipyridine. To further study the structure–property relationship of such materials, many other types of viologens and viologen-like materials were successfully developed. The properties of viologens can be modulated by changing the substituted alkyl chain or the counter anion category easily. To synthesis and study viologen-based polymers, macromolecules and supramolecules, halogenated alkanes, or pyridinium compounds with multifunctional groups were used. With the further development of viologen-type quaternary salts, similar structures were frequently discovered. The two steps of stable and unique electron-accepting capacity and the corresponding stable unique properties make viologens one of the most interesting and important building blocks of many types of functional materials. In this review, different structures of viologens and their derivatives will be discussed in the following three sections: conventional viologens, extended viologens, and polyviologens.
3.1 Substituted groups and counter anions of viologens
According to the structure, viologen-based compounds can be divided into conventional viologens and extended viologens. Most conventional viologens were synthesized through N-alkylation substitution. Thus, by altering the category of halogenated alkanes, diverse modified small-molecular viologens can be easily obtained. The N-substituted alkyls can be categorized into two groups: different-length alkyl chain and terminal functional group-substituted alkyl chain. So far, viologens with different lengths from C(1) to C(18) have been successfully obtained; they can be used to control the hydrophobic interaction or the host–guest interaction. Viologens with different chain lengths of oligo-ethylene oxide71 have also been obtained (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  Structures of different functional groups of N-substituted viologens. 
Note that alternation of the counter anions of viologens is another important method of modulating the thermodynamic properties of viologens, such as solubility and crystallization. In general, halides are soluble in protic solvents such as water and methanol. Viologens with the anions BF4− or PF6− are soluble in aprotic solvents such as acetonitrile, dimethyl formamide, and dimethyl sulfoxide. Most viologens with a long alkyl chain and the Tf2N-anion can form a mesophase at varying temperatures.72
3.2 Extended viologens
The primary condition to obtain extended viologens is to ensure the conjugation of multi-pyridinium quaternary salts, which can ensure the formation of stable radical cationic or even neutral compounds. Design and synthesis of extended viologens involve synthesis of conjugated multi-pyridinium quaternary salts. Conjugated pyridinium quaternary salts can be synthesized using many methods; for example, they can be bridged with aromatic rings, heterocyclic rings, or double/triple bonds. Among the numerous extended viologens synthesized so far, although most of the functional materials are not named a viologen, they indeed possess viologen-like structures and properties. In this section, extended viologens are divided into four subparts, namely fused viologens, viologen-based cycles, non-4,4′-connected dipyridyl salts, and other extended viologens.

3.2.1 Fused viologens. 
In recent years, to modulate the electron affinity of viologens, aromatic ring-fused viologens, which can extend the π-system of viologens, have attracted considerable attention of materials scientists. In terms of the structure, fused viologens can be categorized into two types according to the bridging between two QPSs: benzene- or acene-ring- and heterocyclic-ring-fused viologens (Scheme 3).
 Scheme 3  Categories and synthesis routines of fused viologens. (a) Acene-ring-fused viologens; (b) heterocyclic-ring-fused viologens. 
Thus far, one benzene-ring-fused and or and five acene-ring-fused viologens have been reported using different synthesis methods. Recently, Clennan et al.73 reported the synthesis of several methyl-substituted vinyl-bridged viologens. First, they used the coupling reaction of 3-bromopyridine (two equivalents) and triethoxyvinylsilane to introduce vinyl into the intermediate 1,2-bis-(3-pyridyl)ethenes. Through Mallory photocyclization, a vinyl-bridged dipyridine was obtained. With the treatment of iodomethane, the target viologens (vio-f1, Scheme 3) were successfully obtained. The naphthalene- and perylene-fused viologens (vio-f2 and vio-f3, respectively) were obtained through a similar synthesis routine.74 Both viologens were synthesized from corresponding dianhydrides. For example, in the case of the naphthalene-fused viologen, 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic anhydride was first reacted with aminomethane to produce the diimide. Then, after reduction with LiAlH4 and subsequent aromatization with Pd/C, the diimide was successfully converted to 2,7-diazapyrene, which was then converted to the final acene-ring-fused viologen by treating with iodomethane.
To synthesize a heterocyclic-ring-fused viologen, phosphorus oxide, silicon and germanium atoms have been used to bridge two QPSs. The synthesis of a phosphine oxide-bridged methyl viologen by using an established method of ring fusion of phospholes was first reported in 2011.8 Then, 3,3′-dibromo-4,4′-bipyridines was obtained through the traditional coupling reaction of pyridine with lithium diisopropylamide. After treating with two equivalents of n-butyllithium, diazadibenzophosphole oxide was added to realize ring fusion to produce phosphine oxide-bridged bipyridines (11). Through treatment with methyl triflate, the final phosphine oxide-bridged methyl viologen (vio-f4) was obtained. In 2014, using a similar ring fusion method, Ohshita et al.75,76 reported the synthesis of Si- and Ge-ring-fused bipyridines (12, 13, and 14) through treatment with dichlorodiphenylsilane and dichlorodiphenylgermane, respectively, instead of treatment with diazadibenzophosphole oxide. One year later, they reported the structures of viologens based on Ge-bridged bipyridines (vio-f5).


3.2.2 Viologen-based cycles. 
Using bi- or tri-functional reactants, both pyridinium compounds and chlorinated hydrocarbons, viologen cycles could be successfully obtained through the end-to-end loop closing reaction. Two main types of viologen cycles exist: viologen cyclophanes and cages. In regard to viologen or extended viologen cyclophanes, Stoddart et al.77–79 contributed substantially from 1994. They first used 1,4-bis(chloromethyl)benzene and four types of bipyridinium compounds as the building blocks to synthesize several viologen cyclophanes with different circle sizes (Scheme 4). Moreover, the molecular capacity was investigated by studying the interaction of cyclophanes of different sizes. Meanwhile, Smith et al.80 also synthesized the same viologen cyclophane. Cava et al.81 replaced 1,4-bis(chloromethyl)benzene with other building blocks such as halogen disubstituted alkyl and tetrathiocarbonic fulvalene. Greenland et al.82 used viologen Zincke salts (15) and m-terphenylene diamine (16) to synthesize a new viologen-based macrocycle (vio-cy1, Scheme 5). Young and Wasielewski et al.83 reported the synthesis of o-, m-, and p-xylylene bridged viologen cycles and researched the distance-dependent intramolecular electronic interactions by using femtosecond vibrational spectroscopy (vio-cy2, Scheme 6). Then, Wasielewski et al.84 synthesized another viologen-based cycle with the donor–acceptor structure for quantum information science applications (vio-cy3 and vio-cy4, Scheme 7). With further study of viologen cycles, Stoddart et al.85 demonstrated the template-directed synthesis of an extended viologen cage (vio-cy5), consisting of six pyridinium rings fused with two central triazines and bridged by three para-xylylene units (Scheme 8). Similarly, Jonathan et al.86 synthesized an extended viologen cage (vio-cy6) through a hydrazine (amino) derivative (21) and a triazine pyridinium aldehyde derivative (20) (Scheme 8).
 Scheme 4  Synthesis and structure of viologen cyclophanes. 
 Scheme 5  Synthesis and structure of vio-cy1. 
 Scheme 6  Synthesis and structures of vio-cy2. 
 Scheme 7  Structures of vio-cy3 and vio-cy4. 
 Scheme 8  Synthesis and structures of viologen cages. 


3.2.3 Non-4,4′-connected dipyridyl salts. 
Most of the conventional viologens were prepared from 4,4′-dipyridine. However, we found that non-4,4′-dipyridyl salts can also be used to synthesize functional materials with structures and properties similar to those of viologens. Non-4,4′-connected bipyridyl salts can be used to synthesize special N-any-position-based viologens, such as 2,2′-bipyridyl-based (vio-n1 and vio-n2), 2,3′-bipyridyl-based (vio-n3), and 3,3′-bipyridyl-based (vio-n4–vio-n7) viologens. In recent years, Lainé et al.87,88 reported a 1,4′-dipyridyl-based viologen (vio-n9). The O-alternation of oxonium ion salts with several different primary amino reagents, such as 4-aminopyridine and aniline, was adopted to synthesize intermediate QPSs. The target extended viologens were successfully obtained through further photochemical cyclization (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Structures of non-4,4′-connected dipyridyl salts. 


3.2.4 Other extended viologens. 
In addition to the extended viologens that have been described above, a large number of other extended viologens that possess similar structures and properties have been reported (Schemes 10 and 11). Many π-conjugated structures, such as vinyl,79 acetenyl,89 azo,90 imide,91 and aromatic rings have been introduced as the bridging molecules to obtain these desirable extended viologens. Thiazolo[5,4-d]-thiazole-bridged bipyridine (vio-ex2) was synthesized by microwave activation through the condensation of isonicotinaldehyde and dithiooxamide and subsequent oxidation of 2,3-dicyano-5,6-dichlorobenzoquinone.92 Tetrazine-bridged bipyridine (vio-ex7) was synthesized through the reduction reaction of 4-cyanopyridine and hydrazine. The aiphenyl-bridged extended viologen (vio-ex10) was obtained through the N-alkylation reaction of 1-bromooctane and 4,4′-bis(4-pyridyl)biphenyl.93 Teplý et al.6,94 contributed to the synthesis of a series of helical extended viologens (vio-ex3 and vio-ex8). The alternation of 12 different counter anions of vio-ex8 and their sequence crystalline properties were also investigated (Scheme 11).
 Scheme 10  Structures of double-pyridinium extended viologens. 
 Scheme 11  Structures of multiarmed pyridinium extended viologens. 
 Scheme 12  Synthesis and structures of nonconjugated linear polyviologens. (a) Viologen in the main chain; (b) viologen in the side chain. 
Due to the multifunctional ability, multiarmed pyridinium viologens are promising building blocks for the synthesis of cross-linked poly(extended viologen) or extended viologen dendrimers. Moieties of triazine porphyrin,95 thiophene,96 pyrene,97 tetrathiafulvalene,98 triphenylamine,99 and hexaphenylbenzene100 were used as the bridging structures of multiple QPSs. Cobalt tetrapyridyl porphyrin was first synthesized using the traditional Lindsey method with isonicotinaldehyde and pyrrole. Water-soluble cationic cobalt porphyrin with four-armed QPSs (vio-ex16) could be then synthesized through the methylation of the fundamental tetrapyridyl porphyrin.95 Pyrene-bridged multi-pyridines were obtained through the Suzuki coupling reaction of 4-pyridylboronic acid and 1,3,6,8-tetrabromopyrene. Further N-alkylation with iodomethane gave the target tetrapyridyl pyrene-based extended viologen (vio-17). A straightforward synthesis of bis-(pyrrolo)tetrathiafulvalene-based tetrapyridyl (vio-20) was reported by Sallé et al.98

3.3 Polyviologens
Compared with polymers with small molecules, polymers with a viologen and viologen-like structures can exhibit unique properties, such as higher stability, excellent mechanical properties, and higher solvent processability. Hence, various viologen-based polymers have been discovered over the years. According to the chain category of polymers, polyviologens can be divided into linear and cross-linked species.

3.3.1 Linear polyviologens. 
The linear polyviologens can be divided into nonconjugated and conjugated polymers; moreover, in terms of the positioning of viologens, polyviologens can be divided into main chain and side chain polymers (Scheme 12). Using disubstituted halogenated alkanes and bipyridinium compounds, polymers with a viologen in the main chain can be obtained by a one-pot synthesis. This polymerization method has been widely used because of its convenience. Since 1994, Bhowmik et al.101–104 have conducted numerous excellent studies on various polymers synthesized by using 4,4′-dipyridines and several types of disubstituted halogenated alkanes (by varying the length and viologen substitution position). Regarding side-chain viologen-based polymers, on one hand, side-chain halogenated alkyl-functioned polymers can be presynthesized, following which viologens can be attached to the side chains of these polymers using the substitution reaction; on the other hand, viologen-functioned monomers can be preobtained, following which the functional polymers can be obtained using various polymerization methods. In recent years, Scherman et al.105–107 synthesized several polyviologens through radical polymerization with polyethylene as the main chain backbone and a viologen moiety as the pendant as well as using 4-chlorophenyl as the halogenated alkyl anchor.
Similar to nonconjugated viologens, conjugated viologens can be divided into two categories according to whether the viologen moiety is in the main chain or the pendent chain. Note that the Zincke reaction has been the most frequently used method for the synthesis of conjugated polyviologens. As shown in Scheme 13a, Michl et al.70 reported successful synthesis of conjugated extended viologen oligomers (P5) from p-phenylenediamine and p-phenylene-bis-4,4-(2,6-diphenylpyrylium). In recent years, Lu et al.108 and Toppare et al.109 reported several new extended polyviologens (P1, P2, P3, and P4) by using the same monomers of p-phenylene-bis-4 and 4-(2,6-diphenylpyrylium), replacing diamine-based monomers (24, 25, 26, and 27). Similar to the synthesis of nonconjugated linear polyviologens, viologen-based monomers or pendants could be presynthesized by the Zincke reaction. In recent years, Yamaguchiand et al.110–113 used the Zincke reaction to synthesize several pendent viologens for the modification of linear and cross-linked polymers. As is shown in Scheme 13b, presynthesized unilateral viologen Zincke salts (31) and polyfluorene with amino side groups (P6) were used. Moreover, N-aminopyrrole was reacted with unilateral viologen Zinke salts to synthesize an N-substituted pyrrole monomer (30), and subsequently, the conjugated pendent-viologen-modified polypyrrole was synthesized (P8).
 Scheme 13  Structures and synthesis of conjugated linear polyviologens. (a) Viologen in the main chain; (b) viologen in the side chain. 


3.3.2 Cross-linked polyviologens. 
Cross-linked polyviologens are also categorized into conjugated and nonconjugated viologens. As mentioned above, viologens can be synthesized through the reduction coupling of 4-cyanopyridine-based quaternary salts. Using a similar mechanism, electro-reduction of 4-cyanopyridine-based quaternary salts was first reported by Tomokazu et al.114 in 1999. A trifunctional monomer, 1,3,5-tris(4′-cyanopyridinio-1′-methyl)-2,4,6-trimethylbenzene tribromide (34), was used to electro-polymerize and produce the nonconjugated cross-linked polyviologen (P10) onto an indium tin oxide (ITO) surface in Na2SO4. In recent years, Kvarnström et al.115,116 reported the synthesis and study of several viologen-based materials using this electropolymerization reaction, including some cross-linked polyviologens. Son et al.117 reported a microporous organic nanotube (P9) synthesized using two building blocks, tetra(4-ethynylphenyl)methane (32) and N,N′-di(4-iodophenyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride (33) through the Sonogashira coupling reaction. Coskun et al.51 also reported the same porous cross-linked conjugated polyviologen with different counter anions, Cl−, BF4−, and PF6−. Yamaguchi et al.110,113 reported the synthesis of conjugated cross-linked polyviologens using the Zincke reaction. N-aminopyrrole (35) or 4-amino-phenylacetylene (36) was reacted with viologen Zinke salts (15) to synthesize a pyrrole or 4-phenylethynyl disubstituted monomer (36 and 38) to obtain cross-linked polypyrrole (P11) and polyacetylene (P12)-bridged polyviologens (Scheme 14). Subsequently, viologen-based organic frameworks have been reported most recently. Coskun et al.118 for the first time synthesized a charged covalent triazine framework (P13) by using 1,1′-bis(4-cyanophenyl)-[4,4′-bipyridine]-1,1′-diium dichloride (39) under ionothermal reaction conditions (Scheme 15). In 2018, Ghosh et al.119 synthesized a similar structure (P14) via the Zincke reaction by using 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)trianiline and 1,1′-bis(2,4-dinitrophenyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium dichloride as precursors at 120 °C for 2 days (Scheme 16). Trabolsi et al.120 used viologen Zincke salts (15) and an aromatic amine (41) to synthesize a crystalline covalent organic gel framework (P15) by the Zincke reaction under microwave irradiation (Scheme 17).
 Scheme 14  Structure and synthesis of cross-linked polyviologens. 
 Scheme 15  Structure and synthesis of P13. 
 Scheme 16  Structure and synthesis of P14. 


3.3.3 Viologen-based dendrimers and branched polymers. 
Using branching units and the central core of dendrimers, highly branched dendrimers can be obtained. Recently, Walder et al.121,122 and Balzani et al.123,124 successfully synthesized a series of benzylic viologen dendrimers (44 and 45, Scheme 18) through N-alkylation substitution. The successful synthesis of benzylic viologen dendrimers was first reported in 2000 by Walder et al. Using 1,3,5-tris(bromomethyl)benzene as the core, 4,4′-bipyridines was first used to synthesize benzylic viologen dendrimers with different sizes. Then, 1-(bromomethyl)-3,5-bis(hydroxymethyl)benzene was used to control the size of the dendrimers, which, similar to a snow ball, controllably grows step by step. Similarly, Balzani et al. used 1, 3-bis(bromomethyl)-5-(hydroxymethyl)benzene and 4,4′-bipyridines to synthesize the precursor; furthermore, this was reacted with chloridine in order to obtain size-verified benzylic viologen dendrimers. Majoral et al.125 successfully synthesized several viologen dendrimers (P16) with a hydrazine-terminated cyclotriphosphazene (46) as the core and viologen oligomers (47) with phosphonate ending groups as the dendrons. The size of these dendrimers can also be controlled by controlling the molecular chain length of the reacting viologen-based oligomers (Scheme 19).
 Scheme 17  Structure and synthesis of P15. 

4. Properties and applications
The properties of viologens can be easily changed by tuning the substituted groups, such as methyl, ethyl, alkoxy, phenyl and so on. Different substituted groups can influence redox potentials, UV-Vis absorption bands, ion conductivity, etc. For example, the redox peaks of methyl viologen are at −0.78 and −1.19 V, while for ethyl viologen they are at −0.61 and −0.89 V, respectively. The detailed redox potentials of viologens with different functional groups are summarized in Table 1. Some hydrophilic substituent groups like trimethylammonio or sulfonic acid groups can improve the solubility of viologens in water, which is beneficial for aqueous organic redox flow batteries (OFRBs). Hiroyuki et al.126 investigated the ionic conductivity of different alkyl viologens in a poly(ethylene oxide) medium. They found that the ionic conductivity showed dependence on the alkyl chain length. Alkyl viologens with shorter alkyl chains exhibited higher ionic conductivities.
Table 1 Summarized redox potentials of viologens with different N-substituents






First reduction (V)
Second reduction (V)
Ref.







−0.78
−1.19 (vs. Ag/Ag+)

126






−0.61
−0.89 (vs. Ag/AgCl)

61






−0.71
−1.15 (vs. Ag/Ag+)

126






−0.40
−0.80 (vs. SCE)

20






−0.69
−0.97 (vs. Fc/Fc+)

59






−0.70
−0.98 (vs. Fc/Fc+)

127





 Scheme 18  Control growth synthesis and structures of viologen-based dendrimers. 
Viologen-based functional materials have exceptional properties, including three stable redox states, excellent capability to accept electrons, and tunable nitrogen substituents. Therefore, these materials have been widely used in many significant applications. For examples, viologens can undergo two steps of reductions to form stable radical cations and neutral species with different colours, indicating potential applications in electrochromism. With good reversible redox capacity, viologens can be used as potential anolytes in organic redox flow batteries (OFRBs). Besides, as desirable electron acceptors, viologens can combine with an electron donor to form charge transfer complexes, which can be used as an active layer in field-effect transistors or memory devices. Especially in recent years, a number of viologen-based functional materials have been designed and synthesized continuously, greatly expanding the applications of viologens. In this section, a few typical applications will be discussed, including electrochromism, organic field effect transistors, memory devices, molecular machines, antibacterial and antiviral agents, carbon dioxide adsorption, and energy storage and conversion.
 Scheme 19  Synthesis and structure of viologen dendrimers with a hydrazine-terminated cyclotriphosphazene as the core. 
4.1 Electrochromism
The phenomenon of color change for viologens during redox operation has long gained considerable attention. Such a feature makes viologens a promising candidate for electrochromic applications. Viologens were first reported as an active electrochrome for an electrochromic display in 1973.128 Since then, diverse viologen-based molecules, polyviologens, extended viologens, and viologen/nanomaterial composites have been constantly developed for electrochromic devices (ECDs). A typical ECD is composed of an electrochrome and an electrolyte sandwiched between two electrodes. Viologen-based materials can serve as either electrochromes or electrolytes.
Lee et al.9 reported a new flexible electrolyte-free ECD using methyl viologen (MV2+) nanocomposites and graphene quantum dots (GQDs). Owing to the intrinsic ionic feature, no liquid ionic electrolyte was used in this ECD. The active nanomaterials of GQDs and MV2+ were obtained and stabilized through strong intermolecular forces, the electrostatic interaction between the dicationic viologen and the carboxylate at the edge of GQDs and the π–π stacking interactions between the benzene ring of GQDs and the two pyridinium ring faces of MV2+. The as-fabricated ECD exhibits excellent operational stability with a repeatable switch. Moreover, under harsh treatment conditions of heating and bending, the device exhibited excellent electrochromic performance. The electron-deficient methyl viologen serves as an acceptor and the conductive electron-rich GQDs serve as an electron donor in the composite. Due to the strong interaction between GQDs and MV2+, the viologen can easily obtain electrons from GQDs to form a colored radical cationic state.
As a matter of fact, most liquid crystals do not exhibit electrochromic properties because of fluorescence quenching caused by aggregation. Beneduci et al.10 reported the first example of the use of thienoviologen-based π-conjugated ionic liquid crystals (vio-t1 and vio-t2 in Fig. 2c) in electrochromism. These ordered materials, combining ionic and electronic functions, exhibit strong fluorescence with a quantum yield of up to 60% in the bulk state. The direct electrochemical reduction results in a reversible and fast bulk electrofluorochromic response in both columnar and smectic phases, which allows for color tuning and fluorescence intensity modulation.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the MV2+–GQD-based ECD; (b) CV curves of 5 mM MV2+ at an ITO electrode in an aqueous solution containing 0.1 M KCl (red line) and 8 mg mL−1 GQDs (blue line) at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (c) molecular structure of vio-t1 and vio-t2; (d) three-electrode liquid crystalline cell; (e) UV spectra of vio-t2 in the smectic A phase at 0 V (black line), −1.2 V (red line), and −2.1 V (green). Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Trabolsi et al.11 reported the synthesis of a new phosphazene–viologen dendrimer (HV12+˙12Cl) with switching and electrochromic properties. They used cyclotriphosphazene as the core and the viologen as the dendron through the nucleophilic substitution reaction; in the reaction, the two viologen moieties connected through the same phosphorous atom. Spectroscopic and electrochemical experiments showed a reversible color change of HV12+˙12Cl from colorless to purple upon redox in the solvent. An ECD was prepared by sandwiching this material and 1 M NaCl between two transparent ITO electrodes. The prepared ECD exhibited a reversible and relatively fast color change up to ten cycles without any significant changes.
4.2 Field-effect transistors
Viologens have widely served as electron acceptors due to their instinct electron deficient properties and relatively stable excited states. Many types of nanomaterials, including carbon materials, inorganic nanomaterials, and organic materials, have been regularly doped with a viologen for carrier mobility manipulation through field-effect transistors (FETs). In addition, a viologen itself can also be applied to serve as an active layer for optoelectronic devices.
Kulkarni et al.14,15 reported the successful fabrication of transistor devices based on a donor/acceptor (D/A) system in which coronene tetracarboxylate (CS) served as the donor and a methyl viologen (MV) or dodecyl-substituted asymmetric methyl viologen (DMV) derivative served as the acceptor. The device based on CS–MV showed an appreciable hole mobility while operating at low voltages. Moreover, the device based on CS–DMV showed a considerably greater hole mobility of 1.33 cm2 V−1 s−1 than the device based on CS–MV. This difference between the two FETs was attributed to the formation of much more ordered nanofibers of CS–DMV, which is beneficial to the charge transfer channel formation. The CS-DMV-based device didn't respond much sensitively after being in an ambient atmosphere for seven days and the hole mobility value reduced to 0.77 cm2 V−1 s−1 after being in an ambient atmosphere for seven days; this indicates that a structural disorder may arise from the electrical stress. Notably, a drop of deionized water can recover this disorder (Fig. 3). It then began to exhibit similar characteristics to the fresh device with nearly similar mobility.
Stoddart et al.16 reported the self-assembly and solid-state semiconducting properties of a single crystal of the trisradical tricationic complex formed with a methyl viologen radical cation (MV˙+)and a diradical dicationic cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) (CBPQT2(˙+)) ring. The organic FET device based on the single crystal of the CBPQT2(˙+) ⊂ (MV˙+) complex, which was fabricated by lithographic techniques on a silicon substrate, exhibited a hole mobility of 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1. The SEM image showing the morphology of the crystals on the silicon substrate indicated that the complexes self-assemble into “molecular wires”, which also could be observed by the naked eye as millimeter-long crystalline needles. The self-assembled complex was formed through radical–radical interactions between bipyridinium radical cations (BIPY˙+). Then the authors used Raman spectroscopy and X-ray structural analyses to demonstrate that the bond order of the BIPY˙+ radical cationic units of the host and guest components did not change upon complexation and related to its conductivity in the solid state.
Carbon materials doped with a viologen was also widely used. Lee et al.17 used single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) chemically doped with benzyl viologen as n-type materials and pristine SWCNTs as the p-type materials to form a SWCNT p–n junction, which served as a FET channel material for FET devices. The as-fabricated devices based on the semiconducting SWCNTs and stable benzyl viologen dopant exhibited a mobility of 5–8 cm2 V−1 s−1, a high on/off current ratio and similar current levels between the n-channel and p-channel in the diode, which is a critical condition for minimizing leakage current, and a high rectifying efficiency in a rectifier. Moreover, the rectifier showed a wide range of input frequency responses up to 10 MHz, which is in relatively good contrast to the commercial Si diode.
 Fig. 3  (a) Molecular structure of CS–DMV supramolecular nanofibres; (b) schematic of the FET; (c) output and (d) transfer characteristics of the FET based on CS–DMV. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Javey et al.18 reported highly robust n-doping of MoS2 crystals with great stability both in ambient air and a vacuum by using benzyl viologen, a high-reduction-potential molecule, as the surface charge transfer dopant. Similar to other D/A systems, benzyl viologen served as the acceptor and MoS2 crystals served as the donor. The key doping mechanism is surface charge transfer between MoS2 and the dopant benzyl viologen molecule to form an electron transfer complex, which is stable in air. The charge transfer process was verified by electrical measurements and Raman spectroscopy. The benzyl viologen molecule was able to dope MoS2 to a high sheet electron density of 1.2 × 1013 cm−2, which was further explored by fabricating a wide range of different transistor structures. Considering the importance of doping control and dopant profiling of semiconductors for exploring various electronic and optoelectronic devices, the ability to pattern-dope transition metal dichalcogenides through an air-stable process presents an important advance in the field that could facilitate the probing of the intrinsic transport properties of these 2D semiconductors while exploring novel device architectures.
4.3 Memory devices
Because of the two reversible steps of accepting electrons and stability of the corresponding radical cationic and neural states, viologens often serve as a strong and excellent electron acceptor to form viologen/electron-donor charge transfer complexes in the field of memory devices. Typically, viologen-based bistable memory devices include resistive memory device and memristors.
Chen and Zhuang et al.21 used the Suzuki coupling reaction to synthesize a viologen-based D/A-type conjugated ionic copolymer (PTPA-V). In this copolymer, the viologen serves as the electron acceptor and triphenylamine acts as the electron donor. Then, a sandwich-type memory device with a structure of Al/PTPA-V/ITO was fabricated to evaluate the electrical switching behavior. The device showed typical nonvolatile information storage performance with a bistable and rewritable feature. The device showed the turn-on and turn-off voltages of −1.92 and 2.67 V with an on/off current ratio up to 105 (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structure of PTPA-V; (b) illustration of the device structure. (c) I–V curves of the device; (d) retention times of the device in either the ON or the OFF state at 1 V; (e) endurance performance for either the ON or the OFF state stimulated by read pulses at −1 V. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Elsevier. 
Memristors have been widely investigated for application in the fields of nonvolatile memory storage and neuromorphic computation in recent years. Liu, Chen, and Li et al.22–25 have published several articles about viologen-based heterojunction devices successively, which were used in memristors. They synthesized three types of polymers, namely triphenylamine-based polyimide (TPA-PI), triphenylamine-containing polymer (BTPA-F), and terpyridyl-iron polymer (TPy-Fe). Then, they combined the polymer layer with a blend of polyethylene oxide (PEO) and an ethyl viologen diperchlorate (EV(ClO4)2) layer and formed a heterojunction structure, as shown in Fig. 5. In one study, they fabricated a sandwich-type structure of Ta/EV(ClO4)2/TPA-PI/Pt on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate. The device exhibited distinctive history-dependent memristive behavior. Subsequently, they successfully emulated essential synaptic plasticity, that is, some memory and learning behavior of human beings, including long-term plasticity, short-term plasticity, the conversion from short-term memory to long-term memory, and the ‘‘learning–forgetting–relearning’’ process. It is noteworthy that the device was able to maintain performance even after enduring 100 bending cycles. The device could be well applied in biomimicking synapses.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of BTPA-F and EV(ClO4)2; (b) illustration of Ta/EV(ClO4)2/BTPA-F/Pt devices; (c) the I–V curves of the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/BTPA-F/Pt device. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (d) chemical structures of TPy-Fe, EV(ClO4)2 and PEO; (e) the structure and I–V curves of the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/TPy-Fe/ITO device. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) chemical structures of TPA-PI, EV(ClO4)2 and PEO and the device structure; (g) the I–V curves of the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/TPA-PI/Pt device. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.4 Molecular machines
To investigate the working mechanism of microscopic organisms, research around molecular machines has been launched, such as molecular shuttles and molecular pumps. Catenanes and rotaxanes are widely used in a typical molecular machine system, which are obtained by the interlocking of a loop structure and a dumbbell molecular chain or another molecular loop by the host–guest interaction. External chemical or electrochemical stimuli are necessary for the operation of the molecular machine. The radical cation dimers at a high concentration (>1 M) that form a viologen are the most popular guest component that can be complexed with neutral hosts. Viologen cyclophanes and dumbbell molecular chains are widely used as the guest component, with Cucurbit[n]uril (CB[n]) as the neutral host component.
Stoddart et al.2 synthesized two bistable and a tristable rotaxanes and their radically enhanced molecular recognition (Fig. 6a). In this system, cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) (CBPQT4+) served as the ring component and tetrathiafulvalene (TTF), 1,5-dioxynaphthalene as well as bipyridine served as the recognition site on the dumbbell component. Introduction of TTF and viologens can offer reversible radical cationic, dicationic, and neutral recognition sites. Let us take tristable [2]rotaxane as an example; upon oxidation, the ring moves from tetrathiafulvalene to dioxynaphthalene (TTF to TTF2+), and upon reduction, it moves to a bipyridinium radical cation, provided that the ring is also reduced synchronously to the diradical dication (CBPQT4+ to CBPQT2˙+ and V2+ to V˙+). The operating mechanisms of the two bistable [2]rotaxanes are similar.
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the formation of the inclusion complex and graphical representations of the structural formulae. Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature; (b) schematic of the threading process. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Zhao et al.26 reported a novel photoresponsive [3]rotaxane containing two CB [7] rings and a dumbbell component consisting of one trans-azobenzene unit along with two viologen units. The trans-to-cis photoisomerization of the azobenzene unit restricts the shuttling distribution to a certain extent and results in more concentrated rings on the viologen units. Cantekin et al.27 reported an allosterically controlled threading of viologen-based polymers through zinc porphyrin-based macrocyclic dimers using the host–guest interaction. Initially, a bidentate ligand (1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane, DABCO) was added to a chloroform solution of zinc porphyrin macrocycles to form a stable 2:1 (porphyrin:DABCO) dimeric complex through strong cooperative interactions of metal–ligand and hydrogen bonds. Further titration of this complex with viologen-based polymers results in the threading of the viologen-based polymer to zinc-porphyrin-based macrocyclic cage dimers. Thus, it can be seen that viologens have wide application as a guest component in molecular machines.
4.5 Antibacterial and antiviral agents
Initially, viologens were used as herbicides due to their remarkable negative biological compatibility. Decades of study on the negative biological compatibility of viologens, such as antimicrobial, cytotoxic, and hemotoxic properties, gradually widened their application in this field.
The moiety of N-hexyl-N′-(4-vinylbenzyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium (HVV) was widely graft-copolymerized to other polymers to obtain antibacterial materials. Neoh et al.28,29 demonstrated HVV-surface-functionalized poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) as an antibacterial material. The antibacterial activity is determined by the surface concentration of pyridinium groups. Their studies showed that the surface concentration with 25 nmol cm−2 of pyridinium groups on PET exhibited high effectiveness in killing Escherichia coli. The antibacterial effects against E. coli can also be significantly enhanced after the deposition of silver nanoparticles. Yang et al.30 also demonstrated monodisperse core–shell microspheres in which polystyrene served as the core and HVV served as the shell. HVV, which is a bicationic surfmer, was employed for the polymerization of styrene to obtain the core–shell microspheres. The obtained microspheres exhibited antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus. Kang et al.31,32 demonstrated the modification of metals by coupling them with a viologen-based moiety, which can effectively inhibit microbiologically influenced corrosion. For the first time, 4-(chloromethyl)phenyl trichlorosilane was fixed on the surface of an oxidized metal to allow the coupling of 4,4′-bipyridine with methyl–chloride groups, which were then terminally quaternized with benzyl chloride. The quaternized viologen moieties showed excellent bacterial inhibition efficiency against aerobic bacteria in a seawater-based medium at the initial stages (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) Preparation of an antibacterial surface and its performance; (b) antibacterial performance in contact with different substrates; (c) antibacterial performance before weathering and after weathering for 48 h. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Asaftei et al.33,34 reported five different benzylic viologen dendrimers and their inhibitory activity against human immunodeficiency virus type 1. The increasing positive character of dendrimers leads to greater cytotoxicity. Among the five dendrimers, those bearing five viologen units have a less effect on cell viability but a lower inhibition effect on the binding of the C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) mAb clone 1D9. The dendrimers bearing nine viologen units are the most promising CXCR4 imaging probes.
4.6 Gas storage and separation
With the development of modern industry, emission of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide, is one of the most serious pollutants in our living environment. Therefore, the development of renewable energy and the storage and conversion of greenhouse gases are the most crucial solutions. Viologen-based materials and composites have been used widely in the storage and conversion of greenhouse gases.
Porous polymers, such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs), have been widely investigated in recent years because of their large surface areas, simple synthesis, and tunable structure. Coskun et al.51 reported porous cationic polymers (PCPs) bearing positively charged viologen units in their backbones and different counter anions (Cl−, PF6−, and BF4−) through the Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling reaction. The obtained materials had a surface area of 755 m2 g−1 and exhibited a good CO2/N2 selectivity. The CO2/N2 selectivity of PCPs was within 42–48 at 273 K and 1 bar. By simply varying the counter anions, both the gas sorption and catalytic properties of PCPs can be tuned for metal-free capture and conversion of CO2 into valuable products such as cyclic carbonates. PCPs incorporating the counter anions BF4− (PCP–BF4) and PF6− (PCP–PF6) showed high affinity toward CO2. PCP–Cl as an organic porous catalyst exhibited excellent catalytic activity and selectivity for CO2 capture and conversion into cyclic carbonates using epoxides with a high product yield of up to 99% (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  (a) Preparation of PCPs; CO2 and N2 uptake isotherms of PCPs at 273 K (b) and 298 K (c); (d) CO2/N2 selectivity of PCPs; (e) isosteric heats of adsorption (Qst) of CO2 for PCPs. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Uosaki et al.52 reported the introduction of a viologen moiety into the surface of a Si(111) electrode. The obtained p-type Si(111) electrode modified with the viologen molecular layer and counter anions of [AuCl4]− and [PdCl4]2− showed effective photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction. The CO2 reduction was dominant at the Si(111) electrode modified with [PdCl4]2− in the potential region where the viologen moiety was in the first reduced state. By contrast, it became dominant at the electrode modified with [AuCl4]− when the viologen moiety was in the second reduced state. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy measurement confirmed the formation of formic acid/formate ions at the [PdCl4]2−/viologen-modified Si electrode. The viologen moiety played a significant role in mediating electron transfer from Si to metal catalysts.
4.7 Energy storage and conversion
Clean and environment-friendly renewable energy, including wind energy, solar energy, water energy, and hydrogen energy, has drawn much attention. However, many reproducible resources depend on the geographical position, season, and climate to a great extent and need large-scale devices for storage unlike the case of conventional fossil fuels. Advanced storage and conversion technologies are in demand to overcome these problems. In recent years, new energy devices such as batteries and supercapacitors have attracted extensive attention. By virtue of the ideal electron accepting ability and good redox behavior, viologens and their derivatives are often used as the key components in such devices.

4.7.1 Supercapacitors. 
A supercapacitor is a new type of energy storage device which bridges the gap between rechargeable batteries and conventional capacitors. It can realize fast charging and discharging with ultrahigh power density and good cycle stability. Generally, polyviologens can be used as the electrode material in supercapacitors and small-molecular viologens can be used as the redox couple in the supercapacitor electrolyte.
Viologens can be used as electrodes for supercapacitors. Chen and Zhuang et al.35 reported a novel viologen-bridged polyaniline (VBP) film electropolymerized on the surface of ITO glass. Then, they synthesized gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and another VBP film layer-by-layer to form heterofilms (VBP|Au|VBP); these films were then used as active materials in all-solid-state supercapacitors and resistance memory devices. Compared with the VBP-based all-solid-state supercapacitor, the maximum volumetric capacitance of the VBP|Au|VBP-based supercapacitor was up to 6.22 F cm−3, an increase by 58.7%, at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. This is attributed to the introduction of Au nanoparticles, which greatly improve the charge transfer behavior inside the films. VBP|Au|VBP also achieved a higher volumetric energy density of 2.24 mW h cm−3 than VBP (0.57 mW h cm−3) at a power density of 13.98 mW cm−3. Chen and Zhuang et al.36 also reported an in-plane micro-supercapacitor based on a viologen-linked ionic porous polymer film (IPP-V). This film was obtained by direct electropolymerization on an Au substrate (Fig. 9). The IPP-V film was further pyrolyzed at 500 °C to get a partially carbonized film (IPP-V-500) in order to improve the conductivity. The IPP-V-500 based micro-supercapacitor exhibited an excellent volumetric capacitance of 4.44 F cm−3. The volumetric energy density reached 0.35 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 12.5 mW cm−3.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of IPP-V and IPP-V-500; (b) C–V curves, (c) charge–discharge curves and (e) impedance phase angle of IPP-V- and IPP-V-500-based micro-supercapacitors. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Viologens can be used as the electrochromic material in supercapacitors. Feng and Zhuang et al.37 fabricated a stimulus-responsive micro-supercapacitor that used V2O5 nanoribbons with an exfoliated graphene (EG) nanosheet hybrid as electrode materials and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/LiCl with methyl viologen as the electrolyte. This micro-supercapacitor presented a great volumetric capacitance of 130.7 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and an ultrahigh volumetric energy density of 20 mW h cm−3 at a power density of 235 W cm−3. This micro-supercapacitor exhibited an excellent reversible electrochromic phenomenon during the charge–discharge process, providing a direct visual observation of the charge–discharge state.


4.7.2 Flow redox batteries. 
Because of the high power density and energy efficiency, redox flow batteries (RFBs) are an effective option for sustainable energy storage, including solar energy and wind energy. However, conventional RFBs, such as vanadium and Zn–Br2-based RFBs, are limited because of a series of challenges, such as limited resources of redox-active metals, high costs, and hazardous electrolytes. To overcome this, researchers have recently turned their attention from metal-based materials to organic active materials. With an ideal electron-accepting capability and reversible, stable redox states, viologen-based functional materials are often used as the anolyte in aqueous organic redox flow batteries (ORFBs).
Janoschka et al.38 reported a novel aqueous ORFB on the basis of two polymers, which contained 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxyl (TEMPO) and viologen moieties in the side chain, respectively. Both polymers contained ammonium moieties, which increased their solubility in water to a great extent, allowing the utilization of NaCl aqueous solution as the electrolyte. Compared with organic solvents, a water-based electrolyte has many significant advantages; it is nonflammable, cheap, and allows for high ion mobility. Notably, the as-fabricated ORFB exhibited high cycle stability, allowing repeatability by maintaining 80% capacity retention over 10000 cycles of the charge/discharge process at 20 mA cm−2. The energy density was approximately 10 W h L−1 (Fig. 10).
Hu et al.40 reported an aqueous ORFB based on ferrocene derivatives and methyl viologen. Ferrocene and its derivatives are often used as the catholyte in ORFBs due to the reversible Fe3+/2+ redox couple and excellent thermal stability. The authors synthesized two types of soluble ferrocene derivatives ((ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium chloride (FcNCl) and N1-ferrocenylmethyl-N1,N1,N2,N2,N2-pentamethylpropane-1,2-diaminium dibromide (FcN2Br2)). The FcNCl/methyl viologen-based ORFB presented excellent long cycling performance with 91% capacity retention at 60 mA cm−2 after 700 cycles. Liu et al.42 reported an aqueous OFRB with 1,10-bis[3-(trimethylammonio)propyl]-4,40-bipyridinium tetrachloride ((NPr)2V) as the anolyte and 4-trimethylammonium-TEMPO chloride (NMe-TEMPO) as the catholyte. This ORFB presented 97.48% capacity retention after 500 cycles or 99.995% capacity retention per cycle. This can be attributed to the considerably higher stability of [(NPr)2V]+˙ than [MV] +˙. Later, they synthesized a sulfonate-functionalized viologen molecule, 1,1′-bis(3-sulfonatopropyl)-4,4′-bipyridinium ((SPr)2V), which was used as the anolyte and KI as the catholyte in aqueous ORFBs. The as-fabricated (SPr)2V/KI ORFB exhibited great current performance from 40 to 100 mA cm−2 with an energy efficiency of 71% and stable cycling performance with 99.99% capacity retention per cycle. The authors expanded the applications of viologen derivatives in OFRBs and promise sustainable and safe storage of renewable energy. We will not describe every case in detail here. Most of the reported ORFBs based on viologens and their derivatives have been summarized in Table 2.
 Fig. 10  (a) Working principle and (b and c) stability of a polymer-based ORFB. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Table 2 Summary of the technical characteristics of the reported ORFBs




Anolyte/catholyte
Electrolyte
Membrane
Cell voltage [V]
Energy density [W h L−1]
Current density [mA cm−2]
Cycles
Ref.







NaCl/H2O
Dialysis membrane
1.1
10
40–100
104

38






NaCl/H2O
Selemion AMV
1.44
53.7
40–100
300

39






NaCl/H2O
AMV anion-exchange membrane
0.85
45.5
40–100
700

40






NaCl/H2O
AMV anion-exchange membrane
1.06
35.8
40–100
—







NaCl/H2O
Fumasep FAA-3-PE-30
1.4
38
—
100

41






KCl/H2O
Nafion 212 and Selemion CSO
1.00
—
40–100
300

42






NaCl/H2O
Selemion DSV anion exchange membrane
0.75
20
25–150
500

43






NaCl/H2O
Anion exchange membrane
1.25
8.4
20–100
100

44






NaCl/H2O
Selemion AMV anion exchange membrane
1.38
—
20–80
500

45







4.7.3 Hydrogen generation. 
Viologens and their derivatives, which serve as an important building block, play a significant role in the material design for hydrogen production. Nano-inorganic compounds/viologen composites have been widely used.
Sakai et al.50 reported the synthesis of three new tris(2,2′- bipyridine)ruthenium(II)-viologen dyads, in which unique branched frameworks of viologen tethers were achieved by employing L-Asp-based peptide backbones. These obtained materials showed (i) a rapid photoinduced electron transfer; (ii) a considerably long charge transfer state lifetime; and (iii) a high quantum yield. Such cation–anion interactions could be used, for example, to introduce negatively charged Pt(II)-based H2-evolving catalysts at geometries near the viologen acceptors. Schubert et al.46 synthesized graft copolymers composed of a 4,4′-bipyridinium salt (the electron relay) and a charged heteroleptic metal complex (the photosensitizer) along with triethylene glycol methyl ether (the solubility mediator) through reversible addition-fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT). The viologen moiety content in the macromolecules was limited to 5 mol%, because higher loadings could not initiate radical polymerization. The obtained polymer showed a good performance of hydrogen generation, revealed by a maximum turnover number of 139.3, by using blue LED light (470 nm) as the light source and colloidal platinum as a catalyst. Replacing phenylpyridine as the cyclometalating ligand with coumariN-6 can improve the efficiency with strong absorption from 420 to 520 nm (Fig. 11).
Nanomaterials such as CdSe/CdS48,49 or CdSe47 quantum dots have been widely used to generate hydrogen. By controlling the composition, shape, and size of nano-heterostructures, Lian et al. obtained a near-unity quantum yield of light-driven methyl viologen radical generation using 3-mercaptopropionic acid as the sacrificial hole acceptor, and colloidal quasi-type II CdSe/CdS dot-iN-rod NRs as the charge-separation and light-harvesting components. Coupled with Pt nanoparticles, the system could produce H2 efficiently by reducing water using solar energy.


4.7.4 Solar cells. 
As an important optoelectronic material, viologens have also been used as the active chromophore or the electrode-modified materials in solar cells.
Lewis et al.53 synthesized ordered arrays of crystalline p-type silicon (p-Si) microwires on p+-Si(111) substrates through the vapor–liquid–solid–growth process. While the silicon microwire arrays served as photocathodes in aqueous solution with methyl viologen as the electrolyte, an energy conversion efficiency of 3% was obtained in the incident light of monochromatic 808 nm at fluxes comparable to solar illumination, where the external quantum yield was at a short circuit only 0.2. The internal quantum yield was at least 0.7, which demonstrated that the measured photocurrents were limited by the light absorption in the wire arrays, which filled only 4% of the incident optical plane in the test devices. The inherent performance of these wires thus allows the development of efficient photoelectrochemical and photovoltaic energy-conversion devices based on a radial junction platform (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the hydrogen evolution process and its performance; (b) turnover number and turnover frequency depending on the irradiation time. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Nishide et al.54 synthesized cross-linked polyviologens through electro-polymerization of the corresponding 4-cyanopyridine moiety. The obtained polyviologens showed a relatively good two-electron reversible redox behavior, appropriate for accepting an electron from the TiO2 conduction band or a photo-anode. Hence, with an aqueous solution of 4-hydroxy hydrophilic tetramethylpiperidinyl-1-oxyl as the electrolyte and the cross-linked polyviologen as the charge storage electrode, a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) was fabricated. The as-fabricated DSSC showed a conversion efficiency of 1.3% with a short-circuit current (JSC) of 3.1 mA cm−2. The open-circuit voltage and fill factor are 0.81 V and 0.56 respectively. Odobel et al.55 fabricated NiO-based DSSCs with two series of push–pull porphyrins as sensitizers. The first series was composed of push–pull zinc porphyrins in the presence or absence of an ethynyl spacer between the porphyrin (ZnP) core and the trans-meso aryl groups. The second series of systems used naphthalene diimide or benzyl viologen appended to the ZnP as a secondary electron acceptor. Due to the favourable charge transfer characteristics together with the large energy changes of the regeneration and injection reactions, the first series showed a relatively low photocurrent density, in sharp contrast to the parent porphyrins with excellent photovoltaic performances. The modest JSC was attributed to the fast charge recombination due to the partial delocalization of the electron density close to the surface. With the help of a secondary electron acceptor, the performance was significantly improved due to the electron shift from the ZnP to the secondary acceptor and the corresponding lower rate of charge recombination.
 Fig. 12  (a) Structure of a solar cell. Current–potential data as a function of 808 nm illumination intensity for (b) planar and (c) wire-array photoelectrodes; (d) angle-resolved photocurrent measurements performed with a 633 nm He–Ne laser (power = 2.6 mW). Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

5. Summary and outlook
In this review, we present an overview about the synthesis, properties, and applications of viologens and viologen-type quaternary salts. A long period of development has presented various efficient synthesis methods of viologens and their derivatives. By methods such as N-alkylation, N-acylation, N-arylation, and the Zincke reaction, we can obtain a variety of viologens and their derivatives with unique structures and outstanding functions. With the stable, reversible redox states and good electron-accepting properties, viologen-based materials have found wide application in electrochromism, molecular machines, memory devices, energy harvesting, energy storage, and energy conversion, among others. At present, the studies mainly concentrate on the synthesis and application of small-molecular viologen derivatives. The research on viologen-based polymers and hybrid materials is relatively less. Combining viologens and other functional molecules into polymers will be meaningful and powerful, having the potential to greatly extend the applications of viologen-based materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
JJD, CNZ and LXW contributed equally to this work. This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China for Excellent Youth Scholars (51722304), National Natural Science Foundation of China (21720102002), Shanghai Pujiang Talent Program (18PJ1406100), and Open Project Program of the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment (SKLPEE-KF201702, Fuzhou University).
References
H. M. Li, D. Lee, D. Qu, X. Liu, J. Ryu, A. Seabaugh and W. J. Yoo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6564 CrossRef CAS .
A. Trabolsi, N. Khashab, A. C. Fahrenbach, D. C. Friedman, M. T. Colvin, K. K. Coti, D. Benitez, E. Tkatchouk, J. C. Olsen, M. E. Belowich, R. Carmielli, H. A. Khatib, W. A. Goddard III, M. R. Wasielewski and J. F. Stoddart, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Smith, A. S. Batsanov, M. A. Fox, A. Beeby, D. C. Apperley, J. A. Howard and P. W. Dyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9109–9113 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, L. Zhi, G. J. Bodwell, G. Cui, N. Tsao and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5417–5420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fortage, C. Peltier, C. Perruchot, Y. Takemoto, Y. Teki, F. Bedioui, V. Marvaud, G. Dupeyre, L. Pospisil, C. Adamo, M. Hromadova, I. Ciofini and P. P. Laine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2691–2705 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pospisil, L. Bednarova, P. Stepanek, P. Slavicek, J. Vavra, M. Hromadova, H. Dlouha, J. Tarabek and F. Teply, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10826–10829 CrossRef CAS .
L. Michaelis, Biochem. Z., 1932, 250, 564–567 CAS .
S. Durben and T. Baumgartner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7948–7952 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hwang, S. Seo, S. Bak, H. Lee, M. Min and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5129–5136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beneduci, S. Cospito, M. La Deda, L. Veltri and G. Chidichimo, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3105 CrossRef .
K. Wadhwa, S. Nuryyeva, A. C. Fahrenbach, M. Elhabiri, C. Platas-Iglesias and A. Trabolsi, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 2302–2307 RSC .
H. M. Osorio, S. Catarelli, P. Cea, J. B. G. Gluyas, F. Hartl, S. J. Higgins, E. Leary, P. J. Low, S. Martin, R. J. Nichols, J. Tory, J. Ulstrup, A. Vezzoli, D. C. Milan and Q. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14319–14328 CrossRef CAS .
I. V. Pobelov, Z. Li and T. Wandlowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16045–16054 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Sagade, K. Venkata Rao, S. J. George, A. Datta and G. U. Kulkarni, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5847–5849 RSC .
A. A. Sagade, K. V. Rao, U. Mogera, S. J. George, A. Datta and G. U. Kulkarni, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fahrenbach, S. Sampath, D. J. Late, J. C. Barnes, S. L. Kleinman, N. Valley, K. J. Hartlieb, Z. Liu, V. P. Dravid, G. C. Schatz, D. R. P. Van and J. F. Stoddart, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9964–9971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Biswas, S. Y. Lee, T. H. Ly, A. Ghosh, Q. N. Dang and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9817–9823 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kiriya, M. Tosun, P. Zhao, J. S. Kang and A. Javey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7853–7856 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yu, L. Liao, S. H. Chae, Y. H. Lee and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4759–4763 CrossRef CAS .
Q. V. Nguyen, P. Martin, D. Frath, M. L. Della Rocca, F. Lafolet, S. Bellinck, P. Lafarge and J. C. Lacroix, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10131–10134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Sun, B. Zhang, L. Yang, Y. Yao, X. Zhuang and Y. Chen, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 94, 222–229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. T. Tai, J. Shang, G. Liu, K. L. Wang, C. Hsu, X. Yi, X. Yang, W. Xue, H. Tan, S. Guo, L. Pan and R. W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 3217–3223 RSC .
X. Yang, C. Wang, J. Shang, C. C. Zhang, H. W. Tan, X. H. Yi, L. Pan, W. B. Zhang, F. Fan, Y. Q. Liu, Y. Chen, G. Liu and R. W. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 25179–25184 RSC .
G. Liu, C. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Pan, C. Zhang, X. Yang, F. Fan, Y. Chen and R.-W. Li, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500298 CrossRef .
G. Liu, Y. Chen, S. Gao, B. Zhang, R. W. Li and X. D. Zhuang, Eng. Sci., 2018, 4, 4–43 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, H. Yan, X. J. Wang and Y. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 10168–10175 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cantekin, A. J. Markvoort, J. A. A. W. Elemans, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3915–3923 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6847–6852 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 501–508 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Liu and W. Yang, Polymer, 2012, 53, 2190–2196 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yuan, F. J. Xu, S. O. Pehkonen, Y. P. Ting, K. G. Neoh and E. T. Kang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 103, 268–281 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yuan, F. J. Xu, E. T. Kang and S. O. Pehkonen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, C645–C657 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asaftei, D. Huskens and D. Schols, J. Med. Chem., 2012, 55, 10405–10413 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asaftei and E. De Clercq, J. Med. Chem., 2010, 53, 3480–3488 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Sun, Y. He, N. He, F. Zhang, Y. Yao, B. Zhang, X. Zhuang and Y. Chen, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 98, 125–136 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Ding, S. Sun, B. Zhang, X. Tian, J. Zhu, S. Song, B. Liu, X. Zhuang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701679 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, F. Zhu, F. Wang, J. Wang, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604491 CrossRef .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78–81 CrossRef .
J. Luo, B. Hu, C. Debruler and T. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, C. DeBruler, Z. Rhodes and T. L. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1207–1214 CrossRef CAS .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14425–14428 CrossRef .
C. DeBruler, B. Hu, J. Moss, J. Luo and T. L. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 663–668 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Beh, D. De Porcellinis, R. L. Gracia, K. T. Xia, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, X. Wei, Z. Nie, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 6, 1501449 CrossRef .
B. Hu, Y. Tang, J. Luo, G. Grove, Y. Guo and T. L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6871–6874 RSC .
B. Happ, J. Kuebel, M. G. Pfeffer, A. Winter, M. D. Hager, B. Dietzek, S. Rau and U. S. Schubert, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 671–677 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Liu and T. Lian, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3678–3683 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, N. Song, H. Lv, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11701–11708 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, W. E. Rodriguez-Cordoba, Z. Liu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7173–7185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ogawa, B. Balan, G. Ajayakumar, S. Masaoka, H.-B. Kraatz, M. Muramatsu, S. Ito, Y. Nagasawa, H. Miyasaka and K. Sakai, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 4421–4434 RSC .
O. Buyukcakir, S.-H. Je, D. S. Choi, S. N. Talapaneni, Y. Seo, Y. Jung, K. Polychronopoulou and A. Coskun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 934–937 RSC .
Y. Sun, T. Masuda and K. Uosaki, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 328–330 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Boettcher, J. M. Spurgeon, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, J. R. Maiolo, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2010, 327, 185–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suzuka, S. Hara, T. Sekiguchi, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Polymer, 2015, 68, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maufroy, L. Favereau, F. B. Anne, Y. Pellegrin, E. Blart, M. Hissler, D. Jacquemin and F. Odobel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3908–3917 RSC .
T. Shoji and S. Ito, Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 2018, 126, 1–54 CrossRef .
S. K. Cook and B. R. Horrocks, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 320–331 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. De Simone, T. Marino and N. Russo, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2016, 135, 118 Search PubMed .
W. W. Porter and T. P. Vaid, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 5028–5035 CrossRef CAS .
J.-I. Fujisawa and G. Giorgi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17955–17959 RSC .
K. Madasamy, V. M. Shanmugam, D. Velayutham and M. Kathiresan, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1354 CrossRef .
X. Ma, Q. Wang, D. Qu, Y. Xu, F. Ji and H. Tian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 829–837 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sliwa, Curr. Org. Chem., 2003, 7, 995–1048 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murugavel, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 5873–5884 RSC .
L. Striepe and T. Baumgartner, Chemistry, 2017, 23, 16924–16940 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schmidt and T. Mordhorst, ARKIVOC, 2003, 14, 233–245 Search PubMed .

          Z. Wang, Comprehensive Organic Name Reactions and Reagents, John Wiley & Sons,  2009, vol. 2, pp. 3172-3177 Search PubMed .
E. M. Kosower and J. L. Cotter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1964, 86, 5524–5527 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Harris and K. Folkers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1939, 61, 1245–1247 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valasek, J. Pecka, J. Jindrich, G. Calleja, P. R. Craig and J. Michl, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Zhou, D. Liu and Y. Wang,  2015, US9196424B2 .
K. Binnemans, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 4148–4204 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bakupog, E. L. Clennan and X. Zhang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015, 56, 5591–5594 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Stang, D. H. Cao, S. Saito and A. M. Arif, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6273–6283 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohshita, K. Murakami, D. Tanaka, Y. Ooyama, T. Mizumo, N. Kobayashi, H. Higashimura, T. Nakanishi and Y. Hasegawa, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murakami, J. Ohshita, S. Inagi and I. Tomita, Electrochemistry, 2015, 83, 605–608 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Gibbs-Hall, N. A. Vermeulen, E. J. Dale, J. J. Henkelis, A. K. Blackburn, J. C. Barnes and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15640–15643 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Barnes, E. J. Dale, A. Prokofjevs, A. Narayanan, I. C. Gibbs-Hall, M. Juricek, C. L. Stern, A. A. Sarjeant, Y. Y. Botros, S. I. Stupp and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2392–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Ashton, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, M. T. Gandolfi, D. J. F. Marquis, L. Perez-Garcia, L. Prodi, J. F. Stoddart and M. Venturi, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 177–180 RSC .
E. A. Smith, R. R. Lilienthal, R. J. Fonseca and D. K. Smith, Anal. Chem., 1994, 19, 3013–3020 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Simonsen, K. Zong, R. D. Rogers, M. P. Cava and J. Becher, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, K. J. C. Lim, T. S. Babra, J. O. Taylor, M. Pižl, R. Evans, A. M. Chippindale, F. Hartl, H. M. Colquhoun and B. W. Greenland, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2018, 16, 5006–5015 RSC .
Y. Wu, J. Zhou, B. T. Phelan, C. M. Mauck, J. F. Stoddart, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14265–14276 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. Zhou, J. N. Nelson, R. M. Young, M. D. Krzyaniak and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13011–13021 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hafezi, J. M. Holcroft, K. J. Hartlieb, E. J. Dale, N. A. Vermeulen, C. L. Stern, A. A. Sarjeant and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 456–461 CAS .
H. Li, H. Zhang, A. D. Lammer, M. Wang, X. Li, V. M. Lynch and J. L. Sessler, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 1003–1008 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fortage, G. Dupeyre, F. Tuyeras, V. Marvaud, P. Ochsenbein, I. Ciofini, M. Hromadova, L. Pospisil, A. Arrigo, E. Trovato, F. Puntoriero, P. P. Lainé and S. Campagna, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 11944–11955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fortage, F. Tuyeras, C. Peltier, G. Dupeyre, A. Calborean, F. Bedioui, P. Ochsenbein, F. Puntoriero, S. Campagna, I. Ciofini and P. P. Laine, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7880–7891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamashita, T. Hanaoka, Y. Takeda, T. Mukai and T. Miyashi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1988, 61, 2451–2458 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kniep, S. M. Walter, E. Herdtweck and S. M. Huber, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 1306–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rockley and L. Summers, Aust. J. Chem., 1980, 33, 1397–1400 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dessì, M. Calamante, A. Mordini, L. Zani, M. Taddei and G. Reginato, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 1322–1328 RSC .
W. W. Porter III, T. P. Vaid and A. L. Rheingold, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16559–16566 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Vávra, L. Severa, P. Švec, I. Císařová, D. Koval, P. Sázelová, V. Kašička and F. Teplý, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2012, 2012, 489–499 CrossRef .
M. Natali, A. Luisa, E. Iengo and F. Scandola, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1842–1844 RSC .
G. Bar, N. Larina, L. Grinis, V. Lokshin, R. Gvishi, I. Kiryuschev, A. Zaban and V. Khodorkovsky, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 99, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hagiwara, Y. Ishida, D. Masui, T. Shimada and S. Takagi, Tetrahedron Lett., 2012, 53, 5800–5802 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bivaud, J. Y. Balandier, M. Chas, M. Allain, S. Goeb and M. Sallé, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11968–11970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhaskar, G. Ramakrishna, Z. Lu, R. Twieg, J. M. Hales, D. J. Hagan, E. Van Stryland and T. Goodson III, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11840–11849 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoffmann, J. Karnbratt, M. H. Chang, L. M. Herz, B. Albinsson and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4993–4996 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Bhowmik and H. Han, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1994, 35, 617–618 CAS .
P. K. Bhowmik, H. Han, J. J. Cebe, R. A. Burchett and A. M. Sarker, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2002, 40, 659–674 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Bhowmik, H. Han, A. K. Nedeltchev, H. D. Mandal, J. A. Jimenez-Hernandez and P. M. McGannon, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 1197–1206 CAS .
P. K. Bhowmik, W. Xu and H. Han, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1994, 32, 3205–3209 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Appel, J. d. Barrio, J. Dyson, L. Isaacs and O. A. Scherman, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2278–2281 RSC .
E. A. Appel, F. Biedermann, U. Rauwald, S. T. Jones, J. M. Zayed and O. A. Scherman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14251–14260 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Janecek, J. R. McKee, C. S. Tan, A. Nykanen, M. Kettunen, J. Laine, O. Ikkala and O. A. Scherman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5383–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Li, J. Sun, Y. Lu, Y. Sun, D. Cheng and C. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 40933 CrossRef .
M. L. Keshtov, Y. A. Udum, L. Toppare, V. S. Kochurov and A. R. Khokhlov, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 936–943 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamaguchi and T. Asano, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 4582–4587 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamaguchi and S. Makishi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 397–403 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamaguchi, N. Mizoguchi and M. Sato, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4416–4425 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamaguchi and M. Yamamoto, High Perform. Polym., 2013, 26, 12–19 CrossRef .
K. Kamata, T. Suzuki, T. Kawai and T. Iyoda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 473, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, P. Damlin, B. M. Esteban, T. Aaritalo, J. Kankare and C. Kvarnstrom, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 90, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, A. Kahkonen, P. Damlin, T. Aaritalo, J. Kankare and C. Kvarnstrom, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 154, 361–369 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kang, J. H. Park, J. Choi, J. Jin, J. Chun, I. G. Jung, J. Jeong, J. G. Park, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim and S. U. Son, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6626–6630 CrossRef CAS .
O. Buyukcakir, S. H. Je, S. N. Talapaneni, D. Kim and A. Coskun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7209–7216 CrossRef CAS .
P. Samanta, P. Chandra, S. Dutta, A. V. Desai and S. K. Ghosh, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 7874–7881 RSC .
G. Das, T. Skorjanc, S. K. Sharma, F. Gándara, M. Lusi, D. S. Shankar Rao, S. Vimala, S. Krishna Prasad, J. Raya, D. S. Han, R. Jagannathan, J.-C. Olsen and A. Trabolsi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9558–9565 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heinen and L. Walder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 806–809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kathiresan, L. Walder, F. Ye and H. Reuter, Tetrahedron Lett., 2010, 51, 2188–2192 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, H. Bandmann, P. Ceroni, C. Giansante, U. Hahn, F.-G. Klaerner, U. Mueller, W. M. Mueller, C. Verhaelen, V. Vicinelli and F. Voegtle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 637–648 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ronconi, J. F. Stoddart, V. Balzani, M. Baroncini, P. Ceroni, C. Giansante and M. Venturi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8365–8373 CrossRef CAS .
N. Katir, A. El Kadib, V. Colliere, J. P. Majoral and M. Bousmina, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6981–6983 RSC .
H. Ohno and H. Satoh, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 360, 27–37 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, E. Vivier, C. J. Eling, T. S. Babra, J. S. G. Bouillard, A. M. Adawi, D. M. Benoit, F. Hartl, H. M. Colquhoun, O. A. Efremova and B. W. Greenland, Synth. Met., 2018, 241, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Schoot, J. J. Ponjee, H. T. Van Dam, R. A. Van Doorn and P. T. Bolwijn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1973, 23, 64–65 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Three reversible redox states of methyl viologen (MV); (b) cyclic voltammograms of methyl viologen in 0.1 M TBAPF6/MeCN solution (vs. Ag/Ag+). Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the John Wiley and Sons; (c) computed UV-Vis absorption spectra of methyl viologen. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis methods of viologens and their derivatives.	 

 	Scheme 2  Structures of different functional groups of N-substituted viologens.	 

 	Scheme 3  Categories and synthesis routines of fused viologens. (a) Acene-ring-fused viologens; (b) heterocyclic-ring-fused viologens.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis and structure of viologen cyclophanes.	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis and structure of vio-cy1.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis and structures of vio-cy2.	 

 	Scheme 7  Structures of vio-cy3 and vio-cy4.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthesis and structures of viologen cages.	 

 	Scheme 9  Structures of non-4,4′-connected dipyridyl salts.	 

 	Scheme 10  Structures of double-pyridinium extended viologens.	 

 	Scheme 11  Structures of multiarmed pyridinium extended viologens.	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis and structures of nonconjugated linear polyviologens. (a) Viologen in the main chain; (b) viologen in the side chain.	 

 	Scheme 13  Structures and synthesis of conjugated linear polyviologens. (a) Viologen in the main chain; (b) viologen in the side chain.	 

 	Scheme 14  Structure and synthesis of cross-linked polyviologens.	 

 	Scheme 15  Structure and synthesis of P13.	 

 	Scheme 16  Structure and synthesis of P14.	 

 	Scheme 17  Structure and synthesis of P15.	 



	−0.78	−1.19 (vs. Ag/Ag+)	
126



	−0.61	−0.89 (vs. Ag/AgCl)	
61



	−0.71	−1.15 (vs. Ag/Ag+)	
126



	−0.40	−0.80 (vs. SCE)	
20



	−0.69	−0.97 (vs. Fc/Fc+)	
59



	−0.70	−0.98 (vs. Fc/Fc+)	
127


 	Scheme 18  Control growth synthesis and structures of viologen-based dendrimers.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis and structure of viologen dendrimers with a hydrazine-terminated cyclotriphosphazene as the core.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the MV2+–GQD-based ECD; (b) CV curves of 5 mM MV2+ at an ITO electrode in an aqueous solution containing 0.1 M KCl (red line) and 8 mg mL−1 GQDs (blue line) at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (c) molecular structure of vio-t1 and vio-t2; (d) three-electrode liquid crystalline cell; (e) UV spectra of vio-t2 in the smectic A phase at 0 V (black line), −1.2 V (red line), and −2.1 V (green). Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Molecular structure of CS–DMV supramolecular nanofibres; (b) schematic of the FET; (c) output and (d) transfer characteristics of the FET based on CS–DMV. Reproduced from ref. 15 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Molecular structure of PTPA-V; (b) illustration of the device structure. (c) I–V curves of the device; (d) retention times of the device in either the ON or the OFF state at 1 V; (e) endurance performance for either the ON or the OFF state stimulated by read pulses at −1 V. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structures of BTPA-F and EV(ClO4)2; (b) illustration of Ta/EV(ClO4)2/BTPA-F/Pt devices; (c) the I–V curves of the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/BTPA-F/Pt device. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from John Wiley and Sons; (d) chemical structures of TPy-Fe, EV(ClO4)2 and PEO; (e) the structure and I–V curves of the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/TPy-Fe/ITO device. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) chemical structures of TPA-PI, EV(ClO4)2 and PEO and the device structure; (g) the I–V curves of the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/TPA-PI/Pt device. Reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the formation of the inclusion complex and graphical representations of the structural formulae. Reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from Springer Nature; (b) schematic of the threading process. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Preparation of an antibacterial surface and its performance; (b) antibacterial performance in contact with different substrates; (c) antibacterial performance before weathering and after weathering for 48 h. Reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Preparation of PCPs; CO2 and N2 uptake isotherms of PCPs at 273 K (b) and 298 K (c); (d) CO2/N2 selectivity of PCPs; (e) isosteric heats of adsorption (Qst) of CO2 for PCPs. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis of IPP-V and IPP-V-500; (b) C–V curves, (c) charge–discharge curves and (e) impedance phase angle of IPP-V- and IPP-V-500-based micro-supercapacitors. Reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Working principle and (b and c) stability of a polymer-based ORFB. Reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from Springer Nature.	 



	NaCl/H2O	Dialysis membrane	1.1	10	40–100	104	
38



	NaCl/H2O	Selemion AMV	1.44	53.7	40–100	300	
39



	NaCl/H2O	AMV anion-exchange membrane	0.85	45.5	40–100	700	
40



	NaCl/H2O	AMV anion-exchange membrane	1.06	35.8	40–100	—	



	NaCl/H2O	Fumasep FAA-3-PE-30	1.4	38	—	100	
41



	KCl/H2O	Nafion 212 and Selemion CSO	1.00	—	40–100	300	
42



	NaCl/H2O	Selemion DSV anion exchange membrane	0.75	20	25–150	500	
43



	NaCl/H2O	Anion exchange membrane	1.25	8.4	20–100	100	
44



	NaCl/H2O	Selemion AMV anion exchange membrane	1.38	—	20–80	500	
45


 	Fig. 11  (a) Illustration of the hydrogen evolution process and its performance; (b) turnover number and turnover frequency depending on the irradiation time. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Structure of a solar cell. Current–potential data as a function of 808 nm illumination intensity for (b) planar and (c) wire-array photoelectrodes; (d) angle-resolved photocurrent measurements performed with a 633 nm He–Ne laser (power = 2.6 mW). Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
