Electrochromic conjugated polyheterocycles and derivatives—highlights from the last decade towards realization of long lived aspirations  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CC14992J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CC14992J
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1083-1101Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsElectrochromic conjugated polyheterocycles and derivatives—highlights from the last decade towards realization of long lived aspirations

        
          
            Gorkem 
            Gunbas
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Levent 
            Toppare
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, One Shield Avenue, Davis, USA. E-mail: ggunbas@ucdavis.edu;   Tel: 001 530 219 5358
bDepartment of Chemistry, Middle East Technical University, Turkey. E-mail: toppare@metu.edu.tr;   Tel: +90 312 210 3115
Received 
      11th August 2011
    , Accepted 15th September 2011First published on 10th October 2011Abstract
Polymer electrochromism has been considered one of the liveliest branches of conducting polymer research, a tradition continued in the last decade. We have witnessed numerous significant advances, making commercial applications closer than ever. This feature article highlights these advances by separating them into 3 sections. The material design section emphasizes the new molecular structures that have been utilized as electrochromic materials and their promising results. The color control of polymeric electrochromics section focuses on the recent achievements towards realization of full color electrochromic display devices, lastly the advances en route commercial applications section demonstrates how some of the major drawbacks towards commercialization have been successfully addressed.
Gorkem Gunbas
Gorkem Gunbas received his BSc in chemistry from Middle East Technical University in 2006 and did undergraduate studies with Prof. Levent Toppare. He then joined the same group for MSc degree in polymer chemistry focusing on synthesis and electrochromic properties of novel donor–acceptor type polymers. In 2008, he moved to University of California Davis for his PhD and currently working under the supervision of Prof. Mark Mascal on the design and synthesis of topologically and theoretically interesting organic molecules, particularly bowl-shaped heterotriquinanes.
Levent Toppare
Levent Toppare is a professor of chemistry at the Department of Chemistry, Department of Polymer Science and Technology and Department of Biotechnology in Middle East Technical University with expertise in electrochemistry. He is also a member of Center for Solar Energy Research and Applications (GUNAM). His research interests include conducting polymers for over 25 years. His group has recently been involved in electrochromism, electrochromic devices and photovoltaic cells. Toppare obtained his PhD (1982) degree from METU. He has published over 300 scientific papers. He is the recipient of British Council, Fulbright and Alexander von Humboldt Scholarships.
Introduction
The ability to generate different colors from a deposited thin polymer film upon applied potential fascinated researchers all around the world, making polymeric electrochromics a remarkable and a very productive research area over the last 3 decades.1–4 Even though electrochromism was first observed with inorganic materials such as tungsten trioxide (WO3)3,5 and iridium dioxide (IrO2)3,6 the limitations7 of these compounds motivated researchers towards the utilization of organic materials. Conducting polymers were proven to be the material of choice due to their numerous advantages such as different colors obtained from the same material at different redox states (multichromism),8–11 the ease of band gap control with structure modification towards generating different colors,12–18 fast switching times19–21 and superior coloration efficiencies.9,22
Fundamentals of electrochromism in conducting polymers have been understood in detail by the creative and definitive works of Garnier et al.,23 Druy and Seymour,24 Wudl and Heeger et al.25,26 and many others,27–30 followed by the syntheses and characterization of many ingenious examples of electrochromic polymers.4 Although it is very tempting to tell this story framing successes, this feature article will concentrate on some of the advances in this very lively research area over the last decade, concentrating mainly on the last few years.  
We had no intention to cover all advances in the field and we specifically focused on all organic fully conjugated polymer systems with an emphasis on polythiophene derivatives (polyaniline and analogues were not included). Due to the immense amount of work performed in this area, some significant and relevant research may have been excluded, and any such omissions were unintentional. Readers can refer to recent reviews4,31 for a more detailed introduction of electrochromism in conjugated polymers (and other systems) and parameters in identifying and characterizing the electrochromic materials.
Advances in molecular design
Without any hesitation one of the most important advances in electrochromic polymers was the synthesis of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene), PEDOT (1),32 and its derivatives.4,33 After chemists at Bayer showed the powerful properties of PEDOT, many scientists around the world investigated the electrochromic properties of many other derivatives in the 1990s.
The synthesis of poly(3,4-alkylenedioxypyrrole)s, PXDOPs (2), by the Reynolds group in the beginning of the new century was also a milestone in polymeric electrochromics34 (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Colors of the parent PEDOP and P(ProDOP) at neutral (n), intermediate (i) and oxidized (o) states. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany. 
At that time these polymers revealed the lowest oxidation potential for any conducting polymer synthesized resulting in an enhanced stability of the doped states.35Polymers can be switched many thousands of times between their red-orange neutral states to light blue-gray doped states with over 70% optical contrast in as low as 200 ms. Following this work Reynolds group revisited these groups of polymers and investigated the effect of N-substitution which dramatically changed the electronic structures of the polymers.36 In fact, a tri(ethylene glycol) substituted derivative was shown to be a pure anodically coloring polymer which is rare among fully conjugated polymer systems.
The investigation on poly(3,4-alkylenedioxythiophene)s, PXDOTs (3), also vividly continued into the next decade by pushing the limits of these polymers for better optical contrasts and switching times. It has been known that optical contrast improves as the ring size increases in PXDOT derivatives.37 Additionally interchain separation via incorporation of rigid and bulky side chains enhances optical contrast as well.37
The Kumar group took advantage of this fact and prepared a dibenzyl substituted ProDOT derivative (4) which showed remarkable electrochromic properties.20 The polymer revealed a record high optical contrast of 89% in the visible region and had very fast switching times, as low as 0.4 s (Fig. 2). Furthermore, the polymer showed a 575 cm2C−1 coloration efficiency, the highest reported to date at the time of publication. The Kumar group also showed that a dendronic group substitution on the PEDOT backbone had a drastic effect on the optical contrast.38  
 Fig. 2  Optical switching studies for PProDOT-Bz2 (4) film (charge density 15.2 mC cm−2) monitored at 632 nm, when it was stepped between its reduced (−1.0 V) and oxidized (+1.0 V) states. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright © 2001 by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Shortly after, the Reynolds group published a diethyl derivative of ProDOT (5), which also demonstrated a notable 75% optical contrast and a 505 cm2C−1 coloration efficiency.39 The electrochemically synthesized dibutyl derivative (6) also revealed a 75% optical contrast where a solution cast film of the polymer synthesized by the Grignard method showed only a 45% optical contrast.40 A spiro PXDOT derivative, poly(spiroBiProDOT) (7), reported by Reynolds et al. revealed drastically different optical properties compared to a simple PXDOT derivative.10 This polymer was shown to be both cathodically and anodically coloring, and gave three distinct colors (red, blue-gray, dark blue).  
While the pursuit for high optical contrast, stable polymeric electrochromics continued, syntheses of polymers with readily accessible negatively doped states became a major goal since more complicated device structure can be attained with these materials such as light emitting p(i)n diodes, bipolar transistors, and polymeric analogues of silicon field effective transistors.41 Band gap reduction was proven to be effective and could be achieved using many methods like bond-length alternation (Peierls distortion), creating highly planar systems, inducing order by interchain effects, resonance effects along the polymer backbone, and the donor–acceptor (D–A) approach.42
Reynolds et al. synthesized and characterized two elegant examples (8, 9) using the D–A approach.43,44 The polymers revealed true n-type behavior proven by analyses of both electrochemical and optical changes. With readily accessible reduced states 8 and 9 were shown to have multi-color electrochromism with three or more distinct colors. For example, 8 exhibited a red neutral state, a blue-purple oxidized state, a sky-blue reduced state, and a navy-blue protonated state, while 9 showed a neutral lime green, an oxidized light gray, a reduced burgundy red, and a further reduced dark gray. It is important to note here that multichromic materials are promising candidates for cost effective device applications like colored signs and simple displays where polymers with vibrantly colored and highly transmissive states hold great promise for more complex device applications, especially fully colored display devices.12
The versatility of D–A type polymers was quickly realized by other groups and Sonmez et al. reported on a BisEDOT substituted monomer, which polymerized to give a low band gap (1.10 eV) polymer (10).45 The polymer film was very stable against overoxidation upon p-doping and had an easily accessible n-doped state that was relatively stable. The polymer was found to have a superior charger storage capacity compared to any other conducting polymer at the time of publication. High optical contrast (49%) in the near-infrared (NIR) region accompanied by very low optical contrast in the visible region (8% at 440 nm, 15% at 780 nm) made this polymer a promising candidate for NIR electrochromic devices. Even though compounds that exhibit electrochromism in the NIR region of the spectrum are much less recognized, these types of compounds might be utilized in diverse areas like medicine (photodynamic therapy), telecommunications (fiber-optics), aerospace applications and military camouflage.46–49  

Polymerization of a new BisEDOT substituted monomer utilizing a methoxy ethylhexyloxy benzene unit resulted in a very promising electrochromic material (11) as reported by the same group in the same year.9 The polymer revealed multichromism where the purple-red neutral state of the material switched to purple-blue, blue, gray-blue, and transmissive blue upon successive oxidation. Coloration efficiencies as high as 680 cm2C−1 at 535 nm and 360 cm2C−1 at 760 nm were reported where the 680 cm2C−1 is almost 4 times higher than the parent polymer PEDOT.   
A closely related derivative (12) where ProDOT derivatives were utilized instead of EDOT also revealed multichromism switching from orange to blue and transmissive gray upon oxidation. The polymer was found to be highly soluble in common organic solvents and homogeneous films can be prepared by spin-coating or spray-casting from a chloroform solution. Due to the electron rich nature of the alkoxy benzene units, the polymer revealed a higher band gap (2.1 eV) compared to polymers utilizing electron deficient units.50
A BisEDOT substituted carbazole derivative (13) and BiEDOT (14), monomers with very similar oxidation potentials (+0.56 V and +0.41 V vs.Ag/Ag+), were copolymerized at different monomer feeds to show the versatility of copolymerization to yield polymers (15) with different colors and better electrochromic characteristics. The homopolymer of 13 is a high band gap polymer (2.5 eV) with yellow neutral and blue oxidized states. By varying the comonomer concentration, the neutral states of the electrochemically synthesized copolymers of 13 and 14 ranged in color from blue, to red, to orange, and to yellow, spanning the entire visible spectrum. Upon oxidation the polymers go through a green intermediate and finally switch to their fully oxidized blue state. The study showed that by careful choice of comonomers and/or feed ratios, electrochemical or chemical copolymerization is a powerful tool to modulate the band gap and the specific electrochromic properties of the resulting materials.51
Successful results towards low band gap polymers were also obtained by the synthesis of fused heterocycles containing thiophene and their derivatives. The Sotzing group reported on the electrochromic properties of poly(thieno[3,4-b]thiophene) (16), a successful application of the approach.52,53 The polymer revealed a strikingly low band gap of 0.85 eV. 16 is sky-blue in the reduced form and is both colorless and highly transparent in the oxidized state. 16 can be easily switched between its neutral and oxidized states with high stability. This group then prepared a low band gap (lower than 1.0 eV), water dispersible version by polymerizing (thieno[3,4-b]thiophene) in the presence of a polymeric charge compensating dopant and a chemical oxidant in water.54 The spectral properties of this water-dispersible system were shown to be highly dependent on chemical oxidants utilized during polymerization. Later, Sotzing et al. succeeded in the synthesis of the furan derivative of 16, poly(thieno[3,4-b]furan) (17), and reported its electrochromic properties.55,5617 also showed a low band gap of 1.04 eV, however, it was comparatively higher than its thiophene 16 analog. The polymer had a 72% and 62% transmittance in the oxidized and neutral states, respectively, indicating a very subtle change in the visible region. This unique property qualified this polymer as a strong candidate for optically transparent ion-storage layers.  
Our group began investigating the effect of substitution on the 3-position of thiophene with ester containing moieties namely poly(hexanedioic acid bis-(2-thiophen-3-yl-ethyl ester) (18) and octanoic acid 2-thiophen-3-yl-ethyl ester (19).57,58 The polymers gave a yellow color in the neutral state which was drastically different to the red color mainly observed by simple poly(3-alkylthiophene)s.23,24,59,60 The optical contrast values were found to be 26% and 27%, respectively, at maximum absorption wavelengths. The work demonstrated how introducing a simple functional group on the pendant chains of the polymer backbone could drastically affect the electronic structure of the polymer hence its neutral state color. A maleimide substituted derivative (20) showed better results where a yellow to blue transition occurred with a 41% optical contrast and 1.7 second switching time.61  
Hongchao Liet al. reported on the synthesis of poly(3,4-methylenedithiopyrrole) (21), a polymer that mimics the structure of PEDOP.62 The resulting polymer had a lower band gap of 1.8 eV compared to PEDOP, while a fully oxidized polymer still possessed two strong absorption peaks. This unusual behavior of 21 resulted in a broad absorption throughout the whole UV-Vis-NIR region, thus yielding a black color.
The Stoddart group reported a drastically different type of electrochromic materials in 2004, bistable [2]catenanes and [2]rotaxanes. An electrochromic device was assembled as the proof of the concept by incorporating these materials into a polymer matrix. A reversible color change was observed upon applied potential.63 A red to green transition was observed for the bistable [2]catenane 22. A following computational study from the same group and the Goddard group demonstrated a tristable [2]catenane that can switch between red, green and blue colors. The authors claimed a potential use as a pixel component in low cost e-paper applications for these types of materials.64  
In 2005 the Roncali group reported on a new and very promising polymer, poly(3,6-dimethoxy-thieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (23), which was a strong candidate as a PEDOT alternative. The polymer revealed very similar redox potentials, band gap, optical transparency in the oxidized state and stability compared to PEDOT. Additionally, the polymer had inherent potential advantages in terms of further derivatization.65 Another set of promising PEDOT alternatives were reported in 2006 by Reynolds et al. Syntheses of two soluble narrow band gap propylenedioxythiophene–cyanovinylene polymers were achieved (24, 25)66 and polymers were shown to be transmissive (colorless) in their oxidized state and colored/absorptive (blue, blue/purple) in the neutral state. These electrochromic properties are very similar to those of PEDOT but these materials were more advantageous with a highly air-stable neutral state. The reduced states of these polymers were colored which indicated multichromism and n-type doping capabilities. These polymers also had promising results as active layers in organic solar cells.  
The interest in n-type electrochromic materials continued to grow and resulted in one of the most promising materials, poly[1,4-dioctyloxyl-p-2,5-dicyanophenylenevinylene] (26), which was reported by Yingping Zou et al.67 The spectroelectrochemistry of the polymer revealed clean n-doping/dedoping processes with applied incremental potentials, which have not been reported for any other PPV derivative before. The polymer film also showed a reversible color change between red and gray.  
The Toppare group focused their attention on an interesting molecular structure where two thiophenes were bridged with two sulfur atoms from the 3 and 4 positions (27). The monomer was potentiodynamically polymerized in the presence of boron trifluoride diethyl etherate (BF3·O(Et)2) to give an electrochromic material with promising properties.68 The polymer was shown to be both p- and n-dopable by both cyclic voltammetry (CV) and spectroelectrochemistry studies, and revealed 5 distinct color multichromism (brick, green, light gray, transmissive and brown).
Even though poly(2,5-di(2-thienyl)-1H-pyrrole) (poly(SNS)) and its alkyl substituted derivatives69,70 were synthesized and investigated 15 years ago, no further work on these types of materials have been reported. We concentrated our efforts towards the synthesis and polymerization of a series of N-functionalized 2,5-di(2-thienyl)-1H-pyrrole (SNS derivatives) and their copolymers with EDOT.8,71–88 All homopolymers were shown to be soluble with promising electrochromic properties. A wide range of colors for neutral and oxidized states was observed with subtle changes in polymer structure (Fig. 3). Phenyl (28) and p-tolyl (29) substituted polymers75,79 showed a yellow color in the neutral and a blue color in the oxidized state.
 Fig. 3  Structures of SNS homopolymers and their colors at different oxidation states. 

Copolymerization with EDOT resulted in two new materials (30, 31) that revealed distinct multichromism.78,8530 showed a claret red neutral, a green intermediate and a blue oxidized state with a 1.90 eV band gap where 31 revealed chestnut, khaki and blue colors with a 1.65 eV band gap. The alkyl amine substituted derivative (32) showed a claret red to blue transition where the corresponding copolymer (33) showed 4-distinct colors (claret red, lilac, gray, blue).86 The aryl amine substitution (34) on the other hand resulted in a yellow to blue transition with a band gap of 2.12 eV. Copolymerization with EDOT results in a multichromic polymer (35) with 5 different colors.84 Additionally, fine-tuning of these colors could be achieved by changing the potential of copolymer synthesis. Fig. 4 shows all the different colored states that can be attained from this system at different synthesis and working potentials. While a fluorobenzene derivative (36) showed a yellow to blue transition,76 a more electronegative pentafluorobenzene substituted derivative (37) revealed multichromism with yellow, green and light purple colors.73Copolymerization of the fluorobenzene containing monomer with EDOT resulted in a multichromic polymer (38) where the purple neutral state switched to red, light gray, green and blue upon progressive oxidation.77Copolymerization of the pentafluorobenzene containing monomer with EDOT gave a polymer (39) with 5 distinct color multichromism.81 The nitrobenzene substituted derivative showed one of the most promising results in the series where both the homopolymer (40) and the copolymer with EDOT (41) showed multichromic properties.8,72 The homopolymer with a band gap of 2.18 eV was yellow in the reduced state and the color switched to green, gray and blue upon successive oxidation. The copolymer on the other hand showed a 1.6 eV band and 5-color multichromism (purple-red, orange, green, turquoise and blue).
 Fig. 4  Colors of 35 at different applied potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright © 2008 by Elsevier Science Inc. 
This series of polymers showed that slight changes in the monomer structure (introduction of a nitro group on a phenyl unit) could result in completely different properties such as multichromism. Copolymerization with EDOT resulted in higher optical contrasts (up to 40%) and faster switching times (as low as 1 second). Additionally, copolymerization induced multichromism in almost all cases. All of these studies further proved the versatility of copolymerization as a unique technique to synthesize promising new materials (Fig. 5).84
 Fig. 5  Structures of SNS copolymers with EDOT and their colors at different oxidation states. 
Following our work, many other SNS derivatives have been synthesized and their electrochromic properties were investigated by other groups in detail.89–97  
Another development in obtaining a processable low band gap polymer, poly(4,4-dioctyl-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]-dithiophene) (42), was reported by the Wu group.22 The polymer revealed a 1.73 eV band gap and an impressive 60% optical contrast in the visible region. The polymer was also shown to be very stable having minor contrast loss even after 1000 cycles. It is important to point out the coloration efficiency of 923 cm2C−1 and a rapid response time of 0.4 s.
Even though a vast amount of work has been done in the field of electrochromism on thiophenes and thiophene bis-substituted derivatives, the selenium containing analogue selenophene has received little attention.98 In the late 1990s two reports have focused on bis-selenophene containing monomers and corresponding polymers. However, little detail has been included on the electrochromic properties of these interesting materials.99,100 Our group started to investigate the potential use of selenophenes and their derivatives as high performance electrochromic materials. Towards this aim, 1,4-diselenophenyl benzene has been synthesized and electrochromic properties of the corresponding polymer (43) were investigated in detail.10143 revealed a band gap of 1.85 eV and a very subtle contrast change (lower than 1%) in the visible region. A 25% optical contrast was observed in the NIR region (1240 nm) with a switching time of 0.6 seconds. These results indicate that these types of materials with further improvement can be promising materials as exclusively NIR active electrochromic materials. Next, we utilized selenophenes in donor–acceptor type conjugated polymers.102 A bis-selenophene substituted benzotriazole derivative (44) was prepared and electrochemically polymerized to give an electrochromic material. The polymer revealed a red-purple color in the neutral and a transmissive blue color in the oxidized state with a good optical contrast of 32%. A 56% optical contrast was achieved in the NIR region with a 0.4 second switching time. More interestingly, this polymer was shown to be both p and n dopable where a transmissive light blue color was observed upon complete reduction. To the best of our knowledge this was the first example of an n-dopable selenophene-containing polymer. Following this work a bis-selenophene polymer was synthesized utilizing an alkoxybenzene unit (45).103 The polymer showed a 30% optical contrast in the visible region and a 60% optical contrast in the NIR region. 45 was shown to be stable, especially for a selenophene derivative where only a small (∼10%) electroactivity loss was observed even after 2000 cycles. Additionally, fast switching times (1 second) for both visible and NIR regions were reported. These three reports on selenophenes clearly demonstrated that with logical design selenophene containing polymers can be a strong element in our toolbox towards generating advanced electrochromic materials.  
As stated before n-type low band gap polymers are an important class of materials due to their great potential to be utilized as electron-transport materials,104 and electron acceptors.105,106 Reversible n-type doping is also crucial for the realization of high performance electrochromic devices and capacitors.107 In the context of electrochromism reversible and stable n-dopable materials open the way for realizing multiple colors (if an n-doping process results in significant spectral changes, which is generally the case) from a single polymer.  
The Yang group reported a copolymer of perylene diimide and cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b`]dithiophene (46) which clearly demonstrated this advantage.108 The copolymer showed a reversible p-doping/dedoping and two waves of n-doping/dedoping processes. The yellow neutral state polymer turned into a green color upon first reduction at −0.8 V versusFc/Fc+. A second reduction at −1.0 V resulted in a vibrant blue color. The polymer revealed good stability where only a small charge decrease was observed after 1000 cycles under ambient conditions.  
A donor–acceptor type polymer (47) from our group showed both p- and n-type doping capability and revealed one of the highest optical contrasts in the NIR region reported to date.109 The electrochemically polymerized film showed an optical contrast of 98% at 1800 nm with a fast switching time of 0.6 seconds. The polymer revealed good stability where no significant charge loss was observed after 1000 cycles. Toppare et al. synthesized a bisEDOT substituted highly electron-poor acceptor unit which was polymerized (48) to give a low band gap multichromic polymer (red, orange, brown, green and gray).110 Switching studies revealed a 99% transmittance change in the NIR region (1460 nm) when switched between its neutral and oxidized states (−0.3 V to 1.2 V). To the best of our knowledge this is the highest optical contrast reported for a conjugated polymer system. Another interesting result for NIR device applications came from the Reynolds group.111 A disubstituted ProDOT derivative (49) with a high optical contrast in the NIR region revealed no change in the visible region when incorporated into a reflective device platform. The device was utilized as an electrochromic variable optical attenuator modulating fiber-optic signals for optical telecommunications. A low operation voltage and a switching time under 1 second were reported.  
In 2008, the Bendikov group reported a new synthetic method for 3,4-ethylenedioxyselenophene (EDOS) while revisiting the synthesis of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxyselenophene), PEDOS (50), with different methods.112 The syntheses of the monomer and the polymer were actually reported 7 years ago by the Cava group,113 however, no detail was given on the electrochemical and electrochromic properties. Bendikov et al. have successfully polymerized 2,5-dibromo-3,4-ethylenedioxyselenophene by transition-metal-mediated polymerization using Ni(COD)2, resulting in clean formation of PEDOS in good yield. Additionally, dibromo and diiodo derivatives were polymerized by a solid-state polymerization technique that utilized mild conditions. Applying these methods was necessary to avoid the defects in the conjugation of the polymer chain that formed during conventional FeCl3 mediated oxidative polymerization. The resulting polymers were the first examples of highly conducting polyselenophene derivatives. The following two reports from the same group mainly concentrated on the electrochromic properties of PEDOS and its alkyl substituted derivatives.114,115 PEDOS is blue in its neutral and highly transmissive in its oxidized state. The polymer showed a high optical contrast of 55% at 666 nm with a coloration efficiency of 212 cm2C−1. The bleaching and coloring times were measured to be 0.4 s and 0.6 s, respectively. The introduction of a C6 unit on the monomer and subsequent polymerization resulted in one of the most promising electrochromic polymers reported to date. PEDOS-C6 revealed an optical contrast of 89%, the highest reported to date, and gave a true blue color achieving 95% of its ΔT in 0.7 seconds. A later systematic study performed where the length of the alkyl chain changed from a C2 to C12 unit by increments of 2 carbons showed that C6 is actually the “sweet spot” for the electrochromic properties in PEDOS derivatives.
A polymer very similar to PEDOT, poly(3,4-ethylenedithiothiophene) PEDTT (51) was synthesized by the Kanatzidis group and its electronic properties were investigated in detail in 1995.116 However, electrochromic properties of this interesting polymer were not published for another 16 years.117 The polymer occurred as a golden-brown color which upon oxidation became green, and further oxidation resulted in a pomegranate color. A very close derivative, poly(thieno[3,4-b]-1,4-oxathiane), PEOTT (52) was synthesized by the Roncali group.118 Details on the electrochromic properties were not reported, however the maximum absorption wavelength was found to be right between PEDOT (1) and PEDTT (51). The spectroelectrochemistry series of 51 were published in 2011 by the Bendikov group and revealed the depletion of the absorption band centered at 574 nm upon successive oxidation.119 The selenophene derivatives of 51 and 52 (53, 54) were also synthesized and spectroelectrochemistry of these polymers was studied.119 PEDTS (53) showed a very broad and shallow peak between 500 to 700 nm, which attributed to the superposition of several absorption peaks resulting from planar and twisted fragments of the polymer chain. In contrast, PEOTS (54) gave a maximum absorption wavelength of 643 nm. Upon successive oxidation, the corresponding absorption bands depleted and new low energy absorption bands formed (polaron).  
A striking example of an electrochromic material was published by Martin et al.120 A commercially available indole derivative, 5,6-dimethoxyindole-2-carboxylic acid, was electrochemically polymerized and resulted in distinct color changes upon different applied potentials. The material (55) revealed a transparent color when reduced where a green color was observed at around 0 V. Further oxidation yielded a purple color. Even though electrochromic properties have not been investigated in detail, the simplicity of the monomer, both n- and p-dopable character of the polymer and the green color in its neutral state are very promising properties towards commercial applications. Another polyindole derivative, poly(indole-6-carboxylic acid) (56), was synthesized and electrochromic properties have been investigated.121 The polymer revealed a yellow color in the neutral state and upon oxidation a green color was observed. Optical contrast of the material was calculated to be 39% and the response required to attain 95% of total transmittance difference was found to be 2 s for oxidation and 0.7 s for the reduction processes.
D–A type materials incorporating benzotriazole were proven to be promising to generate multichromic materials by our group in 2009.11,122 The results encouraged us to further investigate the possibility of generating this type of material polymersvia utilizing different donor counterparts. Furan and thieno[3,2-b]thiophene were used as the donor units and D–A–D type monomers have been synthesized (Fig. 6).12357 was red in the neutral state and upon successive oxidation the polymer turned into amber, brown, gray, black and purple. Upon applied negative potential 57 becomes fully reduced and revealed a transmissive blue color. Polymer 58 also showed multichromism with 5 distinct colors (red, orange, brown, green and blue). Following this work we concentrated our efforts towards the synthesis of benzotriazole containing processable multichromic polymers.124 The materials were obtained through the Stille reaction using 4,7-bis(5-bromothiophen-2-yl)-2-dodecyl-2H-benzo[d][1,2,3]triazole and 2,5-bis(tributylstannyl)thiophene and Suzuki coupling using 1,4-phenylenediboronic acid. The resulting materials 59 and 60 were shown to be spray processable, 5 distinct color multichromic polymers including a highly transmissive reduced state. The thiophene derivative 59 showed an optical contrast of 40% at 527 nm and 65% at 1280 nm with a good switching time of 1.4 seconds. Additionally, these polymers were multifunctional since both materials strongly emit in the visible region, making them potential candidates for PLED applications.
 Fig. 6  Structures of polymers 57, 58, 59 and 60 and their colors at different oxidation states. 
For the synthesis of soluble benzotriazole containing polymers an alkylation step is often required. This step generally yields two compounds where symmetric and unsymmetrical benzotriazoles are obtained.  
Mostly, the symmetric benzotriazoles were utilized in D–A type polymers. A systematic study was performed where symmetrical and unsymmetrical benzyl substituted benzotriazoles were coupled with EDOT and thiophene to yield 4 new D–A–D type monomers that polymerized to give polymers 61, 62, 63 and 64.125,12661 showed a blue color in the neutral state, upon oxidation the absorption in the visible region depleted to give a highly transmissive light blue polymer film with a 32% optical contrast. 62 on the other hand showed a drastically different color (orange) in the neutral state which switched to gray upon oxidation. More drastic effects were observed for thiophene analogues. The red neutral color of the 63 film switched to purple, gray and blue upon successive oxidation and brown, greenish-blue, and light-gray upon progressive reduction. A 44% optical contrast was achieved for the transition centered at 504 nm with a fast switching time of 0.6 seconds. The unsymmetrical substituted derivative 64 was shown to be yellow in the neutral state and gray in the oxidized state with a yellowish green intermediate. A higher band gap and blue shifted absorption of 64 compared to 63 suggested that the effective conjugation length is shorter. These results revealed that the position of the substitution greatly affects the electrochromic properties of the resulting polymers and it has been shown that higher optical contrast and faster switching times were observed with symmetrically substituted benzotriazoles.  
The Toppare group introduced a new class of D–A type polymers where substituted benzimidazoles are utilized as the acceptor and EDOT as the donor unit (65, 66, 67).127Phenyl substituted polymer 65 showed different hues of the same purple-blue color where a highly transmissive state was reached upon oxidation. A 41% optical contrast was recorded with a 1 second switching time. 66 which utilized a EDOT instead of phenyl as the substituent showed 4-color electrochromism with a highly transmissive gray oxidized state. The optical contrast value was calculated to be 43% (at a switching time of 1 second). Ferrocene substituted derivative 67 showed completely different colors where a brownish-purple color switched to blue upon oxidation with an intermediate green color. The bright colors, high optical contrasts and fast switching times proved that benzimidazole containing D–A type polymers are strong candidates as high performance electrochromic materials.  
An innovative new type of electrochromic material was recently reported which consisted of the polythiophene backbone wrapped with tetra-cationic cyclophane [cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene)] (68).128 The electrochromic properties were compared to naked reference polythiophene films. AFM studies revealed that the surfaces of 68 films were more homogeneous compared to naked polythiophene films which revealed micrometre-scale aggregates due to strong interactions between the polythiophene chains. Since these interactions were eliminated by the cyclophanes, 68 had brighter colored films. 68 also showed higher optical contrast values and faster switching times.
Advances in color control
The design and synthesis of polymers with specific colors has always been one of the primary goals, serving as a challenging pursuit for most of the chemists working in the area of electrochromic materials. Although a lot is known about how absorption is related to the molecular structure, controlling secondary interactions as well as unknown phenomena is challenging when trying to control the color of the resulting polymers. Research in the area of electrochromic polymers mostly resulted in blue or red colored polymers in their neutral state due to the dependence of these colors on one wavelength. One of the most famous electrochromic polymers, PEDOT, revealed a saturated blue color in the neutral state and a light blue transmissive oxidized state.33 Knowing its high stability and ease of production, chemists have not visited the idea of producing a superior blue polymer with a transmissive oxidized state for over 10 years. Polythiophenes and poly(3-alkylthiophene)s mostly revealed a red color in the neutral state with fairly transmissive light blue oxidized states.23,24 Numerous examples can be given for these types of polymers. Green colored polymers were highly desired since it would be possible to generate a variety of colors with simple combination with red and blue colored polymers. Synthesis of a green polymer would result in the completion of RGB color space, opening the way for multicolored electrochromic device applications. However, for a polymer to reveal a green color, it is necessary for there to be two absorption bands in specific regions of the visible spectrum. Additionally, these absorption bands should be simultaneously depleted upon oxidation. Due to the difficulty to create and deplete two absorption bands in the visible region by a single polymer, neutral state green polymers were perceived as impossible to attain.
All the above shortcomings were addressed by Wudl et al. in 2004 with the synthesis of a donor–acceptor type polymer, PDDTP (69).13 The polymer can be classified as a breakthrough in the era since it had a green color in the neutral state, very fast switching times and an outstanding stability of 10000 cycles. The dioctyl substituted soluble derivative of the polymer also gave a saturated green color.129 The Wudl group did not lose time investigating the power of utilizing RGB based polymeric electrochromics for generating many other colors.130Fig. 7 shows some of the colors that can be attained by only utilizing the fully oxidized and reduced states of three polymers. In the same report Wudl et al. also emphasized the importance of getting different tones of the same color at different oxidation levels and the possibility of generating thousands of different colors from the combination of these possible tones of the RGB polymers.
 Fig. 7  Different colors obtained using mixtures of RGB colors and their two redox states. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2004, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany. 
Cyan, magenta, yellow and black colors constitute subtractive primary colors that are the main color set used in printing technologies (CMYK color system, where K stands for black). Realization of these colors with electrochromic materials, which also possess transmissive states, is a crucial step towards fabrication of non-emissive full color electrochromic display devices. Successful results towards synthesis of these unique materials will be discussed accordingly.
The more promising use of RGB polymers is in display devices utilizing white backlight systems. In modern flat-panel displays, a voltage is applied to a cell filled with liquid crystals to have control over color. The cell is actually a switchable light regulator that can be transparent or colored. In principle, if light filters themselves can be switched between colored and transparent states it would be possible to omit expensive liquid crystal cells.131 This is where RGB based polymeric electrochromic holds a great potential. However, RGB colored polymers have to have highly transmissive oxidized states. Unfortunately, as Sonmez described in a subsequent contribution that there was a significant drawback of this green polymer that could obstruct its use in commercial applications: the low optical contrasts which result in the residual brown color in the oxidized state.132 For achieving multicolor polymeric display devices, the polymers with primary colors in their neutral state should have a high degree of transparency in one of their oxidized states since a mixture of only red and blue chromophores would be necessary for generation of a specific colored state in a specific pixel. This creates an additional challenge for green polymeric materials since effective depletion of two absorption bands in the visible region would be necessary.
In 2007, our group overcame all these challenges and reported the first green polymeric material with a transmissive oxidized state (Fig. 8).133 It was clear that the key was to design a polymer utilizing the donor–acceptor approach, but the real challenge was to find the right combination of donor and acceptor moieties. The monomer, BDT, had two EDOT units attached to a benzothiadiazole. The corresponding polymer PBDT (70) had a saturated green color in the neutral state and upon oxidation both absorption bands depleted to reveal a highly transmissive light blue oxidized state. The kinetic studies showed a substantial increase in optical contrasts compared to PDDTP (37% at 428 nm and 23% at 755 nm versus 23% at 370 nm and 12% at 725 nm) without any significant increase in switching times (ca. 1 second). PBDT was also shown to be highly stable, where no significant charge loss was observed even after 5000 consecutive cycles.
 Fig. 8  Colors and structure of the first neutral state green polymer with a transmissive oxidized state (70). Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In the same year, Toppare et al. reported on a new polymer bearing a quinoxaline derivative as the acceptor instead of benzothiadiazole, which also revealed a saturated green color with a transmissive oxidized state (Fig. 9).134 The kinetic studies showed that, the polymer (71) had an optical contrast of 30% at 780 nm and 20% at 405 nm. PBDT revealed superior characteristics compared to this quinoxaline polymer with the exception of ease in the modification of the acceptor unit in the monomer. Thiophene units that are incorporated on the quinoxaline unit were replaced with benzene (72) and tert-butylbenzene (73) for the fine-tuning of the polymer structure. One of the resulting polymers PTBPEQ (73) showed optical contrasts of 43% at 711 nm and 33% at 452 nm and achieved these high optical contrasts in less than 1 second.
 Fig. 9  Structures and colors of neutral state green polymeric materials with transmissive oxidized states by the Toppare group. 
These contrast changes, both in the visible region, of course resulted in a saturated green color and a highly transmissive oxidized state. PTBPEQ was the missing piece of the puzzle for completion of RGB color space with electrochromic materials.14 We then concentrated our efforts for a solution processable derivative, an important step towards possible commercial applications. Instead of tert-butyl groups on the pendant phenyl rings, two long alkoxy chains were introduced.135 The alkoxy chains only slightly modified the absorption spectrum and the saturated green color of the polymer was preserved. On the other hand, long alkyl chains greatly effected solubility and resulted in a solution processable polymer, PDOPEQ (74). 42% at 690 nm and 29% at 415 nm optical contrasts were recorded for PDOPEQ nearly identical values compared to PTBPEQ.  
Following our work, similar approaches were adopted to achieve neutral state green polymers. In 2008, Reynolds et al. introduced a pentamer where additional ProDOT derivatives (with solubilizing groups) were introduced to the core BDT structure (70) for facile processing and better optical contrasts.16 The approach yielded a new soluble green polymer (75), which showed very similar high quality electrochromic properties like PDOPEQ (74). Towards the end of 2008, Cihaner et al. introduced a new neutral state green polymeric material by introducing benzoselenodiazole as the acceptor unit. The polymer (76) is very similar to PBDT (70), where sulfur was exchanged by selenium. The absorption spectrum and the electrochromic properties on the other hand were greatly influenced. The absorption maxima were blue-shifted and the absorptions responsible for the green color were located at 448 nm and 796 nm. The optical contrast values were lower compared to PBDT because the residual absorption remained upon oxidation.136 Algi et al. prepared the polymer, poly(5,8-bis(2,3-dihydrothieno[3,4-b][1,4]dioxin-5-yl)-2,3-di(1H-pyrrol-2-yl) quinoxaline) (77), for fine tuning of the neutral state color by changing the pendant group of the core structure that is known to give green materials. As expected, the polymer revealed a green color in the neutral state: however, this polymer also suffered low optical contrasts in higher wavelength (746 nm) due to the same type of residual absorption observed in benzoselenodiazole derivatives.137  
Our group introduced a new acceptor molecule to be used in D–A type polymers in 2009.138 When utilized in D–A type polymers with thiophene, the resulting polymer (78) showed two absorption bands. However since one of these absorption bands was not in the visible region the polymer gave a saturated blue color. Upon oxidation both absorption bands depleted to give a transmissive sky blue polymer. 78 revealed a 35% optical contrast and 0.6 second switching time. When a more electron rich unit, EDOT, was utilized as the donor (79), both absorption bands shifted to higher wavelengths resulting in a saturated green color. The optical contrast values were shown to be 16% at 423 nm and 38% at 738 nm and the switching times were found to be 0.6 seconds for both transitions. Realizing two primary additive colors by just changing the donor unit in the polymer structure was of importance. A numerous number of green polymers with relatively transmissive oxidized states were synthesized and characterized in the following years from both our group and others.139–141
The successful realization of green to transmissive electrochromic polymers paved the way for the synthesis of black to transmissive electrochromic material (Fig. 10).15 Black electrochromic materials are of high importance since they would be the choice of material for smart window applications and they would also be a crucial component for non-emissive ECD based display devices. The first black to transmissive switching polymer (80) was realized by the Reynolds groupvia copolymerizing a blue-green polymer precursor with a ProDOT derivative which has an absorption maximum around the valley that no significant absorption presented by the blue-green counterpart (Fig. 10). The polymer revealed a high optical contrast of 40% at longer switching times. A 31% optical contrast was observed when the switching time was fixed at 1.5 seconds. Cihaner et al. electrochemically copolymerized two DAD monomers, precursors to blue to transmissive and green to transmissive polymers that have been reported by the same group, to yield a new black to transmissive polymer (81).142 The polymer is soluble in common organic solvents and revealed a 15% optical contrast.
 Fig. 10  Molecular structure and colors of the first black to transmissive copolymer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. 
In a further contribution the Reynolds group reported that the complexity of the synthesis of the first black to transmissive polymer which requires a DAD monomer synthesis might limit the use of this material in commercial applications. Hence, the group devised a more easily scalable, efficient and reproducible method for generation of black to transmissive polymers.1432,5-Dibromo- and 2,5-tributylstannyl-2-ethyl-hexyloxy-substituted 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene with 4,7-dibromo-2,1,3-benzo-thiadiazole have been randomly copolymerized in the presence of a transition metal catalyst to give a neutral state black polymer (82). A precise absorption spectrum control was achieved by careful variation of monomer feed ratios in Stille type polymerization. The resulting polymer showed an optical contrast of 42% with a switching time of 1 second.
Our group realized a simplified random copolymerization approach using 3 easily accessible, cost effective and stable starting materials to realize full visible region absorption.144 The similar approach utilized by the Reynolds group that has been mentioned above appeared in the literature during the preparation of our manuscript. It has been shown that D–A type polymers bearing quinoxaline derivatives as the acceptor and thiophene as the donor result in green polymers; whereas, benzotriazole as the acceptor mostly yields red color. Hence, we realized a random copolymerization of 5,8-dibromo-2,3-di(thiophen-2-yl)quinoxaline, 4,7-dibromo-2-dode-cyl-2H-benzo[d][1,2,3] triazole and 2,5-bis(tributylstannyl) thiophene resulted in full visible light absorption giving a neutral state black electrochromic material (83). 83 showed a 23% optical contrast with a switching time of 0.7 seconds. These results combined with the ease of polymer synthesis and relatively cheap starting materials make 83 a significant candidate for smart window applications (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Structures and colors of recently synthesized black to transmissive polymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2010 by Elsevier Science Inc.ref. 143 Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany and ref. 144. Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Synthesis of neutral state green polymeric materials with enhanced electrochromic properties motivated our group and others towards better candidates for the blue and the red leg of the RGB color space. Blue to transmissive polymers are also important towards completion of RYB color space, an important goal for realization of non-emissive display device applications. Our group introduced the use of benzotriazole, a lower acceptor capacity unit compared to BDT, in donor–acceptor type polymers with EDOT, allowing a significant bathochromic shift that gave a true blue polymer (84) (Fig. 12).18
 Fig. 12  Structures and colors of blue to transmissive polymers realized by the D–A approach. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society; ref. 145. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society and ref. 146. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany. 
This approach resulted in significantly improved electrochromic properties compared to parent polymer PEDOT. The optical contrast value was found to be 53%, more than 10% higher than the mighty PEDOT, with twice faster switching times (2.2 seconds versus 1.1 seconds). The ease of synthesis of the corresponding monomer and the open site for alkyl chain introduction was of importance. The study showed the proof of concept and opened the way for preparing soluble, highly efficient neutral state blue polymers. Cihaner et al. demonstrated further evidence for utilizing the D–A approach towards generating polymers with specific colors and excellent electrochromic properties.145 As shown before, benzoselenodiazoles and benzotriazoles yield promising polymers when used as acceptor units in D–A–D type polymers with EDOT. Taking advantage of this fact, they utilized a substituted ProDOT derivative as the donor unit in D–A–D systems and subsequent polymerization gave two new electrochromic polymers. A benzoselenodiazole containing derivative revealed very good optical contrast of 44% at 340 nm and 42% at 428 nm making it one of the most promising candidates for green to transmissive materials. Benzotriazole containing polymer 85 showed an optical contrast of 43% (electrochemical synthesis yielded a polymer that showed more than 60%) with a saturated blue color in the neutral and a transmissive oxidized state, one of the few examples of a blue to transmissive polymer with higher optical contrast values compared to PEDOT.
The Reynolds group also utilized the power of the donor–acceptor approach for the synthesis of neutral state blue polymers with highly transmissive oxidized states. An alternating co-polymer of BDT and a ProDOT derivative (86) were shown to be absorbing strongly in the red region of the visible spectrum to yield a blue polymer.146 Optical contrast values were shown to be around 40% with a fast switching time of 1 second.  
In the following year, polymers with meta-phenyl substituted quinoxaline units as the acceptor and EDOT as the donor were reported and all polymers (87) revealed a saturated blue color in their neutral state and high transparency in the oxidized state with 46% (TQ1), 41% (TQ2) and 36% (TQ3) optical contrasts when the switching time was fixed at 1 second.
Even though successful results have been attained concerning electrochromic properties when one more carbon was introduced on the ethylene bridge of PEDOT, resulting in P(ProDOT), the same approach was applied to PEDOS after 9 years of its original synthesis. Onal et al. synthesized the first poly(ProDOS) derivative, ProDOS-C10 (88), and characterized its electrochromic properties. 88 revealed a saturated blue color in neutral and a highly transmissive oxidized state with a 56% optical contrast. This value is very similar to the parent polymer, PEDOS (55%). Only a 3% electroactivity loss after 40000 cycles was also impressive.
Different approaches also yielded very promising blue to transmissive electrochromic polymers. For example, poly(4,4-dioctyl-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]-dithiophene) (46) with fused thiophene rings (mentioned earlier in the polymer design section) was shown to have a saturated blue color in the neutral state. This solution processable polymer revealed over 60% optical contrast with a record holding CE of 923 cm2C−1.22PEDOS-C6, even though it is not solution processable, revealed an impressive 89% optical contrast with a CE of 715 cm2C−1.112
Although there are vast amounts of polymers that have a red color in their neutral states, due to the difficulty of shifting corresponding transitions upon oxidation fully to the NIR region, most of these polymers did not reveal a transmissive state. PEDOP was shown to be an exception nearly 10 years ago, which revealed a vibrant red color in the reduced and a light blue transmissive oxidized state with an appreciable 59% optical contrast.34 However, for realization of electrochromic polymer based display devices, solution processability is of great importance. Towards achieving this aim Dyer et al. copolymerized 3,4-dimethoxythiophene and 3,4-dihexyloxythiophene (89) to yield a new solution processable material.147 The polymer revealed a saturated red color in the neutral state and upon oxidation a highly transmissive oxidized state was reached, achieving almost the same high optical contrast of PEDOP.
Wu et al. reported on the synthesis of soluble, RGB colored cathodically coloring polymers utilizing 4,4-dioctyl-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]-dithiophene as the core structure. 46 is one of the most promising blue to transmissive polymers reported to date as discussed before.  
An alternating copolymer of 4,4-dioctyl-cyclopenta[2,1-b:3,4-b′]-dithiophene and 3-hexylthiophene (90) gave a neutral state red polymer with a transmissive oxidized state. 90 revealed a high optical contrast of 47% with a 0.6 second switching time. The copolymer with benzothiadiazole on the other hand resulted in a green to transmissive polymer (91) with a 38% optical contrast and a fast switching time of 0.8 seconds.
As stated before polymers having one of the subtractive colors (CMYK) in the neutral state and transmissive in the oxidized state hold a great potential towards realization of non-emissive full color display devices. Disubstituted P(ProDOT)s with longer alkyl chains mostly yielded a purple/magenta color with very high optical contrasts and switching times. PProDOT-(CH2OEtHx)2 (49) was shown to have a saturated magenta color in the neutral state and a highly transmissive oxidized state.148 Cyan colored electrochromic materials have been realized by polymerization of D–A–D type monomers utilizing a ProDOT derivative as the donor and benzothiadiazole as the acceptor unit (92).149  
Yellow to transmissive polymer synthesis has been delayed since much efforts have been concentrated towards the relatively low band gap polymers towards generation of other colors in the visible spectrum. A high band gap is required for having a yellow color in the neutral state and upon oxidation the low energy absorption should shift to the NIR region making synthesis of these polymers challenging. The Reynolds group realized the first yellow to transmissive polymer by preparing an alternating polymer of ProDOT with solubilizing groups and benzenevia Suzuki coupling.150 This gave a sufficiently high band gap polymer (93) that resulted in a yellow color in the neutral state. The level of electrochemical doping was sufficiently high enough to shift the absorption to the NIR region, resulting in a transmissive state. The polymer had a very high optical contrast of 70% and a fast switching time of 1 second. With cyan, magenta and yellow colors in hand, in addition to blue and red, full color non-emissive electrochromic based display devices are closer to reality.12  
The Sotzing group recently reported a very promising approach for the color control in conducting polymers.151 This group utilized 1,3-substitution on ProDOT systems compared to the common 2,2-substitution pattern. Four different polymers have been synthesized where a tert-butyl group (94), a hexyl group (95), an iso-propyl group (96) or a methyl group (97) was used as the substituent. A clear structure–property relationship was observed for this system. 94 had a yellow color in the neutral state where upon oxidation the polymer switched to green color. A dark blue-purple neutral state was observed for 97 which switched to a transmissive light blue oxidized state upon oxidation. This clearly demonstrated the power of this method where fine tuning of color is possible by simply changing the size of the substituents at the 1,3-positions.
Advances en route commercial applications
Electrochromic materials are candidates for many different applications spanning from display devices to e-papers and more. Even though the discovery began at the material design and fine-tuning of polymer structures, many other important factors and problems need to be addressed for utilization of these materials in commercial devices.
Advantages gained by using polymeric electrochromics, like ease of color-tuning, flexibility and low cost are mostly shadowed by long-term stability ECDs (electrochromic devices) built with them. A team of scientists led by Mattes et al. addressed this problem by utilizing ionic liquids as the electrolytes in an electrochromic window.152 The device showed a remarkable stability with no significant charge loss for 1000000 cycles, an order of magnitude higher compared to best polymer ECDs.
In 2003 Argun et al. demonstrated truly all polymer electrochromic devices (Fig. 13).153 Most of the ECDs reported in the literature utilize ITO coated glass or plastic substrate. In this study ITO has been replaced with PEDOT:PSS. Layer by layer deposition of this polymer resulted in highly transparent and conducting electrodes. ECDs made by using these electrodes, a ProDOT derivative (98) as the cathodically coloring polymer, a BisEDOT carbazole (99) as the anodically coloring polymer and a polymer gel electrolyte resulted in the first all polymer ECD. The devices switched between blue and light green with a 51% contrast and a noticeable stability of 32000 cycles.
 Fig. 13  Schematic representation and colors of the transmissive/absorptive type ECD constructed from all-polymer components. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2003, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany. 

        Pena
        et al. reported on a simplified ECD that was built from all commercially available electrodes and polymers, where PEDOT acts both as the electrode material and the electrochromic layer.154 However, the electrochromic properties of the device need improvement towards smart window applications.
One of the other major problems towards utilization of electrochromic materials, apart from stability, was switching times. Of course smart windows do not need a drastically fast switching time, however, for any application concerning display technologies this property becomes immensely important. A great deal of synthetic work has been done to improve switching times and mostly resulted in fruitful results. Polymers that can achieve 95% of their optical contrast in less than 0.3 seconds were realized. However, no polymer was able to achieve moving-image speeds (less than 40 ms) with satisfactory coloration for displays due to the diffusion rate dependence of counter ions into the polymer film during the switching. Kim and Lee proposed an elegant solution, where they synthesized an array structure of PEDOT nanotubes using porous alumina films which provided 10–20 nm diffusion distances.21 This resulted in very fast switching times of less than 10 ms and these structures can still produce strong coloration. Following this work, the Lee group applied a new electrochemical synthetic method and utilized a track-etched porous polycarbonate (PC) membrane (due to fragility of alumina films) to generate nanotubes on flexible substrates, which resulted in the first example of a very fast, and flexible electrochromic device.155
In the search for cost-effective, low voltage driven electronic paper applications, active matrix displays hold a great potential. This potential was thoroughly investigated by Berggren et al.156 An all organic active matrix addressed display was achieved utilizing PEDOT:PSS as the active electrochemical material. A matrix display fill-factor of 65% was achieved by incorporating a three terminal electrochemical transistor with the electrochromic display cell architecture. The smart pixels operated at very low voltages and only five patterning steps were needed for manufacturing.
Realization of electrochromic devices with specific colors stands as an important step towards commercial applications. The ease of color tuning for electrochromic polymers is not enough for generating specific colors in dual electrochromic devices due to the mixing of the colors for the anodically and cathodically coloring polymers. This complexity encouraged different groups towards the synthesis of polymers that have a minimal change in the visible region, so they can be utilized as ion-storage layers in ECDs. The Sotzing group reported a successful example of this kind of polymer.157 Poly(thieno[3,4-b]thiophene), PT34bT (16), was shown to exhibit high transparency in both neutral and oxidized states and have a high charge capacity. Devices prepared with some common electrochromic materials revealed that the ion storage layer did not affect the color of any of the devices and resulted in a very small amount of contrast loss due to the thickness of the ion storage layer.
One of the most important aspects of commercialization is the cost. This is also true for any type of industrial application concerning electrochromic materials and devices. As described in the color control section, there has been a great deal of advances for realizing primary additive and subtractive color systems with carefully designed polymer structures. However, having three different materials for each color may not be viable due to syntheses cost and additional costs that can arise from device fabrication. In 2009, Toppare et al. addressed this issue with the synthesis of a new benzotriazole containing polymer (100) (Fig. 14).11
 Fig. 14  Molecular structure and colors of 100. Reproduced with permission from ref 11. Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The polymer was red in its neutral state and upon successive oxidation becomes orange, black, green and finally blue at the fully oxidized state. Hence, the polymer can be switched between RGB colors. Additionally, the polymer can be fully transparent upon reduction. No considerable change in the optical density and the injected/ejected charge per unit area were observed after 1000 cycles and the polymer can switch between all 5 distinct colors in fewer than 2 seconds. Even though there is room for improvement for color saturation and switching times, PTBT brings single component display devices utilizing white backlight closer to realization. In 2011, a direct synthesis approach was realized where the synthesis of D–A–D type monomer was omitted.158  A series of benzotriazole and thiophene bearing spray processable donor–acceptor type conducting polymers were synthesized via the Stille cross coupling reaction to give alternating D–A type polymers (101). Three different lengths of the alkyl chains were introduced on the benzotriazole unit and the resulting polymers differed in terms of average number of repeating units and showed different spectroelectrochemical and kinetic characteristics. All polymers showed clear multichromism with transmissive states. The most promising polymer was shown to be PTBT–DA12, since all primary additive colors can be attained with this material. The ease of synthesis, high yields and saturated colors of the polymer are worth mentioning as well.
A new type of polycyclic pyrrole derivative was synthesized and electropolymerized to give another very promising multichromic polymer (102). 102 revealed a yellow color in the neutral state. Upon oxidation the polymer turned into bright red where further oxidation resulted in a green color and finally upon full oxidation the polymer turned into a blue color. These results are important since a single polymer showed all RGB and RYB colors. However, polymers lacked an accessible transparent state, an important property towards realization of single material display devices.159
The ease of synthesis and modification of monomers and polymers stands as a great challenge for incorporation of electrochromic materials for different types of applications. The Kumar group achieved an elegant development in the era. Processable, regioregular and most importantly clickable monomers and polymers based on ProDOT were synthesized.160 The electrochromic properties were above average as expected from a ProDOT derivative for which many successful examples were realized by Kumar and Reynolds groups.20,39 More interestingly, a special copolymer composed of propargyl ProDOT and dihexyl ProDOT resulted in an organic solution processable polymer (103) which then can be reacted with different azide derivatives to give water soluble cationic counterparts (104). A complete reversal of solubility by a single and easy click reaction stands as a very significant progress in cost-effective commercial applications. Additionally, this is the first time where a polycationic conjugated polymer based on ProDOTs was realized. This of course opens the way for realization of layer by layer deposition with known polyanionic ProDOT derivatives for ECD applications.  
In addition to the cost of active electrochromic material synthesis, the cost and ease of device assembly are also major concerns for electrochromic devices, solar cells, LEDs, and OFETs. Smooth and uniform film formation has always been a significant necessity for better device performance; hence, a rigorous cleaning procedure is often required. Electrodeposition or electrochemical conversion of a precursor is often needed for device assembly, which is a costly and wasteful step. Additionally, this step requires disposal of toxic organic solvents, a problem that has not been clearly addressed. Moreover retaining the entire precursor material, monomeric or polymeric is generally not possible making cost-effective functional devices less plausible. All these concerns were cleverly addressed by the Sotzing group161 by preparing active conjugated polymers inside of already assembled solid state devices, namely in situ conversion. Sotzing et al. utilized copolymers of aromatic and silane units for this purpose. Oxidative conditions are then applied to cleave C–Si bonds followed by coupling of aromatic units to form the electrochromic material. Intentionally unclean ITOs have been used in device preparation and no significant effect on the performance was observed compared to clean ITOs. Since all the precursor material is inside the closed assemble system, no leaking of monomers or oligomers was possible making the system highly cost effective. The precursor materials exhibit Tg values ranging from −9 °C to 80 °C making melt-processing a possible addition to known solution based methods like ink-jet printing, electrostatic spinning, spin coating, spray coating, dip coating and doctor blading. A year later the same group reported a slightly different approach.162 Conductive polymer composites of blends were prepared within a polymer electrolyte using electrochemical polymerization of monomers inside an assembled solid-state device. The method was shown to be applicable to monomers that could dissolve in the gel electrolyte. The tedious cleaning process of the substrates was also eliminated in this method. Electrochromic devices prepared using the new method with PEDOT as the active electrochromic material showed comparable switching times and stability with a slightly higher optical contrast. The authors claimed that complex patterning in the devices could be realized by combining their method with the inkjet printing technique.
An elegant example of a post polymer modification technique that can drastically affect the construction of electrochromic devices came from the Reynolds group in the following year.163 Reynolds et al. devised a method namely, side chain defunctionalisation, which opened the way for spray-processing electrochromic materials from aqueous solutions.  
A simple dioxythiophene homopolymer that contains an alkyl ester side chain (105) is chemically synthesized and further defunctionalized to give a polyanionic polymer (106) that dissolves in water. Films of this material were spray-coated from a saturated solution and upon neutralization a solvent resistant (both organic and water) polymer, ProDOT-acid (107), was formed. This material has a 61.5% optical contrast, a comparable value to 65.8% of its ester counterpart. On the other hand the ProDOT-acid switches faster with only a 4% contrast loss when the switching time decreased from 10 seconds to 0.25 seconds. Additionally, the polymer was shown to be remarkably stable where only a 5% contrast loss was observed after 16000 switching cycles in water. The solvent resistant polymer opened the way for deposition of other electrochromic polymers to achieve colors that are not readily available by a single material. Water processability offers a green alternative to solvent-based methods that can facilitate the utilization of these materials in industrial scale device applications.
Towards commercialization of electrochromic materials a great deal of effort has been concentrated on achieving higher optical contrasts and faster switching times by design and synthesis of new polymers. Chu et al. demonstrated that simple changes in the film formation processes could yield better electrochromic characteristics.164 The group studied the self-organization of poly(3-hexylthiophene) by controlling the solvent evaporation rate. Well-ordered polymer films were developed after solvent-annealing and it has been shown that these highly crystalline structures yield better electrochromic properties. After application of solvent annealing conditions, the optical contrast, coloration efficiency and switching time were improved to 64.8%, 293.5 cm2C−1, and 3.2 s from 54.2%, 182.6 cm2C−1, and 5.3 s, respectively. One of the most anticipated uses of electrochromic polymers is their implementation in textiles. There are numerous applications for fabric electrochromics like adaptive camouflage, wearable displays and as solely for fashion. A very simple method for preparing conductive textile was reported by the Sotzing group in 2010 (Fig. 15).165 These studies mainly concentrated on Spandex but many other materials have been utilized as well. Spandex fabric was simply soaked in aqueous polymer dispersion, PEDOT:PSS and the resulting textile had a conductivity of 0.1 S cm−1. By repetitive soaking it was shown that conductivities up to 2.0 S cm−1 could be achieved resulting in a 33% faster switching speed. It was found that the PEDOT–PSS did not form a film on Spandex, rather it was a homogenously dispersed nanoparticle within the fabric matrix. In their following work Sotzing et al. described a reflective-type electrochromic device using fabric electrodes, a woven stainless steel and spandex impregnated with PEDOT:PSS.166 Electrochromic polymers were realized by chemical or electrochemical oxidation of precursor polymers that can be coated on fabric electrodes with simple methods like spray coating, pin-coating, dip-coating, ink-jetting, melt-processing, and electrostatic spinning. Fast switching times of 0.3 s can be achieved by stainless steel electrodes, whereas switching times around a few seconds were observed using Spandex electrodes. These advances opened the way for chameleonic fabrics and stands as an important proof of concept towards integration of these technologies in display and textile industries.
 Fig. 15  Images of (A) a stretched, spandex fabric electrode in an electrolyte bath switching an EC polymer from its neutral state and (B) oxidized state. (C) Stencil-patterned solid-state fabric ECD in its neutral and (D) oxidized states. Adapted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Towards large area display and smart window applications, scalable film fabrication techniques with reproducible control over thickness and especially homogeneity are of immense importance. The Kaner group recently demonstrated a unique method for film fabrication (Fig. 16).167 High quality transparent monolayer films of different conducting polymer nanofibers can be formed on virtually any surface by a thermodynamically driven solution-based process. This inexpensive process that also utilized recyclable solutions was proven to be a remarkable new technique in the field of conducting polymers.
 Fig. 16  Transparent films of monolayers of conducting polymer nanofibers. (A) Glass slides coated with Cl−-doped polythiophene nanofibers (red), doped polyaniline nanofibers (green), and dedoped polyaniline nanofibers (blue). (B) A uniform p-TSA doped polyaniline nanofiber film on a large glass substrate (12.7 × 17.7 cm2). (C) A nonactivated hydrophobic flexible substrate coated with polyaniline nanofibers. Adapted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2011, National Academy of Sciences of USA. 

Conclusions
Recent advances in the field of conjugated electrochromic materials and their applications were discussed. Many significant problems in the field were addressed and commercial applications are closer than ever. There is still a lot of work to be done for realization of futuristic items like, rollable e-papers with movie playing capabilities or t-shirts that you can change color on touch of a button. However, with the ever-increasing interest in the field and advances in related areas like nanotechnology and engineering, the word “futuristic” might look obsolete in near future.
Notes and references
A. Donnadieu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1989, 3, 185–195 CrossRef .
R. J. Mortimer, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Displays, 2006, 27, 2–18 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. S. Monk, R. J. Mortimer and D. R. Rosseinsky, Electrochromism and electrochromic devices, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 268–320 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Dautremontsmith, Displays, 1982, 3, 3–22 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Dautremontsmith, Displays, 1982, 3, 67–80 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Somani and S. Radhakrishnan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 77, 117–133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Varis, M. Ak, I. M. Akhmedov, C. Tanyeli and L. Toppare, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 603, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sonmez, H. Meng and F. Wudl, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 574–580 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Reeves, B. C. Thompson, K. A. Abboud, B. E. Smart and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 717–719 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balan, D. Baran, G. Gunbas, A. Durmus, F. Ozyurt and L. Toppare, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6768–6770 RSC .
A. L. Dyer, E. J. Thompson and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1787–1795 CAS .
G. Sonmez, C. K. F. Shen, Y. Rubin and F. Wudl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1498–1502 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Gunbas, A. Durmus and L. Toppare, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 691–695 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger and J. R. Reynolds, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 795–799 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge, S. Ellinger and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2772–2776 CrossRef CAS .

          A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Handbook of conducting polymers. Conjugated polymers: theory, synthesis, properties, and characterization, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 3rd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Balan, G. Gunbas, A. Durmus and L. Toppare, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7510–7513 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Sapp, G. A. Sotzing and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2101–2108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, A. V. Ambade, M. Kanungo, A. Q. Contractor and A. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 2909–2911 RSC .
S. I. Cho, W. J. Kwon, S. J. Choi, P. Kim, S. A. Park, J. Kim, S. J. Son, R. Xiao, S. H. Kim and S. B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Wu, M. I. Lu, S. J. Chang and C. S. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1063–1070 CrossRef CAS .
F. Garnier, G. Tourillon, M. Gazard and J. C. Dubois, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 148, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Druy and R. J. Seymour, J. Phys. Colloq., 1983, 44, 595–598 CrossRef .
M. Kobayashi, N. Colaneri, M. Boysel, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 5717–5723 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yashima, M. Kobayashi, K. B. Lee, D. Chung, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bjorklund, S. Andersson, S. Allenmark and I. Lundstrom, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1985, 121, 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Funt and S. V. Lowen, Synth. Met., 1985, 11, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kaneto, K. Yoshino and Y. Inuishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1983, 22, L412–L414 CrossRef .
A. Kitani, J. Yano and K. Sasaki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1986, 209, 227–232 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Argun, P. H. Aubert, B. C. Thompson, S. I. Schwendemann, C. L. Gaupp, J. Hwang, N. J. Pinto, D. B. Tanner, A. G. MacDiarmid and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4401–4412 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jones, G. Heywang and W. Schmidtberg, DE 38 589 A1 (Bayer AG), Eur. Patent, 1988, 339–340 Search PubMed .
B. L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef .
P. Schottland, K. Zong, C. L. Gaupp, B. C. Thompson, C. A. Thomas, I. Giurgiu, R. Hickman, K. A. Abboud and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 7051–7061 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Walczak and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1121–1131 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sonmez, I. Schwendeman, P. Schottland, K. W. Zong and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 639–647 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, D. M. Welsh, M. C. Morvant, F. Piroux, K. A. Abboud and J. R. Reynolds, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 896–902 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, A. V. Ambade, S. P. Mishra, M. Kanungo, A. Q. Contractor and A. Kumar, Polymer, 2002, 43, 6465–6470 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Gaupp, D. M. Welsh and J. R. Reynolds, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 885–889 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Welsh, L. J. Kloeppner, L. Madrigal, M. R. Pinto, B. C. Thompson, K. S. Schanze, K. A. Abboud, D. Powell and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 6517–6525 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. deLeeuw, M. M. J. Simenon, A. R. Brown and R. E. F. Einerhand, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Meijer, H. A. M. van Mullekom, J. A. J. M. Vekemans and E. E. Havinga, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2001, 32, 1–40 CrossRef .
C. J. DuBois, K. A. Abboud and J. R. Reynolds, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8550–8557 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Dubois and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1844–1846 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sonmez, H. Meng and F. Wudl, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4923–4929 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fabian and R. Zahradnik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1989, 28, 677–694 CrossRef .
M. Emmelius, G. Pawlowski and H. W. Vollmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1989, 28, 1445–1471 CrossRef .
P. Chandrasekhar, B. J. Zay, T. McQueeney, A. Scara, D. Ross, G. C. Birur, S. Haapanen, L. Kauder, T. Swanson and D. Douglas, Synth. Met., 2003, 135, 23–24 CrossRef .
P. Chandrasekhar, B. J. Zay, G. C. Birur, S. Rawal, E. A. Pierson, L. Kauder and T. Swanson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Galand, J. K. Mwaura, A. A. Argun, K. A. Abboud, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 7286–7294 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Gaupp and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 6305–6315 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee and G. A. Sotzing, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5746–5747 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Sotzing and K. H. Lee, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 7281–7286 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, V. Seshadri and G. A. Sotzing, Synth. Met., 2005, 152, 177–180 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, J. G. Bokria, Z. Buyukmumcu, T. Dey and G. A. Sotzing, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7098–7108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, Z. Buyukmumcu and G. A. Sotzing, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2723–2725 CrossRef CAS .
P. Camurlu, A. Cirpan and L. Toppare, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 92, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
P. Camurlu, A. Cirpan and L. Toppare, Synth. Met., 2004, 146, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
C. Arbizzani, A. Bongini, M. Mastragostino, A. Zanelli, G. Barbarella and M. Zambianchi, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 571–574 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Collomb-Dunand-Sauthier, S. Langlois and E. Genies, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1994, 24, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ak, A. Durmus and L. Toppare, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 729–735 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Li and C. Lambert, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1235–1237 CAS .
D. W. Steuerman, H. R. Tseng, A. J. Peters, A. H. Flood, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6486–6491 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Deng, A. H. Flood, J. F. Stoddart and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15994–15995 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turbiez, P. Frere, P. Leriche, N. Mercier and J. Roncali, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1161–1163 RSC .
B. C. Thompson, Y. G. Kim, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12714–12725 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zou, J. H. Hou, C. H. Yang and Y. F. Li, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8889–8891 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sahin, P. Camurlu and L. Toppare, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 124–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ferraris and M. D. Newton, Polymer, 1992, 33, 391–397 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ferraris, R. G. Andrus and D. C. Hrncir, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1989, 1318–1320 RSC .
S. Varis, M. Ak, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Solid State Sci., 2006, 8, 1477–1483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Varis, M. Ak, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Eur. Polym. J., 2006, 42, 2352–2360 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sahin, E. Sahmetlioglu, I. M. Akhmedov, C. Tanyeli and L. Toppare, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 351–362 CrossRef CAS .
U. H. Yildiz, E. Sahin, I. M. Akhmedov, C. Tanyeli and L. Toppare, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2006, 44, 2215–2225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tarkuc, E. Sahmetlioglu, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5412–5419 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arslan, O. Turkarslan, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 104, 410–416 CrossRef CAS .
O. Turkarslan, M. Ak, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 4496–4503 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yigitsoy, S. Varis, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 6561–6568 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yigitsoy, S. Varis, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 3898–3904 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tarkuc, E. Sahmethoglu, C. Tanyeh, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 121, 622–628 CrossRef .
P. Camurlu, E. Sahmetlioglu, E. Sahin, I. M. Akhmedov, C. Tanyeli and L. Toppare, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4139–4144 CAS .
M. Ak, E. Sahmetlioglu and L. Toppare, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 621, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
P. Camurlu, S. Tarkuc, E. Sahmetlioglu, I. M. Akhmedov, C. Tanyeli and L. Toppare, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yidiz, P. Camurlu, C. Tanyeli, I. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 612, 247–256 CrossRef .
S. Tarkuc, E. Sahmetlioglu, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Opt. Mater. (Amsterdam), 2008, 30, 1489–1494 CAS .
S. Tarkuc, M. Ak, E. Onurhan and L. Toppare, J. Macromol. Sci., Part A: Pure Appl. Chem., 2008, 45, 164–171 CAS .
M. Ak, C. Tanyeli, I. M. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4334–4341 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kiralp, P. Camurlu, G. Gunbas, C. Tanyeli, I. Akhmedov and L. Toppare, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 112, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cihaner and F. Algi, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 54, 665–670 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cihaner and F. Algi, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2574–2578 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cihaner and F. Algi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 614, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cihaner, O. Mert and A. S. Demir, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1333–1338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yavuz, B. Bezgin, L. Aras and A. M. Onal, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 639, 116–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, J. I. Son and Y. B. Shim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1286–1292 CrossRef CAS .
X. K. Fu, G. Wang, J. Huang, L. Wu and Q. L. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 6933–6940 CrossRef .
E. Sefer, F. B. Koyuncu, E. Oguzhan and S. Koyuncu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 4419–4427 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, J. Hwang, J. I. Son and Y. B. Shim, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra and M. Bendikov, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 422–433 RSC .
T. T. Ong, S. C. Ng and H. S. O. Chan, Polymer, 2003, 44, 5597–5603 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Ng, H. S. O. Chan, H. H. Huang, T. T. Ong, A. Sarkar, K. Kumura, Y. Mazaki and K. Kobayashi, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1996, 15, 1684–1686 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aydemir, S. Tarkuc, A. Durmus, G. E. Gunbas and L. Toppare, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2029–2032 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Cetin, A. Balan, A. Durmus, G. Gunbas and L. Toppare, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Udum, S. Tarkuc and L. Toppare, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirota and H. Kageyama, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 953–1010 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kietzke, D. A. M. Egbe, H. H. Horhold and D. Neher, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4018–4022 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon, M. M. Koetse, J. Sweelssen, J. J. A. M. Bastiaansen, H. F. M. Schoo, X. Yang, A. Alexeev, J. Loos, U. S. Schubert and M. M. Wienk, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2503–2508 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Shukla, S. Sampath and K. Vijayamohanan, Curr. Sci., 2000, 79, 1656–1661 CAS .
J. H. Hou, S. Q. Zhang, T. L. Chen and Y. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6034–6036 RSC .
Y. A. Udum, E. Yildiz, G. Gunbas and L. Toppare, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 3723–3731 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tarkuc, E. K. Unver, Y. A. Udum and L. Toppare, Eur. Polym. J., 2010, 46, 2199–2205 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dyer, C. R. G. Grenier and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1480–1486 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, Y. H. Wijsboom, S. S. Zade, M. Li, Y. Sheynin, G. Leitus and M. Bendikov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6734–6736 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aqad, M. V. Lakshmikantham and M. P. Cava, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 4283–4285 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, A. Patra, Y. Sheynin and M. Bendikov, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1707–1711 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Sheynin, A. Patra and M. Bendikov, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2482–2488 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Wang, J. L. Schindler, C. R. Kannewurf and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 58–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. Domagala, D. Palutkiewicz, D. C. Lacalle, A. L. Kanibolotsky and P. J. Skabara, Opt. Mater. (Amsterdam), 2011, 33, 1405–1409 CAS .
P. Blanchard, A. Cappon, E. Levillain, Y. Nicolas, P. Frere and J. Roncali, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 607–609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wijsboom, Y. Sheynin, A. Patra, N. Zamoshchik, R. Vardimon, G. Leitus and M. Bendikov, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1368–1372 RSC .
J. Kim, L. K. Povlich, J. Le and D. C. Martin, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3770–3774 CrossRef .
G. M. Nie, L. J. Zhou, Q. F. Guo and S. S. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 160–163 CrossRef CAS .
See the advances en route commercial applications section for details.
N. Akbasoglu, A. Balan, D. Baran, A. Cirpan and L. Toppare, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 5603–5610 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hizalan, A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1804–1809 RSC .
B. Yigitsoy, S. M. A. Karim, A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2534–2539 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yigitsoy, S. M. A. Karim, A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2263–2268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akpinar, A. Balan, D. Baran, E. K. Unver and L. Toppare, Polymer, 2010, 51, 6123–6131 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikeda and M. Higuchi, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4184–4189 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sonmez, H. B. Sonmez, C. K. F. Shen, R. W. Jost, Y. Rubin and F. Wudl, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 669–675 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sonmez, H. B. Sonmez, C. K. E. Shen and F. Wudl, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1905–1908 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sonmez and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 20–22 RSC .
G. Sonmez, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5251–5259 RSC .
A. Durmus, G. E. Gunbas, P. Camurlu and L. Toppare, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3246–3248 RSC .
A. Durmus, G. E. Gunbas and L. Toppare, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 6247–6251 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Gunbas, A. Durmus and L. Toppare, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2026–2030 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cihaner and F. Algi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3583–3589 CrossRef CAS .
F. Algi and A. Cihaner, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tarkuc, Y. A. Udum and L. Toppare, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3458–3464 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Andersson, S. Hellstrom, T. Q. Cai and O. Inganas, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3454–3459 CrossRef .
S. Ozdemir, A. Balan, D. Baran, O. Dogan and L. Toppare, React. Funct. Polym., 2011, 71, 168–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. Celebi, A. Balan, B. Epik, D. Baran and L. Toppare, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 631–636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Icli, M. Pamuk, F. Algi, A. M. Onal and A. Cihaner, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1255–1260 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Shi, C. M. Amb, E. P. Knott, E. J. Thompson, D. Y. Liu, J. G. Mei, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4949–4953 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oktem, A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3933–3935 RSC .
M. Icli, M. Pamuk, F. Algi, A. M. Onal and A. Cihaner, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4034–4044 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, P. M. Beaujuge and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 724–728 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dyer, M. R. Craig, J. E. Babiarz, K. Kiyak and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 4460–4467 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Reeves, C. R. G. Grenier, A. A. Argun, A. Cirpan, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 7559–7569 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge, S. V. Vasilyeva, S. Ellinger, T. D. McCarley and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 3694–3706 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Amb, J. A. Kerszulis, E. J. Thompson, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 812–814 RSC .
T. Dey, M. A. Invernale, Y. J. Ding, Z. Buyukmumcu and G. A. Sotzingt, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2415–2417 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, A. G. Fadeev, B. H. Qi, E. Smela, B. R. Mattes, J. Ding, G. M. Spinks, J. Mazurkiewicz, D. Z. Zhou, G. G. Wallace, D. R. MacFarlane, S. A. Forsyth and M. Forsyth, Science, 2002, 297, 983–987 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Argun, A. Cirpan and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1338–1341 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mecerreyes, R. Marcilla, E. Ochoteco, H. Grande, J. A. Pomposo, R. Vergaz and J. M. S. Pena, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3555–3559 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Cho, D. H. Choi, S. H. Kim and S. B. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4564–4566 CrossRef CAS .
P. Andersson, R. Forchheimer, P. Tehrani and M. Berggren, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3074–3082 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Invernale, V. Seshadri, D. M. D. Mamangun, Y. Ding, J. Filloramo and G. A. Sotzing, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3332–3336 CrossRef CAS .
A. Balan, D. Baran and L. Toppare, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9861–9866 RSC .
V. V. Roznyatovskiy, N. V. Roznyatovskaya, H. Weyrauch, K. Pinkwart, J. Tubke and J. L. Sessler, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 8355–8362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sinha, R. Sahoo and A. Kumar, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2015–2022 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Invernale, Y. J. Ding, D. M. D. Mamangun, M. S. Yavuz and G. A. Sotzing, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1379–1382 CAS .
Y. Ding, M. A. Invernale, D. M. D. Mamangun, A. Kumar and G. A. Sotzing, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11873–11878 RSC .
P. M. Beaujuge, C. M. Amb and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5383–5387 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Huang, C. Y. Yang, C. Y. Hsu, C. L. Chen, L. Y. Lin, R. R. Wang, K. C. Ho and C. W. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2821–2828 CAS .
Y. J. Ding, M. A. Invernale and G. A. Sotzing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1588–1593 CAS .
M. A. Invernale, Y. J. Ding and G. A. Sotzing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 296–300 CAS .
R. B. Kaner, J. M. D'Arcy, H. D. Tran, V. C. Tung, A. K. Tucker-Schwartz, R. P. Wong and Y. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 19673–19678 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Gorkem Gunbas
	Gorkem Gunbas received his BSc in chemistry from Middle East Technical University in 2006 and did undergraduate studies with Prof. Levent Toppare. He then joined the same group for MSc degree in polymer chemistry focusing on synthesis and electrochromic properties of novel donor–acceptor type polymers. In 2008, he moved to University of California Davis for his PhD and currently working under the supervision of Prof. Mark Mascal on the design and synthesis of topologically and theoretically interesting organic molecules, particularly bowl-shaped heterotriquinanes.

Levent Toppare
	Levent Toppare is a professor of chemistry at the Department of Chemistry, Department of Polymer Science and Technology and Department of Biotechnology in Middle East Technical University with expertise in electrochemistry. He is also a member of Center for Solar Energy Research and Applications (GUNAM). His research interests include conducting polymers for over 25 years. His group has recently been involved in electrochromism, electrochromic devices and photovoltaic cells. Toppare obtained his PhD (1982) degree from METU. He has published over 300 scientific papers. He is the recipient of British Council, Fulbright and Alexander von Humboldt Scholarships.

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Colors of the parent PEDOP and P(ProDOP) at neutral (n), intermediate (i) and oxidized (o) states. Adapted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Optical switching studies for PProDOT-Bz2 (4) film (charge density 15.2 mC cm−2) monitored at 632 nm, when it was stepped between its reduced (−1.0 V) and oxidized (+1.0 V) states. Adapted with permission from ref. 20. Copyright © 2001 by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Structures of SNS homopolymers and their colors at different oxidation states.	 

 	Fig. 4  Colors of 35 at different applied potentials. Adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright © 2008 by Elsevier Science Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structures of SNS copolymers with EDOT and their colors at different oxidation states.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  Structures of polymers 57, 58, 59 and 60 and their colors at different oxidation states.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Different colors obtained using mixtures of RGB colors and their two redox states. Adapted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2004, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany.	 

 	Fig. 8  Colors and structure of the first neutral state green polymer with a transmissive oxidized state (70). Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2007, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures and colors of neutral state green polymeric materials with transmissive oxidized states by the Toppare group.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular structure and colors of the first black to transmissive copolymer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structures and colors of recently synthesized black to transmissive polymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2010 by Elsevier Science Inc.ref. 143 Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany and ref. 144. Copyright 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structures and colors of blue to transmissive polymers realized by the D–A approach. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society; ref. 145. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society and ref. 146. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic representation and colors of the transmissive/absorptive type ECD constructed from all-polymer components. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2003, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany.	 

 	Fig. 14  Molecular structure and colors of 100. Reproduced with permission from ref 11. Copyright 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 15  Images of (A) a stretched, spandex fabric electrode in an electrolyte bath switching an EC polymer from its neutral state and (B) oxidized state. (C) Stencil-patterned solid-state fabric ECD in its neutral and (D) oxidized states. Adapted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Transparent films of monolayers of conducting polymer nanofibers. (A) Glass slides coated with Cl−-doped polythiophene nanofibers (red), doped polyaniline nanofibers (green), and dedoped polyaniline nanofibers (blue). (B) A uniform p-TSA doped polyaniline nanofiber film on a large glass substrate (12.7 × 17.7 cm2). (C) A nonactivated hydrophobic flexible substrate coated with polyaniline nanofibers. Adapted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2011, National Academy of Sciences of USA.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
