Existing and emerging strategies for the synthesis of nanoscale heterostructures  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CP22343G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CP22343G
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19256-19269Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsExisting and emerging strategies for the synthesis of nanoscale heterostructures

        
          
            Paromita 
            Kundu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            E. A. 
            Anumol
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Nethravathi
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            N. 
            Ravishankar
          
          
        
      *
      Materials Research Centre, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. E-mail: nravi@mrc.iisc.ernet.in;  Fax: +91 80 2360 7316;   Tel: +91 80 2293 3255
Received 
      19th July 2011
    , Accepted 7th September 2011First published on 4th October 2011AbstractDevelopment of new multifunctional nanostructures relies on the ability to make new materials at the nanoscale with control over size, shape and composition. While this control is extremely important to tune several properties, an alternative strategy is to create active interfaces between two or more nanostructures to form nanoscale heterostructures. In these heterostructures, the interfaces play a key role in stabilizing and enhancing the efficiency of the individual components for various applications. In this article, we discuss synthesis methods of different types of nanoscale heterostructures and the role of interfaces in various applications. We present the current state-of-the-art in designing heterostructures and possible upcoming synthetic strategies with their advantages and disadvantages. We present how such heterostructures are highly efficient for catalytic, photovoltaic and nanoelectronic applications drawing several examples from our own studies and from the literature.
Paromita Kundu
Paromita Kundu obtained her BSc Chemistry in 2005 from Presidency College, Calcutta University. She joined IISc under the Integrated PhD program and completed her MS (Chemical Sciences) in 2008. She is currently pursuing her PhD in Materials Research Centre at IISc. Her current research interests include understanding morphology evolution in nanocrystals and designing nanoscale heterostructures of metal and semiconductors with engineered interfaces for catalytic and nanoelectronics applications.
E. A. Anumol
E. A. Anumol is currently a PhD student in the Materials Research Centre at Indian Institute of Science. She completed her MSc in Chemistry from Mahatma Gandhi University in 2005. Her present research includes synthesis of porous and hollow nanostructures and hybrid nanomaterials for heterogeneous catalysis and energy applications.
C. Nethravathi
C. Nethravathi is currently a senior research associate in the Materials Research Center (MRC) at the Indian Institute of Science. She earned her MSc (Chemistry) in 2003 and completed her PhD in 2009 at St. Joseph's College, Bangalore. Her research interests include exfoliation of layered solids (anionic/cationic clays, graphite oxide) and using the exfoliated layers as precursors in synthesis of functional layered composites.
N. Ravishankar
N. Ravishankar is currently an Associate Professor in the Materials Research Centre at the Indian Institute of Science. His primary research interests include understanding the mechanisms of nucleation and growth of nanostructures and hybrids for a variety of applications. His group specializes in the use of electron microscopy as a tool for obtaining insight into nanostructure growth, assembly and stability.
1. Introduction
The current state-of-the-art in designing multifunctional nanomaterials focuses on combining two or more functional nanostructures with deterministic control over surfaces and interfaces. Size and shape control of nanostructures have been demonstrated as viable methods to enhance properties,1–7 and hence several studies have focused on obtaining mechanistic understanding of size control and shape evolution during wet chemical synthesis with detailed investigation of the role of reaction parameters in controlling growth.8–13 Once such an understanding is gained, the next step is to develop methods to put these nanostructures together with active interfaces between the nanoscale components to form a composite. The interfaces in such composites play a key role in stabilizing and enhancing the functionality of the individual components. The resultant two/multi-component nanostructure with an interface is termed as a nanoscale heterostructure.
Nanoscale heterostructures can be classified based on the role of the components/units in enhancing/tuning the properties. Broadly, we can categorize them as
Type I—where the components/subunits offer a synergistic effect as in supported catalysts and sensitized systems,
Type II—where the components/subunits offer an additive effect (multi-functionality).

Scheme 1 describes the morphological variation of heterostructures which includes core–shell, metal embedded in a metal organic framework (MOF), metal/semiconductor nanoparticles on supports and heterostructures and anisotropic/striped structures. Based on the nature of the constituent materials, heterostructures can be classified as semiconductor–semiconductor (SC–SC), metal–semiconductor (M–SC), metal–metal (M–M), metal–metal organic framework (M–MOF), carbon-based and inert oxide based heterostructures. Fig. 1 is an illustration of different kinds of nanoscale heterostructures obtained by various growth strategies and used in a variety of applications.14–22
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the morphological classification of heterostructures where (a) Core–shell structure which could be composed of M–M/SC–SC/M–SC and can be either equiaxed or anisotropic; (b) M–MOF structure where the metal nanoparticle remains stabilized within a metal–organic framework (MOF); (c) metal nanoparticles/SC quantum dots decorating the oxide or carbon support/substrate; (d) Striped M–M anisotropic heterostructure. 
 Fig. 1  Examples of different types of heterostructures synthesized by various physical and chemical methods. (a) Selective growth of Au nanoparticles at the tip of CdS nanorods (ref. 14), (b) Au–Fe3O4 dumb-bell obtained by epitaxial growth of Fe3O4 on Au (ref. 15), (c) PbSe nanodots grown at the tip of CdS nanorods (ref. 16), (d) shows SiO2-coated Au nanorods (ref. 17), (e) Si–GaP heterostructure grown under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) in in situTEM to understand the growth mechanism in real time (ref. 18), (f) CNT–Pt heterostructures (ref. 19), (g) high resolution TEM image of the γ-Fe2O3/ZnS heterostructure obtained due to large lattice mismatch (ref. 20), (h) free-standing Fe–Au barcode nanowires obtained by electrodeposition (ref. 21), (i) Au nanoparticles deposited on silica sub-microspheres by a sonochemical method (ref. 22). 
1.1. Type I heterostructures
Of the above combinations described, SC–SC and M–SC heterostructures mainly fall under this category and are used in photovoltaic and photocatalytic processes where the synergism between the two units via the interface is crucial. Carbon-based and oxide-based heterostructures may also be considered of Type I depending on the role of the support. Considering the SC–SC type, TiO2 and ZnO are the most widely used wide band gap semiconductors that are active in the UV range. For optimal utilization of the solar spectrum for photovoltaic or photocatalytic applications, sensitization with visible light active materials (like dyes or low band gap semiconductors) is a commonly employed strategy.23–26 Hence, combinations of these oxides with low band gap materials like CdS, CdSe, PbS, PbSe, PbTe, CuO and Cu2O are desired. In these cases, a heterojunction is created between the two semiconductors that favors the electron excitation in the low band gap material in the visible range and the transfer of the exciton to the wide band gap semiconductor across the interface. This process minimises recombination of the electron–hole pair within the same material, thereby increasing the efficiency of the electron–hole separation process in the heterostructure. SC–SC heterostructures are also used in cases where the surface defect states in one semiconductor could be eliminated by coating it with another semiconductor as in the formation of core–shell structures.27 M–SC combination has also attracted considerable attention due to their enhanced role as gas sensors, photodetectors and photocatalysts. To name a few, SnO2/Au (gas sensors),28ZnO/Au (photodetectors),29TiO2/Au (catalyst),30TiO2/Ag (antibacterial),31ZnO/Ag (photocatalyst),32–34 CdS/Au, CdSe/Au are widely studied and have emerged as promising candidates for different applications. In these cases the proximity of the metal counterpart modifies the electronic band structure of the semiconductor thereby influencing its properties.29,35 The metal particle acts as a sink for accumulating electrons from an adjacent semiconductor in photogenerated electron transfer processes like photocatalysis. Particularly, ZnO and TiO2 based heterostructures have found diverse applications owing to their photoactivity as well as non-toxicity, stability and biocompatibility. Ag–TiO2 and Ag–ZnO heterostructures are known for their anti-bacterial activity in addition to their photocatalytic properties.31–33,36 Several other systems like Au–CeO2, Pt–CeO2, Au–hydroxyapatite (HA) and Au–MgO, Pd–Al2O3 with close synergism between the two components are widely used as CO, H2oxidation catalysts, sensors28,37–41 and photocatalysts.35
1.2. Type II heterostructures
Recently, carbon nanotube (CNT) and graphene-based semiconductor heterostructures have gained importance due to the enhancement of the photocurrent in the presence of graphene which acts as a facile channel for electron transport.42Carbon-supported metal heterostructures typically fall under the Type II classification where the carbon framework offers stability, conductivity and high surface area. Fuel cells, hydrogen storage, CO pollution control, hydrogen combustion, oxygen reduction are some of the applications where this type of materials have been explored.43–46 For electrocatalytic applications as in fuel cells, it is important for the metal/alloy catalyst to be well-dispersed on a conducting support where graphene and CNTs have been successfully exploited. SiO2 is also known to be an inert support which is used widely for a noble metal catalyst in photocatalytic application and CO oxidation.47,48
Besides the all-carbon frame, metal organic frameworks (MOF) have also shown promising gas sorption ability which is extremely useful for sensor and hydrogen storage applications.49,50 Recently, M–MOF is the new member of the MOFs family which has gained importance in the field of catalysis and gas sensing. The high porosity of the cage-like structure which offers stability to the metal particle and a high surface area makes them ideal for heterogeneous catalysis and sensors. The mechanism of formation of these heterostructures is not yet clear although the strategy involved in the formation of the combination is fairly simple. The degradation of the framework is a limitation of synthesis of M–MOFs and active study is still ongoing in this area.51
Inorganic nanoheterostructures also find major applications as biosensors, in bioimaging and nanoelectronics. Core–shell SC–SC heterostructures (CdSe/CdS, CdS/ZnS, for instance) further coated with biocompatible polymer/organic molecules have been used in bioimaging,52,53 and as biosensors.54,55Silica is used for coating multifunctional nanoparticles for biological applications since it offers extreme photostability, thermal stability and biocompatibility which make it unique for such applications. Besides this, ZnO–Au, SiO2–Au are some of the M–oxide combinations which are employed in tumor treatment and drug delivery.56 FePt–Au heterodimers have potential applications in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) where Au acts as an anchoring point for N and S-containing ligands.57 The gold nanoshells on a silica, silica-coated Fe2O3 core and magnetic QDs are also used for tumor treatment, MRI and live cell imaging respectively.54,58 M–M heterostructures are also well recognized in this category for their wide range of applications like optoelectronics, catalysis, and electrical transport. Magnetically powered nanoswimmers of Au–Ag–Ni have been designed recently which are believed to be useful candidates for many bioapplications.59 Synthesis and application of such heterostructures have been an active field of research recently.60–63
Besides, graphene and CNT-based supports have recently emerged as potential candidates for diverse biological applications.64,65
For all these applications, the common requirement is the ability to synthesize such heterostructures with good control over the size, distribution and interfaces. The stability of these heterostructures under different operating conditions is also a critical aspect for applications. In this perspective, we discuss general principles for the synthesis of nanoscale heterostructures with several examples drawn from the literature and from our own recent work in this area.
2. General principles for synthesis of nanoscale heterostructures—heteronucleation
Most methods for forming heterostructures rely on the heterogeneous nucleation of one component on the other. This nucleation process is primarily controlled by the interfacial energy between the components.66 Therefore, synthesis of nanoheterostructures basically involves promoting conditions under which heterogeneous nucleation will dominate the homogeneous nucleation of the second component. In order to achieve this, it is essential that (i) the first component is in a stable phase which can survive the conditions under which the second one is being formed, (ii) the component phases do not interdiffuse/react under reaction conditions, i.e., the interfacial chemistry of the two phases is compatible and (iii) the surface of the first phase is sufficiently reactive/accessible (not passivated by strongly bound capping agents) to facilitate interface formation. Core/shell morphology resulting due to an epitaxial growth mechanism is an appropriate example of favourable interface formation.27,67–72Epitaxy in creating a heterojunction is a direct consequence of matching of lattices, however, interfacial strain hinders the heterojunction formation when there is a large lattice mismatch. Anisotropic heterostructures are obtained in such cases due to the presence of coincidence site lattices (CSL)20,71,73–77 that leads to a preferential orientation of the two types of lattices at an interface across different crystals. In both lattice matched/mismatched growth, the strain relaxation on the facet edges and the island (nuclei) interaction with the crystal surface result in heteronucleation and thus formation of heterojunctions.66 The different modes of growth are indicated schematically in Fig. 2 which depicts that,
 Fig. 2  (a) Frank–van der Merwe growth mode where the second component deposited completely wets the surface of the first component which is governed by their respective surface energies and the interfacial energy; (b) Volmer–Weber model describes a transition from the previous case when the summation of the surface energy of the second component and the interfacial energy is greater than the surface energy of the first component; (c) Stranski–Krastanov growth mode is a case where a thick layer of the second phase forms which results in a high elastic energy and in order to relax that it tends to break up into isolated islands as shown. 
(i) In the case of lattice-matched heteroepitaxial systems, Frank–van der Merwe or Volmer–Weber growth modes are observed as determined by the relation between the energies of the two surfaces [epitaxial layer (γ2) and substrate (γ1)] and the interfacial energy [γ12]. If the material being deposited wets the substrate [γ2 + γ12 < γ1] then the Frank–van der Merwe growth mode is observed, else the Volmer–Weber mode is preferred.
(ii) In the case of lattice-mismatched heteroepitaxial systems, a layer-by-layer deposition of the material on the substrate takes place initially. As the layer thickness increases the elastic energy also increases which is eventually reduced via formation of islands. This results in a Stranski–Krastanov growth mode.
2.1. Core–shell structures
Core/shell structures are formed by the heterogeneous nucleation of the shell on preformed nanocrystal cores retaining the symmetry of the inner core. Generally the strategy for synthesis of core/shell nanocrystals involves two steps: (1) homogeneous nucleation of the monodispersed core nanocrystals followed by (2) heterogeneous epitaxial nucleation of the shell on the core. The heterogeneous nucleation of the shell nanocrystals is favoured compared to their homogeneous nucleation because the nucleation on the core surface lowers the free energy barrier for nucleation considerably.27,67–72,78,79 Hence the reaction conditions such as concentration of the shell precursor and reaction time are optimised such that the shell nuclei formed at various sites on the core grow and fuse to form a uniform coating. Methods based on conversion of the surface of core into a shell by a suitable redox process,80–83 successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR),69 co-reacting molecular precursors on the surface84,85 or annealing of discontinuous/amorphous shell or phase segregation of the starting alloy have been developed for the growth of the shell on the core.86,87Fig. 3 schematically describes the above strategies of producing core/shell morphology. Core/shell heterostructures of fluorescent semiconductor nanocrystals—CdSe@ZnS/CdS, CdTe@CdSe, CdSe@MX@ZnS (MX = ZnSe/CdS),88,89Co@CdSe86 and magnetic nanoparticles iron oxide@Au and FePt@Fe3O415,90—have been synthesized for various applications. Different noble metal core–shell nanostructures have been synthesized for different physicochemical applications. Transmetallation and sequential reduction is the formation mechanism of these types of heterostructures like Au@Pd91,92 and Au–Ag93 which is a very well known wet chemical approach to obtain M–M heterostructures of core–shell morphology.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of different strategies of growing core–shell morphology of heterostructures where one component forms a shell around the other. (a) describes a method where successive ion adsorption takes place followed by a chemical reaction to form the compound (adapted from ref. 79), (b) and (c) also describe a similar technique where the metal precursor is reduced in the second step of the reaction forming the shell. (d) shows the effect of polarity of the solvent where a polar solvent favours a uniform shell formation around the pre-nucleated seed (from ref. 90). 
2.2. Anisotropic nanoheterostructures
In heterodimers/oligomers, different nanocrystals exist as separate particle domains with a common interface. Crystal systems with large interfacial energy, limited miscibility and lattice mismatch result in anisotropic structures.94 The influence of the lattice mismatch on the formation of heterojunctions has been explained on the basis of CSL theory as described in the previous section.
Though the growth mechanism in the case of heterodimers is similar to core–shell nanoparticles, it has been demonstrated that the polarity of the solvent plays a crucial role in the formation of heterodimers against core–shell structures as described in Fig. 4a. Once a single nuclei is formed on the core, there is charge transfer to the core or away from the core in order to match the chemical potentials of the core and nuclei. This charge transfer cannot be restored in the case of non-polar solvents thus restricting the nucleation at only one site on the core.15,20,73–77,90 Heterodimers have also been made by other methods like recrystallisation of the shell of metastable core–shell nanoparticles to form a dimer95 or fusion of preformed heterodimers in the presence of sulfur.96 The preformed heterodimers could also act as seeds for nucleation of a third component resulting in oligomers. Magnetic–metallic, semiconductor–metallic, semiconductor–magnetic, as well as ternary magnetic–metallic–semiconductor are the various classes of heterodimers described in the literature.20,73–77,90,97 Apart from spherical nanoparticles with high surface curvature that have been studied as seeds to nucleate a second component, the reactive polar facets of tips of nanorods or tetrapods70 have also been used as nucleating sites to promote linear/branched growth of the second material or only spherical particles nucleate at terminals that result in dumbbell like nanoparticles.86 In Fig. 4b, a general schematic is described to show the different anisotropic growth structures that are possible from a pre-nucleated seed.
 Fig. 4  Schematic describing the effect of non-polar solvent in dictating the morphology of heterostructures. (a) Anisotropic heterostructures resulting due to site-specific nucleation of the second component owing to a non-polar medium (ref. 90). (b) Possible morphology of anisotropic heterostructures that can be obtained from an equiaxed seed crystal. TEM images of different Fe3O4/II–VI semiconductor heterostructures have been shown as examples where the seed crystal is Fe3O4 (adapted from ref. 94). 
The absence of defects in nanocrystal seeds promotes the site specific nucleation on certain facets or regions of high surface curvature whereas defects on the nanocrystal seeds, existing or induced, provide additional high energy surface sites for nucleation and growth. This principle has been exploited for heterogeneous nucleation of nanoparticles on substrates like metal oxides, carbon nanotubes and graphene.72
2.3. 
          Catalyst promoted growth of heterostructures
One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures are typically synthesised by the vapour–liquid–solid (VLS) growth mechanism, in which a metal nanoparticle functions as a catalyst and promotes anisotropic growth.98–103 At elevated temperatures the catalyst solubilises the gaseous reactant phase and forms a supersaturated melt which eventually precipitates as nuclei which grow axially resulting in 1D heterostructures. Similar to heterostructures in the case of spherical particles, structurally coherent, epitaxially grown axial, radial and branched heterostructures are synthesised in the case of 1D nanowires.18,104 As the growth of the nanowire proceeds axially, the introduction of the second component in the absence of the first component causes the growth of the second component along the nanowire axis resulting in axial heterostructures whereas the conformal coating of the second component on the nanowire core instead of VLS growth leads to radial heterostructures. The VLS growth method has been described schematically in Fig. 5 which is a typical strategy adopted for designing semiconductor heterostructures.105 The nucleation on the preformed nanowire results in branched heterostructures. A superlattice of the nanowire can be grown by alternating the reactant precursors during growth. Semiconductor–semiconductor/metal 1D heterojunctions have been synthesised by this route.18,104,106,107 The VLS method has also been used to synthesize carbon nanotubes (CNTs)–semiconductor/metal 1D heterojunctions where the metal catalyst attaches to the preformed CNTs and subsequently grows. VLS has also been used to form 1D heterojunctions inside the carbon nanotubes.97,108,109 The VLS method has been adopted to grow 1D heterojunctions in the solution phase referred to as the solution–liquid–solid (SLS) approach.110–115 In this approach, the catalytically active metal nanoparticles are added separately or generated in situ during the reaction. Though these metal nanoparticles are found to be necessary for the anisotropic growth, the actual role of these nanoparticles is not very clear in terms of whether they provide specific nucleation sites or they become supersaturated with the precursor phase to promote unidirectional growth. The preformed 1D structure is used as a substrate to nucleate the second phase to yield heterostructures.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the VLS growth mechanism which involves formation of a catalyst liquid droplet as shown in (a) followed by alloying, nucleation and growth of nanowires. (b) Monophase nanowire growth, (c) shows the formation of a superlattice nanowire by alternating the reactant precursor and (d) shows growth of a coaxial nanowire formed by coating with a different material on the preformed wire (from ref. 105). 
2.4. Template assisted growth of heterostructures
Template-assisted growth is a simple route to synthesize nanostructures of various shapes. The template serves as a scaffold within or around which the nucleation is promoted which eventually grows into nanostructures of complementary shape to the template.116 In the presence of a template the nucleation and growth can be induced by solution based reactions, VLS approach or electrodeposition. Soft templates involve the use of organic [block co-polymers]/biomolecules [lipids, peptides]—micelles117,118 that self assemble into various shapes and act as nano-reactors for solution based synthesis of inorganic nanostructures. The nanowire grown by the VLS method could in turn act as a template for the growth of the second phase by the VLS method itself as described in the previous section. Porous alumina and polycarbonate have been used as templates for growth of superlattice heteronanowires by electrodeposition through sequential reduction of different ions100,119,120 as described in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration showing the steps of forming segmented metal NRs and NWs in hard templates by electrochemical deposition in a single-bath or alternating-bath procedure. In Step 1 an easily dissolvable metal is usually deposited (such as Ag, Cu, etc.) and then the electrochemical deposition of the metals of interest takes place. Depending on the reduction potentials of the metal couples either a single bath or an alternate bath procedure can be followed. The alternate bath process is tedious and lengthy however it leads to minimum contamination from the noble metal. (b) and (c) show examples of metal superlattice heterostructures of Cu/Co and Pt/Ni, respectively, obtained by a single bath technique using AAO or a polycarbonate template. (a), (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 100, 119 and 120, respectively. 
Anodized aluminium oxide (AAO) membranes are used as a template where once the nucleation followed by growth is completed, the template can be removed however in some cases the template would be retained as they add to the functionality of the nanostructures.116
The fabrication of the heterostructures by controlling heterogeneous nucleation is very system-specific and generally not a universal method. As the nature of the interface at the junction of two lattices determines the properties of the heterostructures it is crucial to have a fine control of the interface formation. However, in most of the cases the interface is expected to be defective and clear epitaxial relationships do not exist thus dampening the properties of the heterostructures. As heterostructures are designed to serve as multifunctional probes it is necessary to retain the intrinsic properties of the individual components. But in some cases, for instance, the growth of Au domains at the CdSe tips dampens the fluorescence efficiency of CdSe nanorods and in order to conserve the fluorescence, insulating domains would need to be built in between, further complicating the synthetic procedure. In most of the case the chosen synthetic routes employ either high temperature or expensive/toxic molecular precursors and organic solvents. This calls for developing greener synthetic routes especially targeting bioapplications and also in terms of reducing toxicity and cost.
In the following sections, we discuss several specific examples of nanoscale heterostructures synthesis developed in our group and in the literature with emphasis on the mechanism of formation of such structures.
3. 
        Case studies on nanoheterostructures synthesis
We demonstrate simple wet chemical routes for obtaining functional nanoheterostructures where heterogeneous nucleation of a precursor phase on a nanosubstrate is the key step. The attachment of the precursor and its loading can be tuned by altering reaction conditions; further controlled conversion to the phase of interest results in the formation of the nanoscale heterostructure. The resulting interface is free from any molecular linker and size control can be achieved without any external capping agent. A schematic description of the above strategy is given in Fig. 7. The formation of metal nanostructures supported on oxides or graphene support involves controlled reduction of a metal–ion precursor121,122 prenucleated on the support. On the other hand, obtaining SC–SC heterostructures involves controlled sulfidation/oxide formation from the precursor. Table 1 describes different heterostructures synthesized by nucleating appropriate precursors on nanosubstrates following the strategy described in this section. The Pt heterostructures based on the graphene support show enhanced electrocatalytic activity for methanol oxidation and ZnO/CdS exhibits enhanced photocatalytic activity towards degradation of methylene blue (MB) in sunlight.
 Fig. 7  Schematic description of formation of nanoheterostructures where heterogeneous nucleation of a precursor phase (metal ion) is followed by controlled conversion of the precursor to the final product. Tethering a low band gap material QD (CdS for instance) to a wide band gap SC (ZnO for instance) involves coating of the SC with the Cd2+ (as hydroxide/salt-nitrate, acetate, etc.) followed by sulfidation in aqueous medium. This involves a competition between dissolution and sulfidation of the precursor. This step can be controlled by the concentration of the sulfide and the pH of the medium and an optimum coating of CdS QDs on ZnO can be obtained as shown in (a). In obtaining the M–oxide/SC/C heterostructures the general protocol involves formation of an insoluble intermediate (Mn+) phase on the substrate which can be further reduced in a controlled manner to obtain the M particles on the substrate as shown in (b). In the case of Au, nanowires could be grown from the seeded particles on the substrate as shown in (c). The mechanism of Au nanowire growth is explained by oriented attachment along the 111 facet by removal of the capping as demonstrated in the box below (d and e). This leads to smoothing of the junction between two particles by atomic diffusion forming the wire as shown in the figure (adapted from ref. 122). 
Table 1 Precursor phases for the formation of various types of nanoscale heterostructures




Substrate/support
Precursor
Heterostructures




CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA

                  AuCl cubes
CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA–Au NP


CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA

                  Au NP
CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA–Au wires/tetrapods


CNT

                  Pt2+/Pt4+
CNT–Pt


GO

                  Pt2+/Pt4+
G–Pt


GO

                  Pt2+/Pt4++Ru intermediate
G–RuPt



                  ZnO
                

                  Cd2+

                  ZnO–CdS




3.1. Metal nanoparticle decorated carbon nanotubes
CNTs have emerged as unique supports for a variety of functional materials ranging from metal nanoparticles to semiconductor quantum dots. CNT-based heterostructures have been studied for catalysis, sensor, biomedical applications, mechanical properties, photovoltaics, capacitors and nanoelectronics.123Platinum nanoparticles or alloys of platinum are used as catalysts for methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction in PEMFCs.124,125 Dispersion of the noble metal nanoparticles on a support material ensures greater stability by preventing aggregation.126,127 CNTs as supports have distinct advantages due to their thermal and electrical conductivity, mechanical and chemical stability and high surface area.128–131 In comparison with carbon black which is the common catalytic support, CNTs offer better durability and better performance of the catalyst132,133 and Pt nanoparticles on CNTs show better CO tolerance compared to commercially available catalysts.134
Various methods have been developed for the synthesis of metal decorated CNTs. Reduction of the metal salt in the presence of pristine CNTs, thermal evaporation of Pt over CNTs or DC sputtering of Pt result in the formation of metal NPs on the CNT surface.135,136Self-assembly of catalyst nanoparticles on the surface of pristine CNT is another approach where the CNT surface is functionalized for better anchoring137 and for preventing aggregation of the nanoparticles.138
Among the various functionalization routes, non-covalent functionalization is non-destructive where molecules like poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate), poly(allylamine hydrochloride), (1-aminopyrene), poly(diallyldimethyl ammonium chloride) or aniline are bound to CNTs through non-covalent interaction and act as linkers for the metal ion precursor or metal nanoparticles.19,139–142 Methods involving the use of linkers such as imidazolium-salt-based ionic liquid are also employed to obtain metal particles on CNTs.143
Covalent functionalization induces permanent change on the surface as it employs reactive groups which can attach to another molecule through a covalent bond.144 The most common method adopted for covalent functionalization is the oxidation of CNTs using various oxidants such as HNO3, H2SO4, KMnO4, K2Cr2O7, polyphosphoric acid and H2O2. These treatments introduce hydroxyl (–OH), carboxyl (–COOH) and carbonyl (–CO) functional groups on the surface of CNTs which can act as anchoring sites for the metal ion precursor or metal nanoparticles.145
Recently, we demonstrated controlled attachment of ultrafine Pt NPs to functionalized CNTs using a two-step reduction method in an organic medium. The heterogeneous nucleation of a Pt intermediate (Pt+4 and Pt+2oxidation states) on the CNT surface leads to control over the size distribution and dispersion of the 2–3 nm sized particles as shown in Fig. 8.121TEM images show the attachment of the cube-shaped Pt intermediate uniformly on the functionalised CNT surface, which is a vital step for the formation of the heterostructures. Similarly other catalytic metals such as Pd, Au have also been synthesized on CNTs for various applications such as methanol oxidation or formic acid oxidation using the same principles of functionalization followed by reduction of the precursor onto the CNT surface or attachment of pre-synthesized nanoparticles on functionalized CNTs.146,147
 Fig. 8  Dark-field (a) and bright field (b) TEM images of platinum nanoparticles decorated on the wall of functionalised CNTs respectively (adapted from ref. 121). 
3.2. 
          Graphene oxide as a substrate

Graphene-based metal or semiconductor nanoparticles heterostructures have been demonstrated to be a promising candidate for photovoltaic devices,148–153lithium batteries,154,155catalysts156,157 and biosensors.64,65,158Graphene/Pt (G/Pt) and graphene/PtRu (G/PtRu) composites have been investigated largely for PEM fuel cell applications.159 However, in most of these cases, metal particle distribution in terms of size and loading is non-uniform and remains a challenging issue in designing these kinds of electrocatalysts.
It has been recognized that the number density of the oxygen functional moieties on the graphite oxide (GO) surface can be varied160,161 and that they are the potential anchors/nucleating centres for controlled growth of nanoparticles. However, their exact role in controlling the nucleation, growth and density of the catalyst particles remains inconclusive. Recently, we have shown that the strategy of nucleation of a metal precursor on the graphite oxide (GO) surface resulted in a high dispersion of ultrafine Pt and PtRu nanoparticles on graphene. Two different methods have been developed where the difference mainly lies in the kinetics of formation of the heterostructures. The conventional reflux method ensures more control over the formation of the intermediate stage i.e. the Pt and the Ru intermediates which were reduced to the alloy/bimetallic state.162 On the other hand, the microwave heating results in instant formation of the G–Pt heterostructures with excellent control over the particle size and distribution.45 Detailed investigation of the steps of formation of such heterostructures by both methods shows that the oxygen-bearing functional groups on graphite oxide play a key role in the anchoring of the metal ions to the surface. A subsequent synergistic co-reduction step allows for the reduction of GO to graphene and the formation of a highly uniform dispersion of nanoparticles on the reduced GO surface. Fig. 9 shows the TEM images of the synthesized graphene based metal heterostructures following the above strategy. For alleviating CO poisoning of the catalyst,163 alloying of Pt with Ru is a commonly used strategy. An alternative strategy has been replacing Pt with Au for instance to reduce the poisoning effect.164,165 In our case, the nucleation of both the metal precursors i.e. Pt(+2) and Ru-intermediate on the GO and its subsequent co-reduction using a strong reducing agent like borohydride result in fine dispersion of the PtRu alloy particles on reduced GO as shown in Fig. 9d. Graphene–Pt heterostructures synthesized by employing either of the strategies exhibit exceptional activity towards methanol oxidation. Thus the method opens up new possibilities to engineer graphene-based metal heterostructures which can exhibit multifunctionality depending on the metal counter part.
 Fig. 9  
TEM bright field image of the G–Pt nanoheterostructures synthesized by the microwave route (dark-field inset) (a) and the HRTEM in (b) showing a faceted Pt nanoparticle of 2 nm size adhered to the graphene sheet. (c) and (d) show the fine dispersion of Pt and RuPt nanoparticles on the graphene sheets obtained by nucleation of the precursor phase in toluene medium followed by borohydride reduction. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 45 and (c) and (d) are adapted from ref. 162. 
3.3. Metal nanoparticles on oxide supports
Metal heterostructures based on oxide supports have enhanced properties compared to the individual components due to the synergistic effect of the support and the metal making them suitable for various applications such as catalysis and sensing.166,167 Particularly, the catalysts based on supports like silica, TiO2, ZnO, Al2O3 are critical as they form industrially important heterogeneous catalysts. Also the support, used to anchor the metal nanoparticles, lowers the cost and improves the stability of the metal catalyst by preventing the sintering of the particles which is a key issue in the application of metal nanoparticles as catalysts.168 Apart from the morphology, the performance of the supported catalyst relies a lot on the nature of the metal–support interface. Pt, Au, Cu on various oxide supports like CeO2, TiO2, ZnO and MgO are shown to be active catalysts for water–gas shift reaction (WGS) and CO oxidation.169
A recent study shows that Au(111) is catalytically inactive for WGS as the activation energy barrier for water splitting is high and Au on ZnO(0001) is a poor WGS catalyst whereas Au/CeO2(111) is a good catalytic material for WGS.169 This indicates the role of the support for such catalysis. Another study on the shape and crystal-plane effects of nanoscale ceria on the activity of Au–CeO2 catalysts for the WGS shows that ceria nanorods ({110} and {100}) are better supports for anchoring and dispersing very fine gold clusters compared to ceria nanocubes ({100}) and nanopolyhedra ({100} and {111}).2 Energetically favorable formation of anion (O2−) vacancies at the {110} facet of CeO2 leads to a higher reducibility and activity of the Au–CeO2 surface for the WGS reaction. Theoretical modelling studies show that the crystallite size of CeO2, when increased from 4 to 60 nm, changes the concentration of oxygen vacancies by two orders of magnitude which directly affects the catalytic activity of the heterostructures.170,171
Current approaches of synthesis of the heterostructures involve physical methods such as thermal evaporation172 or sputtering173 and chemical routes such as deposition/precipitation174,175 or co-precipitation175–177 and impregnation of the support with the metal precursor solution followed by evaporation of the solvent and post-treatment like calcinations at desired temperature to cause the decomposition of the precursor to obtain metal particles on the support.178 Although these methods are used extensively, they result in larger size catalyst particles and polydispersity with non-uniform dispersion on the support.2,171,179–183 Besides these the deposition/precipitation technique is highly pH dependent and metal oxides cannot be deposited at lower pH, the method is not viable for several oxides like SiO2 or Al2O3.30,177,178,184Fig. 10(a) and (b) shows Au and Pd nanoparticle catalysts deposited on MgO nanocubes and ZnO nanobelts by combining the thermal evaporation and deposition–precipitation techniques.181
 Fig. 10  
            TEM micrographs of Au deposited on MgO nanocubes (a), and Pd on ZnO nanobelts (b), respectively, by a deposition–precipitation technique. (c) and (d) represent attachment of Au–CeO2 onto ZnO nanobelts by microwave radiation (adapted from ref. 181). 

Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD) is also used for obtaining metal nanoparticles on the oxide support. CVD has the advantage that metal deposition can be done on any kind of substrate and over large areas.47,185,186 Chemical methods based on the use of linkers are also used for the synthesis of such heterostructures.30,187 For example, noble metal nanoparticles of Au, Pt and Ag are attached to Fe2O3 using lysine as a linker in aqueous medium.188 Zheng and Stucky developed a method by which monodisperse Au nanoparticles are immobilized on various oxide supports via weak interactions between the metal NP and oxide support.189 Sonochemical and microwave assisted synthesis is also used for the synthesis of metals on oxide supports. Au on TiO2/SiO2 and Pt on CeO2/TiO2 have been synthesized using high intensity ultrasound.22,190–192 Microwave synthesis is used for the synthesis of Au and Pd nanoparticles on CeO2 and ZnO supports in an aqueous solution containing NaOH and PVP/PEG as a surfactant193 as shown in Fig. 10(c) and (d). Though there have been different methods demonstrated in the literature for the making of several supported metal catalysts yet the linkers and surfactants could not be avoided and the mechanism of evolution of the morphology and microstructure of the heterostructure is not often understood clearly.
3.4. Anisotropic nanoscale heterostructures
Metal–semiconductor heterostructures with an active heterojunction is highly desired for a wide range of applications including nanoelectronics, solar cells,194,195 catalysis35,196,197 and sensing.28Au-based anisotropic heterostructures are important for biological applications due to their low cytotoxicity and chemical stability combined with interesting optical properties. Silicon based metal heterostructures have been obtained in recent past which has added a new dimension to the silicon electronics. Interesting electrical properties of metal silicides have been exploited by making NiSi nanowires as circuit elements.198 The strategy of dissolving the interface between Ni and Si in the heterostructure resulted in an alloyed single component with an added advantage in terms of the transport behavior (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Schematic describing the synthesis of NiSi nanowires in (a) where a Si wire is coated with Ni and then reacted at 550 °C to form a NiSi alloy nanowire; the excess Ni is etched off to obtain the clean NiSi wire. (b) Bright field TEM of NiSi nanowires with an average diameter of about 20 nm (marked by arrows) (adapted from ref. 198). 
The template-assisted growth method as discussed earlier has been typically followed for synthesizing 1D metal and semiconductor nanostructures and striped metal/semiconductor heterostructures. As the dimension of the wire depends on the pore size (typically of the order of 100 nm), it poses a limitation for the technique in designing smaller diameter wires. Recently wet chemical synthesis of ultrathin single crystal gold nanowires opened up new possibilities of realizing molecular scale interconnects.122,199,200 However, exploring the transport behavior in such systems still remains a challenging issue in terms of nanodevice fabrication.201
Dispersion of metal nanoparticles on various nanostructures to obtain heterostructures has been demonstrated recently; however, site specific attachment of metal nanowires to substrates still remains a challenge. Unique routes of obtaining metal–semiconductor heterostructures have been presented earlier and related studies show the role of interface in modifying the electron dynamics in the system.202–205 We have recently demonstrated a simple wet-chemical route for nucleating and growing ultrathin single-crystal Au nanowires site-selectively from nanosubstrates of different materials.206 The approach involves heterogeneous nucleation of an AuCl precursor on the substrate and subsequent growth of the anisotropic nanostructure from the anchor points. The method has been successfully employed for growing single-crystal Au nanowires from different oxides and semiconductors including ZnO nanorods, MgO cubes, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and hydroxyapatite (HA) nanorods. Fig. 12(a)–(f) show representative bright-field TEM images of the molecular scale sub 2 nm Au nanowires with a high aspect ratio grown from different nanostructures. In all these cases, the nanowires seem to originate from and/or terminate on substrates, one end of the nanowire being always linked to the substrate. This method of growing wires from the substrate offers a clean interface to study transport properties of the wire as we see that bridging interconnects could be achieved as well (Fig. 12a and b). We also demonstrated the attachment of Au tetrapods to ZnO nanorods which indicated that the heterogeneous nucleation of the AuCl phase can be conceivably be extended to other types of anisotropic nanostructures. Since nanostructured intermediates are known to form in Pt121 and Pd also, our method could be adapted to synthesize single-crystal wires of these noble metals.
 Fig. 12  
            TEM images of ultrathin, single crystalline Au nanowires attached to a variety of nanostructures as indicated. The growth of the wires from the nanostructure surfaces was initiated by the nucleation of the AuCl phase on the surface and subsequent reduction to form ultrafine Au nanoparticles. The wires form by oriented attachment of particles from the Au anchor points on the nanostructure surfaces (ref. 206). 
3.5. Attaching quantum dots
The fundamental concept of tuning the band gap with particle size has been exploited to design new heterostructures that can fulfill the need of clean energy and atmosphere. In the past few decades, photovoltaic devices and photocatalyst materials are successfully developed based on the above insight. TiO2 and ZnO are two such wide band gap semiconductors that have been known to exhibit excellent UV light harvesting capability in acting as a photocatalyst for organic pollutant removal as well as a major component of a photovoltaic cell.207–209 Despite their photosensitivity, their activity is largely restricted to the ultraviolet (UV) region (4% of the entire solar spectrum) due to the large band gap of 3.2 eV. Apart from this, the recombination of e–h pair tends to reduce the efficiency significantly. In order to address these issues the most viable strategy adopted is to couple them with a semiconductor preferably a dye molecule210–219 or quantum dots1,24,220–222 which shows photoactivity in the visible zone of solar spectrum. The factors controlling the sensitization process are (a) the relative positions of the conduction bands (CB) of the wide and narrow band gap semiconductors and (b) the nature of the interfaces/heterojunction in the system.96,125 Higher position of the sensitizer CB is a requirement for the electron transfer to be facile223 and the kinetics of the process is thus largely dependent on the nature of the interface. The most common approach in obtaining sensitized ZnO and TiO2 is to tether the sensitizer using a molecular linker and size control is achieved using a capping molecule/template. The presence of the linkers could affect the electron transfer process at the heterojunctions and the dynamics of the transfer process also tends to change with the length of the linker molecule.24 Though this method gives monodispersity and uniform distribution of the low band gap material on the wide band gap semiconductor, the limitation lies in attaining a clean interface for the electron transport phenomenon. Several approaches are reported in the literature to obtain heterostructures of PbS/CdS–TiO2 and CdS–ZnO224–227 with active heterojunctions, however, very few observed high photoactivity of the heterostructures.228
Recently, we demonstrated a novel method of coupling narrow band gap semiconductor nanoparticles (CdS) to ZnO nanorods with an engineered interface.229 We followed the strategy of coating the nanosubstrate with a precursor of the sensitizer and its subsequent conversion to the desired nanostructure as shown in the schematic in Fig. 7. The absence of a molecular linker ensures an active heterojunction which is reflected in high photocatalytic activity of the heterostructure under sunlight. The loading of CdS and the nature of interface are tuned by the synthesis conditions as shown in Fig. 13(a)–(c). TEM bright field images show that an increase in concentration of the sulfiding agent results in higher loading of CdS on ZnO. At the same time an increase in pH of the medium alters the chemistry at the interface to a large extent as described by the schematic in Fig. 13d. All these factors contribute significantly to the optical properties like band gap and photoluminescence and therefore tuning the catalytic behaviour of the composites. The lowest CdS loading shows highest visible light catalytic degradation of methylene blue (MB) which is inferred owing to the maximum electronic interaction at the interface of ZnO and CdS. The formation of a buffer layer of Zn1−xCdxS at higher loading of CdS hinders the facile electron transport at the interface thereby reducing the activity of the catalyst as detailed in the report.
 Fig. 13  
            Bright-field TEM images of ZnO/CdS nanoscale heterostructures synthesized using different initial concentrations of the sulfiding agent, Na2S. The precursor nitrate phase was formed on the surface of ZnO nanorods and subsequently converted to the sulfide phase. (a) ZC-1, 0.025 M, (b) ZC-3, 0.1 M and (c) ZC-4, 1 M of Na2S. (d) Possible mechanism of formation of ZnO/CdS nanoscale structures with the interfacial reactions (ref. 229). 
All the above mentioned strategies have the significant advantage of producing heterostructures with excellent control over the structure, interface and chemistry. However, the drawback is that the methods are system-specific and widely varying mechanisms are responsible for heterogeneous nucleation of the precursor phase. For instance, the affinity of the Pt ions towards the oxygen-bearing functional groups of functionalized CNTs or graphene oxide is primarily responsible for the excellent dispersion of Pt-based nanoparticles on these supports. It is not immediately obvious that this can be directly used for other metal nanoparticles; different strategies need to be employed in that case. Also, new chemistry needs to be developed for the conversion of this precursor phase to the final desired nanostructure. While sulfidation of Cd and Pb nitrate precursors is relatively straightforward, newer methodologies need to be devised for other types of nanoparticles.
4. Conclusions
Nanoheterostructures of different categories exhibit different synergistic relation between two or more components improving the functional behaviour. In some cases, one component plays the role of a support whereas the other component shows enhanced activity while in other cases, both the components play a complementary role to impart multifunctionality. In this perspective, we discussed about different strategies adopted for building nanoheterostructures. We described our strategies of maximizing the interaction at the interface of the building units of heterostructures of different types like metals on CNTs and graphene, oxide and combination of widely different band gap semiconductors at the nanoscale. The mechanism of nucleation and growth of such heterostructures are discussed which is essential to control the interfacial character and the morphology of the heterostructures; this then governs the property of the nanoscale heterostructures. We believe that this understanding of the mechanism of formation of different heterostructures is critical and will be useful for designing and synthesizing multifunctional nanoheterostructures for a variety of advanced applications.
Acknowledgements
NR thanks CSIR, Nanomission-DST and ISRO for funding. PK acknowledges Bristol Myers Squibb Graduate Fellowship. EAA thanks UGC for a senior research fellowship. The electron microscopes are a part of the Advanced Facility for Microscopy and Microanalysis (AFMM) at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.
Notes and references
X. Y. Lang, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2008, 7, 5–9 CrossRef .
R. Si and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2884–2887 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Li, N. Wang, X. Quan and Y. Chen, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2008, 62, 727–732 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhai, X. Fang, Y. Bando, Q. Liao, X. Xu, H. Zeng, Y. Ma, J. Yao and D. Golberg, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 949–959 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Boucher, S. Goergen, N. Yi and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2517–2527 RSC .
I. Lee, R. Morales, A. Manuel, A. Albiter and F. Zaera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 15241–15246 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, W. Nie, X. Liu, S. Tian, Y. Zhang and X. Ji, Small, 2008, 4, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .
B. Viswanath, P. Kundu, A. Halder and N. Ravishankar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16866–16883 CAS .
A. Halder, P. Kundu, B. Viswanath and N. Ravishankar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4763–4772 RSC .
B. Viswanath, P. Kundu and N. Ravishankar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 330, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Ahmadi, Z. L. Wang, T. C. Green, A. Henglein and M. A. El-Sayed, Science, 1996, 272, 1924–1925 CAS .
B. Viswanath, P. Kundu, B. Mukherjee and N. Ravishankar, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 195603 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, N. Wu, B. H. Wunsch, R. J. Barsotti and F. Stellacci, Small, 2006, 2, 1046–1050 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Saunders, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25421–25429 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, M. Chen, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang, R. L. White and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 379–382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kudera, L. Carbone, M. F. Casula, R. Cingolani, A. Falqui, E. Snoeck, W. J. Parak and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 445–449 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gorelikov and N. Matsuura, Nano Lett., 2007, 8, 369–373 CrossRef .
K. A. Dick, S. Kodambaka, M. C. Reuter, K. Deppert, L. Samuelson, W. Seifert, L. R. Wallenberg and F. M. Ross, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1817–1822 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, Y. Q. Liu, L. Fu, L. C. Cao, D. C. Wei and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2431–2437 CrossRef CAS .
K.-W. Kwon and M. Shim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10269–10275 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, J. H. Wu, H. L. Liu, J. U. Cho, M. K. Cho, B. H. An, J. H. Min, S. J. Noh and Y. K. Kim, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Pol, A. Gedanken and J. Calderon-Moreno, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1111–1118 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183–3188 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rehman, R. Ullah, A. M. Butt and N. D. Gohar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 170, 560–569 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019–7029 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Qian, K. Wang, Y. Li, H. T. Fang, Q. H. Lu and X. L. Ma, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 100, 82–84 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, M. Sakurai, M. Liao and M. Aono, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 114, 19835–19839 Search PubMed .
W.-C. Li, M. Comotti and F. Schuth, J. Catal., 2006, 237, 190–196 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Chang, C.-H. Lai, J.-T. Hsu, C.-H. Tang, W.-C. Liao and H.-L. Huang, Clin. Oral Invest., 2011, 15, 1–6 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang and J. Mu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 309, 478–484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, L. Zheng, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng and K. Wei, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6980–6986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, C. Chen, Y. Zhan, X. Lin, Q. Zheng, K. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10773–10777 CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y. Chang, Y. Zhang, S. Ma, Y. Qu and C. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255, 1996–1999 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Joshi, Q. Hu, F. Alvi, N. Joshi and A. Kumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16199–16202 CAS .
M. Shafiei, P. G. Spizzirri, R. Arsat, J. Yu, J. du Plessis, S. Dubin, R. B. Kaner, K. Kalantar-zadeh and W. Wlodarski, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13796–13801 CAS .
J. Hu Young, L. Dae-Sik, C. Hong Kyw, L. Duck Hyun, K. Ji-Eun, L. Jeong Yong, L. Won Jong, K. Sang Ouk and C. Sung-Yool, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 213105 CrossRef .
J. C. Kim, H. K. Jun, J.-S. Huh and D. D. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, 45, 271–277 CrossRef .
R. Rella, A. Serra, P. Siciliano, L. Vasanelli, G. De, A. Licciulli and A. Quirini, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, B44, 462–467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, I. V. Lightcap, K. Goodwin, M. Matsumura and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2222–2227 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kauffman, Y. Tang, P. D. Kichambare, J. F. Jackovitz and A. Star, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1877–1881 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2826 RSC .
P. Kundu, C. Nethravathi, P. A. Deshpande, M. Rajamathi, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2772–2780 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Qiu, G.-C. Wang, R.-P. Liang, X.-H. Xia and H.-W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(31), 15639–15645 CAS .
M. Okumura, S. Nakamura, S. Tsubota, T. Nakamura, M. Azuma and M. Haruta, Catal. Lett., 1998, 51, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, D. Xie, Y. Li, G. Lu and S. Li, React. Kinet. Catal. Lett., 2008, 95, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Tranchemontagne, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 8553–8557 CrossRef CAS .
D. Britt, D. Tranchemontagne and O. M. Yaghi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 11623–11627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meilikhov, K. Yusenko, D. Esken, S. Turner, G. Van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 3701–3714 CrossRef CAS .
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deka, A. Quarta, M. G. Lupo, A. Falqui, S. Boninelli, C. Giannini, G. Morello, M. De Giorgi, G. Lanzani, C. Spinella, R. Cingolani, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2948–2958 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Selvan, P. K. Patra, C. Y. Ang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mattoussi, J. M. Mauro, E. R. Goldman, G. P. Anderson, V. C. Sundar, F. V. Mikulec and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12142–12150 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Wang, F. Chai, C.-G. Wang, L. Li, H.-Y. Liu, L.-Y. Zhang, Z.-M. Su and Y. Liao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 358, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Heitsch, D. K. Smith, R. E. Patel, D. Ress and B. A. Korgel, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1590–1599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Yang, H. Ko, S. J. Oh, J. Kang, J.-H. Son, K. Lee, S.-W. Lee, H.-G. Yoon, J.-S. Suh, Y.-M. Huh and S. Haam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 258–264 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, D. Weihs and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14403–14405 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mirkovic, N. S. Zacharia, G. D. Scholes and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1782–1789 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Wheat, N. A. Marine, J. L. Moran and J. D. Posner, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13052–13055 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sundararajan, P. E. Lammert, A. W. Zudans, V. H. Crespi and A. Sen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1271–1276 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kagan, P. Calvo-Marzal, S. Balasubramanian, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, G.-U. Flechsig and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12082–12083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mao, G. Lu, K. Yu, Z. Bo and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3521–3526 CrossRef CAS .
S. Myung, A. Solanki, C. Kim, J. Park, K. S. Kim and K.-B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2221–2225 CrossRef CAS .
Z. I. Alferov, ChemPhysChem, 2001, 2, 500–513 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 468–471 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Li, Y. A. Wang, W. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567–12575 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Milliron, S. M. Hughes, Y. Cui, L. Manna, J. Li, L.-W. Wang and A. Paul Alivisatos, Nature, 2004, 430, 190–195 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Cozzoli, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1195–1208 RSC .
R. Costi, A. E. Saunders and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4878–4897 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Bollmann, Crystal Defects and Crystalline Interfaces, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1970 Search PubMed .
A. Brokman and R. W. Balluffi, Acta Metall., 1981, 29, 1703–1719 CrossRef CAS .
A. Trampert and K. H. Ploog, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2000, 35, 793–806 CrossRef CAS .
B. Q. Li and J. M. Zuo, Surf. Sci., 2002, 520, 7–17 CrossRef CAS .
H. McDaniel and M. Shim, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 434–440 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Protière and L. Li, Small, 2009, 5, 154–168 CrossRef CAS .
J.-I. Park and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5743–5746 CrossRef CAS .
W.-R. Lee, M. G. Kim, J.-R. Choi, J.-I. Park, S. J. Ko, S. J. Oh and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16090–16097 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Sobal, M. Hilgendorff, H. Mohwald, M. Giersig, M. Spasova, T. Radetic and M. Farle, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 621–624 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and H.-P. Too, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19208–19212 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mokari and U. Banin, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3955–3960 CrossRef .
H. Kim, M. Achermann, L. P. Balet, J. A. Hollingsworth and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 544–546 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, B. Wang, J. Zeng, X. Wang, S. Zhang and J. G. Hou, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3684–3687 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dorfs and A. Eychmuller, Z. Phys. Chem., 2006, 220, 1539–1552 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. van Embden, J. Gomez, D. E. Mulvaney and P. M. Giersig, Aust. J. Chem., 2007, 60, 457–471 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zeng and S. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kan, W. Cai, C. Li, L. Zhang and H. Hofmeister, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, 1609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Lee, M. Kim, Z. H. Kim and S. W. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17036–17037 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, H. Petrova, A. R. Sekkinen, J. Chen, J. M. McLellan, Z.-Y. Li, M. Marquez, X. Li, Y. Xia and G. V. Hartland, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19923–19928 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shim and H. McDaniel, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2010, 14, 83–94 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gu, R. Zheng, X. Zhang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5664–5665 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, H. Zeng, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, M. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 875–881 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, Z. Bai, L. Yang, J. Lv, K. Wang, Y. Guo, Y. Cao and J. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 6036–6041 CrossRef .
K. Hiruma, M. Yazawa, T. Katsuyama, K. Ogawa, K. Haraguchi, M. Koguchi and H. Kakibayashi, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 447–462 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, J. Goldberger and P. Yang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2004, 34, 83–122 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mieszawska, R. Jalilian, G. U. Sumanasekera and F. P. Zamborini, Small, 2007, 3, 722–756 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89–91 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Morales and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1998, 279, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jung, D.-K. Ko and R. Agarwal, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 264–268 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Fan, P. Werner and M. Zacharias, Small, 2006, 2, 700–717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paladugu, J. Zou, G. J. Auchterlonie, Y. N. Guo, Y. Kim, H. J. Joyce, Q. Gao, H. H. Tan and C. Jagadish, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 133115-1–133115-3 CrossRef .
M. Paladugu, J. Zou, Y.-N. Guo, G. J. Auchterlonie, H. J. Joyce, Q. Gao, H. Hoe Tan, C. Jagadish and Y. Kim, Small, 2007, 3, 1873–1877 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Y. Bando, U. K. Gautam, T. Zhai, S. Gradecak and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5683–5689 RSC .
U. K. Gautam, Y. Bando, L. Bourgeois, X. Fang, P. M. F. J. Costa, J. Zhan and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4414–4420 RSC .
S. P. Ahrenkiel, O. I. Micic, A. Miedaner, C. J. Curtis, J. M. Nedeljkovic and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 833–837 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Grebinski, K. L. Hull, J. Zhang, T. H. Kosel and M. Kuno, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5260–5272 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Trentler, K. M. Hickman, S. C. Goel, A. M. Viano, P. C. Gibbons and W. E. Buhro, Science, 1995, 270, 1791–1794 CAS .
T. Hanrath and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1424–1429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kan, A. Aharoni, T. Mokari and U. Banin, Faraday Discuss., 2004, 125, 23–38 RSC .
J. D. Holmes, K. P. Johnston, R. C. Doty and B. A. Korgel, Science, 2000, 287, 1471–1473 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, B. K. Kelley and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12738–12739 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Sone, E. R. Zubarev and S. I. Stupp, Angew. Chem., 2002, 114, 1781–1785 CrossRef .
O. Carny, D. E. Shalev and E. Gazit, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1594–1597 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Liang, Y.-G. Guo, J.-S. Hu, C.-F. Zhu, L.-J. Wan and C.-L. Bai, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .
L. Piraux, J. M. George, J. F. Despres, C. Leroy, E. Ferain, R. Legras, K. Ounadjela and A. Fert, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 2484–2486 CrossRef CAS .
A. Halder, S. Sharma, M. S. Hegde and N. Ravishankar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1466–1473 CAS .
A. Halder and N. Ravishankar, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1854–1858 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Schnorr and T. M. Swager, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 646–657 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Burstein, C. J. Barnett, A. R. Kucernak and K. R. Williams, Catal. Today, 1997, 38, 425–437 CrossRef CAS .
K.-W. Kwon, B. H. Lee and M. Shim, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6357–6363 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, J. Zhang, H. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 507–522 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Schnorr and T. M. Swager, Chem. Mater., 2010, 23, 646–657 CrossRef .
C. Wang, M. Waje, X. Wang, J. M. Tang, R. C. Haddon and Y. Yan, Nano Lett., 2003, 4, 345–348 CrossRef .
P. Serp, M. Corrias and P. Kalck, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 253, 337–358 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, J. Chen, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1076–1098 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, D. Gournis, V. Tzitzios, L. Pasquato, D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2679–2694 RSC .
T. Matsumoto, T. Komatsu, H. Nakano, K. Arai, Y. Nagashima, E. Yoo, T. Yamazaki, M. Kijima, H. Shimizu, Y. Takasawa and J. Nakamura, Catal. Today, 2004, 90, 277–281 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Qiu, Z. Zhou, G. Sun and Q. Xin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6292–6299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mu, H. Liang, J. Hu, L. Jiang and L. Wan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22212–22216 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bittencourt, M. Hecq, A. Felten, J. J. Pireaux, J. Ghijsen, M. P. Felicissimo, P. Rudolf, W. Drube, X. Ke and G. Van Tendeloo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 462, 260–264 CrossRef CAS .
N. Soin, S. S. Roy, L. Karlsson and J. A. McLaughlin, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2010, 19, 595–598 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, X. Wang, F. Yang, C. Yang and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2579–2587 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Saha and A. Kundu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6255–6261 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Q. Yang, S. Sun, J.-P. Dodelet and E. Sacher, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11717–11721 CAS .
Z. Sheng, Y. Shao, G. Yin and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7995 RSC .
S. Wang, S. P. Jiang and X. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 265601 CrossRef .
C.-H. Hsu, H.-Y. Liao and P.-L. Kuo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7933–7939 CAS .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1269–1272 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1853–1859 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, B. Zhao, C. Guo, Y. Sun, Y. Shi, H. Yang and Z. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 351, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu and T. Imae, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2416–2420 CAS .
C. M. Hill, Y. Zhu and S. Pan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 942–951 CrossRef CAS .
J. McClain and J. Schrier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14332–14338 CAS .
Y.-B. Tang, C.-S. Lee, J. Xu, Z.-T. Liu, Z.-H. Chen, Z. He, Y.-L. Cao, G. Yuan, H. Song, L. Chen, L. Luo, H.-M. Cheng, W.-J. Zhang, I. Bello and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3482–3488 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, S. Sun, T. Salim, S. Wu, X. Huang, Q. He, Y. M. Lam and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5263–5268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, K. Park, M. Durstock and L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1113–1118 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Y. Yang, M. Durstock, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5633–5640 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Wen, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3187–3194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. K. Sharma, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang, M. Srinivasan, S. Mhaisalkar, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8400–8406 CAS .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mulhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. J. Zhen, Y. Zhang, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12815–12821 CAS .
H. Wu, D. Wexler and H. Liu, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1057–1062 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Compton, B. Jain, D. A. Dikin, A. Abouimrane, K. Amine and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4380–4391 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3270–3271 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nethravathi, E. A. Anumol, M. Rajamathi and N. Ravishankar, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 569–571 RSC .
A. Velazquez-Palenzuela, F. Centellas, J. A. Garrido, C. Arias, R. Maria Rodriguez, E. Brillas and P.-L. Cabot, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4399–4407 CAS .
J. Luo, P. N. Njoki, Y. Lin, D. Mott, L. Wang and C.-J. Zhong, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2892–2898 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mott, J. Luo, P. N. Njoki, Y. Lin, L. Wang and C.-J. Zhong, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, CATTECH, 2002, 6, 102–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chen and D. W. Goodman, Science, 2004, 306, 252–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Farmer and C. T. Campbell, Science, 2010, 329, 933–936 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rodriguez, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. Evans and M. Pérez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1329–1332 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Zhou and W. Huebner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3512–3514 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carrettin, P. Concepción, A. Corma, J. M. López Nieto and V. F. Puntes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2538–2540 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Sadeghi and V. E. Henrich, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1984, 19, 330–340 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kobayashi, M. Haruta, S. Tsubota, H. Sano and B. Delmon, Sens. Actuators, B, 1990, 1, 222–225 CrossRef .
M. Khoudiakov, M. C. Gupta and S. Deevi, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 987–990 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, S. Tsubota, T. Kobayashi, H. Kageyama, M. J. Genet and B. Delmon, J. Catal., 1993, 144, 175–192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, N. Yamada, T. Kobayashi and S. Iijima, J. Catal., 1989, 115, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yazid, R. Adnan, S. A. Hamid and M. A. Farrukh, Turk. J. Chem., 2010, 34, 639–650 CAS .
Y. Matsumura, M. Okumura, Y. Usami, K. Kagawa, H. Yamashita, M. Anpo and M. Haruta, Catal. Lett., 1997, 44, 189–191 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia, J. R. Vargas, M. A. Valenzuela, M. Rebollar and D. Acosta, MRS Online Proc. LIbr., 1999, 549, 237–242 CAS .
E. Garbowski, C. Feumi-Jantou, N. Mouaddib and M. Primet, Appl. Catal., A, 1994, 109, 277–291 CrossRef CAS .
G. Glaspell, H. M. A. Hassan, A. Elzatahry, L. Fuoco, N. R. E. Radwan and M. S. El-Shall, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21387–21393 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, A. Weber and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Catal. Lett., 2001, 77, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, S. M. Mahurin, Z. Pan, S. H. Overbury and S. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10480–10481 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, Catal. Surv. Jpn., 1997, 1, 61–73 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, Catal. Today, 1997, 36, 153–166 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Chen and C.-T. Yeh, J. Catal., 2001, 200, 59–68 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Persaud and T. E. Madey, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 56, 10549 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Guo, S. Wu and S. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8108–8116 CAS .
N. Zheng and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14278–14280 CrossRef CAS .
V. Belova, T. Borodina, H. Möhwald and D. G. Shchukin, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18, 310–317 CrossRef CAS .
N. Perkas, H. Rotter, L. Vradman, M. V. Landau and A. Gedanken, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7072–7077 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shanmugam and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18707–18712 CAS .
G. Glaspell, L. Fuoco and M. S. El-Shall, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17350–17355 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekharan and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10851–10857 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928–3934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valden, X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, Science, 1998, 281, 1647–1650 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. Xiang, C. Yang, W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2004, 430, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huo, C.-K. Tsung, W. Huang, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2041–2044 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and S. Sun, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 1028–1034 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Hu, C. M. Lieber and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8902–8903 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mokari, C. G. Sztrum, A. Salant, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 855–863 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg, I. Popov, R. Costi and U. Banin, Science, 2004, 304, 1787–1790 CrossRef CAS .
D. Steiner, T. Mokari, U. Banin and O. Millo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 056805 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, M. Sakurai, M. Liao and M. Aono, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19835–19839 CAS .
P. Kundu, A. Halder, B. Viswanath, D. Kundu, G. Ramanath and N. Ravishankar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 20–21 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Konstantinou and T. A. Albanis, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 49, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Bhatkhande, G. V. Pangarkar and A. A. C. M. Beenackers, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2002, 77, 102–116 CrossRef .
M. A. Rauf and S. S. Ashraf, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 151, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ye, J. Qi, Z. Qi, X. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5806–5809 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Mikroyannidis, M. S. Roy and G. D. Sharma, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5391–5398 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ganapathy, B. Karunakaran and S.-W. Rhee, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5138–5143 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, S. Guldin, M. Stefik, P. Tiwana, M. C. Orilall, S. Hüttner, H. Sai and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1787–1796 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Sun, K. Xie and C. Lin, Sci. China, Ser. B: Chem., 2009, 52, 2148–2155 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, P. Shin, L. Cao and D. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 125–129 CAS .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, X. Hu, X. Zhao and M. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14973–14979 CAS .
K. S. Yao, D. Y. Wang, C. Y. Chang, W. Y. Ho and L. Y. Yang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 2699–2702 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, S.-H. Lee, S. O. Kang and W. Choi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2477–2479 RSC .
Q. Sun and Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 113, 12387–12394 Search PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
J. Nayak, S. N. Sahu, J. Kasuya and S. Nozaki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 7215–7218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, Z. Shao, X. Lu, Y. Liu, L. Cao and Y. He, J. Environ. Sci., 2009, 21, 991–996 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Huang, C. S. Kan, P. S. Khiew and S. Radiman, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 2411–2415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Geng, D. Chen and Z. Jiang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2008, 10, 729–736 CrossRef CAS .
G.-S. Li, D.-Q. Zhang and J. C. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 7079–7085 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tak, S. J. Hong, J. S. Lee and K. Yong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2627–2632 CAS .
P. Wu, H. Zhang, N. Du, L. Ruan and D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8147–8151 CAS .
J.-J. Wu and C.-H. Tseng, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kundu, P. A. Deshpande, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4209–4216 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
Table Content:

Paromita Kundu
	Paromita Kundu obtained her BSc Chemistry in 2005 from Presidency College, Calcutta University. She joined IISc under the Integrated PhD program and completed her MS (Chemical Sciences) in 2008. She is currently pursuing her PhD in Materials Research Centre at IISc. Her current research interests include understanding morphology evolution in nanocrystals and designing nanoscale heterostructures of metal and semiconductors with engineered interfaces for catalytic and nanoelectronics applications.

E. A. Anumol
	E. A. Anumol is currently a PhD student in the Materials Research Centre at Indian Institute of Science. She completed her MSc in Chemistry from Mahatma Gandhi University in 2005. Her present research includes synthesis of porous and hollow nanostructures and hybrid nanomaterials for heterogeneous catalysis and energy applications.

C. Nethravathi
	C. Nethravathi is currently a senior research associate in the Materials Research Center (MRC) at the Indian Institute of Science. She earned her MSc (Chemistry) in 2003 and completed her PhD in 2009 at St. Joseph's College, Bangalore. Her research interests include exfoliation of layered solids (anionic/cationic clays, graphite oxide) and using the exfoliated layers as precursors in synthesis of functional layered composites.

N. Ravishankar
	N. Ravishankar is currently an Associate Professor in the Materials Research Centre at the Indian Institute of Science. His primary research interests include understanding the mechanisms of nucleation and growth of nanostructures and hybrids for a variety of applications. His group specializes in the use of electron microscopy as a tool for obtaining insight into nanostructure growth, assembly and stability.

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the morphological classification of heterostructures where (a) Core–shell structure which could be composed of M–M/SC–SC/M–SC and can be either equiaxed or anisotropic; (b) M–MOF structure where the metal nanoparticle remains stabilized within a metal–organic framework (MOF); (c) metal nanoparticles/SC quantum dots decorating the oxide or carbon support/substrate; (d) Striped M–M anisotropic heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 1  Examples of different types of heterostructures synthesized by various physical and chemical methods. (a) Selective growth of Au nanoparticles at the tip of CdS nanorods (ref. 14), (b) Au–Fe3O4 dumb-bell obtained by epitaxial growth of Fe3O4 on Au (ref. 15), (c) PbSe nanodots grown at the tip of CdS nanorods (ref. 16), (d) shows SiO2-coated Au nanorods (ref. 17), (e) Si–GaP heterostructure grown under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) conditions by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) in in situTEM to understand the growth mechanism in real time (ref. 18), (f) CNT–Pt heterostructures (ref. 19), (g) high resolution TEM image of the γ-Fe2O3/ZnS heterostructure obtained due to large lattice mismatch (ref. 20), (h) free-standing Fe–Au barcode nanowires obtained by electrodeposition (ref. 21), (i) Au nanoparticles deposited on silica sub-microspheres by a sonochemical method (ref. 22).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Frank–van der Merwe growth mode where the second component deposited completely wets the surface of the first component which is governed by their respective surface energies and the interfacial energy; (b) Volmer–Weber model describes a transition from the previous case when the summation of the surface energy of the second component and the interfacial energy is greater than the surface energy of the first component; (c) Stranski–Krastanov growth mode is a case where a thick layer of the second phase forms which results in a high elastic energy and in order to relax that it tends to break up into isolated islands as shown.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of different strategies of growing core–shell morphology of heterostructures where one component forms a shell around the other. (a) describes a method where successive ion adsorption takes place followed by a chemical reaction to form the compound (adapted from ref. 79), (b) and (c) also describe a similar technique where the metal precursor is reduced in the second step of the reaction forming the shell. (d) shows the effect of polarity of the solvent where a polar solvent favours a uniform shell formation around the pre-nucleated seed (from ref. 90).	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic describing the effect of non-polar solvent in dictating the morphology of heterostructures. (a) Anisotropic heterostructures resulting due to site-specific nucleation of the second component owing to a non-polar medium (ref. 90). (b) Possible morphology of anisotropic heterostructures that can be obtained from an equiaxed seed crystal. TEM images of different Fe3O4/II–VI semiconductor heterostructures have been shown as examples where the seed crystal is Fe3O4 (adapted from ref. 94).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the VLS growth mechanism which involves formation of a catalyst liquid droplet as shown in (a) followed by alloying, nucleation and growth of nanowires. (b) Monophase nanowire growth, (c) shows the formation of a superlattice nanowire by alternating the reactant precursor and (d) shows growth of a coaxial nanowire formed by coating with a different material on the preformed wire (from ref. 105).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration showing the steps of forming segmented metal NRs and NWs in hard templates by electrochemical deposition in a single-bath or alternating-bath procedure. In Step 1 an easily dissolvable metal is usually deposited (such as Ag, Cu, etc.) and then the electrochemical deposition of the metals of interest takes place. Depending on the reduction potentials of the metal couples either a single bath or an alternate bath procedure can be followed. The alternate bath process is tedious and lengthy however it leads to minimum contamination from the noble metal. (b) and (c) show examples of metal superlattice heterostructures of Cu/Co and Pt/Ni, respectively, obtained by a single bath technique using AAO or a polycarbonate template. (a), (b) and (c) are adapted from ref. 100, 119 and 120, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic description of formation of nanoheterostructures where heterogeneous nucleation of a precursor phase (metal ion) is followed by controlled conversion of the precursor to the final product. Tethering a low band gap material QD (CdS for instance) to a wide band gap SC (ZnO for instance) involves coating of the SC with the Cd2+ (as hydroxide/salt-nitrate, acetate, etc.) followed by sulfidation in aqueous medium. This involves a competition between dissolution and sulfidation of the precursor. This step can be controlled by the concentration of the sulfide and the pH of the medium and an optimum coating of CdS QDs on ZnO can be obtained as shown in (a). In obtaining the M–oxide/SC/C heterostructures the general protocol involves formation of an insoluble intermediate (Mn+) phase on the substrate which can be further reduced in a controlled manner to obtain the M particles on the substrate as shown in (b). In the case of Au, nanowires could be grown from the seeded particles on the substrate as shown in (c). The mechanism of Au nanowire growth is explained by oriented attachment along the 111 facet by removal of the capping as demonstrated in the box below (d and e). This leads to smoothing of the junction between two particles by atomic diffusion forming the wire as shown in the figure (adapted from ref. 122).	 

CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA	
                  AuCl cubes	CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA–Au NP
CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA	
                  Au NP	CNT/ZnO/MgO/HA–Au wires/tetrapods
CNT	
                  Pt2+/Pt4+	CNT–Pt
GO	
                  Pt2+/Pt4+	G–Pt
GO	
                  Pt2+/Pt4++Ru intermediate	G–RuPt

                  ZnO
                	
                  Cd2+	
                  ZnO–CdS

 	Fig. 8  Dark-field (a) and bright field (b) TEM images of platinum nanoparticles decorated on the wall of functionalised CNTs respectively (adapted from ref. 121).	 

 	Fig. 9  
TEM bright field image of the G–Pt nanoheterostructures synthesized by the microwave route (dark-field inset) (a) and the HRTEM in (b) showing a faceted Pt nanoparticle of 2 nm size adhered to the graphene sheet. (c) and (d) show the fine dispersion of Pt and RuPt nanoparticles on the graphene sheets obtained by nucleation of the precursor phase in toluene medium followed by borohydride reduction. (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 45 and (c) and (d) are adapted from ref. 162.	 

 	Fig. 10  
            TEM micrographs of Au deposited on MgO nanocubes (a), and Pd on ZnO nanobelts (b), respectively, by a deposition–precipitation technique. (c) and (d) represent attachment of Au–CeO2 onto ZnO nanobelts by microwave radiation (adapted from ref. 181).	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic describing the synthesis of NiSi nanowires in (a) where a Si wire is coated with Ni and then reacted at 550 °C to form a NiSi alloy nanowire; the excess Ni is etched off to obtain the clean NiSi wire. (b) Bright field TEM of NiSi nanowires with an average diameter of about 20 nm (marked by arrows) (adapted from ref. 198).	 

 	Fig. 12  
            TEM images of ultrathin, single crystalline Au nanowires attached to a variety of nanostructures as indicated. The growth of the wires from the nanostructure surfaces was initiated by the nucleation of the AuCl phase on the surface and subsequent reduction to form ultrafine Au nanoparticles. The wires form by oriented attachment of particles from the Au anchor points on the nanostructure surfaces (ref. 206).	 

 	Fig. 13  
            Bright-field TEM images of ZnO/CdS nanoscale heterostructures synthesized using different initial concentrations of the sulfiding agent, Na2S. The precursor nitrate phase was formed on the surface of ZnO nanorods and subsequently converted to the sulfide phase. (a) ZC-1, 0.025 M, (b) ZC-3, 0.1 M and (c) ZC-4, 1 M of Na2S. (d) Possible mechanism of formation of ZnO/CdS nanoscale structures with the interfacial reactions (ref. 229).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2011
