Solar H 2 production systems: current status and prospective applications   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2GC00292B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2GC00292B
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 5379-5402Solar H2 production systems: current status and prospective applications†

        
          
            Noemi 
            Pirrone
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Federico 
            Bella
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Simelys 
            Hernández
          
          
        
      *a
aCREST group, Department of Applied Science and Technology, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, 10129, Torino, Italy. E-mail: simelys.hernandez@polito.it
bElectrochemistry Group, Department of Applied Science and Technology, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, 10129, Torino, Italy
Received 
      21st January 2022
    , Accepted 19th May 2022First published on 2nd June 2022AbstractThe effect of anthropological greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions on climate change is a staple of globalized civilization, which makes carbon-rich fossil fuel replacement an emergency. In this context, solar H2 plays a fundamental role as it can be easily used as a green energy vector in many applications, ranging from transportation to industry. Sun-driven water splitting devices for H2 production are a perfect example of the circular economy concept, as they use a renewable energy source to split water into H2 and O2, which in turn can be used in combustion engines, producing water as a by-product. This technology has still many limitations and needs a strong breakthrough to be considered in the market. The aim of this review is to precisely outline, from a critical point of view, the recent developments in this field. In particular, the three fundamental types of devices, i.e. photocatalytic (PC), photoelectrochemical (PEC) and photovoltaic-electrolyzer (PV-EC), are firstly described in terms of fundamental working principles. Then, a recent state-of-the-art update underlines the main progress in materials optimization and device engineering, pointing out the limitations of large-scale application of these systems. Sun-driven H2 production feasibility is regarded also from an economical point of view based on recent literature data, focusing on the future possibilities of the technology integration in the world energy supply scenario.Noemi PirroneNoemi Pirrone is pursuing her PhD program in Materials Science and Technology at Politecnico di Torino, under the supervision of Prof. Simelys Hernández and Prof. Federico Bella. In 2021, she obtained her Master's degree in Chemical and Sustainable Processes Engineering at Politecnico di Torino, discussing a thesis on the development of a lab-scale device for solar hydrogen production. Before entering the PhD course, she received a research scholarship to study the topic of electrochemical water treatment for bacteria removal. Now, her main field of research is the electrochemical nitrogen reduction to ammonia in aqueous electrolytes.Federico BellaFederico Bella is a Full Professor of Chemistry at Politecnico di Torino, Italy. In the Electrochemistry Group he leads the research activities on post-Li batteries, electrochemical nitrogen reduction and hybrid photovoltaics. Due to his important achievements in energy chemistry, he received the “ENI Award” and the “Roberto Piontelli Award” from the President of the Italian Republic. In 2021, he was the recipient of the USERN Prize, awarded among 10000 candidates by a jury of previous Nobel awardees. He is the author of 95 international publications (h-index 64) and he leads the ERC project SuN2rise, a 1.5 M€ EU grant for redesigning the NH3 production process.Simelys HernándezSimelys Hernández is an Associate Professor of Chemical Plants at Politecnico di Torino, Italy. In the CREST Group she leads the research activities on novel photo-electrocatalytic processes for the sustainable production of chemicals and fuels by water splitting, CO2 reduction, wastewater treatment and industrial waste recycling. She is the author of >90 international publications (h-index 31). She has been the technical coordinator of H2020 EU projects (SuCOChem (https://suncochem.eu/), RECODE (https://recodeh2020.eu/), Celbicon (https://www.celbicon.org/), Artiphyction (https://www.artiphyction.org/) and Eco2CO2 (https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/309701/it)) for developing technologies for green H2 production and CO2 capture and utilization from the lab-scale (TRL2/3) to the pilot scale (TRL5/6).
1 Introduction
Concerns about increasing global warming are drawing attention towards a switch to net-zero CO2 emission energy supply. As a matter of fact, one of the Paris Agreement aims is to hold the increase of the global temperature below 2 °C.1 Unfortunately, if the actual trend is maintained, by 2100, anthropogenic CO2 levels could reach more than 540 ppm and global temperature could suffer a 1.9 °C increase.2 Thus, the future of energy supply must be oriented toward renewable energy sources, such as sunlight, wind and geothermal heat. Among them, solar energy seems to be the most approachable as it is endless and it covers all of the Earth's surface. Moreover, it is so abundant that it can easily meet the global energy demand. Photovoltaics (PVs) represent the most widespread technology converting solar irradiation into electricity. PV devices are growing rapidly and, up to now, Si and multijunction solar cells can reach 30% and 47% efficiency values, respectively.3 Moreover, the electricity cost from PVs is undergoing a 13% decrease every year.4 One of the main drawbacks of PVs is the unstable power generation due to the intermittent nature of solar irradiation, which cannot provide electrical continuity to the final user. Energy storage technologies, i.e., batteries, capacitors or supercapacitors, must be integrated with PVs in order to fulfil the energy demand during dark periods. However, since these devices often show low accumulation efficiencies, elevated costs and short lifetimes, there is a need to find another solution that is able to guarantee power continuity.
In this context, solar power can be converted into energy carriers, which can be used anytime and anywhere by the consumer. H2 is the best candidate as an energy carrier because it can be used as a fuel in internal combustion engines and can also produce electricity in proton-exchange membrane fuel cells, demonstrating its potential not only as an energy carrier, but also as a fuel for vehicles. When combined with O2 in either combustion or electrochemical processes, H2 produces energy (−285.8 kJ mol−1 (ref. 5)) with water as a by-product. Thus, H2 combustion has zero greenhouse gas emissions, owing to the highest energy density compared to any fuel (143 MJ kg−1, three times higher than gasoline). Unfortunately, it is highly diffusive in the surrounding air and has the lowest volumetric energy density under ambient conditions (0.11 MJ L−1), which makes its storage challenging. H2 is highly explosive as, in the presence of air and under heat sources, it ignites immediately. Nevertheless, it must be said that the hazards of fire and explosion are no more dangerous than other fuels, so this does not represent a considerable drawback.
Currently, H2 world demand is primarily supplied by steam methane reforming (SMR), which emits a great amount of CO2. Sun-driven water splitting devices represent a sustainable and economical way to convert solar energy into H2, as water is directly converted into H2 and O2 because of the absorption of sunlight from a semiconductor material. Thus, the theoretical advantage of this process lies in the abundance of the raw material needed, i.e. water and solar energy. Nevertheless, the difficult design of efficient, large scale and low-cost catalyst devices hinders the progress of this technology. First and foremost, the main obstacle is the discovery of an efficient light absorber material, which can provide the energy needed for overall water splitting (OWS) reactions, and secondly, the creation of low-cost, efficient and stable catalysts for H2 and O2 evolution reactions. All the critical aspects of the technology will be illustrated in the body of this review, sifting through all the current state-of-the-art laboratory tests, in order to update previous work released in 2019.6–8 At the end, the comparison between all the available technologies will enable us to identify the most promising system and give some perspectives for further development towards a competitive H2 production method.
2 Photoelectrochemical water splitting: theoretical insights
Light induced charge generation in semiconductors is at the basis of understanding photoelectrochemical systems. Briefly, in those materials current is generated when a source of light with energy (hν) higher than the material band gap (Eg) hits the surface so that electrons can flow from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB). The so generated charge carriers can be employed to perform electrochemical reactions. Doping is essential to alter the number of charged carriers, thereby increasing the conductivity; semiconductors with donor impurities can provide electrons to the crystal structure and electrons are the majority carriers (n-type), while acceptor impurities remove electrons so that holes are the majority carriers (p-type).9,10
In photoelectrochemical water splitting, a light absorber material (semiconductor) is used to provide the current flow needed for the reaction to occur. Overall, solar water splitting is a non-spontaneous reaction with ΔG = 237.2 kJ mol−1 (ΔE° = 1.23 V).11 To conduct the reaction, the semiconductor should absorb radiation with a photon energy higher than 1.23 eV, corresponding to light with wavelengths lower than 1000 nm, which includes all of the visible spectrum. The light absorption process produces electron–hole pairs: an electron will fill the CB, while a hole will be left in the VB. The overall water splitting needs two electron–hole pairs per H2 molecule and four electron–hole pairs per O2 molecule. The general reaction mechanism is explained as follows: Semiconductor + hν → e−cb + h+vb(1) OER: 2H2O + 4h+vb → O2 + 4H+(2) HER: 2H+ + 2e−cb → H2(3) OWS: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2(4)where the OER is the O2 evolution reaction and the HER is the H2 evolution reaction. Moreover, semiconductors must have an appropriate band position: the CB must be more negative than the H2 reduction potential, while the VB must be more positive than the O2 reduction potential, as shown in Fig. 1. At the semiconductor/liquid interface, the electron transfer process suffers losses due to concentration and kinetic overpotentials, which is the potential surplus to the thermodynamic one necessary to drive the HER and the OER. Thus, the real energy requirement for overall solar water splitting was calculated to be between 1.6 and 2.4 eV.11 An important aspect to be considered in the selection of adequate semiconductor materials is that, when Eg increases, the absorption wavelength decreases. Thus, to exploit all the solar spectrum, it is important to select a material with the minimum needed Eg value.9
 Fig. 1  Semiconductor/liquid junction: charge carrier transport mechanism. Potential expressed in V vs. standard hydrogen electrode at pH 0. 
Accordingly, the photo-excited electron–hole pair migrates to the surface separately. This mechanism is always in competition with the charge recombination process, which leads to heat dissipation. The charge carriers generated are part of H2 and O2 evolution reactions, respectively, occurring at catalytically active sites.11 In general, photoabsorbers can be classified on the basis of their optical properties in a single band gap configuration (S2) and a dual band configuration (D2 or D4). The former configuration, shown in Fig. 2(a), consist of a single semiconductor material and it requires two photons to produce one molecule of H2. The latter configuration (Fig. 2(b)) involves the stacking of two semiconductors with different band gap energies and band positions, forming heterojunctions, which can increase the light absorption efficiency by covering complementary portions of the solar spectrum.12 The D2 and D4 configuration difference is the number of photons required to produce one molecule of H2, which are 2 and 4, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Single band gap light absorber (S2); (b) dual band gap light absorber (D2 or D4). 
2.1 Solar water splitting devices
Solar water splitting devices can be classified into three major categories (Fig. 3): PC systems, PEC water splitting cells and PV-EC systems.
 Fig. 3  Solar water splitting devices: (a) PC system, (b) PEC, and (c) PV-EC system. 
In terms of technology and device components, PC systems are the simplest water splitting devices. In fact, the photocatalyst is simply immersed in the electrolyte, without the need for electrical connections, so that the charge transfer pathway is short and the reactions are faster. Ideally, H2 and O2 are both generated on the same particle, so these systems require a downstream gas separation system. Photocatalysts are composites made of a light-harvesting semiconductor and one or more co-catalysts, in which the semiconductor is responsible for providing electron–hole pairs, while the co-catalyst is responsible for both the HER and OER, as well as for the suppression of backward reactions, which are more favourable and can occur on the surface of the particle, considering that a bare photocatalyst is active towards both oxidation and reduction reactions. Electron–hole recombination and light harvesting efficiencies are the major source of energy losses, which make concurrent H2 and O2 production difficult in pure water. The best strategy to overcome this problem is to use a sacrificial agent as intermediate electron donors (or acceptors), that reacts with the VB hole (or the CB electrons) for the production of H2 and O2. Such sacrificial agents are chosen to better straddle the band edges, making the reactions more thermodynamically favourable and enhancing charge separation. Methanol, ethanol, glycerol, and Na2SO3 are the common choice for this purpose.13,14 This expedient has an economic impact on the final price of H2 and environmental pollution drawbacks, due to the continuous addition of reactants and the degradation of these compounds in water, which must be treated at the end of the process. Thus, despite the overall system simplicity, the above-mentioned critical aspects, together with flow control problems and photocatalyst instability in the medium, make these systems less efficient and viable than their PEC and PV-EC counterparts.
PECs are generally made by semiconductors (photoanodes and/or photocathodes) connected to charge collectors and electrically connected to each other. Only the light absorber side of the photoelectrode is in contact with the electrolyte phase, while the charge collector side is isolated from the liquid. A basic PEC can be constructed by a single p-type photocathode and an O2 catalytic anode or by an n-type photoanode and a H2 catalytic cathode, separated by a membrane to prevent gas crossover and to efficiently separate H2 and O2in situ. When the photoelectrode surface is illuminated photogenerated charges produced can either recombine or react at the surface of the material for H2 or O2 production. These configurations need an external voltage to compensate for the overvoltage and overall losses. A viable way to provide this voltage is to combine the photocathode/photoanode with a PV cell. An unbiased operation, also referred to as unassisted, can be achieved also in a cell made by both a photoanode and a photocathode in which the photovoltage generated from the photoelectrodes is larger than the overall water splitting potential including all the cell overpotentials. Photoelectrode materials in this configuration can be both wired or wireless. In the first case, the photoelectrodes are separated and the electrical connection is external; in the second case, the semiconductors are directly in ohmic contact. The main drawbacks of these configurations concern mainly the efficiency of light absorption, in fact, before reaching the photoelectrode, the incident light needs to travel through the electrolyte or the back contact of the substrate (depending on the configuration). Such a pathway decreases the photon flux and the photogenerated current, affecting the overall performance. Additionally, the contact between the photoelectrode and the electrolyte in the presence of an electric field may cause irreversible material degradation, leading to stability loss. The complexity and performance of the overall system depend on the choice of the photoelectrode, which is composed not only of a light absorber, but also of a catalyst layer, a protective layer and a substrate.15,16
PV-EC devices stem from the idea to make the largely employed water electrolysis more environmentally friendly, through the use of a well-established renewable source of energy as a power source. PV-EC systems are assembled by a PV device electrically connected to an electrolysis cell, containing well-selected electrocatalysts. The energy needed for water splitting is totally provided by the PV unit, while the HER and OER occur at the electrocatalyst/electrolyte contact in the electrolyzer unit. Thus, the efficacy of PV-EC systems depends both on PV and electrocatalyst performances. Electrocatalysts can be both wired to PV cells or directly deposited as nanofilms. The latter case is more complex and requires adequate protection to prevent the PV unit corrosion. This type of device offers a lot of advantages compared to its PC and PEC counterparts: light-absorber corrosion and stability problems of the semiconductor are absent because the PV unit is not directly in contact with the liquid phase; thanks to the fact that photogeneration of charges and electrocatalysis occur separately, the system is easily scalable, freely modulating PV and electrocatalyst dimensions. During the design of a PV-EC device, PVs and electrolyzer parameters are the key specifications to consider. PV performance indicators are efficiency, defined as the percentage of incident solar energy converted into electrical one, and the open circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current (Jsc), which are the maximum voltage available when no current is flowing and the maximum current obtained when the potential across the device is zero, respectively. The electrolyzer performance is commonly indicated through efficiency, defined as the combustion energy of the H2 produced divided by the electrical input, and by the water splitting overpotential, which depends on the material employed as a catalyst. When a PV system is connected with an electrocatalytic cell, the operating current and voltage become the same for those parts. In fact, the operating point is determined by intersecting current–voltage curves of PV cells and electrocatalysts. The biggest source of losses in this process is the mismatch between the PV unit and the electrolyzer; indeed, PV maximum power is supplied under certain current–potential operating conditions, and thus the electrolyzer should work under these conditions, to avoid huge energy losses.17,18
2.2 Figures of merit
The most common term used to describe the performance of all the types of devices described in the previous section is the so-called solar-to-H2 efficiency (ηSTH), which is determined under the standard solar irradiation of 1 sun (100 mW cm−2) without any applied external bias. ηSTH can be defined as the amount of chemical energy produced by H2 combustion against the incident solar energy. (5)where rH2 is the H2 production rate and ΔG is the H2 combustion free energy. The H2 production rate is directly linked to the generated photocurrent density (Jph) at the operating voltages, so ηSTH can also be written as follows: (6)where ηF (faradaic efficiency) represents the ratio between the real H2 produced and the theoretical quantity obtainable with the same Jph.
On the other hand, PC devices are often assessed through the apparent quantum efficiency (AQY), defined as: (7)where n represents the number of electrons involved in the reaction, R is the production rate and I is the rate of incident photons.6
To understand how large is the room for improvement of solar water splitting devices, some studies report the maximum theoretical ηSTH (ηSTH,T) as a function of three main characteristics: the light absorption fraction, strictly linked to the material band gap, the charge carrier transport efficiency and the catalytic exchange current density. Considering the idealistic conditions of complete absorption of all photons, perfect charge transport, no resistances, negligible catalytic overpotentials and unit ηF, ηSTH,T is only a function of the band gap. In PC and PEC devices, for a single semiconductor material of 1.59 eV band gap ηSTH,T is around 30%, while for a dual semiconductor of 0.52/1.40 eV ηSTH,T is around 40%. A more realistic situation, considering the existing high performances of materials, photon absorption losses, resistances and catalyst overpotentials, leads to 15% ηSTH,T for a single semiconductor of 2.05 eV band gap and 28% for a dual semiconductor with 0.9/1.6 eV band gaps.19,20 On the other hand, ηSTH for PV-EC devices can be seen as: (8)where ηPV is the photovoltaic efficiency, expressed as the maximum attainable power (PMP) with respect to the total input power (Ptot), and ηEC is the electrolyzer efficiency, which can be written as the ratio between the power obtained from the H2 produced (PH2) and the input power (PEC). C is the power coupling factor, which accounts for the fact that the working point of the system does not coincide with the PMP. If there is an optimal match between the electrolyzer I–V curve and photovoltaic PMP, PEC is equal to PMP and C = 1, otherwise C is below 1.21 Such an expression suggests that ηSTH,T will depend on both photovoltaic and electrolyzer efficiency and coupling optimization. According to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), the highest photovoltaic efficiency achieved up to now is around 50%,22 while the electrolyzer efficiency ranges from 56% to 73%.23 Considering C = 1, ηSTH,T ranges from 30% to 36%, while for C = 0.5 these values diminish by half, underlining the importance of an optimal match.
3 State-of-the-art
Before addressing the current state-of-the-art, it is necessary to clarify what are the specifications that could make this technology competitive with the well-established H2 production methods (e.g., steam reforming, etc.). According to the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), solar-derived H2 can find a place in the market only if a capital cost of 2.10 $ per kg is achieved. Techno-economic reports suggest that the only way to reach this target is to create an industrial-scale device with ηSTH between 10% and 25% and a lifetime of at least 10 years.24 In this context, it is important to identify the most promising devices and materials which could lead the solar water splitting technology to reach these goals.
3.1 PC systems
Photocatalysts used in PC systems can be classified into one-step photoexcitation systems and two-step photoexcitation systems. One-step photoexcitation systems are made by a single semiconductor material (S2 configuration); photogenerated electrons and holes diffuse on the surface where they participate in the HER and OER. Besides, two-step photoexcitation systems, also called the “Z-scheme” due to their resemblance with natural photosynthesis, are made by a combination of two types of semiconductors (D2 and D4 configurations), separately employed in H2 and O2 production.25 The contact between the two semiconductors can be guaranteed indirectly, through a redox mediator, or directly, through a solid state electron mediator.26,27
Recent updates of photocatalytic materials for water splitting are presented in Table 1. We can appreciate that the most used photocatalyst materials for water splitting are CN, BiVO4, ZnS, SrTiO3 and InGaN composites. The activity toward the HER and OER and charge separation is usually guaranteed by the addition of co-catalyst materials, such as Ru, Au, Pt, etc. Up to now, these materials are not able to overcome the barrier of 5% ηSTH. Due to this issue, in the last few years not so much research has been conducted on these systems. Among the most relevant works, Zhao et al. analysed a two-dimensional (2D) CN photocatalyst, reaching an AQY equal to 11.2% and stability for more than 7 h, without using sacrificial agents.28 Instead, Wang et al. coupled four InGaN nanowire arrays with different Eg values to enhance light absorption. The formulations chosen were In0.35Ga0.73N, In0.27Ga0.73N, In0.2Ga0.8N and GaN, with Eg values of 2.1 eV, 2.4 eV, 2.6 eV and 3.4 eV, respectively. Such multi-band InGaN nanowire arrays were integrated on a nonplanar Si wafer and exhibited a ηSTH of 5.2% (under 23 suns) and stable operation for more than 8 h. The unique structure reached is easily scalable by adding new panels and higher ηSTH values can be achieved by incorporating a suitable co-catalyst.29 ZnS-based materials are one of the most promising photocatalysts for water splitting, but they only absorb UV light. In this regard, Liu et al. synthesized a (Zn0.95Cu0.05)0.6Cd0.4S solid solution as a photocatalyst for the HER, based on a metal–organic framework (MOF)-templated method, to make the material active also under visible light. The material demonstrated an improvement in H2 production for ZnS-based materials, showing an AQY of 7.9% and stability for more than 40 h given by the protective action of ZnCu on CdS photocorrosion.30 Another strategy to absorb the visible light portion is the dye sensitization, commonly used to make TiO2 suitable for H2 production.31 After the absorption of visible light by the dye molecule, the photo-excited electrons are transferred to the semiconductor and used for H2 evolution.32,33 The most popular dyes are organometallic complexes, among all ruthenium complexes, and organic molecules.34
Table 1 State-of-the-art (*AQY, **sacrificial agent, *** μmol h−1 cm−1)




 
H2 production rate, μmol h−1 g−1

η
STH, %
Stability, h
Electrolyte, pH
Ref.





One-step excitation













p–n CN
270.95
11.2*
>7
Na2SO4
Zhao et al.28


In0.35Ga0.65N/In0.27Ga0.73N/In0.2Ga0.8N/GaN
1848***
5.2 (23 sun)
8
Water, pH 7
Wang et al.29


(Zn0.95Cu0.05)0.6Cd0.4S
4150.1
7.91*
>40
Na2S·9H2O/Na2SO3**
Liu et al.30



Two-step excitation














OEP


HEP













CoOx/BiVO4/Au
Rh@Cr2O3/ZrO2/TaON
1300
0.5
12
NaH2PO4, pH 6
Qi et al.41


RuOx/Mo:BiVO4
Rh@Cr2O3/La,Rh:SrTiO3
—
1.2
17
Water, pH 6.8
Wang et al.42


Bi4NbO8Cl
d-ZCS-P


0.15
6
0.5 M Na2SO4
Ng et al.43


MIL-125-NH2(Ti)
Zn0.5Cd0.5S
92498
30.8*
>16
Na2S·9H2O/Na2SO3**
Guo et al.44


DMA3BiI6
MA3Bi2I9
198.2
3,5
>100
HI**
Tan et al.45




As can be noticed in Table 1, most of the reported results are obtained using sacrificial agents as hole scavengers, which can increase the effective charge and prevent recombination. Furthermore, photocatalyst corrosion due to the reaction with OH radicals is limited, as they combine with the sacrificial agent rather than react with the material. The work of Wang et al. involved the study of the performance of various sacrificial agents in common photocatalysts, like ZnCd based, TiO2 and/or g-C3N4. A clear enhancement of photocatalytic H2 production was observed in all cases thanks to the addition of a hole scavenger. In particular, Na2S and Na2SO3 showed better durability compared to carboxylic acids, which were deactivated due to photo-oxidation after a short period of time.35 Those molecules are highly expensive and may affect particularly the produced H2 cost.36 For this reason, the idea to use biomass waste for its resemblance to the sacrificial agent role is more and more appealing. This process is usually called photoreforming and represents a sustainable alternative to photocatalytic water splitting, in which H2 evolution occurs simultaneously with biomass degradation to value-added products, such as methanol, ethanol, glycerol, etc.37,38 In this case, biomass acts as sacrificial agents, in an irreversible reaction, undergoing oxidation at a lower energy than water.39,40
A strategy to improve ηSTH is to employ two different photocatalysts for the HER and OER. While discussing about two-excitation step systems in which charge recombination is provided by a redox mediator, it is noteworthy to cite the work by Qi et al., which achieved a 10% AQY in a system made by Ru@Cr2O3/ZnO2-modified TaON and CoOx/BiVO4/Au as H2 and O2 evolution photocatalysts and [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− as a redox mediator.41 On the other side, while discussing about charge recombination via a solid material as a mediator, the work of Domen et al. can be illustrated as an example: they created an efficient RuOx/Mo:BiVO4-Ru/La,Rh:SrTiO3 system using both Au and C as a charge mediator and reached 1.1% and 1.2% ηSTH, respectively.42 Recently, Ng et al. developed a system made by P-doped Zn0.5Cd0.5S1−x (d-ZCS-P) as a HEP and Bi4NbO8CL as an OEP, embedded on N-doped carbon nanotubes as a solid mediator, which showed 0.15% ηSTH.43 The performance of ZnxCd1−xS with different ratios of Zn and Cd was also investigated by Guo et al., who indicated Zn0.5Cd0.5S as the best compound for photocatalytic activity. To improve the exposed active sites, they combined Zn0.5Cd0.5S with MIL-125-NH2(Ti), a MOF with excellent light absorption and a suitable CB position. The compound was a mediator-free two-step excitation system and it showed 30% AQY and stability for more than 16 h.44 In recent years, attention moved towards perovskite-type materials; in particular, Tan et al. synthesized a bismuth-based perovskite photocatalytic system (MA3Bi2I9/DMA3BiI6) heterostructure for HER via the solvothermal method. Using HI as a sacrificial agent, the junction between two perovskite materials can improve the H2 evolution rate with respect to the photocatalysts taken individually (198.2 μmol h−1 g−1 compared with 12.3 of MA3Bi2I9 alone and 24.5 of DMA3BiI6 alone). The construction of the heterojunction improved also the overall stability without using noble-metal coverage, which would have increased the overall cost nullifying the efforts to create an approachable technology. The resulting AQY is ∼3.5% under 1 sun illumination and the stability was proven for over 100 h.45
3.2 PEC systems
PEC performance depends on photoanode and photocathode selection. Photoanodes are n-type semiconductors in which electrons are excited to the CB leaving holes in the VB, with a consequent flow of electrons (generated by water oxidation) from the aqueous electrolyte to the photoelectrode material. Instead, photocathodes are p-type semiconductors in which excited electrons are transferred to the solution, where the H2 reduction occurs.

3.2.1 Photoelectrodes. 
Photoanode and photocathode efficiency is assigned by Jph developed at 1.23 VRHE and 0 VRHE, which represents the OER and HER standard potentials, respectively. Common photoanodes are n-type metal oxide semiconductors, such as TiO2, WO3, Fe2O3 and BiVO4, which are significantly stable in water and, therefore, require less complex protective layers. These materials need some implementation due to their relatively large Eg, which leads to poor optical properties, poor conductivity and low charge carrier mobility.
BiVO4 and hematite (Fe2O3) are among the most promising photoanodes, and a lot of progress has been made in the development of strategies to improve their efficiency and stability. In particular, BiVO4 suffers from photocorrosion due to V5+ ion dissolution from the lattice. Lee et al. solved the problem of photocorrosion for NiOOH/FeOOH/BiVO4 (NiOOH/FeOOH added as an OER catalyst) using a V5+ saturated electrolyte, which can retard the rate of V5+ dissolution from the photoanode on the basis of Le Châtelier's principle, thus improving the photoelectrode stability and reaching a current density of 5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 eV.46 Photoconversion efficiency can be improved by obtaining better bulk and surface charge mobility through the optimization of porosity, photoelectrocatalyst thickness and doping techniques. Rao et al. combined all these methods to synthesize coated WO3 nanowires with a thin layer of W doped BiVO4; the system reached a current density of 3.1 mA cm−2 under 1 sun and stability for 1 h without degradation.47 BiVO4 light absorption can be broadened using a visible-light sensitizer, among which N, S co-doped carbon nanosheets (NSCNs) stand out since they are earth-abundant and non-toxic. Fig. 4(a) displays the structure of a photoanode made by anchoring NSCN to BiVO4; CoP, acting as an OER catalyst, is connected to the photoactive substrate through poly(aniline) (PANI), a flexible and stable hole transporting layer. This layer acts both as BiVO4 protection, thus enhancing the stability up to 10 h, and as a charge carrier, boosting Jph up to 4.46 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE.48 On the other hand, Shim et al. dealt with the problem of photoelectrochemical activity by controlling the grain and the pore size. The Mo:BiVO4 morphology was varied by adding different molecular weights of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) to the precursor solution, discovering that the addition of PEG (200 g mol−1) leads to better charge separation efficiency as a consequence of the largest pore sizes (199 nm). The addition of a NiFeOOH layer, acting as an OER catalyst, made it possible to produce a Jph of 4.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE and to perform stable operation for more than 10 h.49
 Fig. 4  Photoanode materials: (a) BiVO4-NSCN/PANI@CoPi. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (b) CoAl LDHs/α-Fe2O3. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019. (c) WO3/CdS/NiOOh/Co–Pi. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019. (d) Al spiked Ni/SiO2/Si. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021. (e) NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
Hematite possesses an Eg value of 2.2 eV and a theoretical ηSTH of 15%, but the most important advantages are its earth abundance and the high stability in alkaline water. Up to now, Jph for this material is around 4 mA cm−2, changing from case to case as a function of the morphology, doping techniques, and co-catalyst employed.50,51 Recently, Chong et al. increased the photocurrent density up to 4.30 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE using exfoliated CoAl-LDHs (layered double hydroxides) as OER catalysts on α-Fe2O3. As illustrated in Fig. 4(b), the catalyst is assembled on the surface of the photoabsorber through PO43− bonding, mimicking a p–n junction; superior catalytic efficiencies are reached thanks to the LDH structure, in which the edge sites of the octahedral structure can act as active sites, with high surface areas owing to exfoliation.52
TiO2 and WO3 show good stability and electrical properties towards the OER, but they show low current density values (1–3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 eV) because of their large Eg values. The fact that the current generated is low means that the production rate of O2 and H2 in a PEC will be very low. Strategies to narrow the Eg, and thus improve the generated current density, are the addition of some co-dopants, such as W, Mo, N or Al, that can create anodic and cathodic impurities modifying the electronic band structure, or the combination with a photosensitizer material. In this field, the CdS layer was used by Li et al. to compensate poor visible light absorption of WO3. The photoabsorber was covered with NiOOH and the Co–Pi catalyst layer to enhance the OER rate and to protect the electrode against photocorrosion, since NiOOH offers good hole storage and Co–Pi offers good hole-transfer services. Such a heterostructure, schematically summarized in Fig. 4(c), could achieve a photocurrent density 6.4 times higher than bare WO3 (2.59 mA cm−2 at 1.23 eV).53
Furthermore, semi-stable nitrides and oxynitrides, such as Ta3N5 and TON, have been proposed as photoanode materials, thanks to their appropriate Eg values. The problem with these compounds is their degradation in water solutions, which makes them require sophisticated protective layers. An interesting result in this field was obtained by Liu et al., who optimised this material following the photosystem II working principle; Ni(OH)x together with ferrihydrite (Fh) to extract photogenerated holes, preventing their accumulation on TaN5. The thickness of this protective layer was investigated until a photocurrent density of 12.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE was achieved (Fig. 4(e)).54
A particular class of photoanodes is represented by buried junction, PV-grade semiconductors composed of elements like Si, Ga, In, Cd, S, Ge, etc., and a protective layer against corrosion. These photoabsorbers, combined with a protective layer and a catalytic layer, can provide current density values higher than 27.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE.55 Metal insulation with SiOx is commonly employed to prevent semiconductor corrosion, but too large thickness could decrease the overall efficiency since current losses are generated in the pathway to the solid/electrolyte interface. To meet this necessity, Lee et al. covered the surface of a p+–n Si with SiO2 and created a local conductive path through Al spiking, which made the insulating material more efficient in photogenerated charge transport. The Al layer was substituted with Ni as an OER catalyst. As shown in Fig. 4(d), the catalyst at some point is directly in contact with the semiconductor, allowing the shortening of the charge pathway. With a 35% Ni surface coverage, the material can generate a current of 32 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE showing stability for more than 7 h.56
Photocathodes are constituted by a p-type semiconductor with an ideal Eg of 1.23 eV. Similarly to photoanodes, the materials commonly used as light absorbers are metal oxides, oxy (nitrides) and PV-grade materials. Cu2O is the metal oxide most commonly reported in the literature as the photocathode, because with its Eg of 2 eV it can reach a theoretical 18% ηSTH. The inconvenience of this material is that it suffers reduction by photoelectrons, due to the fact that its redox potential falls in the water splitting potential window. Thus, it needs adequate surface protection to perform stable operation, such as the more stable TiO2, in which the CB is traversed by Cu2O photogenerated electrons, reacting at the TiO2/electrolyte interface.57 The protective layer, together with the morphology of the oxide, enables it to reach great photocurrent densities and high durability.58 Carbon is also commonly used for that purpose as demonstrated by Kunturu and Huskens, who found an easy and cost-effective experimental method to obtain an efficient photocathode made by a porous granular bilayer Cu2O/CuO/C composite with a carbon protective layer. The material was prepared by surfactant-free electrodeposition on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) using aqueous glucose as a solution, followed by thermal oxidation (Fig. 5(a)). Performance characterization showed a current density of −7.5 mA cm−2 and stability for over 50 h provided by the carbon layer protection.59 Besides that, excellent results in the photocathode were obtained with PV grade light absorbers such as Si, Cu–In–Ga–Se (CIGS) and III/V semiconductors. For example, Pt and the CdS surface-modified CIGS photocathode demonstrated impressive performance in H2 production, proved by a current density >−27 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE in neutral electrolytes.60Fig. 5(b) shows an efficient photocathode configuration, in which CdS is used to create a p–n junction with CIGS, while TiO2 is added as a protective layer. Al2O3 between the junction and TiO2 can increase the charge transport efficiency, as it is able to passivate the interface. Instead, the HER is performed on Pt with a high surface area.61 It is important to underline the necessity of protective layers, which should be able to compensate for the low stability of these materials in aqueous solutions. Nowadays, this is the main challenge, which prohibits their use on a large scale. Si-Based materials are among the most attractive photocathodes in the field of PVs because of their high activity if coupled with an electrocatalyst. However, these materials are unstable in acidic media, so they need a protective layer that does not inhibit the transfer of photogenerated electrons. SrTiO3 is a good candidate as it has a minimum CB offset and it is stable in the water splitting potential range. The combination of this material with Pt as a catalyst can bring the activity of the overall photocathode to a great value (−35 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE).62 In 2019, Wang et al. demonstrated stability for more than 200 h and a photocurrent density of −34.7 mA cm−2 in a pn+-Si/Ta2O5/Pt photocathode (Fig. 5(c)). Ta2O5 showed good properties as a protective layer against the solution compared to TiO2 and allowed it to exploit the entire solar spectrum.63 An important goal was obtained by Lee et al., who investigated antimony triselenide (Sb2Se3), a low-cost p-type semiconductor (Fig. 5(d)). They focused their attention on the research of a hole-selective layer capable of transporting holes preventing electron backflow, and found that Cu-doped NiOx is an effective bottom contact layer, allowing the photocathode to increase its current density from −10 to −17.5 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE.64
 Fig. 5  Photocathode materials: (a) Cu2O/CuO/C. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) CIGS/CdS/Al2O3/TiO2/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (c) pn+-Si/Ta2O5/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) Cu:NiOx/Sb2Se3/TiO2/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 


3.2.2 Perovskite photoelectrodes. 
As perovskite solar cells (PSCs) are emerging as promising PV alternatives, increasing interest is arising for a possible application of this material as a photoelectrocatalyst, able to provide good light absorption capacities even if mostly composed of organic materials. Perovskite materials refer to a class of solids with a cubic lattice-nested octahedral layered structure. These materials attract attention for their potential use in photoelectrochemistry because of their good optical and electrical properties, low charge recombination probability, high carrier lifetimes and diffusion lengths.65,66Fig. 6 shows the perovskite general structure ABX3, in which A and B are cations, and X is an anion. Basically, cation A (generally constituted by CH3NH3+, also called MA+ or CH(NH2)2+, also called FA+) is surrounded by twelve X (Cl−, Br− or I−) anions in the form of a cuboctahedron, while cation B (Pb2+, Sn2+) is located in the octahedral site of X. The most interesting aspect of perovskite light absorbers is that their specific absorption peaks can be adjusted by changing the metal ions and halogens of the structure: different metal–anion bonding results in a change in both valence and conduction energy levels, while different A organic cations result only in a change of the conduction band level. The biggest obstacle to perovskite applicability in PECs is its instability in humid environments, due to the high hygroscopicity of organic compounds, resulting in their water-induced detachment from the crystal structure, leading to an overall crystallinity change.67 Perovskite-based photoabsorbers are generally composed of the perovskite, a passivation layer to prevent degradation, an electron transporting layer and a hole transporting layer, the function of which is to facilitate the extraction of electrons and holes.68
 Fig. 6  Perovskite crystalline structure. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from MDPI, copyright 2020. 
Perovskite photoelectrodes can be used both for the OER and HER. Fig. 7(a) shows a FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au/Field's metal/Ni photoanode configuration designed by Nam and co-workers. TiO2 and Spiro-OMeTAD act as electron transport layer and hole transport layer, respectively, while Ni acts as a catalyst. The deposition of Field's metal, an alloy made of Bi and Sn, protects the material against degradation also in alkaline media, allowing it to reach good stability and 16 mA cm−2 photocurrent density at 1.23 VRHE under the irradiation of 0.7 sun.69
 Fig. 7  Perovskite-based photoanodes and photocathodes: (a) FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au/Field's metal/Ni. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) FTO/TiO2/(5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3/CC/CS/CC. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) ITO/SnO2/PSC/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au/GS/Ni. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (d) ITO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ti/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2018. (e) ITO/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PCBM + TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (f) ITO/OHP/PCBM/Ti/MoS2. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021. 
Protection with waterproof materials is a common technique to preserve long-time stability and prevent perovskite degradation. Carbon-based materials may be useful for this purpose. For example, Tao et al. reached good stability and performance using carbon silver (CS) as a passivation layer in a mixed-cation perovskite (5-Ammonium valeric acid (AVA))x(MA)1−xPbI3 with conductive carbon (CC) paste as a hole transporting layer (Fig. 7(b)). The non-permeability provided by the CS layer managed to improve the stability and performance of this photoanode, which reached a photocurrent density of 12.4 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE.70 Instead, the double-layer graphite sheet/nickel (GS/Ni) was used by Wang et al. to protect a perovskite photoanode against corrosion. The so created SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au/GS/Ni photoanode deposited on indium tin oxide (ITO) (Fig. 7(c)) was able to provide an initial current density of 17.4 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE, which was lowered after 40 h of operation, thanks to the synergic effect of GS and Ni layers.71
On the other hand, a perovskite-based photocathode was proposed by Zhang et al., who covered CH3NH3PbI3 with NiO as a hole transporting material, PCBM (fullerene derivative of C60) as an electron transporting material and Ti foil as a passivation layer. The inactivity of titanium toward HER imposed the use of Pt, sputtered on Ti foil as a catalyst layer (Fig. 7(d)). The resulting photocathode performed water splitting with a 100% ηF and a photocurrent density of −18 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE in stable conditions for more than 12 h under continuous illumination.72 In 2019, Kim et al. prepared a Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 perovskite with improved optical and electrical performances by substituting the methylammonium lead iodide with a triple-cation structure. A hybrid electron transporting layer (PCBM + TiO2) with exceptional electron transporting capacity and low recombination was used instead of the classic TiO2 (Fig. 7(e)). A photocurrent density higher than −10.5 mA cm−2 was registered at 0 VRHE under 0.5 sun illumination. The peculiar perovskite structure conferred better thermal resistance to the photocathode, resulting in long-term stability.73Jph of −20.6 mA cm−2 and more than 120 h stability is the current best result achieved to the best of the authors’ knowledge in the field of perovskite-based photoelectrodes. This unprecedented performance was obtained by protecting an organometal halide perovskite (OHP) with MoS2/Ti foil (Fig. 7(f)), in which MoS2 also acts as HER catalyst.74 As can be graphically appreciated in Fig. 8, these results are very close to PV-grade materials performances, suggesting that the research is on the right way to discover an innovative material able to compete with Si. The data reported until now are presented in Fig. 8, allowing the reader to focus on the best materials up to now, which can be useful to select what is the best pathway to follow. Those data are also detailed in Tables S1 and S2 of the ESI.†
 Fig. 8  Graphical representation of state-of-the-art photoelectrode performances, expressed as Jph generated at 1.23 VRHE and at 0 VRHE for photoanodes and photocathodes, respectively. Data shown in the plot have been taken from ref. 46–56, 58–60, 62–64, 69–73 and 75. 

3.3 Unassisted PEC systems
Unassisted solar water splitting is accomplished in photoanode-photocathode tandem cells or in photoelectrode-PV systems. In a PEC tandem device, an n-type (photoanode) and a p-type (photocathode) semiconductors are connected in a wired or wireless configuration. When the two photoelectrodes are parallel and both fully exposed to the solar spectrum, the cell is of Mode P type, while when the photoanode is positioned in front of the photocathode so that light beams first to the photoanode and then to the photocathode, the cell is of Mode T type.76
The greatest limitation to PEC high ηSTH is that materials with an optimal band gap of energy higher than the water splitting potential and adequate CB and VB edge positions are difficult to find in nature. This is the reason why current state-of-the-art technology offers poor examples of appreciable efficiency PEC cells. The photoanodes and photocathodes presented in the previous section have been coupled in various ways to obtain the best combination, considering that the operating point (potential and current) of the overall system is determined by intersecting J–V curves for the photoanode and photocathode. Regarding Mode T configuration, which is the most common in the literature, Kobayashi et al. reached a 3.7% ηSTH in a cell made by a CIGS photoabsorber with Pt/TiO2/CdS on top and Mo/single layer graphene at the bottom as a photocathode and a NiFeOx/BiVO4 photoanode.77 A 3% ηSTH was reached by Pan et al. using a BiVO4-based photoanode and a Cu2O-based photocathode (NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4-NiMo/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O). Stability in basic media was confirmed for more than 12 h.78 In the last two years, not so many improvements have been made in PECs performance, possibly due to the impossibility to find materials with a high current density at the operating point. In 2020, Yang et al. created a tandem Mode T device by coupling Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3/Au/FTO as photocathode and NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4/FTO as photoanode (Fig. 9(a)). Sb2Se3 showed a Jph of 30 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, underlining its good activity toward H2 production. The operative point of the cell was estimated at 1.2 mA cm−2 and 0.4 VRHE, which allowed the device to obtain a ηSTH of 1.5% and stability for more than 10 h. This work put in evidence how Sb2Se3 photoelectrodes represent an attractive breakthrough material thanks to their high activity, light absorption properties and stability.79 An interesting application in which BiVO4 is used as photocathode and WO3 as photoanode (Fig. 9(b)) with a ηSTH of 1.9% was presented by Wang and co-workers. This PEC consisted of a WO3 nanoflakes-based film sensitized with a visible light responsive zeolitic-imidazolate-framework-67 (ZIF-67) photoanode and a BiVO4-black phosphorus (BP) heterojunction photocathode, which exhibited near-infrared light absorption. So far as known, this was the first attempt using BP as a photocathode for water splitting and the results illustrated its good ability to produce H2.80 An example of Mode P configuration is presented by the work of Chen et al., who achieved the best result up to now in the field of PEC devices, as they monolithically integrated PSCs with Earth-abundant OER and HER catalysts, i.e. FeNi(OH)x and CoP, respectively. This coupling managed to reach 8.54% ηSTH (Fig. 9(c)), while encapsulation of perovskite with polyisobutylene (PIB) and cover glass made the device stable for more than 17 h, preventing moisture-induced degradation.81 Such efficiency indicates the promising features of perovskite materials in the field of photoelectrochemical H2 production and can push research attention toward the discovery of an efficient encapsulation method, thus making this material suitable for commercialization. As we can notice, due to the limit imposed by the material light absorption capacities and the difficulties in finding photoelectrode matches with high current operating points, unassisted PECs are far away from reaching efficiency and stability specifications.
 Fig. 9  (a) Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3/Au/FTO as a photocathode and NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4/FTO as a photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (b) WO3/ZIF-67 photoanode and BiVO4/BP photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2020. (c) PIB/PSC/FeNi(OH)x as a photoanode with PIB/PSC/FeNi(OH)x as a photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2020. 
A hybrid configuration between unassisted PECs and PV-ECs is given by PV-photoelectrode systems, in which the photoelectrode is used to conduct only one of the half-reactions. In this way, there is no need to have a well-matched band edges position, as the potential needed for the other half-reaction is provided by a PV system. In Fig. 10 we can appreciate the working mechanism: the photoanode holes are involved in the OER, while electrons recombine with holes generated by the PV module, then the photogenerated electrons flow in the external circuit to reach the cathode (usually a metal) to conduct HER; since OER accounts for the majority of overpotential for water splitting, the best configuration is a tandem cell with an n-type front light absorber (photoanode). In any case, it is important to balance light absorption between the photoelectrode and the PV cell in order to exploit all the UV-vis spectra, as the PV cell receives the portion of light transmitted through the transparent photoelectrode.
 Fig. 10  PV-photoelectrode device design, in the case of a photoanode coupled with a p–n junction PV system taken as an example. 
Recent research in the PEC-PV devices field shows a modestly increasing trend in ηSTH. In particular, Fig. 11(a) shows a device made of a CoPi/W:BiVO4 photoanode combined with series-connected Si heterojunction solar cells. The system was able to produce a current density of 4.45 mA cm−2 with a 5.5% ηSTH. The authors demonstrated the scalability of the system by designing an analogous device with an active area of 50 cm2. Higher areas produced lower current density and so lower ηSTH due to ohmic losses in the FTO substrate and low charged species concentration in the electrolyte solution.82 An impressive 12.2% ηSTH has been obtained by Tan et al. in a device with Si intrinsic thin layer (HIT) solar cells, in which one of the solar cells acted as a photocathode thanks to the atomic layer deposition (ALD) TiO2 film and Pt deposition as protective and catalytic layers, respectively (Fig. 11(c)). Si-HIT PV cell can provide 40 mA cm−2Jsc, representing a good option for water electrolysis at high ηSTH. This device showed great durability (>120 h) in basic medium.83
 Fig. 11  (a) CoPi/W:BiVO4 photoanode with a Si heterojunction PV system. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (b) CIGS photocathode coupled with a PSC PV system. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2015. (c) HIT/ALD-TiO2/Pt photocathode coupled with a HIT PV system. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (d) Si photocathode coupled with a PSC PV system. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2020. (e) CIGS/ZnS/CdS photocathode coupled with a PSC PV system. Reproduced with from ref. 86 with permission from America Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (f) Co(OH)2/BiVO4 and a PSC PV system. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019. 
The fact that PV materials are more expensive and production costs are higher than photoelectrode materials make PEC-PV devices cost strictly linked to the materials employed in the solar cell system. For this reason, current state literature is rich in research on PSCs, which show efficiency values similar to those of Si solar cells, but at lower production cost and with higher recyclability. Although PSCs present some issues, such as instability when heated in a humid environment, a lot of work has been done to make them work in PEC-PV systems. Luo et al. managed to reach 6.3% ηSTH inverting the PEC-PV configuration into a PV-PEC configuration by using a semi-transparent perovskite (MAPbBr3) solar cell in front of a CIGS photocathode (Fig. 11(b)).84 The same configuration was chosen by Karaturi et al., who created a PV-PEC using a semi-transparent Cs0.05Rb0.05FA0.765MA0.13SPbI2.5SBr0.45 perovskite solar cell in front of a p+nn+-Si/Ti/Pt photocathode (Fig. 11(d)). This device accomplished 17.6% ηSTH, which is the highest value ever obtained for PEC-PV. The p–n Si junction was more efficient in the generation of photovoltage than standard p-type Si, but well-structured passivation layers were needed to avoid photovoltage losses.85 Meanwhile, Koo et al. tried to maximize the performance of a CIGS photocathode by adding ZnS and CdS layers, which were able to minimize the overpotential and reach an onset potential of 0.66 VRHE for HER (Fig. 11(e)). Coupling this photocathode with an organic–inorganic PSC (Cs0.15FA0.65MA0.20)Pb(I0.8Br0.2)3, a 9% ηSTH and stability for 6.5 h were achieved.86 A carbon-based CH3NH3PbI3 PSC with a Jsc of 19.84 mA cm−2 was studied by Li et al. and then coupled with a Co(OH)2/BiVO4 photoanode to obtain a device with a 4.6% ηSTH and more than 10 h of stability in alkaline medium (Fig. 11(f)).87 Park et al. reported the highest recorded ηSTH (4.49%) for hematite/PSC PEC-PV device in an assembly made by a transparent NiFeOx@Ti:Si-Fe2O3 thin film photoanode and a PSC. Through a Si-doping and a transparent NiFeOx deposition, low species absorption and sluggish surface oxidation reaction were compensated, reaching the performances of thick-film hematite.88
PEC-PV cells explained so far were wired systems; however, another possible approach is given by monolithic wireless devices, which are sheet-like devices working without an external connection. These types of devices have reduced ηSTH compared to wired systems because of ineffective contacts. However, this technology represents a good option because of its lower complexity and its portability.89
3.4 PV-EC systems
PV-EC systems represent a well-defined technology, able to produce the sought-after ηSTH higher than 10%. These devices are made of a PV system connected in parallel to the electrodes, so the potential needed for water splitting is provided by the Solar System and the current is the same for each component. The operating point is determined by intersecting J–V curves of PV cells and electrocatalysts. Most commonly, PV and electrocatalysts are connected through a wired circuit, but systems in which catalysts are directly deposited on the PV unit are not so rare to find. Generally, PV systems can supply the potential needed to drive water splitting reactions plus the electrocatalyst overpotentials. Overall, ηSTH in PV-EC systems depends on both PV performance and electrocatalyst overpotentials. Indeed, HER and OER require an additional potential compared to the standard one in order to reach consistent reaction rates, which depends on catalyst nature and on its interaction with the electrolyte solution. This means that, to reduce PV power supply necessity, electrocatalyst overpotentials must be minimized. A comparison of electrocatalysts provided by McCrory et al. highlighted that the lowest overpotentials for HER were registered in acidic media, while OER was favoured in alkaline media90 (Fig. 12(a)). Precious metal–base electrocatalysts, such as Pt, Ru and Ir, confirm their high ability in H2 and O2 production, but due to their low abundance and very high cost it is not economically advantageous to use them in PV-EC systems. Recent studies demonstrated that earth-abundant materials, such as Co, Ni and Mo, are even better candidates for operating in alkaline media (Fig. 12(b)).
 Fig. 12  (a) Overpotential needed to produce 10 mA cm−2 for various electrocatalyst materials. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 of 2019–2021 state-of-the-art electrocatalysts in alkaline media for both the OER and the HER.90–104 Complete information on data used in plot (b) is given in Tables S5 and S6 of the ESI.† 
As we can notice in Fig. 12(a), only a few OER catalysts are stable in acidic media, thus it is more convenient to perform water splitting in alkaline media. Under a basic electrolyte, NiFe alloy represents a better alternative in terms of overpotential for OER if compared to Ir, while for HER Ni4Mo or, more generally, Ni- and Mo-based materials offer better activity than Pt. All these studies prove the practicability of replacing noble metals with non-noble catalysts in alkaline medium. In the last years, the performances of these earth-abundant electrocatalysts have been tested in PV-EC devices, with the goal to lower the overall technology cost and to reach the same level of the already established 30% ηSTH PV-electrolysers, working with concentrated sunlight and a membrane electrode assembly or proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzer.105,106 In this matter, Park and co-workers created a solar water splitting cell combining a monolithic perovskite/Si tandem solar cell with NiFe (oxy)hydroxide as anode and Ni4Mo electrodeposited on a NiFe foil as a cathode (Fig. 13(a)). A 17.5% ηSTH was reached in NaOH medium for more than 24 h of operation.97 A similar configuration was designed by Wang et al., who improved the PSC photovoltage by coating the surface of the active layer with n-butylammonium bromide as a passivation layer. It also demonstrated the outperformance of NiMo/NF and NiFe/NF in the HER and OER, with respect to the noble Pt and Ir. The perfect coupling of the system components managed to obtain 20% ηSTH and stability was confirmed for more than 15 h.107 Also, Li et al. conducted solar water splitting coupling a perovskite-organic flexible tandem cell with a Pt/C cathode and a NiFe alloy as an anode in KOH 1 M solution (Fig. 13(c)). They integrated a wide band gap perovskite (1.74 eV) and a low band gap organic active layer (1.30 eV) to exploit a larger portion of the solar spectrum. The resulting system showed 12.3% ηSTH and good stability.108 The work of Pan et al. continued in the same field, thus emphasizing the need to improve the performances and the stability of low-cost and earth-abundant materials.109
 Fig. 13  (a) Perovskite/Si solar cell with a NiFe anode and a Ni4Mo cathode. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) Integrated solar water splitting device with a PSC and a CoP catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Flexible perovskite-organic solar cell with Pt/C as a cathode and NiFe alloy as an anode. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2020. (d) III–V triple-junction PV embedded in a Nafion membrane with Ir and Pt as catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from The Electrochemical Society, copyright 2020. 
A particular type of tandem cell is constituted by a buried-junction type photoelectrode (PE buried), which is composed of PV grade material layers in contact with the liquid phase. These types of devices are convenient because ηSTH higher than 10% can be easily reached, but their high cost linked to the complex production phases make them economically unfavourable. For example, a photoanode consisting of GaAs/InGaP stabilised with a TiO2 layer in conjunction with NiMo as HER and OER catalysts can provide a ηSTH of 10.5% and stability for more than 440 h in alkaline medium.110 Recently, Fu et al. created a monolithic wireless device fabricating a back-buried junction (BBJ) based on crystalline Si featuring the electrocatalyst and carrier separation/collection junctions on the back side of the device. A current density of 12 mA cm−2 and a 15.6% ηSTH were achieved by coupling 3 BBJ-PEC units, where two of the junction were covered with Ni as OEC and Pt as HEC.111 To be employed in PE buried devices, PSCs must be optimized to improve humidity resistance. Liang et al. encapsulated a two-series connected PSCs/CoP catalyst with thermoplastic Surlyn film, by using a low-cost fabrication method (Fig. 13(b)). This device performed H2 production with a ηSTH of 6.7% in the KOH electrolyte.102 Tembhurne and co-workers found a different path to create a cost-competitive and well-performing PE buried system: they used concentrated solar power to increase current density, maintaining a high PV efficiency. In fact, an increased current density leads to higher rH2 and higher ηSTH, but it is also accompanied by high temperatures, photoabsorber losses and the possibility of the membrane drying out, leading to low ionic conductivity. Thus, they put their attention on the creation of a solar concentrator device, solving the problem of overheating by using active thermal management, employing conduction and forced convection to cool the photoabsorber. The device consisted of III–V-based PV components directly integrated onto an anodic titanium plate and covered by a thin water layer in a cooling chamber. The overall system reached 17.12% ηSTH (under 474 kW m−2 irradiation power) for more than 2 h in water medium. These devices can reach high ηSTH, which could theoretically compensate for the apparatus cost.112 Recently, a very interesting result was reached by Kistler et al.: they constructed a system made by a III–V triple-junction PV embedded in a Nafion membrane, using iridium and platinum as catalysts (Fig. 13(d)). The system can be fed by vapor, achieving stability for more than 1000 h and a maximum ηSTH of 14%, during in-lab and on-sun testing.113
4 Concluding remarks
4.1 Highlights of laboratory scale results
As it has been already cited at the beginning of this manuscript, according to the DOE, technology competitiveness can be accomplished only if high ηSTH, durability and dimensions of the technology are achieved. Literature results discussed until now are graphically illustrated to better appreciate which of the technologies is sufficiently mature to be considered in the H2 production market. Fig. 14(a) shows ηSTH evolution, while the dimension of the bubble serves to illustrate the device scale. What can be noted is that, in terms of ηSTH, PV-EC cells are the best option for an efficient solar water splitting, followed by PE buried and PV-PEC. In particular, PV-EC devices are able to reach 30% ηSTH, followed by PV-PEC and PE buried with ∼20%. A positive trend can be seen in PEC devices since, according to Kim et al., the maximum ηSTH obtained until 2018 was 3.7%,6 while now the progress in perovskite encapsulation allowed these materials to be employed as photoelectrodes and to reach ∼9% ηSTH without applied bias. The graph emphasises the promising nature of these innovative semiconductors, as a candidate for the replacement of the largely employed Si, which is often the go-to choice also when it comes to solar water splitting, besides its maximum reachable ηSTH is ∼30%.114 PSCs are emerging in the light harvesting scenario, as they can be designed to absorb different portions of the solar spectrum and do not have this limitation in the maximum theoretical PV efficiency.115 Moreover, their manufacturing cost is low as they do not require high temperature treatment as Si does and they can be deposited in very thin layers.116 Many works of the last two years employ perovskite/Si junctions as PVs in PV-EC systems and there is a lot of interest in creating photoelectrodes with this semiconductor, despite their low durability especially in humid atmospheres (Fig. 14(b)). This positive trend can be appreciated also in Fig. 15, which depicts consideration of device complexity and, consequently, cost. Despite their short durability, perovskite-based devices are breaking through the barrier of feasibility, reaching the ηSTH DOE target without exceeding in complexity.
 Fig. 14  (a) ηSTH and (b) durability of solar water splitting devices from 2019 to 2021. PC from ref. 29 and 43, PEC from ref. 79–81, 119 and 120, PV-PEC from ref. 82, 83, 85–88, 121 and 122, PE buried from ref. 102, 111–113, PV-EC from ref. 91, 97, 101, 106–109, 123, 124. Data referring to PE-PE, PV-EC, PE buried and PV-EC are detailed in Tables S3 and S4 of the ESI.† 
 Fig. 15  
η
STH
vs. system complexity, devices are compared upon an estimation of the cost impact of the materials (availability, cost, manufacture, etc.). PC from ref. 29 and 43, PEC from ref. 79–81, 119 and 120, PV-PE from ref. 82, 83, 85–88, 121 and 122, PE buried from ref. 102 and 111–113, and PV-EC from ref. 91, 97, 101, 106–109, 123 and 124. 
The main challenge and most critical aspect of PECs is scalability; indeed, attempts to produce H2 at larger scales experimented with decreases in ηSTH due to internal charge transfer resistance and photon absorption losses.117,118 The literature data cited above was acquired only in laboratory tests and ηSTH values of bigger cells are not mentioned. Unless very high ηSTH and stability are reached at a laboratory scale, it is unthinkable to move the attention towards a high dimension system; indeed, this is the breakthrough to achieve. Satisfactory stability and ηSTH have been reported only for PV-EC devices using semiconductors already established in the market and noble metal electrocatalysts. In such systems, rH2 can be simply increased by employing much bigger current densities, thus using bigger PV cells/modules and connecting them in the most convenient way. Hence, the sizes of PV and electrocatalytic components can be freely modulated. In this type of technology, the problem of photoabsorber corrosion in the electrolyte is absent just because there is no contact between the PV cell and the liquid phase. For these reasons, PV-EC systems seem to be the best current option to fit sun-driven H2 production targets in the short-to-mid term. The next step would be the reduction in overall cost, to make the produced H2 saleable in the market. Therefore, it is necessary to exalt the properties of PSCs and low-cost Earth abundant electrocatalysts, which demonstrated equal or even superior qualities in solar water splitting.
4.2 Large scale tests and perspective on future commercialization
Large-scale sun-driven H2 production device prototypes are difficult to find in the literature. The biggest attempt up to now in the scaling of solar hydrogen production systems has been reported by Domen's research group. They demonstrated the feasibility of a secure 100 m2 PC reactor, employing SrTiO3:Al on a glass substrate. The device was operated for more than one year and reached a 0.76% ηSTH in the best irradiation condition. Since the produced mixture of O2, H2 and moisture could be subjected to spontaneous ignition, some tests were performed to evaluate the damage on all the systems, tubes and gas separation apparatus after forced ignition. The study demonstrated a long-term operation under safe conditions also after intentional ignition. At this point, the remaining biggest obstacles are the low ηSTH, especially in extreme weather conditions, and negative energy and cost balance.125 Furthermore, the most recent attempt in the scaling-up of a PV-EC device belongs to Privitera and coworkers. A total of 730 cm2 bifacial Si multijunction PV mini-modules were connected without a DC converter to the PEM-EC cell, in which the active catalyst for the anode and cathode were iridium and a mixture of iridium and Nafion, respectively. The system operating in bifacial mode can produce about 3.7 gH2 h−1 m−2 and 13.5% average ηSTH under 1 sun condition. Stability was tested for 55 h under real radiation exposure and no significant ηSTH variation has been reported.126 Large-scale trials on PEC systems corroborate the thesis that PV-EC devices could more easily achieve performances closer to the thresholds. Indeed, Vilanova et al. experienced a consistent decrease in ηSTH between 5.5 cm2 and 50 cm2 α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes. The decrease in performances during PEC scale-up is a consequence of the different spatial distribution of potential and of current inhomogeneity in the photoelectrode.127 Moreover, higher current collector areas (in the latter case FTO) generate higher resistances because recombination phenomena are amplified when electrons need to travel a longer path to reach the electrical contact.128 Furthermore, through the analysis of a 2D finite element model, Abdi et al. concluded that in a PEC system scale-up related voltage losses are mainly ascribable to the reduced conductivity of the substrate. Possible solutions are the use of a more conductive substrate, such as ITO, the main disadvantage of which is the low resistance to high temperatures, or the application of conductive metallic lines in the substrate (as has been done during the demonstration of the EU FP7 Projects ARTIPHYCTION and PEC DEMO), which can increase the conductivity, but also slightly reduce the photoactive area.129,130 These obstacles confirm that PV-EC devices are the most mature solar water splitting technology, as the photoactive and catalytic sides can be scaled up separately, so that high productivities can be obtained using relatively small electrocatalytic cells, while in a PEC system the same situation can be reached only increasing the overall cell size, which gives birth to a series of ohmic resistances and, consequently, lower ηSTH. The biggest PEC device built up to now has been the TRL5 demonstrator of the Artiphyction project (No. 303435), which due to ohmic losses in the system showed a potential of a 3% overall sunlight conversion efficiency into H2. However, mass-transfer and kinetics limitation phenomena (bubbles formation and accumulation on the electrode surface)131,132 caused a decrease in the performance of up to about 2% during long-term operation.130
Nevertheless, when it comes to commercialization, photoelectrochemical H2 production must compete also in terms of predicted levelized cost of H2 (LCOH). Large scale, modest ηSTH and appreciable stabilities have been obtained in PV-PEM systems comprising III–V semiconductor-based PVs, solar concentrators and noble metal electrocatalysts, the elevated cost of which hinders the possibility to obtain a LCOH suitable for the market.105,106 Generally, the main parameters affecting LCOH for solar driven H2 are sizes, materials, capital cost and overall ηSTH, which plays the most important role in techno-economic analysis. Indeed, with optimistic ηSTH values from 5 to 10%, LCOH produced by PC systems is estimated to range from 3 to 4 $ per kgH2;133 as expected, if more realistic efficiency is considered, such as 0.4–0.7%, the LCOH can increase up to 18.32 $ per kgH2.134 A recent study by Grimm et al. presented a techno-economic comparison of the two most promising reactor configurations for solar H2 production, i.e. PEC and PV-EC. 18% efficiency crystalline Si PV cells and a 61% efficient electrolyzer were chosen for the PV-EC system components, while the choice of photoactive material for PEC fell on triple-junction amorphous Si, as it can offer a ηSTH comparable to PV-EC devices. A realistic value of 10% ηSTH was selected for the comparison. Considering the cost and durability of components, the analysis confirmed that PV-EC seems the most approachable technology in terms of H2 market competitiveness and that most of the cost is due to PV materials. In fact, LCOH was calculated to be 8.43 $ per kgH2 for PEC and 6.22 $ per kgH2 for PV-EC systems. Looking forward to the future scenario, it is possible to expect a reduction of PV and EC costs in the next 10 years,135 while the lower TRL of PEC systems arises uncertainties on future components costs. For this reason, this work suggests that the prospective for successful commercialization of PEC devices is much lower than for PV-EC systems.136 Considering a scenario in which the capital cost of PV and electrolyzers decreases while ηSTH increases, 2.5 $ per kgH2 or less LCOH could be accomplished.137 Most of the techno-economic analyses do not consider that, until a complete transition to renewable sources, the manufacture of PV-EC plant components will rely upon fossil fuels energy, thus underestimating the impact of the emitted GHG disposal. Indeed, Palmer et al. revealed that during a life cycle of 20 years, the GHG emissions for a plant using solar-batteries to compensate for dark periods are not irrelevant, i.e. 2.3 kgCO2/kgH2 compared to the 11.9 kgCO2/kgH2 produced by methane steam reforming.138,139 At this point, it is important to compare PV-electrolysis systems to the actual H2 production technologies, in terms of GHG emissions and LCOH. H2 is commonly categorized as gray if produced via SMR or coal gasification (CG), blue if those plants include the abatement of CO2 emissions with carbon capture and storage technologies (CCS) and green if the power source is entirely renewable. The values found in the literature for H2 production methods GHG emissions and LCOH are summarized in Table 2, where it is evident that those parameters are subjected to fluctuation owning to the conditions supposed for their determination. For example, gray H2 GHG emission and LCOH strictly depend on the feedstock origin and the transportation cost, while for blue H2 the most important condition is the carbon capture efficiency, defined as the percentage of CO2 captured. In fact, it is true that as this parameter rises, CO2 emissions are lower but, on the other hand, there is an increase of H2 cost as the overall system efficiency falls for the necessity to use part of the energy produced to carry on the CCS plant. Whereas, electrolyzer GHG emissions are comparable to SMR due to the fact that grid electricity is the main energy source; the H2 produced cost fluctuates depending on the plan capital cost and the electricity supply cost, varying for each nation.140,141 In contrast, solar driven water H2 production has only indirect CO2 emission, coming from the photovoltaic panel production phase, which makes its carbon footprint comparable to blue H2.142 In fact, PV production has a non-negligible environmental impact arising from mining, extraction and purification processes of the raw materials, such as Si, Cd, Te, Ga, etc. For example, Si is produced from the Earth abundant SiO2 through reduction in the presence of coke at high temperatures and post treatment with chemicals and solvents (HCl, HNO3, isopropanol, etc.). Moreover, to meet the global demand there is the need to recycle raw material, a process involving high energy and cost.143 In this context, to make PV-electrolyzers greener it is necessary to reduce the environmental impact of the manufacturing process. Again, PSCs can be the solution as their production route has more room for improvements with regard to contaminant raw materials and energy supply.144–146
Table 2 Comparison of GHG emissions and LCOH of various H2 production methods. *Predicted value




Process
GHG emissions (kgCO2/kgH2)
LCOH ($ per kgH2)




SMR
9.2–11140,147
1.6–1.8140


CG from black coal
22.26140
3.15140


CG from brown coal
24.1140
3.15140


Electrolyser powered by grid electricity
11.1147
7–3140


SMR + CCS with 75%-90% carbon capture efficiency
2.7147–1.1140
2.4–2.7140


CG + CCS from black coal with 90% carbon capture efficiency
1.8141–5.7140
2.7140


PV + electrolyzers
2.3132
1.86*–3.64140,148




All these studies highlight that the technology is not yet convenient enough in energetic and economic terms and low LCOH values are only possible in an optimistic future scenario. The main challenges to deal with are: (i) improve the light absorption efficiencies of materials, (ii) optimize photoelectro/electrocatalytic activity to minimize overvoltages and energy requirements, (iii) endeavor low-cost manufacturing methods and materials and (iv) enhance stability to target industrial relevant lifetimes. Even if all these points require a lot of dedication, the prospect of fossil fuel depletion and the climate urgency to reduce CO2 emissions must be the driving force for the affirmation of these devices in the world market. As it has been highlighted in this review, lower-cost, efficient materials exist and, when all the hindrances will be overcome, we will be able to get a glimpse of a greener future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The Green Independence startup is acknowledged for the financial support.
References
C. A. Horowitz, Int. Leg. Mater., 2016, 55, 740–755 CrossRef .

          W. D. Collins, P. Friedlingstein, A. T. Gaye, J. M. Gregory, A. Kitoh, R. Knutti, J. M. Murphy, A. Noda, S. C. B. Raper, I. G. Watterson, A. J. Weaver and Z.-C. Zhao, in Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,  2007, pp. 747–846 Search PubMed .

          NREL, Best Res. Effic. Chart|Photovolt. Res.|NREL,  2020 Search PubMed .

          E. Sugawara and H. Nikaido, Properties of AdeABC and AdeIJK efflux systems of Acinetobacter baumannii compared with those of the AcrAB-TolC system of Escherichia coli,  2014, vol. 58 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, P. A. Thiessen, E. E. Bolton, J. Chen, G. Fu, A. Gindulyte, L. Han, J. He, S. He, B. A. Shoemaker, J. Wang, B. Yu, J. Zhang and S. H. Bryant, Nucleic Acids Res., 2016, 44, D1202–D1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
M. Wang, G. Wang, Z. Sun, Y. Zhang and D. Xu, Global Energy Interconnect, 2019, 2, 436–443 CrossRef .
M. Ahmed and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 2474–2507 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Rajeshwar, in Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry,  2002 Search PubMed .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. L. Ullmann, P. W. F. Alons, B. L. Clausen, J. J. Kraushaar, J. H. Mitchell, R. J. Peterson, R. A. Ristinen, R. L. Boudrie, N. S. P. King, C. L. Morris, J. N. Knudson and E. F. Gibson, Pion scattering to collective excitations in Zr90 and Sn118,  1987, vol. 35 Search PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jing, L. Guo, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Liu, M. Li, S. Shen, G. Liu, X. Hu, X. Zhang, K. Zhang, L. Ma and P. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7087–7097 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fajrina and M. Tahir, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 540–577 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J.-H. Yun, S. Wang and L. Wang, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 7, 012006 CrossRef .
M. A. Marwat, M. Humayun, M. W. Afridi, H. Zhang, M. R. A. Karim, M. Ashtar, M. Usman, S. Waqar, H. Ullah, C. Wang and W. Luo, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 12007–12031 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Gu and L. Wang, Front. Energy, 2021, 15, 596–599 CrossRef .
X. Li, L. Zhao, J. Yu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 1–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Fountaine, H. J. Lewerenz and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
O. Astakhov, V. Smirnov, U. Rau and T. Merdzhanova, Sol. RRL, 2022, 6, 2100783 CrossRef CAS .

          NREL, Best Res. Effic. Chart | Photovolt. Res. | NREL,  2022 Search PubMed .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, U.S. Dep. Energy Off.
U. S. D. of Energy, U.S. Dep. Energy.
C. Kranz and M. Wachtler, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1407–1437 RSC .
X. Li, C. Garlisi, Q. Guan, S. Anwer, K. Al-Ali, G. Palmisano and L. Zheng, Mater. Today, 2021, 47, 75–107 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liao, C. Li, S. Y. Liu, B. Fang and H. Yang, Trends Chem., 2022, 4, 111–127 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhao, S. Hao, J. Guo, Y. Xing, L. Zhang and X. Xu, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 501–509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, K. Sun and Z. Mi, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1454–1462 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Feng, L. Lu, B. Wu, P. Ren, W. Shi and P. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10261–10267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zani, M. Melchionna, T. Montini and P. Fornasiero, JPhys Energy, 2021, 3, 031001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2017, 18, 705–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Han, W. Li, C. Ren, H. Li, X. Liu, X. Li, X. Ma, H. Liu and A. Khan, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2020, 112, 4–14 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cecconi, N. Manfredi, T. Montini, P. Fornasiero and A. Abbotto, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016, 5194–5215 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, S. Shen, L. Li, Z. Tang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 5155–5164 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Ng, S. Y. Lai, C. K. Cheng, Y. W. Cheng and C. C. Chong, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 128847 CrossRef CAS .
N. Luo, T. Montini, J. Zhang, P. Fornasiero, E. Fonda, T. Hou, W. Nie, J. Lu, J. Liu, M. Heggen, L. Lin, C. Ma, M. Wang, F. Fan, S. Jin and F. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 575–584 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Wang, Z. Zheng, Q. Yang, C. Li and B. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 296, 120381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cargnello, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac, T. Montini, D. Barreca and P. Fornasiero, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4309–4323 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Puga, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 315, 1–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qi, Y. Zhao, Y. Gao, D. Li, Z. Li, F. Zhang and C. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 2393–2402 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Q. Jia, H. Tokudome, M. Zhong, C. Wang, Z. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, Y. Li, I. D. Sharp, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 611–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Ng, L. K. Putri, X. Y. Kong, P. Pasbakhsh and S. P. Chai, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 127030 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Li, X. Yang, Y. Lou and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2020, 112, 107714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. H. Mak, R. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Ji, H. Song, C. Tan, F. Barrière and H. Y. Hsu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2006919 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee and K. S. Choi, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Rao, L. Cai, C. Liu, I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, J. M. Weisse, P. Yang and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1099–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Reddy, Y. Kim, H. S. Shim, K. A. J. Reddy, M. Gopannagari, D. Praveen Kumar, J. K. Song and T. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4474–4483 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Shim, J. Tan, H. Lee, J. Park, J. Yun, Y. S. Park, K. Kim, J. Lee and J. Moon, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133061 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, T. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Li, H. Li and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12878–12882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J. W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Chong, G. Wang, Y. Du, Y. Jia, X. Wang, C. Li, Z. Chang and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 366, 523–530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, Z. Guo, Y. Xin and L. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 790, 493–501 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, S. Ye, P. Yan, F. Xiong, P. Fu, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Shi and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1327–1334 RSC .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, D. Friedrich, M. T. McDowell, F. Yang, S. T. Omelchenko, F. H. Saadi, A. C. Nielander, S. Yalamanchili, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2644–2649 RSC .
S. Lee, L. Ji, A. C. De Palma and E. T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. T. Song, H. S. Jang, M. J. Choi, D. M. Sim, S. Yim, H. Lim, Y. S. Jung and J. Oh, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2017, 13, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, L. Steier, M. K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1848–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Kunturu and J. Huskens, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7850–7860 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, N. Sato, T. Yamada, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8300–8307 RSC .
M. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Li, A. Li, X. Chang, W. Liu, Y. Sun, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2025–2034 RSC .
L. Ji, M. D. Mcdaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 84–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, S. Liu, H. Li, C. Li, Z. Luo and J. Gong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 5510–5515 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, W. Yang, J. Tan, Y. Oh, J. Park and J. Moon, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. R. Assirey, Saudi Pharm. J., 2019, 27, 817–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang and G. Han, Prog. Energy, 2020, 2, 022002 CrossRef .
D. Kim, D. K. Lee, S. M. Kim, W. Park and U. Sim, Materials, 2020, 13, 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nam, C. T. K. Mai and I. Oh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14659–14664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tao, Z. Sun, F. Li, W. Fang and L. Xu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1969–1976 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Li, X. Cui, Q. Zhang, S. Pan, S. Mazumdar, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 7526–7534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, H. Wang, W. Ma, X. Zong and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800795 CrossRef .
I. S. Kim, M. J. Pellin and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, S. Seo, J. H. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. Kim, G. Piao, H. Park, K. Lee and S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22291–22300 RSC .
Z. Zhao, K. Chen, J. Huang, L. Wang, H. She and Q. Wang, Front. Energy, 2021, 15, 760–771 CrossRef .
C. Ding, W. Qin, N. Wang, G. Liu, Z. Wang, P. Yan, J. Shi and C. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15608–15614 RSC .
H. Kobayashi, N. Sato, M. Orita, Y. Kuang, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3003–3009 RSC .
L. Pan, J. H. Kim, M. T. Mayer, M. K. Son, A. Ummadisingu, J. S. Lee, A. Hagfeldt, J. Luo and M. Grätzel, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 412–420 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. H. Kim, O. S. Hutter, L. J. Phillips, J. Tan, J. Park, H. Lee, J. D. Major, J. S. Lee and J. Moon, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Shi, K. Cui, L. Zhang, S. Ge and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 275, 119094 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. Zhang, T. Tran-Phu, R. Bo, L. Shi, I. Di Bernardo, J. Bing, J. Pan, S. Singh, J. Lipton-Duffin, T. Wu, R. Amal, S. Huang, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie and A. Tricoli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008245 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Ahmet, Y. Ma, J. W. Jang, T. Henschel, B. Stannowski, T. Lopes, A. Vilanova, A. Mendes, F. F. Abdi and R. Van De Krol, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2366–2379 RSC .
C. S. Tan, K. W. Kemp, M. R. Braun, A. C. Meng, W. Tan, C. E. D. Chidsey, W. Ma, F. Moghadam and P. C. McIntyre, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1490–1500 RSC .
J. Luo, Z. Li, S. Nishiwaki, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, P. Cendula, Y. H. Lee, K. Fu, A. Cao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler, S. D. Tilley, L. H. Wong, A. N. Tiwari and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501520 CrossRef .
S. K. Karuturi, H. Shen, A. Sharma, F. J. Beck, P. Varadhan, T. Duong, P. R. Narangari, D. Zhang, Y. Wan, J. H. He, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000772 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, D. Kim, P. Boonmongkolras, S. R. Pae, S. Byun, J. Kim, J. H. Lee, D. H. Kim, S. Kim, B. T. Ahn, S. W. Nam and B. Shin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2296–2303 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Jia, Y. Lu, N. Li, Y. Z. Zheng, X. Tao and M. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, K. Y. Yoon, T. Kim, H. Jang, M. J. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and J. H. Jang, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105089 CrossRef CAS .
J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F309–F311 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, I. M. Ferrer, S. M. Chatman, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4347–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, F. Sahli, C. Liu, D. Ren, X. Guo, J. Werner, Q. Jeangros, S. M. Zakeeruddin, C. Ballif, M. Grätzel and J. Luo, Joule, 2019, 3, 2930–2941 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, H. J. Niu, X. Ma, J. J. Feng, X. Weng, H. Huang and A. J. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 561, 372–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Ibupoto, A. Tahira, P. Y. Tang, X. Liu, J. R. Morante, M. Fahlman, J. Arbiol, M. Vagin and A. Vomiero, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807562 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, H. Jia, J. Yuan, X. Liu, C. Fang, Y. Fan, C. Cao and Z. Chen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 24342–24352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiao, H. Liu, Z. Huang, Q. Ma, S. Luo, J. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhong and X. Qi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, R. Wang, P. Hei, L. Gao, J. Yang and T. Jiao, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 612, 125992 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, I. J. Park, M. G. Lee, K. C. Kwon, S. P. Hong, D. H. Kim, S. A. Lee, T. H. Lee, C. Kim, C. W. Moon, D. Y. Son, G. H. Jung, H. S. Yang, J. R. Lee, J. Lee, N. G. Park, S. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33835–33843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, N. Chen, Y. Wang, G. Wu and X. Du, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 22921–22928 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, Y. Wu, D. Zheng, K. Wang and Z. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134568 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wan, J. Luo, C. Zhou, T. Zhang, J. Arbiol, X. Lu, B. W. Mao, X. Zhang and J. Fransaer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900315 CrossRef .
H. Chen, L. Song, S. Ouyang, J. Wang, J. Lv and J. Ye, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900465 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liang, X. Han, Y. Qiu, Q. Fang, B. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Zhang, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5426–5434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Kou, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Liu, W. Zang, J. Zhang, S. Huang, Y. Du, A. K. Cheetham and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 678–685 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Galani, A. Mondal, D. N. Srivastava and A. B. Panda, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 18635–18644 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Khan, I. Al-Shankiti, A. Ziani and H. Idriss, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1085–1094 RSC .
Y. Wang, A. Sharma, T. Duong, H. Arandiyan, T. Zhao, D. Zhang, Z. Su, M. Garbrecht, F. J. Beck, S. Karuturi, C. Zhao and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101053 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. Wu, J. Zhang, K. C. Lee, H. Lei, F. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pan, R. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Cui, M. Wang, B. Shi, P. Wang, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14085–14092 RSC .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
H. C. Fu, P. Varadhan, C. H. Lin and J. H. He, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tembhurne, F. Nandjou and S. Haussener, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Kistler, M. Y. Um and P. Agbo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 066502 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Andreani, A. Bozzola, P. Kowalczewski, M. Liscidini and L. Redorici, Adv. Phys.: X, 2019, 4, 1548305 CAS .
B. N. Ezealigo, A. C. Nwanya, S. Ezugwu, S. Offiah, D. Obi, R. U. Osuji, R. Bucher, M. Maaza, P. Ejikeme and F. I. Ezema, Arabian J. Chem., 2020, 13, 988–997 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1559–1572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dilger, M. Trottmann and S. Pokrant, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1931–1938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Son, Energies, 2021, 14, 7422 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. F. M. Nasir and M. A. Mat-Teridi, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2020, 93, 1–5 CrossRef .
W. Shi, D. Li, W. Fan, J. Ma, C. Li, W. Yu, J. Shi and C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Shen, T. Ye, K. Kong, H. Ye, H. Ding, Y. Hu and J. Hua, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 5016–5023 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, J. B. Gumundsdóttir, R. Strandbakke, K. G. Both, T. Aarholt, P. A. Carvalho, M. H. Sørby, I. J. T. Jensen, M. N. Guzik, T. Norby, H. Haug and A. Chatzitakis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20313–20325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Khan, I. Al-Shankiti, A. Ziani, N. Wehbe and H. Idriss, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14802–14808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, T. Y. Hsieh, M. A. Hoque, W. Cambarau, S. Narbey, C. Gimbert-Surinãch, E. Palomares, M. Lanza and A. Llobet, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55856–55864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishiyama, T. Yamada, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Maehara, M. Yamaguchi, Y. Kuromiya, Y. Nagatsuma, H. Tokudome, S. Akiyama, T. Watanabe, R. Narushima, S. Okunaka, N. Shibata, T. Takata, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, Nature, 2021, 598, 304–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. S. Privitera, M. Muller, W. Zwaygardt, M. Carmo, R. G. Milazzo, P. Zani, M. Leonardi, F. Maita, A. Canino, M. Foti, F. Bizzarri, C. Gerardi and S. A. Lombardo, J. Power Sources, 2020, 473, 228619 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hankin, F. E. Bedoya-Lora, C. K. Ong, J. C. Alexander, F. Petter and G. H. Kelsall, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 346–360 RSC .

          C. Ottone, S. Hernández, M. Armandi and B. Bonelli, in PoliTO Springer Series,  2019, pp. 93–114 Search PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, R. R. Gutierrez Perez and S. Haussener, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2734–2740 RSC .
K. R. Tolod, S. Hernández and N. Russo, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 13 CrossRef .
S. Hernández, G. Barbero, G. Saracco and A. L. Alexe-Ionescu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9916–9925 CrossRef .
A. S. Gliozzi, S. Hernández, A. L. Alexe-Ionescu, G. Saracco and G. Barbero, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 280–286 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983–2002 RSC .
L. S. F. Frowijn and W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, Sustainable Energy Technol. Assess., 2021, 48, 101631 CrossRef .

          ITPRV, Itrpv, 11th edn,  2020, p. 76 Search PubMed .
A. Grimm, W. A. de Jong and G. J. Kramer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 22545–22555 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Mallapragada, E. Gençer, P. Insinger, D. W. Keith and F. M. O'Sullivan, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100174 CrossRef .
G. Palmer, A. Roberts, A. Hoadley, R. Dargaville and D. Honnery, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5113–5131 RSC .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264–3278 RSC .
T. Longden, F. J. Beck, F. Jotzo, R. Andrews and M. Prasad, Appl. Energy, 2022, 306, 118145 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Zapantis, Blue hydrogen Germany,  2021 Search PubMed .
A. Al-Qahtani, B. Parkinson, K. Hellgardt, N. Shah and G. Guillen-Gosalbez, Appl. Energy, 2021, 281, 115958 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tawalbeh, A. Al-Othman, F. Kafiah, E. Abdelsalam, F. Almomani and M. Alkasrawi, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 759, 143528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, T. Stedman, L. M. Woods and A. Urbina, JPhys Energy, 2020, 2, 022001 CrossRef .
K. P. Goetz, A. D. Taylor, Y. J. Hofstetter and Y. Vaynzof, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Park, Nat. Sustainability, 2021, 4, 192–193 CrossRef .

          Hydrogen Council, Hydrogen decarbonization pathways A life-cycle assessment,  2021 Search PubMed .
J. Yates, R. Daiyan, R. Patterson, R. Egan, R. Amal, A. Ho-Baille and N. L. Chang, CRPS, 2020, 1, 100209 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2gc00292bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Noemi Pirrone	Noemi Pirrone is pursuing her PhD program in Materials Science and Technology at Politecnico di Torino, under the supervision of Prof. Simelys Hernández and Prof. Federico Bella. In 2021, she obtained her Master's degree in Chemical and Sustainable Processes Engineering at Politecnico di Torino, discussing a thesis on the development of a lab-scale device for solar hydrogen production. Before entering the PhD course, she received a research scholarship to study the topic of electrochemical water treatment for bacteria removal. Now, her main field of research is the electrochemical nitrogen reduction to ammonia in aqueous electrolytes.
Federico Bella	Federico Bella is a Full Professor of Chemistry at Politecnico di Torino, Italy. In the Electrochemistry Group he leads the research activities on post-Li batteries, electrochemical nitrogen reduction and hybrid photovoltaics. Due to his important achievements in energy chemistry, he received the “ENI Award” and the “Roberto Piontelli Award” from the President of the Italian Republic. In 2021, he was the recipient of the USERN Prize, awarded among 10000 candidates by a jury of previous Nobel awardees. He is the author of 95 international publications (h-index 64) and he leads the ERC project SuN2rise, a 1.5 M€ EU grant for redesigning the NH3 production process.
Simelys Hernández	Simelys Hernández is an Associate Professor of Chemical Plants at Politecnico di Torino, Italy. In the CREST Group she leads the research activities on novel photo-electrocatalytic processes for the sustainable production of chemicals and fuels by water splitting, CO2 reduction, wastewater treatment and industrial waste recycling. She is the author of >90 international publications (h-index 31). She has been the technical coordinator of H2020 EU projects (SuCOChem (https://suncochem.eu/), RECODE (https://recodeh2020.eu/), Celbicon (https://www.celbicon.org/), Artiphyction (https://www.artiphyction.org/) and Eco2CO2 (https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/309701/it)) for developing technologies for green H2 production and CO2 capture and utilization from the lab-scale (TRL2/3) to the pilot scale (TRL5/6).
Semiconductor + hν → e−cb + h+vb	(1)
OER: 2H2O + 4h+vb → O2 + 4H+	(2)
HER: 2H+ + 2e−cb → H2	(3)
OWS: 2H2O → 2H2 + O2	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Semiconductor/liquid junction: charge carrier transport mechanism. Potential expressed in V vs. standard hydrogen electrode at pH 0.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Single band gap light absorber (S2); (b) dual band gap light absorber (D2 or D4).	 

 	Fig. 3  Solar water splitting devices: (a) PC system, (b) PEC, and (c) PV-EC system.	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)


One-step excitation
	
	
	
	
	

p–n CN	270.95	11.2*	>7	Na2SO4	Zhao et al.28
In0.35Ga0.65N/In0.27Ga0.73N/In0.2Ga0.8N/GaN	1848***	5.2 (23 sun)	8	Water, pH 7	Wang et al.29
(Zn0.95Cu0.05)0.6Cd0.4S	4150.1	7.91*	>40	Na2S·9H2O/Na2SO3**	Liu et al.30

Two-step excitation
	
	
	
	
	


OEP
	
HEP
	
	
	
	
	

CoOx/BiVO4/Au	Rh@Cr2O3/ZrO2/TaON	1300	0.5	12	NaH2PO4, pH 6	Qi et al.41
RuOx/Mo:BiVO4	Rh@Cr2O3/La,Rh:SrTiO3	—	1.2	17	Water, pH 6.8	Wang et al.42
Bi4NbO8Cl	d-ZCS-P	
	0.15	6	0.5 M Na2SO4	Ng et al.43
MIL-125-NH2(Ti)	Zn0.5Cd0.5S	92498	30.8*	>16	Na2S·9H2O/Na2SO3**	Guo et al.44
DMA3BiI6	MA3Bi2I9	198.2	3,5	>100	HI**	Tan et al.45

 	Fig. 4  Photoanode materials: (a) BiVO4-NSCN/PANI@CoPi. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (b) CoAl LDHs/α-Fe2O3. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019. (c) WO3/CdS/NiOOh/Co–Pi. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019. (d) Al spiked Ni/SiO2/Si. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2021. (e) NiOx/CoOx/SiOx/n-Si. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photocathode materials: (a) Cu2O/CuO/C. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) CIGS/CdS/Al2O3/TiO2/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. (c) pn+-Si/Ta2O5/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (d) Cu:NiOx/Sb2Se3/TiO2/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  Perovskite crystalline structure. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from MDPI, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  Perovskite-based photoanodes and photocathodes: (a) FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au/Field's metal/Ni. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) FTO/TiO2/(5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3/CC/CS/CC. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (c) ITO/SnO2/PSC/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au/GS/Ni. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2021. (d) ITO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Ti/Pt. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2018. (e) ITO/Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PCBM + TiO2. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (f) ITO/OHP/PCBM/Ti/MoS2. Reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  Graphical representation of state-of-the-art photoelectrode performances, expressed as Jph generated at 1.23 VRHE and at 0 VRHE for photoanodes and photocathodes, respectively. Data shown in the plot have been taken from ref. 46–56, 58–60, 62–64, 69–73 and 75.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Pt/TiO2/CdS/Sb2Se3/Au/FTO as a photocathode and NiFeOx/H,Mo:BiVO4/FTO as a photoanode. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2020. (b) WO3/ZIF-67 photoanode and BiVO4/BP photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2020. (c) PIB/PSC/FeNi(OH)x as a photoanode with PIB/PSC/FeNi(OH)x as a photocathode. Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  PV-photoelectrode device design, in the case of a photoanode coupled with a p–n junction PV system taken as an example.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) CoPi/W:BiVO4 photoanode with a Si heterojunction PV system. Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (b) CIGS photocathode coupled with a PSC PV system. Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2015. (c) HIT/ALD-TiO2/Pt photocathode coupled with a HIT PV system. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (d) Si photocathode coupled with a PSC PV system. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2020. (e) CIGS/ZnS/CdS photocathode coupled with a PSC PV system. Reproduced with from ref. 86 with permission from America Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (f) Co(OH)2/BiVO4 and a PSC PV system. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Overpotential needed to produce 10 mA cm−2 for various electrocatalyst materials. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (b) Overpotentials at 10 mA cm−2 of 2019–2021 state-of-the-art electrocatalysts in alkaline media for both the OER and the HER.90–104 Complete information on data used in plot (b) is given in Tables S5 and S6 of the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Perovskite/Si solar cell with a NiFe anode and a Ni4Mo cathode. Reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. (b) Integrated solar water splitting device with a PSC and a CoP catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (c) Flexible perovskite-organic solar cell with Pt/C as a cathode and NiFe alloy as an anode. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, copyright 2020. (d) III–V triple-junction PV embedded in a Nafion membrane with Ir and Pt as catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from The Electrochemical Society, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) ηSTH and (b) durability of solar water splitting devices from 2019 to 2021. PC from ref. 29 and 43, PEC from ref. 79–81, 119 and 120, PV-PEC from ref. 82, 83, 85–88, 121 and 122, PE buried from ref. 102, 111–113, PV-EC from ref. 91, 97, 101, 106–109, 123, 124. Data referring to PE-PE, PV-EC, PE buried and PV-EC are detailed in Tables S3 and S4 of the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 15  
η
STH
vs. system complexity, devices are compared upon an estimation of the cost impact of the materials (availability, cost, manufacture, etc.). PC from ref. 29 and 43, PEC from ref. 79–81, 119 and 120, PV-PE from ref. 82, 83, 85–88, 121 and 122, PE buried from ref. 102 and 111–113, and PV-EC from ref. 91, 97, 101, 106–109, 123 and 124.	 

SMR	9.2–11140,147	1.6–1.8140
CG from black coal	22.26140	3.15140
CG from brown coal	24.1140	3.15140
Electrolyser powered by grid electricity	11.1147	7–3140
SMR + CCS with 75%-90% carbon capture efficiency	2.7147–1.1140	2.4–2.7140
CG + CCS from black coal with 90% carbon capture efficiency	1.8141–5.7140	2.7140
PV + electrolyzers	2.3132	1.86*–3.64140,148
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2gc00292b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
