Femtosecond to millisecond studies of electron transfer processes in a donor–(π-spacer)–acceptor series of organic dyes for solar cells interacting wi ...  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP23825J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP23825J
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2816-2831Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFemtosecond to millisecond studies of electron transfer processes in a donor–(π-spacer)–acceptor series of organic dyes for solar cells interacting with titania nanoparticles and ordered nanotube array films†

        
          
            Marcin 
            Ziółek
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Boiko 
            Cohen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xichuan 
            Yang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Licheng 
            Sun
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Maggie 
            Paulose
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Oomman K. 
            Varghese
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Craig A. 
            Grimes
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Abderrazzak 
            Douhal
          
        
      *a
aDepartamento de Química Física, Facultad de Ciencias Ambientales y Bioquimica and Inamol, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Avda. Carlos III, S.N., 45071 Toledo, Spain. E-mail: abderrazzak.douhal@uclm.es
bState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116012, China
cSchool of Chemical Science and Engineering, Department of Chemistry, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), 10044 Stockholm, Sweden
dThe Materials Research Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
ePhotonic Fuels LLC, Naval Ship Yard, Philadelphia, PA 19112, USA
Received 
      1st December 2011
    , Accepted 20th December 2011First published on 20th December 2011AbstractTime-resolved emission and absorption spectroscopy are used to study the photoinduced dynamics of forward and back electron transfer processes taking place between a recently synthesized series of donor–(π-spacer)–acceptor organic dyes and semiconductor films. Results are obtained for vertically oriented titania nanotube arrays (inner diameters 36 nm and 70 nm), standard titania nanoparticles (25 nm diameter) and, as a reference, alumina nanoparticle (13 nm diameter) films. The studied dyes contain a triphenylamine group as an electron donor, cyanoacrylic acid part as an electron acceptor, and differ by the substituents in a spacer group that causes a shift of its absorption spectra. Despite a red-shift of the dye absorption band resulting in an improved response to the solar spectrum, smaller electron injection rates and smaller extinction coefficients result in reduced dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) conversion efficiencies. For the most efficient dye, TPC1, electron injection from the hot locally excited state to titania on a time scale of about 100 fs is suggested, while from the relaxed charge transfer state it proceeds in a non-exponential way with time constants from 1 ps to 50 ps. Our results imply that the latter process involves the trap states below the conduction band edge (or the sub-bandgap tail of the acceptor states), localized close to the dye radical cation, and is accompanied by fast electron recombination to the parent dye's ground state. This process should limit the efficiency of DSSCs made using these types of organic dyes. The residual, slower recombination can be described by a stretched exponential decay with a characteristic time of 0.5 μs and a dispersion parameter of 0.33. Both the electron injection and back electron transfer dynamics are similar in titania nanoparticles and nanotubes. Variations between the two film types are only found in the time resolved emission transients, which are explained in terms of the difference in local electric fields affecting the position of the emission bands.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is one of the most promising renewable energy sources, and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are one of the most encouraging photovoltaic systems.1–3 To date the best DSSC solar energy conversion efficiency has reached approximately 12% with the use of Ru complex dyes.4,5 The synthesis of new, metal-free organic dyes for DSSC use has recently been reported6–10 with the aim to find alternatives to the Ru complexes. In a typical DSSC, after light excitation of the organic chromophore rapid electron injection occurs from the dye to the semiconductor conduction band. Most commonly the semiconductor is TiO2, constructed as a nanoparticle film approximately 10 μm thick.2,11,12 The titania nanoparticle film of a DSSC provides a large surface area for the adsorption of light-harvesting molecules. However, the nanoparticle film exhibits significantly slower charge collection in comparison to single-crystal materials due to trap-limited electron diffusion. Recently, it has been proposed that this disadvantage of DSSCs can be overcome by using one-dimensional (1-D) titania nanowire or nanotube arrays instead of nanoparticles.13–16 In such structures a direct path to the electrodevia the semiconductor conduction band is provided, which should increase the charge collection efficiency of the solar cells.
Among the most important factors that influence the efficiency of the solar cells are the dynamics of the electron injection, from the excited state of the dye to the titania conduction band, and the electron recombination processes (from titania to the ground state of the oxidized dye). The first process initiates the electrical circuit in the solar cell and its quantum yield determines the initial population of electrons, while the second one decreases the efficiency of electron collection. Fast and ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopic techniques are often used to study these processes for ruthenium dyes attached to nanoparticles.17–24 However, to the best of our knowledge, there are only few reports on such studies for both new organic dyes25–27 and titania nanotube array films.28,29
Therefore, we have chosen one of the recently introduced triphenylamine dyes,10TPC1, having a solar light conversion efficiency comparable to that of the Ru-complexes,6 to study its interaction with vertically oriented titania nanotube structures of different diameters and lengths by means of fs–ns transient emission and fs–ms transient absorption techniques. For comparison, as a reference we also performed analogous measurements for TPC1 attached to films of titania (TiO2) and alumina (Al2O3) nanoparticles. The alumina semiconductor often acts as a reference sample in dye–semiconductor interaction because, for many systems, dye attachment to its surface is found to be similar to that of titania, while the conduction band of Al2O3 lies about 4 eV above that of TiO2.28,30–32 Therefore, all the photophysical processes due to the interaction between the dye and the semiconductor surface should be similar in both materials (titania and alumina), except for electron injection which is not possible in alumina.
Moreover, we compare the photobehaviour of TPC1 with that of two other dyes from the same family, TPC3 and TPC5 (Fig. 1).10 In these dyes the different substituents have been introduced to shift the absorption spectra more to the red, in order to better cover the available spectrum of the Sun and, thus, increase the solar cell efficiency. However, it was found that instead of being increased, the photoconversion efficiency is reduced with the more long-wavelength absorption and reduced extinction coefficient of the dyes, being 5.3% for TPC1, 3.9% for TPC3 and only 0.4% for TPC5 (37600 M−1 cm−1 for TPC1, 21400 M−1 cm−1 for TPC3 and 12000 M−1 cm−1 for TPC5).10 We are motivated to understand how different photodynamic factors contribute to the performance of the different DSSC designs.
 Fig. 1  
Scanning electron microscope images of (A) cross section and (B) surface of transparent films of titania nanotube arrays fabricated on FTO coated glass (titanium film thickness ≈ 2 μm; anodization at 20 V). (C) Structures of the TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5 dyes. 
Recently, we have studied in detail the ultrafast photobehaviour of TPC1 in solution.33,34 Briefly, we found that it is dominated by a strong charge-transfer character of the excitation to the first singlet state (dipole moments: 10 D in S0 and 50 D in S1 states). We identified the locally excited state (LE) of the dye that decays within 50 fs and a subsequent charge transfer state (CT) that is energetically stabilized during the solvation dynamics. The latter process takes place on a time scale depending on the solvent used: around 400 fs in acetonitrile, 1.4 ps in dichloromethane, and 25 ps in ethanol. The relaxed charge transfer S1 state has the emission band highly Stokes shifted with respect to the absorption band and decays with time constants from tens of ps to single ns, depending on solvent properties. We have also reported on the preliminary studies of TPC1 interacting with titania nanoparticles, and randomly distributed small nanotubes (8 nm inner diameter) in suspension.34 We found evidence of multi-exponential electron injection from the dye to the conduction band in the 100 fs to single ps time scale, as well as fast back electron transfer from titania to the ground state of TPC1 with the time constants of 1 ps, 15 ps and 1 ns.
Our present contribution aims to improve the understanding of the interfacial processes that occur between the dye and titania. In particular, in the present contribution: (i) we study the systems in conditions more similar to those of real solar cells (films of particles and vertically oriented nanotubes instead of the suspension, lower laser pulse intensities); (ii) using a reference alumina sample enables us to explain the previously observed apparent differences in the transient absorption and time-resolved emission results; (iii) the range of transient absorption observation is extended to 1 ms by applying flash photolysis techniques; (iv) new dyes (TPC3 and TPC5) are investigated and the observed differences in their photobehaviour are correlated with their sunlight conversion efficiencies. We believe that the present study will enable a better understanding of the photobehaviour of organic dyes interacting with titania leading in turn to higher efficiency lower cost DSSCs.
Even though the presented studies are not performed for the real solar cells (with electrolyte) and the excitation intensities in the transient absorption experiments are higher than those for the sunlight illumination, our work is focused on the comparison between the behavior of different dyes and different titania morphologies, measured under the same conditions. Therefore, we expect that many of the conclusions based on such comparison can be extrapolated to the features and differences observed under real, operating conditions.
2. Experimental

        Titanium films approximately 700–800 nm or 2 μm thick were deposited by dc sputtering on cleaned fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) glass substrates (Pilkington TEC 15). Detailed fabrication procedures have been reported elsewhere.35 Briefly, the titanium films were anodized in an electrolyte containing dimethylsulfoxide, 4 vol% water and 4 vol% hydrogen fluoride at 10 V and 20 V, which resulted in films with nanotube length approximately 700 nm (pore size ≈ 36 nm, NT36) and 2 μm (pore size ≈ 70 nm, NT70) respectively. The films were heat treated in an oxygen atmosphere at 400 °C for 4 h and then at 450 °C for 2 h to obtain crystallized (anatase phase) transparent films of nanotube arrays. Fig. 1A and B, respectively, show the cross section and surface of the 2 μm thick transparent films of titania nanotube prepared at 20 V. For fabricating titania and alumina nanoparticle films (TiNP and AlNP, respectively), a colloidal solution was prepared by grinding 12 g powder with 30–40 ml water containing acetic acid (solution pH ≈ 3).36Aluminium oxide nanopowder (Al2O3, 99.8%) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (USA) with average particle size of 13 nm. For titania Degussa P-25 powder was used. The suspension was spin coated on Tec 15 glass substrates to obtain films of thickness approximately 800 nm or 2 μm. The films were dried and annealed in oxygen at 450 °C for 3 h. The films were immersed in 0.05 M TiCl4 aqueous solution for about 12 h, then rinsed with distilled water, dried in air, and then annealed at 450 °C for 30 min in oxygen.4

        TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5 dyes were synthesized as previously described.10TPC1 consists of a triphenylamine unit as an electron donor and a cyanoacrylic acid group as an electron acceptor, with the two separated by an oligophenylenevinylene unit. TPC3 and TPC5 differ by substituents in the spacer part (Cl atoms and –CN group, respectively) and their structure is shown in Fig. 1C. Acetonitrile (ACN spectroscopic grade, >99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as received. Just before coating with the dyes all alumina and titania films (AlNP, TiNP, NT36 and NT70) were annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. Then they were immersed in TPC1/ACN or TPC5/ACN solution (10−4 M) for 1.5 h, washed with clean ACN two times and dried in air. The anchoring of the dye to titania was very fast. The typical absorbance of the TPC1/nanoparticle samples was 0.5–1.0 of the maximum after 1 h immersion, a value not increased when the titania films were immersed overnight in TPC1/ACN solution. In the case of TPC3, the maximum concentration in ACN was much lower (10−6 M) and, therefore, the immersion of films in TPC3/ACN solution was done overnight. The films were measured in air, without electrolyte.
The steady-state fluorescence and absorption spectra were measured using FluoroMax-4 (Jobin-Yvone) and JASCO V-670, respectively. In both cases pure films of nanoparticles or nanotubes (not covered with dyes) were used as references. Femtosecond (fs) emission transients have been collected using the fluorescence up-conversion technique. The system consists of a femtosecond Ti:sapphire oscillator Mai Tai HP (Spectra Physics) and coupled to second harmonic generation and up-conversion setups.37 The oscillator pulses (90 fs, 2.5 W, 80 MHz) were centered at 780 or 840 nm and doubled in an optical setup through a 0.5 mm BBO crystal to generate a pumping beam at 390 or 420 nm (∼0.1 nJ). The polarization of the latter was set to magic angle with respect to the fundamental beam. The sample film on glass was placed in a holder connected to a pair of translation stages (MTS series, Thorlabs). They move the sample in the x–y plane perpendicular to the pump beam preventing it from photodegradation during the measurements. The fluorescence was focused by two off-axis parabolic mirrors on a 1 mm BBO crystal and gated with the fundamental fs-beam. The instrument response function (IRF) of the apparatus was ∼180 fs (FWHM). It was estimated from the Raman signal of ACN solvent in a 1 mm thick cell and it was checked that this value agrees with the rising slope of the emission transients of the film samples. To analyze the decays, multi-exponential function convoluted with the IRF was used to fit the experimental transients. All the up-conversion measurements were performed in the 200 ps or 600 ps time window.
The UV-visible fs-transient absorption spectra and decays were collected using a two-channel detection femtosecond system described previously.38 It consists of a Ti-sapphire oscillator (TISSA 50, CDP Systems) pumped by a 5 W diode laser (Verdi 5, Coherent). The seed pulse (30 fs, 450 mW at 86 MHz repetition rate) centered at 800 nm wavelength is directed to an amplifier (Legend-USP, Coherent). The amplified fundamental (50 fs, 1 W at 1 kHz repetition) is split into two arms. The first one is frequency doubled in a nonlinear BBO crystal to give 400 nm (0.5–5 mW). The remaining fundamental beam goes through a delay line (7.8 fs step and 2 ns of maximum delay) and is focused on a rotating 3 mm thick CaF2 plate to generate a white light continuum. The produced white light is split into two parts to form probe and reference beams, which are directed to the sample, where the probe and the pump beams are overlapped. Similarly as in the up-conversion measurements, the sample is moved in the x–y plane perpendicularly to the direction of the probe beam. The polarization of the pump is set to magic angle with respect to the probe. The transmitted light is focused to light guides, directed to a spectrograph and collected by a pair of photodiode arrays (1024 elements). The obtained signal, as a difference in the optical density (ΔA) of the sample probed by the white light continuum with and without pump excitation, is processed by ExciPRO software (CDP Systems). The spectra were analyzed in the 420–980 nm spectral range with the exclusion of the 760–830 nm part due to strong influence from the fundamental beam (800 nm) used to produce white light continuum. The “time-zero” of all the spectra analyzed was corrected for group velocity dispersion effect, according to the standard numerical scheme.39 The chirp of white light continuum was obtained by measuring two-photon absorption (TPA) in a very thin (150 μm) BK7 glass plate. The same TPA signal was used to determine the IRF of the system and it was 110–150 fs (FWHM). Three-exponential function with offset, convoluted with IRF, was used to perform the fitting of the data at a particular wavelength. The data were also analysed using multi-exponential global fit program.40
The ns–s flash photolysis setup consists of a LKS.60 laser flash photolysis spectrometer (Applied Photophysics) and a Vibrant (HE) 355 II laser (Opotek) as a pump pulse source (5 ns duration). The signal from OPO (355 nm pumped by Q-switched Nd:YAG laser, Brilliant, Quantel) at 410 nm or 500 nm was used for the sample excitation. The probing light source was a 150 W xenon arc lamp. The light transmitted through the sample was dispersed by a monochromator and detected by a photomultiplier coupled to a digital oscilloscope (Agilent Infiniium DS08064A, 600 MHz, 4 GSa s−1). The pump pulse energy was attenuated by the pair of a half-waveplate and a polarizer. The kinetics were recorded in the spectral range 420–900 nm every 10 nm and the time-resolved spectra were constructed from the kinetic traces fitted by the global analysis program (PC ProK, Applied Photophysics).
All experiments were done at 293 K. The typical pump pulse energy densities and pulse power densities for all the three setups were as follows: 0.2 μJ cm−2 (105 W cm−2) in the up-conversion, 2 mJ cm−2 (109 W cm−2) in the fs–ps transient absorption and 2 mJ cm−2, (105 W cm−2) in the flash photolysis studies. The pump pulse energy in the fs–ps transient absorption experiment was much larger than that in the up-conversion studies, but the repetition rate was much smaller (1 kHz instead of 80 MHz), so the average continuous power was similar in both setups (single mW).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Stationary absorption and emission studies

Fig. 2 shows representative stationary UV-visible absorption and emission spectra of the dyes interacting with alumina and titania films. Part (A) of the figure presents the absorption and emission spectra of TPC1/AlNP and TPC5/AlNP samples, showing a 60 nm red shift between the absorption maxima of TPC1 and TPC5, and an approximate 40 nm red shift between emission bands. Fig. 2B shows the absorption bands of different dyes on NT36 material. The decrease in the maximum absorbance intensity from TPC1 to TPC5 is consistent with the extinction coefficient values. The oscillatory features of the baseline were also observed for the pure films (without deposited dyes) and probably originate from some interference patterns since the thickness of the layer (700 nm) is comparable to the probe wavelengths. The absorption and emission maxima of TPC1 on alumina nanoparticles are very similar to those of titania nanoparticles and titania nanotubes, see Fig. S1 (in the ESI†). The bands of TPC3 are also quite similar to those of TPC1 and are shifted to the red by only a few nm. Moreover, the emission spectra for all dyes and films did not change when varying the excitation wavelengths between 400 and 500 nm.
 Fig. 2  (A) Normalized stationary absorption and emission spectra (excitation at 420 nm) of TPC1/AlNP (black solid line) and TPC5/AlNP (blue dotted line). (B) Comparison of stationary absorption of TPC1/NT36 (black solid line), TPC3/NT36 (red dashed line) and TPC5/NT36 (blue dotted line). 
The Stokes shift between the absorption and emission maxima is large and equals 9400 cm−1 for TPC1, 9000 cm−1 for TPC3, and 7000 cm−1 for TPC5, indicating that the observed emission comes from the stabilized CT state of the dyes33 and the environment around the excited state is very polar. Indeed, the value of the Stokes shift of TPC1 on alumina and titania lies between that observed in the polar dichloromethane (DCM, 8200 cm−1) and ACN (10000 cm−1) solvents.33,34 However, in the films the polarity function of Al2O3 and TiO2 substrates is much below those of DCM and ACN solvents (see Table S1, ESI†). The closely packed dye molecules induce a spectral shift of their emission since they have large dipole moments (10 D in the ground state of TPC1). The mechanism might be similar to that proposed for the so called “solid state solvation”41 observed for dyes possessing dipole moments similar to that of TPC1. Although the averaged concentration of the dyes in the films is much lower than the concentration of DCM or ACN in bulk (compare Table S2, ESI†), the dyes are localized only on the semiconductor surface and, therefore, they can create strong local electric field and local order,42 responsible for the macroscopic total shift of the emission band. It is also possible that some water adsorbed by the samples from the air can be partially responsible for the polarity at the semiconductor surface.
Another important point is that the Stokes shifted emission from the CT state is observed not only from the alumina samples, but also from the titania ones. The emission intensity from TPC1/TiNP is about 10 times weaker than that for TPC1/AlNP (prepared in the same way and for the same film thickness), but it is still well resolved in the stationary experiment. Therefore, despite possible fast electron injection from the LE and hot CT states to the titania conduction band, the vibrational relaxation can effectively compete with this process, and at least some population of the dyes attached to the titania surface reaches the relaxed CT state. In Table 1 we compare the estimated positions of both LE (from −1.52 V to −1.17 V vs.NHE) and relaxed CT states (from −0.70 to −0.55 V, more negative values indicating higher energetic state) for the three dyes studied. These values can be compared with the position of the conduction band edge for titania which is around −0.5 V.10,30,43Scheme 1 presents the estimated positions of the potentials of the dye' states with respect to the titania and alumina conduction bands. The results indicate that the relaxed CT state of the dye lies close to the edge and the involvement of the electron injection to the trap states below the conduction band (or to the sub-bandgap tail of the acceptor states) is likely to occur. Because of the much lower density of the acceptor states close to and below the edge, such injection is expected to have a slower rate than the electron injection to the states well above the conduction band edge.19,31,44,45
Table 1 Comparison of different properties of the studied triphenylamine dyes





Dye


                    TPC1
                  

                    TPC3
                  

                    TPC5
                  





a From ref. 10.
b Calculated as the position in the red slope of the absorption band corresponding to 40% of its maximum intensity, this value (40%) was previously obtained from the crossing point between the absorption and emission of TPC1 in n-hexane.33
c Calculated as oxidation potential minus 0–0 transition energy/e, where e is the electron charge.
d Calculated as the difference between the potential of LE and CT Stokes shift energy/e, where CT Stokes shift is obtained from the total Stokes shift by subtracting the LE Stokes shift, 2700 cm−1, obtained from TPC1 in n-hex.33
e With respect to the value for TPC1.





Extinction coefficienta/M−1 cm−1
37600
21400
12000


Solar cell efficiencya (%)
5.3
3.9
0.4



Oxidation potentiala (vs.NHE)/V
1.07
1.16
1.17


0–0 transitionb/cm−1
21000
20100
18900


Potential of LE statec/V
−1.52
−1.33
−1.17


Total Stokes shift (between absorption and emission maxima)/cm−1
9400
9000
7000


Potential of CT stated/V
−0.70
−0.55
−0.64


Lifetime of the LE state
∼100 fs
∼200 fs
∼200 fs


Averaged lifetime of the CT state from the transient absorption
3 ps
10 ps
7 ps


1/2 lifetime of CT state from the time-resolved emission
1.2 ps
2.4 ps
2.1 ps


Bleach recovery in fs transient absorption (intensity at 500 ps/initial intensity)
∼0.75
∼0.5
—


Intensity of radical cation signal in fs transient absorptione
100%
40%
20%


Intensity of radical cation signal in flash photolysise
100%
50%
25%




 Scheme 1  The estimated positions of the potentials (vs.NHE) of the three dyes' states (S0, locally excited (LE) and charge transfer (CT)) with respect to titania and alumina conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). For the detailed values, see Table 1. 
3.2. Femto- to nanosecond transient absorption studies of TPC1 dye interacting with alumina

UV-visible transient absorption studies were made following 400 nm excitation in a 0–1000 ps time window. First, we identify the transient absorption features for TPC1/AlNP (the reference sample without the electron injection process) by comparing them with the previously studied TPC1 in ACN solution.34 For clarity Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows representative spectra of TPC1 in ACN. Within the instrumental response function (IRF), an initial band having its maximum intensity around 685 nm appears (with a long-wavelength tail extending to the near IR region), and which is assigned to the LE state of TPC1 (spectrum at 0 ps). The LE state decays very rapidly (time constant of 50 fs) to a CT one having a band maximum at 550 nm (spectrum at 0.2 ps). This excited state undergoes an energy stabilization due to solvation (with time constants of 400 fs) leading to a relaxed CT state having its band maximum around 520 nm (spectrum at 1.5 ps).

Fig. 3A shows the transient absorption spectra of TPC1 interacting with alumina for selected time delays between pump and probe. Fig. 3B exhibits the results of global analysis and the spectral evolution of the pre-exponential factors of the fitted components (often called also “decay associated difference spectra”). A very good fit quality (correlation r2 > 0.99) was obtained using a model of three exponentials (convoluted with an IRF of ∼150 fs duration) with global time constants of 200 fs, 3 ps and 350 ps. Subsequent to fs excitation, a negative band with a maximum around 450 nm (due to ground state depopulation) and a positive one between 500 and 750 nm appear (Fig. 3A). In addition to that, a weaker, positive and unstructured signal is also observed in the near IR region (830–980 nm). We observed, with a time constant of 200 fs, a decay of the long-wavelength part (640–750 nm) of the positive visible band and a partial decay of the near IR band (Fig. 3B). Part (∼670 nm) of the pre-exponential factor spectrum for the 200 fs component (Fig. 3B) is not different from the spectrum of TPC1/ACN (Fig. S2, ESI†) recorded at 0 time delay. The apparent two peaks at 640 and 730 nm observed for TPC1/AlNP are probably the artefact present for very early spectra due to the chirp correction procedure (oscillatory-like shape). Therefore, we can assign the observed decay (∼200 fs) to the depopulation of the LE state of TPC1/AlNP, created immediately after photoexcitation of the dye.
 Fig. 3  (A) Representative transient absorption spectra (ΔA is the change of absorbance) of TPC1/AlNP at selected delays between pump (400 nm) and probe pulses. (B) Pre-exponential factor spectra obtained from 3-exponential global analysis of the transient absorption spectra of TPC1/AlNP. The negative values indicate a rising component, while the positive values—a decay component. The fitted time components are indicated in the figure. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM). 
Next, the remaining positive band with maximum intensity around 550 nm can be attributed to the CT state. Its shape and spectral position are again similar to those of the CT band observed for TPC1/ACN (Fig. S2, ESI†). Only the contribution of the negative bleach band is smaller in the latter case. Note also the symmetry of the amplitude of the positive band at 550 nm and the negative bleach band at 450 nm for TPC1/AlNP. The decay of the CT state takes place in a non-exponential way and it has to be fitted by at least two time components of 3 and 350 ps to model the observed signal changes. As Fig. 3B shows, the amplitudes of both components slightly differ in the red region. This might reflect the vibrational relaxation affecting the faster one. However, the bleach recovery is present in both of them. This means that the decay from the excited state to the ground state occurs partially also at early times (single ps). Such multi-exponential decay indicates the participation of intermolecular quenching in relatively dense packed TPC1 molecules on the semiconductor surface, like, for example, singlet–singlet annihilation.46,47 The transient absorption in the near IR region (830–980 nm) is often assigned as originating exclusively from the electrons in the trap states of the titania conduction band.21,22,25,45,48 However, due to the specific properties of the TPC1, both the LE and CT states of the dye on alumina give some contribution in this spectral range, hence complicating the direct observation of the signal due to the electrons.
The ratio of the initial ground state depopulation amplitude to the stationary absorbance value for the same wavelength is about 0.1. Taking into account the possibilities of not perfect pump–probe overlap and the contribution of positive transient absorption signal in this spectral range, we can estimate that about 20% of the molecules are excited by the pump pulse. A similar value can be obtained when calculating the number of molecules and incoming pump photons.
The ground state depopulation band of TPC1/AlNP decreases for wavelengths shorter than 460 nm (Fig. 3A), opposite to the shape of the stationary absorption band (Fig. 2). This suggests a strong contribution of a positive transient absorption from the CT state in this region. To verify this assumption we performed a test transient absorption measurement in the spectral range below 400 nm. Although the signal to noise ratio of our setup is worse in that range, we were able to observe a positive transient absorption band between 350 and 400 nm due to the presence of the CT state.
3.3. Femto- to nanosecond transient absorption studies of TPC1 dye interacting with titania
Now we present the results of TPC1 interacting with titania films of 700 nm thickness, and compare them with those of the AlNP sample discussed above. Fig. 4A and B show representative transient absorption spectra for TPC1/TiNP and TPC1/NT36, respectively, while Fig. 4C and D exhibits the global analysis results. Some examples of kinetic traces for selected wavelengths along with the multi-exponential fits are given in Fig. S3 and Table S3 (ESI†). The first difference between semiconductors is that the LE state of TPC1 on titania decays faster (time constant 100 fs) than that on alumina (200 fs). It is also directly confirmed by the comparison of the kinetics measured at the maximum of the LE band (700 nm), and analyzed using a single-wavelength fit (Fig. 5A and Table 2). One possible explanation is that electron injection from LE to the titania conduction band is the additional process that competes with internal conversion between LE to CT states and makes the overall lifetime of the LE state in titania shorter than that in alumina. Additionally, by comparing the time constants (100 and 200 fs) we can deduce about 50% efficiency of such electron injection from the LE state.
 Fig. 4  Representative transient absorption spectra of (A) TPC1/TiNP and (B) TPC1/NT36 at selected delays between pump (400 nm) and probe pulses. Pre-exponential factor spectra obtained from 3-exponential global analysis of the transient absorption spectra of (C) TPC1/TiNP and (D) TPC1/NT36. The fitted time components are indicated in the figure. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM). 
 Fig. 5  Comparison of transient absorption kinetics of different samples upon excitation at 400 nm and at the (A) 700 nm and (B) 550 nm probe wavelengths. The solid lines are from the best fit. See Table 2 for the fit parameters for 700 nm kinetics. The fitted time constants for (B) are: 10 ps (36%) and 440 ps (64%) for TPC1/alumina and 1.5 ps (54%), 50 ps (19%), and >1 ns (27%) for TPC1/titania. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM). A part of the “x” axis corresponding to long times of observation is in a logarithmic scale. 
Table 2 Values of the time constants (τi) and their fractional amplitudes (Ai, a negative value indicates a rise time) obtained from three-exponential functions used to fit the fs absorption transients at 700 nm for different samples. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) of intensity of fitted IRF is 150 fs




Sample

A
1


τ
1/ps

A
2


τ
2/ps

A
3


τ
3/ps





                    TPC1/AlNP
0.0123
0.21
0.0048
2.6
0.0027
470



                    TPC1/TiNP
0.0133
0.14
0.0032
1.7
0.0030
>1000



                    TPC1/NT36
0.0129
0.13
0.0044
1.9
0.0023
>1000



                    TPC3/NT36
0.0114
0.23
0.0041
2.7
0.0033
120




Further transient absorption evolution in TPC1/titania samples is connected with the CT state decay (maximum at 580 nm), taking place with the averaged time constant of 3.5 ps for TPC1/TiNP and 3 ps for TPC1/NT36, and the residual long living (>1 ns) species, see Fig. 4C and D. For simplification and clarity of the discussion in most cases only the result of a three-exponential global analysis is shown (Fig. 4C and D) (four-exponential fit for TPC1/NT36 gives time constants of 1.5 ps and 50 ps, which should be compared to the CT lifetime observed in alumina: 3 ps and 350 ps, Fig. S4 (ESI†)). Thus, the CT state evolution (in fact non-exponential, see below) is represented by one component of averaged value (around 3 ps in the case of TPC1/titania). We have found substantial shortening of the CT lifetime for TPC1/NT36 and TPC1/TiNP with respect to TPC1/AlNP as visualized in Fig. 5B, where the transient absorption kinetic traces at 550 nm (close to the maximum of the CT state signal) are compared. It should be noted that similar excitation conditions were used in both nanoparticle samples (TiNP and AlNP). In addition to that, the absorptions of the dye in these samples are comparable, and hence its concentration is very similar. This suggests similar rate of self-quenching in the studied systems. Moreover, we also did not observe any change in the CT lifetime when the control 4 times diluted sample of TPC1/TiNP was measured (the dilution of TPC1 was achieved by immersing the film in TPC1/ACN solution for the time as short as 3 minutes). Therefore, the only probable reason for the shortening of the CT lifetime in titania is electron injection to the semiconductor. The relaxed CT state lies close to the conduction band edge, so the electron injection to the trap states or the sub-bandgap tail of the acceptor states can explain the slower injection rate with respect to that from the LE state or higher energy levels of CT (Scheme 1). Further support and more detailed analysis of this multi-exponential electron transfer process is shown in section 3.5.
The pre-exponential factor spectrum of the component assigned to CT state decay of TPC1 on titania is similar to that on alumina (Fig. 3 and 4), with the symmetry between the intensities of positive absorption band and negative bleach recovery. This indicates that the decay of the CT state on titania is accompanied by the repopulation of the ground state with comparable time constants. Indeed, even when the global analysis range was divided into two parts: below 500 nm (bleach band) and above 500 nm (positive band), the time constants obtained independently in these two parts did not differ by more than 1 ps. If the relaxed CT states decay due to the interaction with the trap states of titania, as stated before, it is reasonable to assume that the observed feature is due to the electron injected from TPC1 to the titania sub-band surface states that recombines very quickly to the ground state of the same parent dye.
This finding is in agreement with the recent reports on the observed intermediates in the electron injection process.49,50 It has been shown that in some systems the electron injection can take place via the interface-bound charge-separated pairs49 (consisting of the dye and titania centers bounded to it), before the full charge separation takes place (leading to dye radical cation and free electrons in the conduction band). On the other hand, for highly coupled dye–titania systems an ultrafast (sub-ps) electron recombination from the semiconductor trap states, localized at the Ti centers bounded to the parent dye, has been reported.51,52 Taking into account both observations, it is quite probable that, when the electron injection occurs from the CT state of TPC1 to the trap states, a rapid recombination to the oxidized TPC1 ground state can occur before the electron can be transferred to another trap state, localized further away from the dye. Importantly, it suggests that the observed process significantly limits the efficiency of sunlight conversion for TPC1 and that the position of the CT state close to the conduction band edge is very undesired from the point of view of solar cell performance in this family of organic dyes.
Now, we discuss the residual species present in titania samples (Fig. 4), with the maximum of transient absorption around 570 nm. Although its band is similar to that of the CT state, there is evidence that allows us to assign the former to the TPC1 radical cation, created after electron injection. First, the clear asymmetry between positive transient absorption and negative bleach bands (the intensity of the latter signal being about 2–3 times larger than the former one) is quite distinctive when compared to symmetric CT signal. Similar asymmetry in the transient absorption band of radical cation was observed recently in the studies of polyene-diphenylaniline dye (A1).25 This dye has the same electron donor and attaching units as TPC1, but, instead of the oligophenylenevinylene part as a spacer, A1 dye contains a thiophene group. The correctness of the observed band's assignment to the radical cation was confirmed by photoinduced absorption measurements and observation of conduction band electrons in IR.25 Although the maximum of the radical cation absorption band for A1 is at around 680 nm, we believe that the shift comparing to TPC1 (570 nm) is due to the different spacer unit. Indeed, as we show below, the corresponding radical cation of TPC5 dye, having additional nitrile groups in the bridging unit, exhibits the absorption peak even more red-shifted, at around 800 nm. Moreover, additional arguments for the presence of radical cation can be found by a closer inspection of the transient absorption spectra of TPC1 in alumina and titania, which at long time delays reveal important differences. The transient absorption spectra at different time delays (but after the initial decay of the LE state) show a clear one ΔA = 0 crossing point for the alumina sample due to the presence of only one species, the CT state (Fig. S5A, ESI†). On the contrary, for all titania samples the ΔA = 0 crossing point shifts to the red with increasing time (Fig. S5B, ESI†). This indicates the participation of another species, which most obviously is a radical cation (with a more pronounced bleach band than that of the CT state). Further differences between CT and radical cation spectra are present for TPC5, and will be presented in the next section.
In addition to the TPC1/TiNP and TPC1/NT36 samples of 700 nm thickness we have also measured two other samples (TPC1/NT70 and TPC1/NP) of 2 μm thickness. Due to higher levels of light scattering in these thicker films, the analysis was not possible below 480 nm, the main part of the depopulation band. However, in the long-wavelength region the results were the same in all titania samples (compare, for example, Fig. S6 with Fig. S4 (ESI†)). Therefore, within the sensitivity and signal to noise ratio of our transient absorption studies, we can state that the early photoinduced processes in this system are not dependent on the morphology of the titania material (nanotubes of different size or nanoparticles).
Here we make a short comparison with our previous results of TPC1 interacting with P25 titania nanoparticles in suspension.34 In those studies, the spectral separation between the CT state and radical cation of TPC1 was even less evident than in the present study on films. Therefore, the fastest two components in the ground state recovery (1 ps and 15 ps) were assigned to the electron recombination of the free electrons in the conduction band of titania or the electrons in the shallow trap states.34 In the view of the current studies, this interpretation should be refined and these times are more likely to be rather due to the injection from the CT state and rapid recombination of interface-bound trapped electrons. Another refinement to the previous model is connected with the LE state. Previously, based on the comparison of the lifetimes on titania (100 fs) and of free dyes in solution (50 fs),34 we assumed that electron injection cannot take place efficiently from that state. However, according to the current results on alumina (LE lifetime of 200 fs), that assumption was probably not entirely correct. Finally, the total electron recombination in suspension was faster than on films: only 20–30% of the initial injected electrons in the conduction band were left within the first 1 ns after excitation,34 while on films this value is approximately 2 times larger. However, this difference might be also justified by much higher energy of the pump pulses used in the previous transient absorption experiments (about 10 times larger than in the current studies). An increase in the electron recombination rate for more intense excitation (when many electrons are injected into the same nanoparticle) has been reported for many DSSC systems.36,48
To summarize this part and the proposed mechanism, Scheme 2 illustrates the observed deactivation pathways of TPC1 interacting with titania films. A rapid decay of the initially excited LE state takes place with the time constant 100 fs, probably partially due to electron injection to the conduction band of titania and partially due to internal conversion to the CT state. This latter suffers a significant energy stabilization in the local environment of high electric field that shifts the CT position close to or below the conduction band edge of titania material. From that level the electron injection takes place in a multi-exponential way to the trap states or the sub-bandgap tail of the acceptor states with lower density. The averaged time constant of this process is 3 ps, much longer than that from the LE state. A more detailed investigation of the time constants for this injection as well as the injections from higher energy levels of CT (before stabilization) will be presented in section 3.5. The electrons transferred to the trap states and localized at the semiconductor–dye interface recombine quickly to the ground state of the parent dye with the times shorter than their injection. Those electrons that have been transferred to the titania conduction band from the LE state or the hot CT state are thermalized on the sub-ps time scale (∼100 fs53–55) to the trap states, localized further away from the formed radical cation. The recombination of the latter, taking place on the time scale longer than 1 ns, will be the subject of the flash photolysis studies presented in section 3.6.
 Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the photoinduced electron transfer processes, taking place in TPC1 interacting with titania nanotubes and nanoparticles. 
3.4. Femto- to nanosecond transient absorption studies of TPC3 and TPC5 dyes
In light of the proposed deactivation scheme for the TPC1 dye, we compare the interaction of the other two dyes with titania. We have studied TPC3/NT36, TPC5/NT36 and, as a reference, TPC5/AlNP samples.
The transient absorption spectra of TPC3 are very similar to those of TPC1, with a red-shift by only few nm of all the bands (see Fig. S7, ESI†). However, the decay times of both the LE and CT states are longer for TPC3, being about 200 fs and 10 ps, respectively (Table 1). The first value means that the efficiency of electron injection from LE is very weak, since its lifetime on titania is almost the same as that on alumina (Fig. 5A). The yield of the radical cation formation can be estimated from the analysis of bleach recovery. Under the assumption of negligible contribution of positive transient absorption in the spectral range of the bleach (or the similar contribution for both CT state and radical cation absorption) the above yield can be deduced as the ratio of the initial bleach intensity (proportional to the number of initially excited molecules) to the residual bleach at around 500 ps (after the fast recombination on single and tens of ps time scale). Its ratio is about 0.75 for TPC1 and is significantly smaller, 0.50, for TPC3 (Table 1, see also Fig. 4 and Fig. S7 (ESI†)). The weaker electron injection yield for TPC3 can also be figured out from the intensity of the radical cation band, which is about 40% of that of TPC1 (much smaller than what can be expected from the difference in the stationary absorbance at 400 nm for TPC1/NT36 and TPC3/NT36 samples, see Fig. 2B).

Fig. 6 shows that, unlike TPC3, the transient absorption spectra of TPC5 are much more different from those of TPC1. The main difference is in the shape of the bands assigned to CT and the radical cation. The CT band maximum is similar to other dyes (570 nm for TPC5/AlNP and 580 nm for TPC5/NT36), but the amplitude of the accompanied negative bleaching band is much smaller for TPC5, probably due to a new positive absorption band below 500 nm (Fig. 6). The radical cation absorption band in the titania sample has the maximum intensity significantly red shifted to about 800 nm. The new absorption band at around 450 nm decreases the negative bleach intensity, similarly as for the spectra of the CT state. As for the dynamics (Fig. 6C and D), the LE state decays with a time constant of about 200 fs, the same for TPC5/AlNP and TPC5/NT36. This means that, similarly to TPC3, the electron injection efficiency from LE is small for TPC5. The CT state of TPC5 decays with time constants of 3 and 100 ps for TPC5/AlNP (similar to the times of TPC1/AlNP, 3 and 300 ps) and about 7 ps for TPC5/NT36. The latter value, inversely proportional to the electron injection rate from the CT state, can be compared to that of TPC1/NT36 (3 ps) and TPC3/NT36 (10 ps). Because of the above-mentioned low intensity of the bleaching band and, generally, the weakest signals for TPC5 among the three dyes, it is not possible to obtain reliable information about the yield of radical cation formation from the ground state recovery dynamics. However, the intensity of the TPC5 radical cation band is approximately 2 times lower than that of TPC3 (measured under the same conditions), proportionally to the decrease in absorbance at the pump wavelength (Fig. 2B), which suggests similar efficiency of dye–titania charge separation in TPC3 and TPC5 systems (assuming similar absorption coefficients for both radical cations).
 Fig. 6  Representative transient absorption spectra of (A) TPC5/AlNP and (B) TPC5/NT36 at selected delays between pump (400 nm) and probe pulses. Pre-exponential factor spectra obtained from 3-exponential global analysis of the transient absorption spectra of (C) TPC5/AlNP and (D) TPC5/NT36. The fitted time components are indicated in the figure. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM). 

Table 1 shows the comparison of the most important parameters and decay times of the three dyes studied here (TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5) on NT36. The shortest lifetimes of both LE and CT states are for TPC1. This can be explained by the electron-withdrawing substituents in the bridge present for both TPC3 and TPC5 (–Cl and –CN, respectively, see Fig. 1) which may lower the electron density at the attaching carboxylic acid unit and, thus, slowing down the electron injection rate. As we suggested in the previous section, the electron injection from LE (and probably also from hot CT states) is most likely contributing to the efficient charge separation in the TPC1/titania system. Therefore, larger injection rates for TPC1 can explain the larger population of the radical cation, and, as a consequence, better sunlight conversion efficiency when compared to TPC3 and TPC5. As for the relaxed CT states, the parameter that might influence the electron injection rate is the position of its potential with respect to the conduction band edge of titania: the more positive it is (with respect to NHE), the energy level is lower and the concentration of electron accepting states/trap states is smaller. The calculated potential of the CT states (−0.70 V for TPC1, −0.55 V for TPC3 and −0.64 V for TPC5) agrees well with the differences in CT lifetime (3, 10 and 7 ps, respectively). However, as we showed before, this lifetime probably does not have an impact on the efficiency of the charge separation since the electrons injected from CT recombine very quickly to the dye ground state.
3.5. Femto- to nanosecond transient emission studies
The excitation wavelength in the up-conversion studies of TPC1 samples was set at 420 nm and 3 gating emission wavelengths were used: 500, 600 and 680 nm, corresponding to the blue (500 and 600 nm) and red part of the emission spectrum of the CT state (Fig. 2A). We also checked that there is no effect on the emission transients when a higher energetic pump at 390 nm was used. Fig. 7A shows the illustrative emission transients of TPC1/NT36, and the results for TPC1/AlNP and TPC1/TiNP are shown in Fig. S8A and S8B (ESI†). Table 3A and Table S4 (ESI†) give the corresponding results of the multi-exponential fits. In all cases, a two- or three-exponential function without offset was used to fit the observed transients with satisfactory quality (correlation r2 > 0.99). Fig. S8C (ESI†) presents a comparison of the emission transients for the different TPC1 samples (TPC1/AlNP, TPC1/TiNP and TPC1/NT36) at one wavelength in the red part (680 nm).
 Fig. 7  (A) Femtosecond (fs) emission transients of TPC1/NT36 at the indicated wavelengths of observation, and upon excitation at 420 nm. The solid lines are from the best fit (see Table 3A). (B) Comparison of the fs–ps emission transients upon excitation at 420 nm of the indicated samples and indicated gated wavelengths. The gated wavelength corresponds to approximately the same energy position with respect to the maximum of emission band. The solid lines are from the best fit (see Table 3B). A part of the “x” axis corresponding to long times of observation is in a logarithmic scale. 
Table 3 Values of the time constants (τi) and their fractional amplitudes (Ai, normalized to 1) of (A) TPC1/NT36, and (B) different dyes, at the indicated emission wavelengths and upon excitation at 420 nm obtained from two- or three exponential functions, used to fit the fs transient emission (convoluted with an IRF of 180 fs). For (B), the average half-lifetime is also given in the last column




(A) λ/nm

A
1


τ
1/ps

A
2


τ
2/ps

A
3


τ
3/ps




500
0.75
0.16
0.25
1.3
—
—


600
0.53
0.46
0.37
3.2
0.10
44


680
0.50
0.89
0.35
6.3
0.15
88






(B) Sample

λ/nm

A
1


τ
1/ps

A
2


τ
2/ps

A
3


τ
3/ps
Half-lifetime/ps





                    TPC1/NT36
640 nm
0.54
0.68
0.34
5.2
0.12
76
1.2



                    TPC3/NT36
640 nm
0.38
0.84
0.42
7.3
0.20
80
2.4



                    TPC5/NT36
680 nm
0.45
0.80
0.37
6.8
0.18
84
2.1



                    TPC5/AlNP
680 nm
0.27
0.70
0.47
8.4
0.26
190
5.3




In all the samples the values of the fitted time constants increase gradually with the observation wavelength. For example, the fastest component for TPC1/NT36 changes from 0.16 ps at 500 nm to 0.89 ps at 680 nm, the medium component—from 1.3 ps at 500 nm to 6.3 ps at 680 nm, while the longest component, absent at 500 nm, has values of 44 ps at 600 nm and 88 ps at 680 nm (Table 3A). For the alumina sample, the fitted components reflect the vibrational relaxation process and the decay of the relaxed CT state of TPC1 at the semiconductor surface. They can be also influenced by dye self-quenching due to aggregation on the alumina surface (and energy transfer between neighbouring molecules), which has been shown to influence the emission transients for some systems.28,56 For titania samples, the shortening of the fitted time constants is due to the electron injection to conduction band and trap states. The emission transients decay faster in titania than in alumina for the gating wavelength at the blue side of the emission spectrum (500 and 600 nm). This result shows that the electron injection occurs partially from the hot CT state. Such injection competes with the vibrational relaxation process.20–22 However, the most pronounced differences are observed at the red side of the emission (680 nm) where the relaxed CT state dynamics is mostly probed. Some estimation about the efficiency of electron injection can be made assuming that an average emission decay rate is a reciprocal of a half-lifetime of the emission transients. Its value at 680 nm is τAl = 8.8 ps for TPC1/AlNP and τTi = 1.1 ps for TPC1/TiNP (Fig. S8C, ESI†), which indicates that the injection to titania is very efficient, 88% ([τAl − τTi]/τAl). However, one should have in mind that, as shown in the previous sections, such electron injection to the localized trap states is followed by a fast back electron recombination, and, probably, does not much affect the solar cell efficiency.
The multi-exponential nature of the emission transients indicates that the electron transfer from TPC1 to titania cannot be described as a single-exponential process. Thus, to explain the observed behavior, we applied the heterogeneous model which has been used to explain the non-exponential electron injection.17,18,57 In this model the microscopic rate of electron transfer is proportional to the density of acceptor states in the semiconductor, which is exponentially increasing with energy. Due to the inhomogeneity in the titania sample, the relative energy of the conduction band and the excited state of the dye vary slightly due to the variance in the interface contacts. This results in an energetic shift of the exponential function of acceptor states density for different dye–titania pairs and a macroscopic distribution of electron injection rates. Scheme S1 (ESI†) illustrates this model. This model not only accounts for the multi-exponential nature of the electron transfer process in the TPC1/titania system, but it also explains the wavelength dependence of the electron injection. The emission gated at different wavelengths probes the injection dynamics at different vibrational energy levels, being faster from higher vibrational states (blue emission) and slower from the more relaxed levels (red emission). This is because the density of acceptor states is, on average, larger for higher vibrational levels (see Scheme S1, ESI†), and so the electron injection is faster.
The emission transients of TPC1 are comparable for both nanotube array films (NT36 and NT70, the illustrative example is given in Fig. S9 (ESI†)), but TPC1 on titania nanoparticle films has an averaged injection rate slightly larger (compare Table 3A and Table S3B, and also Fig. S8C (ESI†)). For example, the half lifetime of the emission transient at 680 nm is increased from 1.1 ps for TPC1/TiNP to 1.7 ps for TPC1/NT36. One of the explanations might be the difference in the electron injection rates. If such a difference was due to the shift of the conduction band position, it should be higher by about 0.24 V of the nanotubes. It is because the transients at 680 nm for TPC1/NP are similar to those for TPC1/NT36 at 600 nm, and the difference of the energy between 600 and 680 nm is 0.24 eV. However, electrochemical studies have shown that the flat-band potential of titania nanotubes (−0.32 eV vs.NHE)58 has rather lower energy than that of nanoparticles (−0.5 eV vs.NHE10,30,43). So, this explanation can be ruled out. Moreover, the transient absorption results suggest the same averaged lifetime of the CT state (around 3 ps) for both TiNP and NT36.
Therefore, since the difference is only observed in the emission experiment, the probable explanation is that it is due to the dynamic shift of the emission spectrum. If the shift is not the same for the two samples, then the emission gated at the same wavelength might correspond to the population at different vibrational levels having different emission transients. Although the stationary emission bands are very similar for TPC1/TiNP and TPC1/NT36 (Fig. S1, ESI†), the emission shift can be due to the additional local electric field (see section 3.1) increased upon excitation (for example from the created TPC1 radical cations having larger dipole moments than TPC1 molecules in the ground state). It is supported by the fact that the repetition rate of the up-conversion setup (80 MHz) is high enough to probe the system that is not completely relaxed (longest decays in the range of 100 μs, see next section) and that the absorbance of the NP samples was approximately 50% larger than that of the NT36 samples. Therefore, under the same excitation conditions the additional pump-induced local electric field stabilizes the CT state more in NP than in NT36, and the emission transients at the same gating wavelength are faster for the former than for the latter.
We also checked the excitation energy dependence of the measured transients and found that they become slightly faster (by a few percent, on average) when increasing the excitation energy from 0.1 μJ cm−2 up to 0.4 μJ cm−2, see Fig. S10 (ESI†). This relatively small change might be due to singlet–singlet annihilation46,47 or due to the above-mentioned differences in the pump-induced local electric fields.
Now, we discuss the emission transients of the three dyes (TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5). Due to the difference in the stationary emission spectrum (Fig. S1, ESI†) the transients of TPC5 dye measured at the experimentally longest possible gating wavelength (680 nm) should be compared with those of TPC1 and TPC3 measured at about 40 nm shorter wavelength (640 nm). Fig. 7B shows illustrative emission transients of TPC1/NT36, TPC3/NT36, TPC5/NT36, and TPC5/AlNP. Table 3B gives the corresponding results of the multi-exponential fits. As discussed previously for TPC1, the kinetics are multi-exponential, but for the simplicity and clarity the half lifetimes can be compared. Their values for TPC5/AlNP (5.3 ps) and TPC5/NT36 (2.1 ps) indicate that the efficiency of electron injection from the CT state is smaller for TPC5 (60%) than for TPC1 (88%). The trend in the half lifetime values for the different dyes (1.2 ps for TPC1, 2.1 ps for TPC5 and 2.4 ps for TPC3, see Table 3B) is in agreement with the averaged CT lifetimes obtained in the transient absorption experiment (3 ps, 7 ps and 10 ps, respectively, see section 3.4). The shorter values obtained in the transient emission experiment can be due to the contribution of vibrational relaxation which cannot be neglected at 680 nm for TPC5 and at 640 nm for TPC1 and TPC3.
In contrast to the transient absorption studies, the transient emission data have rarely been used to study electron injection dynamics at the dye–semiconductor interface.17,28,34,56,57,59,60 One of the reasons might be that the fluorescence decay observed in the emission studies might not be only due to electron transfer, but also, for example, due to self-quenching and energy transfer between the dyes.28,56 In the transient absorption, the dye cation and the electrons appearing in the titania conduction band can be directly observed. However, when other quenching processes can be ruled out, the transient emission studies are easier to implement and allow the excited state relaxation dynamics to be monitored exclusively.17 In our case, the transient emission measurements allowed probing the CT decay in greater detail than in the transient absorption experiments, thus giving more complementary results.
Finally, it should be noted that the electron injection dynamics observed in films might be different to that occurring in real operating solar cells.61,62 Recently, it was shown that the electron injection dynamics in the complete cell with electrolyte is significantly slower when compared to that measured in sensitized films on a single electrode.18,63–65 The difference is usually explained by the shift of the conduction band edge of titania, which depends on the concentration of additives in the electrolyte, and thus, its pH (higher concentration of lithium ions decreases the energy of the conduction band, while more pyridine derivatives increase it12,66,67). In a recent contribution we compared the TPC1 behaviour when attached to standard titania nanoparticles P25 and titanium doped mesoporous silica structure, and we performed time-resolved emission measurements in the complete solar cell filled with the standard iodine electrolyte (Iodolyte AN-50, Solaronix).68 In agreement with the above-mentioned data for other dyes, we observed an increase in the lifetime of the relaxed S1 state of TPC1 from 0.6 ps in the nanoparticle film in air to 4.5 ps in the complete solar cell. We believe that this effect is due to the movement of the conduction band edge energy towards higher energies in the presence of pyridine derivative in the electrolyte. This effect causes slower electron injection since the density of acceptor states in titania at the level of the S1 state of the dye becomes lower. Therefore, a similar increase in the averaged lifetime (decrease in electron injection rate) should be expected for the other dyes (TPC3 and TPC5) studied in our current work.
3.6. Nano- to millisecond flash photolysis studies
To get a better insight on the further evolution of the structures and related photodynamics, we performed ns–ms flash photolysis experiments with the excitation set at 410 nm and pump pulse energy of about 1 mJ. Fig. 8A shows representative time resolved spectra of TPC1/NT36 for selected times after photoexcitation. The spectra were reconstructed from the global fit of the kinetic traces, measured at a particular wavelength. The observed spectral behavior is similar for TPC1/NT70 and TPC1/NP (Fig. S11A and B, ESI†), and it is in agreement with the residual spectra observed in the fs–ps transient absorption. The negative band, with a maximum at 470–480 nm, is due to the ground state depopulation of TPC1, and the positive band, with a maximum between 550 and 600 nm, is due to the TPC1 cation. The decay of both bands is a direct indication of back electron transfer from the conduction band of titania to the dye.
 Fig. 8  The most important results of flash photolysis experiments. (A) Representative transient absorption spectra of TPC1/NT36 at selected delays between pump (410 nm, 1 mJ) and probe pulses in flash photolysis experiment. (B) Representative bleach recovery kinetics measured for TPC1/NT36 at a probe wavelength of 480 nm (black). The solid red line is from the best stretched exponential fit (eqn (1)) with the following parameters: τS = 0.46 μs and α = 0.33. The time axis is in a logarithmic scale. (C) Comparison of normalized time-resolved spectra measured at 10 ns for the three indicated dyes on NT36 sample. (D) Comparison of the normalized bleach recovery signal measured at a probe wavelength of 480 nm for both TPC1/NT36 and TPC3/NT36 and of 550 nm for TPC5/NT36. The normalization factors (with respect to TPC1 sample) are indicated. 
This recombination dynamic is highly non-exponential, spanning a very broad temporal range from single ns to 100 μs. Multi-exponential behavior of back electron transfer was often reported for DSSC systems.25,69–71 We found that in our case it can be described by the stretched exponential function: f(t) = A exp[(−t/τs)α](1)where τs is a characteristic (mean) time of the decay, and α is the heterogeneity (dispersion) (mathematically this parameter can have values between 0 and 1; α = 1 is for mono-exponential decay, and a smaller value indicates more dispersive kinetics). Using this function to fit the data for TPC1/NT36 we obtained a mean characteristic lifetime of τs = 0.5 ± 0.2 μs and dispersion parameter α = 0.32 ± 0.02. Fig. 8B shows the representative fit. Within the indicated experimental error, the recombination rate is the same for the three studied systems (NT36, NT70 and NP). One of the reasons for non-exponential back electron transfer kinetics might be the distribution of electron occupation of trap states, and the differences of the electron recombination rate between particular traps and the dye. Another origin might be the inhomogeneity in the titania sample, resulting in different relative energies between the dye and conduction band of titania, as discussed before for the transient emission data and used to explain the multi-exponential electron injection kinetics. In both cases, the stretched exponential function (which is the model function, assuming the distribution of time constants) has been shown to well reproduce the experimental behavior of many dyes interacting with titania nanoparticles.72,73
For the two other dyes, the spectra obtained in ns–ms experiment match quite well the residual spectra from the fs–ps transient absorption and reveal the previously discussed trend. When compared to that of TPC1, the initial intensity of the positive radical cation signal (which should be proportional to the number of injected electrons) is approximately two times smaller for TPC3 and four times smaller for TPC5 (Table 1). As Fig. 8C presents for normalized NT36 samples, the radical cation band of TPC3 is only slightly red shifted with respect to that of TPC1. For TPC5 the shift is much larger (maximum at around 800 nm), another positive band appears at 450 nm and the negative bleach band (with a maximum at around 550 nm) has much smaller intensity (with respect to the positive band) when compared to other dyes. However, Fig. 8D shows that, within the signal-to-noise ratio, there is no difference in the recombination dynamics for all three dyes studied.
In the flash photolysis experiments, we also observed additional features when monitoring the pump pulse energy dependence for TPC1. When the energy exceeds 5 mJ, the bleaching band recovery becomes longer, while the decay of the positive cation band remains unchanged (Fig. S12, ESI†). Moreover, the residual negative bleach band has a different shape (shifted to the blue) when compared to the initial one. This behavior resembles the recent report of an apparent bleach of the ground-state absorption of the dye, under conditions where the dye is in the ground state, measured with transient absorption spectroscopy.74 The appearance of this feature was explained by a change in the local electric field affecting (shifting) the absorption spectrum of the dye, similarly to the result of Stark effect. This local field is created by the electrons within the titania, oxidized dye and electrolyte. We suggest that a similar interpretation can be valid in our case, even without the presence of electrolyte—when many electrons are injected to the titania material (intense excitation light), the created electric field can induce changes in the dipole moment orientations of the dyes attached to the semiconductor surface which can persist longer than the electron recombination time. Thus, when the dye is regenerated, the cation band disappears and the dye is back in the ground state, but the absorption spectrum of this ground state is shifted with respect to the one before excitation, and the apparent residual negative signal is present.
We also tried to fit alternative functions to the stretched exponential one that describe the back electron transfer dynamics. One of the models explaining the electron diffusion in titania is the random flight model75 which assumes that electrons move between trap sites on the surface of a nanoparticle by diffusion in the conduction band. In contrast to the nearest-neighbor random walk, it predicts, under some approximation, a different analytical function than a stretched exponential one to describe the electron recombination dynamics.75 We fitted the recombination kinetics to that function and found that, except for the times shorter than 50 ns, it fits to the data as well as the stretched exponential function (Fig. S13, ESI†). However, the model predicts that the recombination kinetics become faster when the pump pulse energy increases and there are more electrons in the titania trap states. As presented above, we did not observe such effect, the bleach recovery becoming even longer for higher pump energies. The most probable explanation is that our reaction is limited by direct long-range electron transfer from the trap site nearest to the cation, not via the conduction band.75
Finally, we address the possible influence of the electrolyte on the observed dynamics in the ns–ms scale. When the complete solar cell with electrolyte is studied in the flash photolysis experiments, the bleach recovery kinetics reflects not only the back electron transfer from titania to the dye, but also the dye regeneration with the electrolyte. For the efficient dyes, the dye regeneration (measured with the redox couple) is usually at least an order of magnitude larger than the electron recombination (without the redox couple).11,76 In a recent contribution we have compared the flash photolysis results for one of the systems reported in this work (TPC1 interacting with titania nanoparticles) in the film in air and in the complete solar cell.68 The averaged (under single exponential approximation) bleach recovery times of TPC1 were comparable (7 μs in the film in air and 8 μs in the solar cell). This indicates that fast electron recombination might be responsible for the limited efficiency of TPC1 and other dyes of this family. However, it should be noted that the lifetimes measured for film with and without electrolyte cannot be directly related, because, the electrolyte induces a change in the position of the conduction band edge of titania and, thus, influences the titania–dye back electron transfer dynamics. The emission studies mentioned before indicate that the conduction band edge is probably shifted to the higher energies in electrolyte, and for most systems for DSSC the back electron transfer process lies in the Marcus inverted region.12 Therefore, the actual electron recombination time (from titania to TPC1) in the presence of electrolyte can be slower than that measured in films without electrolyte, and the dye regeneration might be in fact more efficient.
4. Conclusions
We present detailed studies of electron injection and back electron transfer in a system of organic dyes (TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5) anchored to the surface of titania nanoparticles, vertically oriented titania nanotube arrays and, as a reference, alumina nanoparticles. We used time-resolved absorption and emission techniques in the UV-vis and near-IR range, covering the temporal range from 50 fs up to 1 ms.
The fs–ps transient absorption studies reveal the presence of LE and CT states of the studied dyes both on titania and alumina samples, as well as give indication for the presence of the dyes' radical cation on titania samples. The lifetime of the LE state is around 100 fs for TPC1 and 200 fs for both TPC3 and TPC5 on titania. Based on the observed behavior, we propose a scheme that involves electron injection from the LE state to the semiconductor conduction band. Further comparison of the obtained values with the dyes' lifetime on alumina (200 fs) suggests about 50% electron injection efficiency for TPC1, and negligible yield of this process in TPC3 and TPC5. The decay of the CT state on titania takes place with the averaged times of 3, 10 and 7 ps for TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5, respectively. We propose that the electron injection to the conduction band occurs from the hot CT state, but the main process contributing to the decay of the relaxed CT state is the electron injection to the trap states or to the tail of the acceptor states below the conduction band edge, localized close to the dye radical cation. The last process is accompanied by a very fast electron recombination to the ground state of the oxidized parent dye. The lifetimes of LE and CT are the same for titania nanotubes and nanoparticles.
By means of transient emission studies, we observed in more detail multi-exponential electron injection kinetics from both hot and relaxed CT states. The average injection rate decreases when the electron transfer takes place from lower vibrational levels of the dye's excited state. For TPC1, the relaxed CT state on titania decays with time constants from 1 ps to 50 ps with the electron injection efficiency of 80–90%. For two other dyes, the averaged decay time is about 2–3 times longer and the electron injection efficiency is 50–60%.
The ns–ms flash photolysis show multi-exponential electron recombination dynamics, spanning a broad temporal range from single ns to 100 μs. It is probably due to differently distributed electrons in trap states, and it can be fitted by stretched exponential function with a characteristic time of 0.5 μs and dispersion parameter of 0.33. The electron recombination dynamics are similar for the nanotubes and the nanoparticles, and also for the studied dyes. A schematic representation for the electron transfer processes is shown in Scheme 2.
The observed dynamics of the different dyes partially explains the reported differences in their sunlight conversion efficiency when used in DSSCs (5.3% for TPC1, 3.9% for TPC3 and only 0.4% for TPC5).10 The most efficient dye, TPC1, has the highest electron injection rate from both LE and CT states because of the lack of electron withdrawing substituents in the bridge unit and highest position of the CT state with respect to the conduction band edge. However, the electron transfer rates for TPC3 and TPC5 are very similar and a 2x decrease in the extinction coefficient between TPC3 and TPC5 cannot explain the almost one order of magnitude change in their efficiency. Most probably, some other factors present in the real solar cell (electrolyte, different light intensity conditions) force additional changes in the photodynamics of TPC3 and TPC5.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only few fast and ultrafast studies of the photo-induced electron transfer processes in titania nanotubes, in contrast to many of those measured in titania nanoparticles. Therefore, we believe that our results will be helpful for the better understanding of the electron transfer mechanism in ordered 1-D nanostructures for photovoltaics. On a longer time scale, a 25% improvement in the charge collection efficiency in titania nanotube films was observed compared to nanoparticle films, due to less contact points in nanotube material.77 Our results show that on the fast and ultrafast time scale the electron transfer processes have similar dynamics and, as a result, the charge separation efficiency per number of absorbed photons is similar for the nanotubes and nanoparticles.
Our results also indicate that it is undesirable for the position of the charge transfer state of the dye to be close to the conduction band edge of titania, because electrons injected from this state to the interface bounded trap states recombine very quickly to the parent dyes ground state. Since the population of the relaxed charge transfer state is high, this process lowers substantially the total electron injection efficiency of the solar cell system. A donor–(π-spacer)–acceptor system is the basic structure for designing the metal-free dyes for DSSC use and such dyes often exhibit photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer properties.12 Therefore, we believe that the features observed for the triphenylamine family of molecules studied here should be relevant for many all-organic dyes for solar-cells and our findings can help in better design and optimization of such DSSCs.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement no. 235286 (NANOSOL). This work was also supported by the JCCM and MICINN through projects PCI08-0037-5868, MAT2008-01609, and UNCM08-1E-062. B.C. thanks the MICINN for the Ramon y Cajal fellowship. M. Paulose acknowledges partial support of this work by the Polymer-Based Materials for Harvesting Solar Energy, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001087.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834 CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. Yi, N. Zu, J. Zhang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6032 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, C. Park, H. Lee, C. Kim, C. Park, M.-H. Lee, W. Lee, J. Park, K. Kim, N.-G. Park and C. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4887 RSC .
Z.-S. Wang, Y. Cui, K. Hara, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada and A. Shinpo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1138 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Howie, F. Claeyssens, H. Miura and L. M. Peter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1367 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Hagberg, J.-H. Yum, H. J. Lee, F. De Angelis, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, R. Humphry-Baker, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6259 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, X. Yang, R. Chen, R. Zhang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11023 CAS .
V. K. Thorsmølle, B. Wenger, J. Teuscher, C. Bauer and J. E. Moser, Chimia, 2007, 61, 631 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, J. I. Basham, N. K. Allam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, X. Feng, M. Paulose, J. A. Seabold, K. S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6327 CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 527 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Koops and J. R. Durrant, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 663 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Haque, E. Palomares, B. M. Cho, A. N. M. Green, N. Hirata, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, S. A. Haque, I. P. Mercer, J. E. Moser, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 7424 CrossRef CAS .
G. Benkö, J. Kallioinen, J. E. I. Korppi-Tommola, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 489 CrossRef .
S. Verma, P. Kar, A. Das, D. K. Palit and H. N. Ghosh, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 611 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, N. A. Anderson, E. Hao, X. Ai and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7376 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuciauskas, M. S. Freund, H. B. Gray, J. R. Winkler and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 392 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ramakrishna, A. Jose, D. K. Kumar, A. Das, D. K. Palit and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15445 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wiberg, T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and B. Albinsson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3881 CAS .
J. Wiberg, T. Marinado, D. P. Hagberg, L. Sun, A. Hagfeldt and B. Albinsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 14358 CrossRef CAS .
P. Myllyperkiö, C. Manzoni, D. Polli, G. Cerullo and J. Korppi-Tommola, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13985 Search PubMed .
L. Luo, C.-F. Lo, C.-Y. Lin, I.-J. Chang and E. W.-G. Diau, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1064 RSC .
E. Ghadiri, N. Taghavinia, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and J. E. Moser, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1632 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, T. Lutz and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 125, 475 CrossRef .
L. Dworak, V. V. Matylitsky and J. Wachtveitl, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 384 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal, X. Hua, R. L. Dahlgren, A. G. Lappin, L. K. Patterson and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 10883 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ziółek, X. Yang, L. Sun and A. Douhal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 8098 RSC .
M. Ziółek, I. Tacchini, M. T. Martínez, X. Yang, L. Sun and A. Douhal, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 4032 RSC .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Smestad and M. Grätzel, J. Chem. Educ., 1998, 75, 752 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gil and A. Douhal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 428, 174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gil and A. Douhal, Chem. Phys., 2008, 350, 179 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakayama, Y. Amijima, K. Ibuki and K. Hamanoue, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1997, 68, 4364 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Katilius, J. Hindorff and N. Woodbury, ASUFIT program available at www.public.asu.edu/∼laserweb/asufit/asufit.html.
C. F. Madigan and V. Bulović, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 247403 CrossRef .
A. A. Baldo, Z. G. Soos and S. R. Forrest, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 347, 297 CrossRef .
G. Ramakrishna, A. K. Singh, H. N. Ghosh and D. K. Palit, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4775 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 56, 491 CrossRef CAS .
J. Asbury, E. Hao, Y. Wang, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4545 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Billsten, V. Sundström and T. Polívka, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 1521 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ito, T. Inoue, D. Tomita and T. Nagamura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 5458 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshihara, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Tamaki, M. Murai, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3817 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stockwell, Y. Yang, J. Huang, C. Anfuso, Z. Huang and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6560 CAS .
A. Furube, R. Katoh, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12583 CrossRef CAS .
R. Huber, S. Spörlein, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and J. Wachtveitl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8995 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Hang, N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamaki, K. Hara, R. Katoh, M. Tachiya and A. Furube, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11741 CAS .
O. V. Prezhdo, W. R. Duncan and V. V. Prezhdo, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2009, 84, 30 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwata, T. Takaya, H. Hamaguchi, A. Yamakata, T. Ishibashi, H. Onishi and H. Kuroda, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 20233 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, C. F. Lo, C. Y. Lin, I. J. Chang and E. W. G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, I. V. Rubtsov, I. Montanari, K. Yoshihara, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2001, 142, 215 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Muñoz, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4167 CrossRef .
J. M. Rehm, G. L. McLendon, Y. Nagasawa, K. Yoshihara, J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9577 CrossRef .
B. Burfeindt, T. Hannappel, W. Storck and F. Willig, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 16463 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, Z.-S. Wang, K. Sunahara, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6614 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1799 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O'Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, R. Ulbricht, S. Derossi, J. N. H. Reek and M. Bonn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2578 CAS .
M. Giannouli and M. Fakis, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 226, 42 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Haque, Y. Tachibana, R. L. Willis, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 538 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115 RSC .
M. Ziółek, C. Martín, B. Cohen, H. Garcia and A. Douhal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23642 Search PubMed .
G. Benkö, M. Hilgendorff, A. P. Yartsev and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 967 CrossRef .
Y. Tachibana, S. A. Haque, I. P. Mercer, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1198 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Matylitsky, M. O. Lenz and J. Wachtveitl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8372 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, J. Nelson, X. Li, N. J. Long and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, S. A. Haque, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 63, 205321 CrossRef .
U. B. Cappel, S. M. Feldt, J. Schöneboom, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9096 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Barzykin and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 4356 CAS .
L. Alibabaei, J.-H. Kim, M. Wang, N. Pootrakulchote, J. Teuscher, D. Di Censo, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-E. Moser, Y.-J. Yu, K.-Y. Kay, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1757 CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp23825jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
Scanning electron microscope images of (A) cross section and (B) surface of transparent films of titania nanotube arrays fabricated on FTO coated glass (titanium film thickness ≈ 2 μm; anodization at 20 V). (C) Structures of the TPC1, TPC3 and TPC5 dyes.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Normalized stationary absorption and emission spectra (excitation at 420 nm) of TPC1/AlNP (black solid line) and TPC5/AlNP (blue dotted line). (B) Comparison of stationary absorption of TPC1/NT36 (black solid line), TPC3/NT36 (red dashed line) and TPC5/NT36 (blue dotted line).	 


Extinction coefficienta/M−1 cm−1	37600	21400	12000
Solar cell efficiencya (%)	5.3	3.9	0.4

Oxidation potentiala (vs.NHE)/V	1.07	1.16	1.17
0–0 transitionb/cm−1	21000	20100	18900
Potential of LE statec/V	−1.52	−1.33	−1.17
Total Stokes shift (between absorption and emission maxima)/cm−1	9400	9000	7000
Potential of CT stated/V	−0.70	−0.55	−0.64
Lifetime of the LE state	∼100 fs	∼200 fs	∼200 fs
Averaged lifetime of the CT state from the transient absorption	3 ps	10 ps	7 ps
1/2 lifetime of CT state from the time-resolved emission	1.2 ps	2.4 ps	2.1 ps
Bleach recovery in fs transient absorption (intensity at 500 ps/initial intensity)	∼0.75	∼0.5	—
Intensity of radical cation signal in fs transient absorptione	100%	40%	20%
Intensity of radical cation signal in flash photolysise	100%	50%	25%

 	Scheme 1  The estimated positions of the potentials (vs.NHE) of the three dyes' states (S0, locally excited (LE) and charge transfer (CT)) with respect to titania and alumina conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). For the detailed values, see Table 1.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Representative transient absorption spectra (ΔA is the change of absorbance) of TPC1/AlNP at selected delays between pump (400 nm) and probe pulses. (B) Pre-exponential factor spectra obtained from 3-exponential global analysis of the transient absorption spectra of TPC1/AlNP. The negative values indicate a rising component, while the positive values—a decay component. The fitted time components are indicated in the figure. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM).	 

 	Fig. 4  Representative transient absorption spectra of (A) TPC1/TiNP and (B) TPC1/NT36 at selected delays between pump (400 nm) and probe pulses. Pre-exponential factor spectra obtained from 3-exponential global analysis of the transient absorption spectra of (C) TPC1/TiNP and (D) TPC1/NT36. The fitted time components are indicated in the figure. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM).	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of transient absorption kinetics of different samples upon excitation at 400 nm and at the (A) 700 nm and (B) 550 nm probe wavelengths. The solid lines are from the best fit. See Table 2 for the fit parameters for 700 nm kinetics. The fitted time constants for (B) are: 10 ps (36%) and 440 ps (64%) for TPC1/alumina and 1.5 ps (54%), 50 ps (19%), and >1 ns (27%) for TPC1/titania. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM). A part of the “x” axis corresponding to long times of observation is in a logarithmic scale.	 


                    TPC1/AlNP	0.0123	0.21	0.0048	2.6	0.0027	470

                    TPC1/TiNP	0.0133	0.14	0.0032	1.7	0.0030	>1000

                    TPC1/NT36	0.0129	0.13	0.0044	1.9	0.0023	>1000

                    TPC3/NT36	0.0114	0.23	0.0041	2.7	0.0033	120

 	Scheme 2  Schematic representation of the photoinduced electron transfer processes, taking place in TPC1 interacting with titania nanotubes and nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative transient absorption spectra of (A) TPC5/AlNP and (B) TPC5/NT36 at selected delays between pump (400 nm) and probe pulses. Pre-exponential factor spectra obtained from 3-exponential global analysis of the transient absorption spectra of (C) TPC5/AlNP and (D) TPC5/NT36. The fitted time components are indicated in the figure. The IRF was 150 fs (FWHM).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Femtosecond (fs) emission transients of TPC1/NT36 at the indicated wavelengths of observation, and upon excitation at 420 nm. The solid lines are from the best fit (see Table 3A). (B) Comparison of the fs–ps emission transients upon excitation at 420 nm of the indicated samples and indicated gated wavelengths. The gated wavelength corresponds to approximately the same energy position with respect to the maximum of emission band. The solid lines are from the best fit (see Table 3B). A part of the “x” axis corresponding to long times of observation is in a logarithmic scale.	 

500	0.75	0.16	0.25	1.3	—	—
600	0.53	0.46	0.37	3.2	0.10	44
680	0.50	0.89	0.35	6.3	0.15	88


                    TPC1/NT36	640 nm	0.54	0.68	0.34	5.2	0.12	76	1.2

                    TPC3/NT36	640 nm	0.38	0.84	0.42	7.3	0.20	80	2.4

                    TPC5/NT36	680 nm	0.45	0.80	0.37	6.8	0.18	84	2.1

                    TPC5/AlNP	680 nm	0.27	0.70	0.47	8.4	0.26	190	5.3

 	Fig. 8  The most important results of flash photolysis experiments. (A) Representative transient absorption spectra of TPC1/NT36 at selected delays between pump (410 nm, 1 mJ) and probe pulses in flash photolysis experiment. (B) Representative bleach recovery kinetics measured for TPC1/NT36 at a probe wavelength of 480 nm (black). The solid red line is from the best stretched exponential fit (eqn (1)) with the following parameters: τS = 0.46 μs and α = 0.33. The time axis is in a logarithmic scale. (C) Comparison of normalized time-resolved spectra measured at 10 ns for the three indicated dyes on NT36 sample. (D) Comparison of the normalized bleach recovery signal measured at a probe wavelength of 480 nm for both TPC1/NT36 and TPC3/NT36 and of 550 nm for TPC5/NT36. The normalization factors (with respect to TPC1 sample) are indicated.	 
f(t) = A exp[(−t/τs)α]	(1)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp23825j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
