Nanostructured solar cells harvesting multi-type energies  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03226K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03226K
(Minireview)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6040-6046Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanostructured solar cells harvesting multi-type energies

        
          
            Liang 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shimou 
            Chen
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xuebin 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yoshio 
            Bando
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Dmitri 
            Golberg
          
          
        
      a
aWorld Premier International (WPI) Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Namiki 1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: li.liang1979@yahoo.ca; chen.shimou@nims.go.jp
bDepartment of Nano-Science and Nano-Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Okubo 3-4-1, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 169-8555, Japan
Received 
      19th November 2011
    , Accepted 21st December 2011First published on 21st December 2011AbstractThere is an increasing interest in the construction of hybrid energy scavengers for simultaneously harvesting various forms of energies from nature. This minireview summarizes the progress that has to date been accomplished in the development of multiple energy harvesting nanostructured solar cells. These hybrid cells can in parallel or separately harvest solar, heat, ultrasonic wave, and sound energies. Even though the research on the hybrid nanostructured solar cells has been launched very recently, this timely composed minireview should stimulate many more investigators to enter this exciting field and to push it forward to diverse practical applications.Liang LiLiang Li was born in Anhui province, China, in 1979. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics (ISSP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and won the Excellent President Scholarship in 2006. After completing JSPS Fellowship in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), he joined in Prof. Yoshio Bando's group in the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS) in Tsukuba, Japan. Now he is a postdoctoral researcher of the Faculty of Engineering, University of Western Ontario (UWO) in London, Canada. During these periods he mainly focused on the controlled synthesis, novel physical properties, photoelectronic and electrochemical nanodevices made of metal and semiconductor nanostructures. Since 2003, he has authored and co-authored over 80 refereed publications, 6 book chapters, and 3 patents, which have generated over 1100 citations.Yoshio BandoYoshio Bando received his PhD degree from Osaka University in 1975 and joined the National Institute for Research in Inorganic Materials (at present NIMS) in the same year. From 1979 to 1981 he worked as a visiting researcher at Arizona State University. Currently, he is a Chief Operating Officer (COO) and an Inorganic Nanostructures Unit Director of the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA) and a Fellow within NIMS. He is also an adjunct Professor at both Waseda University and the University of Tokyo. His current research concentrates on the synthesis and properties of various inorganic nanostructures and their TEM characterizations. He has published more than 600 papers which yielded over 15000 citations. The H-index of his publications is 65. He also holds more than 150 patents. He received the 16th Tsukuba Prize in 2005 for his studies on novel inorganic nanotubes and nanothermometers.Dmitri GolbergDmitri Golberg obtained his PhD degree from the Central Research Institute for Ferrous Metallurgy, Moscow, Russia, in 1990, and joined the NIMS, Tsukuba, Japan, 5 years later. To date, he has authored and co-authored more than 440 original papers and nearly 100 patents. His works have been cited over 10000 times (H-index 53). In 2005 he was awarded the 16th Tsukuba Prize for his studies on inorganic nanotubes using electron microscopy. He is currently a Nanotube Unit Director and Principal Investigator within MANA of NIMS, and an adjunct Professor of the University of Tsukuba. His current research focuses on the nanoscale material electrical, mechanical and thermal property studies on a transmission electron microscope.

Broader context

Nanostructures provide new opportunities to improve the conversion efficiency of solar cells based on their decreased optical reflection, enhanced absorption, better carrier collection, transport efficiency, etc. Yet, the performance of nanostructured solar cells is still not comparable with conventional Si and thin film devices. New multiple-type energy harvesting nanostructured hybrid solar cells, developed by Zhong Lin Wang's group at Georgia Tech and others, are integrated into nanogenerators and thermoelectric devices to harvest energies from the ultrasonic wave, sound, and heat. These hybrid cells fully demonstrate the synergetic effects on the performance of each element, and are expected to provide electricity at anytime and anywhere.

1 Introduction
The current global energy problem is mainly attributed to insufficient fossil fuel supplies and excessive CO2 emissions resulting from increasing fossil fuel consumption. The huge demand for clean (or “green”) energy can potentially be met by solar (photovoltaic) cells that directly convert solar energy into electrical power. In fact, even a small fraction of the solar radiation incident to the Earth's surface can satisfy the world's energy demands for a long period of time. Up to now, solid state junction devices based on crystalline silicon (Si) (the first generation solar cells) and amorphous Si, cadmium telluride (CdTe), copper-indium-gallium-selenide (CIGS) and other compound semiconductor thin films (the second generation solar cells) dominate the solar cells market. With regards to crystalline Si solar cells, high cost is involved in producing high-quality pure Si wafers, which makes up to 40–50% of the market price of a completed module. For the thin film solar cells, the electrical performance of hydrogenated amorphous Si is metastable, i.e. the material degenerates when exposed to sunlight. The CdTe and CIGS films are more efficient for conversion of sunlight and are relatively cheap to produce, but they contain heavy metals and thus are harmful for the environment.
The third generation solar cells, composed of hybrid junctions, polymers, organic–inorganic hybrid assemblies, and semiconductor nanostructures, have also drawn much attention,1–5 aiming at making solar energy harvesting more efficient over a wider band of the solar spectrum, decreasing the fabrication cost, and utilizing their enhanced flexibility. Among them, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have obvious advantages in several aspects, such as lower manufacturing cost, long life, mechanical robustness, and ability to work in low light.6–8 Up to now, the DSSCs have received the maximum conversion efficiency of 12.3%,9 a figure which may meet the requirements of most envisaged applications. Recently, nanostructured materials, particularly one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, have offered new opportunities to design more efficient solar cells,10–15 owing to some potential benefits over traditional wafer-based or thin-film devices. They are related to decreased optical reflection and enhanced absorption through light trapping, better carrier collection efficiency and transport, and strain relaxation phenomena.
Although great efforts have been made to design different types of solar cells, their conversion efficiencies are still relatively low compared with industrial single crystalline Si cells. Another major problem is that solar cells can provide electrical energy only in the areas where abundant light illumination is available. Over the years, other green energy technologies, for energy conversion into electrical power from ambient sources, have been developed using heat (thermoelectric), mechanical energy (wind and piezoelectric), and biological energy (biofuels).16–18 However, various energy systems have independently been designed and developed based on different operation mechanisms for each particular energy generator. Hybridizing different kinds of renewable energy systems into a single device will complement the weaknesses of each individual system and result in enhanced overall conversion efficiency. Thus the electrical energy can be provided whenever and wherever at least one of the concerned sources is available.
The purpose of this minireview is to discuss the principal progress that has been made in research on the nanostructured hybrid solar cells for simultaneously harvesting different types of energies available in nature.
2 Multiple-energy harvesting nanostructured solar cells
The use of ambient energy (such as light, heat, vibration, radio waves, etc.) to produce electrical energy has widely been addressed by many researchers around the globe. Since the amount of power available from an individual energy harvesting generator is quite limited, there has been a great interest in parallel utilizing multiple forms of external energy to collect a sufficient amount for practical use.19,20 In recent years, some advances have also been documented in integrating other types of energy into nanostructured solar cells.21,25–29 In 2009, Wang's group firstly reported a hybrid solar cell for harvesting ultrasonic wave energy using a DSSC and ZnO nanowire nanogenerator,25 and then they integrated a CdS/CdTe quantum dot solar cell to a nanogenerator for the harvesting of sound energy.27 In 2010, Guo et al. designed a DSSC and thermoelectric hybrid cell for utilizing the heat energy produced by a solar cell.21 Through replacing a liquid electrolyte with organic solid material, a single compact hybrid cell composed of an organic solid DSSC and nanogenerator was developed for harvesting mechanical energy.26 In 2011, the first integration of multiple energy harvesters and storage devices along a single PMMA fiber was also constructed.29 Very recently, based on the bulk-junction solar cell and nanogenerator, a flexible hybrid cell was reported and clearly demonstrated the synergetic effects of each unit.28 However this is a new field and some challenging issues including interface physics, device design, measurement accuracy, etc. still exist. However, it is undoubtedly a promising route to solve the efficiency problem faced by conventional solar cells. In the following sections, we will introduce these hybrid nanostructured solar cells that simultaneously harvest heat, ultrasonic wave, and sound energies.
2.1 Harvesting heat energy
DSSCs consist of three main components: a dye-adsorbed porous nanocrystalline TiO2 film on a transparent conductive oxide (TCO)-coated glass substrate as the optical active substance, an iodide/triiodide redox couple electrolyte, and a platinized TCO-coated glass substrate as the counter-electrode. The main function of the dye is absorbing solar light to generate excited electron–hole pairs. However, typical dyes only absorb the visible and infrared light of the solar spectrum, and thus photons with lower energy cannot take part in the solar conversion process, limiting the photoelectric conversion efficiency of DSSC. The wasted solar energy is mainly absorbed by non-active parts of a device and is converted to heat energy, increasing the internal temperature and degrading the performance. Is it possible to utilize the heat energy? Thermoelectric (TE) devices can directly convert heat into electricity due to the Seebeck effect, with the advantages of environmental compatibility, vibrationless and noiseless features, small size, long lifetime, etc.16 Combining TE with DSSC to utilize the heat produced by DSSC should improve the overall efficiency.
For example, Meng et al. reported a hybrid tandem cell (HTC) using a TiO2 nanocrystalline DSSC and a thermoelectric cell (TC) as the upper and lower compartments, respectively.21 In the DSSC, photons are absorbed by the optically active and non-optically active materials, and the light energy is converted to electrical and heat energies. The produced heat then transmits to the TC for thermoelectric conversion. The typical two-wire HTC was constructed by connecting DSSC and TC in series. Fig. 1a shows the schematic device structure, and the working principle is demonstrated using the electron energy band diagram depicted in Fig. 1b. When light is shone on the glass side of the DSSC, electrons are excited to a high energy state of the dye molecules and subsequently transferred to the conduction band of TiO2. Afterwards the dye is restored to its original state via obtaining electrons from an organic solvent electrolyte containing an iodide/triiodide couple. After diffusing in the TiO2 film, electrons are exported through the cathode of DSSC and then captured by holes at the anode of the TC. The DSSC not only generates the photoelectric conversion, but also produces the heat transferred to the TC. Heat transfer causes temperature gradient between the two sides of the TC, and thus the balance of carrier density in the semiconductor material is destroyed and rebuilt through a diffusion process, which changes the shape of the Fermi level of the TC. At the cathode of the TC, electrons are exported with higher energy qV = qVDSC + qVTC. The overall maximum output voltage VOC of HTC is 911 mV, the short circuit current ISC is 119.4 mA, and the maximum output power Pmax is 38.02 mW. Furthermore, compared with a single DSSC, the overall conversion efficiency is enhanced by 10% via optimizing the DSSC module with a photocurrent matching design of the two compartments of the HTC integrated in series. One advantage of the present approach is that there is no change of DSSC microstructure, and thus the efficiency of the DSSC itself is not affected. Therefore, the HTC gives higher efficiency than a single DSSC and realizes full-spectrum utilization by harvesting heat which was neglected in the past.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic structure of a hybrid tandem cell composed of the solar cell and thermoelectric device and (b) the corresponding electron energy band diagram. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright from Elsevier. 
2.2 Harvesting ultrasonic wave energy
Mechanical energy generators have been designed on the basis of principles of electromagnetic induction and piezoelectricity, which are applicable if there is a significant mechanical movement/vibration.22–24 Wang et al. firstly reported a hybrid cell (HC) for simultaneously harvesting solar and mechanical (ultrasonic wave) energies.25 Aligned ZnO nanowire arrays are grown on ITO-coated glass substrates and used as active materials to construct the DSSC for harvesting solar energy, which is integrated with the piezoelectric nanogenerator (NG) that harvests ultrasonic wave energy from the surrounding. Interesting points are that these two energy harvesting elements can be integrated in parallel and in serial for raising the output current and voltage, respectively, and they can work simultaneously or individually.
A serially integrated hybrid cell (s-HC) was designed by integrating the anode of the DSSC and the cathode of the NG onto one single Si substrate by sharing a Pt electrode, as shown in Fig. 2. When the sunlight source is on and the ultrasonic wave is off, the s-HC exhibits a UOC of 0.591 V and a JSC of 6.9 μA cm−2 (blue curve in Fig. 3a). When both the ultrasonic wave and the sunlight are turned on, the UOC reaches 0.60 V, while the JSC remains at 6.9 μA cm−2 (red curve in Fig. 3a). The output voltage of the s-HC is different by 9 mV with and without turning on the ultrasonic wave, as shown by the expanded plot of UOC in the inset of Fig. 3a, which is the output voltage of the NG when the sunlight is off (Fig. 3b). A power output increment (ΔPHC) of 13.5 nW cm−2 was also achieved after turning NG on.
 Fig. 2  Schematic structure of a hybrid cell composed of the serially integrated solar cell and nanogenerator for raising the output voltage. The denoted symbol (to represent the hybrid cell) is marked on the right-hand side of the figure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright from American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V characteristics of a hybrid cell composed of the serially integrated solar cell and nanogenerator when illuminated by sunlight with (red curve) and without (blue curve) turning on the ultrasonic wave excitation. The inset is an expanded output of the open circuit voltage UOC, showing the increment of UOC for ∼9 mV after turning ultrasonic waves on. (b) J–V characteristics of the nanogenerator when subjected to the ultrasonic wave excitation with the sunlight off. (c) Energy band diagram of the hybrid cell showing the electron transfer process and the output voltage under solar light illumination and mechanical straining. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright from American Chemical Society. 
The working principle of s-HC is demonstrated in Fig. 3c. For the right-side NG, once the ultrasonic wave is applied and the corresponding mechanical deformation occurs, a negative piezoelectric potential is created at the compressive side of ZnO nanowires and drives electrons to move from the ZnO nanowires into the Pt electrode. The difference of the Fermi level between the ZnO nanowires and the “electron injected” Pt electrode determines the output voltage (VNG) of the NG. When a light is illuminated on the s-HC, electrons in the dye molecules are excited into a high energy state and then transferred to the conduction band of ZnO, and finally collected by the ITO cathode. At the same time, those injected electrons in the Pt electrode transport into the electrolyte of the DSSC through a redox couple process. Consequently, the electron energy is raised twice after flowing through the entire device and the output voltage becomes the sum of VSC and VNG. For raising the output current, a HC composed of parallel integrated DSSC and NG (p-HC) was also designed, in which the anodes of DSSC (Pt electrode) and NG (bottom layer of aligned ZnO nanowires) were integrated together on a single piece of Si substrate coated with Pt. In the p-HC, besides the promoted output current, they also find that the output voltage of the NG can be raised to the same level as that of the SC due to the existence of a reversely biased Schottky barrier in NG, which blocks the flow of electrons fed by the SC. This phenomenon suggests the feasibility of raising the output voltage of NG using the “promotion effect” of the SC. As we know that the typical output voltage of DSSC is 0.7–0.8 V, however, the present value is just about 0.1 V; thus there is plenty of room to promote the output voltage of NG from several millivolts to hundreds of millivolts if the output voltage of the DSSC can be further increased. Obviously, this hybrid cell is not a system composed of two separate units for harvesting their own energies. The carriers produced in NG and SC not only transport in their own system but also in the entire integrated device. The Schottky barrier between the Pt electrode and ZnO nanowires results in the improved output voltage in the HC and the NG.
In order to improve the performance of hybrid cells, two possible routes are provided: (1) optimizing the structure of DSSC. The same group has developed a fully integrated solid-state compact hybrid cell (CHC) that comprises “convoluted” ZnO nanowire structures.26 The CHC is based on a conjunction design of the organic solid-state DSSC and piezoelectric nanogenerator in one compact structure. Compared with the DSSC in Fig. 2, the output voltage is increased to 0.42 V. Further increase can be expected if ZnO is replaced with TiO2. As the ultrasonic wave is turned on, the output voltage and optimum power of the CHC show an increase of 4% and 6%, respectively. Compared with the HC in Fig. 2, the main advantage of this CHC is its solid state nature without necessity for a liquid electrolyte, and a convoluted design of the two parts in a single compact device. In particular, the possibilities of solvent leakage and evaporation from DSSC are no longer the issues. Moreover, the single compact design makes it a truly individual self-consistent device that has the ability to harvest both solar and mechanical energies. (2) Optimizing the structure of NG. The output of NG can be largely improved by three-dimensional layered integration30 and special pre-treatment of ZnO nanowires such as oxygen plasma, annealing and surface passivation with polymers. Employing these approaches, the maximum output voltage and current from a layer of ZnO nanowire arrays have reached 20 V and 6 μA.31
2.3 Harvesting sound energy
Acoustic vibration, including various sound noises with a frequency ranging from several tens to thousands of Hz, is one of the most common mechanical vibrations in our surroundings and can be used for generating electricity. Recently, Wang's group has demonstrated a HC for simultaneously harvesting solar and sound energies, with the sound frequency between 35 and 1000 Hz.27Fig. 4a shows the schematic diagram of the HC device, which is based on a ZnO vertical nanowire array NG (VING) integrated with the infiltrated CdS/CdTe nanoparticles within the nanowire forest. Acoustic waves are irradiated from the bottom Au electrode, while the solar simulator (AM 1.5 G) illuminates the embedded p–n heterojunctions through the transparent PET layer with a conductive ITO electrode. The measured current signal in this HC is shown in Fig. 4b. When the acoustic wave is applied, VING has an AC output with a peak-to-peak current of about 24 nA and a voltage of about 1 mV. The output power density is calculated to be 5 pW cm−2. When the simulated light illuminates the HC, a concurrent output of SC (DC) and VING (AC) shows the sum-up of the two individual output signals. According to the I–V curve under solar simulation (inset in Fig. 4b), the HC has a short-circuit current and an open-circuit voltage of 57 nA and 6 mV, respectively. It indicates that two generators can work individually or simultaneously for harvesting one or two types of energy.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram depicting a hybrid device with two different incoming energy sources—from sunlight illumination and acoustic vibration. (b) A short-circuit current output signal of the hybrid cell. An acoustic wave was applied to the hybrid cell before/during/after solar illumination. The inset shows the I–V characteristics of the hybrid device under sunlight illumination. (c) Working principle of the hybrid cell harvesting solar and sound energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright from American Chemical Society. 
The operation mechanism of the HC is described in terms of the energy band diagram as shown in Fig. 4c. For the SC, the CdS (n-type)/CdTe (p-type) nanoparticles are responsible for harvesting solar energy by forming p–n junctions. The CdS material is usually used as the transparent window due to its relatively wide band gap, and the low band gap CdTe quantum dots serve as the light absorption layer. Under sunlight illumination, the CdTe quantum dots absorb photons to generate electron–hole pairs, and they are separated and accumulated in CdS and CdTe quantum dots resulting from the established built-in potential at their interface. Different Fermi levels at the two electrodes drive the electrons to flow toward the ITO electrode, while the holes flow toward the Au electrode, producing an output current. The vertically aligned ZnO nanowires are utilized for the harvesting of sound energy. If the ZnO nanowire array is subjected to the compressive strain (red arrow and line), nanowires will have an elevated piezopotential near the bottom Au electrode and thus force electrons to flow toward the external load from the bottom Au electrode. If the nanowires are under tensile strain (blue arrow and line), electrons will flow toward the external load from the top ITO electrode due to an opposite piezopotential. Therefore, the controlled electron flow direction in the NG affects the output current and voltage of HC. In addition, the difference in energy bands between quantum dots and nanowires shifts the Fermi level of ZnO, affecting the output voltage and current of NG. Optimizing these interactions can largely improve the performance of HC.
2.4 Flexible hybrid energy scavenger
Flexible solar cells are lightweight and can reliably produce electricity while being integrated into existing buildings, fabrics, tents, sails, glass, and all sorts of surfaces.32 The reported solar cells have mainly been tested under a standard solar simulator using the full sun illumination (100 mW cm−2). In reality, however, many mobile electronic products are operated indoors or in a hidden area with a very dim light, which has a harvested power of 2–3 orders of magnitude lower than the full sun illumination. To attack these two problems, Wang and Choi et al. reported a HC based on the integration of a piezoelectric generator and an organic solar cell (Fig. 5a).28 Briefly, an ITO-coated polyethersulfone (PES) substrate was used as the cathode window in the solar cell, and then the ZnO nanorods were grown on the sputtered ZnO thin film, which simultaneously serve as an electron transport layer and a piezoelectric power generator. A P3HT:PCBM polymer blend was infiltrated between the ZnO nanorods to form a bulk-heterojunction solar cell. This flexible hybrid device should be easily integrated with many electronic products. Results demonstrated that the negative pulse in AC-type piezoelectric output can be greatly reduced by controlling the releasing strain rate (i.e. slow releasing) and thus the piezoelectric output is controlled from the AC type to DC-like type by simply adjusting the mechanical straining process. Based on such a controlled straining process, the overall output voltages from both solar and mechanical energies are synergistically enhanced (Fig. 5b). By using a “programmed” straining process, the total output voltage is increased nearly 2 times compared to that produced solely by solar energy. Such a flexible hybrid cell is expected to be used in conventional environments where the intensity of solar light is very weak.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of a flexible hybrid device based on a nanogenerator and an organic solar cell. (b) Output voltage measured by controlling straining processes under solar energy (SE) with fast bending (FB), fast, but not full releasing (FR), and slow releasing (SR). (c) Operation mechanism of the hybrid cell under different mechanical models: (I) solar light illumination only, (II) solar light illumination plus dynamic mechanical straining, (III) solar light illumination with static bending stress and (IV) solar light illumination with bending fully released. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright from Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Fig. 5c shows the working principle of this HC. When no mechanical straining is applied on the device, the solar light illumination induces the carrier transfer between P3HT and ZnO, and generates the output signal I1. As the dynamic mechanical bending is performed under light illumination, a piezoelectric potential is created in the ZnO film with the positive V1+ lying in ZnO close to the PCBM and the negative V1− at the side facing ITO. This instantaneous high potential not only induces the electron flow IPE but also enhances the photo-induced output to ISE′, producing the overall output signal I2. If keeping the bending status without dynamic change, the overall current just comes from the photo-generated electrons with no contribution from the mechanical unit. However, the piezopotential in ZnO can be preserved for a short time, and the V1+ drops to V2+ due to the screening effect of photo-generated electrons, leaving the V1− unchanged.33 Therefore, the output voltage ISE′ is higher than that produced only by photon energy. When the mechanical straining is released, the piezopotential decreases and electrons will flow back to ITO, showing a negative pulse I4. Complete release will make the HC recover to its initial condition.
2.5 Single fiber hybrid energy scavenger
Researchers are interested in developing nanotechnology to produce energy generation and storage devices in a system, however, they are usually separated units. Wang and Kim et al. reported the first prototype of hybrid energy converters and storage devices utilizing a single microsized polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) fibre and utilizing ZnO nanowires and graphene as the basic constituents.29 Such a fibre system, including a NG (mechanical energy harvesting), a DSSC (solar energy harvesting) and a supercapacitor (electrochemical charge storage), can simultaneously scavenge and store energies, as shown in Fig. 6. For the NG, the maximum output current is approximately 2 nA, and the maximum open-circuit voltage is about 7 mV. For the DSSC, the fill factor FF, JSC, VOC, and energy conversion efficiency are determined to be 0.39, 0.35 mA cm−2, 0.17 V, and 0.02% respectively. The specific capacitance of fibre supercapacitors can reach up to 0.4 mF cm−2 at a voltage scan rate of 100 mV s−1. Although the authors presented the data recorded from individual units and their performances are still not high enough, they believe that the overall performance should be enhanced in the future through the optimization of each part. The regarded unique architecture of single-fibre-based energy generators and accumulators could be valuable for the future development of flexible and wearable electronics.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of a single-fibre-based multi-energy device comprising of the nanogenerator, solar cell and supercapacitor. ZnO nanowires are grown on a flexible thin plastic wire coated with a thin Au film. Graphenes on a Cu mesh were used as electrodes for each energy device. For the solar cell and supercapacitor, the corresponding electrolytes were filled in between ZnO nanowires and graphene electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright from John Wiley. 
3 Conclusion and outlook
Clearly, there is a significant potential in combining nanostructured solar cells with other types of energy generators. These integrated energy scavengers can simultaneously or separately harvest solar energy, heat, sound, and microwave energies. Most of these activities started to be notable since 2009. Therefore, this field is very young, active, rapidly growing and promising. Future work is required to be carried out along with the following directions: (i) the choice of active nanomaterials to optimize the absorption of solar light and to further understand the fundamental photoelectric conversion process of hybrid cells. (ii) Exploration of new types of energy scavengers, such as biology-, fuel cell-, wind-related, etc., to smartly integrate them into nanostructured solar cells. Harvesting of these energies has been studied in other hybrid systems. For example, Wang's group demonstrated a hybrid cell integrated with nanogenerators and biofuel cells, for simultaneously scavenging biomechanical and biochemical energies;34 Sun et al. employed PVDF nanobelts for harvesting energy from air flow and even respiration.35 (iii) Development of reliable packaging technologies for different hybrid cells. This is a critical step that should not affect the performance of each energy scavenger. It is believed that continuing efforts regarding the development of new multiple-energy scavengers will not only lead to the realization of high-efficiency solar cells, but also to many new investigators entering this challenging field and offering novel unique ideas towards applications that have not yet been accomplished.
Notes and references
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 48, 18737–18753 Search PubMed .
S. E. Gledhill, B. Scott and B. A. Gregg, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 3167–3179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bouclé, P. Ravirajan and J. Nelson, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3141–3153 RSC .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19–34 CAS .
L. Tsakalakos, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 62, 175–189 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 335, 737–740 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, Md. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Garnett and P. D. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9224–9225 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS .
T. Umeyama and H. Imahori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 120–133 CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33–71 CrossRef .
L. Li, H. Q. Wang, X. S. Fang, T. Y. Zhai, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2586–2590 CAS .
L. Li, G. Meng, H. Q. Wang, T. Y. Zhai, X. S. Fang, U. K. Gautam, X. D. Fang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8247–8249 RSC .
F. J. DiSalvo, Science, 1999, 285, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2007, 33, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Iqbal, Renewable Energy, 2003, 28, 223–237 CrossRef .
B. J. Hansen, Y. Liu, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3647–3652 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Guo, Y. D. Zhang, D. Qin, Y. H. Luo, D. M. Li, Y. T. Pang and Q. B. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7684–7690 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Sci. Am., 2008, 298, 82–87 CrossRef .
J. A. Paradiso and T. Starner, IEEE Pervasive Comput., 2005, 4, 18–27 CrossRef .
M. Lee, J. Bae, J. Lee, C. S. Lee, S. Hong and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3359–3363 CAS .
C. Xu, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5866–5872 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 873–877 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee, R. Yang, C. Li and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2929–2935 CrossRef CAS .
D. Choi, K. Y. Lee, M. J. Jin, S. G. Ihn, S. Yun, X. Bulliard, W. Choi, S. Y. Lee, S. W. Kim, J. Y. Choi, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4607–4613 CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Wei, J. Liu, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4027–4032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, L. Lin, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 110–114 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 CAS .
Y. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1103–1110 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Hansen, Y. Liu, R. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3647–3652 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, J. Shi, D. J. Bayerl and X. D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4508–4512 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Liang Li	Liang Li was born in Anhui province, China, in 1979. He received his PhD degree from the Institute of Solid State Physics (ISSP), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) and won the Excellent President Scholarship in 2006. After completing JSPS Fellowship in the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), he joined in Prof. Yoshio Bando's group in the National Institute of Materials Science (NIMS) in Tsukuba, Japan. Now he is a postdoctoral researcher of the Faculty of Engineering, University of Western Ontario (UWO) in London, Canada. During these periods he mainly focused on the controlled synthesis, novel physical properties, photoelectronic and electrochemical nanodevices made of metal and semiconductor nanostructures. Since 2003, he has authored and co-authored over 80 refereed publications, 6 book chapters, and 3 patents, which have generated over 1100 citations.
Yoshio Bando	Yoshio Bando received his PhD degree from Osaka University in 1975 and joined the National Institute for Research in Inorganic Materials (at present NIMS) in the same year. From 1979 to 1981 he worked as a visiting researcher at Arizona State University. Currently, he is a Chief Operating Officer (COO) and an Inorganic Nanostructures Unit Director of the International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA) and a Fellow within NIMS. He is also an adjunct Professor at both Waseda University and the University of Tokyo. His current research concentrates on the synthesis and properties of various inorganic nanostructures and their TEM characterizations. He has published more than 600 papers which yielded over 15000 citations. The H-index of his publications is 65. He also holds more than 150 patents. He received the 16th Tsukuba Prize in 2005 for his studies on novel inorganic nanotubes and nanothermometers.
Dmitri Golberg	Dmitri Golberg obtained his PhD degree from the Central Research Institute for Ferrous Metallurgy, Moscow, Russia, in 1990, and joined the NIMS, Tsukuba, Japan, 5 years later. To date, he has authored and co-authored more than 440 original papers and nearly 100 patents. His works have been cited over 10000 times (H-index 53). In 2005 he was awarded the 16th Tsukuba Prize for his studies on inorganic nanotubes using electron microscopy. He is currently a Nanotube Unit Director and Principal Investigator within MANA of NIMS, and an adjunct Professor of the University of Tsukuba. His current research focuses on the nanoscale material electrical, mechanical and thermal property studies on a transmission electron microscope.

Broader context

Nanostructures provide new opportunities to improve the conversion efficiency of solar cells based on their decreased optical reflection, enhanced absorption, better carrier collection, transport efficiency, etc. Yet, the performance of nanostructured solar cells is still not comparable with conventional Si and thin film devices. New multiple-type energy harvesting nanostructured hybrid solar cells, developed by Zhong Lin Wang's group at Georgia Tech and others, are integrated into nanogenerators and thermoelectric devices to harvest energies from the ultrasonic wave, sound, and heat. These hybrid cells fully demonstrate the synergetic effects on the performance of each element, and are expected to provide electricity at anytime and anywhere.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic structure of a hybrid tandem cell composed of the solar cell and thermoelectric device and (b) the corresponding electron energy band diagram. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic structure of a hybrid cell composed of the serially integrated solar cell and nanogenerator for raising the output voltage. The denoted symbol (to represent the hybrid cell) is marked on the right-hand side of the figure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V characteristics of a hybrid cell composed of the serially integrated solar cell and nanogenerator when illuminated by sunlight with (red curve) and without (blue curve) turning on the ultrasonic wave excitation. The inset is an expanded output of the open circuit voltage UOC, showing the increment of UOC for ∼9 mV after turning ultrasonic waves on. (b) J–V characteristics of the nanogenerator when subjected to the ultrasonic wave excitation with the sunlight off. (c) Energy band diagram of the hybrid cell showing the electron transfer process and the output voltage under solar light illumination and mechanical straining. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram depicting a hybrid device with two different incoming energy sources—from sunlight illumination and acoustic vibration. (b) A short-circuit current output signal of the hybrid cell. An acoustic wave was applied to the hybrid cell before/during/after solar illumination. The inset shows the I–V characteristics of the hybrid device under sunlight illumination. (c) Working principle of the hybrid cell harvesting solar and sound energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27. Copyright from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of a flexible hybrid device based on a nanogenerator and an organic solar cell. (b) Output voltage measured by controlling straining processes under solar energy (SE) with fast bending (FB), fast, but not full releasing (FR), and slow releasing (SR). (c) Operation mechanism of the hybrid cell under different mechanical models: (I) solar light illumination only, (II) solar light illumination plus dynamic mechanical straining, (III) solar light illumination with static bending stress and (IV) solar light illumination with bending fully released. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of a single-fibre-based multi-energy device comprising of the nanogenerator, solar cell and supercapacitor. ZnO nanowires are grown on a flexible thin plastic wire coated with a thin Au film. Graphenes on a Cu mesh were used as electrodes for each energy device. For the solar cell and supercapacitor, the corresponding electrolytes were filled in between ZnO nanowires and graphene electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright from John Wiley.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
