Thermal catalytic conversion: general discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1FD90045E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1FD90045E
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2021, 230, 124-151Thermal catalytic conversion: general discussion

        
          
            Katy 
            Armstrong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sergio 
            Barbarino
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiangkun Elvis 
            Cao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Flavia 
            Cassiola
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Richard A. 
            Catlow
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Claeys
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthew 
            Conway
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alexander J. 
            Cowan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nora H. 
            de Leeuw
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            George R. M. 
            Dowson
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nico 
            Fischer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Abolfazl 
            Ghaderian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sourav 
            Ghosh
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ali Reza 
            Kamali
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shaihroz 
            Khan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Stylianos 
            Kyrimis
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Naomi 
            Lawes
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Walter 
            Leitner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marcelino 
            Maneiro
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Haresh 
            Manyar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wijnand 
            Marquart
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Stephen 
            McCord
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Elaine 
            Moore
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            North
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Unni 
            Olsbye
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Deepak 
            Pant
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jeffrey 
            Poon
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Matthew G. 
            Quesne
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Marco 
            Ranocchiari
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Liane 
            Rossi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jonathan 
            Ruiz Esquius
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mzamo 
            Shozi
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Volker 
            Sick
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Styring
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jeannie 
            Tan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Samantha Eleanor 
            Tanzer
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ollie 
            Thomas
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Keith 
            Whiston
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Moritz 
            Wolf
          
        
      
First published on 6th July 2021

Peter Styring opened discussion of the introductory lecture by Volker Sick: If you were talking to a key politician/decision maker, what would you say to convince them that CO2 utilisation was an area on which they should focus attention?

Volker Sick replied: It will be important to emphasize that carbon dioxide utilization (CDU) not only helps us to address climate change effects but also can create economic value and employment opportunities while securing our perpetual demand for carbon-containing materials and products.

Samantha Eleanor Tanzer asked: How would the idea that CO2 avoidance trump reduced energy use fit into a world with a constrained availability of low-CO2 power?

Volker Sick answered: At present the increased energy need for CO2 utilization certainly creates a dilemma – often addressed in the literature as opportunity cost. However, the scenario looks better once we look at a more distant future when carbon-free energy supplies will have increased, and do factor in that CO2 avoidance is more important than lowest possible energy use. CO2 utilization can further help drive the deployment of carbon-free energy conversion technologies. That needs to go hand in hand with the development of CDU technologies. We cannot wait to develop CDU until there is a surplus of carbon-free energy; there needs to be symbiotic growth.

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius enquired: Governments postpone environmental issues seen as not profitable/not urgent. As discussed in your talk, climate change is an issue that should have been addressed yesterday and not in 20–30 years. Is there anything we could do as a part of trying to convince politicians?

Volker Sick answered: Our community needs to inform, explain the environmental opportunities that can be created through CDU technologies and show how these will have a local impact also on employment opportunities.

Xiangkun Elvis Cao asked: There are many methods for CO2 conversion and utilization. My question is centered around the conversion of CO2 to fuels. Of the different catalytic methods, would you be able to offer insights into what the shared challenges would be for scaling up these different technical pathways (e.g., photocatalytic, thermocatalytic, electrocatalytic methods, etc.)?

Volker Sick responded: This is a very broad question and I think that the answer will have to be nuanced, largely based on local conditions and opportunities. I do not see a clear winning category amongst the technologies you list.

Richard Catlow requested: Can you comment on the feasibility of removing CO2 at scale from the atmosphere using Direct Air Capture.

Volker Sick replied: Fundamentally it is possible to do this at scale and plans are underway for a 1 million ton per year facility in the US. Opportunities to increase the capacity of the sorbents as well as the energy efficiency have not been exhausted at all. Therefore, direct air carbon capture will require less land to deploy and the energy demands will also decrease. It is important to note that while the capture plants could be set up in non-arable regions, e.g. deserts, along with solar or wind power generation, we also need to factor in the downstream CO2 utilization processes and their location. Though, along with capturing CO2, water is usually also extracted from the air, and that could be used in conjunction with the CO2 for on-site reformulation.

Walter Leitner questioned: Would it not be better to move from end-of-pipe regulation to taxing fossil carbon at source – are we putting the price tag in the right place?

Volker Sick responded: It seems indeed simpler to tax at the source from an accounting perspective, to reduce the effort in tracking the taxation, and to ensure completeness of covering all fossil carbon sources. However, such a model would require the implementation of mechanisms that could address social issues of this tax. Furthermore, a thorough examination is required of the impact that it might have on the willingness to invest in CO2 capture technologies.

Peter Styring noted: Through the All Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) system in the UK we have recently made recommendations on possible fiscal interventions to enable products derived from recycled carbon to become competitive. These include a reasonable carbon tax and reducing the VAT (sales tax) on low carbon products and fuels to 0% while increasing VAT on products based on fossil carbon to the standard 20%.

Volker Sick responded: I believe that incentives like what you describe can have a powerful impact with consumers. The combination of buying a product that is better for the environment and paying less for it creates a strong motivation. Related government action in Germany to support the introduction of unleaded gasoline had shown the desired effect.

Ollie Thomas said: You indicated early in your presentation that CO2 is often prohibitively expensive, thus dis-incentivising the uptake of CDU techniques which require pure CO2 feedstock. As such do we need, at least in the short term, carbon capture technologies to outstrip those for utilisation to ensure demand is outstripped by supply, and CO2 can be made cheap enough to be an economically attractive feedstock and avoid price inflation as CDU strategies are adopted and demand rises?

Volker Sick answered: I believe that technologies to capture and those to use CO2 need to and will be developed in parallel. There must be a clear message, e.g. via procurement requirements and incentives, that there is a need for CO2 utilization to incentivize efforts to advance capture technologies. In addition, efforts should increase to develop utilization technologies that can use CO2 streams directly from emission sources without capture steps.

Ollie Thomas enquired: What, in your opinion, are the greatest barriers to ensuring a stable relationship between CO2 supply and demand? What steps need to be taken to ensure CDU is economically viable and sustainable?

Volker Sick replied: Ultimately, supply and demand will be market driven, even when incentivized with policy instruments. CO2 will become an attractive non-fossil source of carbon as a replacement raw material because customers will demand it and cost will be competitive through regulatory means and of course economies of scale. Additionally, new better products can be developed that do not even exist without the use of CO2 and thereby new demand will be created.

Deepak Pant asked: In slide 31, what was the economic price of CO2 concretes scoring green? Higher or lower than normal concrete. Idea to show both in future.

Volker Sick answered: The price for CO2 concretes is currently mostly higher than that of regular concrete. However, in combination with the use of supplementary cementitious materials, that otherwise might be waste products, alternative forms of cement with lower energy cost, potentially much longer service life, and the potential to reduce steel reinforcements when engineered cementitious composites are used, the cost can actually be competitive.

Jeffrey Poon said: The presentation (DOI: 10.1039/d1fd00029b) has showcased interesting technological solutions to CO2 utilisation. A particularly interesting aspect is the use of CO2 in the curing of concrete. According to a 2018 Chatham House Report,1 then reported by the BBC, concrete accounts for 8% of worldwide carbon emissions. Do the technologies described, advances in materials science notwithstanding, reduce the carbon emissions of concrete (which is pretty good)? Or do they actually achieve net negative emission?
1 J. Lehne and F. Preston, Making Concrete Change: Innovation in Low-carbon Cement and Concrete, Chatham House Report, 2018, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2018/06/making-concrete-change-innovation-low-carbon-cement-and-concrete.

Volker Sick replied: The 8% number mentioned in the Chatham House Report actually only describes the CO2 emissions from cement production. To make concrete, it is also necessary to mine and transport aggregates and sand, to provide water, etc. So, in reality, the CO2 footprint of concrete is even higher than that. For state of the art CO2 sequestering concretes close to 10% of their mass could be from CO2. Changing the formulation for making concrete, including the use of carbonated aggregates and supplementary cementitious materials, such as steel slag, can potentially bind more than 1 gigatonne of CO2 per year, substantially reducing the environmental burden of construction. Some of those formulations indeed bear the potential for net negative emissions.

Nico Fischer enquired: Do you think that the climate in the private sector has changed/is ripe to implement disruptive new technologies based on CDU? In the past, large scale disruptive changes seem to have had a better lobby, thinking of the incredible speed the ammonia synthesis via Haber–Bosch was established. Now it feels a lot of new processes are dying in the ‘valley of death’ because they do not offer the quick return in investment. It is a little like a Mexican stand off, new processes are not implemented because the financials are not working at the moment and financial incentives from governments are not implemented widely because there is no real industry/lobby this would benefit yet.

Volker Sick replied: From what I observe, interest in CDU technologies in the private sector is increasing rapidly. However, many look for ‘gigatonne’ opportunities and neglect the smaller opportunities. I agree with you that the time horizon for a return of investment is too long for many investors – but not all. Changes in policy support are being developed and begin to get noticed and that helps. But it is still necessary to emphasize the need for CDU and the long term opportunities, beyond helping to fix the climate crisis. In contrast to the race for a viable ammonia synthesis to address the world population rapidly moving towards starvation, climate change is not broadly recognized and accepted as an urgent life threatening problem and therefore does not receive the same level of attention (yet).

Haresh Manyar asked: What are your thoughts on the scale at which the CDU technology can be deployed? Is it feasible to achieve a tangible impact from CDU, comparing the scale of CO2 released in the environment (gigatonnes) vs. potential products manufactured from CO2 (million tonnes)?

Volker Sick answered: The potential for CDU to use gigatonnes of CO2 per year is certainly given. Our market study and Global Roadmap1 shows that in particular the market for CO2-sequestering construction materials (concrete, aggregates) can grow to this level and offer an opportunity as permanent carbon sinks. The market for CO2-based fuels can also reach gigatonne per year levels. And let’s not forget that in a largely de-fossilized circular economy, CDU technologies at the million tonnes per year will make a significant impact.
1 Global Roadmap for Implementing CO2 Utilization, The Global CO2 Initiative, 2016, https://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/150624.

Sergio Barbarino queried: What are the low hanging fruits in terms of industrial applications?

Volker Sick responded: It is difficult to answer this question universally because it depends on so many factors, not only on the maturity of technologies, economics, policies, and the value chains for raw materials and distribution of products. We observe significant regionality that would enable fuels production in one country, while elsewhere CO2-based concrete would be a better choice.

George Dowson asked: In your talk you mention that the public is generally accepting of CDU products (with some caveats), and that subsidised support is required to assist CDU products reaching the marketplace. Given that there is already positive public perception, do further efforts need to be made to bring politicians in line with the general public? Alternatively is the main issue now a lack of subsidy-ready CDU products to support, or perhaps do the subsidies need to be offered in advance to promote the development of CDU products?

Volker Sick replied: The survey that I described polled adult US citizens about their willingness to use CDU products.1 The relevance of the source of CO2 as well as the type of product had some, though minor, influence on the overall positive response rate. The study did not mention to those polled that CDU products (at present) are more expensive than traditional materials. Price is always an issue for consumers and rapid market penetration of products that replace an equivalent but cheaper product will be very slow at best. One can expect that only a small fraction of consumers would buy CDU products because of their environmental benefits. The availability of subsidies should accelerate the availability of CDU products because in such a case they could be competitive in the market.
1 L. Lutzke and J. Arvai, Consumer acceptance of products from carbon capture and utilization, Climate Change, 2021, 166(2), DOI 10.1007/s10584-021-03110-3.

Katy Armstrong questioned: Much of the discussion is focusing on the need for policy support, but are we ignoring the importance of market pull for CDU? We are beginning to see many large companies setting net zero goals and looking to fossil-free feedstocks for manufacture. Do you think this will move CDU forward faster than waiting for policy changes?

Volker Sick responded: I absolutely agree that these commitments will have a significant impact on the growth of CDU. Achieving net zero carbon emissions without CDU will not work in all cases and for those industries that require a source of carbon, CO2 will be a viable opportunity. These needs will actually also help inform future policy to accelerate the transition to CDU based manufacturing.

Marco Ranocchiari addressed Volker Sick and Jonathan Ruiz Esquius: What novel technologies will be able to successfully implement CDU? Should new technologies only focus on lowering costs?

Volker Sick answered: I believe that all of the technology categories that were covered in the presentation can be successful. Achieving competitive cost is paramount, no production ever works with a perpetual financial loss. It is important to note in this context that achieving cost competitiveness could include elements of public subsidies.

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius added: My personal view is that due to the great challenge of reducing our carbon print, there will not be a unique technique/solution. Ideally, we will reach a point where our energy is produced entirely from renewables, and the energy vector would be based on hydrogen and not on carbon. However, CO2 capture and utilisation would play a key role in the production of carbon based chemicals. During the energy turnover from C-based to H-based energy vectors, fuels produced from CO2 revalorisation would be very important. Renewable fuels (based on CO2 capture and revalorisation) would allow recycling of CO2 associated with energy-extensive processes, however, at its end use will be combusted to produce energy and CO2 will be eventually emitted. Thus, atmospheric CO2 must also be efficiently captured and recycled. Lower CDU cost would attract the attention of companies as it would be more economically profitable. However, I think there is a strong social drive for green procedures, and probably some consumers would pay an extra cost if ensured the process is completely CO2 neutral/negative.

Abolfazl Ghaderian addressed Volker Sick, Alexander Cowan and Jonathan Ruiz Esquius: Do you think the reduction of CO2 by catalysis is enough to remove all CO2 in the atmosphere or do we need different ways to convert all CO2 in the atmosphere to useful products?

Volker Sick replied: We need to exploit all possible ways to convert CO2 into useful products.

Alexander Cowan added: A wide range of approaches will be required to address a significant portion of anthropogenic emissions. Catalysis which enables conversion of carbon dioxide to useful or stable products has an important part to play but in my opinion it will be one part of, and not the whole, solution.

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius commented: The current state of this technology requires a high concentration of CO2. Thus, the CO2 hydrogenation to methanol is economically viable when combined with a process that releases CO2 with a high purity. Thus, other technologies must be developed (e.g. carbon capture) if the aim is to convert atmospheric CO2 into valuable products.

Deepak Pant asked: In your introductory slides, you showed the number of publications as an indicator for market readiness of the technology with photovoltaics as an example. Is it a well accepted criteria? Do you know of other such examples. I ask as I know of some fields where once the number of papers peaked, it became clear there was no market for the technology and then the interest and number of publications tapered off from that point onward.

Volker Sick replied: I agree with you in that an increase in the number of scientific publications does not guarantee commercial success of a new technology. As an example, Ailisto and Alahuhta investigate this for mobile technologies.1 Broadly, the interest in understanding the connection of publication metrics and patent activities with commercial success is of interest in the literature as documented, for example in Scientometrics.
1 H. Ailisto and P. Alahuhta, Do Scientific Publications Predict the Supply of New Mobile Technologies?, 2010 Ninth International Conference on Mobile Business and 2010 Ninth Global Mobility Roundtable (ICMB-GMR), 2010, pp. 469–473.

Peter Styring enquired: CCS is needed but is growing slowly at a linear rate, whereas CO2 utilisation is on a much stepper ascent with rapid growth in research and practitioners. Where do you think there will be a step change that allows for net zero being achieved on/ahead of the 2050 schedule?

Volker Sick responded: Indeed, progress in CO2 utilization technologies is on an accelerating path. However, that will not be enough to reach net zero emissions. Aggressive de-fossilization of the energy sector and where possible de-fossilization/de-carbonization of industrial production processes as well as natural solutions are needed. Step change progress towards net zero will need policy support as well as corporate commitments to help build up capacity quickly. Even then, achieving net zero emissions by 2050 is a very aggressive – but important – goal.

Michael Claeys asked: You mentioned large direct air capture (DAC) units would be required for capture of CO2 which could for example be used for the production of synthetic fuels via a power-to-liquids (PTL) process. PTL can potentially also be performed on a small scale and in a distributed manner providing fuels for local use in remote locations. Is there economy of scale regarding DAC and larger units are more efficient, or can it be used, equally economically, at small scale?

Volker Sick answered: The DAC systems that are currently deployed are all based on modularized systems for convenient scaling. This creates flexibility to adapt to downstream CO2 needs, simplifies manufacturing and allows for a rapid increase in deployments.

Peter Styring opened discussion of the paper by Jonathan Ruiz Esquius: How do you feel catalyst design could improve catalyst selectivity/conversion to dimethyl ether (DME) further as DME is the most commercially valuable product within your distribution?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius replied: At low temperature (below 270 °C) methanol is efficiently dehydrated to DME over solid acid catalysts, without the formation of significant by-products. The dehydration of methanol to DME is a mature process that occurs efficiently at a similar temperature to methanol synthesis. If DME is the desired product, then a cheaper methanol catalyst based on Cu could be employed, and one should focus on optimising the reaction parameters (e.g. pressure, temperature, CO2/H2 ratio, space time velocity, recycling ratio) instead of developing new catalysts.
However, since the formation of hydrocarbons requires higher temperature than for methanol synthesis, the aim of this work was to study the PdZn system for the synthesis of higher hydrocarbons (ideally in the C5–C11 range) because of its higher thermal stability compared to Cu-based catalysts.

Peter Styring queried: Do you think that your process is scalable?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius answered: There are some commercial CO2 to methanol plants operating in Iceland, Germany and China. Methanol is an important chemical because it can be blended with gasoline, moreover, it is an important intermediate for the synthesis of other products, such as polymers. The methanol/DME conversion to gasoline or light olefins is also a viable commercial process with several plants in operation.
With the appropriate catalyst, reactor design and reaction conditions the combined process has the potential to be more economically viable than running the two consecutive processes in series. However, the combined process is still in the research stage, there are some issues that need to be addressed. For instance, to narrow the hydrocarbon distribution to exclusively light olefins, or to hydrocarbons in the gasoline range. Another key factor is that this process (with the right methanol catalyst and zeolite combination) would allow the obtaining of aromatics, currently mainly accessible through the oil refinery.

Unni Olsbye asked: In this very interesting contribution (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00135j), you report substantial hydrocarbons formation over PdZn/TiO2 + ZSM-5 catalyst mixtures. This result suggests an important effect of TiO2, compared to your group’s prior studies on PdZn/ZnO + ZSM-5 catalyst mixtures, where dimethyl ether was the main product formed when introducing ZSM-5, compared to PdZn/ZnO alone. Do you have an indication of how TiO2 influences the system, enabling hydrocarbons formation in the zeolite?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius responded: We think that the main role of TiO2 is to disperse the PdZn alloy nanoparticles, as its surface area is higher than ZnO (ca. 50 compared to ca. 15 m2 g−1). Based on the work of Vizdal et al.1 and Penner et al.,2 the PdZn is thermally stable at high temperature (ca. 1200 °C); however, a computational study on PdZn alloys3 suggested that the PdZn is stable when both metals are in an equimolar amount, but that excess of one metal over the other leads to phase segregation in the presence of CO. At the moment we do not have enough evidence, but it could be that the higher dispersion of PdZn on TiO2 and the fact that ZnO is not in that much excess (compared to when ZnO is used as the support) could have an influence on the catalyst stability.
1 J. Vizdal, A. Kroupa, J. Popovic and A. Zemanova, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2006, 8(3), 164.
2 S. Penner, B. Jenewein, H. Gabasch, B. Klötzer, D. Wang, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlögl and K. Hayek, J. Catal., 2006, 241(1), 14.
3 K. Föttinger, J. A. van Bokhoven, M. Nachtegaal and G. Rupprechter, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2(5), 428.

Haresh Manyar requested: Can you please comment on the role of Zn active sites on the catalyst surface? What is the influence of the catalyst structure and synergy of the Pd–Zn interface – are the metals present as individual metals or as an alloy?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius replied: Palladium on its own is an active catalyst for the reverse water gas shift reaction (CO formation) and for the methanation of CO2 to methane; however, it is not active for the hydrogenation of CO2 to methanol. When Zn is present, it alloys with Pd forming the β-PdZn phase, which is active in methanol synthesis and has little activity towards CH4. In our study, catalysts were pre-reduced at 400 °C (5% H2, 1 h) to ensure the PdZn alloy formation.

Marcelino Maneiro said: I would like to draw your attention to the fact that during catalysis, the reactions generally take place on the surfaces or interfaces of catalysts, and only a fraction of the surface atoms are involved in the catalytic reaction. So, an innovative strategy in this field is to minimize the usage of precious metals without compromising the catalytic performance through single-atom catalysts (SACs), which contain isolated metal atoms singly dispersed on a catalyst support. This strategy allows the reduction of metal loads. Have you tried to determine the presence of SACs in your catalytic systems?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius responded: Good suggestion, non-alloyed Pd is active for the reverse water gas shift reaction (RWGS) to CO. My feeling is that atomically distributed Pd would still be very active for the RWGS reaction, unless supported on a reducible support (e.g. ZnO, Ga2O3, ZrO2, CeO2). It would be an excellent opportunity for further research. From characterization we performed on similar catalysts, we did not observed SACs, however, this does not mean that SACs are not present, since special attention must be paid to detect them.
On a related note, at this discussion meeting there were a couple of posters discussing the particle size towards methanol and methane synthesis over Cu and Ni nanoparticles. I think I remember that a certain particle size was required in both systems to allow space for the adsorption of both CO2 and H2. Particles below this size produced mainly CO. Although the mentioned studies were performed over different metals, it might be that Pd follows a similar trend.

George Dowson asked: Your process gives an interesting array of longer-chain compounds, some of which may be very valuable as the basis of low carbon fuels or other feedstocks. Would you be able to test what would happen if the catalyst is supplied with vaporised DME or methanol as the feed gas, rather than CO2? If so, this distribution of chemicals may allow insight into the formation of the longer chain compounds.

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius replied: In our catalytic set up it is challenging to add CH3OH or DME, and we have not tested the proposed experiment. It would be interesting to perform the suggested experiment and observe if the hybrid catalysts (mixture of a methanol catalyst and a solid acid catalyst) change the hydrocarbon distribution compared to parent zeolites. However, based on the literature available for both the synthesis of hydrocarbons from methanol/DME and the synthesis of hydrocarbons from CO2 using a combination of a methanol catalyst and a solid acid catalyst we could state the following:
The hydrocarbon distribution is generally dictated by the zeolite used. For instance, ZSM-5 zeolites are employed for the synthesis of longer chain hydrocarbons (commercially used in the methanol-to-gasoline process), whilst SAPO-34 are employed when light olefins (C2–C4) are the desired products (commercially used in the methanol-to-olefins process). The difference in the hydrocarbon distribution is related to the zeolite framework and porous structure. ZSM-5 have large cavities where long chain hydrocarbons can be formed, and pore apertures big enough for those hydrocarbons to diffuse out of the zeolite structure. SAPO-34 consists of one dimensional channels, without enough space for the production of long chain hydrocarbons. Hence, to optimise the hydrocarbon distribution, the first step would be to focus on methanol/DME conversion, and not on CO2 to hydrocarbons. The methanol synthesis catalyst mixed with the solid acid catalyst can influence the hydrocarbon distribution, for instance, it is observed in the literature that Cu-based catalysts not only act as methanol synthesis sites, but also as olefin hydrogenation centers, limiting the synthesis of olefins or hydrocarbon chain growth. For example, on a zeolite that yields ethene the production of ethane could be observed over a hybrid catalyst. Or over a zeolite that yields hydrocarbons in the gasoline range, shorter hydrocarbons would be detected over hybrid catalysts.

Stephen McCord said: Hi Jonathan, thank you for the excellent paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00135j) and presentation. You point out in your paper that the catalyst was stable throughout operation, but do you have any concerns about stability through temperature cycles? Is there any risk of palladium hydride formation over time?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius answered: Online measurements showed steady CO2 conversion and methanol selectivity. However, we have not done temperature cycles to check if the activity remains the same. However, catalyst deactivation through palladium hydride is not likely to be a major concern, since the hydride is only stable at low temperature and decomposes above room temperature. The main deactivation mechanism for this system would be:
(i) Coke deposition over the zeolite, obstructing methanol/hydrocarbon diffusion within the zeolite.
(ii) PdZn alloy segregation into Pd and ZnO which would then promote CO and CH4 formation over methanol.
(iii) PdZn agglomeration at elevated temperature.

Walter Leitner enquired: What are the benefits of your method compared to Fischer–Tropsch/methanol to gasoline?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius replied: For the conversion of CO2 into hydrocarbons, the main difference between the CO mediated route, or Fischer-Tropsch (FT), and the methanol mediated route is the achievable hydrocarbon distribution. The hydrocarbon distribution through a FT route is controlled by the Anderson–Schulz–Flory distribution, hence, low selectivity towards hydrocarbons in the gasoline range is expected. In contrast, for the CH3OH mediated route, the formation of hydrocarbons follows a different mechanism and high selectivity towards targeted products is in theory feasible.

Deepak Pant asked: How do you separate the product of your choice (methanol/DME) from the product mix? If not done already, what approach do you think will be feasible? Also what was the conversion efficiency at each step CO2 → methanol → DME → MTH (methanol to hydrocarbons) and the overall efficiency?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius responded: In our study products were analyzed on line through a GC but were not recovered. However, methanol plants from both CO2 and syngas are operational. In methanol plants (efficiency above 85%), methanol is recovered in a condenser and gas products (CO/CO2) and non-reacted gases (CO2/CO/H2) are recycled into the feed. DME can be easily liquified, and hence, can be easily separated from CO2/CO/H2 gases. If oxygenates (methanol/DME) are the desired products, operational conditions can be optimised to avoid the synthesis of undesired hydrocarbons.
Under the studied conditions the CO2 conversion and methanol selectivity was ca. 13 and ca. 15% respectively. However, this is not an optimised process, the introduction of a recycling loop would reduce significantly the reverse water gas shift reaction and improve methanol productivity. Moreover, methanol productivity can be improved by increasing the reaction pressure and tuning the space time velocity. Under our non-optimised reaction conditions, methanol was efficiently dehydrated to DME. Methanol was detected in our case because it is also being formed at the end of the catalyst bed. Adding only ZSM-5 at the end of the catalyst bed would translate into no methanol being detected.
In our case, the less efficient step is the conversion of methanol/DME to hydrocarbons (ca. 40% methanol/DME converted to hydrocarbons), however, this process is normally carried out at elevated temperatures (e.g. 400 °C), and hence, there is room for optimisation.

Matthew Conway said: In your conclusions you state “future research using PdZn alloys for the synthesis of hydrocarbons via the methanol route should focus on limiting the activity towards olefin hydrogenation”. Have you performed any kinetic studies on the relative rate of olefin hydrogenation with these catalysts?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius responded: Interesting point that needs to be addressed. In our system we detected C2–C4 alkanes, and C4–C5 alkenes. One possibility is that shorter olefins, with less steric impediments, hydrogenate faster than longer olefins. Another possibility, however, is that C2–C4 products formed in early stages on the catalyst bed are hydrogenated, but longer olefins formed at the end of the catalyst bed have not interacted with the PdZn phase. Increasing the flow or diluting the catalyst with an inert phase could translate into higher selectivity towards olefins. However, the PdZn phase will still be active towards olefin hydrogenation. Since the PdZn phase is thermally stable, if modified to suppress its olefins hydrogenating properties it could potentially be employed for the synthesis of light olefins or gasoline.

Mzamo Shozi asked: How would the catalyst activity and product selectivity compare if you used PdZn/ZSM-5? Also I assume monometallic versions of your catalysts are not as effective as the bimetallic, i.e. Pd/TiO2–ZSM-5?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius replied: The conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons occurs through two consecutive reactions. First, CO2 is hydrogenated to methanol over PdZn sites. Methanol is then converted into hydrocarbons over acid sites in the ZSM-5 framework. A PdZn/ZSM-5 catalyst has the potential to be used in the same manner as our PdZn/TiO2-ZSM-5 catalyst. However, some diffusion limitations might apply. For instance, if PdZn is deposited at the surface of the zeolite it can block the access of methanol into the pore structure, or block the release of hydrocarbons formed within the pore structure. The same could be observed if PdZn is deposited within the ZSM-5 pores. Regarding the second part of the question, when only Pd is used as the catalyst primarily CO and CH4 are observed, with almost no methanol formation. Meanwhile, the activity of Zn is comparatively lower than that of the PdZn system.

Shaihroz Khan enquired: Since various products are created during hydrogenation, which one is the most economical product route given the high conversion and low separation cost of these products for CDU?

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius answered: This overall process has not been optimised, but it produced high value products. If high selectivity towards a set of desired products is achieved, final products are of great interest. For instance CH3OH and DME are already economically viable to synthesise from CO2, and there are already some operational plants (e.g. Iceland, Germany and Japan).
CH3OH and DME can be converted into high value products such as light olefins (ethene and propene are among the most produced chemicals). An optimised process, out of the scope of our work, would enable for the production of light olefins in a one-pass reactor, which would be more economically profitable than combining the two processes in parallel (CH3OH synthesis, and CH3OH to olefins).
Not to forget that gasoline (C5–C11 hydrocarbons) is another profitable product.

Haresh Manyar opened discussion of the paper by Nora de Leeuw: Can you please elaborate more on the synergy between Fe–Ni at the interface, and have you explored this with other metal combinations for e.g. Fe with metals other than Ni or Ni with metals other than Fe.

Nora de Leeuw responded: Experimentally, we have not yet tried other materials. Fe–Co or Ni–Co would be the next choice, as the latter is also a readily available sulfide material in nature, i.e. siegenite. Siegenite is a thiospinel material which is structurally similar to violarite and greigite, i.e. both materials that show promise as catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation. However, as Co is listed as a critical raw material, there may be less appeal in the introduction of Co-based sulfides as new catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation.
Our simulations of the partially oxidised surface of violarite (o-FeNi2S4) suggest that the “imperfect” packing of two types of cations and two types of anions with different sizes is a fundamental requirement of the active catalyst. The minimum energy pathways (MEP) as well as the binding and desorption of the H atoms, carbonate species, intermediates and transition states is only possible on the imperfect surface of a partially oxidised Fe–Ni sulfide. We have not yet simulated the conversion of carbonate into formate on the partially oxidised surface of other mixed-metal sulfide phases. However, we have shown in a previous study that the bulk phases of Daubréelite (FeCr2S4), FeMn2S4, FeCo2S4 and violarite (FeNi2S4) have different degrees of inversion and density of states,1 which will certainly give them unique catalytic properties, but they have still to be tested.
1 D. Santos-Carballal, A. Roldan, R. Grau-Crespo and N. H. de Leeuw, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 195106.

Elaine Moore enquired: Are there any features of VASP that make it particularly suitable for this type of calculation?

Nora de Leeuw replied: The VASP code is particularly useful for the modelling of heterogeneous catalytic reactions as it employs periodic boundary conditions to reduce the number of atoms needed to represent crystalline solids. Standard meta-generalised gradient approximations (meta-GGA), such as the strongly constrained and appropriately normed (SCAN) semi-local density functional fail to describe the experimental bandgap in insulators and semiconductors, as well as the long-range dispersion forces, which are required for a proper description of the molecular interactions. However, VASP has implemented several well-tested methodologies to correct these shortcomings.

Richard Catlow addressed Nora de Leeuw and Elaine Moore: The VASP code which is a general purpose code for DFT calculations employing periodic boundary conditions is very widely used in the computational catalysis community. It has a wide range of functionality and is available to academic users at modest cost.

Nora de Leeuw answered: The Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) has become an indispensable tool for the simulation of extended surface models, as it takes into account symmetry elements to reduce the number of atoms needed. VASP also has implemented several corrections needed to simulate catalytic processes, such as the Hubbard Hamiltonian, which is used to improve the description of the localised d electrons of the transition metal atoms, and the long-range dispersion interactions, which is required to describe properly surfaces and interfaces.

Elaine Moore added: VASP is not available to all academics only to research groups whose members are based in one Department.

Flavia Cassiola asked: What are the hurdles (main obstacles to be overcome in synthesis) to produce these catalysts at scale?

Nora de Leeuw responded: This is certainly an important aspect that needs to be considered. The first and foremost hurdle would be the cost of the precursors and other additives. We use iron(II) acetylacetonate Fe(acac)2 (99.9%), nickel(II) acetylacetonate Ni(acac)2, oleylamine and elemental sulfur. We haven’t studied the synthesis with other cheaper precursors like nitrates or halides. From a technical point of view, this synthesis must be carried out under completely inert atmosphere, which may be challenging. As reported in our earlier work,1 the surface oxygen plays a crucial role in determining the catalytic activity. Hence the exposure of these catalysts to oxidising atmosphere should be controlled and this will impose challenges in handling of these materials. A detailed study should be carried out on the relationship between oxidising conditions, surface oxygen level and activity before optimising the synthesis and handling conditions.
1 C. E. Mitchell, U. Terranova, A. M. Beale, W. Jones, D. J. Morgan, M. Sankar and N. H. de Leeuw, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 779–784, DOI: 10.1039/d0cy01779e.

Michael North questioned: Why use NaOH as solvent and generate NaHCO3in situ? Is it not better to start with sodium bicarbonate solution? By starting with NaOH won’t the reaction solvent be changing during the reaction which will complicate the interpretation of the experimental results?

Nora de Leeuw answered: We have previously worked with NaHCO3 as a solvent for CO2 hydrogenation published in 2019.1 This work uncovered that when using a bicarbonate solvent, the bicarbonate species from the solution would react with the catalyst to form formate without the addition of gaseous CO2. In fact, when CO2 was added as a reactant, the productivity of formate decreased, we believe because adding CO2 to an already heavily concentrated bicarbonate system, causes a decrease in pH by the acidic CO2 dissolution, pushing the equilibrium of the carbonate species towards a CO32− dominant system, and away from the reactant carbonate species HCO3−. By using NaOH, we can be sure that 100% of the formate formed comes from our CO2 reactant and we achieve the favourable pH regime.
1 C. E. Mitchell, U. Terranova, I. Alshibane, D. J. Morgan, T. E. Davies, Q. He, J. S. J. Hargreaves, M. Sankar and N. H. De Leeuw, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 13985–13997, DOI: 10.1039/c9nj02114k.

Ali Reza Kamali remarked: Thank you Nora for your nice work and presentation. In the experimental section of the article (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f), it is mentioned that the reaction time between hydrogen and the carbon source (bicarbonate) in the autoclave was three days. I am wondering what would be the situation at shorter periods of time, in terms of the product and the conversion yield?

Nora de Leeuw replied: When the reaction time is decreased, the product formation becomes too low to be reproducible and accurately quantified. Of course, optimising the reaction, and decreasing the reaction time is certainly something we are working towards.

Jeffrey Poon asked: The paper presented (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f) provides a nice complement between experiments and theory calculations through DFT. From the calculations, specific reaction pathways have been speculated, but lack firsthand experimental proof. Are there any experimental data that back up said proposed reaction pathways/mechanism in operando? Or are there experiments planned for a more complete study? The reactive intermediates (e.g. HCO3*, HCO2*) proposed should be observable through optical spectroscopy (e.g. Raman scattering).

Nora de Leeuw responded: This is an interesting suggestion. The dominating species at different pH are well studied and reported. We agree that operando studies will provide evidence for the mechanistic pathways. Our previous findings1 observed that after charging gaseous CO2 into the reactor system, the pH of the reaction solutions drops from ∼pH 14 to ∼pH 8. Within the region of pH 8, the HCO3− species dominates which was hence the rationale behind our proposed mechanism.
1 C. E. Mitchell, U. Terranova, I. Alshibane, D. J. Morgan, T. E. Davies, Q. He, J. S. J. Hargreaves, M. Sankar and N. H. De Leeuw, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 13985–13997, DOI: 10.1039/c9nj02114k.

George Dowson questioned: Reading the experimental section in your paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f), there is an excess of sodium hydroxide in the reactor vessel (4 mmol) vs. 6 ml CO2 at 30 bar (∼0.33 mmol). Meaning that most of the formic acid generated in the reaction will be converted to sodium formate. Your work-up method, as described in the paper, involves dissolving free formic acid in deuterated chloroform; might this not miss a large proportion of your yield, as sodium formate will have poor solubility in chloroform? This could be addressed by acidifying your reaction mixture post-workup, unless this was already done and simply omitted from the experimental.

Nora de Leeuw replied: D2O was added to the reaction solution for frequency lock prior to NMR analysis. The deuterated chloroform is the solvent for the TMS reference which is sealed in a capillary tube and separately added into the NMR tube for analysis. Hence these two solutions do not mix.

Shaihroz Khan noted: Since the catalyst resembles pentlandite mineral, I suggest studying the catalytic behavior of pentlandite mineral instead of Fe–Ni–S. Can get as concentrate from mining sites and perform cleaning steps to make sure it is mostly Fe.Ni.S type material. This might be helpful to show the process of commercialization. Something similar is done but for hydrogen production in ref. 1.
1 B. Konkena, K. junge Puring, I. Sinev, S. Piontek, O. Khavryuchenko, J. P. Dürholt, R. Schmid, H. Tüysüz, M. Muhler, W. Schuhmann and U.-P. Apfel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12269, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms12269.

Nora de Leeuw responded: Indeed, pentlandite was one of the first natural FexNiyS type materials to be tested for electrocatalytic CO2 hydrogenation by Piontek et al.,1 but with only limited success. Their paper reports the production of mainly CO, and some methane. However, this reaction is preferred in a non-aqueous environment, as increasing the water content pushes the reaction towards hydrogen evolution. Because of these drawbacks, we chose to utilise Fe–Ni–S, a material that is facile to synthesise and performs well.
1 S. Piontek, K. junge Puring, D. Siegmund, M. Smialkowski, I. Sinev, D. Tetzlaff, B. Roldan Cuenya and U.-P. Apfel, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1075–1081, DOI: 10.1039/c8sc03555e.

Nico Fischer enquired: Would you expect that the same active catalyst would form over time when the precursor is left to ‘age’ at room temperature in air compared to your 200 °C calcination process?

Nora de Leeuw replied: We have already worked extensively with oxidising Fe1−xS based material both in air and under calcination.1 In this work, we serendipitously found that aging this iron sulfide in air for 30 days improved the activity of the material, which inspired us to calcine the material to accelerate this effect. This heat treatment increased the activity of the material significantly. We would assume our (Fe,Ni)3S4 catalyst would behave in the same manner. If the question is referring to aging the Fe(acac)2 and Ni(acac)2 precursors, we found that it was very important to keep Fe(acac)2 under an inert atmosphere. If the Fe(acac)2 was exposed to air for too long, we would see a decrease in activity of the synthesised catalyst and a reduction in crystallite size of the (Fe,Ni)3S4 crystal structure, observed by XRD. We believe creating a well-formed (Fe,Ni)3S4 followed by a controlled oxidation creates the Fe–Ni–O structure important for this catalyst’s activity.
1 C. E. Mitchell, U. Terranova, A. M. Beale, W. Jones, D. J. Morgan, M. Sankar and N. H. de Leeuw, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 779–784, DOI: 10.1039/d0cy01779e.

Naomi Lawes asked: Did you observe any further structural transformations during reaction?

Nora de Leeuw responded: Characterisation of the spent catalyst has shown that the violarite (Fe,Ni)3S4 structure is retained. However, we observed the formation of FeCO3 and NiSO4 species as well. At the moment, we speculate that the Fe–Ni–O structure slowly degrades to form FeCO3 and NiSO4 species. Further characterisation of completely deactivated catalysts, along with in situ spectroscopic studies will be necessary to arrive at a definitive conclusion on the structural changes of the catalyst during the reaction.

Richard Catlow enquired: The catalytic activity seems to be optimal when there are both O and S atoms on the surface. Does the modelling give any insights into why this is the case?

Nora de Leeuw answered: Our computer models of the partially oxidised sulfide show that the distorted packing of 54.5% of O atoms, 18.2% of S atoms, 18.2% of NiA and 9.1% of FeB, all with different ionic radii, at the surface layer is essential for an optimal activity of the catalyst. Our previous work on an iron-only partially oxidised sulfide material1 has shown that the geometry of the surface, and in particular the O–Fe–S surface moiety is essential in allowing the transition state to be accessed at relatively low energy; both surface oxygen and sulfur are crucial for the improvement in catalytic activity.
1 C. E. Mitchell, U. Terranova, A. M. Beale, W. Jones, D. J. Morgan, M. Sankar and N. H. de Leeuw, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 779–784, DOI: 10.1039/d0cy01779e.

Jonathan Ruiz Esquius asked: In your manuscript (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f) it is stated that violarite spontaneously oxidises in air. Since a degree of surface oxidation is related to higher activity, would fresh (Fe,Ni)3S4 become more active with aging time? If it does not, TGA showed the presence of phenol, so could phenol be blocking the actives sites of the fresh sample?

Nora de Leeuw replied: Yes, aging will increase the catalytic activity of this material. We have already worked extensively on the role of surface oxidation of Fe1−xS based materials on the catalytic activity,1 where we achieved the surface oxidation either by ageing or by high temperature calcination. In that work, we serendipitously found that aging this iron sulfide in air for 30 days improved the activity of the material, which finding then inspired us to calcine the material to accelerate the surface oxidation. This heat treatment increased the activity of the material significantly. The Fe1−xS in this prior article was prepared in the same way as (Fe,Ni)3S4, and we can therefore be sure that surface oxidation is the reason for the increase in activity instead of blocking active sites by residual solvent.
1 C. E. Mitchell, U. Terranova, A. M. Beale, W. Jones, D. J. Morgan, M. Sankar and N. H. de Leeuw, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 779–784, DOI: 10.1039/d0cy01779e.

Jeannie Tan enquired: Can I assume that the formation of Fe–Ni–O resulted in vacancies due to substitution of metal oxides during the calcination at 200 °C? Do you have direct evidence or any technique that you think we can use to characterize the electron sink or recombination centre formed as a result of Fe–Ni–O formation?

Nora de Leeuw responded: Currently, we do not have any direct experimental or characterisation evidence to suggest that Ni substitution results in vacancies. However, this possibility could not be ruled out. Typically, careful analysis of XPS data and transient optical spectroscopy methods can be used to study this phenomenon.

Sourav Ghosh said: Thank you for your wonderful talk. How comparable are the hydrogen activation energy and formation of metal hydride in the case of mixed metal sulfides with respect to the single metal sulfides? Does the activation energy influence the rate of reduction? I guess the metal hydride is responsible here for the reduction of carbonate to formate.

Nora de Leeuw replied: In this work, we have not calculated the activation energy for the dissociation of the H2 molecule, as we assumed that this process takes place upon adsorption and is, therefore, barrierless.1 We also found that the H adatom prefers to bind to one of the exposed S anions, rather than one of the metal centres or O atoms. Thus, it is a surface hydrosulfide group (HS) that is responsible here for the reduction of the carbonate to formate. Our calculations also indicate that the lattice distortions caused by accommodating diverse atoms with different radii in the partially oxidised surface of the mixed Ni/Fe sulfide offers a unique template to activate and anchor the reactant carbonate species and H atoms.
1 A. Roldan and N. H. de Leeuw, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 2426–2433, DOI: 10.1039/c8cp06371k.

Walter Leitner enquired: Is adsorbed “activated” CO2 formed directly?

Nora de Leeuw responded: We have evidence from previous studies1,2 that CO2 requires alkaline conditions to form carbonate as the active species that bounds the surface of the thiospinels. Thus, we decided to also use alkaline conditions for the CO2 conversion into formic acid in this work, where we have found the most catalytically active yet thiospinel. This sulfide phase requires the synergistic effect of a partial surface oxidation and Ni ions occupying half of the octahedral positions.
In our experiments, we dissolved CO2 gas and H2 gas in a mild alkaline solution before starting the reaction, whereas in our simulations we used CO2 gas and H2O gas as reference. We have assumed that CO2 and H2O reacted in solution forming the adsorbed HCO3* and H* species, which are the active form of the reactants that undergo the conversion into formic acid on the surfaces of our catalyst. Full details of the rationale for our choice of reactants is provided in our manuscript.
1 A. Roldan, N. Hollingsworth, A. Roffey, H.-U. U. Islam, J. B. M. M. Goodall, C. R. A. A. Catlow, J. A. Darr, W. Bras, G. Sankar, K. B. Holt, G. Hogarth and N. H. De Leeuw, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7501–7504.
2 S. N. A. Zakaria, N. Hollingsworth, H. U. Islam, A. Roffey, D. Santos-Carballal, A. Roldan, W. Bras, G. Sankar, G. Hogarth, K. B. Holt and N. H. de Leeuw, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32078–32085.

Ollie Thomas asked: Fig. 6 in your paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f) illustrates how the reactant carbon coordinates directly to a surface oxygen and transfer of the OH* moiety. This raises the possible question of exchange. Are the oxygens of the departing formate the same as those of the original carbonate molecule or has there been exchange with the surface? Have you any intention of perusing isotopic labelling studies to check this prediction, exchange or no exchange, of your model to provide further validation?

Nora de Leeuw answered: This is a very interesting hypothesis. For our simulations, we did not consider atomic exchange between the surface and the adsorbates, but we cannot rule out this possibility either. Certainly, it is possible to carry out further studies using isotopic labelling and computational modelling to test the possibility of atomic exchange.

Ollie Thomas queried: Your studies indicate that catalytic activity is highly sensitive to surface structure ((001) cf. (111)). Do you anticipate there being issues with catalytic lifetime due to surface degradation through catalytic cycling? How stable is the surface with respect to RedOx processes under the reaction conditions, as your calcination studies suggest oxidation strongly deactivates the catalyst? Have you tried perhaps varying the pH of the reacting solution? If you do anticipate there being degradation would perhaps a supported version of the catalyst protect against this and maybe even help promote the favourable spatial configuration indicated in Fig. 6(a) in your paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f)?

Nora de Leeuw responded: Preliminary characterisation of the spent catalyst shows evidence of catalyst degradation to FeCO3 and NiSO4, and we therefore think that the catalyst will deactivate over time. However, the mode of deactivation and the factors affecting the deactivation pathways need detailed investigation. We have not yet tried optimising the pH of the starting solution. The challenge is that as of the moment that CO2 is introduced to the reaction mixture the pH decreases which is very difficult to control. We measure the pH of the initial reaction mixture (pH = 14) which at the moment that CO2 is introduced reduces to pH = 8, where the reactant bicarbonate species dominates. Currently we do not have any lead to establish the relationship between the pH and the catalyst stability. Supporting the catalyst is an interesting suggestion and we will certainly look into this possibility.

Keith Whiston asked: I wondered if you had systematically studied what the effect of substituting some or all of the nickel in this system with other transition metals possessing related redox properties? Both cobalt and manganese are possible alternatives. You say in the paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00137f) that one hypothesis for the role of Ni(III) is to maintain Fe(II) as the lower oxidation state of iron which may stabilise the active site for catalysis. I think it would be particularly interesting to look at cobalt substitution for nickel which could test out this possibility. Cobalt and nickel possess similar redox activity and suitable inorganic materials have previously been prepared.

Nora de Leeuw replied: As also mentioned in my earlier reply to the question from Haresh Manyar, substituting Ni with Co would be the most logical next step. However, its status as a critical raw material makes it less interesting from an application perspective. Nonetheless, both Co and Mn are interesting elements to investigate further.

Moritz Wolf questioned: Have you conducted additional characterisation of the synthesised and calcined nanocrystals, e.g. by means of transmission electron microscopy, to exclude a potential increase in crystallite (domain) size? Such a morphological restructuring may be evidenced in the X-ray diffractograms after calcination at 200 °C and could dominate the observed change rather than an increase in crystallinity as such.

Nora de Leeuw answered: Thank you for this interesting suggestion; we did not do any microscopy of these materials, which will be our next step to investigate the change in the particle size and/or morphological restructuring.

Michael Claeys enquired: Is there a particular reason why you run the reaction at relatively mild conditions (125 °C)? How stable are violarite (FeNi)3S4 compounds at your reaction conditions. Is there loss of sulfur/H2S formation?

Nora de Leeuw replied: We run the reaction at relatively mild conditions as we are interested in developing sustainable catalysts for the conversion of CO2 into useful molecules. Our X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments indicate that violarite is stable up to around 200 °C, which makes the catalyst appropriate for our reaction conditions. However, the catalyst deactivates because of the formation of FeCO3 and NiSO4. Currently we do not have any evidence for the formation of H2S since we did not analyse the gaseous products.

Mzamo Shozi asked: Does any of the surface sulfur get hydrogenated to H2S during the reaction, which may be a poison for the catalyst?

Nora de Leeuw answered: We found in previous studies that the greigite (Fe3S4) surface only becomes partially oxidised in the presence of water.1,2 For this work, we have simulated a 75% partially oxidised surface of violarite (FeNi2S4) and thus, we believe that it will be very unlikely that the few S atoms that remain at the surface will undergo reduction to H2S. We did not analyse the gaseous products, so we do not have any evidence for the formation of H2S and we did not consider this reaction in our simulations. However, we do not believe that H2S would act as a poison because this material is a sulfur-based catalyst.
1 D. Santos-Carballal, A. Roldan and N. H. de Leeuw, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8616–8629.
2 S. N. A. Zakaria, N. Hollingsworth, H. U. Islam, A. Roffey, D. Santos-Carballal, A. Roldan, W. Bras, G. Sankar, G. Hogarth, K. B. Holt and N. H. de Leeuw, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32078–32085.

George Dowson opened discussion of the paper by Wijnand Marquart: You note a large amount of carbon formation in some of your experiments, would it be possible to humidify the feed gas stream to suppress carbon formation or would this have negative effects on your molybdenum catalyst? Also have you considered using isotopically labelled CO2 to track where the carbon in your products (and carbon deposition) is coming from? This may indicate if any CO2 + C2 chemistry is occurring.

Wijnand Marquart replied: Thank you for these valuable suggestions. Co-feeding of water will be investigated this year. While we do not expect oxidation to occur due to water co-feeding, experimental results will hopefully confirm this. We also aim to investigate the origin of the carbon in the products and carbon deposition using labelled CO2 in the near future. However, no signs of CO2 + C2 chemistry are observed based on GC analysis. No C3 products are detected and the carbon balance is closed.

Richard Catlow said: Your work has concentrated on Mo2C. We know that other carbides are active for CO2 conversion. Do you plan to explore other transition metal carbides?

Wijnand Marquart responded: We are aware of other possible (transition) metal carbides being active for CO2 activation, but at this point we are focusing on Mo2C.

Richard Catlow enquired: Your results indicate that there is a strong dependence on the nature of the support. Do you have insights into the origins of this dependence?

Wijnand Marquart replied: At this time, no specific characterizations were performed regarding the metal oxide support materials. However, looking at the initial conversion levels of C2H6, it is interesting to observe an inverse relationship between reducibility of the oxide support material and C2H6 conversion. Further investigations will be required to fully address the strong dependence of the support on the activity of Mo2C.

Walter Leitner questioned: How would you quantify the effect of reducing fossil carbon in your system? If the CO2 was sequestered from incineration, would RWGS not be less carbon intensive to produce CO?

Wijnand Marquart answered: Thanks a lot for the comment. You are of course right if the only value product was CO and the only feed molecule CO2. The advantage of the studied ODH is to potentially valorize CO2 and small hydrocarbons to CO and short olefins.

Ali Reza Kamali asked: Thank you Wijnand for your nice presentation and very interesting work. I have a question about the formation of molybdenum (oxy) carbides with different stoichiometry reported in the work. Some XRD patterns are shown in the ESI of your paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00138d), but the diffraction peaks are typically very weak and broad, and can be attributed to many semi-amorphous materials. Have you done complementary characterisations to confirm the formation of such phases? Also, there are EDS elemental mapping results of the catalysts in the article, but these mappings only show Mo, Si and O. I am wondering why carbon is not involved in these analyses?

Wijnand Marquart replied: Thank you for the question. The molybdenum carbide allotrope phases were indeed mainly characterized by means of XRD. Rietveld refinement on these samples (specifically on the SiO2 supported samples) was challenging but we are confident of the results, confirmed by the quality of the fits. The contrast between the bulk metal oxide support materials (Ga-, Al-, Zr- and Ti oxide) and the carbide nanoparticles are large, which increased the insecurity of the Rietveld refinement analysis. In a previous study from our labs,1 we have attempted to distinguish the Mo allotropes by means of in situ XAS analysis. Analysis of the EXAFS region has confirmed that no α-MoC phase was present. This supports the suggestion of the MoOxCy phase being present, as the XRD diffraction patterns of α-MoC and MoOxCy are very similar (both cubic structures). Further investigations are required to support our suggested compositions.
In terms of the EDS elemental mapping, the samples are prepared on a carbon coated copper grid for analysis purposes, making it impossible to distinguish between carbon from the sample and the grid.
1 W. Marquart, S. Raseale, G. Prieto, A. Zimina, B. B. Sarma, J.-D. Grunwaldt, M. Claeys and N. Fischer, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1624–1639.

Ali Reza Kamali added: Following my previous comment, you might be able to extract valuable information from your Raman results with regards to the formation of molybdenum carbides. You may like to have a look at the relevant works in the literature, for instance ref. 1.
1 M. Fan, H. Chen, Y. Wu, L.-L. Feng, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li and X. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16320, DOI: 10.1039/c5ta03500g.

Wijnand Marquart responded: From our own experience and from literature (for instance ref. 1–4), molybdenum carbides are not Raman active. The observed spectra can all be connected to the presence of molybdenum oxides. When analysed in situ (without the presence of O2 in the cell) no bands are observed once the sample is fully carburized.
1 T. Mo, J. Xu, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Catal. Today, 2016, 261, 101–115.
2 M.-L. Frauwallner, F. López-Linares, J. Lara-Romero, C. E. Scott, V. Ali, E. Hernández and P. Pereira-Almao, Appl. Catal., A, 2011 394, 62–70.
3 T. Xiao, H. Wang, J. Da, K. S. Coleman and M. L. H. Green, J. Catal., 2002, 211, 183–191.
4 T. Xiao, A. P. E. York, V. C. Williams, H. Al-Megren, A. Hanif, X. Zhou and M. L. H. Green, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3896–3905.

Sourav Ghosh asked: A minute amount of water can increase the rate of oxidation of ethane. Did you perform any catalytic test with a minute amount of water in the stream?

Wijnand Marquart answered: Thank you for your suggestion. Adding of water to the feed stream will be investigated this year, to hopefully prevent/remove carbon deposition, to increase catalytic activity.

Ollie Thomas opened discussion of the paper by Matthew Quesne: Would you be able to elaborate a little on the rationale behind the choice of the PBE functional? In your paper PBEsol outperforms plain PBE (though admittedly by a small margin). Why did you choose this functional over other GGA approaches?

Matthew Quesne replied: In reference to the GGAs benchmarked in this paper, they clearly perform almost identically (at least well within the margin of error expected by the theory). Therefore, PBE being the function that has been used for the other materials referenced in this article as points of comparison was chosen to enable a direct comparison to previous work.

Ollie Thomas enquired: What made you decide to use a GGA over, for example, a meta-GGA or hybrid functional? PBE sometimes struggles with catalytic systems1,2 and it has been suggested that more elaborate functionals perform better.3 What do you anticipate would be the effects of the inclusion of exact exchange in this instance?
1 T. J. Goncalves, P. N. Plessow and F. Studt, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4368.
2 K. P. Kepp, Commun. Chem., 2018, 1, 63.
3 Density functional theory, ed. S. Siwaipram, S. Impeng, P. A. Bopp, S. Bureekaew and D. Glossman-Mitnik, IntecOpen, London, 2019.

Matthew Quesne responded: The choice of methodology was certainly a compromise between chemical accuracy and computational cost. A choice of a much more elaborate functional would have necessitated a much more simplified model. Importantly this same methodology has proven ideal for replicating the activity of closely related materials previously (as detailed in the introduction of this paper (DOI: 10.1039/d1fd00004g)).

Ollie Thomas asked: Do you have any plans for experimental studies to test your computational models?

Matthew Quesne replied: The author’s intention was that this paper would offer a first-principle look into the bulk and surface properties of these materials, which have hitherto not garnered a lot of interest for their potential catalytic activity towards CO2 hydrogenation. We agree that experimental studies are definitely needed and just hope that our work sparks some interest in the greater community.

Michael North enquired: In Fig. 4 of the paper (DOI: 10.1039/d1fd00004g) you give adsorption energies for CO2. In what mode is the CO2 adsorbed onto the MAX-phase material? Using the O lone pair, through C, π-bonded etc.? This will affect the way in which the CO2 is activated for subsequent reactions with some binding modes encouraging nucleophilic attack and others electrophilic attack.

Matthew Quesne answered: The authors are grateful of the opportunity to address CO2 adsorption in more detail. We will include a new figure in the ESI (DOI: 10.1039/d1fd00004g) that includes both a depiction of the lowest binding modes for each surface as well as the important structural and electronic data. We will also add the following discussion to the main text:
“Important geometric and electronic information about the lowest energy adsorption modes for carbon dioxide on top of each silicon carbide surface are given in Fig. S5 of the ESI document. These data show that whilst the average metal–oxygen bond distance between the surface and adsorbate is modulated almost completely by the ideal M–C bond distance the amount of charge transfer (and corresponding elongation of the C–O bond length) varies depending on the periodic position of the parent transition metal. Importantly, group IV metals (Ti/V) see an increase of ∼0.6 in electron transferred to the CO2 upon adsorption from the values observed for their V metal equivalents (Zr/Nb), which correspond to both greater activation of the adsorbate and a more exothermic adsorption energy.”

Peter Styring asked: You say that hydrogen interactions are too strong on the surface. Have you tried with a hybrid group? For example, using a steric group decorated onto the surface that while allowing some interaction inhibits interactions that are too strong.

Matthew Quesne responded: Hydrogen adsorption does seem too strong to make the pristine surfaces good candidates for hydrogen transfer reactions. We are more encouraged by the performance of the oxidised surface and as we would expect the formation of such a surface to dominate under reaction conditions this would be our first target. However, surface mediation will be important to any functional catalyst since such phenomena are already crucial in the products pecificity of related materials.

Unni Olsbye enquired: Experimental studies on the corresponding non-metal carbides show substantial activity for the water gas shift reaction. Did those carbides have the same bulk and surface structure as the MAX-phase?

Matthew Quesne answered: As this question implies there is clearly a lot of overlap between the properties associated with good activity towards the WGS reaction (as catalysed by the MAX-phase of the parent carbides) and the surface properties that we report for the silicon carbide. It might even be fair to say that the higher activity towards CO2 could indicate an elevated activity towards the RWGS reaction? However, at the moment this is speculative, and more research is very much required.

Richard Catlow addressed Matthew Quesne and Ollie Thomas: The choice of functional is indeed an important issue. But PBE appears to perform adequately for these systems and requires less computational resource than hybrid functionals.

Matthew Quesne added: Indeed, this is correct!

Stephen McCord said: Hi Matthew, I found your paper (DOI: 10.1039/d1fd00004g) and presentation very interesting. I have a question regarding vanadium and niobium – have you had a chance to consider related areas of vanadium/niobium research? Here, I am thinking about vanadium (and to an extent niobium) and its use as an alternative to palladium–silver alloys in hydrogen gas separation membranes. I wonder if some of the surface and bulk issues you mention may have been (at least partially) addressed here. In particular I was thinking of the work by Michael Dolan1 (most of which is about 10 years old by now) in the area – but there are a host of other experimental and computational works out there that may be of interest.
1 M. D. Dolan, M. E. Kellam, K. G. McLennan, D. Liang and G. Song, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38(23), 9794–9799, DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.05.073.

Matthew Quesne replied: Certainly, there is a lot of important work in the field of vanadium/niobium alloy materials and are grateful for that the author of this question has highlighted some extremely interesting studies. Whilst the materials mentioned are different then the ones that we consider here there is certainly important elements that can be seen across a multitude of different materials. In particular the effect that the series position of the group V metal has on the properties of the alloy.

Keith Whiston opened discussion of the paper by Stylianos Kyrimis: It is usually difficult in a continuous fixed bed reactor of this type to carry out product distribution analysis through the bed but instead usually one is constrained to measuring the final bed exit product distribution. It is however sometimes easier to measure temperature gradients along the bed length and these can be quite sensitive. Although the temperature differences may be small I wondered if you had tried to discriminate between reaction mechanisms by making such temperature measurements? The two kinetic models predict quite different distributions of exotherm along the bed. For sure heat loss from such a small scale test rig makes these measurements challenging.

Stylianos Kyrimis responded: Thank you for your suggestion. It is indeed an interesting idea which can help us to better understand and quantify the reaction profile along the bed. Non-invasive measurements of any quantity, however, are challenging. Even if a thermocouple could be placed within the catalytic bed without disturbing the flow profile, then accurate measurements would still be challenging. Small-scale reactors, such as the one considered here (0.4 g of catalyst and bed height of around 16 mm), have really small changes in their operating parameters. As indicated by the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model, the temperature hotspot was less than 1 K and the pressure drop was around 140 Pa in an operating pressure of 50 bar. Minor changes such as these would require very precise apparatus to accurately and reliably measure. In addition, as you mentioned, small-scale reactors also suffer from heat losses. During the meeting, it has been suggested that IR measurements could be used. Indeed, this methodology would be more suitable compared to a thermocouple, as IR measurements of temperature are really sensitive and could potentially measure the temperature profile along the bed. However, as I am not really familiar with this technique, I would be hesitant to further comment on an IR application with a small-scale MeOH synthesis reactor setup. Undoubtedly, changes in the operating parameters, such as temperature or pressure, which affect and are affected by the catalytic bed morphology, are easier to measure in large-scale reactors. There, the catalytic bed is in the order of metres, and changes in the aforementioned parameters will be significant. As the operating procedure can greatly impact the performance of large-scale reactors, e.g. large temperature hotspots can lead to runaway conditions or catalyst sintering and increased pressure drops will increase the operating costs due to the requirement for stronger compressors, accurate monitoring and precise control of these effects are crucial. On the other hand, small-scale reactors are better suited to quantify the reaction kinetics. In those, the temperature and hydrodynamic profile of the bed are really minor and are thus not expected to significantly affect the equilibrium or reaction rate profile.

George Dowson asked: The major difference between the two reactions followed in your model is the by-production of water, which is present in CO2 hydrogenation but absent in CO hydrogenation. You mention briefly in your paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00136h) the inhibitive effect of water – is this a chemical effect that is being modelled, or essentially just a physical dilution effect in the model? I.e. is your model including any chemical reactions that the water may cause or is the water treated as inert and hence inhibits the reactivity due to diluting the components at the reaction sites?

Stylianos Kyrimis replied: In CFD, molecular species interactions with the active sites cannot be modelled. Instead, the interactions between the different species and between the species and the catalyst can only be approximated with kinetic equations. For example, in the two kinetic models (KM), competitive adsorption of H2O and H2 is considered, and thus the existence (in terms of partial pressure) of H2O will affect the overall equilibrium and reaction rate. Therefore, as you mentioned, H2O is considered as an inert species, with its existence shifting the equilibrium and modifying the reaction rate of the reaction(s) where it is involved.
CFD breaks down the catalytic bed into small computational elements, where, in each one, the species transfer, concentration and reactions are calculated. Based on these concentrations, the direction of chemical reactions is calculated. Looking closer at the MeOH synthesis case, and specifically feed 23, it can be seen how the production and existence of H2O shifts the equilibrium. The excess production of H2O early in the bed, as predicted from Park’s KM, inhibits MeOH hydrogenation; past the axial length of 0.1, CO2 hydrogenation rate drops significantly and instead the forward water–gas shift takes place primarily (towards production of CO2 and H2). Of course, that doesn’t mean that CFD is restricted to estimating the impact of H2O simply as an inert species. This is a really interesting opportunity for different tools to be combined; if the impact of H2O is more severe than what is predicted from the KMs and from the CFD, e.g. if it deactivates the active sites or, as you mention, serves a different role as a part of a side-reaction, then the KMs and CFD can be modified accordingly to also account for this possibility.

George Dowson added: Thank you for your answer, this clarifies some of the model behaviour when looking at how water is treated and is interesting in context of looking at chemical (non-inert) interactions in the future.

Marco Ranocchiari enquired: Can your model predict whether the reactions go through a CO intermediate and to which extent each reaction occurs in the reactor?

Stylianos Kyrimis responded: Yes, the CFD model can predict both the local and the global magnitude of the different pathways. This potential is utilised several times in the paper (DOI: 10.1039/d0fd00136h); it allowed us to estimate the dominant pathways along the reactor, to evaluate the overall MeOH production from CO2 and CO, and to determine the preferable pathway for CO. In addition, the relative changes in the magnitude and in the equilibrium of the different involved reactions, as a result of changes in the operating procedure (e.g. flow composition, operating temperature or pressure), can also be determined. This potential is demonstrated in the last section of the paper, where the impact of flow composition on the amount of methanol synthesised from CO2 and from CO is investigated. As such, it was determined that MeOH synthesis predominantly takes places from CO2 hydrogenation, but direct CO hydrogenation has an important contribution as well (37.5%).

Unni Olsbye questioned: To what extent could your simulations be used to guide catalyst development, i.e. tuning of the various reaction-specific sites in the catalyst?

Stylianos Kyrimis answered: Unfortunately, the CFD model cannot specifically model the molecular interactions with the catalyst and the active sites. These interactions are instead approximated in the flow profile from the kinetic model (KM) and the different terms that it includes. Looking at the MeOH synthesis process, these terms correspond to the adsorption constants of the different species in the active sites, to the chemical equilibrium constants or to the kinetic constants. In addition, the applied KM dictates the interactions between the different species (competitive or non-competitive adsorption). All these terms can be tweaked and optimized in the KM and their impact on the overall process can be evaluated.
As a simple example, a researcher might be interested in improving the rate of CO hydrogenation by adding metallic sites in the Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst. Based on their suggestions, the terms responsible for CO hydrogenation and that are expected to be affected by these metallic sites can be modified in the KM itself. Being used as a parametric study tool, the CFD model can then identify the impact of these modified terms and evaluate whether or not this will be beneficial for the MeOH synthesis process. To conclude, parametric and optimization studies such as these can be achieved, but it is important to ensure that these modifications and tweaks are realistic and well defined. This is a really nice area where experimental investigations can be combined with both DFT and CFD models to accelerate the development process of a catalyst.

Peter Styring asked: What are the complexities of combining the CFD approach (which is associated with bulk properties) with chemical modelling? You discuss the combination of CFD with kinetic modelling but are there opportunities to combine with a more atomistic approach? Is there a possibility to include molecular geometry properties with the CFD approach?

Stylianos Kyrimis replied: The two models, CFD and DFT, investigate the reaction in two different scales. The CFD is well suited to investigate scales in-between the catalytic particle size (e.g. 100–200 μm as in the paper) and the reactor scale. In this investigation, CFD will provide information regarding the local species concentration, inter and/or intra-particle diffusion transfer and reaction equilibrium. The impact of smaller scales, e.g. the catalytic site coverage and the specific interaction between species and active sites, can only be approximated through volumetric correlations, which might not be representative of the molecular dynamics. In addition, the accuracy of the CFD model is directly related to the kinetic model (KM) considered, which defines the mechanisms and species interactions. Also, the differences between different catalysts (e.g. Cu/Zn/Al2O3, Cu/SiO2, Cu/Pd/TiO2) for MeOH synthesis can only be captured through the differences in the incorporated KMs (e.g. different kinetic constants, adsorption terms, and mechanisms), which will give an incomplete picture of the role of the different active sites.
Looking specifically at the MeOH synthesis process, Park’s KM was defined with the assumption that CO2 binds on Cu0 active sites and CO binds on Cu+ sites, signifying a non-competitive adsorption. On the other hand, Nestler’s KM predicts that CO2 and CO have a competitive adsorption. From the CFD side, this cannot be quantified. Using a DFT model however, it would be possible to specifically quantify the species interactions with the active sites. The DFT can then shed light on topics such as (a) competitive or non-competitive adsorption of CO2 and CO, (b) the specific role of H2O inhibition – does it de-activate the active site or does it simply occupy H2 sites, (c) reverse MeOH decomposition to CO or CO2 – does it take place and which sites might be responsible for this, (d) changing catalyst – how does it affect the molecular dynamic mechanisms with the active sites.
It is clear then that DFT models are the best tools to evaluate the interactions between the species and the active sites. Knowledge such as this will lead to more accurate KMs, which can be then incorporated into the CFD model to investigate the impact of the catalyst on the reactor scale and evaluate its scale-up potential. While the two models investigate completely different scales, their combination will allow a deeper and broader understanding of the different scales involved in chemical reactors.

Liane Rossi enquired: How complicated would it be and why was CH4 formation not considered under the studied conditions?

Stylianos Kyrimis responded: The results of the CFD model are directly dependent on the considered kinetic model (KM). The KM strictly determines the species interactions and the reactant/product concentrations. Looking specifically at the MeOH synthesis, in the experimental data used to determine the kinetic constants and the mechanisms of the KMs, those of Park et al.,1 the production of CH4 was not reported. Moreover, in the Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst, CH4 is usually produced only in traces.
If a different catalyst is used, which would result in a different reactant and product distribution at the outlet, then the KM would have to be updated to include these new species and/or mechanisms. Following this, updating the CFD model itself to include the new KM and the new species is straightforward. Thus, the link between the CFD predictions and the experimental results is the KM itself.
1 N. Park, M.-J. Park, Y.-J. Lee, K.-S. Ha and K.-W. Jun, Fuel Process. Technol., 2014, 125, 139–147, DOI: 10.1016/j.fuproc.2014.03.041.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
