A chelating effect in hybrid inks for non-vacuum-processed CuInSe 2 thin films   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA15202B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA15202B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5087-5094A chelating effect in hybrid inks for non-vacuum-processed CuInSe2 thin films†

        
          
            Ara 
            Cho
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Hyunjoon 
            Song
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jihye 
            Gwak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Young-Joo 
            Eo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jae Ho 
            Yun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kyunghoon 
            Yoon
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            SeJin 
            Ahn
          
        
      *a
aPhotovoltaic Laboratory, Korea Institute of Energy Research, 152 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-343, Republic of Korea. E-mail: icemua@kier.re.kr; swisstel@kier.re.kr;  Fax: +82-42-860-3539;   Tel: +82-42-860-3699
bDepartment of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 305-701, Republic of Korea
Received 
      16th December 2013
    , Accepted 22nd January 2014First published on 24th January 2014AbstractWe previously demonstrated a hybrid ink consisting of synthesized Cu–Se ([Cu] > [Se]) nanoparticles and an indium (In) precursor solution to form CuInSe2 (CIS) thin films. In the precursor solution, monoethanolamine (MEA), which exhibited better performance than a different alkanolamine, triethanolamine (TEA), was used as a chelating agent to bind the In precursor and the Cu–Se nanoparticles. MEA easily forms a complex with Cu in the Cu–Se nanoparticles. To observe the effect of the Cu–MEA complex in the hybrid ink, Cu-rich Cu–Se nanoparticles were washed with MEA to reduce the Cu content in the nanoparticles through the formation of a Cu–MEA complex. As a result, CuInSe2 thin films were obtained at a fabrication temperature that was 80 °C lower than usual (530 °C). The fabricated devices made at 450 °C with hybrid inks of washed Cu–Se or normally synthesized Cu–Se exhibited conversion efficiencies of 5.04% and 1.04%, respectively, which confirmed that the Cu–MEA complex affected the performance of CIS solar cells that were produced with the hybrid ink process.
1. Introduction
In recent years, Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS) and CuInSe2 (CIS) chalcopyrites have been widely investigated in the field of environmentally friendly solar renewable energy using photovoltaic cells. In comparison with widely available commercial crystalline Si solar cells with ∼100 to 300 μm thicknesses for electric power generation, thin layers (1 to 2 μm) can be utilized in CIGS solar cells due to their large light absorption coefficient (∼105 cm−1) and tunable direct band gap (∼1.0 to 2.4 eV), which can be adjusted through the In/Ga and S/Se ratios. Traditionally, CIGS absorbers have been produced by vacuum-based processes (co-evaporation and sputtering + selenization) with over 20% efficiency.1 However, non-vacuum processed CIGS has been in the spotlight recently, despite its low conversion efficiency, because of the high production costs and material waste from vacuum-based processes.
We previously reported a non-vacuum hybrid ink process to form CIGS thin films.2–4 The concept of our hybrid ink process merges the advantages of particle-based and solution-based processes, and it is possible to make dense thin films with little organic residue. The hybrid ink consists of synthesized binary nanoparticles (Cu–Se, Cu–S, In–Se, In–S, Ga–Se, or Ga–S) and an indium (In) precursor solution with a chelating agent, monoethanolamine (MEA). In the hybrid ink, the chelating agent, MEA, plays an important role in forming the CIS thin films. Normally, MEA is a well-known alkanolamine that is used as a CO2 absorber5–8 and in wood preservatives (bound with Cu).9–11
In the hybrid ink without MEA, fabricated CIS thin film solar cells failed to show good device performance because many pores existed in the CIS thin layer after the reaction. In this case, nanoparticles were not grown large enough to make a dense CIS thin layer in this precursor solution during the reaction.2 On the other hand, the hybrid ink with MEA produced quite good device performance due to the formation of dense CIS thin layers.2,3 In addition, the combination of components and reduction of organic residues were controlled by mixing a moderate number of binary compounds and precursor solutions.4 However, the high fabrication (selenization) temperature was still a hurdle that had to be overcome. This difficulty is derived from the CIS formation temperature for Cu–Se nanoparticles with an In precursor solution during the reaction and is related to the Cu and Se contents of the nanoparticles in the hybrid ink. Cu–Se compounds with high Cu contents have higher melting temperatures than those with low Cu contents.12
In this work, monoethanolamine (MEA) and triethanolamine (TEA) were compared in use as chelating agents in CIS-forming hybrid inks. Each alkanolamine makes a complex form with Cu, and each has a different form of the Cu–alkanolamine complex. According to the qualities of the CIS thin layer formed via the solution process with MEA and TEA, MEA was selected for use as the chelating agent in the hybrid ink. To observe the character of Cu–MEA complex formation in the hybrid inks, Cu–Se nanoparticles were washed with MEA to reduce the Cu content in the Cu–Se nanoparticles of the hybrid inks. Because the synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles in our previous hybrid ink exhibited high Cu contents, a high selenization temperature was needed to form the CIS thin layer. Conversely, the hybrid ink with Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA requires a lower selenization temperature due to the low melting temperature of Cu–Se nanoparticles with low Cu contents. As a proof-of-concept for the Cu–MEA complex, CIS thin film solar cells were fabricated using the hybrid ink with washed Cu–Se nanoparticles and were compared to those fabricated using the hybrid ink with our originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles at low selenization temperatures.
2. Experimental details
The typical synthetic method for colloidal nanoparticles was performed according to the colloidal synthetic process as follows.13 In a nitrogen-filled glove box, 2 mmol of copper(I) iodide (CuI, 99.998%, Alfa Aesar) and 1 mmol of sodium selenide (Na2Se, 99.8%, Alfa Aesar) were dissolved in 30 ml of pyridine (C5H5N, anhydrous, 99.8%, Aldrich) and 20 ml of methanol (CH3OH or MeOH, 99.6%, Junsei), respectively, and stirred for 10 min. The thoroughly dissolved CuI (yellowish) and Na2Se (reddish) solutions were mixed together in a 100 ml glass bottle under a fume hood. The mixed solution in the bottle was stirred continuously in an ice bath at a set temperature of 0 °C for 7 min; a black colloidal solution of Cu–Se was obtained. The colloidal solutions were then centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 min, the upper layers of the liquids were decanted, and the isolated colloids were dispersed in methanol. The above centrifugation and isolation procedure were repeated several times for purification. Finally, the colloidal nanoparticles were re-dispersed in methanol or dried in air to prepare for measurements.
To choose the best alkanolamine as the chelating agent, monoethanolamine (NH2CH2CH2OH, MEA, 99.0%, Aldrich) and triethanolamine (N(CH2CH2OH)3, TEA, 99.0%, Aldrich) were compared via a solution process. For the precursor solution, copper(II) acetate monohydrate (Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O or Cu(Ac)2, 99.99%, Aldrich), indium(III) acetate (In(CH3COO)3 or In(Ac)3, 99.99%, Aldrich), MeOH, and alkanolamine (MEA or TEA) were mixed together. After that point, all thin film preparation processes were the same as described in the hybrid ink process below. For the hybrid ink, In(Ac)3, MeOH, and MEA were used with MEA acting as a chelating agent and binder. In(Ac)3 was mixed with MEA and MeOH in a 10 ml vial and dissolved thoroughly by ultrasonication. The synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles were added to the dissolved In(Ac)3 solution and sonicated for 3 hours. In this case, the molar ratios of Cu precursors (Cu(Ac)2):In precursor (In(Ac)3) in the solutions or inks were held at approximately 0.9:1 and the Cu–Se:In(Ac)3 molar ratio was approximately 1:3 to prevent loss of In during selenization. The Cu–Se:MeOH (in the In(Ac)3 solution) ratio was 1:4 by weight; however, to adjust the viscosity of the precursor ink for the spin coating step, the quantity of MeOH was controlled by using an individual coating procedure. More details are in our previous articles.2–4 All preparation processes were performed at room temperature in ambient air.
Precursor films were deposited on 1 μm thick Mo-coated soda lime glass using a spin coater (ACE-200, Dong Ah Tech., Korea) at 2000 rpm for 20 s. The samples were then dried at 80 °C, 120 °C, and 200 °C for 5 min each in air on a hot plate to evaporate the MeOH and alkanolamines. This process was repeated three times for the solution process and five times for the hybrid ink process. The selenization was performed in a vacuum evaporator equipped with a Knudsen-type effusion cell. The chamber was initially evacuated to a base pressure of 5 × 10−6 Torr with a turbo-molecular pump, and the elemental Se was then evaporated from the effusion cell. The typical substrate temperature and selenization time were 530 °C and 60 min, respectively. In this experiment, however, values of 450 °C and 60 min were used for the hybrid ink process. During the selenization, the Se vapor was supplied by opening a shutter over the substrate, which was maintained at a substrate temperature of 200 °C to develop a sufficient Se atmosphere. After the reaction, the Se vapor was supplied until the substrate temperature reached approximately 280 °C to prevent the deposition of Se and to maintain sufficient Se in the atmosphere. The flux of the Se vapor was regulated by the effusion cell temperature, and the deposition rate in units of Å s−1 was measured using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM).
Solar cells were fabricated according to the conventional Mo/CIS/CdS/i-ZnO/n-ZnO/Al structure. A 60 nm thick CdS buffer layer was deposited on the CIS film by a chemical bath deposition (CBD) method, and i-ZnO (50 nm)/Al-doped n-ZnO (500 nm) was deposited by radio-frequency (rf) magnetron sputtering onto the CdS layer. An Al grid of 500 nm thickness was deposited as a current collector using thermal evaporation. The active area of the completed cells was 0.4848 cm2.
The morphologies and compositions of the particles, the as-deposited films, and the selenized films were analyzed using high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (HRSEM, XL30SFEG Phillips Co., Holland; acceleration voltage of 10 kV) and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS, EDAX Genesis apex; acceleration voltage of 30 kV and collection time of 100 s using the standardless method). To obtain more information about the Cu–Se nanoparticles, high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Philips F20 Tecnai; acceleration voltage of 200 kV) observations were performed. An elemental analysis of the solution in the hybrid ink was conducted with inductively coupled plasma MS (ICP, Polyscan 61 E mono, Thermal Jarrel-Ash), and the metal–MEA complexes were analyzed by 1H NMR using a Bruker AVANCE 300 MHz spectrometer.
The crystalline structure of the films was identified using X-ray diffraction (XRD, D/MAX-2500, Rigaku Japan) with a CuKα line. The depth-compositional profile of the selenized film was obtained by Auger electron spectroscopy (AES, SAM 4300, Perkin Elmer).
The device performance and conversion efficiency were characterized using a class AAA solar simulator (WXS-155S-L2, WACOM, Japan).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Selection of a chelating agent and characterization of the complex forms
The traditional methods for fabricating CIS thin layers with non-vacuum processes can be broadly grouped into two categories: those that use particles and those that use a metal salt dissolved in a precursor solution. In the particle-based methods, it is relatively easy to remove excess organic solvents through the pores between particles. In addition, the particles can be synthesized with high purity, but the synthesis processes are intricate. Alternatively, the solution-based methods are easy to carry out but are less suited for the removal of excess organic solvents and precursors, especially carbon.
To resolve the disadvantages listed above, our previous research2–4 was focused on the benefits of both methods; specifically, the particle-based and solution-based methods should be integrated to achieve low-cost and high-efficiency CIGS thin film solar cells. However, the use of a normal binder such as propylene glycol caused the formed layers of Cu–Se nanoparticles and In precursor solution to grow sparsely, and Cu/In ratios were high (more than 1) due to the evaporation of In during the selenization.3 Therefore, a chelating agent was required as a binder that would not only bind the materials but also hold In so that it could participate in the CIS formation reaction. In addition, the agent should be adequately chelated with In and set it free as well to react with Cu and Se to form CIS during the selenization. For this reason, weaker chelates were tried such as MEA and TEA.
According to previous reports,7,14 MEA and DEA (diethanolamine), as bidentate ligands of nitrogen and oxygen atoms, make two stable five-membered rings with one Cu and two ligand molecules (MEA and DEA) (Fig. 1(a)). However, TEA makes a Cu dimer complex consisting of one Cu and one TEA molecule (Fig. 1(b)).
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the (a) Cu–MEA complex and (b) Cu–TEA complex. 
For comparison, Cu and In precursor solutions with MEA and TEA were prepared to form CIS thin layers. Fig. 2 shows AES depth profiles of as-deposited (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films. Both as-deposited thin films have oxygen concentrations coupled with In levels due to the oxidation of the In precursor during the air-drying process. Conversely, the Cu concentration is partly related to the oxygen content but is more related to the carbon residual layer between Mo and the thin film. It is believed that carbon in the shallow layer is easily released but carbon in the deep layer is not due to the Cu–alkanolamine complex. In addition, the carbon concentration of Fig. 2(a) is sharper than that of Fig. 2(b), which means the carbon residual layer from MEA is thinner than that of TEA because the high boiling point and steric hindrance of TEA can interrupt carbon release.
 Fig. 2  AES depth profiles of the as-deposited (a) (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (b) (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films. 
As shown in the XRD patterns (Fig. 3), the selenized thin films using both precursor solutions have a major CIS phase (JCPDS# 40-1487, tetragonal 5.782 Å × 5.782 Å × 11.619 Å) and a minor Cu2−xSe phase (Berzelianite, JCPDS# 06-0680, cubic 5.739 Å × 5.739 Å × 5.739 Å), but the thin film with MEA shows stronger peaks due to greater amounts of highly crystalline CIS. In addition, planar and cross-sectional SEM images after selenization are displayed in Fig. 4. From the surface SEM images, the formed CIS layer with TEA looks better because a thin film made with MEA (Fig. 4(a)) has pores on the surface whereas no pores are observed in the thin film with TEA (Fig. 4(b)). However, in the cross-sectional images, the upper layer of the thin film with MEA shows the traditional CIS crystalline phase but that with TEA looks amorphous even though the surface shows a crystalline form; this result agrees with the XRD results. The thin film with MEA has a thicker CIS layer (913 nm) and a thinner residual carbon layer (437 nm) than that with TEA (496 nm and 753 nm, respectively). It is believed that the thin film with TEA retained more carbon residue after the selenization between Mo and the thin film because TEA has more organic functional groups than MEA. The carbon layer between Mo and the thin film is regarded as a resistive layer that creates a high series resistance (Rs) and low conversion efficiency for solar cell performance.4
 Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the selenized thin films with (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) solutions that were processed at 530 °C for 60 min at a Se deposition rate of 100 Å s−1. 
 Fig. 4  Planar and cross-sectional SEM images of selenized (a) (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (b) (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films. 
The EDS analysis showed that the Cu/In ratios of the selenized thin films with MEA and TEA had averages of 0.60 and 0.84, respectively. The Cu/In ratio of the selenized thin film with TEA (0.84) was almost the same as the ratio of the mixed constituents (Cu(Ac)2:In(Ac)3 = 0.9:1) that were used during the preparation of the solution precursor. Conversely, the Cu/In ratio (0.60) of the film produced with MEA was lower than that with TEA. From this result, it was considered that the TEA held Cu more efficiently while it reacted because the Cu–TEA complex was a Cu–Cu dimer complex with one sterically hindered TEA.7,14Fig. 5 shows AES depth profiles of selenized (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films. In the case of the thin film with MEA (Fig. 5(a)), the upper CIS layer containing suitable Cu, In, and Se levels and the bottom residual carbon layer are formed normally as previously observed in the SEM images. Conversely, the thin film formed with TEA (Fig. 5(b)) has an upper layer consisting of In, Se, and a low content of Cu and a bottom residual carbon layer that contains Cu. The solution with TEA makes a thin CIS layer on the surface but has low Cu contents because of the Cu–Cu dimer in the Cu–TEA complex. This complex prevents reactions with Cu to form CIS during selenization. The π–π stacking bond of the d orbitals in the Cu dimer (Fig. 1(b)) makes it hard to break the Cu–Cu bond to allow reaction with In and Se for CIS thin layer formation.9,20 Therefore, it is verified that MEA is more favorable to form the CIS absorber layer than TEA even though the thin film surface with the TEA solution is better.
 Fig. 5  AES depth profiles of selenized (a) (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (b) (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films. 
The chelating effect of MEA in the hybrid ink is easily observed by the visible color change of the solution in hybrid inks.3,15,16 A clear solution was obtained for the hybrid ink lacking MEA, but the solution turned blue when MEA was included. From the ICP elemental analysis, 1.88% of Cu was detected in the hybrid ink solution with MEA following the precipitation of Cu–Se nanoparticles; however, no Cu was detected in the hybrid ink without MEA following Cu–Se nanoparticle precipitation. Based on these results, the blue color was associated with Cu from Cu–Se nanoparticles, and this component had formed a complex with MEA.17–19
To observe the Cu–MEA complex and compare the difference upon addition of MEA between the In precursor and the Cu from Cu–Se nanoparticles, NMR spectra were recorded for the (In precursor + MEA) solution and a decanted solution of (Cu–Se nanoparticles + MEA) (Fig. S1†).20 In the case of the (In precursor + MEA) solution (Fig. S1(a)†), the NMR spectrum is the same aspect as that of MEA such as two triplets from the methylene group (–CH2–CH2–) of MEA. In the case of the decanted (Cu–Se nanoparticles + MEA) solution (Fig. S1(b)†), the NMR spectrum has two broad methylene group peaks instead of two triplets because the d electrons of Cu interfere with the detection of hydrogen in the methylene group of MEA (Fig. 1(a)). In addition, AES depth profiles were carried out for the as-deposited films made from the (In precursor + MEA) solution and the (Cu precursor + MEA) solution on a Mo layer (Fig. S2†).20 For the as-deposited film of the (In precursor + MEA) solution (Fig. S2(a)†), no carbon layer was observed between Mo and the thin film. However, a residual carbon layer was detected between Mo and the as-deposited film of the (Cu precursor + MEA) solution (Fig. S2(b)†). This result shows that the carbon concentration shown in Fig. 2(a) was affected by Cu because of the formation of the Cu–alkanolamine complex. It is thought that the transition metal Cu is more favorable to bind with chelating agents than the post-transition metal In due to the ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) of the In–MEA complex21 and the metal to ligand charge transfer (MLCT) of the Cu–MEA complex.22,23 The LMCT results in the reduction of the metal center whereas the MLCT results in oxidation of the metal center; thus, In was partially reduced and Cu was partially oxidized in the precursor solution. Therefore, In was oxidized more easily in air than Cu because Cu had already been oxidized in the as-deposited layer after the drying process. It is inferred that the MEA release of the Cu–MEA complex is more difficult than that of the In–MEA complex. From the results of the NMR spectra and AES depth profiles, the chelating complex formed with Cu and MEA is more stable than the one formed with In and MEA.14,21
3.2. Observation of the Cu–MEA complex effect
Based on the observed character of the Cu–MEA complex described above, a hybrid ink with MEA was prepared to create CIS thin film solar cells.2–4 Typically, the selenization process was performed at 530 °C, which is the maximum allowable temperature when using glass substrates. This high selenization temperature is needed to form the CIS thin film because the synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles in our hybrid ink have high Cu contents.24 Cu–Se compounds with high Cu content have higher melting temperatures than those with low Cu content.12 Therefore, a hybrid ink with Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA was prepared to reduce the Cu content in the Cu–Se nanoparticles of the hybrid ink by exploiting the formation of Cu–MEA complexes in the hybrid ink. Table S1† shows the Cu and Se contents of Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA after each cycle.20 The originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles have a Cu/Se ratio of 1.46; however, Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA three times have a Cu/Se ratio of 1.12.

Fig. 6 shows XRD patterns of selenized thin films that were created with the hybrid inks using washed Cu–Se nanoparticles (with washing) and originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing) at 450 °C for 60 min at a 100 Å s−1 Se deposition rate. The XRD pattern of the thin film with washing shows only CIS phases (JCPDS# 40-1487, tetragonal 5.782 Å × 5.782 Å × 11.619 Å). In contrast, the selenized film without washing shows a mixture of phases of CuInSe2 (the same as above), Cu0.39In1.2Se2 (JCPDS# 42-0862, tetragonal 5.755 Å × 5.755 Å × 11.52 Å), and Cu2−xSe (JCPDS# 06-0680, cubic 5.739 Å × 5.739 Å × 5.739 Å). It is inferred that the low temperature selenization process is not enough to form the CIS phase with the hybrid ink without washing due to the high Cu/In ratio of the Cu–Se nanoparticles.
 Fig. 6  XRD patterns of the selenized thin films with hybrid inks using washed Cu–Se nanoparticles (with washing) and originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing), which were processed at 450 °C for 60 min at a Se deposition rate of 100 Å s−1. 

Fig. 7 shows the planar and cross-sectional SEM images of thin films reacted at 450 °C using the hybrid inks with and without washing. In these SEM images, the thin film with washing (Fig. 7(a)) shows a dense CIS film on the surface and a double layer with a 1.28 μm thick CIS layer in the cross-section while the film without washing (Fig. 7(b)) displays residual carbon as well as partially aggregated fragments on the surface and a vague single layer with 1.47 μm thickness in the cross-section. The appearance under SEM of the thin film without washing suggests that the CIS thin film formation reaction was not completed because the temperature was too low for Cu–Se nanoparticles with a high Cu/In ratio. These SEM images are in good agreement with the above XRD results in Fig. 6. The thin film without washing needs high temperatures to obtain the CIS phase. From this result, it is confirmed that a Cu–MEA complex is formed in the hybrid ink from Cu–Se nanoparticles without a Cu precursor (such as Cu(Ac)2), and the complex affects the reaction conditions.
 Fig. 7  Planar and cross-sectional SEM images of selenized thin films reacted at 450 °C using hybrid inks with (a) Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing) and (b) originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing). 
In Fig. 8, AES depth profiles of selenized thin films are depicted. For the thin film with washing (Fig. 8(a)), the results suggested a double layer, which is the traditional composition in the hybrid ink process.2–4 The upper layer is a CIS compound with a flat Cu/In ratio, and the bottom layer is mainly composed of carbon. In contrast, the AES depth profile of the thin film without washing (Fig. 8(b)) displays a thin upper layer of In-rich CIS and a carbon-mingling bottom layer that is affected by low temperature selenization. This result agrees with the XRD patterns of the thin film without washing, which displayed a mixture of phases due to the imperfect reaction. According to the XRD results, no carbon peak was identified, so carbons in both films are amorphous. Amorphous carbons usually cause recombination, but in this hybrid ink system, a bottom carbon layer with some In and Se content was determined to be more similar to a current flow path for a working device rather than simply an insulating layer.2–4
 Fig. 8  AES depth profiles of selenized thin films reacted at 450 °C using hybrid inks with (a) Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing) and (b) originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing). 

Fig. 9 shows light-illuminated density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of thin films reacted at 450 °C using the hybrid inks with Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing) and originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing). The best device with washing had a power conversion efficiency (Eff) of 5.04% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF) of 0.39 V, 29.65 mA cm−2, and 0.44, respectively. On the other hand, the best device without washing had a power conversion efficiency (Eff) of 1.04% with an open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF) of 0.22 V, 13.42 mA cm−2, and 0.36, respectively. From this result, it appears that the CIS thin film was well-formed despite the low selenization temperature when the reaction was performed with the hybrid ink using washed Cu–Se nanoparticles. However, as mentioned above, large recombination occurs due to the amorphous carbon so the 1.04% efficiency device suffers more than the 5.04% efficiency one because amorphous carbon is mixed up into almost the whole layer. Imperfect phases of the device are another explanation of the low efficiency. On the other hand, even though the 5.04% efficiency device also has amorphous carbon, layered carbon between the CIS and Mo layers is not completely detrimental to the device. Haug et al. reported that a carbon layer could have a positive effect on thin absorbers.25 It is assumed that the carbon layer might reduce the back contact recombination due to the presence of In from the In precursor solution and Se from the Se vapor in the bottom carbon layer.
 Fig. 9  Light J–V characteristics of the cells. The light-illuminated J–V was measured using a class AAA solar simulator (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at 25 °C. 

Fig. 10 shows (a) the EQE curve and (b) the band gap of the CIS layer determined from the long-wavelength region of the EQE curve for the selenized thin film reacted at 450 °C using a hybrid ink with Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing). The EQE curve in Fig. 10(a) has a maximum point at approximately 550 nm and decreases gradually. This character is attributed to the short minority carrier (electron) diffusion length and incomplete light absorption due to the resistive carbon layer and insufficient thickness of the absorber layer, respectively. The JSC was also calculated from the spectral response of the EQE data, and the value (28.41 mA cm−2) was similar to the measured value (in Fig. 9, with washing) from the solar simulator. The band gap of the CIS layer was determined from the [hν × ln(1 − EQE)]2 against the hν relationship and had a value of 1.09 eV, which is almost the same as the band gap of the CIS (1.04 eV).26
 Fig. 10  (a) The EQE curve and (b) determination of the band gap from the [hν × ln(1 − EQE)]2vs. hν relationship for the selenized thin film reacted at 450 °C using hybrid inks with Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing). 
As reported above, the hybrid ink process using binary nanoparticles and a precursor solution with a chelating agent (MEA) is affected by the Cu–MEA complex. To achieve an improved level of performance, we should control the Cu–MEA complex in detail when fabricating CIS thin film devices using the hybrid ink process.
4. Conclusions
For better performance, the hybrid ink process needs a chelating agent as a binder that can not only bind materials but also hold In to allow it to participate in the CIS formation reaction. To choose the best chelating agent in the hybrid ink for CIS thin films, a hybrid ink with TEA was also prepared to compare with the hybrid ink with MEA. TEA is a sterically hindered alkanolamine that makes Cu dimer species with two molecules of TEA and two Cu atoms. This Cu dimer complex with TEA has π–π stacking bonds with the d orbitals in the Cu dimer, and it is difficult to break the Cu–Cu bond to allow the necessary reaction with In and Se to form a CIS thin layer. Therefore, MEA was selected to prepare the hybrid inks. Cu and MEA formed a complex in the hybrid ink containing one Cu and two molecules of MEA. It was observed from NMR spectra and AES depth profiles that the bonding of the Cu–MEA complex was more stable than that of the In–MEA complex. To exploit the formation of Cu–MEA complexes in the hybrid ink, the synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles were washed with MEA because Cu–Se nanoparticles with high Cu contents need a higher selenization temperature to form CIS thin films. After washing with MEA, the Cu/Se ratio of the Cu–Se nanoparticles changed from 1.46 to 1.12. The hybrid ink with washed Cu–Se nanoparticles formed CIS thin films successfully under 450 °C selenization conditions, and this temperature is 80 °C lower than the usual temperature conditions. The CIS thin film solar cell fabricated under low temperature conditions has a 5.04% conversion efficiency. Therefore, the complex formation effect between Cu and MEA lowered the process (selenization) temperature to fabricate CIS thin film solar cells. In conclusion, the control of a chelating agent is a key factor to improve the cost-effectiveness and cell performance of CIS solar cells with the hybrid ink process.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning, Korea (no. 2013K000187). This study was also conducted under the framework of Research and Development Program of the Korea Institute of Energy Research (KIER) (B4-2421). The authors thank Mijong Kim at KAIST for NMR spectra.
References
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paestel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, New world record efficiency for CIGS thin film solar cells beyond 20%, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 894–897 CAS .
A. Cho, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, H. Song and K. Yoon, A hybrid ink of binary copper sulfide nanoparticles and indium precursor solution for a dense CuInSe2 absorber thin film and its photovoltaic performance, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17893–17899 RSC .
A. Cho, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. K. Ahn, K. Shin, H. Song and K. Yoon, Non-vacuum processed CuInSe2 thin films fabricated with a hybrid ink, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 17–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cho, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, Y.-J. Eo, H. Song and K. Yoon, Carbon layer reduction via a hybrid ink of binary nanoparticles in non-vacuum-processed CuInSe2 thin films, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 110, 126–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fan, A. G. H. Wee, R. Idem and P. Tontiwachwuthikul, NMR studies of amine species in MEA–CO2–H2O system: modification of the model of vapor–liquid equilibrium (VLE), Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 2717–2720 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bottinger, M. Maiwald and H. Hasse, Online NMR spectroscopic study of species distribution in MEA–H2O–CO2 and DEA–H2O–CO2, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2008, 263, 131–143 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Tauler, E. Casassas and B. M. Rode, The complex formation of Cu(II) with mono- and di-ethanolamine in aqueous solution, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1986, 114, 203–209 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Goff and G. T. Rochelle, Monoethanolamine degradation: O2 mass transfer effects under CO2 capture conditions, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 6400–6408 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kozlevcar, P. Baskovic, A. Arko, A. Golobic, N. Kitanovski and P. Segedin, Copper fixation to guaiacyl lignin units by nitrogen donor ligands, Z. Naturforsch., B: J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 63, 481–488 CAS .
B. Mazela, I. Polus-Ratajczak, S. K. Hoffmann and J. Goslar, Copper mono ethanolamine complexes with quaternary ammonium compounds in wood preservation. Biological testing and EPR study, Wood Res., 2005, 50(2), 1–17 CAS .
J. Cao, M. Xie and G. Zhao, Tensile stress relaxation of copper–ethanolamine (Cu–EA) treated wood, Wood Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 417–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Glazov, A. S. Pashinkin and V. A. Fedoriv, Phase equilibria in the Cu–Se system, Inorg. Mater., 2000, 36(7), 641–652 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Schulz, C. J. Curtis, R. A. Flitton, H. Weisner, J. Keane, R. J. Matson, K. M. Jones, P. A. Parilla, R. Noufi and D. S. Ginley, Cu–In–Ga–Se nanoparticle colloids as spray deposition precursors for Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cell materials, J. Electron. Mater., 1998, 27, 433–437 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tauler, E. Casassas, M. J. A. Rainer and B. M. Rode, The complex formation of Cu(II) with triethanolamine in aqueous solution, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1985, 105, 165–170 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, Y.-J. Eo, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yun, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn, S. H. Park, K. Yoon and S. J. Ahn, Role of chelate complexes in densification of CuInSe2 (CIS) thin film prepared from amorphous Cu–In–Se nanoparticle precursors, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8444–8448 RSC .
S. J. Ahn, Y. J. Choi, K. Kim, Y.-J. Eo, A. Cho, J. Gwak, J. H. Yon, K. Shin, S. K. Ahn and K. Yoon, Amorphous Cu–In–S nanoparticles as precursors for CuInSe2 thin-film solar cells with a high efficiency, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6(7), 1282–1287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Flannery, B. Ke, M. W. Grieb and D. Trivich, Polarographic study of Copper(II) complexes with ethanolamine and some derivatives, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1955, 77, 2996–2998 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Hursthouse, K. J. Izod, M. A. Mazid and P. Thornton, Synthesis, properties and X-ray crystal structures of copper(II) and nickel(II) thiocyanate complexes with ethanolamine: a new structure for an aminoalkoxide cluster, Polyhedron, 1990, 9, 535–539 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Cody, S. I. Woodburn, M. W. Blackmore and R. J. Magee, Some copper(II) ethanolamine complexes, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1970, 32, 3263–3269 CrossRef CAS .
See ESI.†.
B. Luo, C. J. Cramer and W. L. Gladfelter, Gallium and indium hydrazides. Molecular and electronic structure of InN(SiMe3)NMe2]3 and related compounds, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 3431–3437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Siddique, Y. Yamamoto, T. Ohno and K. Nozaki, Structure-dependant photophysical properties of singlet and triplet metal-to-ligand charge transfer states in copper(I) bis(diimine) compounds, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 6366–6378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Shin, Y.-Y. Wang and C.-C. Wan, Study of the mechanism of additives on copper dissolution in monoethanolamine-complexed cupric ion solution, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2002, 32, 987–992 CrossRef .
A. Cho, S. J. Ahn, J. H. Yun, J. Gwak, S. K. Ahn, K. Shin, J. Yoo, H. Song and K. Yoon, The growth of Cu2−xSe thin films using nanoparticles, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 546, 299–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Haug, A. Quintilla, I. Klugius and E. Ahlswede, Influence of an additional carbon layer at the back contact–absorber interface in C(In,Ga)Se2 thin film solar cells, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7464–7467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Wei, S. B. Zhang and A. Zunger, Effects of Ga addition to CuInSe2 on its electronic, structural, and defect properties, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3199–3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta15202bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams of the (a) Cu–MEA complex and (b) Cu–TEA complex.	 

 	Fig. 2  AES depth profiles of the as-deposited (a) (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (b) (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the selenized thin films with (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) solutions that were processed at 530 °C for 60 min at a Se deposition rate of 100 Å s−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  Planar and cross-sectional SEM images of selenized (a) (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (b) (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films.	 

 	Fig. 5  AES depth profiles of selenized (a) (Cu precursor + In precursor + MEA + MeOH) and (b) (Cu precursor + In precursor + TEA + MeOH) thin films.	 

 	Fig. 6  XRD patterns of the selenized thin films with hybrid inks using washed Cu–Se nanoparticles (with washing) and originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing), which were processed at 450 °C for 60 min at a Se deposition rate of 100 Å s−1.	 

 	Fig. 7  Planar and cross-sectional SEM images of selenized thin films reacted at 450 °C using hybrid inks with (a) Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing) and (b) originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing).	 

 	Fig. 8  AES depth profiles of selenized thin films reacted at 450 °C using hybrid inks with (a) Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing) and (b) originally synthesized Cu–Se nanoparticles (without washing).	 

 	Fig. 9  Light J–V characteristics of the cells. The light-illuminated J–V was measured using a class AAA solar simulator (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2) at 25 °C.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The EQE curve and (b) determination of the band gap from the [hν × ln(1 − EQE)]2vs. hν relationship for the selenized thin film reacted at 450 °C using hybrid inks with Cu–Se nanoparticles washed with MEA (with washing).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta15202b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
