Tunable hysteresis behaviour related to trap filling dependence of surface barrier in an individual CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 micro/nanowire  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR08934E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR08934E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3360-3369Tunable hysteresis behaviour related to trap filling dependence of surface barrier in an individual CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire

        
          
            Zhen 
            Hong
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shujun 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Baochang 
            Cheng
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Yanhe 
            Xiao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shuijin 
            Lei
          
        
      a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, Jiangxi 330031, P. R. China. E-mail: bcheng@vip.sina.com
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang Hangkong University, Jiangxi 330063, P. R. China
cNanoscale Science and Technology Laboratory, Institute for Advanced Study, Nanchang University, Jiangxi 330031, P. R. China
Received 
      6th November 2018
    , Accepted 19th January 2019First published on 21st January 2019AbstractHybrid organic–inorganic perovskite (HOIP) materials have remarkable potential in solar cells owing to their high power conversion efficiency and inexpensive preparation. However, their current–voltage (I–V) curves often exhibit hysteresis characteristics, which not only strongly affect the accuracy of measurements but also seriously impair device performance, and, moreover, their actual origin is still the subject of debate. Here, a single HOIP micro/nanowire-based two-terminal device was constructed. Not only can its hysteresis properties be accurately modulated, but also their origin can clearly be identified as variations in the surface barrier related to trap filling. Under illumination of the entire device with visible (VIS) light, two anticlockwise hysteresis loops appear symmetrically in cyclic I–V curves. Interestingly, the cyclic I–V curves can be switchably changed into asymmetrical “8”-shaped hysteresis loops with bipolar resistive switching (RS) features when only the vicinity of one electrode is illuminated. The traps located in the surface space charge region play a crucial role in the tunable hysteresis behaviour. Owing to the presence of abundant surface states, two back-to-back connected diodes related to the surface barrier can be formed in the two-terminal device. With the synergistic assistance of illumination and bias, moreover, the injection and extraction of holes in the surface space charge region can effectively modulate the surface barrier, which triggers the formation of a bipolar RS device. Accordingly, two switchable back-to-back connected bipolar RS devices were built. Regarding the tunable hysteresis with nonvolatile memory properties controlled by the synergistic action of bias and illumination, our results provide a valuable insight into the identification of its origin and, furthermore, also indicate that the HOIP materials have significant potential in nonvolatile memory applications.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite (HOIP) materials, such as methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite with its unique electrical band structure, exhibit a strong and wide optical absorption owing to a tunable direct energy band gap that ranges from 1.4 to 2.3 eV in accordance with the tunability of the stoichiometry,1,2 relatively appropriate charge carrier mobilities and lifetimes,3 ambipolar charge transport and long electron–hole diffusion lengths because of the high dispersion of the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB), which can effectively suppress the recombination of photogenerated charges,4–6 high extinction coefficients, and excellent defect tolerance, which arises from solution processing at low temperatures.7,8 These versatile merits make them suitable for various applications, such as thin-film transistors,9–11 photodetectors,12–15 light-emitting diodes,16 resistive switching (RS) memory,17–24 sensors,25 and, in particular, solar cells.26–29 These hybrid perovskite materials, when used in photovoltaic devices, have held a tremendous fascination for many researchers and achieved remarkable certified power conversion efficiencies. However, hysteresis behaviour was often observed during photocurrent–voltage measurements, which brought about an uncertainty in the evaluation of photovoltaic efficiency.30,31 The anomalous hysteresis behaviour is an undesirable change in current–voltage (I–V) curves during sweeping in two opposite directions. This hysteresis affects the performance characterization and stability of devices, which may significantly hinder their large-scale commercial application in perovskite solar cells and other optoelectronic devices. For this reason, it is important to understand and eliminate the hysteresis to fabricate devices with long-term stability and characterize the performance of devices correctly.32 In order to solve the problems that result from hysteresis, it is essential to determine the conditions under which it occurs and understand its origin, which can help us to reduce hysteresis to improve the performance of devices or apply hysteresis in other electronic and optoelectronic devices based on HOIP materials.
In spite of extensive investigations into hysteresis, its underlying physical origin is still highly controversial.33,34 At present, the proposed mechanisms of I–V hysteresis mainly include ferroelectric polarization,35–37 charge trapping/detrapping,27,38,39 and ion migration and accumulation.40–43 There have been numerous conflicting reports regarding ferroelectricity in perovskites.44,45 A recent report has attributed the primary origin of hysteresis to ion migration through perovskite absorbers and trapping of electronic carriers at various interfaces and grain boundaries. It has been shown that ion migration in lead halide perovskites may mainly occur through grain boundaries.34
Recent research has demonstrated that devices based on CH3NH3PbI3 thin films have outstanding RS characteristics and are exceedingly promising for applications in resistive random access memory (RRAM), which is based on an RS effect that originates from an abrupt change in resistance, a reversible bistable state, and nonvolatile properties.19 Xiao et al. produced perovskite-switchable photovoltaic devices based on an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/Au structure, in which the direction of the photocurrent can be switched repeatedly; different resistive states were switched by changing the poling direction.46 A photocurrent switched by a weak electric field can be responsible for the formation of reversible p-i-n structures induced by ion drift in the perovskite layer. This demonstrated their feasibility for applications in memory devices and memristors with electrically and optically readable properties. By exploiting I–V hysteresis characteristics and an RS effect, Yoo et al. were the first to fabricate bipolar RS devices with stable performance (>100 cycles) and long retention times (104 s) based on an Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO structure, which had a low operating voltage of 0.8 V and an ON/OFF ratio of nearly 3.17 The RS was modulated between trap (defect) filling and emptying, which resulted in different conduction mechanisms such as Ohmic conduction, trap-controlled space-charge-limited current, or Poole–Frenkel conduction. Similarly, Choi et al. produced RS devices based on an Ag/CH3NH3PbI3 film/Pt structure with a low SET voltage (<0.15 V) and a high ON/OFF ratio (>106) for multilevel data storage.47 This RS driven by a low voltage was due to the formation of filaments triggered by the low activation energy of iodide ion migration. Furthermore, Gu et al. fabricated flexible perovskite memory devices by depositing a perovskite precursor solution on transparent plastic substrates coated with ITO.48 The formation of conducting filaments caused by the alignment of iodide vacancies was also proposed to explain the reliable RS.
In the case of nanostructures, their surface states play a major role in device performance. Consequently, a Schottky-like barrier invariably forms at the interface of the metal electrode and nanostructure, and, moreover, the barrier height is independent of the work function of the metal and the electron affinity of the semiconductor. Owing to the presence of surface states, two-terminal devices based on a one-dimensional (1D) micro/nanowire are important candidates for electronic and optoelectronic devices. Regarding 1D nanostructure-based devices, not only is their preparation convenient and their structure simple, but also it is more advantageous to determine and control their performance in a microregion. In particular, RS memory devices based on a 1D nanostructure have the great advantages of a simple fabrication process, low power consumption, a fast write/read speed and high-density storage,49 and, moreover, it is easy to identify the site and origin of switching. Therefore, numerous efforts have been devoted to the construction of high-performance nonvolatile 1D nanostructure RS memory devices based on a hysteresis effect.50–52
1D CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanowires can be synthesized on FTO glass by means of a small quantity of an aprotic solvent via a two-step spin-coating procedure. The decrease in dimensionality brings about a hypochromic shift in both absorption and fluorescence spectra, which is indicative of more localized exciton states in the nanowires.53 In addition, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite nanowires can be grown on cheap commercial PET substrates by using a CH3NH3I solution with a small amount of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), which has a strong influence on the morphology and crystallization behaviour. The nanowire structure can achieve faster extraction of electrons than a common thin film, which is possibly due to the larger surface-to-volume ratio and better contact with the electron-transporting layer.54
A thin-film device contains many kinds of interface, which leads to a multitude of factors that need to be considered, and therefore it is arduous to study the mechanism of hysteresis. Here, CH3NH3PbI3 HOIP micro/nanowires were grown by a low-temperature solution approach followed by post-annealing,53 and subsequently an individual micro/nanowire-based two-terminal device with an Ag/CH3NH3PbI3/Ag structure was constructed. Its hysteresis behaviour and memory performance were investigated systematically by illuminating different sites using various bias voltages and powers and energies of the incident light. Moreover, the origin of the hysteresis and the memory mechanism were discussed on the basis of the I–V characteristics. In surface-state-related space charge regions connected to electrodes, the injection of holes into/from traps triggers the formation of two switchable back-to-back bipolar RS diodes in series under the influence of excitation with an electric field and light. In cyclic I–V curves, two symmetrical anticlockwise hysteresis loops and two switchable asymmetrical “8”-shaped hysteresis loops can be controllably generated by illuminating the entirety and one end, respectively, of two-terminal devices based on a single micro/nanowire, which demonstrates a nonvolatile RS memory effect.
2. Experimental
2.1. Synthesis of CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires
CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires were prepared via a simple solution method followed by post-annealing. Firstly, 0.423 g CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite was dissolved in 0.517 g DMF to form a precursor solution with a weight ratio of CH3NH3PbI3 to DMF of 9:11 under stirring and ultrasonic vibration for 30 min. ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned by ultrasonication successively in deionized (DI) water, acetone, isopropanol and DI water for several minutes in each case, and a nitrogen stream was used to dry the substrate. After CH3NH3PbI3 was completely dissolved in DMF, a small amount of the precursor solution was dropped onto the clean glass, which was then placed in a tube furnace and annealed at a temperature of 100 °C for 1 h in a nitrogen atmosphere containing 5% hydrogen gas until DMF was evaporated completely to form CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires. Before heating, the tube was maintained at a constant flow rate of 200 mL min−1 for 30 min to ensure that O2 was eliminated from the tube. During the growth process, the gas flow was kept at a constant rate of 25 mL min−1. After the reaction, the furnace was cooled to room temperature, and CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires were prepared successfully.
2.2. Characterization of structure and morphology
The resulting CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire product was studied and analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Philips X'Pert PRO with Cu Kα radiation) and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; FEI Quanta 200F) to investigate the crystal structure and morphology.
2.3. Fabrication and measurement of performance of devices
Under an optical microscope, the two ends of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire, which was transferred to a clean Al2O3 insulator substrate, were connected to copper wires separately with semi-dried silver paste in order to connect them to external circuits. After the silver paste was completely dry, a small amount of configured polymethylmethoxysiloxane (PDMS) was dropped onto the micro/nanowire device, which was solidified at 80 °C for 60 min to prepare encapsulated micro/nanowire two-terminal devices to prevent water and oxygen from entering.
Electrical measurements were performed using a synthesized function generator (Stanford Research Systems DS345) and a low-noise current preamplifier (Stanford Research Systems SR570). The electrical measurements were performed in DC voltage sweep mode with different amplitudes and a frequency of 0.1 Hz, and all the bias voltages were applied to the two terminal Ag electrodes. In addition, incident light was focused on a spot with a diameter of about 5 μm with a microscopic objective for illumination. The light intensity and wavelength were controlled with an optical microscope. All measurements were performed at room temperature.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Morphology and structural characterization of CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires
The XRD pattern of an as-prepared sample is presented in Fig. 1a. As can be clearly seen, the three strongest diffraction peaks were produced by diffraction from (220) planes (2θ = 28.29° for the main peak), (110) planes (2θ = 14.03° for the first sub-peak), and (310) planes (2θ = 31.7° for the second sub-peak), respectively, and were indexed to tetragonal CH3NH3PbI3 (14.09°, 28.37° and 31.83°)55 and are also in complete agreement with other studies.48,53 The strong diffraction peaks also reveal that the crystallinity of the perovskite was higher. Moreover, the other peaks, which correspond to (112), (202), (312), (224), (314), and (404) planes, respectively, are indicative of the formation of polycrystalline CH3NH3PbI3.54 Because there is no evidence of a (001) diffraction peak (12.8°), this demonstrates that no remaining unreacted or degraded PbI2 was present.55 The morphology of CH3NH3PbI3 samples was examined by FESEM. Fig. 1b shows a typical low-magnification FESEM image, in which a number of wire-like 1D structures can be clearly seen. These 1D wires are vertically and horizontally oriented and almost straight. Fig. 1c shows a higher-magnification FESEM image, which reveals the relatively smooth surface of the structure with a typical diameter in the range of several hundred nanometres. An analysis of the chemical composition of a sample was performed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), as illustrated in Fig. 1d, which indicated that the micro/nanowire contained two elements, namely, Pb and I. Moreover, the atomic ratio of Pb to I was close to 1:3, which was in accordance with the atomic ratio of 1:3 given by the chemical formula and was suggestive of the formation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite.17
 Fig. 1  Characterization of as-prepared samples. (a) XRD pattern. (b) Low-magnification FESEM image viewed from above, showing the general wire-like morphology of the as-prepared sample. (c) High-magnification FESEM image, revealing the relatively smooth surface of the wire-like structure. (d) EDS pattern. 
3.2. Production and controllable modulation of hysteresis behaviour
In order to reveal the factors governing variations in electron transport in the device in the dark and under illumination with visible (VIS) light, the cyclic I–V characteristics were measured at different biases, and the results are illustrated in Fig. 2. The electrical measurements were performed in cyclic DC voltage sweep mode at a frequency of 0.1 Hz at room temperature. In the dark, all the I–V curves exhibit monotonic variations, and the sweep curves in both directions almost coincide regardless of whether the operating bias voltage was lower or higher. Under VIS illumination of the entire device, including the two electrodes, however, two almost identical hysteresis loops with an anticlockwise shape appeared symmetrically in the cyclic I–V curves under forward and reverse biases. Because two back-to-back diodes related to the surface barrier were formed within the device, the degree of hole filling in traps was different under a relatively low bias, which resulted in slight asymmetry in the cyclic I–V curves under forward and reverse biases, as shown in Fig. 2b. At the initial stage of bias loading, the resistance of the device was relatively high. With an increase in applied positive or negative bias, however, the current started to sharply increase at a certain bias, and the device switched from a high-resistance state (HRS) to a low-resistance state (LRS). Moreover, the transition voltage increased with the operating bias voltage and was 0.46, 3 and 6.3 V at an operating bias of 1, 5 and 10 V, respectively. Afterward, the device remained in the LRS when the sweeping voltage was returned to 0 V. When the voltage was subsequently scanned to a value with the opposite polarity, nevertheless, the device current showed an HRS, which indicated that the LRS that was formed could be eliminated by applying a reverse bias. When the reverse bias voltage exceeded a certain value, the device reverted to the LRS again. As a result, the variations in resistance were almost symmetric when the voltage was swept cyclically. This demonstrated that the device has symmetrical switching performance.
 Fig. 2  
I–V characteristics of device at different measurement bias voltages in the dark (left) and under VIS illumination (right). The arrows represent the directions of the voltage sweeps. (a) and (b) 1 V; (c) and (d) 5 V; (e) and (f) 10 V. The insets in (a) and (b) represent an optical image and a schematic illustration, respectively, of the two-terminal device. 
As seen from Fig. 2, the hysteresis behaviour was more apparent with an increase in the operating bias. When the operating bias was higher than 5 V, the hysteresis behaviour appeared more obvious. The relative magnitude of the hysteresis, as described by the hysteresis index (HI), can be calculated as HI = (Ion − Ioff)/Ioff,56 where Ion and Ioff represent the current measured at the same bias in the HRS and LRS, respectively. The formation mechanism of resistive switching originates from the filling and emptying of traps. Under a relatively high bias, some shallow traps can be filled, which results in a relatively high HRS current. For calculations and reading the voltage, therefore, not only should this be lower than the transition voltage for the HRS-to-LRS transition, but also it should be as low as possible to increase the resolution. At the lowest operating bias of 1 V with the lowest transition bias of 0.5 V, a calculation bias of from 0 to 0.5 V is feasible. In order to compare the HI at different biases, here a relatively low voltage of 0.2 V was selected for calculations of the hysteresis effect to ensure effectiveness. At 0.2 V, an HI of 2.91, 6.46, and 8.14 was determined for an operating bias of 1, 5, and 10 V, respectively. It can be seen that the HI increased as the bias voltage increased. These results demonstrate that not only was the hysteresis related to illumination, because the hysteresis behaviour appeared only under illumination, but also the HI was strongly dependent on the operating bias. Therefore, it would be expected that the hysteresis behaviour could be controlled by the illumination and bias in the case of an individual CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based two-terminal device. Moreover, the hysteresis behaviour can be expected to be applied for RS memory.
In order to further study the influence of the power and energy of the incident light on the hysteresis behaviour of the device and to confirm the actual origin of RS, the I–V characteristics were measured at different illumination intensities and wavelengths, respectively, at a bias voltage of 6 V, as shown in Fig. 3. As seen from Fig. 3a, the hysteresis behaviour was less obvious when relatively weak VIS light was applied. With an increase in the power density of the incident light, the HI first increased and then almost reached saturation at a low reading voltage; however, the switching transition voltage decreased continuously. The transition voltage was 4.03, 3.61, 3.31 and 2.81 V at an illumination intensity of 1, 5, 9 and 13 mW cm−2, respectively. At the same operating bias voltage, therefore, the switching transition voltage for the transition from the HRS to the LRS can be controlled by the illumination intensity. At a fixed illumination intensity of approximately 1 mW cm−2, the switching transition behaviour was also measured at different energies of the incident light, as presented in Fig. 3b. It can be seen that the switching transition voltage decreased with an increase in the energy of the incident light. Moreover, the HI increased with an increase in the energy of the incident light.
 Fig. 3  
I–V characteristics of device under illumination with light with different powers and energies, measured at a bias of 6 V. (a) Under VIS illumination with the same energy and different power densities, showing a decrease in the switching transition voltage with an increase in power density. (b) Under illumination with the same power density of 1 mW cm−2 and different wavelengths, showing a decrease in the switching transition voltage with an increase in energy. 
Under a moderate bias, when the illumination intensity of the light reached a certain value of about 5 mW cm−2, changes in the illumination intensity did not cause a significant change in the HI, which indicated that the injection and extraction of carriers in the traps with a constant depth easily reach equilibrium with an increase in illumination intensity. In the case of incident light with a higher energy, however, traps at deeper levels can be filled. Therefore, the HI increases with an increase in the energy of the incident light. In the case of incident light with higher energy and power, these can both promote the injection and extraction of charges in traps, which results in a decrease in the LRS transition voltage. In CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanostructure-based devices, accordingly, this is expected to reduce the adverse effects of hysteresis behaviour in solar energy cells and improve the storage window and reduce the switching SET voltage for RS memory via the modulation of features of hysteresis using the synergistic effect of the operating bias and the power and energy of the incident light.
In order to further study the origin of the hysteresis behaviour, one end of the individual CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based device was illuminated using a microbeam light from an optical microscopy objective, and meanwhile a cyclic sweeping bias voltage of 5 V was applied to both ends of the device, as shown in Fig. 4 and 5. It can be clearly seen that the two hysteresis loops obtained under forward and reverse biases are asymmetrical and furthermore exhibit an “8” shape with typical bipolar RS features. As seen from Fig. 4, the point of the transition from the HRS to the LRS, namely, the SET process, appeared at a forward bias when the vicinity of the end connected to the positive electrode was illuminated and, moreover, decreased with an increase in illumination intensity. On the contrary, it can reversibly appear at a reverse bias when the vicinity of the end connected to the negative electrode is illuminated, as illustrated in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 4  
I–V characteristics of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based device measured at a bias of 5 V under illumination near the end connected to the positive electrode by a microbeam light with different power densities. The arrows represent the direction and sequence of the voltage sweep. (a) 1 mW cm−2; (b) 5 mW cm−2; (c) 9 mW cm−2; (d) 13 mW cm−2. The inset in (d) shows a schematic illustration of illumination near the positive electrode. 
 Fig. 5  
I–V characteristics of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based device measured at 10 V under illumination near the end connected to the negative electrode. (a) single-cycle I–V characteristics; (b) multiple-cycles I–V characteristics. The inset in (a) shows a schematic illustration of illumination near the negative electrode. 
Bipolar RS can occur reversibly under illumination of the vicinity of the electrode at one end, which indicates that two bipolar RS processes can be achieved controllably by illuminating different electrodes in the single micro/nanowire-based two-terminal device. Moreover, it can also strongly confirm that the variations in the resistance of the device originated from the surface connected to the positive electrode. Under the influence of illumination in the vicinity of the end connected to the positive electrode, a bias can trigger the injection and extraction of holes in the surface space charge region near the positive electrode under a forward and reverse bias, respectively. As a result, the surface barrier decreases and increases correspondingly, which leads to bipolar RS behaviour. Moreover, it also indicates that two back-to-back connected bipolar RS devices should be constructed under illumination of the entire device, including the two electrodes, and the two symmetrical hysteresis loops with anticlockwise shapes should originate from the synergistic action of the two back-to-back connected bipolar RS devices.
In order to better understand and clarify the behaviour related to hysteresis and RS, the I–V characteristics were measured only using unidirectional cyclic sweeping voltages ranging from 0 to 10 or −10 V under VIS illumination, as shown in Fig. 6a and b, respectively. It can be clearly seen that the current varied uniformly with the bias; however, a sharp increase in current during the hysteresis phenomena was not found. These results confirm that hysteresis and RS can occur at an opposite bias only after a bias is applied to the device. More interestingly, the current steadily increased at consecutive unidirectional cyclic sweeping voltage. This kind of resistance change behaviour is characteristic of synapse-based neural network-type switching devices, which are distinguishable from digital-type switching devices, which exhibit an abrupt change in the resistance state from the HRS to the LRS under bipolar sweeping. Under a unidirectional bias, the traps near the positive electrode are filled constantly. As a consequence, the surface barriers related to the positive electrode gradually decrease, and the device exhibits the features of synapse-based neural network-type switching.
 Fig. 6  
I-V characteristics measured with a continuous unidirectional cyclic sweeping voltage under illumination of the entire device, which suggest that the current increases steadily with the bias voltage. (a) Only a positive cyclic sweeping bias voltage ranging from 0 to 10 V was used. (b) Only a negative cyclic sweeping bias voltage ranging from 0 to −10 V was used. 
3.3. Memory properties of hysteresis behaviour
Under illumination, cyclic I–V curves can display tunable hysteresis behaviour, and therefore the devices have tremendous potential in RRAM applications. To study the storage properties of an RRAM cell based on an individual HOIP micro/nanowire with a two-terminal electrode structure in detail, measurements over successive reading–writing–erasing cycles were conducted at a reading voltage of 0.1 V, as illustrated in Fig. 7a. As seen from an enlarged plot for a single reading–writing–reading–erasing–reading process, as depicted in Fig. 7b, the memory can be set or written by applying a relatively high positive voltage, read out at a relatively low positive voltage, and reset or erased by applying a relatively high negative voltage. After erasing and writing at a relatively high bias, the ratio of the resistance in the HRS to that in the LRS was approximately 8 at a reading voltage of 0.1 V. The response times for writing and erasing were 1.5 and 0.3 s, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7d and c, and the corresponding response times for reading were 0.4 and 0.2 s, respectively, as shown in Fig. 7f and e, which confirms that the device has a relatively fast read-write speed. To investigate the stability of stored data in the RRAM cell in the HRS and LRS, continuous testing was conducted for about 104 s, as depicted in Fig. 8. The current in the LRS was reduced by 0.2% and the current in the HRS was increased by 1.7% at a reading voltage of 0.1 V. The LRS and HRS currents only exhibited slight variations, which demonstrated apparent nonvolatile features.
 Fig. 7  Writing–reading–erasing process of an RRAM cell based on a single HOIP micro/nanowire with a two-terminal electrode structure under VIS illumination. The red and blue curves represent the applied voltage and response current, respectively, and show that the device current increased after a forward-biased writing voltage of +1 V was applied and conversely decreased after a reverse-biased erasing voltage of −1 V was applied at a relatively low reading voltage of 0.1 V. (a) Consecutive cycles under a pulse voltage of 0.1 → +1 → 0.1 → −1 → 0.1 V. (b) Magnified view of the green dotted frame in (a), showing the detailed writing–reading–erasing process and a memory window of about 8 times. (c) Enlargement of the purple dotted frame in (b), showing a response time of about 0.3 s for erasing. (d) Enlargement of the black dotted frame in (b), showing a response time of about 1.5 s for writing. (e, f) Enlargements of the red and yellow dotted frames in (b), showing response times of about 0.2 s and 0.4 s, respectively, for reading. 
 Fig. 8  Data retention characteristic of RRAM cell in both the LRS and the HRS at a reading voltage of 0.1 V after negative and positive voltages of 1 V, respectively, were applied. 
3.4. Origin of tunable hysteresis with memory behaviour
In the case of nominally undoped CH3NH3PbI3 HOIP, it is usually accepted that it is a p-type semiconductor owing to the presence of unintentionally introduced acceptor centres, such as CH3NH3+ and Pb+ vacancies. Holes are the predominant carriers in CH3NH3PbI3. In addition, the electron affinity of CH3NH3PbI3 is about 3.93 eV,57 which is lower than the work function of Ag of about 4.26 eV. Theoretically, two symmetrical Schottky barriers can be formed when two Ag electrodes are in contact with a p-type CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire with an energy gap of about 1.55 eV. The I–V curves in both directions of devices based on a metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) architecture should coincide. In the case of the two-terminal device based on a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire, however, two symmetrical hysteresis loops with anticlockwise shapes and switchable asymmetrical “8”-shaped hysteresis loops with typical bipolar RS features can be controllably generated by illuminating the entire device, including both electrodes, and only the vicinity of one electrode, respectively, which demonstrates that the tunable hysteresis behaviour is strongly dependent on the surface states of the micro/nanowire related to the two electrodes. In addition, the occurrence of nonvolatile memory behaviour implies that the hysteresis is closely associated with the traps located in the surface space charge region near the two electrodes.
In the case of CH3NH3PbI3 1D micro/nanostructures with a very high surface-to-volume ratio and typical p-type properties, quantities of dangling bonds can induce the presence of surface states because of the breaking of lattice periodicity on their surfaces. Holes will diffuse toward their surfaces and then accumulate, which results in downward band bending. Simultaneously, a carrier depletion region is formed in the vicinity of the surfaces, in which the majority carriers (holes) are almost completely depleted. Accordingly, the surface barrier is mainly dependent on the surface states of the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires rather than differences in the work function of the metal and the electron affinity of the semiconductor. In the case of the two-terminal device based on a single micro/nanowire, two back-to-back connected diodes with a series resistance are formed. Owing to the synthesis of the CH3NH3PbI3 1D micro/nanowire structures at a relatively low temperature of 100 °C with excellent defect tolerance, in addition possible defect states present, such as vacancies, antisites, and interstitials, can serve as trap states. In the surface space charge region, these trap states can capture and then store holes, which in turn adjusts the width and height of the surface barrier. Thus, the level of filling of these trap states plays a crucial role in the conduction behaviour of CH3NH3PbI3-based devices.
Regarding the two back-to-back connected diodes, whether at a relatively low positive or negative bias, the device is reversely biased in both cases. When the traps are emptied, in particular, the surface barrier is extremely wide. In addition, the trap height is relatively great. It is overwhelmingly difficult for an electric field to induce the filling of traps in the dark. As a result, the device exhibits relatively poor conduction in the dark at a low bias, and the corresponding schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 9a. In the case of CH3NH3PbI3, however, its band gap energy is only 1.55 eV, and accordingly it is easy to generate free electron–hole pairs under VIS illumination.58,59 In particular when the incident light has energy higher than the band gap, covalent bonds can be broken. Quantities of photoexcited free electron–hole pairs are generated at the surface of CH3NH3PbI3, are subsequently separated by the built-in electric field on the surface, and finally move to the Ag electrode and CH3NH3PbI3, respectively. As a consequence, the concentration of holes in the CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowires increases. For the same period of illumination, if a bias voltage that is higher than the photogenerated voltage is applied to the two-terminal device, electrons and holes can be injected into the traps located in the surface space charge regions from the negative and positive electrodes with the synergistic assistance of illumination and bias, respectively, which results in asymmetrical filling. In particular, the injection of holes from the positive electrode can give rise to a striking decrease in the width and height of the surface barrier near the positive electrode, and correspondingly the device can exhibit conduction. With increases in the applied bias voltage and filling time, deeper hole traps are filled, and hence the device can exhibit synapse-based neural network-type switching properties. After a forward bias voltage is applied, the filled holes can escape when a relatively low reverse bias voltage is applied again and moreover can also recombine with injected electrons from the negative electrode and thus give rise to a relatively high current; that is, the device can remain in the LRS. With an increase in reverse bias voltage, however, the current reaches a maximum when the reverse injection begins. With a further increase in reverse bias voltage, the current decreases owing to the increase in reverse injection, which is suggestive of a negative differential resistance phenomenon. When the filled holes disappear completely, the device reverts to the HRS. In the case of the micro/nanowire-based device, the two-terminal diodes related to the surface barrier can be switchably adjusted owing to the reversible injection and extraction of trapped holes in the surface space charge region with the assistance of illumination. Therefore, the two diodes related to the surface barrier both display bipolar RS features, and two back-to-back connected bipolar RS devices are formed in the two-terminal device. Therefore, the cyclic I–V curve displays two symmetrical hysteresis loops with anticlockwise shapes when the entire device is illuminated, but, however, exhibits two switchable asymmetrical “8”-shapes hysteresis loops with typical bipolar RS features when only one end of the device is illuminated. The corresponding schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 9b.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram illustrating the energy band of the HOIP micro/nanowire with surface states in the two-terminal device. (a) In the equilibrium state, the entire wire is almost completely depleted and the Fermi level is pinned owing to abundant surface trap states, which forms two back-to-back connected diodes related to the surface barrier in the two-terminal device. (b) Under the influence of illumination and bias, holes are injected from the positive electrode into the traps located in the surface depletion region and are then captured, which results in a decrease in the surface barrier. In contrast, electrons are injected from the negative electrode into the traps, which results in the formation of a thicker blocking layer (depletion region) on the surface. 
4. Conclusions
In the case of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire, in summary, its I–V hysteresis properties can be accurately modulated by illuminating different regions, and, moreover, it can display outstanding trap-related nonvolatile memory performance. In the single micro/nanowire-based two-terminal device, the presence of abundant surface states leads to the formation of two back-to-back connected diodes with a series resistance, and, moreover, quantities of defect traps exist in the surface space charge region. Therefore, the dependence of the surface barrier on the two-terminal trap filling level plays a vital role. Under conditions of a dark environment at room temperature, the emptied traps cause a wide surface barrier, and correspondingly such conditions are unfavourable for conduction at a relatively low operating bias, namely, in the HRS. With the synergistic assistance of a relatively high bias and illumination, however, holes can be injected into the traps located in the surface space charge region from the positive electrode, which results in a striking decrease in the height and width of the surface barrier, and correspondingly the device switches to the LRS. In contrast, holes can be extracted from traps into the negative electrode, which results in the recovery of the HRS. It is due to the reversible injection and extraction of holes that the surface barrier can be controllably modulated, which results in the formation of an RS device. Accordingly, the two-terminal diodes related to the surface state both display bipolar RS behaviour, and two switchable back-to-back connected bipolar RS devices are formed in the single micro/nanowire-based two-electrode device. In cyclic I–V curves, two symmetrical hysteresis loops with anticlockwise shapes can be obtained by illuminating the entire device, including the two electrodes, whereas two switchable asymmetrical hysteresis loops with “8” shapes can be generated by only illuminating the vicinity of the electrode at one end. The trap filling and emptying effect can be well maintained, and therefore the single HOIP micro/nanowire can exhibit superior performance in terms of nonvolatile RS memory. Regarding the tunable hysteresis behaviour with nonvolatile memory properties, its origin can clearly be identified as the injection of holes into/from traps located in the surface space charge regions near the two-terminal electrodes under the synergistic action of bias and illumination, and furthermore it can be believed that HOIP materials have great potential in memory applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51571107, 51462023), and the Major Program of the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20152ACB20010).
Notes and references
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaithand and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan and S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13239–13243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Gratzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liang, C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1316–1320 Search PubMed .
A. B. Yusoff, H. P. Kim, X. Li, J. Kim, J. Jang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602940 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Spina, B. Nafradi, H. M. Tohati, K. Kamaras, E. Bonvin, R. Gaal, L. Forro and E. Horvath, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4888–4893 RSC .
M. Ahmadi, T. Wu and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 373–401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ding, H. J. Fang, Z. P. Lian, Q. R. Lv, J. L. Sun and Q. F. Yan, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10538–10544 RSC .
P. A. Shaikh, D. Shi, J. R. D. Retamal, A. D. Sheikh, M. A. Haque, C. F. Kang, H. He, O. M. Bakr and T. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8304–8312 RSC .
Y. Wu, X. M. Li, Y. Wei, Y. Gu and H. B. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 359–365 RSC .
Y. Ling, Z. Yuan, Y. Tian, X. Wang, J. C. Wang, Y. Xin, K. Hanson, B. Ma and H. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 305–311 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170–6175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, J. H. Lee and W. D. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700527 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, G. Zheng, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5810–5817 RSC .
H. L. Ma, W. Wang, H. Y. Xu, Z. Q. Wang, Y. Tao, P. Chen, W. Z. Liu, X. T. Zhang, J. G. Ma and Y. C. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21755–21763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hwang and J. S. Lee, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8578–8584 RSC .
F. C. Zhou, Y. H. Liu, X. P. Shen, M. Y. Wang, F. Yuan and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800080 CrossRef .
X. F. Cheng, X. Hou, J. Zhou, B. J. Gao, J. H. He, H. Li, Q. F. Xu, N. J. Li, D. Y. Chen and J. M. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703667 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, C. Kang, Y. Choi and L. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7824–7830 RSC .
Y. W. Wang, Y. H. Zhu, J. F. Huang, J. Cai, J. R. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. H. Shen and C. Z. Li, Nanoscale Horiz., 2017, 2, 225–232 RSC .
J. Yoon, H. Sung, G. Lee, W. Cho, N. Ahn, H. S. Jung and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 337–345 RSC .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518–2534 RSC .
P. Docampo, F. C. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400355 CrossRef .
K. M. Lee, K. S. Chen, J. R. Wu, Y. D. Lin, S. M. Yu and S. H. Chang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17699–17704 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .
B. Chen, M. Yang, S. Priya and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 905–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, A. Guerrero, Y. Zhong and S. Huettner, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 193001 CrossRef PubMed .
T. S. Sherkar and L. Jan Anton Koster, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 331–338 RSC .
J. Wei, Y. Zhao, H. Li, G. Li, J. Pan, D. Xu, Q. Zhao and D. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3937–3945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Chen, N. Sakai, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 164–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Grancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472–3481 RSC .
J. W. Lee, S. G. Kim, S. H. Bae, D. K. Lee, O. Lin, Y. Yang and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4270–4276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Jacobs, Y. Wu, H. Shen, C. Barugkin, F. J. Beck, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. R. Catchpole, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 3094–3103 RSC .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kiessling, A. Kohler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyano, M. Yanagida, N. Tripathi and Y. Shirai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2240–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rajagopal, S. T. Williams, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Jen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 995–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Xiao, K. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Ouyang, K. P. Ong, K. Zeng and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Q. Wang, J. J. Zhao, L. Y. Wei, Q. F. Zhu, S. H. Xie, J. X. Liu, X. J. Meng and J. Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3806–3817 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, S. Park, J. Lee, K. Hong, D. Kim, C. W. Moon, G. D. Park, J. Suh, J. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung, N. Park, S. Han, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6562–6567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cheng, Z. Ouyang, C. Chen, Y. Xiao and S. Lei, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3249 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nagashima, T. Yanagida, K. Oka, M. Taniguchi, T. Kawai, J. Kim and B. H. Park, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1359–1363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oka, T. Yanagida, K. Nagashima, T. Kawai, J. Kim and B. H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6634–6635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, B. Cheng, F. Wu, X. Su, Y. Xiao, R. Guo and S. Lei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20812–20818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Im, J. Luo, M. Franckevičius, N. Pellet, P. Gao, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and N. Park, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2120–2126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, H. Hao, J. Dong, F. Cheng, J. Hao, J. Xing and H. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2017, 197, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, P. Wang, L. Wei, Z. Liu, X. Fang, X. Liu, D. Ren and Y. Mai, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 16914–16922 RSC .
H. Kim and N. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Si, Q. L. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. H. Yang, G. J. Zhang, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, T. Sha, Y. Wang, W. Yu, K. Jiang, H. Zhou, C. Liu, Z. Hu and J. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 11906 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Characterization of as-prepared samples. (a) XRD pattern. (b) Low-magnification FESEM image viewed from above, showing the general wire-like morphology of the as-prepared sample. (c) High-magnification FESEM image, revealing the relatively smooth surface of the wire-like structure. (d) EDS pattern.	 

 	Fig. 2  
I–V characteristics of device at different measurement bias voltages in the dark (left) and under VIS illumination (right). The arrows represent the directions of the voltage sweeps. (a) and (b) 1 V; (c) and (d) 5 V; (e) and (f) 10 V. The insets in (a) and (b) represent an optical image and a schematic illustration, respectively, of the two-terminal device.	 

 	Fig. 3  
I–V characteristics of device under illumination with light with different powers and energies, measured at a bias of 6 V. (a) Under VIS illumination with the same energy and different power densities, showing a decrease in the switching transition voltage with an increase in power density. (b) Under illumination with the same power density of 1 mW cm−2 and different wavelengths, showing a decrease in the switching transition voltage with an increase in energy.	 

 	Fig. 4  
I–V characteristics of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based device measured at a bias of 5 V under illumination near the end connected to the positive electrode by a microbeam light with different power densities. The arrows represent the direction and sequence of the voltage sweep. (a) 1 mW cm−2; (b) 5 mW cm−2; (c) 9 mW cm−2; (d) 13 mW cm−2. The inset in (d) shows a schematic illustration of illumination near the positive electrode.	 

 	Fig. 5  
I–V characteristics of a single CH3NH3PbI3 micro/nanowire-based device measured at 10 V under illumination near the end connected to the negative electrode. (a) single-cycle I–V characteristics; (b) multiple-cycles I–V characteristics. The inset in (a) shows a schematic illustration of illumination near the negative electrode.	 

 	Fig. 6  
I-V characteristics measured with a continuous unidirectional cyclic sweeping voltage under illumination of the entire device, which suggest that the current increases steadily with the bias voltage. (a) Only a positive cyclic sweeping bias voltage ranging from 0 to 10 V was used. (b) Only a negative cyclic sweeping bias voltage ranging from 0 to −10 V was used.	 

 	Fig. 7  Writing–reading–erasing process of an RRAM cell based on a single HOIP micro/nanowire with a two-terminal electrode structure under VIS illumination. The red and blue curves represent the applied voltage and response current, respectively, and show that the device current increased after a forward-biased writing voltage of +1 V was applied and conversely decreased after a reverse-biased erasing voltage of −1 V was applied at a relatively low reading voltage of 0.1 V. (a) Consecutive cycles under a pulse voltage of 0.1 → +1 → 0.1 → −1 → 0.1 V. (b) Magnified view of the green dotted frame in (a), showing the detailed writing–reading–erasing process and a memory window of about 8 times. (c) Enlargement of the purple dotted frame in (b), showing a response time of about 0.3 s for erasing. (d) Enlargement of the black dotted frame in (b), showing a response time of about 1.5 s for writing. (e, f) Enlargements of the red and yellow dotted frames in (b), showing response times of about 0.2 s and 0.4 s, respectively, for reading.	 

 	Fig. 8  Data retention characteristic of RRAM cell in both the LRS and the HRS at a reading voltage of 0.1 V after negative and positive voltages of 1 V, respectively, were applied.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram illustrating the energy band of the HOIP micro/nanowire with surface states in the two-terminal device. (a) In the equilibrium state, the entire wire is almost completely depleted and the Fermi level is pinned owing to abundant surface trap states, which forms two back-to-back connected diodes related to the surface barrier in the two-terminal device. (b) Under the influence of illumination and bias, holes are injected from the positive electrode into the traps located in the surface depletion region and are then captured, which results in a decrease in the surface barrier. In contrast, electrons are injected from the negative electrode into the traps, which results in the formation of a thicker blocking layer (depletion region) on the surface.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
