Soft landing of bare nanoparticles with controlled size, composition, and morphology   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4NR06758D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4NR06758D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3491-3503Soft landing of bare nanoparticles with controlled size, composition, and morphology†

        
          
            Grant E. 
            Johnson
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Robert 
            Colby
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Julia 
            Laskin
          
        
      a
aPhysical Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, P. O. Box 999, MSIN K8-88, Richland, WA 99352, USA. E-mail: Grant.Johnson@pnnl.gov; Julia.Laskin@pnnl.gov
bEnvironmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, P. O. Box 999, Richland, WA 99352, USA
Received 
      15th November 2014
    , Accepted 17th January 2015First published on 19th January 2015AbstractPhysical synthesis employing magnetron sputtering and gas aggregation in a modified commercial source has been coupled with size-selection and ion soft landing to prepare bare nanoparticles on surfaces with controlled coverage, size, composition, and morphology. Employing atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), it is demonstrated that the size and coverage of nanoparticles on flat and stepped surfaces may be controlled using a quadrupole mass filter and the length of deposition, respectively. AFM shows that nanoparticles bind randomly to flat surfaces when soft landed at relatively low coverage (4 × 104 ions μm−2). On stepped surfaces at intermediate coverage (4 × 105 ions μm−2) nanoparticles bind along step edges forming extended linear chains. At the highest coverage (2 × 106 ions μm−2) nanoparticles form a continuous film on flat surfaces. On one surface with sizable defects, the presence of localized imperfections results in agglomeration of nanoparticles onto these features and formation of neighboring zones devoid of particles. Employing high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) the customized magnetron sputtering/gas aggregation source is demonstrated to produce bare single metal particles with controlled morphology as well as bimetallic alloy nanoparticles with defined core–shell structures of that are of interest to catalysis.
Introduction
Nanoparticles and subnanometer clusters continue to be a subject of substantial research interest due to their remarkably tunable chemical and physical properties which result from substantial variations in structure and reactivity occurring over the nanometer length scale1,2 and quantum confinement effects, respectively.3,4 The size- and structure-dependent properties of nanoparticles have made them attractive candidates for numerous applications. For example, metal nanoparticles have recently shown utility in composite materials used as sensors for the detection of explosives5 and chemical warfare agents.6 Additional biomedical applications of nanoparticles include targeted drug delivery,7 cellular imaging,8 and photo-thermal treatment of cancer.9 Nanoparticles also hold great promise in plasmon-enhanced photovoltaic devices for improved solar energy conversion10 as well as in inks for the rapid and environmentally benign printing of low cost electronic circuits.11
It is in the field of heterogeneous catalysis, however, where metal nanoparticles find their most widespread application in the chemical sciences.12 This is because bare nanoparticles provide much larger active surface areas than extended flat substrates and may be synthesized from a variety of elements in selected shapes that express catalytically active and selective crystal facets.13 In comparison, clusters which are less than 1 nm in diameter differ from larger nanoparticles in that they may not necessarily express specific crystal facets at their surfaces.14 However, due to their extremely small size, the ratio of surface to interior atoms is very large, in some cases approaching the theoretically highest possible dispersion of active material.15 The surface atoms of bare clusters are also highly undercoordinated which makes them suitable for binding and activating molecules for applications in chemical adsorption, sensing, and catalysis.16–18 For instance, studies have demonstrated that the active species that promote chemical reactions in certain heterogeneous catalysts are supported metal clusters less than 1 nm in diameter.19,20 Therefore, both nanoparticles and clusters exemplify fundamental building blocks with highly tunable properties that may be incorporated into larger mesoscale structures21 and cluster-assembled materials22 exhibiting emergent behavior23 that is not observed in conventional bulk matter.
Preparation of nanoparticles and clusters in solution is considered to be the most practical route to the scalable synthesis of these materials for use in commercial applications. However, solution-phase techniques inevitably involve the use of organic capping ligands to ensure solubility in the reaction medium, arrest particle growth at a certain size, direct the formation of particular crystal facets at the surface, and prevent agglomeration of the synthesized material in solution.24,25 After the particles are removed from solution, purified, and immobilized on support materials the ligands must often be partially or completely removed to expose an active metal surface and enable sufficiently strong binding of the clusters to supports for applications in chemical catalysis, sensing, and separation. This post-synthesis processing of ligated nanoparticles generally involves treatments at elevated temperatures26 or the application of strongly oxidizing chemicals.27,28 Recently, a relatively gentle procedure employing water at low temperature was developed which holds great promise for exposing nanoparticle surfaces that are covered with weakly bound ligands.29 Sub-nanometer clusters capped with strongly bound ligands such as thiols30 and phosphines,31,32 however, will likely require much harsher conditions to expose their active metal surfaces. In either case, the removal of capping ligands introduces additional complexity and cost in the utilization of nanoparticles and clusters and also results in uncertainty about the size and structure of the supported particles that were so painstakingly prepared in solution. An alternative approach to synthesis in solution is to prepare clusters and nanoparticles directly on the support material where they will eventually be used. The particles are typically formed from a reactive metal precursor within a support material such as the pores of a zeolite which serve to limit size and agglomeration.33 A principal drawback to this approach is that the particles are physically trapped within a host material and, therefore, not always easily accessible for all applications.
Complementary physical methods have been developed to produce bare ionic nanoparticles and clusters in the gas-phase without the use of solvents and capping ligands. These techniques include elemental vapor reaction,34 gas aggregation,35 laser vaporization,36,37 magnetron sputtering,38,39 high energy ion sputtering,40 and pulsed arc synthesis.41 These physical synthesis methods are implemented at reduced gas pressures and typically coupled with electrostatic, electrodynamic, or magnetic mass filters which enable one ionic species to be isolated from the distribution of ionic clusters and nanoparticles produced by the source. When combined with sophisticated mass-spectrometry and spectroscopy instrumentation these physical sources enable detailed characterization of the size-dependent structure,42 reactivity,43 thermochemistry,44 and electronic properties45 of mass-selected cluster ions in the gas-phase. Historically, the ion currents produced employing these vacuum-based techniques have been in the range of picoamperes (10−12 A) which has restricted their use to preparing well-defined model surfaces for scientific research. In recent years, however, advances in ion production, mass-selection, and transmission have enabled ion currents of up to 6 nanoamperes (10−9 A) of certain size-selected clusters to be delivered to surfaces.46 This substantial increase in the rate of deposition provides an opportunity for soft landing of mass-selected ions to enter the manufacturing of high-value components such as solar cells47 and shallow junctions in integrated circuits.48 High capacity plasma-based processes that operate at ambient pressure and elevated temperatures are currently used in the large scale industrial production of bare nanopowders.49 These commercial techniques employ both liquid and solid precursors and are capable of preparing from gram to kilogram quantities of bare nanopowders per hour.50 While sufficient for many high-volume applications, most particles prepared in this fashion have an unacceptably high level of polydispersity in both size and composition to be used in specialty manufacturing and scientific research.
Out of the numerous physical synthesis techniques referenced in the preceding paragraph, magnetron sputtering combined with gas-aggregation has evolved to be a particularly versatile method of generating bare ionic nanoparticles and clusters over a wide range of sizes and elemental compositions. The original concept was implemented by Haberland and co-workers in 1991 and subsequently used to study the creation of thin films through energetic cluster deposition onto surfaces.38,51 A modified design was introduced in 2005 by Palmer and co-workers which enabled both radiofrequency (RF) sputtering of target materials as well as a variable aggregation distance for more controlled formation of clusters and nanoparticles.39 This source design expanded the materials which could be sputtered to include insulators and also provided superior control over the size and morphology of ionic nanoparticles and clusters exiting the aggregation region. More recently, modified versions of this source design52 have emerged which enable room temperature direct current (DC) sputtering,53 pulsed sputtering,54,55 pulsed gas aggregation,56 and perhaps, most importantly, sputtering of multiple independent targets in the same region of gas aggregation.57,58 Collectively, these different source configurations have been used to prepare a diverse range of nanomaterials on surfaces for studies in catalysis,46,59,60 photovoltaics,61,62 magnetism,63–65 cluster–surface interactions,66–68 hydrophobic coatings,69 mass-spectrometry imaging,70 and optical spectroscopy.71 It should be noted, however, that all of these source designs produce a distribution of nanoparticle sizes and compositions that must be filtered in the gas-phase using mass-spectrometry techniques in order to prepare a well-defined beam of selected particles for subsequent deposition onto surfaces.
Soft landing of mass-selected ions enables control over the size, composition, and charge state of complex molecules immobilized on surfaces.72–75 The concept of using soft landed ions to modify surfaces was first demonstrated by Cooks and co-workers in 1977 by depositing small sulfur-containing ions onto different metal substrates.76 Immobilization of larger polyatomic ions on surfaces intact with retention of ionic charge was reported by the same group 20 years later.77 Since these seminal publications, a number of experiments have shown that complex ions including peptides,78 proteins,79–81 protein assemblies,82 viruses,83 organometallic complexes,84 metal clusters, and nanoparticles72,85–88 may be soft landed onto a variety of substrates intact with retention of their chemical and biological properties. For example, in our laboratory we recently demonstrated that both the size and ionic charge state of small ligated cationic gold clusters may be controlled by soft landing of mass-selected ions onto carefully chosen self-assembled monolayers on gold (SAMs).73,75 In addition, it was recently shown that the charge retention of soft landed negatively charged polyoxometalate clusters is controlled primarily by their electron binding energy rather than the electron transfer properties of the surface.89 This study also illustrated that clusters soft landed in different ionic charge states may have distinct electrochemical properties in solution. Mass selection allows species with both defined charge and chemical composition to be delivered to surfaces. In addition, for species that are deposited from solution, soft landing may avoid any contamination resulting from the presence of neutrals, residual reactants, solvent molecules, and counterions.74 Therefore, employing soft landing of mass-selected ions it is possible to study the size, coverage, and surface-dependent behavior of complex ions including nanoparticles and clusters with precision.
Herein, we illustrate the capabilities of magnetron sputtering and gas aggregation coupled with size-selection and ion soft landing for the preparation of bare highly dispersed nanoparticles on surfaces with controlled coverage, size, composition, and morphology. Previous investigations have characterized nanoparticles prepared using multiple sputtering targets in one region of gas aggregation.57,58 However, to the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first extensive exploration of the soft landing of a wide array of single metal and alloy nanoparticles generated using a modified commercial Nanogen-Trio source. This source configuration utilizes close-coupling of the sputtering targets in a single plane to achieve intimate mixing of metal vapors at an early stage in particle formation. The size and coverage of bare nanoparticles soft landed onto model glassy carbon, silicon, and graphite surfaces are characterized using a combination of atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). On the relatively flat glassy carbon and silicon substrates the nanoparticles are observed to bind randomly to the surface at low coverage eventually forming a continuous film of nanoparticles at higher coverage. In the presence of an imperfection on one surface the nanoparticles are found to aggregate around the site on the substrate creating neighboring zones that are devoid of particles. Characterization with high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy in the high angle annular dark field imaging mode (STEM-HAADF) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) demonstrates that this physical synthesis technique produces single metal nanoparticles with controlled morphology as well as bimetallic alloy nanoparticles with distinct core–shell structures that are of interest to catalysis. Collectively, magnetron sputtering and gas aggregation combined with ion soft landing is shown to be a valuable complementary technique for preparing uniform films of supported bare nanoparticles with controlled size, shape and composition that are free of the complications arising from solvent, organic capping agents, and residual reactants present with nanoparticles synthesized in solution.
Experimental section
Synthesis and soft landing of bare anionic nanoparticles
A schematic illustration of the modified commercial Nanogen-Trio nanoparticle source and the entire Q-Prep 500 deposition system that was purchased from Mantis Deposition Ltd is presented in Fig. 1. The principal distinction between this source design and previous versions39 is that instead of a single 2′′ sputtering target there are three separate 1′′ targets mounted on the same linear translator within one region of gas aggregation. It should be noted that this source arrangement of three sputtering targets is different from the recently reported design of Huttel and co-workers where three separate 1′′ magnetrons are also mounted in the same region of gas aggregation but on three independent linear translators.57 The advantage of the design with three independent magnetrons is that three different targets may be sputtered at the same time to prepare bare bi- and tri-metallic alloy nanoparticles. Each 1′′ magnetron also has an independent power supply which allows the sputtering current applied to the different targets to be adjusted separately, thereby providing control over the mole fraction of metals incorporated into the nanoparticles. In addition, the gas ports on the Nanogen-Trio source are designed so that the flow of sputtering gas (Ar) is directed from the outside of the targets towards their center. This inward direction of gas flow sweeps Ar across the sputtering surfaces and ensures early mixing of the metal vapors generated over the different targets to form homogeneous alloy nanoparticles. In comparison, particle-in-particle structures may instead result from incomplete mixing of metal vapors.
 Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of the complete nanocluster deposition system including the Nanogen-Trio nanoparticle source from Mantis Deposition, Ltd. Note the presence of three separate sputtering targets on the same linear translator within one region of gas aggregation. The insert illustrates the surface of the magnetron head where three targets may be sputtered simultaneously to generate vapors which are swept to the center by Ar gas. 
Bare single metal nanoparticles of vanadium, titanium, and molybdenum were prepared by DC magnetron sputtering of the appropriate metal targets (circular, 1′′ diameter, 0.15′′ thick, 99.95% purity) obtained from Plasmaterials (Livermore, CA) in a controlled flow of ultra-high purity (UHP) argon and helium (99.999% purity) gas purchased from Matheson Tri-Gas (Newark, CA). Bare alloy nanoparticles containing two metals including platinum/titanium, vanadium/titanium, and platinum/vanadium were prepared by simultaneously sputtering two independent metal targets in the same region of gas aggregation. The sputtering currents applied to each metal target, the flow rates of argon and helium, and the position of the linear translator in the aggregation region were adjusted to optimize the production (ion current) of each nanoparticle type. The values of these parameters differ from system to system and are provided in Table 1. In general, argon and helium gas are introduced through ports near the targets and carry the nanoparticles away from the sputtering surfaces and towards a custom 3 mm diameter aperture installed at the end of the gas aggregation region. The diameter of the aperture provided by the manufacturer is 5 mm which requires larger flow rates of Ar and He gas to achieve ion currents sufficient for deposition. Through a straightforward modification we adapted smaller apertures of different diameter (2, 3, and 4 mm) to the aggregation region which enabled similar ion currents to be produced with substantially lower gas flow rates.
Table 1 Source parameters employed for each of the soft landed nanoparticles reported in this study. The spot size for every deposition was 25 mm2




Sample
Size (nm)
Ar (sccm)
He (sccm)
Sputtering current 1 (ma)
Sputtering current 2 (ma)
Source position (mm)
Ion current (pa)
Deposition time (min)
Number of ions deposited per μm2




V
4
50
5
80
NA
30
280
30
1 × 105


Pt/Ti
8
40
10
30
50
40
700
60
4 × 105


Ti
7
50
25
90
NA
40
430
110
2 × 106


V/Ti
5
50
2.5
70
70
75
310
60
3 × 105


Mo
5
80
70
100
NA
60
230
20
4 × 104


V
8
35
10
100
NA
50
180
60
2 × 105


Pt/V
7
35
50
70
90
30
380
60
3 × 105




After exiting the aggregation region the distribution of anionic nanoparticles (typically FWHM ∼ 2 nm) passes through a 5 mm skimmer and into the MesoQ frequency scanning quadrupole mass filter.90 The anionic nanoparticles discussed herein are assumed to be singly charged so the terms mass-selected and size-selected are equivalent and may be used interchangeably. A representative spectrum of 5 nm V/Ti alloy nanoparticles obtained using the MesoQ mass filter is provided in the ESI.† The size-selected anionic nanoparticles (typically FWHM ∼ 0.25 nm) transmitted by the MesoQ filter are extracted and focused using a set of two custom-built einzel lenses. The einzel lenses (each element 0.75′′ length, 1′′ inner diameter) are located in the deposition region and serve to focus the divergent beam of anionic nanoparticles exiting the quadrupole filter to a circular spot on the surface approximately 2.5 cm in diameter. Typical potentials applied to the entrance and exit elements of each einzel lens are +100 V. The center elements are generally set at a potential of around −5 V. Without the einzel lenses the nanoparticles deposit in a larger circular area approximately 6 cm in diameter. The distance between the final lens and the surface is 8 cm. The potentials applied to the einzel lenses are provided by an 8-channel DC power supply purchased from Ardara Technologies (Ardara, PA). The spatially focused nanoparticles are soft landed onto substrates held at ground potential and rotated at 20 rotations per minute (RPM) throughout the deposition.
The quadrupole filter transmits a narrow window of mass/charge from the broader distribution of anionic nanoparticles produced by the source. It has been estimated previously that DC magnetron sputter sources typically produce cluster distributions that are two thirds ionized (anions and cations) and one third neutrals.51 The cationic clusters are rejected from the ion beam by the positive DC bias applied to the quadrupole rods and einzel lenses (+100 V). The neutral clusters, however, are not removed from the beam of anionic nanoparticles and may impinge on the surface. Repeated TEM imaging of depositions of nanoparticles comprised of several elements indicates that the size observed with microscopy is consistent with the size selected using the quadrupole. This correspondence in size suggests that different size neutral species comprise a very small portion of the total material that reaches substrate.
The modified Nanogen-Trio source is mounted in a nanocluster deposition system (Q-Prep 500) that was obtained from Mantis Deposition Ltd (Oxfordshire, UK). The deposition system consists of three vacuum regions that may be separated from one another as needed with gate valves. The first region contains the magnetron source used for nanoparticle generation. The second region houses the frequency scanning quadrupole filter90 (MesoQ) used for size-selection and the custom einzel lenses used for focusing the ion beam onto surfaces. The second region also houses the deposition target which is mounted on a movable stage that enables positioning, rotation, heating, and voltage biasing. The third region of the instrument is a small vacuum chamber equipped with a magnetically actuated manipulator that is used to introduce blank substrates and remove deposited samples from the second region following soft landing of nanoparticles. The amount of soft landed material was determined by monitoring the ion current during deposition at a wire mesh grid at the exit of the MesoQ quadrupole filter and at the surface with a Keithley 6485 picoammeter (Cleveland, OH). The wire mesh consistently captures ∼5% of the ion current that is measured at the deposition surface. It is assumed that all of the anionic nanoparticles deposited in these experiments are singly charged.
Preparation of surfaces
Glassy carbon substrates, 10 mm × 10 mm, 2 mm thick, with both sides lapped and one side diamond polished to < 50 nm surface roughness were purchased from HTW Hochtemperatur-Werkstoffe GmbH (Thierhaupten, Germany). Highly oriented pyrolytic graphite surfaces (HOPG), 10 mm × 10 mm, 1.5 mm thick, ZYB quality were obtained from NT-MDT (Moscow, Russia). Silicon Si(100) surfaces, 10 mm × 10 mm, 1 mm thick, P-type, B-doped were purchased from MTI (Richmond, CA). All surfaces were ultrasonically washed in 99.5% acetone obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) for 20 min. The sonicated surfaces were dried with a stream of pure nitrogen gas and placed in an ultraviolet cleaner (Boekel Scientific, Feasterville, PA) for 20 minutes. The surfaces were mounted, several at a time, in a molybdenum sample stage which was placed on a magnetic manipulator located in the vented load-lock region of the deposition instrument. The load-lock chamber was evacuated using a turbo-pump backed by an oil free scroll pump. Following evacuation, the gate valve separating the load-lock and deposition regions of the instrument was opened and the sample was transferred to the deposition stage using the magnetic manipulator. The manipulator was then retracted and the gate valve closed. The surfaces were gently degassed in vacuum at a temperature of 200 °C for 30 min and allowed to return to room temperature. The surfaces were then sputtered with argon radiofrequency plasma at a power of 50 W in a background pressure of 10−2 Torr of UHP argon for 1 min. Lacey thin carbon film coated copper microscopy grids (400 mesh) were purchased from Pacific Grid Tech (San Francisco, CA) and used as received.
Characterization of soft landed nanoparticles
AFM employing an Asylum MFP-3D BIO microscope (Santa Barbara, CA) was used to characterize the surface coverage and monodispersity in height of soft landed nanoparticles. The scope was operated in the tapping mode with 330 kHz tips that were purchased from Nanosensors (Neuchatel, Switzerland). The AFM data was converted to 3-dimensional color map images and line profiles and surface topography distributions were extracted from the AFM data using the WSxM software available for free from Nanotech Electronica (Madrid, Spain).91 An FEI Quanta 3D scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Hillsboro, OR) operating at 18 kV was used to verify the size and surface coverage of nanoparticles determined initially by AFM. STEM-HAADF was used to characterize the morphology and composition of Mo, V, and Pt/V nanoparticles soft landed onto continuous carbon microscopy grids. The electron microscopy apparatus employed was a FEI TITAN80-300 TEM/STEM operated at 300 kV and fitted with a spherical aberration corrector for the probe forming lens, thereby enabling sub-angstrom resolution in the STEM imaging mode.
Results and discussion
Diamond polished glassy carbon, single crystal silicon Si(100), and HOPG were selected as representative flat and stepped substrates for soft landing experiments. Characterization of the as-received glassy carbon substrates with AFM revealed dense and unexpected surface features with an average height of ∼5 nm. Following the cleaning procedure described in the experimental section the surface roughness of the glassy carbon substrates was reduced to ∼1 nm. Therefore, all of the nanoparticles deposited during the soft landing experiments described herein (size = 4–8 nm diameter) were readily apparent on the surface of clean glassy carbon with AFM. The Si(100) and HOPG surfaces exhibited a lower roughness than glassy carbon after cleaning. The AFM results for a sample prepared by soft landing 1 × 105 ions μm−2 bare size-selected 4 nm V nanoparticles onto glassy carbon are presented in Fig. 2. The V nanoparticles were prepared by DC sputtering one 1′′ V target at a current of 80 mA in a flow of 50 standard cubic centimeters per minute (sccm) of Ar sputtering gas and 5 sccm of He carrier gas. The linear translator was set at a position of 30 mm in the gas aggregation region. The 4 nm V nanoparticles, therefore, were prepared using a relatively high combined flow rate of Ar and He gas and a reduced aggregation length, both of which result in a shorter residence time in the aggregation region and the formation of smaller size particles. The wide field (5 μm2) AFM image presented in Fig. 2a reveals the formation of a partial layer of V nanoparticles on glassy carbon at this relatively low surface coverage. The particles are also observed to bind randomly to the glassy carbon substrate. This random binding motif is consistent with the SEM results obtained previously by Arenz and co-workers for platinum clusters deposited on glassy carbon electrodes.23 In good agreement with the size of the V nanoparticles that was selected using the quadrupole mass filter (4 nm), it is shown in Fig. 2b that the surface topography distribution obtained with AFM is peaked sharply at 4 nm in height. The higher magnification (2 μm2) AFM image presented in Fig. 2c confirms the relatively low coverage of V nanoparticles on the glassy carbon surface and also reveals the presence of some smaller features that are not evident at lower magnification in Fig. 2a. A line profile obtained through selected features on the glassy carbon surface, presented in Fig. 2d, shows five adjacent particles with a height of 4 nm along with a smaller shoulder feature that is ∼2 nm in height. A reduction in the height of a small fraction of the soft landed nanoparticles compared to the diameter selected in the gas-phase has been observed previously by both AFM and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).92 This phenomenon was attributed to different structural isomers of nanoparticles resulting from the varying strength of the particle-support interaction at certain sites on the surface.92 The features with reduced height may also result from the presence of a minor number of smaller neutral nanoparticles in the beam of clusters that cannot be removed using the quadrupole mass-filter. Although a small fraction of the V nanoparticles exhibit reduced height, the surface topography distribution in Fig. 2b illustrates that bare size-selected V particles may be soft landed onto glassy carbon surfaces with retention of size and without substantial agglomeration into larger aggregates. Polished glassy carbon is a technologically important electrode material used in fuel cell applications and electrocatalysis so soft landing onto these substrates provides a robust way of examining the size and composition dependent electrochemical reactivity of bare metal nanoparticles.23
 Fig. 2  Wide field (5 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 1 × 105 ions μm−2 of size-selected anionic 4 nm V nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. Higher magnification (2 μm2) image (c) and height profile (d) through selected V nanoparticles. Note the monodispersity in height and random spatial distribution of V nanoparticles on the surface of glassy carbon at low coverage. 
In an effort to characterize the influence of the underlying surface structure on the arrangement of soft landed nanoparticles at higher coverage, experiments were also conducted on stepped graphite surfaces. This sample was prepared by DC sputtering one 1′′ Pt target at a current of 30 mA and one 1′′ Ti target at a current of 50 mA in the same region of gas aggregation in a flow of 40 sccm Ar and 10 sccm He. The linear translator was set at a position of 40 mm in the aggregation region. The larger 8 nm Pt/Ti nanoparticles were, therefore, synthesized using a similar total flow rate of Ar and He gas and a slightly longer aggregation distance than the 4 nm V particles described in the preceding paragraph. The principal difference between the source conditions for the two samples is that the sputtering yield of Pt is much larger than either V or Ti at equivalent conditions.93 The larger size of the Pt/Ti alloy nanoparticles, therefore, is attributed to a higher overall concentration of Pt metal vapor in the aggregation region. The AFM results for this sample prepared by soft landing 4 × 105 ions μm−2 bare size-selected 8 nm Pt/Ti alloy nanoparticles onto freshly cleaved HOPG are presented in Fig. 3. The wide field (5 μm2) AFM image presented in Fig. 3a reveals that the arrangement of nanoparticles on the stepped HOPG surface is very different at higher coverage compared to that observed at lower coverage for V particles on flat glassy carbon (Fig. 2a). Instead of binding randomly to the surface, on HOPG the larger Pt/Ti nanoparticles arrange preferentially along the step edges of the surface forming extended chains of particles. In addition, the surface topography distribution shown in Fig. 3b reveals a bimodal distribution of heights. This is very different to the single sharp peak observed in Fig. 2b for V nanoparticles on glassy carbon. The most abundant feature in Fig. 3b is centered at a height of 9 nm which is in excellent agreement with the 8 nm Pt/Ti nanoparticles that were size-selected for deposition using the MesoQ quadrupole mass filter. Therefore, even at higher coverage where some aggregation of particles is evident, the AFM topography distribution is able to resolve features with heights in good agreement with the diameter of the soft landed particles. The less abundant feature in Fig. 3b is centered at a height of 17 nm which is almost twice the height of a single layer of nanoparticles. Therefore, it is reasonable to propose that the 17 nm features are the result of a second layer of nanoparticles that is beginning to form at the step edges at the higher coverage employed in the experiment on HOPG. The higher magnification (1 μm2) AFM image presented in Fig. 3c illustrates the linear structures adopted by the soft landed Pt/Ti nanoparticles along the step edges of the HOPG surface. This image also shows that a large fraction of the terrace sites on HOPG are vacant at this higher coverage. Specifically, it appears to be more energetically favorable to form a second layer of Pt/Ti nanoparticles at the step edge sites than to form a complete single layer that covers the terraces. A line profile obtained across several rows of particles is presented in Fig. 3d. Here, the spacing between the step edges on HOPG is resolved as is the difference in height between the single layer of nanoparticles at the step edges and areas where a second layer of particles is beginning to form at the higher coverage used in these experiments. The alignment of the Pt/Ti nanoparticles along the step edges of HOPG observed with AFM is consistent with observations made previously by Bowen and co-workers for smaller Mo clusters soft landed onto similar surfaces.66 Analogous behavior was also reported by Palmer and co-workers for Ag clusters soft landed onto graphite.94 This alignment may be caused by the Smoluchowski effect95 which results in the preferential alignment of molecules along the top and bottom of step edges of conductive surfaces.96 Overall, the AFM results for larger particles at intermediate coverage on HOPG demonstrate that size-selected particles may be isolated on surfaces and that step edges may be employed to direct the assembly of particles into single and multilayer chains. It is conceivable that such linear arrangements of supported nanoparticles may be employed as nanowires in miniaturized electronic devices or to direct the spatially confined assembly of other nanomaterials on surfaces.97
 Fig. 3  Wide field (5 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 4 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 8 nm Pt/Ti alloy nanoparticles soft landed onto highly oriented pyrolytic graphite. Higher magnification (1 μm2) image (c) and height profile (d) through selected Pt/Ti nanoparticles. Note the bimodal distribution in height and linear alignment of nanoparticles along step edges on the surface of graphite at intermediate coverage. 
Certain applications of supported nanoparticles require their layer-by-layer deposition98 onto surfaces or their co-deposition along with a matrix or host material.61,99 In order to characterize how anionic nanoparticles behave when soft landed at relatively high coverage on a flat surface a sample was prepared by depositing 2 × 106 ions μm−2 bare size-selected 7 nm Ti nanoparticles onto a Si(100) substrate. The Ti nanoparticles were prepared by DC sputtering one 1′′ Ti target at a current of 90 mA in a flow of 50 sccm Ar and 25 sccm He. The linear translator was set at a position of 40 mm in the aggregation region. The 7 nm Ti nanoparticles, therefore, were prepared using a larger combined flow rate of Ar and He gas than the V or Pt/Ti particles described in the preceding paragraphs. In addition, the sputtering current and aggregation distance were set relatively high. While the larger flow rate of He favors the formation of smaller nanoparticles, the high sputtering current and long aggregation distance are consistent with the formation of the larger 7 nm Ti particles. The wide field (5 μm2) AFM image obtained for this sample is presented in Fig. 4a. It is clear in the image that at higher nanoparticle coverage a much denser layer is present on the surface and less of the underlying substrate remains exposed. It appears that the first layer of nanoparticles binds randomly to the surface and the subsequent layers fill in randomly on top. The surface topography distribution is presented in Fig. 4b and reveals a broad height distribution that is peaked at 26 nm. The features observed with AFM on the Si(100) surface at high coverage are, on average, much greater in height than those observed on either HOPG or glassy carbon at intermediate and low coverage, respectively. In addition, while the topography distributions obtained on glassy carbon and HOPG are narrowly focused around heights corresponding to the formation of one and two vertical layers of nanoparticles, the distribution in Fig. 4b is substantially wider and peaked at a value consistent with the formation of four vertical layers of 7 nm Ti nanoparticles (∼28 nm). The large width of the topography distribution indicates that features with a height of 10 nm all the way to 50 nm are observed which corresponds to single nanoparticles on the bare Si surface all the way up to a maximum layer of 7 nanoparticles. In addition, the wide distribution of heights suggests that the nanoparticles do not always stack linearly on top of each other but may also stack in a zig-zag fashion forming features with heights that are not multiples of 7 nm. The higher magnification (1 μm2) AFM image presented in Fig. 4c illustrates the substantial variation in height between the largest and smallest features observed on the Si(100) surface at high coverage. The incomplete formation of multiple layers is also evident in the line profile presented in Fig. 4d where features 14 nm, 21 nm, and 26 nm in height are observed which are consistent with the vertical stacking of 2, 3, and 4 layers of 7 nm Ti nanoparticles, respectively. Altogether, the AFM results demonstrate that it is possible to build up multiple layers of bare nanoparticles on a flat Si surface using ion soft landing. In addition, the layers do not appear to form one after the other. Instead the nanoparticles stack between one and four layers deep on top of each other in an apparently random manner. Such rough and nanoporous three dimensional films may find applications in catalysis and chemical separations.98
 Fig. 4  Wide field (5 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 2 × 106 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 7 nm Ti nanoparticles soft landed onto Si(100). Higher magnification (1 μm2) image (c) and height profile (d) through selected Ti nanoparticles. Note the broad distribution in height and extensive coverage of the substrate with nanoparticles. 
Further characterization of soft landed bare nanoparticles was performed using SEM to validate the findings from initial analyses with AFM. This sample was prepared by soft landing 3 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected 5 nm V/Ti alloy nanoparticles onto HOPG. These nanoparticles were synthesized by DC sputtering one 1′′ V target at a current of 70 mA and one 1′′ Ti target at a current of 70 mA in a flow of 50 sccm Ar and 2.5 sccm He. The linear translator was set at a position of 75 mm in the aggregation region. The sputtering yields of both V and Ti are relatively low93 which necessitates the use of both a large flow rate of Ar sputtering gas and high sputtering currents applied to both metal targets. A long aggregation distance was also employed to ensure complete mixing of the metal vapors and sufficient clustering time. The low magnification SEM image presented in Fig. 5a illustrates that soft landing of size-selected nanoparticles may be used to create films of particles over extended areas on relatively defect-free surfaces. The higher magnification SEM image presented in Fig. 5b shows individual nanoparticles on the surface as well as larger features resulting from agglomeration and vertical stacking of particles. Some of these features may also result from the presence of a small number of larger neutral nanoparticles in the ion beam. The SEM image, therefore, is consistent with the previous AFM results which revealed similar features corresponding to single and stacked aggregates of nanoparticles on the surfaces. Unfortunately, SEM does not have sufficient spatial resolution to accurately determine the size of the particles presented in Fig. 5. Their size, therefore, was assigned based on the size selected with the quadrupole mass filter prior to deposition. An SEM image of V/Ti nanoparticles soft landed in the vicinity of a large surface imperfection on HOPG is presented in Fig. 5c. This imperfection is proposed to result from a layer or several layers of graphite that delaminated from the surface during sonication in solution forming a scroll-like feature on the surface.100 It is evident in the SEM image that the nanoparticles aggregate preferentially around the defect creating a surrounding zone on the surface that is largely devoid of nanoparticles. This observation is consistent with previous studies that have demonstrated substantial field enhancement at thin carbon nanosheets extending out from bulk surfaces.101 Theoretical calculations have also predicted that graphene surfaces subjected to mechanical strain exhibit an enhanced binding interaction towards supported metal clusters.102 Outside of the depletion zone the film of nanoparticles is similar to that observed on a pristine surface as shown in Fig. 5a. The higher magnification SEM image presented in Fig. 5d illustrates the preferential binding of nanoparticles along the step edges of HOPG in the depletion zone next to the surface defect. This observation further supports the formation of linear chains of nanoparticles that was found with AFM and presented in Fig. 3c. The SEM results emphasize the importance of carefully preparing the surface prior to nanoparticle deposition. Moreover, they suggest that surface defects may be introduced in a controlled fashion using ion beam milling to direct the assembly of nanoparticles on substrates during soft landing.103,104
 Fig. 5  Low (a) and high (b) magnification scanning electron microscopy images obtained for 3 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 5 nm V/Ti alloy nanoparticles soft landed onto pristine highly oriented pyrolytic graphite. Low (c) and high (d) magnification images of nanoparticles soft landed at a surface imperfection possibly consisting of layers of delaminated graphite. Note the even coverage on the pristine substrate and the aggregation of nanoparticles around the defect to create an adjacent depletion zone. 
In addition to the size and surface coverage of supported nanoparticles, morphology is critically important as it controls which crystal facets are present at the particle surface. Different crystal facets are known to have widely varying chemical reactivity which has been exploited extensively in designing improved materials for heterogeneous catalysis.105 A low magnification STEM image of 4 × 104 ions μm−2 size-selected 5 nm Mo nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid is presented in Fig. 6a. The Mo nanoparticles were synthesized by DC sputtering one 1′′ Mo target at a current of 100 mA in a flow of 80 sccm Ar and 70 sccm He. The linear translator was set at a position of 60 mm in the gas aggregation region. While these nanoparticles were synthesized employing a relatively high sputtering current and long aggregation region, the flow rates of Ar and He gas were also sufficiently high that the nanoparticles had reduced residence time in the aggregation region which arrested their growth at around 5 nm in diameter. The wide-field STEM image in Fig. 6a reveals a relatively low coverage of nanoparticles on the surface that have similar size and structure. Fig. 6a also illustrates the strong correspondence in size between what is selected using the quadrupole mass-filter and what is observed on the surface with TEM. Neutral nanoparticles, therefore, are not a likely source of particle polydispersity on the surface. A higher magnification STEM image, presented in Fig. 6b, compares two adjacent Mo nanoparticles imaged in close proximity to each other on the continuous carbon surface. The particles are identical in size, spherical in morphology, and exhibit a clear difference in Z-contrast between their centers and outer shells. As these bare Mo nanoparticles were deposited under vacuum conditions without any passivating layers, it is reasonable that a Mo-oxide layer with lower Z-contrast formed when they were removed from vacuum and exposed to the ambient atmosphere. This observation is consistent with the previous findings of Hippler and co-workers for bare Ti nanoclusters examined following exposure to laboratory air.106 For comparison, a sample consisting of 2 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected 8 nm V nanoparticles was soft landed onto an identical continuous carbon microscopy grid. These particles were synthesized by DC sputtering one 1′′ V target at a current of 100 mA in a flow of 35 sccm Ar and 10 sccm He. The linear translator was set at a position of 50 mm in the aggregation region. The larger size of these 8 nm V nanoparticles compared to the 4 nm V particles characterized with AFM in Fig. 2 may be attributed to the larger sputtering current and longer aggregation region employed for this deposition. A wide-field STEM image of these particles is presented in Fig. 6c. Quite surprisingly, all of the V nanoparticles appear to have a cubic morphology. Indeed, each of the features in Fig. 6c is either cubic or the result of the agglomeration of several smaller cubic particles into a larger cubic aggregate. A representative V particle was selected for further analysis and is presented in the higher magnification STEM image in Fig. 6d. Close examination of the image reveals a cubic particle with a large difference in Z-contrast between the center and outer layers of the cube. Furthermore, lattice planes can be seen clearly in both the core and shell of the V particle indicating the presence of crystalline regions. Again, the formation of a passivating V-oxide shell on the bare metal surface is consistent with the results observed previously for other reactive early transition metals.106 The STEM results demonstrate that source parameters, in particular the flow rate of Ar and He, may be employed to direct the formation of spherical vs. cubic nanoparticles. This is consistent with previous studies which demonstrated that the flow of Ar and He gas in the aggregation region may be utilized to direct the core–shell morphology of Cu–Au nanoparticles.107 A similar influence of magnetron power and aggregation length on nanoparticle morphology was also reported recently by Palmer and co-workers.108
 Fig. 6  Low (a) and high (b) magnification scanning transmission electron microscopy images obtained for 4 × 104 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 5 nm Mo nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. Low (c) and high (d) magnification images obtained for 2 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 8 nm V nanoparticles soft landed onto a carbon grid. Note the monodispersity in size and core–shell structure of the Mo nanoparticles as well as the cubic morphology of the V nanoparticles. 
As well as preparing single metal nanoparticles with selected size and shape, and bimetallic nanoparticles with defined elemental composition, it is also desirable to control how the different elements are distributed spatially within individual nanoparticles. In particular, formation of core–shell particles comprised of one metal surrounded by a second element is particularly promising for applications in catalysis. For instance, for many fuel cell reactions the most effective catalyst material is still platinum dispersed in the nanoparticulate form. Unfortunately, platinum is so expensive that it is cost prohibitive to waste it in the core of nanoparticles where it does not promote catalysis. Correspondingly, there has been substantial effort directed towards coating a thin layer of active precious metals such as platinum around a core of a cheap less noble metal (typically an early transition metal). Theoretical calculations have also predicted that the thickness of the platinum shell and the elemental composition of the core region may be used as parameters to tune the overall catalytic efficiency of the nanoparticles.109,110 To examine the capabilities of the magnetron sputtering source to prepare core–shell nanoparticles we soft landed 3 × 105 ions μm−2 of size-selected 7 nm Pt/V nanoparticles onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. These particles were synthesized by DC sputtering one 1′′ Pt target at a current of 70 mA and one 1′′ V target at a current of 90 mA in a flow of 35 sccm Ar and 50 sccm He. The linear translator was set at a position of 30 mm in the aggregation region. The relatively large size of the Pt/V nanoparticles may be attributed to the high sputtering yield of Pt93 combined with the large sputtering currents used in this deposition. A wide-frame STEM image of the bimetallic nanoparticles is presented in Fig. 7a. Close inspection of this electron micrograph reveals that the particles are all of similar size and morphology. While some aggregation of the particles has clearly occurred, the individual particles making up each aggregate are still resolved. To better characterize the spatial distribution of the elements within these individual nanoparticles a representative particle was selected and imaged at higher magnification. The near-field STEM image, presented in Fig. 7b, reveals a spherical particle with substantially higher Z-contrast at the edges and lower Z-contrast at the center. This observation is consistent with the presence of a higher atomic number element (Pt) in the shell region and the lower atomic number element (V) in the core. To further support these claims made based on the Z-contrast imaging, an EELS spectroscopy line profile was obtained across the particle shown in Fig. 7b. The results of the EELS line scan are presented in Fig. 7c. It is clear from the line profile that Pt is enriched in the shell region and exhibits a decrease in abundance in the central core of the particle. At the same time, the V is observed to be less abundant in the shell region and enhanced in abundance in the core of the particle. Based on characterization with both STEM and EELS, we conclude that magnetron sputtering combined with ion soft landing may be used to prepare bare core–shell nanoparticles of noble and non-noble metals. It is expected that core–shell nanoparticles such as these will find widespread applications in fuel cells and in heterogeneous catalysis in general.111
 Fig. 7  Low (a) and high (b) magnification scanning transmission electron microscopy images obtained for 3 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 7 nm Pt/V alloy nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. Electron energy loss spectroscopy line profile (c) across a representative nanoparticle. Note the increased Z-contrast of the shell of the nanoparticle and the enrichment of platinum and vanadium at the shell and core, respectively. Black line = Pt, blue line = V. 
Conclusion
Employing a suite of complementary characterization techniques including AFM, SEM, STEM, and EELS we have examined the size, coverage, and morphology of bare size-selected single-metal and bimetallic alloy nanoparticles synthesized using a customized multi-target magnetron sputtering/gas aggregation source that facilitates intimate mixing of different elements. On flat surfaces at relatively low coverage it is demonstrated with AFM that the soft landed nanoparticles bind randomly to the substrate with only a minor distortion of their gas-phase structure. In comparison, on stepped surfaces at intermediate coverage the soft landed nanoparticles are shown to bind preferentially along the step edges forming extended linear chains of particles. Furthermore, it is demonstrated that a second layer of nanoparticles forms at the step edges on these surfaces before the terrace sites are filled. At the highest coverage examined in this study, the nanoparticles are shown to form a dense layer on flat surfaces with features that vary in height from one layer up to seven layers of vertically stacked nanoparticles. SEM images illustrate that soft landing may be used to form extended continuous films of nanoparticles on relatively defect free surfaces. However, on one surface with large imperfections the nanoparticles are found to clump around the defect site creating neighboring zones that are largely devoid of particles. High resolution STEM imaging demonstrates that nanoparticles may be formed with spherical or cubic morphology by varying the flow rate of Ar and He in the source. Finally, in addition to providing control over the surface coverage and size of nanoparticles, it is shown that this physical approach may be used to prepare species with well-defined core–shell morphologies that are highly sought after for applications in catalysis. Collectively, the results presented herein demonstrate that magnetron sputtering/gas aggregation in a modified commercial source is a versatile method for preparing highly dispersed bare nanoparticles on surfaces that are free of the complications resulting from synthesis in solution with ligands.
Acknowledgements
GEJ acknowledges support from the Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL). JL acknowledges support from the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences & Biosciences of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). RC acknowledges support from the William R. Wiley postdoctoral fellowship. This work was performed using EMSL, a national scientific user facility sponsored by the Department of Energy's Office of Biological and Environmental Research and located at PNNL. PNNL is operated by Battelle for the U.S. DOE.
References
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12663–12676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Cuenya, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3127–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brack, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 677–732 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Deheer, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65, 611–676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riskin, R. Tel-Vered and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1387–1391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Q. Liu, C. H. Lu and I. Willner, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7278–7286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ghosh, G. Han, M. De, C. K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1307–1315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, A. M. Gole, J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, A. M. Alkilany, E. C. Goldsmith and S. C. Baxter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1721–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2115–2120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Li, Y. L. Wu and B. S. Ong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3266–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Li and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2289–2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Baletto and R. Ferrando, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2005, 77, 371–423 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jortner, Z. Phys. D: At., Mol. Clusters, 1992, 24, 247–275 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kulkarni, R. J. Lobo-Lapidus and B. C. Gates, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5997–6015 RSC .
D. P. Anderson, R. H. Adnan, J. F. Alvino, O. Shipper, B. Donoeva, J. Y. Ruzicka, H. Al Qahtani, H. H. Harris, B. Cowie, J. B. Aitken, V. B. Golovko, G. F. Metha and G. G. Andersson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14806–14813 RSC .
D. P. Anderson, J. F. Alvino, A. Gentleman, H. Al Qahtani, L. Thomsen, M. I. J. Polson, G. F. Metha, V. B. Golovko and G. G. Andersson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3917–3929 RSC .
A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely, A. F. Carley, P. Landon and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2008, 321, 1331–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Turner, V. B. Golovko, O. P. H. Vaughan, P. Abdulkin, A. Berenguer-Murcia, M. S. Tikhov, B. F. G. Johnson and R. M. Lambert, Nature, 2008, 454, 981–U931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Crabtree and J. L. Sarrao, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 1079–1088 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Claridge, A. W. Castleman, S. N. Khanna, C. B. Murray, A. Sen and P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 244–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nesselberger, M. Roefzaad, R. F. Hamou, P. U. Biedermann, F. F. Schweinberger, S. Kunz, K. Schloegl, G. K. H. Wiberg, S. Ashton, U. Heiz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and M. Arenz, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 919–924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ortiz and S. E. Skrabalak, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6649–6659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Qian, M. Z. Zhu, Z. K. Wu and R. C. Jin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1470–1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Huang, Q. Hua and T. Cao, Catal. Lett., 2014, 144, 1355–1369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Menard, F. T. Xu, R. G. Nuzzo and J. C. Yang, J. Catal., 2006, 243, 64–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kilmartin, R. Sarip, R. Grau-Crespo, D. Di Tommaso, G. Hogarth, C. Prestipino and G. Sankar, Acs Catal., 2012, 2, 957–963 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Lopez-Sanchez, N. Dimitratos, C. Hammond, G. L. Brett, L. Kesavan, S. White, P. Miedziak, R. Tiruvalam, R. L. Jenkins, A. F. Carley, D. Knight, C. J. Kiely and G. J. Hutchings, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 551–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Jin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 343–362 RSC .
M. F. Bertino, Z. M. Sun, R. Zhang and L. S. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21416–21418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pettibone and J. W. Hudgens, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2989–3002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Serna and B. C. Gates, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2612–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Martin, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 4426–4432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Baker, S. C. Thornton, K. W. Edmonds, M. J. Maher, C. Norris and C. Binns, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2000, 71, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Dietz, M. A. Duncan, D. E. Powers and R. E. Smalley, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 74, 6511–6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Duncan, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83 Search PubMed .
H. Haberland, M. Karrais and M. Mall, Z. Phys. D: At., Mol. Clusters, 1991, 20, 413–415 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pratontep, S. J. Carroll, C. Xirouchaki, M. Streun and R. E. Palmer, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2005, 76 Search PubMed .
M. H. Schaffner, J. F. Jeanneret, F. Patthey and W. D. Schneider, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1998, 31, 3177–3184 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Siekmann, C. Luder, J. Faehrmann, H. O. Lutz and K. H. Meiwesbroer, Z. Phys. D: At., Mol. Clusters, 1991, 20, 417–420 CrossRef CAS .
F. Furche, R. Ahlrichs, P. Weis, C. Jacob, S. Gilb, T. Bierweiler and M. M. Kappes, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 6982–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Bohme and H. Schwarz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2336–2354 CrossRef PubMed .
P. B. Armentrout, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 423–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Zhai and L. S. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 500, 185–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yin, E. Tyo, K. Kuchta, B. von Issendorff and S. Vajda, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140 Search PubMed .
C. C. Yen, D. Y. Wang, L. S. Chang, M. H. Shih and H. C. Shih, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 4717–4720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, M. Yu, W. Li, H. H. Ji, L. M. Ren, K. Zhan, R. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Y. Wang, J. Y. Zhang and H. Oka, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2006, 251, 390–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Kortshagen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42 Search PubMed .
D. Vollath, J. Nanopart. Res., 2008, 10, 39–57 CrossRef CAS .
H. Haberland, M. Karrais, M. Mall and Y. Thurner, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1992, 10, 3266–3271 CAS .
T. Momin and A. Bhowmick, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2010, 81 Search PubMed .
A. Majumdar, D. Kopp, M. Ganeva, D. Datta, S. Bhattacharyya and R. Hippler, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80 Search PubMed .
V. Stranak, S. Block, S. Drache, Z. Hubicka, C. A. Helm, L. Jastrabik, M. Tichy and R. Hippler, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2011, 205, 2755–2762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Zhang, H. Tsunoyama, H. Akatsuka, H. Sekiya, T. Nagase and A. Nakajima, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10211–10217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Drache, V. Stranak, F. Berg, Z. Hubicka, M. Tichy, C. A. Helm and R. Hippler, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1189–1193 CrossRef CAS .
L. Martinez, M. Diaz, E. Roman, M. Ruano, D. Llamosa and Y. Huttel, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11241–11249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, C. Cassidy, P. Grammatikopoulos, F. Djurabekova, K. Nordlund and M. Sowwan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 13869–13875 CAS .
A. Dollinger, L. Stolch, Y. Luo, M. Beck, C. H. Strobel, M. Hagner, S. Dilger, M. Bein, S. Polarz, G. F. Gantefoer, Y. D. Kim and S. Proch, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11017–11023 RSC .
C. Strebel, S. Murphy, R. M. Nielsen, J. H. Nielsen and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8005–8012 RSC .
M. W. Majeski, I. L. Bolotin and L. Hanley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12901–12908 CAS .
H. M. Al Dosari and A. I. Ayesh, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114 Search PubMed .
B. Balamurugan, R. Skomski, X. Z. Li, V. R. Shah, G. C. Hadjipanayis, J. E. Shield and D. J. Sellmyer, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109 Search PubMed .
D. L. Perez, A. Espinosa, L. Martinez, E. Roman, C. Ballesteros, A. Mayoral, M. Garcia-Hernandez and Y. Huttel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3101–3108 Search PubMed .
E. Verrelli, D. Tsoukalas, K. Giannakopoulos, D. Kouvatsos, P. Normand and D. E. Ioannou, Microelectron. Eng., 2007, 84, 1994–1997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Wepasnick, X. Li, T. Mangler, S. Noessner, C. Wolke, M. Grossmann, G. Gantefoer, D. H. Fairbrother and K. H. Bowen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12299–12307 CAS .
V. N. Popok, I. Barke, E. E. B. Campbell and K. H. Meiwes-Broer, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 347–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Gracia-Pinilla, E. Perez-Tijerina, J. A. Garcia, C. Fernandez-Navarro, A. Tlahuice-Flores, S. Mejia-Rosales, J. M. Montejano-Carrizales and M. Jose-Yacaman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13492–13498 CAS .
A. Serov, A. Choukourov, I. Melnichuk, A. Shelemin, A. Kuzminova, O. Kylian, J. Hanus, J. Kousal, M. Drabik, D. Slavinska and H. Biederman, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 254, 319–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Jackson, K. Baldwin, L. Muller, V. M. Womack, J. A. Schultz, C. Balaban and A. S. Woods, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2014, 406, 1377–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, W. Shen, B. Das, Y. Y. Li and G. W. Qin, Rsc Adv., 2014, 4, 22660–22668 RSC .
G. E. Johnson, C. Wang, T. Priest and J. Laskin, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 8069–8072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, T. Priest and J. Laskin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 573–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, Q. C. Hu and J. Laskin, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2011, 4, 83–104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Johnson, T. Priest and J. Laskin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24977–24986 CAS .
V. Franchetti, B. H. Solka, W. E. Baitinger, J. W. Amy and R. G. Cooks, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. Ion Processes, 1977, 23, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Miller, H. Luo, S. J. Pachuta and R. G. Cooks, Science, 1997, 275, 1447–1450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Laskin, P. Wang and O. Hadjar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1079–1090 RSC .
Z. Ouyang, Z. Takats, T. A. Blake, B. Gologan, A. J. Guymon, J. M. Wiseman, J. C. Oliver, V. J. Davisson and R. G. Cooks, Science, 2003, 301, 1351–1354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mazzei, G. Favero, M. Frasconi, A. Tata, N. Tuccitto, A. Licciardello and F. Pepi, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 5937–5944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Deng, N. Thontasen, N. Malinowski, G. Rinke, L. Harnau, S. Rauschenbach and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2452–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Mikhailov, T. H. Mize, J. L. P. Benesch and C. V. Robinson, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 8321–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Siuzdak, B. Bothner, M. Yeager, C. Brugidou, C. M. Fauquet, K. Hoey and C. M. Chang, Chem. Biol., 1996, 3, 45–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagaoka, K. Ikemoto, K. Horiuchi and A. Nakajima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18719–18727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kahle, Z. T. Deng, N. Malinowski, C. Tonnoir, A. Forment-Aliaga, N. Thontasen, G. Rinke, D. Le, V. Turkowski, T. S. Rahman, S. Rauschenbach, M. Ternes and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 518–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Ayesh, N. Qamhieh, H. Ghamlouche, S. Thaker and M. El-Shaer, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107 Search PubMed .
S. Duffe, T. Irawan, M. Bieletzki, T. Richter, B. Sieben, C. Yin, B. Issendorff, M. Moseler and H. Hovel, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2007, 45, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
E. Perez-Tijerina, M. A. Gracia-Pinilla, S. Mejia-Rosales, U. Ortiz-Mendez, A. Torres and M. Jose-Yacaman, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 138, 353–362 RSC .
K. D. D. Gunaratne, G. E. Johnson, A. Andersen, D. Du, W. Y. Zhang, V. Prabhakaran, Y. H. Lin and J. Laskin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27611–27622 CAS .
S. H. Baker, S. C. Thornton, A. M. Keen, T. I. Preston, C. Norris, K. W. Edmonds and C. Binns, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1997, 68, 1853–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Horcas, R. Fernandez, J. M. Gomez-Rodriguez, J. Colchero, J. Gomez-Herrero and A. M. Baro, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2007, 78 Search PubMed .
M. Getzlaff, A. Kleibert, R. Methling, J. Bansmann and K. H. Meiwes-Broer, Surf. Sci., 2004, 566, 332–336 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Seah, Thin Solid Films, 1981, 81, 279–287 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Carroll, K. Seeger and R. E. Palmer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 305–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Smoluchowski, Phys. Rev., 1941, 60, 661–674 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. H. Sykes, P. Han, S. A. Kandel, K. F. Kelly, G. S. McCarty and P. S. Weiss, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 945–953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, X. Chen, N. Lu and L. Chi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3009–3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, P. Grammatikopoulos, C. Cassidy, M. Benelmekki, M. Bohra, Z. Hawash, K. W. Baughman and M. Sowwan, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16 Search PubMed .
O. Polonskyi, O. Kylian, M. Drabik, J. Kousal, P. Solar, A. Artemenko, J. Cechvala, A. Choukourov, D. Slavinska and H. Biederman, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 3352–3360 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Braga, V. R. Coluci, S. B. Legoas, R. Giro, D. S. Galvao and R. H. Baughman, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 881–884 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Zhu, R. A. Outlaw, M. Bagge-Hansen, H. J. Chen and D. M. Manos, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2526–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, Y. Kawazoe and K. R. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1989–1996 CrossRef CAS .
B. Prevel, L. Bardotti, S. Fanget, A. Hannour, P. Melinon, A. Perez, J. Gierak, G. Faini, E. Bourhis and D. Mailly, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 226, 173–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hayakawa, H. Yasumatsu and T. Koudow, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2009, 52, 95–98 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Zhou and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 602–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Shyjumon, M. Gopinadhan, C. A. Helm, B. M. Smirnov and R. Hippler, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 500, 41–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yin, Z. W. Wang and R. E. Palmer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10325–10327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Plant, L. Cao and R. E. Palmer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7559–7562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Yang, M. B. Vukmirovic, D. Su, K. Sasaki, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, S. J. Liao and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1748–1753 CAS .
L. Zhang, R. Iyyamperumal, D. F. Yancey, R. M. Crooks and G. Henkelman, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9168–9172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Guo, S. Zhang and S. H. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8526–8544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06758dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic diagram of the complete nanocluster deposition system including the Nanogen-Trio nanoparticle source from Mantis Deposition, Ltd. Note the presence of three separate sputtering targets on the same linear translator within one region of gas aggregation. The insert illustrates the surface of the magnetron head where three targets may be sputtered simultaneously to generate vapors which are swept to the center by Ar gas.	 

V	4	50	5	80	NA	30	280	30	1 × 105
Pt/Ti	8	40	10	30	50	40	700	60	4 × 105
Ti	7	50	25	90	NA	40	430	110	2 × 106
V/Ti	5	50	2.5	70	70	75	310	60	3 × 105
Mo	5	80	70	100	NA	60	230	20	4 × 104
V	8	35	10	100	NA	50	180	60	2 × 105
Pt/V	7	35	50	70	90	30	380	60	3 × 105

 	Fig. 2  Wide field (5 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 1 × 105 ions μm−2 of size-selected anionic 4 nm V nanoparticles soft landed onto glassy carbon. Higher magnification (2 μm2) image (c) and height profile (d) through selected V nanoparticles. Note the monodispersity in height and random spatial distribution of V nanoparticles on the surface of glassy carbon at low coverage.	 

 	Fig. 3  Wide field (5 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 4 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 8 nm Pt/Ti alloy nanoparticles soft landed onto highly oriented pyrolytic graphite. Higher magnification (1 μm2) image (c) and height profile (d) through selected Pt/Ti nanoparticles. Note the bimodal distribution in height and linear alignment of nanoparticles along step edges on the surface of graphite at intermediate coverage.	 

 	Fig. 4  Wide field (5 μm2) tapping mode atomic force microscopy image (a) and surface topography distribution (b) obtained for 2 × 106 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 7 nm Ti nanoparticles soft landed onto Si(100). Higher magnification (1 μm2) image (c) and height profile (d) through selected Ti nanoparticles. Note the broad distribution in height and extensive coverage of the substrate with nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 5  Low (a) and high (b) magnification scanning electron microscopy images obtained for 3 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 5 nm V/Ti alloy nanoparticles soft landed onto pristine highly oriented pyrolytic graphite. Low (c) and high (d) magnification images of nanoparticles soft landed at a surface imperfection possibly consisting of layers of delaminated graphite. Note the even coverage on the pristine substrate and the aggregation of nanoparticles around the defect to create an adjacent depletion zone.	 

 	Fig. 6  Low (a) and high (b) magnification scanning transmission electron microscopy images obtained for 4 × 104 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 5 nm Mo nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. Low (c) and high (d) magnification images obtained for 2 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 8 nm V nanoparticles soft landed onto a carbon grid. Note the monodispersity in size and core–shell structure of the Mo nanoparticles as well as the cubic morphology of the V nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 7  Low (a) and high (b) magnification scanning transmission electron microscopy images obtained for 3 × 105 ions μm−2 size-selected anionic 7 nm Pt/V alloy nanoparticles soft landed onto a continuous carbon microscopy grid. Electron energy loss spectroscopy line profile (c) across a representative nanoparticle. Note the increased Z-contrast of the shell of the nanoparticle and the enrichment of platinum and vanadium at the shell and core, respectively. Black line = Pt, blue line = V.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4nr06758d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
