Rational catalyst design for oxygen evolution under acidic conditions: strategies toward enhanced electrocatalytic performance  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11982B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11982B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5890-5914Rational catalyst design for oxygen evolution under acidic conditions: strategies toward enhanced electrocatalytic performance

        
          
            Yu 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojuan 
            Zhu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Guanglu 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Peidong 
            Shi
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            An-Liang 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory for Colloid and Interface Chemistry Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of Crystal Materials, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, P. R. China. E-mail: alwang@sdu.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Collaborative Innovation Center of Functionalized Probes for Chemical Imaging in Universities of Shandong, Key Laboratory of Molecular and Nano Probes, Ministry of Education, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, P. R. China
Received 
      10th December 2020
    , Accepted 15th January 2021First published on 16th January 2021AbstractElectrochemical water splitting can convert the electricity derived from renewable solar and wind energy into hydrogen energy, which is considered as a promising way for hydrogen production. In principle, water splitting under acidic conditions possesses many advantages, such as high ionic conductivity, few side reactions, high proton concentrations, low ohmic losses and compact system designs. However, under acidic conditions, only a limited range of electrocatalysts could survive, especially for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which needs a high potential. It remains a challenge to design and synthesize acidic OER electrocatalysts with high performance, which is intrinsically related to the electronic, surface and morphological structure of catalysts. Therefore, rational design of advanced OER catalysts is indispensable for superior performance. In this review, various design strategies for the development of desired catalysts with enhanced OER performance are comprehensively summarized, including defect engineering, structural manipulation, atomic arrangement tailoring, and interface regulation. The acidic OER mechanism and state-of-art OER catalysts, together with current issues, critical challenges and perspectives, are discussed. It is highly expected that this review will deepen the understanding of the acidic OER and guide us to synthesize more-efficient OER catalysts in the future.Yu ZhangYu Zhang obtained her M.S. degree from Shandong University in 2018. Currently, she is a PhD student at Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. An-Liang Wang. Her current research focuses on the synthesis of novel nanomaterials for oxygen evolution reactions.Xiaojuan ZhuXiaojuan Zhu obtained her M.S. degree from China West Normal University in 2020. Currently, she is a research assistant with Prof. An-Liang Wang. Her current research focuses on the synthesis of novel nanomaterials for nitrogen and nitrate reduction reactions.An-Liang WangAn-Liang Wang obtained his PhD from Sun Yat-sen University in 2016. He then moved and finished his post-doctoral training at Nanyang Technological University in 2018 with Prof. Zhang Hua. In September of 2018, he joined Shandong University as a professor. His research interests focus on the development of novel nanomaterials for electrocatalytic applications, including water splitting, fuel cells, and nitrogen and nitrate reduction reactions.
1. Introduction
With the depletion of fossil energy and worsening of environmental pollution, the search for sustainable and clean fuels to replace the traditional fossil fuels is becoming more urgent.1,2 Hydrogen energy has lots of advantages, such as high energy density and high power density and is free of pollution, which is considered to be a promising clean type of energy.3,4 Currently, the production of hydrogen is mainly from the reforming of coal, oil and natural gas, exploiting a large amount of fossil fuels, thus aggravating the energy crisis and environmental pollution, which goes against the original intention of hydrogen as clean energy.5–7 Therefore, it is desirable to find an economic and environmentally friendly way for the production of hydrogen.
Nowadays, the electricity from renewable wind and solar energy is taking up an increasing portion in the global energy infrastructure.8 However, the storage of these energies becomes quite important due to discontinuous acquisition. The conversion of electricity into hydrogen by electrochemical water splitting is expected to be an efficient way due to the merits of hydrogen energy mentioned above.9–12 The electrochemical water splitting can be proceeded in acidic, alkaline and neutral electrolytes.13–18 Under alkaline and neutral conditions, there exists lots of drawbacks, such as low ionic conductivity, the crossover of produced hydrogen and oxygen, limited electrolysis rate and low operating pressure.13,19 In contrast, water splitting under acidic conditions can not only eliminate those limitations, but also offer great advantages, such as lower ohmic losses, fewer side reactions, higher efficiency and a larger partial load range. For example, the acidic electrolyser can operate at current densities that are a factor of three to four higher than those under alkaline conditions and they are more stable towards load-cycling and shutdowns.20 Due to these mentioned advantages, water electrolyzers with proton exchange membranes (PEMs) under acidic conditions have been considered as the most promising hydrogen production technology.21 Unfortunately, the electrochemical water splitting is mainly hindered by the sluggish oxygen evolution reaction (OER) process with four-electron transfer occurring on the cathode, which needs electrocatalysts to expedite the reaction.22–26 Furthermore, most electrocatalysts cannot suffer a strong acidic environment together with high anodic potentials, causing dissolution or oxidative dissolution of electrocatalysts, which greatly limits the practical implementation of PEM water electrolysis.19,27,28 Accordingly, efficient and stable catalysts are required to expedite the OER process and enhance the water splitting efficiency.
So far, the state-of-the-art acidic OER electrocatalysts are RuO2 and IrO2.29,30 Compared with IrO2, RuO2 is much more active but easier to form RuO4 at applied OER potentials, which can be easily dissolved in solution, causing low stability.31,32 In opposite, IrO2 is much more stable but less active.33,34 In addition, Ru and Ir are platinum group metals (PGMs), especially Ir, which is an even more critical element than Ru and only produced in small amounts (<10 tonnes per year) as the by-product,20 greatly limiting their applications. Therefore, extensive efforts have been devoted towards exploring acidic OER catalysts with high activity, excellent stability and low cost. Various Ir-based and Ru-based catalysts have been developed, such as metal catalysts, oxide catalysts, perovskite (pyrochlore) catalysts and single atom catalysts, while a few catalysts based on non-precious metals and non-metals (e.g., transition metal-based materials and carbon-based materials) also exhibit comparable OER performance.
Given the rapid development in this hot research area during the past few years, it is necessary to update progress for various catalysts design strategies employed for improving OER performance. Recently, several reviews on OER electrocatalysts have been reported, mainly demonstrating OER mechanisms or different kinds of electrocatalysts.4,22,35 However, there is still no report about the comprehensive design strategies for highly efficient OER catalysts under acidic conditions. Therefore, it is extremely necessary to summarize and discuss the research advances in this aspect, revealing the underlying factors for the design and synthesis of high-performance OER electrocatalysts under acidic conditions.
In this review, we mainly focus on the rational design strategies of highly efficient OER electrocatalysts in acidic media. First, we begin with the introduction of the OER mechanism under acidic conditions, including the adsorbate evolution mechanism (AEM) and lattice-oxygen participation mechanism (LOM), which are demonstrated in detail to deeply understand the role of electrocatalysts in the OER process. Then, several design strategies for highly efficient OER electrocatalysts are put forward, including defect engineering (heteroatom doping, alloying formation, and vacancy creation), structural manipulation (morphology control and single atom design), atomic arrangement tailoring (crystal facet modification, crystal phase engineering, and amorphization modulation), and interface regulation (metal (oxide)–metal oxide interface regulation and metal (oxide)–carbon material interface regulation), as depicted in Fig. 1, the principles of each strategies with existing problems are also analyzed. Finally, critical challenges and future perspectives in this research field are provided.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of various design strategies for OER catalysts with high performance under acidic conditions. 
2. OER mechanism under acidic conditions
The OER is a four electron/proton transfer process with multiple electrochemical steps, including the breaking of H–O bonds and the formation of O–O bonds. It is well accepted that the OER can proceed through two different mechanisms: AEM and LOM. In the AEM process, a four proton-electron transfer reaction is centered on the metal active sites, as described in Fig. 2a.22,36–39 At each step, one proton is injected into the electrolyte and combined with one electron at the electrode. The formation of absorbed HO* produced by decomposition of water on the metal (M) site is the first step (eqn (1)), and then, HO* on the M site oxidizes into O* by losing one proton, which is the second step (eqn (2)). Subsequently, the intermediate HOO* is formed by absorbing water (eqn (3)), followed by releasing an O2 molecule and recovering back to form a fresh M site (eqn (4)). The absorption strengths between active sites and HO*, O*, HOO* intermediates determine the reaction barriers and the overpotential for the OER. It is noted that the adsorption energies of OER intermediates are linearly correlated, in particular, the HOO* and HO* intermediates bind the catalyst surface through one oxygen atom via a single bond.36 Man et al. used density functional theory (DFT) calculations to investigate the origin of overpotential for a wide range of oxides catalysts, and identified a universal scaling relationship between the binding energy of HOO* and HO* with a constant difference (ΔGHOO* − ΔGHO*) of 3.2 ± 0.2 eV for the binding site of either metals or oxides. Moreover, the OER activity (overpotential) and standard free energy of ΔGO* − ΔGHO* followed a volcano type relationship (Fig. 2b).36 According to the Sabatier principle, the adsorption strength of the key intermediates for an ideal catalyst should be neither too strong nor too weak. The overpotential is limited by the formation of HOO* species on the surfaces that bind oxygen too strongly, whereas for surfaces that bind oxygen too weakly, the overpotential is limited by the oxidation of HO*. Therefore, the plot of overpotential as a function of ΔGO* − ΔGHO* leads to the universal volcano-shaped relationship independent of the catalytic materials. * + H2O → HO* + e− + H+(1) HO* → O* + e− + H+(2) O* + H2O → HOO* + e− + H+(3) HOO* → O2 + * + e− + H+(4)
 Fig. 2  (a) AEM with oxygen from the electrolyte. (b) Volcano curve of the theoretical overpotential (η) against the standard free energy of ΔGO* − ΔGHO* based on the DFT calculations. (c) LOM with one oxygen atom of oxygen molecular derived from the catalyst. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) LOM with entire oxygen atoms of oxygen molecules derived from the catalyst. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The potential dependence of the 16O18O fraction in the oxygen produced on Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ. (f) The fraction of 16O18O in the oxygen produced potentiostatically in 0.1 M HClO4 on RuO2 and Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ electrodes. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2009, Elsevier. 
With an increase in covalency, the ability to bind with oxygen becomes weak; thus, direct O–O bonding with the reversible formation of oxygen vacancies becomes favorable, which leads to the occurrence of LOM.40–42 LOM can be divided into two reaction pathways based on one oxygen atom or entire oxygen atoms of oxygen molecular originating from catalysts.22,43 For one oxygen atom of the oxygen molecule derived from the catalyst (Fig. 2c), the first two steps are the same as those in the AEM process. In the third step, the O* species is combined with lattice oxygen in the catalyst to form an O2 molecule, leaving oxygen vacancies in the crystal structure of the catalyst. Subsequently, the oxygen vacancy is renovated by the water molecule, forming HO* on the M site of M–O. At the last step, the proton is released to obtain refreshed M active sites. For all oxygen atoms of the oxygen molecule derived from catalysts, LOM proceeds on two neighboring M sites, different from that in AEM, which proceeds on a single M site (Fig. 2d). First, two HO* on M sites undergo deprotonation, forming two metal-oxo species. Subsequently, the two oxo species couple to form an O–O bond. Finally, oxygen gas is released with the exposure of two oxygen vacancies, which are occupied by OH−.
According to the AEM, the minimum overpotential is about 0.37 V, which causes a huge obstacle for water splitting.36 Compared with the AEM, LOM may result in a lower reaction barrier and thus lower overpotential.35,44 However, catalysts may be susceptible to performance degradation during the acidic OER process due to the formation and renovation of oxygen vacancies. It is noted that LOM was involved in less-crystalline, amorphous RuO2 or at nanocrystalline particles with a low-coordinated surface and large surface area-to-bulk ratios, while AEM occurred on the oriented RuO2 films.32,45,46 Moreover, the applied potential and compositions of catalysts can greatly influence the mechanism. Macounova et al.46 investigated the mechanism of the OER on RuO2 and Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ using differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS), and the results demonstrated that the mechanism was sensitive to the applied potential. Below 1.12 V vs. the saturated calomel electrode (SCE), all the evolved oxygen originated from the electrolyte solution, indicating AEM, while at higher potentials, LOM involving the exchange of the oxygen between the electrolyte and catalyst occurred (Fig. 2e). Surprisingly, the extent of the oxygen exchange for Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ was much higher than that for RuO2, indicating the much higher reactivity of lattice oxygen in Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ (Fig. 2f). Similarly, Alexandrov et al.44 employed DFT calculations to reveal that the AEM was preferred on prefect RuO2, while the creation of metal vacancies on RuO2 led to LOM with much lower overpotential. Moreover, the introduction of Ni and Co dopants into RuO2 could also promote the LOM. However, compared with RuO2, IrO2 was less LOM active, which resulted in better stability under acidic conditions.
The catalyst design can be based on the fundamental understanding of the OER mechanism and the origin of the reaction overpotential. According to the OER mechanism, the catalyst with oxygen binding that is neither too strong nor too weak, leading to an optimal value of ΔGO* − ΔGHO*, shows maximum activity. Therefore, it is possible to obtain an excellently active catalyst by regulating the electronic structure to optimize oxygen binding and the value of ΔGO* − ΔGHO*. Moreover, the amount of exposed active sites plays an important role in the surface related catalytic reactions. Therefore, in the following part, four main catalyst design strategies are discussed in detail, including defect engineering, structural manipulation, atomic arrangement tailoring and interface regulation. It is noted that most catalysts discussed below are Ir and Ru based catalysts due to their outstanding activity and stability, while few non-precious metal and non-metal based catalysts are also presented.
3. Defect engineering
Defect engineering is considered as an efficient approach to tailoring the surface chemistry properties, featuring abundant active sites and suitable binding energies, thus leading to substantial enhancements of catalytic performance.47,48 In the case of the OER under acidic conditions, defects introduced by heteroatom doping, alloying formation and vacancy creation show great potential for performance enhancement.
3.1. Heteroatom doping
Heteroatom doping is an effective approach to tailoring the electronic structures, binding strength of intermediates and the surface compositions of catalysts, which could modify the reaction mechanism and lower the free energy barrier, thus enhancing performance in many catalytic reactions.49–52
For the electrocatalytic OER under acidic conditions, heteroatom doping into RuO2 and IrO2 is mostly studied, in which most dopants are metal atoms, while few non-metal atoms as dopants are also investigated. For metal atom doping, Ni, Co, Cu, Ce, Mn, etc. are usually selected as heteroatoms to modify the electrocatalytic performance of RuO2 or IrO2.53–61 Alexandrov et al.44 used DFT calculations to reveal that the dopants (e.g., Ni and Co) of RuO2 could promote the LOM over AEM, resulting in improved performance towards OER. In another work, Chen et al.54 successfully prepared Cu-doped RuO2 hollow porous polyhedra through one-step annealing of Ru-exchanged Cu-BTC derivatives in air (Fig. 3a). Electrochemical evaluations indicated the Cu doped RuO2 with an annealing temperature of 300 °C possessed the best OER activity, with a low overpotential of 188 mV at 10 mA cm−2 in acidic media (Fig. 3b) and excellent stability (Fig. 3c, with an increase of 83 mV in an 8 h chronopotentiometric test at current density of 10 mA cm−2). DFT calculations revealed that Cu doping could alter the electronic structure and lower the energy barrier of O* transformation into HOO*, thus improving the OER performance (Fig. 3d). Besides the Cu dopant, doping other metal atoms, such as Cr, Mn, and Ni, into RuO2 was considered, which exhibited enhanced OER performance. Similarly, IrO2 with metal atoms (Ni, Co, Ce, and Cu) as dopants could also exhibit enhanced OER performance.60,61 Sun et al. reported Cu-doped IrO2 as an excellent OER catalyst.61 In this study, CuxIr1−xOδ with different Ir fractions was first synthesized by the hydrothermal method, which was subsequently annealed with high temperature to achieve Cu–IrO2. Experimental tests indicated that Cu doping into IrO2 had a strong Jahn–Teller effect due to the CuO6 octahedron and induced partial oxygen defects in the lattice that changed the IrO6 octahedral geometric structure, which resulted in enhanced OER performance. Apart from single metal element doping, it is found that co-doping two metal elements could further improve the OER performance.62,63 Yang et al.63 reported the synthesis of Ni and Co co-doping into IrO2 by the hydrothermal method and annealing treatment, which could not only reduce the usage of Ir but also greatly enhance the performance. In the case of non-metal doping, F as the dopant of IrO2, reported by Kumta et al., was found to enhance the OER performance.64,65
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route and the model of the Cu-doped RuO2 hollow porous polyhedron. (b) LSV curves of samples synthesized at different temperatures. (c) Chronopotentiometric test at a fixed current density of 10 mA cm−2. (d) Free energy profile of the OER on the (110) and (111) surfaces. External potential of 1.23 V was considered. Structures of key intermediates are shown in the insets. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic illustration for the incorporation of Ir dopants into the STO matrix. (f) LSV curves of Ir-STO, STO and IrO2 in 0.1 M HClO4. (g) Gibbs free energy diagrams for the OER on the Ti site in STO (blue) and Ti4 site in Ir-STO (green). (e–g) Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Heteroatom doping in RuO2 and IrO2 can slightly lower the usage of precious metals, however, the cost of catalysts is still high as that of the precious metals (Ir or Ru) taking up the main parts of catalysts. In order to further reduce the usage of precious metals and cost of catalysts, various iridate or ruthenate oxides, such as perovskite (ABO3 type)66–70 or pyrochlore (A2B2O7)71–74 compounds as OER catalysts have attracted a great deal of attention due to their tunable structures and compositions and low content of precious metals, in which the Ir or Ru atom occupies the B site. Strikingly, it is found that by the introduction of other metal dopants, taking up the A site or B site, the performance can be enhanced greatly, while the usage of Ir or Ru is further reduced.75–79 In the case of dopants taking up the A site, María Retuerto et al.80 revealed that Na doping in SrRuO3, which was prepared by sol–gel chemistry followed by thermal treatment in air, enhanced both activity and stability towards the OER under acidic conditions. DFT calculations demonstrated that Na doping increased the oxidation of Ru and shifted the band center between the O 2p and Ru 3d, thereby weakening the adsorption bond strength between Ru centers and oxygenated intermediates, which led to optimal activity. In addition, the doping effect of Na stabilized the Ru metal center, resulting in OER stability improvement. Moreover, dopants taking up the B site could render the formation of double perovskites or pyrochlore,68,75,76 which favors the improvement of OER performance. Koper et al.75 reported a class of catalysts based on Ba2IrMO6 double perovskites (M = Y, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, and Tb) synthesized by the standard solid–state reactions, in which BaCO3, MxOy and metallic Ir powder were mixed together and heated to high temperature in air. Electrochemical evaluations indicated that the OER performance of Ba2IrMO6 double perovskites greatly depended on the cation in the B-site, with the order Ce ∼ Tb ∼ Y < La ∼ Pr < Nd. The enhanced activity and excellent stability were due to the perovskite-like network optimizing the orbital interaction between the B site and O2−, and allowing adjustment of B–O bond distances to accommodate local charge changes, the breathing mode displacement of oxygen in the perovskite-like network would favour lattice adjustments, which did not exist in IrO2.
Apart from the above-mentioned heteroatom doping into Ir or Ru based oxides, Ir or Ru as the dopant of non-precious metal compounds is another efficient way to improve the performance and lower the cost of catalysts. Zou et al. reported Ir doping into SrTiO3 (Ir-STO) synthesized by a polymerized complex method,67 which contained 57 wt% less Ir relative to IrO2 (Fig. 3e). Electrochemical evaluations indicated that Ir-STO exhibited 10 times higher activity than commercial IrO2, with a current density of 43 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 295 mV (Fig. 3f). Theoretical calculations revealed that the incorporation of Ir in SrTiO3 activated the intrinsically inert Ti sites, strengthening the surface oxygen adsorption on Ti sites (Fig. 3g). Similarly, Ir doping in nickel cobaltite81 also exhibited high mass specific OER activity and excellent durability under acidic conditions.
Except for the catalysts containing Ir or Ru, researchers found that catalysts based on non-precious metal composites could also exhibit acceptable OER performance. For instance, transition metal oxides, such as Co3O4 (ref. 82) and MnO2,83,84 possessed OER performance under acidic conditions.85 Similarly, by doping heteroatoms, such as Ti, Ge, and Ag, the OER performance could be enhanced.85,86 Stephens et al.86 predicted by DFT calculations that GeO2-terminated and TiO2-terminated MnO2 could improve the stability of MnO2. Based on the theoretical insight, they synthesized a Ti doped MnO2 nano-film, which exhibited unprecedented OER activity for non-noble metal oxides under acidic conditions. The Ti doping could decrease the metal loss during the OER process; thus, only a small drop in catalytic activity and improved stability were achieved.
Moreover, metal-free materials, especially carbon-based materials, have attracted huge attention in various electrocatalysis reactions due to their high conductivity, excellent stability and earth abundance. Pure carbon materials possess almost no activity due to their nonpolar characteristics, while the introduction of heteroatoms into carbon materials could substantially enhance their activity in various catalytic reactions.87–89 In the case of the acidic OER, some pioneering studies have demonstrated the positive effect of heteroatom doping in carbon materials on OER performance.90–92 The study by Ozkan et al.90 revealed that N doped carbon nanostructures (CNx) possessed satisfactory OER activity with 1.62 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (VRHE) at 10 mA cm−2, and the OER activity of CNx enhanced with the increase of pyridinic-N content. However, it still needed in-depth investigations to confirm whether pyridinic-N species or adjacent C-atoms were the active sites. Lately, Feng et al. reported a novel metal-free electrocatalyst–oxygen-functionalized electrochemically exfoliated graphene nanosheet array,91 which was synthesized by physical dilation treatment of graphite, followed by electrochemical activation in concentrated sulfuric acid. This metal free electrocatalyst exhibited superior activity and stability, which was mainly due to the oxygen introduction of the graphene nanosheet array, and the active sites were the COOH species.
In spite of great achievements on heteroatom doping enhancing OER performance, several major challenges remain to be considered. First, the Ir and Ru based catalysts with heteroatom doping can improve the OER performance and lower the cost of catalysts. However, the doping elements, especially Ni, Co, and Zn, generally cannot endure the strong acidic conditions and high anodic potential; therefore, the dopants on the surface of catalysts can be easily dissolved, causing the activity degradation and the pollution of PEM. Second, the synthetic procedures of heteroatom doping catalysts normally need high temperature treatment, which easily causes sintering and aggregation of catalysts. Third, the OER performance of non-precious metal oxides and metal-free catalysts is still relatively low. Therefore, it still needs more investigations to improve the activity and stability of catalysts under acidic conditions.
3.2. Alloying formation
Alloying, which can be categorized into metal alloys and oxide alloys, could adjust the interfacial coordination environments of active sites; thus, the electronic structure could be tuned accordingly, which influences the binding energy between intermediates and active centers.93–95 Furthermore, when two or more metals or oxides with different lattice parameters form alloys, lattice distortions occur at the interfaces, changing the geometric and electronic structures. Therefore, alloying formation may be a promising way for performance enhancement. Plenty of investigations found that alloying formation could provide a straightforward method to reduce the usage of precious metal and improve the catalytic performance towards the acidic OER.
Most metal alloy catalysts towards the acidic OER are based on alloying Ir or Ru with other metals (M). In the case of Ir based alloys, most studies focused on IrM (M = Ni, Co, Cu, Ag, W, and Rh) binary alloys.96–105 Guo et al. reported the synthesis of an IrW alloy with a highly porous and uniform nanodendritic structure through a colloidal-chemical approach, using iridium chloride hydrate and tungsten carbonyl as precursors, cetyltrimethylammonium chloride as the surfactant, oleylamine as the solvent, and glucose as the reducing agent (Fig. 4a).105 In 0.1 M HClO4, the IrW alloy catalyst exhibited superior OER activity relative to Ir/C and Pt/C catalysts, with an onset potential of 1.45 VRHE (Fig. 4b). Moreover, the Tafel slope for the IrW alloy catalyst was much lower than that of other catalysts. Besides the enhanced OER activity, the IrW alloy catalyst possessed excellent stability, with almost unchanged polarization curves before and after a 3000-cycle cyclic voltammetry (CV) test, while for the Ir/C catalyst, the current density declined greatly (Fig. 4c). DFT calculations indicated the alloying Ir with W could stabilize the formed active IrO2 and lower the binding energy of the intermediate, which resulted in enhanced OER activity. From the projected density of states (DOS) results, the IrW alloy showed much larger overlapped area of Ir 5d and O 2p orbitals, indicating stronger interaction between Ir cations and O anions, which could enhance the anti-dissolution ability of Ir and stabilize the catalytic surface (Fig. 4d). Besides the binary alloys, Ir based ternary or high-entropy alloys could provide infinite possibilities for tuning the alloy's electronic properties and maximizing catalytic activities owing to the multiple element combinations.106,107 The IrRuCo ternary alloy,108 reported by Qiao et al., exhibited superior OER activity with a small overpotential of 235 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2. In a very recent study, Qiu et al.109 reported a nano-porous Al–Ni–Co–Ir–Mo high-entropy alloy with low Ir usage by a simple alloying–dealloying method, which exhibited excellent OER activity. Compared with Ir based alloys, the reports on Ru based alloys are comparatively few, which may be due to their low stability, caused by oxidative dissolution of Ru. Huang et al. reported RuNi nanosheet assemblies, which exhibited outstanding OER performance.110 In addition, alloying Ru with Co111 or Cu112 could also boost the acidic OER performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of IrW nanodendrites. (b) LSV curves; the inset shows the corresponding Tafel slopes. (c) LSV curves of IrW/C and Ir/C before and after durability test of 3000 cycles. Inset: TEM image of IrW NDs after the durability test. (d) Projected density of states of IrO2 (up) and W–IrO2 (bottom) with the overlapped states of Ir 5d (red) and O 2p (blue) denoted by the shaded area (yellow). (a–d) Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Cr0.6Ru0.4O2 electrocatalyst. (f) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image and EELS analysis (inset of i). (g) LSV curves of different catalysts. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Strikingly, two different oxides with the same crystalline structure and low lattice mismatch could form an oxide solid solution alloy, which could greatly enhance the OER performance.113–115 Chen et al.113 reported a CrxRu1−xO2 solid solution alloy with remarkable OER performance under acidic conditions (Fig. 4e). For the synthesis of the CrxRu1−xO2 alloy, a small amount of RuCl3 was loaded into the pores of Cr-MOF by the impregnation method, which was followed by annealing treatment at high temperature in air. The atomic-solution high-angle dark-field scanning transmission electron microscope (HAADF-STEM) image clearly displayed the well crystalized single nanocrystals (Fig. 4f). In addition, electron energy loss spectrum (EELS) analysis of a randomly selected region confirmed the coexistence of Ru and Cr atoms. Electrochemical tests indicated that the ratio of Cr greatly influenced the OER performance, in which Cr0.6Ru0.4O2 exhibited the highest activity with an overpotential of 178 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 4g). Besides, the Cr0.6Ru0.4O2 alloy possessed excellent stability, as shown by galvanostatic and CV tests. Experiments and DFT calculation results revealed that the electronic structure of RuO2 was modulated by Cr incorporation, rendering a low electron density and shortened Ru–O bond length, thus leading to high activity, while the enhanced stability was related to low occupation at the Fermi level. In addition, other solid solution alloys, such as CrxIr1−xO2,114 RuxIr1−xO2,116 and IrxSn1−xO2,117 were also developed, which exhibited enhanced OER performance under acidic conditions.
Great achievements were obtained for alloy catalysts with enhanced OER performance. However, there still exist many problems for alloy catalysts. First, the synthesis of precious metal-based alloys normally needs the assistance of surfactants, which are difficult to remove, causing the blocking of active sites, while the preparation of oxide alloys usually employs high temperature treatment, which easily causes aggregation and sintering of catalysts.
Second, some alloying elements, such as Ni, Co, and Zn, are usually not stable under acidic OER conditions and easily dissolve, thus leading to performance degradation. Finally, there is a lack of conductivity for the oxide alloys, which limits further application.
3.3. Vacancy creation
Recently, it is of growing importance to optimize the electrocatalytic performance of materials by creation of vacancies, including cationic and anionic vacancies, which can tailor the electronic structure, charge transport and surface adsorption capacity.118–121 For electrocatalytic OER under acidic conditions, some pioneering studies have explored the effect of vacancies on OER performance.55,122–124 Chen et al.122 developed defective RuO2 with O vacancies on carbon cloth (CC) (Fig. 5a). Electrochemical tests indicated that RuO2 with O vacancies possessed higher activity, smaller charge transfer resistance and larger electrochemical surface area, compared with RuO2/CC and commercial RuO2 (Fig. 5b–d). The negligible change in potential (19 mV) before and after the 20 h galvanostatic test indicated the robustness of RuO2 with O vacancies Fig. 5e. The DFT calculations revealed that the O vacancy could not only create more active sites to favor the OER but also alter the electronic structures of the existing five-coordinated Ru atoms to promote the intrinsic catalytic activity. It is worth noting that vacancy creation on non-precious metal oxides could also boost the OER performance. Alshareef et al.125 successfully synthesized the WO3 nanostructure with O vacancies by ultrafast plasma sputtering, which exhibited improved OER activity and stability under acidic conditions, and the enhanced OER performance originated from the existence of O vacancy.
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the synthetic route for defective RuO2 with oxygen vacancies. (b) LSV curves of defective RuO2/CC, RuO2/CC, and commercial RuO2/CC. (c) Nyquist plots of defective RuO2/CC and RuO2/CC. (d) Linear relationships between capacitive current and scan rate for defective RuO2/CC and RuO2/CC. (e) Stability test of defective RuO2/CC at a fixed current density of 10 mA cm−2. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
To date, the investigations for the effect of the vacancy on OER performance are still at infancy, and more studies are needed to address some key challenges. First, the effects of vacancy types (including the anionic and cationic vacancy) and concentrations of vacancies on the OER performance should be investigated. Second, insightful characterization and understandings of the vacancy effect are still at an initial stage. Third, it should be noted that the vacancies normally have a dynamic change over time and operation potential during the OER process. Therefore, theoretical calculations combined with advanced in situ or operando characterization techniques are highly recommended to probe the vacancy effect and underlying mechanism.
4. Structural manipulation
4.1. Morphology control
Controllable morphological manipulation of catalysts is an effective strategy for performance enhancement toward the acidic OER. Catalysts with various morphologies, such as one dimensional (1D) nanorod/nanotube/nanoneedles, 2D nanosheets, and 3D assembly/nano-array structures, have been designed and synthesized for enhanced OER performance. Among these morphologies, 1D nanomaterials have received extensive attention due to their unique physicochemical properties. For example, 1D nanostructures could offer direct transfer pathways, which could facilitate effective electron transport.126 In addition, they could provide sufficient interactions at the interface of electrolyte–catalyst–oxygen due to their large surface area, thus improving the mass transport.127,128 Based on these merits, 1D nanostructures as acidic OER electrocatalysts have attracted a great deal of attention.56,99,114,129–132 In this aspect, Lee and co-workers reported the synthesis of ultrafine IrO2 nanoneedles using a molten salt method by calcining the mixture of NaNO3, Ir chloride precursor and cysteamine at high temperature.133 The aspect ratio of nanoneedles can be variable by changing the amount of cysteamine, and were denoted as short nanoneedles (NN-S), medium length nanoneedles (NN-M) and long nanoneedles (NN-L) (Fig. 6a). Compared with NN-S, NN-M and IrO2 nanoparticles, the NN-L exhibited superior OER activity, with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 313 mV, which was due to the large surface area provided by ultrathin and long nanoneedles (Fig. 6b). Moreover, this ultrafine nanostructure possessed excellent stability (Fig. 6c). In a very recent study, Chen et al. reported the synthesis of hollow Ir nanotubes with a roughly porous surface by the self-template method, which exhibited outstanding OER performance under acidic conditions.130
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of IrO2 NN-L. (b) LSV curves of different catalysts. (c) LSV curves before and after the durability test. The inset shows chronopotentiometry curves measured at 10 mA cm−2 for 120 min (a–c) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) TEM image of NaRuO2 nanosheet (insets are the experimental (left) and simulated (right) SAED patterns of a nanosheet). (e) LSV curves (inset is the corresponding Tafel plot). (f) Perspective view of the two-nanosheet system employed in the calculations. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) HAADF-STEM image of the 3D Ir assembly. LSV curves (h) and Tafel plots (i) of different catalysts in 0.1 and 0.5 M HClO4 solutions. (g and h) Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with 1D nanostructures, ultrathin 2D nanostructures possess many unique advantages and a great deal of unprecedented physical, electronic, chemical and optical properties.134–137 For example, the ultrathin structure could provide plenty of unsaturated coordination and dangling bonds that can effectively stabilize reaction intermediates and lower activation energy barriers. Moreover, the large lateral size with few-layer thickness endows them with an ultrahigh specific area, favorable for performance enhancement. Meanwhile, the high exposure of surface atom makes them appropriate for surface modification and functionalization, thus offering new routes to engineer 2D nanostructures for various catalytic reactions. On the basis of these merits, 2D ultrafine nanostructures as OER catalysts have gained special attention, in which Ir nanosheets,138 IrOOH nanosheets,139 IrOx nanosheets,140 RuO2 nanosheets,141 and RuM (M = Cu, Co) alloy nanosheets142,143 exhibited enhanced OER performance. Bettina V. Lotsch et al.141 first demonstrated the superior performance of RuO2 nanosheets for the OER under acidic conditions, which were synthesized by exfoliation of proton exchanged NaRuO2. The TEM image showed the nanosheet structure with an ultrathin nature (Fig. 6d). Electrochemical tests demonstrated that RuO2 nanosheets only needed an overpotential of 255 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2, which was much better than that of RuO2 nanoparticles. Moreover, the Tafel slope of RuO2 nanosheets was much lower than that of RuO2 (Fig. 6e). The morphology and oxidation state after OER analyses revealed no observable change, indicating the excellent stability of RuO2 nanosheets. Theoretical calculations revealed that the terminal O species at the under-coordinated Ru edge atoms rather than the threefold-coordinated O atoms of the sheet surface were active sites and the edges were the origin of the high OER activity (Fig. 6f). Despite considerable potential towards acidic OER catalysis, the research on 2D nanostructures is just beginning. On the basis of further explorations on the catalytic behaviors of 2D nanomaterials and their modifications, researchers would be able to provide new directions of these materials for the acidic OER.
3D nanostructures, especially assembly/nanoarray structures, possess many advantages for various catalytic reactions.144 For example, a 3D nanosheet assembly, which consists of ultrathin nanosheets as subunits, could provide 3D accessible sites, maximized the surface area and proper layer distance, which is beneficial for improving the OER performance. Huang et al.145 reported the synthesis of a 3D Ir assembly that consisted of ultrathin Ir nanosheets by using the wet-chemical approach (Fig. 6g). Due to this unique structure, the 3D Ir assembly showed superior OER performance with a low onset potential of 1.45 VRHE in 0.1 M HClO4, only needing an overpotential of 270 mV to achieve 10 mA cm−2, which was much better than that of other catalysts (Fig. 6h). Moreover, this 3D Ir assembly exhibited a very low Tafel slope of 40.8 mV dec−1 (Fig. 6i). Furthermore, 3D RuNi and IrRh nanosheet assemblies as OER electrocatalysts also exhibited enhanced OER performance.110,146 As another typical example of 3D nanostructures, nanoarrays, through in situ growth of vertically aligned arrays with 1D or 2D nanostructures on a conductive substrate, could directly be used as the electrode, which could avoid the usage of binders. Moreover, the in situ derived nanoarrays could supply more available active sites and anisotropic morphologies, which could improve mass transport and catalyst utilization. In addition, they are less vulnerable to dissolution and aggregation during the catalytic reaction.85,147–149 Based on these merits mentioned above, 3D nanoarrays could be promising candidates for the OER under acidic conditions.150 Sun et al. successfully synthesized N-doped WC nanoarrays, composed of thin belts through the hydrothermal method, followed by chemical vapor deposition. As the OER electrocatalyst,150 N-doped WC nanoarrays exhibited superior OER activity, with 60 mA cm−2 at 1.70 VRHE. However, the stability of N-doped WC nanoarrays still needs to be enhanced.
In spite of significant achievements on morphological manipulation of catalysts for acidic OER applications, there are still many issues to be solved. On the one hand, the synthesis of catalysts with well-defined morphology normally needs the assistance of surfactants (e.g., polyvinyl pyrrolidone and oleylamine), which are difficult to remove thoroughly. The remaining surfactants will block the active sites and cause large resistance due to the low conductivity of surfactants, thus reducing the performance of catalysts. On the other hand, the nanostructures of OER catalysts much easily collapse under the strong acidic environment and high anodic potential; therefore, how to keep the nanostructures during the OER process remains challenging.
4.2. Single atom design
The sizes of metal particles are key to determining catalytic performance, as the specific activity per metal atom generally increases with decreasing sizes of the metal particles.151 Single atom represents the theoretically ultimate size limit for metal particles, in which metal atoms, isolated from each other without appreciable interaction, are dispersed on specific supports. Therefore, single atom catalysts (SACs) possess the maximum atom-utilization efficiency and unique coordination and electronic structures, and have been regarded as greatly potential catalysts in various catalytic reactions.152–154 For acidic OER catalysis, most catalysts are based on Ir and Ru, which are scarce on earth; therefore, SACs could be great candidates in reducing the usage of precious metals, lowering the cost of catalysts and enhancing the catalytic performance. Li and co-workers first demonstrated atomically dispersed Ru1 on PtCu3 supports synthesized through the acid etching and electrochemical leaching method.155 Electrochemical evaluations indicated that Ru1–Pt3Cu possessed superior activity with an overpotential of 220 mV delivering 10 mA cm−2. In situ X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) and in situ attenuated total reflection infrared (ATR-IR) spectro-electrochemical measurements indicated that the chemical state of Ru was almost unchanged during OER test, which could be due to the charge compensation from Pt to Ru, avoiding the over-oxidation of Ru. DFT calculations suggested that the compressive strain of the Pt shell tailored the electronic structure of Ru, allowing optimized binding of oxygen species and resistance to over-oxidation, which was beneficial for performance enhancement. It is noted that M–N–C is an important type of SAC, which shows great potential in the acidic OER. Yao and co-workers reported the single-atomic Ru confined in a carbon nitride-derived N–C support via impregnation of RuCl3 into a dispersion of phosphide carbon nitride, followed by pyrolysis reaction.156 The Fourier transform of the extended XAFS curve of the Ru–N–C catalyst revealed the existence of single Ru atoms without Ru–Ru bonds (Fig. 7a). Electrochemical evaluations indicated that the Ru–N–C catalyst was a robust and efficient OER electrocatalyst, just requiring an overpotential of 267 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7b). Moreover, a slight degradation (∼5%) and as low as 5% dissolution rate of Ru over the 30 h chronoamperometry test at 1.5 VRHE verified the excellent stability of Ru–N–C (Fig. 7c). Operando Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) and XAFS spectra revealed the appearance of intermediate species at high potentials, which came from the single oxygen adsorption on the Ru1–N4 site in the form of O–Ru1–N4 (Fig. 7d and e). The DFT calculations indicated that the formation of O–Ru1–N4 was beneficial for reducing the limiting reaction barrier, and the real active site was O–Ru–N4 with a high Ru oxidation state. Besides Ru SACs for enhanced OER performance, Ir SACs also showed impressive performance for the acidic OER.157,158 For instance, a double protecting strategy was taken to disperse Ir single atoms in/onto Fe nanoparticles and encapsulating IrFe nanoparticles into nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes, which exhibited outstanding OER activity and excellent stability.157 It is worth noting that for the first time, Liu et al. reported a new type of atomically dispersed hetero-N-coordinated Co single site, with Co active centers bonding to hetero pyridinic- and amino-N ligands with excellent OER performance in 0.5 M H2SO4.159 A potential-driven active site of H2N–(*O–Co)–N4 was observed by operando synchrotron infrared spectroscopy, which promoted the surface oxo-species transformation, thus improving the OER performance.
 Fig. 7  (a) The Ru k-edge k2-weighted Fourier transform spectra for different catalysts. (b) LSV curves in 0.5 M H2SO4. (c) Plots of current density and Ru dissolved mass ratio versus time at a constant potential of 1.49 VRHE in 0.5 M H2SO4. (d) Operando FTIR spectra for Ru–N–C during the acidic OER process. (e) Operando EXAFS spectra and first-shell fitting curves for Ru–N–C at different applied voltages from the open circuit condition to 1.5 V. (f) Free energy diagram for the OER on Ru1–N4 (red line), O–Ru1–N4 (blue line), and HO–Ru1–N4 (green line). Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Despite the significant superiority achieved on the SACs for acidic OER application, many issues still remain to be solved. First, successful reports on SACs toward enhanced OER performance are still few; second, the metal loading amounts of SACs are relatively low, leading to low OER current density. Finally, because of the high surface energy of single atoms combined with the strong acidic environment and high operation potential, the change in chemical states and agglomeration of single atoms may occur during the OER process, resulting in performance degradation.
5. Atomic arrangement tailoring
The catalytic performances of catalysts are closely related with their atomic arrangements.160–162 The atomic arrangement tailoring can drive the change of coordination environment of active sites, thus leading to the modification of the electron distribution state, which influences the adsorption, activation and desorption of reactants, intermediates and products; therefore, the catalytic performance will be greatly altered. According to whether the atoms of materials have periodic arrangements, they can be divided into crystalline and amorphous materials, in which crystalline materials possess long-range ordered but short-range disordered atomic arrangements and vice versa for amorphous materials.163 For crystalline materials, the crystal structures can be distinguishable based on the stacking sequences and the close-packed planes. For example, in the hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure, the close-packed planes are {100} and the stacking sequence is AB, while in the face-centered cubic (fcc) structure, the close-packed planes are {111} and the stacking sequence is ABC.164 Moreover, unlike crystal structure tailoring, which requires the rearrangement of all atoms to form a new lattice, crystal facet tailoring only involves the surface atom rearrangement.165 Therefore, it can display different exposed crystal facets for one certain crystalline nanomaterial, possessing different surface atomic arrangements. In this part, the acidic OER electrocatalysts with different atomic arrangements (crystal faceted, crystal phase, and amorphous structure) were discussed in detail.
5.1. Crystal facet modification
Through precisely exposing special facets, the modification of crystals with desired facets at the atomic scale is crucial for the enhancement of catalytic performance. For instance, Pt tetrahexahedral nanocrystals possessing {730} and {210} surfaces,166 Cu (100) crystal facet,167 and octahedral Pd NPs dominated by Pd (111) facets168 displayed outstanding performance for various electrocatalytic reactions.
For the electrocatalytic OER under acidic conditions, crystal facets greatly affect the OER performance.169–173 Roy et al.170 systematically studied the impacts of RuO2 crystal facets on OER performance. They prepared thin films with different facets of (111), (101), (001), and single-crystal (110), as well as commercial nanoparticles. As OER electrocatalysts under acidic conditions, the initial activities were ranked as follows: (001) > (101) > particles > (110) > (111). By using inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS) to measure Ru dissolution during the OER process, it was found that their stability was not related to the activity. Similarly, for metal nanoparticles, the exposure of well-defined crystal facets could boost the performance. Tilley et al.171 developed Pd-core Ru-branch nanoparticles that have nanosized branches with low index Ru facets by using the cubic Pd as seeds through the cubic–core hexagonal–branch approach, which exhibited excellent OER performance. The TEM, HAADF-STEM and elemental mappings images (Fig. 8a and b) clearly showed the bimetallic branched nanoparticles with the Pd-core and Ru-branch structure. The HRTEM image revealed that the branch was terminated by {0001} and {10−11} facets with an hcp crystal structure (Fig. 8c), resulting in the formation of a hexagonal pyramid shape. The magnified HRTEM image from the marked rectangle in Fig. 8c indicated the epitaxial growth of the {111} facets of Pd. In 0.1 M HClO4, this branched structure not only gave outstanding OER activity, but also provided excellent stability for prolonged time. Strikingly, this design strategy can be extended to the synthesis of bimetallic nanoparticles with an Au-core and Ru-branch structure, which exhibited excellent OER performance under acidic conditions.172 Lately, the direct synthesis of branched Ru nanoparticles with low-index facets was reported by the same group through using an appropriate amount of dodecylamine as the surfactant.173 The TEM image revealed the angular branched structure (Fig. 8e); the HRTEM image of a branch marked by the black dashed rectangle in Fig. 8f, suggested that the surfaces of the branches could be indexed to a mixture of {0001}, {10−11} and {10−10} facets with several defects along the edges, and the interplanar distance of the {0002} planes was 0.21 nm, which matched with metallic Ru. As the OER electrocatalyst, faceted Ru exhibited enhanced acidic OER performance with higher activity and stability compared with polycrystalline Ru nanoparticles (Fig. 8g and h). The superior OER performance of faceted Ru branched nanoparticles could be ascribed to the low Ru dissolution rate under OER conditions, which was due to low-index facets on the branch surfaces. In addition, some other studies analyzed the effect of crystal facets on Ru redox during the OER process and the water absorption on different crystal facets.44,174 Importantly, the study of the catalyst with a defined crystal facet is favorable for the investigation of the mechanism.
 Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of Pd–Ru branched nanoparticles. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a tripod nanoparticle and the corresponding STEM-EDX mapping images. (c) HRTEM image of a linear bipod nanoparticle. (d) Magnified HRTEM image taken from the black rectangle in panel (c) showing the Pd-core and Ru-branch interface with ABCABC and ABABAB stacking of close packed planes in the fcc Pd core and hcp Ru branch, respectively. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of an individual branched nanoparticle. (f) HRTEM image of a branch taken from the black rectangle in (e) and the corresponding FFT pattern (inset). (g) LSV curves. (h) Chronopotentiometric profile in 0.1 M HClO4. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
5.2. Crystal phase engineering
Conventionally, most materials adopt the same crystal phase as their bulk counterpart. However, unconventional crystal phases in nanomaterials that are unattainable in the bulk state have been observed in different categories, such as metal,175 metal oxides,176 metal halide perovskites,177 and transition metal dichalcogenides.178 Because of their unique atomic arrangements, nanomaterials with an unconventional crystal phase can potentially exhibit intriguing properties and innovative applications. For example, the NiFe alloy with an hcp structure exhibited enhanced OER activity compared to the conventional fcc NiFe alloy under alkaline conditions.179 Meanwhile, the Ru nanostructure with an unconventional crystal phase (4H/fcc) possessed higher HER activity and stability compared with the hcp Ru.180
It was also observed that catalysts with unconventional crystal phases could significantly improve the OER performance under acidic conditions. For instance, Xia et al.169 first reported Ru octahedral nanocrystals with an unconventional fcc structure by the wet-chemical method. As shown in the HAADF-STEM (Fig. 9a and b) images, the lattice fringe spacings of 1.9 and 2.2 Å could be assigned to the {200} and {111} planes of fcc Ru, respectively. In situ X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) data indicated that the fcc structure of Ru octahedral nanocrystals could be preserved up to 400 °C (Fig. 9c); while the heating temperature exceeded 400 °C, the fcc structure turned into a mix of fcc and hcp structures. When utilized as an acidic OER electrocatalyst, the fcc Ru octahedral nanocrystals exhibited enhancement in terms of specific activity over those of Ru nanoparticles with a conventional hcp structure and fcc Ru nanoparticles (Fig. 9d). In another work, Zou et al.181 presented the identification of the 6H-phase SrIrO3 perovskite as a highly active OER electrocatalyst. 6H-SrIrO3 possessed unique face-sharing IrO6 octahedral subunits (Fig. 9e), distinguished with 3C-SrIrO3 with corner-shared IrO6 octahedra (Fig. 9f). Electrochemical evaluations indicated the 6H–SrIrO3 exhibited much more excellent OER performance than 3C–SrIrO3 and other reported electrocatalysts, which was due to its unique crystal structure. In addition, chronopotentiometric tests indicated the good stability of 6H–SrIrO3 (Fig. 9h). Therefore, crystal phase engineering can be an effective approach for tailoring the OER performance of catalysts.
 Fig. 9  (a) HAADF-STEM image of an individual Ru octahedron. (b) Atomic-resolution STEM image taken from the marked square in (a). (c) In situ XRD patterns of fcc Ru octahedral nanocrystals. The characteristic peaks of fcc and hcp Ru are marked by blue and red dashed lines, respectively. Blue dashed lines: JCPDS no. 88-2333 (fcc-Ru). Red dashed lines: JCPDS no. 06-0663 (hcp-Ru). (d) LSV curves measured over different Ru catalysts in 0.05 M H2SO4. The inset shows the enlarged polarization curves. (a-d) Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e and f) The crystal structure of 6H SrIrO3 and 3C SrIrO3, respectively. (g) Comparison of mass activity at 1.525 VRHE. (h) Chronopotentiometric curves of 6H–SrIrO3 and 3C–SrIrO3 in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 10 mA cm−2. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
5.3. Amorphization modulation
With respect to crystalline counterparts, amorphous materials as electrocatalysts possess lots of advantages due to their unique disordered atomic arrangement;173,182 first, amorphous materials tend to have much larger electrochemical surface areas due to the “dangling bonds” in amorphous structures, compared with the crystalline one with the same mass; second, amorphous materials usually possess high corrosion resistance; finally, amorphous materials normally have more defects because of plenty of unsaturated coordination sites. All these merits make amorphous materials unique and attractive for various electrocatalytic reactions.183–185 Some studies have investigated the effect of the amorphous structure on acidic OER performance.
Berlinguette et al. successfully synthesized an amorphous IrOx film by light-driven decomposition of Ir(acac)3, which exhibited much higher OER performance than crystalline IrOx.186 Lately, Li et al. developed a general method for preparing dozens of amorphous noble metal (e.g., Ir, Rh, Ru, RhFe, and IrRu) nanosheets with a thickness less than 10 nm by annealing the mixture of metal acetylacetonate and alkali salts at high temperature (Fig. 10a).187 As a typical example, amorphous Ir nanosheets were analyzed deeply. The TEM image (Fig. 10b) revealed that the lateral sizes of obtained Ir nanosheets could be up to a few micrometers. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image (Fig. 10c) showed the disordered atomic structure, verifying the amorphous feature, which was in accordance with the diffractive halo-like in the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern. As the OER electrocatalyst under acidic conditions, amorphous Ir nanosheets exhibited superior activity. At an overpotential of 300 mV, amorphous Ir nanosheets achieved 2.5 fold and 17.6 fold higher mass activity than crystalline Ir nanosheets and the commercial IrO2 catalyst, respectively (Fig. 10d). In addition, the Tafel slope of amorphous Ir was much smaller than that of other catalysts (Fig. 10e). It is worth noting that the OER activity of amorphous Ir nanosheets displayed negligible degradation even after the 5000-cycle CV test (Fig. 10f), indicating the excellent stability of amorphous Ir nanosheets. Furthermore, the amorphous structure remained unchanged after the durability test, manifesting its excellent structural stability (Fig. 10g). Moreover, the XAFS spectra of Ir L3-edge remained unchanged after the 8 h durability test (Fig. 10h), further revealing the excellent stability of amorphous Ir nanosheets. In situ XAFS spectra indicated that the valance state of Ir increased to less than +4 and kept invariable during the OER process (Fig. 10i), recovering to its initial state after reaction.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic synthesis process of amorphous precious metal and alloy nanosheets. (b) TEM image of amorphous Ir nanosheets. (c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of amorphous Ir nanosheets. (d and e) LSV curves and the corresponding Tafel plots of various catalysts. (f) LSV curves of amorphous Ir nanosheets before and after 5000 cycles. The inset shows the chronoamperometry measurement curve at an overpotential of 255 mV for the 8 h test. (g) Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of the amorphous Ir nanosheets after the stability test. The inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (h) In situ XAFS spectral change of the Ir L3-edge. (i) XANES spectrum of amorphous Ir nanosheets after the stability test. (a–i) Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
In a very recent study, Huang et al. first used theoretical calculations to identify that the local distortion-strain effect in the amorphous RuTe2 system abnormally could sensitize the Te–pπ coupling capability and enhance the electron-transfer of Ru-sites, which could boost OER performance.131 Based on the theoretical calculations, they synthesized amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods by a simple hydrothermal process. As anticipated, the amorphous RuTe2 porous nanorods exhibited excellent OER performance, which was superior to that of crystalline RuTe2 and Ir/C catalysts. Detailed investigations showed that extensive defects existing in the amorphous structure could combine oxygen atoms to form RuOxHy species, which resulted in improved catalytic activity. Impressively, the alkaline OER performance, acidic and alkaline HER performance, and overall water splitting performance were enhanced for amorphous RuTe2 nanorods. Lately, Yang et al.188 found that the introduction of the Lu atom was favorable for the formation of the LuIr1–nOx(OH)y amorphous structure, which contributed to improved OER performance. Similarly, Ir–La amorphous metal oxides, reported by Huang et al.,189 also showed more outstanding OER activity than crystalline IrO2. Therefore, amorphous materials as OER electrocatalysts had great potential for performance enhancement.
Despite some pioneering studies proving the effectiveness of atomic arrangement tailoring of catalysts on enhanced OER performance, it is still at an initial stage, and some issues exist that need to be further solved. First, it is difficult to synthesize materials with optimized crystal facets, unconventional crystal phases or amorphous structures, as crystal seed formation and growth need to satisfy the principle of minimum surface energy; therefore, surfaces with high energy normally disappear rapidly during the growth process. Second, the unconventional crystal phase and amorphous structure are normally in metastable states and lack thermodynamic stability, probably transforming into a thermodynamically stable crystal structure during the OER process, which can cause activity degradation. Third, there is a lack of deep investigation of the mechanism on the atomic arrangement tailoring of catalysts at an atomic level. Finally, OER catalysts with different atomic arrangements are still referred to Ir or Ru based materials, which cost high. It is desirable to take the advantages of atomic arrangement tailoring to improve the performance of catalysts without containing Ir and Ru.
6. Interface regulation
The interface between two or more different components can stabilize surface active sites and enable their synergetic effects, which could contribute to the enhanced catalytic performance.47 The interface can be divided into different categories based on the material types. In the case of catalysts for the OER under acidic conditions, metal (oxide)–metal oxide interfaces are frequently investigated, as most catalysts are based on precious metals (Ir, Ru), precious metal oxides (IrO2, RuO2), non-precious metal oxides (CeO2, TiO2, MnO2, SnO2, PbO2, etc.), giving rise to the coexistence of metals and oxidized metals.43 Some metal oxides are capable of stabilizing metal or metal oxides, which can increase the amount of active sites and change the electronic structure due to their synergistic effect.190–192 As an alternative type of interface, metal (oxide)–carbon material interfaces are found to be favorable for performance enhancement, in which carbon-based materials possess many advantages, such as excellent electro-conductivity, chemical stability, large surface area and low cost.193,194
6.1. Metal (oxide)–metal oxide interface regulation
Metal (oxide)–metal oxide interfaces can be divided into metal–metal oxide (MMO) interfaces and metal oxide–metal oxide interfaces. The MMO interface, usually located at the interlayer between metal nanoparticles and oxide supports, is widely recognized as a highly active component in various catalytic reactions. Recent studies have demonstrated that the MMO interface effect is beneficial for the improvement of electrocatalytic performance. Dai et al.195 developed an Ni/NiO heterostructure formed on carbon nanotube sidewalls, which exhibited excellent HER performance due to the unique Ni/NiO interface. Similarly, for the CO2 reduction reaction, Xie et al. reported Co/CoO nanosheets by slight oxidation of Co,196 which exhibited outstanding activity and selectivity for formate production at low overpotential. For the OER in acidic media, some pioneering studies also demonstrated the positive effect of the MMO interface on OER performance.190,197–199
Qiao et al. reported a core–shell Ru@IrOx nanocrystal with charge redistribution across the interface for the acidic OER (Fig. 11a).198 In this work, an Ru@IrOx nanocrystal was synthesized by a sequential polyol method, where the Ru precursor was first reduced by ethylene glycol, followed by adding the Ir precursor to coat the IrOx shell on Ru cores. The HAADF-STEM image showed an Ir-containing shell with brighter contrast and an Ru core with darker contrast (Fig. 11b), which manifested the core–shell structure of Ru@IrOx. According to the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) characterization, the interface between Ru and IrOx resulted in charge redistribution across the Ru–IrOx heterojunction with a high valence state of the IrOx shell and , which could lead to the optimized adsorption of oxygen intermediates, boosting the OER performance. As a result, the Ru@IrOx exhibited excellent OER activity, with an overpotential of 282 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 11c). A chronoamperometric test at a potential of 1.55 VRHE revealed the excellent stability of Ru@IrOx with almost no activity loss after 24 h, while the RuIrOx lost nearly 80% of its activity within less than 1 h (Fig. 11d). By using ICP-MS, there was almost no Ir and Ru dissolution, further manifesting the excellent stability of the Ru@IrOx nanocrystal. Furthermore, the creation of the Ru/RuO2 interface by slight oxidation treatment of metallic Ru199 or laser irradiation of RuO2 (ref. 200) was found to be favorable for performance enhancement towards the OER under acidic conditions.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of Ru@IrOx for enhanced OER performance. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a randomly chosen Ru@IrOx icosahedral nanocrystal. (c) LSV curves of different catalysts in 0.05 M H2SO4. (d) Chronoamperometric response of Ru@IrOx and RuIrOx at 1.55 VRHE. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of IrOx supported on ATO. (f) Ir oxidation states of different catalysts. (g) Mass activity at η = 280 mV before and after stability test. (h) Chronopotentiometric curves at 10 mA cm−2 for different catalysts. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
As another category, metal oxide–metal oxide interface regulation is often adopted strategy to improve the performance of catalysts. As one typical example, the mixtures of Ir and Ru oxides were most studied, which revealed that the Ru–Ir mixed oxides generally provided a lower activity but a higher stability than RuO2 and a reverse trend compared to IrO2.201–205 Yi et al.205 found that the IrxRu1−xO2 revealed the enhanced OER activity, which was ascribed to the introduction of RuO2. Furthermore, it is found that the OER performance could be improved when a third type for inert metal (M = Ce, Mo, Co, etc.) oxide was introduced into Ir–Ru oxides.206–208 Morais et al.206 successfully synthesized Ir–Ru–Ce oxides by hydrolysis of metallic chloride precursors. Electrochemical tests indicated that the introduction of CeO2 with high oxygen mobility contributed to an enhanced OER activity of Ir–Ru–Ce oxides. Despite Ir–Ru and Ir–Ru–M oxides possessing excellent OER performance, the precious metals Ir and Ru take up the main part of catalysts, which causes high cost. In order to lower the cost and further improve the performance, several inert or stable oxides, such as NiO,209 MnO2,210,211 CeO2,212 TiO2,191,213 SnO2,214 and ATO,192 were introduced into IrO2 or RuO2 to form mixtures or heterostructures. Strasser et al.215 investigated the electrochemical OER behavior of IrOx nanoparticles supported on an ATO aerogel (Fig. 11e). For comparison, high surface area carbon was used as a support of IrOx. According to the results of XAS and XPS measurements, the strong interface between oxidized Ir and ATO resulted in a lower Ir oxidation state (Ir3.2+) than carbon-supported oxidized Ir (IrOx/C, Ir4.0+) and commercial ATO-supported IrOx (IrOx/Com. ATO, Ir3.3+), which stabilized the oxidized Ir particles on ATO and protected Ir from being oxidized easily, contributing to the enhanced OER performance (Fig. 11f). As shown in Fig. 11g, IrOx/ATO possessed larger mass current density both before and after stability tests than other catalysts, which indicated the superior activity of IrOx/ATO. Moreover, after stability tests, the IrOx/C and IrOx/Com. ATO showed drastic performance decline by 96.5% and 88.1%, while there was only a 45.8% drop for the IrOx/ATO catalyst, demonstrating the superior stability of IrOx/ATO. To further probe the stability, galvanostatic tests at 10 mA cm−2 were employed. For IrOx/C and IrOx/Com. ATO, the potential sharply increased above 1.9 VRHE after 9 and 13 h, respectively, while there was almost no potential increase for the IrOx/ATO catalyst after 15 h (Fig. 11h), further confirming its excellent stability.
6.2. Metal (oxide)–carbon material interface regulation
Carbon-based materials are frequently adopted as supports due to their inherent large surface area, high conductivity and superior chemical stability. The construction of metal (oxide)–carbon material interface is considered as an efficient way to boost the electrocatalytic OER performance.216,217 Deng et al.217 developed robust interface Ru centers between RuO2 and graphene (G) by a controllable oxidation of graphene encapsulating RuNi nanoparticles (Fig. 12a). The HRTEM image showed a unique interface between RuO2 and graphene (Fig. 12b). Electrochemical evaluations indicated that the RuNi2@G-250 (250 referred to the oxidation temperature, °C) catalyst exhibited superior activity with a much lower overpotential of 227 mV at 10 mA cm−2, compared with 290 mV for commercial RuO2 (Fig. 12c). More importantly, a significantly more excellent durability of RuNi2@G-250 than commercial RuO2 was achieved, which was due to the unique interface between RuO2 and graphene (Fig. 12d). DFT calculations further revealed that the interface between RuO2 and graphene stabilized the free energies of HO* and O* and the rate-determining step (RDS) for the interface Ru centers was the conversion of HOO* to O2, which was different from that for RuO2. In addition, the limiting potential of RuO2 (1.82 V) for RDS was much higher than that of the interface Ru centers (1.64 V), indicating better activity of the interface Ru centers (Fig. 12e). Furthermore, the differential charge density of the interface Ru centers indicated that the strong interface effect between RuO2 and graphene resulted in graphene acting as an electron reservoir, which could donate electrons to the RuO2 surface and thus prevent the over-oxidation and corrosion for RuO2, beneficial for the improvement of stability (Fig. 12f). Lately, Li et al. reported ultra-small Ir nanoparticles supported on nitrogen-doped graphene with boosted OER activity and improved stability, which was due to the fact that the strong metal–support interaction enhanced the electron density of Ir, modulating the electronic structure of Ir nanoparticles to facilitate the OER process.218 It is worth noting that the strong interfacial strength between transition metal oxides and carbon materials could result in great stability enhancement of transition metal oxides. Li et al.219 reported that a layer of amorphous carbon was in situ formed on the surface of Co3O4. Electrochemical tests revealed that the synthesized Co3O4@C possessed excellent catalytic stability because of the strong interfacial strength between Co3O4 and C. These findings provide an in-depth understanding and guidance for the future development of high-performance electrocatalysts based on interface regulation.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for RuNi2@G-T. (b) HRTEM image of RuNi2@G-250. (c) LSV curves of RuNi2@G-250 in comparison with other samples treated with different oxidation temperatures and commercial RuO2. (d) Chronopotentiometric curves at 10 mA cm−2 for RuNi2@G-250 and commercial RuO2. (e) Free energy profiles over RuO2 and interface Ru centers between RuO2 and graphene at zero potential. (f) Differential charge density at the interface Ru centers between RuO2 and graphene. Yellow and blue contours represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Great progress has been made in the studies of interface regulation for enhanced OER performance. However, there still exist some issues that need to be further solved. First, precious metal-free electrocatalysts with a strong interface effect and excellent OER performance are still relatively few. Second, the decisive descriptors of the interface effects remain unclear, like optimized chemisorption of intermediates, bonding interaction, and charge injection/distribution. Third, it is reported the carbon materials would go through slow electrochemical oxidation during the OER process, causing the corrosion of carbon.220 Therefore, how to improve the anti-corrosion ability of carbon materials is a major task for metal (oxide)–carbon material interface regulation.
7. Conclusions and perspectives
To date, great achievements have demonstrated the possibility of catalytic oxygen evolution on heterogeneous catalysts under acidic conditions. The OER performance summary of different catalysts under acidic conditions is given in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of recently reported OER electrocatalysts under acidic conditions




Catagories
Catalyst
Electrolytes

η (mV)
Stabilityb (h)
Loading amountc (μg cm−2)





a Unless otherwise specified, η refers to overpotential required to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in the OER.
b Unless otherwise specified, stability refers to work life (hour) at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 toward the OER.
c Unless otherwise specified, the loading amount refers to the mass loading of the catalyst.





Precious metal catalysts
Ir nanotube130
0.1 M HClO4
245
4
NA


Ir superstructure145
0.1 M HClO4
270
8@2.5 mA cm−2
11.5


Ir nanorod129
0.5 M H2SO4
290
1000 cycles
14


Ir nanowire132
0.5 M HClO4
270
6.94
31


Ir nanosheet138
0.5 M H2SO4
240
8
9.6


fcc Ru octahedral169
0.05 M H2SO4
168
NA
NA


Ru branch173
0.1 M HClO4
180
4
127


Au–Ru branch172
0.1 M HClO4
220
1000 cycles
612


Amorphous RuTe2 nanorod131
0.5 M H2SO4
290
24
200


Pd–Ru branch171
0.1 M HClO4
225
NA
408


IrNi nanocluster100
0.1 M HClO4

η
9.1 = 270
2
12.5Ir


IrW nanodendrites105
0.1 M HClO4

η
8.1 = 300
3000 cycles
10.2Ir


IrPd nanocage101
0.1 M HClO4
226
15 h
12.5Ir


Al–Ni–Co–Ir–Mo alloy109
0.5 M H2SO4
275
48
24.3Ir


IrAg nanotube99
0.05 M H2SO4
296
6
13.3Ir


IrCoNi hollow nanocrystal221
0.1 M HClO4
303
200 min@5 mA cm−2
10Ir


Co doped IrCu ONC104
0.1 M HClO4
290
2000 cycles
20Ir


Co doped RuIr nanocrystal108
0.1 M HClO4
235
25
NA


RhIr nanoparticle96
0.5 M H2SO4
292
8
280


IrNiCu DNF107
0.1 M HClO4
300
2500 cycles
20Ir


RuCu nanotube123
0.5 M H2SO4
345
12
NA


RuCu nanosheet143
0.5 M H2SO4
236
13.5
NA


Ir/ATO193
0.05 M H2SO4
400
15
10.2Ir


4H/fcc Au@Ir nanoribbon222
0.5 M H2SO4
296
NA
26Ir


Ir/NG210
0.5 M H2SO4
303
20
23Ir


Ir/NiN4 (ref. 223)
0.5 M H2SO4
340
2
76.5Ir


IrCu nanocrystal87
0.05 M H2SO4
311
10
60Ir


RuNi nanosheet assembly110
0.5 M H2SO4
252
10
NA


Precious metal oxide catalysts
RuO2/CC122
0.5 M H2SO4
179
20
520


Amorphous IrOx film196
1.0 M H2SO4
220
24
0.1


IrO2 nanoneedle133
1.0 M H2SO4
313
4
4000


IrOx nanosheet140
0.5 M H2SO4
250
12
7.8Ir


RuO2 nanosheet141
0.1 M HClO4
255
6
200


IrOx/ATO215
0.05 M H2SO4
NA
15
10.2Ir


IrOOH nanosheet139
0.1 M HClO4
344
7
200


Ir0.7Ru0.3O2 (ref. 224)
0.05 M H2SO4
366 @5 mA cm−2
450
60


IrNi oxide209
0.1 M HClO4
310
NA
20Ir


Ni, Co–IrO2 (ref. 63)
0.1 M HClO4
285
20000 s
200


W0.57Ir0.43O3−δ (ref. 225)
1.0 M H2SO4
370
0.6
NA


Co doped RuO2 (ref. 55)
0.5 M H2SO4
169
50
NA


Mn doped RuO2 (ref. 53)
0.5 M H2SO4
158
10
NA


Ir0.6Cr0.4O2 nanowire114
0.5 M H2SO4
250
25
600


Cu doped RuO2 (ref. 54)
0.5 M H2SO4
188
8
275


Ce–IrO2 (ref. 60)
0.5 M H2SO4
224
100
NA


Cu doped IrO2 (ref. 61)
0.1 M HClO4
351
6000 s
NA


F Doped IrO2 (ref. 65)
1.0 M H2SO4
400
24
300


Cr0.6Ru0.4O2 (ref. 113)
0.5 M H2SO4
178
10
NA


Ru@IrOx (ref. 197)
0.05 M H2SO4
282
24
NA


Ru–RuO2/CNT199
0.5 M H2SO4
180
10
800


IrNiOx (ref. 226)
0.05 M H2SO4
330
NA
20


MnOx–TiO2–RuO2 (ref. 59)
0.1 M H2SO4
386
6
NA


IrO2–MnO2 nanorod210
0.1 M HClO4
275
25
200


RuO2–graphene217
0.5 M H2SO4
227
24
320


IrO2/GCN193
0.5 M H2SO4
276
4@20 mA cm−2
801IrO2


Amorphous La–IrOx (ref. 189)
0.1 M HClO4
263
5.6
200


Precious metal-based perovskites or pyrochlores
6H SrIrO3 (ref. 181)
0.5 M H2SO4
248
30
900


IrOx/SrIrO3 (ref. 66)
0.5 M H2SO4
340
30
NA


CaCu3Ru4O12 (ref. 79)
0.5 M H2SO4
171
24
250


Sr0.90Na0.10RuO3 (ref. 80)
0.1 M HClO4
170
NA
100


SrCo0.9Ir0.1O3−δ (ref. 70)
0.1 M HClO4
NA
3
NA


Ir doped SrTiO3 (ref. 67)
0.1 M HClO4
247
20
210


Y2Ru2O7−δ (ref. 71)
0.1 M HClO4
270@1 mA cm−2
8
NA


Y2Ru1.6Y0.4O7–δ (ref. 76)
0.1 M HClO4
270@18.1 mA cm−2
NA
NA


Y1.85Zn0.15Ru2O7−δ (ref. 72)
0.5 M H2SO4
291
8 h @1 mA cm−2
3000


Single atom catalysts
Ru–N–C156
0.5 M H2SO4
267
30
280


Ru1–Pt3Cu155
0.1 M HClO4
220
28
16.3Pt+Ru


Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT157
0.5 M H2SO4
270
12
1.14Ir


N-Coordinated Co single sites159
0.5 M H2SO4
265
100 h
NA


Non-precious catalysts
N-WC nanoarray150
0.5 M H2SO4

η
60 = 470
20@10 mA cm−2
NA


Exfoliated graphene nanosheets array91
0.5 M H2SO4
334
10
NA


WO3 (ref. 125)
0.5 M H2SO4
600
10
6000


Co3O4 (ref. 82)
0.5 M H2SO4
570
12
NA


Co3O4@C/CP219
0.5 M H2SO4
370
86.8@100 mA cm−2
2520


Ag doped Co3O4 (ref. 85)
0.5 M H2SO4
680
10
NA




To obtain catalysts with high activity, superior stability and low cost, versatile strategies for rational catalyst design have been extensively introduced to improve the OER performance, which can be summarized in the following aspects.
First, defect engineering, including heteroatom doping, alloying formation and vacancy creation, is regarded as an effective approach to tailoring the electronic structures, binding strength of intermediates and energy barrier of RDS, which could be favorable for OER performance enhancement. Many investigations indicated that the acidic OER performance of Ir or Ru based oxides (IrO2, RuO2, Ir or Ru based perovskite, and pyrochlore oxides) could be enhanced greatly by doping other atoms, such as Ni, Co, Cr, Cu, and F. In addition, non-precious metal compounds with precious metals (Ru, Ir) or non-precious metals (e.g., Ti and Pb) as dopants could not only exhibit improved OER performance, but also greatly lower the cost of catalysts. Moreover, the introduction of dopants (e.g., N and O) into carbon materials could contribute to the performance enhancement. For the alloy catalysts, they were mainly referred to IrM and RuM alloys (M = Ni, Co, W, Ce, etc.) and IrMO2 and RuMO2 oxide alloys (M = Ti, Cr, etc.), which exhibited improved performance for the acidic OER. In the case of vacancy engineering, it is found that the creation of oxygen vacancies in precious or transition metal oxides is beneficial for improving the OER performance.
Second, structural manipulation, which can be divided into morphology control and single atom design, is another efficient way to improve the OER performance of catalysts. Abundant exposed active sites and effective electron transport can be achieved by morphology control, such as 1D nanowires/nanoneedles/nanorods/nanotubes, 2D nanosheets, and 3D assemblies/nanoarrays, thus resulting in enhanced performance. Moreover, the SACs possess the maximum atom-utilization efficiency, unique coordination and electronic structure and have been regarded as potential catalysts towards the acidic OER. Importantly, for the catalysts containing precious metals, SACs are perfect candidates to reduce the usage of precious metals and the cost of catalysts. Recent investigations have indicated that Ir or Ru based SACs exhibited enhanced OER performance, while the usage of Ir or Ru is extremely lower compared with other catalysts. Moreover, SACs without precious metals surprisingly show excellent OER performance.
Third, by tailoring the atomic arrangements, catalysts with optimal crystal facets, unconventional crystal phases or amorphous structures can be promising candidates towards the acidic OER due to their unique atomic arrangements, which could change the electronic distribution state and coordination environment of active sites, thus affecting the adsorption, activation and desorption of reactants, intermediates and resultants. Many investigations have indicated that the atomic arrangement of metals (Ru and Ir), metal alloys (Ru or Ir based alloys), and oxides (RuO2, IrO2, etc.) could greatly improve the OER performance under acidic conditions.
Finally, interface regulation, which exploits the synergistic effect at the interface to modify the electronic structure of active sites, has been extensively explored and efficiently utilized as an efficient strategy to improve the electrocatalytic performance for the acidic OER. Considering the strong acidic environment and high anodic potential, metal (oxide)–metal oxide interfaces and metal (oxide)–carbon material interfaces are two main research subjects, which show great potential for enhanced OER performance. The metal (oxide)–metal oxide interface can be detailedly divided into metal–metal oxides interfaces, such as the interfaces of Ru–IrOx and Ru–RuO2, and metal oxide–metal oxide interfaces (e.g., IrO2–RuO2, IrO2–SnO2, and IrO2–MnO2). For the case of the metal (oxide)–carbon material interface, carbon materials, such as graphene and N doped graphene as supports, were mainly investigated. Based on the strong interface effect, the catalysts exhibited enhanced OER performance under acidic conditions.
Even though incredible advances in OER electrocatalysts under acidic conditions have been developed, there are still many remaining challenges for future exploration of catalysts with high activity and excellent stability.
(1) Understanding the relationship between electronic structure of catalysts and OER performance.
As described in previous sections, the electronic structure of catalysts greatly influences the OER performance by affecting the absorption and desorption of intermediates. For example, alloying Ir with W could tune the electronic structure of Ir, lowering the binding energy of the oxygen intermediate, which resulted in enhanced OER activity.105 Normally, the binding energy between intermediates and active centers is derived from theoretical calculations (i.e. DFT). However, those calculations alone cannot completely describe the real electronic state of the catalyst, as the electronic structure of catalysts may be susceptible to the operational potential. The change in electronic structure of catalysts can be observed by using in situ/operando X-ray based spectroscopic techniques (i.e., in situ XPS and XAS), which can reveal the local environment, oxidation state, or charge density of catalysts. Therefore, by combining theoretical calculation results and in situ/operando results, we can deeply understand the relationship between the electronic structure of catalysts and OER performance, which provides a guidance for the design and synthesis of more efficient OER catalysts.
(2) Unravelling the mechanism of catalyst dissolution during the OER.
Although the development of OER catalysts with high activity has achieved great progress, the stability issue still remains a major challenge, since even the most promising Ir based OER catalysts undergo slow dissolution during the OER process, which causes performance degradation and loss of Ir. Therefore, it is highly important to understand the electrochemical dissolution kinetics and mechanism. Dissolution kinetics can be obtained by electrochemical methods and sensitive analytical methods (i.e. ICP-MS), while the study of the dissolution mechanism is much more challenging, as they typically require the detection of intermediates with a short lifetime, which are not easily accessible by experiments. Moreover, the dissolution pathways may be dependent on the catalyst type and operation potential. Mayrhofer et al.227 reported that for the metallic Ir catalyst, at least three dissolution mechanisms are possible, including the direct dissolution of metallic Ir, the transition of Ir5+ to Ir3+ and the formation of IrO3 at high potentials. However, there is still no experimental data to confirm this claim. Only recently, in situ/operando characterization techniques (i.e. in situ Raman, FTIR, and operando XAS) have been attempted to detect the intermediates of the OER process. Yao et al.156 reported a direct observation of the O–Ru1–N4 intermediate by operando XAS and in situ FTIR, which was responsible for the excellent OER performance. Therefore, the development of in situ/operando techniques would greatly elevate our understanding of the catalyst dissolution mechanism during the OER process, which could give a scientific guideline for the design of more stable OER catalysts.
(3) The appropriate choice of foreign elements for improving the performance of Ir or Ru based catalysts.
The modifications of electronic structures of active sites (normally Ir and Ru) are considered as a highly potential approach to improving the OER performance, which can be realized by introducing foreign elements of different types, such as metals, metal compounds and non-metals. However, under the strongly acidic environment and high anodic potential, most of them are not stable and can be easily dissolved, undergo oxidative dissolution or be corroded, resulting in performance degradation and the pollution of PEM. Therefore, the durability of foreign elements during the OER process has to be considered when designing the catalysts. Recently, Lee et al.228 reported Pt, which was less sensitive to electrochemical oxidation, doped into IrOx, accomplishing an optimal combination of Ir oxidation states. As result, Pt–IrOx exhibited excellent OER performance. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of the stability of foreign elements is necessary for appropriate catalyst designs.
(4) Searching for non-precious metal based catalysts with highly efficient performance.
Although Ir or Ru based catalysts could exhibit outstanding OER performance, their low abundances and high costs greatly restrict the further application. Therefore, searching for non-precious metal based catalysts with highly efficient OER performance is of great importance for acidic OER catalysis. It is found that transition metal based materials, such as Co3O4 (ref. 82) and WO3,125 could catalyse the OER, but the OER performances were not very good. It is anticipated that the design strategies presented in this review could help improve the OER performance of non-precious metal based catalysts.
In conclusion, rational strategies have been highlighted in the development of OER electrocatalysts with high performance and low cost under acidic conditions, in terms of defect engineering, structural manipulation, atomic arrangement tailoring and interface regulation. It is envisioned that rational catalyst design, combined with reliable theoretical calculations and advanced in situ/operando characterization will greatly promote the development of OER electrocatalysts with high performance and low cost under acidic conditions in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Z. and X. Z. contributed equally to this work. This work was supported by the Qilu Young Scholarship Funding of Shandong University. This work was also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22005176), the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2020QE014), and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20200228).
Notes and references
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Z. Wei, J. Sun, Y. Li, A. K. Datye and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7994–8008 RSC .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
M. A. Khan, H. Zhao, W. Zou, Z. Chen, W. Cao, J. Fang, J. Xu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 483–530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Li, J. Wang, Y. Du, S. Xi, Y. Sun, M. Sherburne, J. W. Ager, A. C. Fisher and Z. J. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 572 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Grigoriev, V. I. Porembsky and V. N. Fateev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 171–175 CrossRef CAS .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS .
L. Du, L. Xing, G. Zhang, M. Dubois and S. Sun, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000016 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, X. F. Lu, J. Nai, S. Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900576 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Wen, F. Ni, B. Zhang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600380 CrossRef .
J. Shan, T. Ling, K. Davey, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900510 CrossRef .
Z. Zhuang, Y. Wang, C.-Q. Xu, S. Liu, C. Chen, Q. Peng, Z. Zhuang, H. Xiao, Y. Pan, S. Lu, R. Yu, W. C. Cheong, X. Cao, K. Wu, K. Sun, Y. Wang, D. Wang, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4875 CrossRef .
K. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Li, B. Yang, M. Ling, X. Gao, J. Lu, Q. Shi, L. Lei, G. Wu and Y. Hou, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105162 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Gu, J. J. Chen, T. Zhou, X. F. Lu and G. R. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11201–11208 RSC .
T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601275 CrossRef .
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 430–433 CrossRef .
S. Park, Y. Shao, J. Liu and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9331–9344 RSC .
J. Song, C. Wei, Z. F. Huang, C. Liu, L. Zeng, X. Wang and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2196–2214 RSC .
Q. Shi, C. Zhu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3181–3192 RSC .
X. F. Lu, L. F. Gu, J. W. Wang, J. X. Wu, P. Q. Liao and G. R. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604437 CrossRef .
Z. P. Wu, X. F. Lu, S. Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, S. Lyu, J. Si, B. Yang, Z. Li, L. Lei, Z. Wen, G. Wu and Y. Hou, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5855–5874 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, J. Joo, N. K. Chaudhari, S. I. Choi and K. Lee, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ahicart, J. S. López, J. J. Carbó, J. M. Poblet and J. R. G. Mascaros, Nat. Chem., 2017, 10, 24–30 CrossRef .
Y. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. S. Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399–404 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Pedersen, M. E. Escribano, B. Sebok, A. Bodin, E. Paoli, R. Frydendal, D. Friebel, I. E. Stephens, J. Rossmeisl and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 878–887 CrossRef .
R. Kötz, S. Stucki, D. Scherson and D. M. Kolb, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1984, 172, 211–219 CrossRef .
M. W. Mehrens and J. Heitbaum, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1987, 237, 251–260 CrossRef .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, K. C. Chang, S. H. Chang, Y. J. Kang, J. Snyder, A. P. Paulikas, D. Strmcnik, Y. T. Kim, D. Myers, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2474–2478 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Escribano, A. F. Pedersen, E. A. Paoli, R. Frydendal, D. Friebel, P. Malacrida, J. Rossmeisl, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 947–955 CrossRef .
J. Shan, Y. Zheng, B. Shi, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2719–2730 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. C. Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martinez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys., 2005, 319, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
X. Rong, J. Parolin and A. M. Kolpak, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1153–1158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grimaud, A. Demortière, M. Saubanère, W. Dachraoui, M. Duchamp, M. L. Doublet and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16189 CrossRef .
H. N. Nong, T. Reier, H. S. Oh, M. Gliech, P. Paciok, T. H. T. Vu, D. Teschner, M. Heggen, V. Petkov, R. Schlögl, T. Jones and P. Strasser, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 841–851 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, C. Chen, Z. Han, Y. Yang, J. Li and Q. Deng, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1161 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, T. Wang, B. Zhao, W. Cai, Y. Liu, S. Jiao, Q. Li, R. Cao and M. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000478 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zagalskaya and V. Alexandrov, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3650–3657 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Stoerzinger, O. D. Morales, M. Kolb, R. R. Rao, R. Frydendal, L. Qiao, X. R. Wang, N. B. Halck, J. Rossmeisl, H. A. Hansen, T. Vegge, I. E. L. Stephens, M. T. M. Koper and Y. S. Horn, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 876–881 CrossRef CAS .
K. Macounova, M. Makarova and P. Krtil, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1865–1868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. Han, X. Lv, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2551–2582 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, K. Jiang, H. Wang and X. Yao, Chem, 2019, 5, 1371–1397 CAS .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D. H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
A. Zhang, R. He, H. Li, Y. Chen, T. Kong, K. Li, H. Ju, J. Zhu, W. Zhu and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10954–10958 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, X. Zhu, Z. Xing, S. Mou, C. Li, Y. Qiao, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18449–18453 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiong, Y. Wang, P. F. Liu, L. R. Zheng, G. Wang, H. G. Yang, P. K. Wong, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef .
S. Chen, H. Huang, P. Jiang, K. Yang, J. Diao, S. Gong, S. Liu, M. Huang, H. Wang and Q. Chen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1152–1160 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Su, R. X. Ge, K. M. Jiang, Y. Dong, F. Hao, Z. Q. Tian, G. X. Chen and L. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801351–1801358 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, S. Wang, E. Velasco, Y. Yang, L. Cao, L. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Lin, Q. J. Zhang and L. Chen, iScience, 2020, 23, 100756 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Ji, R. G. Yin, Y. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6411–6416 RSC .
Z. Li, S. Wang, Y. Tian, B. Li, H. Yan, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, Q. J. Zhang, Y. Lin and L. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 1749–1752 RSC .
K. Yang, P. Xu, Z. Lin, Y. Yang, P. Jiang, C. Wang, S. Liu, S. Gong, L. Hu and Q. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1803009 CrossRef .
M. E. C. Pascuzzi, A. Goryachev, J. P. Hofmann and E. J. M. Hensen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118225 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, S. Hao, X. Liu, Q. Wang, Z. Su, L. Lei and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37006–37012 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Song, X. Q. Gong, L. Cao and J. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4993–4999 RSC .
Y. Wu, M. Tariq, W. Q. Zaman, W. Sun, Z. Zhou and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4105–4110 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Zaman, Z. Wang, W. Sun, Z. Zhou, M. Tariq, L. Cao, X. Q. Gong and J. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2786–2793 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Velikokhatnyi, K. Kadakia, M. K. Datta and P. N. Kumta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20542–20547 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kadakia, P. H. Jampani, O. I. Velikokhatnyi, M. K. Datta, S. K. Park, D. H. Hong, S. J. Chung and P. N. Kumta, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 855–865 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Seitz, C. F. Dickens, K. Nishio, Y. Hikita, J. Montoya, A. Doyle, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic, H. Y. Hwang, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2016, 353, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, L. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Chen, R. Si, W. Yan, Q. Zhang, G. D. Li, L. Yang and X. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7631–7635 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, N. Dubouis, M. B. Osman, W. Yin, M. T. Sougrati, D. A. D. Corte, D. Giaume and A. Grimaud, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4571–4575 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, G. Yu, X. Ai, W. Yan, H. Duan, W. Chen, X. Li, T. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Huang, J. S. Chen and X. X. Zou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Li, J. Wang, Y. Du, S. Xi, Y. Sun, M. Sherburne, J. W. Ager, A. C. Fisher and Z. J. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 572 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, P. C. Shih, K. C. Tsao, Y. T. Pan, X. Yin, C. J. Sun and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12076–12083 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, Q. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Xiong, H. Li, Y. Yao, X. Z. Yuan, M. C. Williams, M. Gu, H. Chen and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 494–501 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lebedev, M. Povia, K. Waltar, P. M. Abdala, I. E. Castelli, E. Fabbri, M. V. Blanco, A. Fedorov, C. Copéret, N. Marzari and T. J. Schmidt, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5182–5191 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shang, C. Cao, D. Yu, Y. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Li, T. Zheng, X. Yan, W. Yu, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805104 CrossRef .
O. D. Morales, S. Raaijman, R. Kortlever, P. J. Kooyman, T. Wezendonk, J. Gascon, W. T. Fu and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12363 CrossRef .
J. Kim, P. C. Shih, Y. Qin, Z. A. Bardan, C. J. Sun and H. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13877–13881 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Kuznetsov, M. A. Naeem, P. V. Kumar, P. M. Abdala, A. Fedorov and C. R. Müller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7883–7888 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sardar, E. Petrucco, C. I. Hiley, J. D. B. Sharman, P. P. Wells, A. E. Russell, R. J. Kashtiban, J. Sloan and R. I. Walton, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10960–10964 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, L. Zhang, L. Wu, Z. Hu, L. Shi and S. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3809 CrossRef .
M. Retuerto, L. Pascual, F. C. Vallejo, P. Ferrer, D. Gianolio, A. G. Pereira, Á. García, J. Torrero, M. T. F. Díaz, P. Bencok, M. A. Peña, J. L. G. Fierro and S. Rojas, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2041 CrossRef .
W. Q. Zaman, W. Sun, M. Tariq, Z. Zhou, U. F. Z. Abbas, L. Cao and J. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 295–302 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Mondschein, J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, J. Y. C. Chen, C. F. Holder, C. K. Badding and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 950–957 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huynh, D. K. Bediako and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6002–6010 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huynh, D. K. Bediako, Y. Liu and D. G. Nocera, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 17142–17152 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Yan, J. Q. Chi, J. Y. Xie, B. Dong, Z. Z. Liu, W. K. Gao, J. H. Lin, Y. M. Chai and C. G. Liu, Renew. Energy, 2017, 119, 54–61 CrossRef .
R. Frydendal, E. A. Paoli, I. Chorkendorff, J. Rossmeisl and I. E. L. Stephens, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500991 CrossRef .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D. H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16130 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Younis, S. Lyu, Q. Zhao, C. Lei, P. Zhang, B. Yang, Z. Li, L. Lei, Y. Hou and X. Feng, BMC Mater., 2019, 1, 6 CrossRef .
K. Mamtani, D. Jain, D. Dogu, V. Gustin, S. Gunduz, A. C. Co and U. S. Ozkan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 88–97 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lei, Q. Zheng, F. Cheng, Y. Hou, B. Yang, Z. Li, Z. Wen, L. Lei, G. Chai and X. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, S. E. Lowe, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. Pang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhong, P. Liu, K. Zhao, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16511–16515 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bing, H. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184–2202 RSC .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J. Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Z. Fang, H. Li, D. Fernandez, G. Henkelman, S. M. Humphrey and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13225–13234 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pi, J. Guo, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8571–8578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, K. Yin, J. Zhang, H. Gao, N. Liu, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 39728–39736 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Q. Shao, Y. Qian and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pi, Q. Shao, P. Wang, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700886 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Chen, M. Xie, Z. Lyu, M. Chi, M. Mavrikakis, W. Jin and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7244–7248 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, S. A. Liao, L. X. Dai, J. W. Yu, W. Zhu and Y. W. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 926–938 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, X. Liu, K. Wang, X. Zhao, H. Pu, T. Zhang, J. Jia, K. Y. Dong and Y. J. Deng, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 9956–9962 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kwon, H. Hwang, Y. J. Sa, J. Park, H. Baik, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604688 CrossRef .
F. Lv, J. Feng, K. Wang, Z. Dou, W. Zhang, J. Zhou, C. Yang, M. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Li, P. Gao and S. Guo, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 1244–1252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Luo, S. F. Chu, M. Peng, B. Liu, Q. Wu, P. Liu, F. M. F. de Groote and Y. Tan, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 146–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, Y. J. Sa, H. Baik, T. Kwon, S. H. Joo and K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5500–5509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shan, T. Ling, K. Davey, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900510 CrossRef .
Z. Jin, J. Lv, H. Jia, W. Liu, H. Li, Z. Chen, X. Lin, G. Xie, X. Liu, S. Sun and H. J. Qiu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Q. Shao, B. Huang, M. Sun and X. Huang, iScience, 2019, 11, 492–504 CrossRef CAS .
T. Feng, G. Yu, S. Tao, S. Zhu, R. Ku, R. Zhang, Q. Zeng, M. Yang, Y. Chen, W. Chen, W. Chen and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9638–9645 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, X. Zhao, W. Cheng, H. Su, H. Zhang, M. Liu and Q. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7483–7489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Z. Tian, L. Zhang, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, B. J. Deibert, R. Ge and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 162 CrossRef .
W. Gou, M. Zhang, Y. Zou, X. Zhou and Y. Qu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 6008–6014 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Yu, D. Yang, J. Chi, X. Wang, S. Sun, Z. Shao and B. Yi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 15–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, H. Zhang, G. Chen and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 6250–6256 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, H. Yu, X. Wang, S. Sun, Y. Li, Z. Shao and B. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2858–2866 RSC .
M. Q. Yang, J. Wang, H. Wu and G. W. Ho, Small, 2018, 14, 1703323 CrossRef .
F. Cheng, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Du, X. Han and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2474–2477 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, X. Kong, W. Chen, H. Su, Y. Liu, F. Cai, G. Wang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6054–6059 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, L. Li, X. Liu, C. Tang, W. Xu, S. Chen, L. Song, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902709 CrossRef .
R. Ge, L. Li, J. Su, Y. Lin, Z. Tian and L. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901313 CrossRef .
D. Cao, H. Xu and D. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903038 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Feng, Z. Zhao, X. Z. Yuan, H. Li and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 260, 118176 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, Z. Cao, C. Xia, F. Ming, W. Zhang, A. H. Emwas, L. Cavallo and H. N. Alshareef, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 1553–1561 CrossRef .
A. L. Wang, H. Xu, J. X. Feng, L. X. Ding, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10703–10709 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, P. Hasin and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1926–1929 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Liu, Z. Lai, B. Li, Y. Zong, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701331 CrossRef .
F. Luo, L. Guo, Y. Xie, J. Xu, K. Qu and Z. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 279, 119394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Q. Xue, Y. Y. Xue, Y. Ding, F. M. Li, P. J. Jin, P. Chen and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14064–14070 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Han, B. Huang, Q. Shao, H. L. Xin and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5692 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1892–1897 RSC .
J. Lim, D. Park, S. S. Jeon, C. W. Roh, J. Choi, D. Yoon, M. Park, H. Jung and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704796 CrossRef .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, L. Peng, Z. Fang, C. Yan, X. Zhang and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706347 CrossRef .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, Y. Guo, J. Kim, A. E. Whitten, K. Wood, K. Kani, A. E. Rowan, J. Henzie and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12434–12441 CrossRef CAS .
D. Weber, L. M. Schoop, D. Wurmbrand, S. Laha, F. Podjaski, V. Duppel, K. Müller, U. Starke and B. V. Lotsch, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21558–21566 RSC .
B. Jiang, J. Kim, Y. Guo, K. C. W. Wu, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, N. Alhokbany, J. Henzie and Y. Yamachi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 3697–3702 RSC .
S. Laha, Y. Lee, F. Podjaski, D. Weber, V. Duppel, L. M. Schoop, F. Pielnhofer, C. Scheurer, K. Müller, U. Starke, K. Reuter and B. V. Lotsch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803795 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, J. Bai, X. R. Wu, P. Chen, P. J. Jin, H. C. Yao and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16437–16446 RSC .
Q. Yao, B. Huang, N. Zhang, M. Sun, Q. Shao and X. Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13983–13988 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu, L. Du, D. Adekoya, G. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Sun and Y. Lei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001537 CrossRef .
Y. Pi, N. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4424–4430 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Xu, S. Liu, S. Yin, H. Yu, Z. Wang, X. Li, L. Wang and H. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15747–15754 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Wang, X. J. He, X. F. Lu, H. Xu, Y. X. Tong and G. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3669–3673 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Wang, H. Xu and G. R. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 445–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Wu, B. Zhang, S. Cao, Z. Li and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808367 CrossRef .
N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, W. Xu, T. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 924 CrossRef .
M. H. Shao, A. Peles and K. Shoemaker, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3714–3719 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yang, A. Wang, B. T. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, J. Dong, Y. Feng, C. S. Allen, C. Wan, B. Volosskiy, M. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, H. Sun, P. An, W. Chen, Z. Guo, C. Lee, D. Chen, I. Shakir, M. Liu, T. Hu, Y. Li, A. I. Kirkland, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z. Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C. R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W. X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, Q. Luo, J. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, X. Liu, X. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Liu, Z. Qi, Z. Jiang, J. Yang and T. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4849 CrossRef .
F. Luo, H. Hu, X. Zhao, Z. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Xu, T. Kaneko, Y. Yoshida, C. Zhu and W. Cai, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 2120–2128 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, J. Jin, M. Lu, B. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Peng, P. Xi and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 18378–18386 CrossRef CAS .
H. Su, X. Zhao, W. Cheng, H. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Zhou, M. Liu and Q. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1816–1822 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 63–82 RSC .
J. Liang, F. Ma, S. Hwang, X. Wang, J. Sokolowski, Q. Li, G. Wu and D. Su, Joule, 2019, 3, 956–991 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ling, D. Y. Yan, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Mao, X. W. Du, Z. Hu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12876 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj and S. Noda, Small, 2020, 16, 1905779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Lai, X. Zhang, Z. Fan, Q. He, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 243–256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao and Y. Xia, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 440–459 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, S. G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C.
T. Dinh, J. Li, A. Ozden, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. S. Tan, C. M. Gabardo, M. Luo, H. Zhou, F. Li, Y. Lum, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, M. Liu, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, P. Todorovic, T. T. Zhuang, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 98–106 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Zhu, S. Kattel, F. Jiao and J. G. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802840 CrossRef .
M. Zhao, Z. Chen, Z. Lyu, Z. D. Hood, M. Xie, M. Vara, M. Chi and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7028–7036 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roy, R. R. Rao, K. A. Stoerzinger, J. Hwang, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, Y. S. Horn and I. E. L. Stephens, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2045–2051 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, S. Cheong, C. E. Marjo, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12760–12764 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, S. Cheong, Y. Li, X. H. Chan, L. M. Lacroix, S. L. Y. Chang, R. Arenal, I. Florea, H. Barron, A. S. Barnard, A. M. Henning, C. Zhao, W. Schuhmann, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10241–10245 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Poerwoprajitno, L. Gloag, T. M. Benedetti, S. Cheong, J. Watt, D. L. Huber, J. J. Gooding and R. D. Tilley, Small, 2019, 15, 1804577 CrossRef .
J. H. Domingo, M. Sodupe and X. S. Monfort, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 7786–7798 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, M. Bosman, X. Huang, D. Huang, Y. Yu, K. P. Ong, Y. A. Akimov, L. Wu, B. Li, J. Wu, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, C. E. Png, C. L. Gan, P. Yang and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7684 CrossRef CAS .
S. Devaraj and N. Munichandraiah, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4406–4417 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dobrovolsky, A. Merdasa, E. L. Unger, A. Yartsev and I. G. Scheblykin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 34 CrossRef .
Y. Yu, G. H. Nam, Q. He, X. J. Wu, K. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, F. R. Ran, X. Wang, H. Li, X. Huang, B. Li, Q. Xiong, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Gu, Y. Du, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 638–643 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Zhang and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6099–6103 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, A. L. Wang, Y. Gong, W. Hao, H. Cheng, J. Chen, B. Li, N. Yang, W. Niu, J. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Fan, X. J. Wu, J. Chen, J. Luo, S. Li, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, G. Yu, X. Ai, W. Yan, H. Duan, W. Chen, X. Li, T. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Huang, J. S. Chen and X. Zou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5236 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 3946–3960 Search PubMed .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, S. Zhai, H. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701410 CrossRef .
C. Lv, C. Yan, G. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Sun, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6073–6076 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. M. Chen, Z. Hu, S. F. Hung, N. Ma, J. Dai, H. J. Lin, C. T. Chen, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900883 CrossRef .
R. D. L. Smith, B. Sporinova, R. D. Fagan, S. Trude and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1654–1659 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, X. Zheng, P. Cui, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Y. Qu, W. Chen, Y. Lin, H. Li, X. Han, Y. Hu, P. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Ge, Y. Yao, R. Sun, Y. Wu, L. Gu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4855 CrossRef .
C. Ma, W. Sun, W. Q. Zaman, Z. Zhou, H. Zhang, Q. Shen, L. Cao and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34980–34989 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, C. Ma, X. Tian, J. Liao, J. Yang, C. Ge and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12518–12525 RSC .
H. S. Oh, H. N. Nong, T. Reier, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3321–3328 RSC .
E. Oakton, D. Lebedev, M. Povia, D. F. Abbott, E. Fabbri, A. Fedorov, M. Nachtegaal, C. Copéret and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2346–2352 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Oh, H. N. Nong, T. Reier, A. Bergmann, M. Gliech, J. F. de Araújo, E. Willinger, R. Schlögl, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12552–12563 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, P. Cui, G. Zhao, K. Rui, M. Lao, Y. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Jiang, H. Pan, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12540–12544 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Lu, B. Yang, X. San and Z. S. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. Zhou, M. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abbou, R. Chattot, V. Martin, F. Claudel, L. S. Hernandez, C. Beauger, L. Dubau and F. Maillard, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7283–7294 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shan, C. Guo, Y. Zhu, S. Chen, L. Song, M. Jaroniec, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem, 2019, 5, 445–459 CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Chen, H. Li, P. Cai, Y. Li and Z. Wen, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 576–583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, T. Yang, C. Cheng, X. Zhao, E. Liu and J. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2020, 41, 1161–1167 CrossRef CAS .
T. Audichon, T. W. Napporn, C. Canaff, C. Morais, C. Comminges and K. B. Kokoh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2562–2573 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, W. Xu, L. Wu, Y. C. Hsieh, P. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Sasaki, J. N. Rennerc, K. E. Ayers, R. R. Adzic and J. X. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 819, 296–305 CrossRef .
N. Danilovic, R. Subbaraman, K. C. Chang, S. H. Chang, Y. J. Kang, J. Snyder, A. P. Paulikas, D. Strmcnik, Y. T. Kim, D. Myers, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14016–14021 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mamaca, E. Mayousse, S. A. Clacens, T. W. Napporn, K. Servat, N. Guillet and K. B. Kokoha, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 111, 376–380 CrossRef .
G. Li, H. Yu, W. Song, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Shao and B. Yi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 16786–16794 CrossRef CAS .
T. Audichon, S. Morisset, T. W. Napporn, K. B. Kokoh, C. Comminges and C. Morais, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1128–1137 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. C. Guinto, L. C. García, D. C. M. Casillas, J. M. S. Pineda, P. T. Meza, R. S. Casarin and R. G. G. Huerta, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 12667–12673 CrossRef .
J. Cheng, H. Zhang, H. Ma, H. Zhong and Y. Zou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 6609–6613 CrossRef CAS .
T. Reier, Z. Pawolek, S. Cherevko, M. Bruns, T. Jones, D. Teschner, S. Selve, A. Bergmann, H. N. Nong, R. Schlögl, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13031–13040 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, W. Q. Zaman, W. Sun, L. M. Cao, M. Tariq and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4959–4962 RSC .
W. Sun, Z. H. Zhou, W. Q. Zaman, L. M. Cao and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41855–41862 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, W. Q. Zaman, C. Ma, J. Liao, C. Ge and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4432–4440 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Pham, M. Bühler, J. Knöppel, M. Bierling, D. Seeberger, D. E. López, K. J. Mayrhofer, S. Cherevko and S. Thiele, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118762 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, G. Liu, J. Li and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Oh, H. N. Nong, T. Reier, A. Bergmann, M. Gliech, J. F. de Araújo, E. Willinger, R. Schlögl, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12552–12563 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, Y. Xu, Z. Wang, J. Luo, M. A. Khan, L. Zhang, D. Ye, H. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 104511 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, P. Ren, C. Ma, J. Zhao, R. Chen, S. Chen, N. P. Rajan, H. Li, L. Yu, Z. Tian and D. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, B. Feng, W. Li, Y. Niu, Y. Yu, S. Lu, C. Zhong, P. Liu, Z. Tian, L. Chen, W. Hu and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 117–126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, H. Li, A. Y. Lu, S. Min, Z. Idriss, M. N. Hedhili, K. W. Huang, H. Idriss and L. J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yi, J. Tornow, E. Willinger, M. G. Willinger, C. Ranjan and R. Schlögl, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1929–1937 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, F. Lv, W. Zhang, P. Li, K. Wang, C. Yang, B. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Zhou, F. Lin, G. C. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703798 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, Z. Luo, Y. Chen, J. Wang, B. Li, Y. Zong and H. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 3908 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Tackett, W. Sheng, S. Kattel, S. Yao, B. Yan, K. A. Kuttiyiel, Q. Wu and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2615–2621 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, V. A. Saveleva, S. Zafeiratos, E. R. Savinova, P. Lettenmeier, P. Gazdzicki, A. S. Gago and K. A. Friedrich, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 385–391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumari, B. P. Ajayi, B. Kumar, J. B. Jasinski, M. K. Sunkara and J. M. Spurgeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2432–2440 RSC .
H. N. Nong, H. S. Oh, T. Reier, E. Willinger, M. G. Willinger, V. Petkov, D. Teschner and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2975–2979 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kasian, J. P. Grote, S. Geiger, S. Cherevko and K. Mayrhofer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 57, 2488–2491 CrossRef .
S. Choi, J. Park, M. Kabiraz, Y. Hong, T. Kwon, T. Kim, A. Oh, H. Baik, L. Minseop, S. M. Paek, S. I. Choi and K. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003935 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Yu Zhang	Yu Zhang obtained her M.S. degree from Shandong University in 2018. Currently, she is a PhD student at Shandong University under the supervision of Prof. An-Liang Wang. Her current research focuses on the synthesis of novel nanomaterials for oxygen evolution reactions.
Xiaojuan Zhu	Xiaojuan Zhu obtained her M.S. degree from China West Normal University in 2020. Currently, she is a research assistant with Prof. An-Liang Wang. Her current research focuses on the synthesis of novel nanomaterials for nitrogen and nitrate reduction reactions.
An-Liang Wang	An-Liang Wang obtained his PhD from Sun Yat-sen University in 2016. He then moved and finished his post-doctoral training at Nanyang Technological University in 2018 with Prof. Zhang Hua. In September of 2018, he joined Shandong University as a professor. His research interests focus on the development of novel nanomaterials for electrocatalytic applications, including water splitting, fuel cells, and nitrogen and nitrate reduction reactions.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of various design strategies for OER catalysts with high performance under acidic conditions.	 
* + H2O → HO* + e− + H+	(1)
HO* → O* + e− + H+	(2)
O* + H2O → HOO* + e− + H+	(3)
HOO* → O2 + * + e− + H+	(4)

 	Fig. 2  (a) AEM with oxygen from the electrolyte. (b) Volcano curve of the theoretical overpotential (η) against the standard free energy of ΔGO* − ΔGHO* based on the DFT calculations. (c) LOM with one oxygen atom of oxygen molecular derived from the catalyst. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) LOM with entire oxygen atoms of oxygen molecules derived from the catalyst. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The potential dependence of the 16O18O fraction in the oxygen produced on Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ. (f) The fraction of 16O18O in the oxygen produced potentiostatically in 0.1 M HClO4 on RuO2 and Ru0.9Ni0.1O2−δ electrodes. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2009, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route and the model of the Cu-doped RuO2 hollow porous polyhedron. (b) LSV curves of samples synthesized at different temperatures. (c) Chronopotentiometric test at a fixed current density of 10 mA cm−2. (d) Free energy profile of the OER on the (110) and (111) surfaces. External potential of 1.23 V was considered. Structures of key intermediates are shown in the insets. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic illustration for the incorporation of Ir dopants into the STO matrix. (f) LSV curves of Ir-STO, STO and IrO2 in 0.1 M HClO4. (g) Gibbs free energy diagrams for the OER on the Ti site in STO (blue) and Ti4 site in Ir-STO (green). (e–g) Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of IrW nanodendrites. (b) LSV curves; the inset shows the corresponding Tafel slopes. (c) LSV curves of IrW/C and Ir/C before and after durability test of 3000 cycles. Inset: TEM image of IrW NDs after the durability test. (d) Projected density of states of IrO2 (up) and W–IrO2 (bottom) with the overlapped states of Ir 5d (red) and O 2p (blue) denoted by the shaded area (yellow). (a–d) Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Cr0.6Ru0.4O2 electrocatalyst. (f) Atomic-resolution HAADF-STEM image and EELS analysis (inset of i). (g) LSV curves of different catalysts. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the synthetic route for defective RuO2 with oxygen vacancies. (b) LSV curves of defective RuO2/CC, RuO2/CC, and commercial RuO2/CC. (c) Nyquist plots of defective RuO2/CC and RuO2/CC. (d) Linear relationships between capacitive current and scan rate for defective RuO2/CC and RuO2/CC. (e) Stability test of defective RuO2/CC at a fixed current density of 10 mA cm−2. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of IrO2 NN-L. (b) LSV curves of different catalysts. (c) LSV curves before and after the durability test. The inset shows chronopotentiometry curves measured at 10 mA cm−2 for 120 min (a–c) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) TEM image of NaRuO2 nanosheet (insets are the experimental (left) and simulated (right) SAED patterns of a nanosheet). (e) LSV curves (inset is the corresponding Tafel plot). (f) Perspective view of the two-nanosheet system employed in the calculations. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (g) HAADF-STEM image of the 3D Ir assembly. LSV curves (h) and Tafel plots (i) of different catalysts in 0.1 and 0.5 M HClO4 solutions. (g and h) Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The Ru k-edge k2-weighted Fourier transform spectra for different catalysts. (b) LSV curves in 0.5 M H2SO4. (c) Plots of current density and Ru dissolved mass ratio versus time at a constant potential of 1.49 VRHE in 0.5 M H2SO4. (d) Operando FTIR spectra for Ru–N–C during the acidic OER process. (e) Operando EXAFS spectra and first-shell fitting curves for Ru–N–C at different applied voltages from the open circuit condition to 1.5 V. (f) Free energy diagram for the OER on Ru1–N4 (red line), O–Ru1–N4 (blue line), and HO–Ru1–N4 (green line). Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) TEM image of Pd–Ru branched nanoparticles. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a tripod nanoparticle and the corresponding STEM-EDX mapping images. (c) HRTEM image of a linear bipod nanoparticle. (d) Magnified HRTEM image taken from the black rectangle in panel (c) showing the Pd-core and Ru-branch interface with ABCABC and ABABAB stacking of close packed planes in the fcc Pd core and hcp Ru branch, respectively. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of an individual branched nanoparticle. (f) HRTEM image of a branch taken from the black rectangle in (e) and the corresponding FFT pattern (inset). (g) LSV curves. (h) Chronopotentiometric profile in 0.1 M HClO4. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) HAADF-STEM image of an individual Ru octahedron. (b) Atomic-resolution STEM image taken from the marked square in (a). (c) In situ XRD patterns of fcc Ru octahedral nanocrystals. The characteristic peaks of fcc and hcp Ru are marked by blue and red dashed lines, respectively. Blue dashed lines: JCPDS no. 88-2333 (fcc-Ru). Red dashed lines: JCPDS no. 06-0663 (hcp-Ru). (d) LSV curves measured over different Ru catalysts in 0.05 M H2SO4. The inset shows the enlarged polarization curves. (a-d) Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e and f) The crystal structure of 6H SrIrO3 and 3C SrIrO3, respectively. (g) Comparison of mass activity at 1.525 VRHE. (h) Chronopotentiometric curves of 6H–SrIrO3 and 3C–SrIrO3 in 0.5 M H2SO4 at 10 mA cm−2. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic synthesis process of amorphous precious metal and alloy nanosheets. (b) TEM image of amorphous Ir nanosheets. (c) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image of amorphous Ir nanosheets. (d and e) LSV curves and the corresponding Tafel plots of various catalysts. (f) LSV curves of amorphous Ir nanosheets before and after 5000 cycles. The inset shows the chronoamperometry measurement curve at an overpotential of 255 mV for the 8 h test. (g) Atomic resolution HAADF-STEM image of the amorphous Ir nanosheets after the stability test. The inset shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (h) In situ XAFS spectral change of the Ir L3-edge. (i) XANES spectrum of amorphous Ir nanosheets after the stability test. (a–i) Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of Ru@IrOx for enhanced OER performance. (b) HAADF-STEM image of a randomly chosen Ru@IrOx icosahedral nanocrystal. (c) LSV curves of different catalysts in 0.05 M H2SO4. (d) Chronoamperometric response of Ru@IrOx and RuIrOx at 1.55 VRHE. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of IrOx supported on ATO. (f) Ir oxidation states of different catalysts. (g) Mass activity at η = 280 mV before and after stability test. (h) Chronopotentiometric curves at 10 mA cm−2 for different catalysts. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for RuNi2@G-T. (b) HRTEM image of RuNi2@G-250. (c) LSV curves of RuNi2@G-250 in comparison with other samples treated with different oxidation temperatures and commercial RuO2. (d) Chronopotentiometric curves at 10 mA cm−2 for RuNi2@G-250 and commercial RuO2. (e) Free energy profiles over RuO2 and interface Ru centers between RuO2 and graphene at zero potential. (f) Differential charge density at the interface Ru centers between RuO2 and graphene. Yellow and blue contours represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 


Precious metal catalysts	Ir nanotube130	0.1 M HClO4	245	4	NA
Ir superstructure145	0.1 M HClO4	270	8@2.5 mA cm−2	11.5
Ir nanorod129	0.5 M H2SO4	290	1000 cycles	14
Ir nanowire132	0.5 M HClO4	270	6.94	31
Ir nanosheet138	0.5 M H2SO4	240	8	9.6
fcc Ru octahedral169	0.05 M H2SO4	168	NA	NA
Ru branch173	0.1 M HClO4	180	4	127
Au–Ru branch172	0.1 M HClO4	220	1000 cycles	612
Amorphous RuTe2 nanorod131	0.5 M H2SO4	290	24	200
Pd–Ru branch171	0.1 M HClO4	225	NA	408
IrNi nanocluster100	0.1 M HClO4	
η
9.1 = 270	2	12.5Ir
IrW nanodendrites105	0.1 M HClO4	
η
8.1 = 300	3000 cycles	10.2Ir
IrPd nanocage101	0.1 M HClO4	226	15 h	12.5Ir
Al–Ni–Co–Ir–Mo alloy109	0.5 M H2SO4	275	48	24.3Ir
IrAg nanotube99	0.05 M H2SO4	296	6	13.3Ir
IrCoNi hollow nanocrystal221	0.1 M HClO4	303	200 min@5 mA cm−2	10Ir
Co doped IrCu ONC104	0.1 M HClO4	290	2000 cycles	20Ir
Co doped RuIr nanocrystal108	0.1 M HClO4	235	25	NA
RhIr nanoparticle96	0.5 M H2SO4	292	8	280
IrNiCu DNF107	0.1 M HClO4	300	2500 cycles	20Ir
RuCu nanotube123	0.5 M H2SO4	345	12	NA
RuCu nanosheet143	0.5 M H2SO4	236	13.5	NA
Ir/ATO193	0.05 M H2SO4	400	15	10.2Ir
4H/fcc Au@Ir nanoribbon222	0.5 M H2SO4	296	NA	26Ir
Ir/NG210	0.5 M H2SO4	303	20	23Ir
Ir/NiN4 (ref. 223)	0.5 M H2SO4	340	2	76.5Ir
IrCu nanocrystal87	0.05 M H2SO4	311	10	60Ir
RuNi nanosheet assembly110	0.5 M H2SO4	252	10	NA
Precious metal oxide catalysts	RuO2/CC122	0.5 M H2SO4	179	20	520
Amorphous IrOx film196	1.0 M H2SO4	220	24	0.1
IrO2 nanoneedle133	1.0 M H2SO4	313	4	4000
IrOx nanosheet140	0.5 M H2SO4	250	12	7.8Ir
RuO2 nanosheet141	0.1 M HClO4	255	6	200
IrOx/ATO215	0.05 M H2SO4	NA	15	10.2Ir
IrOOH nanosheet139	0.1 M HClO4	344	7	200
Ir0.7Ru0.3O2 (ref. 224)	0.05 M H2SO4	366 @5 mA cm−2	450	60
IrNi oxide209	0.1 M HClO4	310	NA	20Ir
Ni, Co–IrO2 (ref. 63)	0.1 M HClO4	285	20000 s	200
W0.57Ir0.43O3−δ (ref. 225)	1.0 M H2SO4	370	0.6	NA
Co doped RuO2 (ref. 55)	0.5 M H2SO4	169	50	NA
Mn doped RuO2 (ref. 53)	0.5 M H2SO4	158	10	NA
Ir0.6Cr0.4O2 nanowire114	0.5 M H2SO4	250	25	600
Cu doped RuO2 (ref. 54)	0.5 M H2SO4	188	8	275
Ce–IrO2 (ref. 60)	0.5 M H2SO4	224	100	NA
Cu doped IrO2 (ref. 61)	0.1 M HClO4	351	6000 s	NA
F Doped IrO2 (ref. 65)	1.0 M H2SO4	400	24	300
Cr0.6Ru0.4O2 (ref. 113)	0.5 M H2SO4	178	10	NA
Ru@IrOx (ref. 197)	0.05 M H2SO4	282	24	NA
Ru–RuO2/CNT199	0.5 M H2SO4	180	10	800
IrNiOx (ref. 226)	0.05 M H2SO4	330	NA	20
MnOx–TiO2–RuO2 (ref. 59)	0.1 M H2SO4	386	6	NA
IrO2–MnO2 nanorod210	0.1 M HClO4	275	25	200
RuO2–graphene217	0.5 M H2SO4	227	24	320
IrO2/GCN193	0.5 M H2SO4	276	4@20 mA cm−2	801IrO2
Amorphous La–IrOx (ref. 189)	0.1 M HClO4	263	5.6	200
Precious metal-based perovskites or pyrochlores	6H SrIrO3 (ref. 181)	0.5 M H2SO4	248	30	900
IrOx/SrIrO3 (ref. 66)	0.5 M H2SO4	340	30	NA
CaCu3Ru4O12 (ref. 79)	0.5 M H2SO4	171	24	250
Sr0.90Na0.10RuO3 (ref. 80)	0.1 M HClO4	170	NA	100
SrCo0.9Ir0.1O3−δ (ref. 70)	0.1 M HClO4	NA	3	NA
Ir doped SrTiO3 (ref. 67)	0.1 M HClO4	247	20	210
Y2Ru2O7−δ (ref. 71)	0.1 M HClO4	270@1 mA cm−2	8	NA
Y2Ru1.6Y0.4O7–δ (ref. 76)	0.1 M HClO4	270@18.1 mA cm−2	NA	NA
Y1.85Zn0.15Ru2O7−δ (ref. 72)	0.5 M H2SO4	291	8 h @1 mA cm−2	3000
Single atom catalysts	Ru–N–C156	0.5 M H2SO4	267	30	280
Ru1–Pt3Cu155	0.1 M HClO4	220	28	16.3Pt+Ru
Ir-SA@Fe@NCNT157	0.5 M H2SO4	270	12	1.14Ir
N-Coordinated Co single sites159	0.5 M H2SO4	265	100 h	NA
Non-precious catalysts	N-WC nanoarray150	0.5 M H2SO4	
η
60 = 470	20@10 mA cm−2	NA
Exfoliated graphene nanosheets array91	0.5 M H2SO4	334	10	NA
WO3 (ref. 125)	0.5 M H2SO4	600	10	6000
Co3O4 (ref. 82)	0.5 M H2SO4	570	12	NA
Co3O4@C/CP219	0.5 M H2SO4	370	86.8@100 mA cm−2	2520
Ag doped Co3O4 (ref. 85)	0.5 M H2SO4	680	10	NA
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
