Highly stable CdTe quantum dots hosted in gypsum via a flocculation–precipitation method   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC04412D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC04412D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 12336-12342Highly stable CdTe quantum dots hosted in gypsum via a flocculation–precipitation method†

        
          
            Yajing 
            Chang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaopeng 
            Cheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jinhua 
            Zhang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dabin 
            Yu
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Pulsed Power Laser Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230037, P. R. China. E-mail: dabinyu@sina.cn
Received 
      10th August 2019
    , Accepted 19th September 2019First published on 23rd September 2019AbstractPoor stability hinders the practical application of aqueous CdTe quantum dots (QDs) in optoelectronic devices. In this work, a flocculation–precipitation method is demonstrated to host aqueous CdTe QDs in gypsum to form CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites, which is simple, effective and environmental-friendly. Ascribed to gypsum acting as a tight and robust matrix protection agent, the photo-, thermal-, anti-acid and long-term stability of CdTe QDs were remarkably improved. Moreover, this approach solved the problem of incompatibility between aqueous QDs and epoxy resin, allowing for the application of aqueous QDs in white light emitting diodes (WLEDs), based on which a WLED with the red-emission nanocomposites used as a color-conversion layer was successfully fabricated. These results indicate the potential of this technique in stabilizing aqueous QDs as well as their practical application in optoelectronic devices.
Introduction
Semiconductor nanocrystals, also named quantum dots (QDs), have attracted enormous attention in the past two decades. This is due to their unique properties, such as tunability of absorption and emission wavelengths because of the quantum confinement effect,1–3 narrow emission bandwidths, broad absorption profiles and high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY).4,5 Besides, taking advantage of flexible solution processing, QDs with varied compositions, as well as different size or shapes, are easily obtained.6,7 QDs provide great potential for optoelectronic applications, for instance, light emitting diodes (LEDs)8,9 solar cells,10,11 and photodetectors.12,13 Indeed, a large number of companies have been focusing on the development of QD-based products, such as Samsung, LG and QD Vision.
Regarding the practical use of QDs, their long-term stability is a critical issue. As is known, QDs in the colloidal solution phase are quite stable, ascribed to the excess of surface ligands passivating the QD surface and protecting QDs from the surrounding environment.14–16 However, once isolated from the colloidal solution, deterioration of QDs occurs, which can be quickened by heat, light, oxygen and moisture.17,18 Additionally, the PLQY of QDs is dramatically reduced since there are no excess surface ligands. In terms of this problem, many groups have developed various approaches to incorporate QDs in a tight matrix or polymers, which is helpful to improve their stability and simultaneously sustain their high PLQY.19–21 Alexander et al. reported direct incorporation of aqueous CdTe QDs into inorganic salt crystals, that is, NaCl, KCl, KBr, and so forth, which is achieved by mixing CdTe QDs with salts followed by slow evaporation of solvents for several days up to several weeks.22,23 The resulting mixed crystals exhibit extraordinary high stability. Borax and LiCl matrices have also been reported for incorporation of CdTe QDs to improve their stability.24,25 Recently, the liquid–liquid-diffusion-assisted-crystallization (LLDC) method has been applied to embed CdTe QDs in NaCl. Due to the reduced solubility of NaCl in water by the interdiffusion of the orthogonal solvent, the crystallization can be completed in less than one day.26 Inspired by this work, our group developed a water–ethanol phase assisted co-precipitation approach to integrate CdTe QDs in NaCl crystals.27 With this facile method, the duration of incorporation of QDs could be reduced from days to seconds compared with the evaporation and LLDC technique, which has potential for industrial applications. Although NaCl, LiCl and borax crystals appear to be tight matrices and provide QDs with higher stability, their inherent hygroscopy is inevitable, which limits the resulting mixed crystals in obtaining extremely robust stability. Therefore, it is of significance to find a robust and tight matrix to embed QDs and at the same time maintain their PLQY.
Herein, we report a flocculation–precipitation approach to host CdTe QDs within a robust matrix—gypsum, which is effective, inexpensive and environmental-friendly. Specifically, the encapsulation process was achieved by the introduction of Na2SO4 and subsequently a CaCl2 solution into a CdTe QD/water solution. The subsequent filtering process readily removes the excess precursors and allows the isolation of CdTe QDs from the parent solution without the need for using ethanol. With the protection of the tight matrix, the resulting CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites exhibit excellent optical properties with remarkably improved stability. First, photo-stability is manifested in the retention of the high PL of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites under ultraviolet irradiation. Second, thermo-stability is demonstrated by the preservation of strong fluorescence when placing CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in the oven at 150 °C. Consequently, anti-acid stability is revealed after acid treatment. Finally, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites possess long-term stability, which is verified by their high PL after four years of storage. A representative WLED composed of CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites excited by a blue InGaN chip is constructed, displaying excellent optical properties. Taken together, the results of this study exemplify that gypsum is an attractive and reliable host for stabilizing CdTe QDs, yielding highly stable fluorescent solid-state materials for optoelectronic devices.
Results and discussion
A set of CdTe QDs were synthesized via an aqueous approach. Fig. 1a shows the crystal structure of the synthesized CdTe QDs (grown for 6 h). The standard X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of bulk CdTe is also provided as the reference. The diffraction peaks at 23.7°, 39.3°, and 46.4° match well with the crystal planes of (110), (220) and (311) of CdTe, suggesting the formation of cubic phase CdTe QDs. As shown in Fig. 1b, the CdTe QDs are spheres with an average size of 3.3 nm. The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image of the CdTe QDs is also shown (the inset of Fig. 1b). The interplanar distance is measured to be 0.196 nm, which coincides well with the (311) plane of CdTe.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD pattern of CdTe QDs (red curve). The standard XRD pattern of the bulk CdTe material is also included for comparison (black curve). (b) TEM image of CdTe QDs, scale bar = 20 nm. Inset: HRTEM image of CdTe QDs, scale bar = 5 nm. 
The fluorescent properties of the synthesized CdTe QDs are exhibited in Fig. 2 (Table S1 in the ESI†). By extending the reaction time, the sizes of the CdTe QDs are increased. Therefore, different emission colors from green to red can be seen when placing the CdTe QDs in water solution under 365 nm UV light (Fig. 2b). Fig. 2c shows the UV-vis and PL spectra of different-size CdTe QDs dispersed in water, where the absorption peak ranged from 506 nm to 561 nm and the PL maximum between 552 nm and 621 nm. It is clear that with the size ranging from 2.5 nm to 3.3 nm, the absorption peak together with the PL emission peak obviously exhibits a red shift, which can be ascribed to the quantum confinement. With the size increasing, the PLQY of the CdTe QDs was also enhanced from 19% to 28%. This is because with the size increasing, the amount of surface traps decreased, thus leading to the decrease of nonradiative recombination.
 Fig. 2  Digital image of CdTe QDs with different sizes dispersed in water (a) under daylight and (b) under 365 nm UV light. (c) UV-vis absorption (dashed curves) and PL spectra (solid curves) of the respective CdTe QDs. 

Fig. 3a presents a schematic illustration of the preparation of CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites. Na2SO4 powder was directly added into the CdTe QD solution, after which CaCl2 solution was added. SO42− immediately reacted with Ca2+ to form CaSO4·2H2O (gypsum). While gypsum flocculated and precipitated, CdTe QDs were simultaneously hosted in the gypsum (Fig. S1, ESI†). After filtering, washing with water and drying in the oven, CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites were successfully fabricated. True images of different-emission CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites under daylight and UV light are presented in Fig. 3b and c. A bright emission color from green to red can be observed under UV light excitation. As shown in Fig. 3d, a slight red-shift of both the UV-vis absorption peak and the PL emission peak can be observed (Table S2, ESI†), which can be ascribed to the decreased distance between the CdTe QDs as well as the reabsorption of the blue part of the spectrum in optically dense samples.28,29 No broadening occurred of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the nanocomposites, suggesting no aggregation of the CdTe QDs in gypsum. Particularly, for 2.8 nm-sized QDs, the FWHM of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites is narrower by more than 10 nm, because the resulting nanocomposites were filtered with water more than three times; as a result, smaller QDs which were not encapsulated in gypsum or just attached on the surface of gypsum were dispersed in water and filtered out. Thus, the resulting CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites had fewer smaller QDs compared with the initial CdTe QDs. When reflected in the PL spectrum, the intensity of the shorter wavelength was lower, leading to a narrower FWHM. For 3 nm-sized QDs, the PL peak position of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites is redshifted more than the others because they were dried under a higher temperature (70 °C) in the oven, which might cause surface-related emission. A similar phenomenon has been reported by Andrey's group, who discussed this temperature-dependent exciton and trap-related photoluminescence of CdTe QDs in an NaCl matrix.30
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites. Digital image of different-emission CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites (b) under daylight and (c) under 365 nm UV light. (d) UV-vis absorption spectra (dashed curves) and PL spectra (solid curves) of the respective CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites. 
From the XRD pattern of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites (Fig. S2, ESI†), it can be observed that the nanocomposites show the same diffraction peaks as standard gypsum, suggesting that gypsum was formed. The diffraction peaks of CdTe could not be observed because of its low weight percent (1%) in the nanocomposites. The in situ XRD evolution of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites (Fig. S3, ESI†) shows that after precipitation for 1 min, there was a big and wide bump ranging from 20° to 50°, indicating that the gypsum was amorphous at the initial stage. As time went on, the intensity of the bump decreased. Meanwhile, the diffraction peaks at 11.6°, 20.7° and 29.1° became stronger and sharper. After 10 min, the bump totally disappeared, indicating that the gypsun was completely crystallized. We can infer that during this process, gypsum went from an amorphous state to a crystal state, thus tightly encapsulating CdTe QDs inside. TEM and SEM measurements of the prepared CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites have also been conducted (Fig. S4, ESI†). However, it is hard to find CdTe QDs in gypsum, because the weight percent of CdTe QDs in gypsum is very low (less than 1%). Moreover, the size of the CdTe QDs is just about 3 nm, while the size of gypsum is as large as several micrometers, so it is difficult to find CdTe QDs by TEM and SEM under experimental conditions.
The Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrum has been measured to investigate the interaction between the CdTe QDs and gypsum. The surface of the CdTe QDs was capped with the MPA ligand, where S− bonded together with the Cd2+ dangling bond while COO− was bare in the solution (Fig. S5, ESI†). It can be infered that when Na2SO4 was added into the CdTe QD solution, due to electrostatic attraction, Na+ bonded to the COO− of MPA while SO42− bonded to Cd2+ on the surface of the CdTe QDs, which helped surface passivation. After CaCl2 was added, Ca2+ replaced Na+ and bonded with COO− because the electrostatic attraction between Ca2+ and COO− was stronger. Meanwhile, Ca2+ reacted with SO42− which had already bonded with Cd2+ and thus gypsum was formed on the surface of the CdTe QDs. As a result, CdTe QDs together with the surface ligand MPA were encapsulated in gypsum (Fig. S6, ESI†). As the solubility of gypsum in water was very low, gypsum together with CdTe QDs precipitated from water. During the drying process in which gypsum went from an amorphous state to a crystal state, the gypsum structure tended to be compact and tight, thus providing a stable host environment and well protecting the CdTe QDs inside. The PL decay lifetime of the CdTe QDs (Fig. S7, ESI†) indicates that after encapsulation, the CdTe QDs possessed a longer lifetime. This suggests the decrease of non-radiation recombination, which is ascribed to the surface passivation of SO42−. This result matches well with our inference and reported work.22,26
In the following work, we demonstrate an impressive set of stabilities of CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites, including photo-, thermo-, long-term and anti-acid stability. First, we took CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites to showcase their high photo stability. CdTe QD/water solution was also taken as a comparison. A 365 nm UV lamp was applied to irradiate both samples for different times. The PL evolution of both samples is shown in Fig. 4. Obviously, for the CdTe QD/water solution, the PL intensity increased first and then dropped dramatically. After 48 h, the fluorescence completely disappeared. The enhancement of the PL intensity in the initial 6 hours can be ascribed to the photo degradation of MPA, which released sulfide and thus passivated the surface defects of the CdTe QDs.18,31 As the irradiation time was extended and MPA degraded, the CdTe QDs lost the surface ligands and finally aggregated. Moreover, Te2− ions on the surface were oxidized to Te (Fig. S8, ESI†). All of these led to the decrease of fluorescence. In stark contrast, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites still displayed high PL intensity (80% of the original) after UV irradiation for 48 h and remained highly luminescence (65% of the original) even after irradiation for 96 h. This observation clearly suggests the prominent photo-stability of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites, suggesting the effective encapsulation and protection of CdTe QDs by gypsum.
 Fig. 4  PL evolution of (a) CdTe QD/water solution and (b) CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in the solid state under irradiation with a 365 nm UV lamp for different times. 
Second, the thermo-stability of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites is then evaluated. As shown in Fig. 5a, after 1 h heat treatment at 150 °C, an evident red-shift and a sharp decrease of the PL intensity can be observed for the CdTe QD/water solution. This is because of the high temperature accelerated dynamic adsorption–desorption process and, as a result, the surface defects were not passivated sufficiently, which led to the decrease of the PL intensity. Besides, the highly dynamic adsorption–desorption process also resulted in the aggregation of CdTe QDs, thus leading to the red-shift in the PL maximum. As a sharp comparison, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites retained 95% of the original PL intensity and showed a slight red-shift in the PL maximum (Fig. 5b). The high thermo-stability of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites can be attributed to the tight matrix of gypsum, which effectively confines the dynamic adsorption–desorption process to a large extent, therefore endowing a relatively stable host environment for CdTe QDs.
 Fig. 5  PL spectra of (a) CdTe QD/water solution and (b) CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in the solid state before and after 1 h heat treatment at 150 °C. 
We also added hydrochloric acid solution (HCl, 0.12 mol L−1) to both the CdTe QD/water solution and CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites to test their anti-acid stability. As shown in Fig. 6a, upon the addition of HCl, the CdTe QDs displayed decreased fluorescence as time increased and totally lost their fluorescence after 8 h. This can be ascribed to the fact that the addition of HCl offered H+ to the surface ligand MPA, resulting in the disorption of protonated MPA from the CdTe QDs. Without the steric-hinerance effect of surface lighands, the CdTe QDs aggregated. Meanwhile, without surface passivation of ligands, the dangling bonds increased, leading to the dramatic drop of fluorescence. In contrast, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites still retained bright emission even after 5 days (Fig. 6b). The enhancement of the anti-acid stability suggests the tight encapsulation and efficient protect of gypsum.
 Fig. 6  Digital images of (a) CdTe QD/water solution and (b) CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites under 365 nm UV light after the addition of HCl solution. 
Notably, the as-prepared CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites also possess remarkable long-term stability. Quite surprisingly, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites retain brilliant fluorescence, showing a PL emission peak at 640 nm with an FWHM of 70 nm and a PLQY of 24%, after being stored under ambient conditions over 4 years (Fig. S9, ESI†). These results clearly indicate that the gypsum encapsulation is robust, providing a highly stable host environment for CdTe QDs.
As described above, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites exhibit a suite of excellent stabilities. Subsequently, the practical application of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in a WLED is demonstrated to certify that gypsum encapsulation skillfully solved the incompatibility between CdTe QDs and the epoxy resin used in LED crafting, thus providing an effective approach to apply aqueous CdTe QDs in LEDs. A WLED was crafted by employing a mixture of red-emission CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites, yellow-emission YAG:Ce3+ phosphor and epoxy resin deposited on a blue InGaN chip. Fig. 7 shows the electroluminescence (EL) spectrum of the constructed WLED driven at a 20 mA current. Bright light can be emitted with CIE color coordinates of (0.31, 0.29), a color rendering index (Ra) of 90.1, a color temperature (Tc) of 6932 K and an efficiency of 78.53 lm W−1. As a comparison, a commercial WLED using a mixture of YAG:Ce3+ phosphor and epoxy resin excited by an InGaN chip was also crafted (Fig. S10, ESI†), which possessed a much lower Ra (74.9). These results signify the great potential of the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in WLED applications.
 Fig. 7  (a) EL spectrum and (b) CIE color coordinates of the WLED crafted by depositing a mixture of YAG:Ce3+ and the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites on a blue InGaN chip. Inset: Paper illuminated by the WLED driven at a 20 mA current. 
Conclusion
In conclusion, we have developed a facile yet effective approach, that is the flocculation–precipitation method, to host CdTe QDs in a robust inorganic matrix of gypsum, thus obtaining emission-tunable CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites with a set of impressive stabilities. Notably, this method enables rapid and effective purification of CdTe QDs from the crude solution, thus avoiding the use of a polar solvent, which will decrease the PLQY of the CdTe QDs. Because of the tight structure and effective protection of the gypsum, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites display excellent photostability, thermal stability and anti-acid stability. Moreover, the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites retain bright fluorescence after 4 years of storage under ambient conditions. Upon encapsulation in the gypsum host, the CdTe QDs can be applied in WLED fabrication, thus solving the incompatibility issue between aqueous CdTe QDs and epoxy resin. A WLED using the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites as a color conversion layer was crafted, exhibiting good performance including a high Ra of 90.1. These results suggest that this simple strategy has great potential to prepare highly stable CdTe QDs as well as for their application in opto-electronic devices.
Experimental section
Chemicals
Tellurium powder (Te, 99.999%), sodium borohydride (NaBH4, 99.5%), sodium hydroxide (NaOH, ≥85%), sodium sulfate (Na2SO4, 98%), calcium chloride (CaCl2, 99.5%), and hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagents Co. Ltd. Cadmium acetate dehydrate (CdCl2·2H2O, 99%) and 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, 99%) were the products of Tianjin Chemical Reagents Co. Ltd. Ultrapure water of 18.2 MΩ cm−1 (Millipore Simplicity, USA) was used in all syntheses. The transparent epoxy (JH-6800MA and B) used for LED packaging was obtained from Tianchang Jiahao Electronic Materials Factory. All reagents were used directly without further purification. 460 nm InGaN LED chips with a power of 0.1 W were purchased from APT Electronics Ltd.
Preparation of sodium hydrogen telluride (NaHTe)
NaHTe was prepared by following a previously reported procedure.24 Typically, NaHTe was prepared by adding 40 mg NaBH4 to a flask containing 46 mg Te powder and 2 mL of Milli-Q water under a N2 atmosphere. The reaction was continued for several hours to ensure that all of the Te powder was dissolved and the solution was slightly pink. Then the flask containing the resulting clear aqueous solution was stored in an ice bath before transferring into 100 mL of degassed water.
Preparation of CdTe QDs
CdCl2·2H2O (0.114 g, 0.5 mmol) and MPA (0.133 g, 1.25 mmol) were dissolved in 100 mL of Milli-Q water, followed by adjustment of the pH to 8.0 by dropwise addition of 1.0 M NaOH solution during which the solution firstly turned turbid and then became transparent. The flask was deaerated by N2 bubbling for 30 min and was then kept in an ice bath. Subsequently, freshly prepared NaHTe solution (400 μL) was quickly injected into the flask under vigorous stirring, followed by heating to 99–100 °C under open air conditions upon refluxing with a condenser attached. Aliquots of the reaction solution were taken out at regular intervals for further PL characterization. The reaction was stopped when the emission of the QDs reached the desired wavelength. The CdTe QDs used for the subsequent encapsulation process were grown for 2 h, 4 h, 6 h and 9 h, respectively.
Encapsulation of CdTe QDs in gypsum
3 mmol of Na2SO4 was dissolved in 30 mL of crude CdTe QD solution, and after that 3.5 mmol of CaCl2 was added into the solution. Immediately, the solution turned turbid and precipitation occurred. It could be seen that after a few minutes the parental solution was colorless and transparent while the precipitate at the bottom exhibited strong luminescence under UV light, indicating complete precipitation. Then the resultant nanocomposites were filtered, rinsed with water, dried in an oven and finally ground into fine powder.
Fabrication of WLEDs
Typically, equal weights of JH-6800MA and JH-6800MB were mixed together. Then the desired amounts of yellow-emission YAG:Ce3+ phosphor and the as-prepared red-emission CdTe–gypsum powder were added. The mixture was stirred sufficiently to become homogenous and then dispersed on a blue InGaN LED chip. Subsequently the coated LED chip was solidified in a vacuum oven at 40 °C for 60 min and thermally cured at 150 °C for 1 h.
Characterization
All measurements were performed at room temperature. The TEM and HRTEM images of the CdTe QDs were acquired on a JEM-2100 field emission source transmission electron microscope operating at 200 kV. X-ray diffraction patterns of the CdTe QDs and CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites were recorded with a Rigaku D/MaxrB diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation with a wavelength of 0.1540 nm. UV absorbance spectra of the CdTe QDs and CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites were obtained by using a Shimadzu UV-2600 UV-vis spectrophotometer. PL spectra of the CdTe QDs and CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites were recorded using a HitachiF-4600 fluorescence spectrophotometer. The PLQY was measured by using a Horiba FluoroMax-4 fluorescence spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating sphere. Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of MPA and the CdTe QDs were obtained by using a Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer. Time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) data of the CdTe QDs and CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites were obtained on an Edinburgh FL 900 photon-counting system. The optical properties of the as-fabricated white LEDs were obtained using an integrating sphere (Everfine Photo-E-Info Co., Ltd).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. U1632151 and 61076040). The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from Prof. Yang Jiang's group.
References
B. O. Dabbousi, J. Rodriguez-Viejo, F. V. Mikulec, J. R. Heine, H. Mattoussi, R. Ober, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9463–9475 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Mansur, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2010, 2, 113–129 CAS .
X. Lan, S. Masala and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Kim, Y. Wang, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6341–6345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, Y. Jiang, Y. Zhang, D. Sun, C. Liu, J. Huang, X. Lan, H. Zhou, L. Chen and H. Zhong, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 285201 CrossRef PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2196–2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. V. Demir, S. Nizamoglu, T. Erdem, E. Mutlugun, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 632–647 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, S. Liu, Y. Chang, G. Li, L. Mi, X. Wang and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23117–23123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, O. Voznyy, A. Kiani, F. P. García de Arquer, A. S. Abbas, G. H. Kim, M. Liu, Z. Yang, G. Walters and J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 299–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, W. J. Zhang, J. S. Jie, X. M. Meng, X. Fan and S. T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Zhang, K. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 403–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Yu, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4300–4308 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bätzner, A. Romeo, M. Terheggen, M. Döbeli, H. Zogg and A. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451, 536–543 CrossRef .
B. Blackman, D. Battaglia and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4847–4853 CrossRef CAS .
I. Visoly-Fisher, K. D. Dobson, J. Nair, E. Bezalel, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 289–299 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jing, S. V. Kershaw, Y. Li, X. Huang, Y. Li, A. L. Rogach and M. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10623–10730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tekin, P. J. Smith, S. Hoeppener, A. M. van den Berg, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Cui, Y. Wang, K. Zhang, X. Ji, C. Lü, B. Yang and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 777–780 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Hong, Y. Liu, D. Li, Y. W. Wang, J. H. Li, Y. B. Bai and T. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. Müller, M. Kaiser, G. M. Stachowski, U. Resch-Genger, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3231–3237 CrossRef .
T. Otto, M. Müller, P. Mundra, V. Lesnyak, H. V. Demir, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5348–5354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adam, T. Erdem, G. M. Stachowski, Z. Soran-Erdem, J. F. Lox, C. Bauer, J. Poppe, H. V. Demir, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Talha, S. E. Zeliha, S. Vijay Kumar, K. Yusuf, A. Marcus, G. Nikolai and D. Hilmi Volkan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17611 RSC .
M. Adam, Z. Wang, A. Dubavik, G. M. Stachowski, C. Meerbach, Z. Soran-Erdem, C. Rengers, H. V. Demir, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2638–2645 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chang, X. Yao, L. Mi, G. Li, S. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Zhang and Y. Jiang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4439–4445 RSC .
R. Koole, P. Liljeroth, C. de Mello Donegá, D. Vanmaekelbergh and A. Meijerink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10436–10441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gogoi, P. Deb and A. Kostka, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2012, 209, 1543–1551 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalytchuk, O. Zhovtiuk, S. V. Kershaw, R. Zbořil and A. L. Rogach, Small, 2016, 12, 466–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Jing, R. Qiao and M. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9293–9311 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc04412dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD pattern of CdTe QDs (red curve). The standard XRD pattern of the bulk CdTe material is also included for comparison (black curve). (b) TEM image of CdTe QDs, scale bar = 20 nm. Inset: HRTEM image of CdTe QDs, scale bar = 5 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Digital image of CdTe QDs with different sizes dispersed in water (a) under daylight and (b) under 365 nm UV light. (c) UV-vis absorption (dashed curves) and PL spectra (solid curves) of the respective CdTe QDs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites. Digital image of different-emission CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites (b) under daylight and (c) under 365 nm UV light. (d) UV-vis absorption spectra (dashed curves) and PL spectra (solid curves) of the respective CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 4  PL evolution of (a) CdTe QD/water solution and (b) CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in the solid state under irradiation with a 365 nm UV lamp for different times.	 

 	Fig. 5  PL spectra of (a) CdTe QD/water solution and (b) CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites in the solid state before and after 1 h heat treatment at 150 °C.	 

 	Fig. 6  Digital images of (a) CdTe QD/water solution and (b) CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites under 365 nm UV light after the addition of HCl solution.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) EL spectrum and (b) CIE color coordinates of the WLED crafted by depositing a mixture of YAG:Ce3+ and the CdTe–gypsum nanocomposites on a blue InGaN chip. Inset: Paper illuminated by the WLED driven at a 20 mA current.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc04412d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
