Rising from the horizon: three-dimensional functional architectures assembled with MXene nanosheets  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA06222G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA06222G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18538-18559Rising from the horizon: three-dimensional functional architectures assembled with MXene nanosheets

        
          
            Fei 
            Song
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guohao 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yisong 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenjun 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiuqiang 
            Xie
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Nan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: xiuqiang_xie@hnu.edu.cn; nanzhang@hnu.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China
Received 
      24th June 2020
    , Accepted 14th August 2020First published on 15th August 2020AbstractMXenes, as an emerging family of two-dimensional (2D) materials, possess excellent conductivity, abundant hydrophilic surface groups, and a high proportion of redox-active transition metals, and thus recently have become a research hotspot. Furthermore, 2D MXene nanosheets have been widely explored with superior performances in a broad spectrum of applications. To maximize the inherent properties of MXenes for specific applications, assembling 2D MXenes into three-dimensional (3D) architectures has been actively pursued and significant achievements have been made. In this review, we present the design and performance of 3D MXene-based functional architectures. Specifically, we elaborate some typical methodologies for the 3D assembly of MXenes, including that assisted by ions/molecules, graphene oxide, and other materials, the hard-template method, soaking method, and 3D printing. Additionally, the competitive performances of 3D MXene-based materials are exemplified, covering their applications for electrochemical energy storage, electromagnetic interference shielding, sensors, photocatalysis, and water purification, with the focus on objectively analyzing their structure-dependent performances. Finally, some noteworthy research directions expanding from fundamental understanding to material design are proposed, which is expected to inspire the rational engineering of customized 3D MXene-based architectures toward target applications.Fei SongFei Song received his B.S. Degree from the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University in 2019. His main research interests focus on surface modification, 3D assembly of MXene-based materials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage devices.Xiuqiang XieXiuqiang Xie is now an Associate Professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University. His main research interests include the synthesis of 2D materials and their heterostructures for sustainable technologies, such as photocatalysis, hybrid supercapacitors, and sodium-ion batteries.Nan ZhangNan Zhang is now a Professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University. Her main research interests include the design and controlled synthesis of composites towards photocatalytic applications and investigation of their mechanism.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted widespread attention since the discovery of graphene. Among them, single-element 2D materials have been studied in-depth, but these materials still cannot fully meet certain requirements such as hydrophilic electrode materials.1–3 Transition metal carbides, carbonitrides and nitrides, which are known as MXenes, have emerged as a new family of 2D materials.4–6 In general, MXenes are synthesized using MAX phase precursors, where M represents an early transition metal (Sc, Ti, V, Cr, Zr, Nb, Mo, Hf, and Ta), A is mainly a group IIIA or IVA element, and X is carbon and/or nitrogen.7–10 To date, more than 70 MXenes with different elements have been discovered in successions, such as Ti2CTx,11 V2CTx,12 and Mo2CTx,13 where T represents the surface termination (–O, –OH, and –F). The special structure and surface terminations of MXenes endow them with many key properties, such as metallic conductivity (6000–8000 S cm−1),14 hydrophilic surface,11 and good mechanical stability,7 which distinguish them from other 2D materials and make them promising candidates for energy storage,15–18 electromagnetic interference shielding,14 transparent conductors,19 catalysis,20 and sensor applications.21
However, 2D MXene nanosheets with a lamella structure are prone to restacking during their further processing, which severely limits their applications in many fields. Accordingly, introducing interlayer spacers,22 creating porous structures,23,24 and integrating 2D MXene nanosheets into 3D macroscopic structures are effective routes to solve this problem. 3D assemblies not only transform the intrinsic properties of MXenes from the nano to macroscopic scale, but also result appealing features favorable for specific applications (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the evolution of MXenes from 2D to 3D materials. 
Compared with 2D film materials, which are prone to restacking, 3D MXenes with a larger specific surface area can maximize the excellent properties of MXenes. For example, for electromagnetic shielding, 3D MXenes with an internal interconnected porous structure showed improved ability to absorb electromagnetic waves compared to their counterparts of 2D MXene films.23,25 For applications such as energy storage, water purification, and catalysis, the target reactants need to interact with the surface of MXenes, where the open structure of 3D MXenes enables high functional. In addition, the mutually supporting laminar structure of 3D MXenes affords desirable mechanical properties, which are favorable for sensor applications. Notably, the sorption/intercalation of hydrated metal cations within MXenes in a salt solution lead to the swelling and gradual expansion of the interlayers of MXenes.26,27 This structural change is detrimental to the integrity of MXene-based films and the adhesion between MXenes and the substrate, thereby hampering their performances and durability for target applications. In contrast, a porous 3D structure can buffer the swelling behavior of MXenes to maintain their structural stability during applications.28 Moreover, studies have shown that the swelling behavior of MXenes is related to the shear force, air humidity, and ion species.29,30 In this case, it is also very promising to combine the swelling behavior and structural advantages of 3D MXene-based materials to explore their applications for sensors and water purification. Accordingly, it is of great significance to explore controllable 3D assemblies of MXenes for different applications to take further advantage of the prolific properties of MXenes and simultaneously alleviate the limitations of 2D MXene-based film materials in practical applications, with the aim to broaden the applications of MXenes.
Considering that there are abundant mutually repulsive negatively charged groups on the surface of MXenes, restricting the self-gelation process, the direct assembly of 2D MXene nanosheets into 3D architectures is not feasible. Thus, to enlarge the specific surface area and prevent the self-restacking of MXene nanosheets, intensive efforts have been made to develop 3D MXene-based functional materials.31–33 There have been some excellent reviews summarizing the progress on the construction of 3D MXene-based structures and their applications. For example, Wu et al. summarized some typical methodologies to prepare 3D MXenes, covering their applications for energy storage and electromagnetic shielding.34 Another review specifically focused on the application of 3D MXene-based architectures for electrochemical energy storage.35 With the continuous efforts of researchers, tremendous advances and further understanding have been achieved recently in this field. Herein, based on a comprehensive literature search and critical analysis of the recent advances, we provide a comprehensive account on the 3D assembly methods and elaborate the structure-property relationship for the application of 3D MXene-based architectures, together with remarks on the existing problems to be effectively solved in this area. Specifically, we begin by introducing the approaches for assembling 2D MXenes (mainly Ti3C2Tx) into 3D structures, with emphasis on elucidating the underlying mechanisms of the 3D assembly process. The competitive performances of 3D MXene-based materials are then exemplified, comprehensively covering their applications in electrochemical energy storage and the emerging fields of electromagnetic interference shielding, sensors, photocatalysis, and water purification, with a focus on objectively analysing their structure-dependent performances. Finally, we present an outlook of the future development of 3D MXene-based functional architectures. It is expected that our review can provide fundamental information for understanding the microscopic assembly process and inspire the design of advanced 3D MXene-based materials toward target applications by innovative materials engineering.
2. Fabrication of 3D MXene-based architectures
The typical route for the fabrication of 2D MXene sheets is to remove the A atomic layer and exfoliation from the corresponding precursor MAX phase. However, it is too difficult to extract the Mn+1Xn layers from the MAX phase using the physical method due to the rigid metallic M–A bonds in the MAX precursor.36–38 Meanwhile, the M–A bonds can be broken because they are relatively weaker than the M–X bonds. The first multilayered MXene (Ti3C2Tx) was discovered and synthesized through wet-chemical etching with HF by the Gogotsi group in 2011.39 Subsequently, Ti2CTx, Ti3CNTx, Nb2CTx, and V2CTx were synthesized via the same method.40 In 2013, single-layer Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes were successfully isolated with large intercalated organic molecules and the sheets were delaminated from each other, which provided inspiring ideas for the further synthesis and application of 2D MXenes.41 To date, Ti3C2Tx is the most widely studied MXene, which is synthesized through the removal of the A atomic layer of the MAX phase (Ti3AlC2) via acid etching followed by delamination.41 There are two mainstream approaches for Ti3AlC2 etching, using HF or in situ generation of HF. The former method involves etching the Al element layer from Ti3AlC2 with HF directly, followed by the intercalation of organic molecules and ultrasonication delamination, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)41 or tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH).42 The latter method effectively avoids the direct use of noxious HF by introducing LiF to an HCl solution to generate HF in situ. Meanwhile, Li+ intercalates into the Ti3C2Tx layers simultaneously, which is beneficial for further delamination.
To effectively avoid the restacking of MXene nanosheets caused by van der Waals force during the course of experiments, numerous researchers have tried to introduce intercalation agents, such as carbon material, organic molecules, and polymers to increase the interlamellar space of the MXene nanosheets.41,43,44Fig. 2a and b show the intercalation of MXene with hard carbon particles and carbon nanotubes (CNT), respectively. Fig. 2c shows a comparison of the SEM images of MXene before and after the molecular intercalation of hydrazine monohydrate (HM) dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solution, and it can be seen that the effect of the intercalant on the MXene lamellae. Consequently, porous 2D MXene films and 3D MXene aerogel films with a larger specific surface area and excellent porosity were prepared in succession. Furthermore, different intercalating agents provide some excellent properties for MXene aerogels. In Sambyal's report, a hybrid aerogel raw material was prepared by mixing Ti3C2Tx and CNT solutions.46 The insertion of carbon materials not only increases the distance between MXene lamellae and avoid their restacking, but also improves the mechanical properties and conductivity of MXene and reduces the density of aerogels. By inserting polyimide (PI) macromolecules into MXene lamellae, Liu et al. produced Ti3C2Tx-based aerogels with excellent compressibility and tensile properties.47 However, in general, physical intercalation cannot provide enough mixing between MXene layers to form a 3D monolith automatically. At present, it is still not feasible to assemble MXene nanosheets into macroscopic 3D monoliths directly, even though some materials such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with an adhesive functional group have been used as intercalation agents.48,49 Therefore, MXene aerogel can be obtained only through some post-treatment such as freeze-drying.50 Accordingly, herein, the intercalation process is categorized as a part of the pre-processing to offer raw materials with properties such as larger interlayer spacing for further 3D assembly and applications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of MXene intercalated with hard carbon (HC). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (b) Schematic of MXene intercalated with CNT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (c) SEM images of Ti3C2 before (left) and after (right) the intercalation of HM and DMF (24 h at 80 °C), respectively. Scale bars: 200 nm in c. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2013 Nature. 
Graphene, as the first 2D material to be discovered, has led the development of 2D materials into a new era. Since it was discovered, graphene has received extensive research attention and shown great application prospects in many fields. Strategies such as self-assembly (hydrothermal reduction and chemical reduction),51,52 and 3D printing53 have proven to be efficient for the assembly of 3D graphene. In addition, gas-assisted expansion,54 hard template methods,55 and etching methods56 can meet the needs of increasing the internal pores of 3D graphene. The research achievements for graphene have afforded inspiration for the development of other emerging 2D materials. Some methods developed for the 3D assembly of graphene have been demonstrated to be similarly feasible for the assembly of MXenes, which will be introduced and discussed in the following sections. Besides, the mutually repulsive electronegative groups on the surface of MXenes and their superior hydrophilicity make it challenging for the anisotropic intersheet cross-linking of MXenes. Accordingly, the introduction of alien species to screen the intersheet repulsion has proven to be viable to realize the 3D assembly of MXenes. Thus, we focus on this type of strategy for the 3D assembly of MXenes in detail.
2.1 3D self-assembly
The assembly of 3D MXene structures with ideal electrical and mechanical performances is much more difficult than the synthesis of 2D MXene nanosheets due to the weak gelation capability of MXene nanosheets.47,49,57–62 Thus, to address this issue, many methods have been proposed by researchers for preparing 3D MXenes, which are dedicated to providing a 3D framework to support the MXene nanosheets (Fig. 3). To date, some carbon materials and their derivatives have been proved to be suitable carriers for the construction of 3D MXene assemblies under the premise of maintaining the unique advantages of MXenes. Herein, we introduce some of the main methods for the construction of 3D MXene-based architectures.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the various methods and examples of the 3D assembly of MXenes. 

2.1.1 Ion/molecule-assisted assembly. 
Although 3D MXene structures cannot be constructed directly, it is still a feasible strategy to build tightly connected 3D structures of MXenes in the presence of suitable crosslinkers. 3D MXene-based composite aerogels are fabricated by adding certain mediators, which can adjust the charge repulsion in the MXene suspension, or some adjuvants, which can be transformed into a 3D structure via a simple method. For example, Deng and others used Fe2+, Mg2+, and other metal cation solutions as charge-regulating crosslinking agents to neutralize the negative charge groups on the surface of Ti3C2Tx and form highly condensed 3D hydrogels in a very short time (Fig. 4a and b).63 On the one hand, the mutually exclusive state formed by the negatively charged groups on the surface of MXene nanosheets is destroyed by positively charged metal ions, thereby leading to the flocculation of MXene nanosheets. On the other hand, positively charged metal ions act as cross-linking agents for the functional groups such as (–OH and –F) between MXene nanosheets, which results in their assembly into a 3D macrostructure. Besides, some organic molecules with abundant functional groups that can interact and crosslink with the surface groups of MXene are employed for the assembly of 3D MXene. Zhou and coworkers prepared Ti3C2Tx composite aerogel films by introducing sodium alginate (SA) and calcium alginate (CA) into a suspension of Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 4c and d).64 SA is an organic molecule extracted from seaweed, which has a large number of oxygen-containing functional groups (–OH, –COO, and O) on its surface. Therefore, a strong hydrogen bonding interaction will be formed between the functional groups of SA and MXene when they are mixed. Considering that positively charged calcium ions can further initiate functional group crosslinking, a T3C2Tx/CA aerogel film was prepared by freeze-drying after the replacement of the sodium ion in SA with the divalent calcium ion in calcium chloride solution. Li et al. used ethylenediamine (EDA) as a reducing agent and crosslinking agent to realize the auxiliary assembly of T3C2Tx MXene layers and then obtained MXene aerogels by freeze-drying (Fig. 4e–g).65 Both ends of EDA are amino groups, which can form a strong hydrogen bond with the functional groups of MXene. Moreover, the reducing amino group can be bonded to the oxygen-containing functional group through redox reactions, which further enhances the cross-linking between MXene nanosheets and helps avoid the oxidation of MXene.
 Fig. 4  2D Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are cross-linked and assembled with auxiliary agents. (a) Schematic of the metal ion-initiated interaction of Ti3C2Tx. (b) SEM image of MXene monolith. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of Ti3C2Tx/SA film. (d) SEM images of Ti3C2Tx/SA composite film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (e) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of Ti3C2Tx aerogel with EDA. (f) SEM images of cross-section of 3D Ti3C2 aerogel. (g) Enlarged view of the cross-section of 3D Ti3C2 aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. 


2.1.2 Graphene oxide-assisted assembly. 
Due to its excellent electrical and chemical properties, graphene as a special carbon material has triggered extensive research since it was discovered.66–68 Graphene oxide (GO) has shown potential for extensive applications due to its excellent mechanical flexibility and chemical stability, and it can be reduced and converted into a 3D porous reduced graphene oxide (RGO) aerogel under hydrothermal conditions followed by a freeze-drying process. Therefore, numerous researchers have attempted to assemble GO/RGO with MXene nanosheets to fabricate the 3D MXene-based hydrogels or aerogels (Fig. 5). It is critical to use additives that can regulate the charge of the mixed suspension and procedures that can help the cross-linking of GO, such as hydrothermal treatment (Fig. 6a and b).69 To avoid the high-temperature oxidation of MXenes and maintain their microstructure, most of the studies employ freeze-drying to generate aerogels.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the GO-assisted 3D assembly of MXenes. 
 Fig. 6  Assembly of 3D MXene with the assistance of GO. (a) Illustration of the preparation process of the MXene/GO hydrogel through hydrothermal treatment. (b) SEM images of the MXene/GO aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx/RGO ternary composite aerogel, where NaHSO3 acts as a reducing agent to reduce GO. (d) and (e) Different magnification SEM views of the TiO2/Ti3C2Tx/RGO ternary composite aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the formation process of MXene/GO hydrogel with EDA. (g) SEM images of the MXene/GO hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2019 Wiley. 
Zhao et al. reported an efficient approach for constructing highly conductive 3D Ti3C2Tx porous architectures via graphene oxide-assisted hydrothermal assembly followed by directional-freezing and freeze-drying.31 In their experiment, stable Ti3C2Tx/GO suspensions were prepared based on their negative charge repulsion effect. To avoid the oxidization and degradation of the MXene sheets in water at high temperatures, they choose mild hydrothermal conditions at a low temperature of 65 °C. Ascorbic acid was selected as a reducing agent to promote the conversion from 2D GO to 3D RGO structures and an RGO/MXene hybrid hydrogel was formed simultaneously. Then the hydrogel was dialyzed in ethanol solution followed by directional-freezing treatment. In the freezing process, countless ice crystals grew directly, which promoted the assembly of MXene/RGO. Finally, a lattice-like MXene/RGO hybrid aerogel was fabricated after the removal of ice by freeze-drying. In other reports, NaHSO3 and other reducing agents were used for GO-assisted assembly (Fig. 6c–e).70,71 To strengthen the connection between GO and MXene, crosslinking agents are applied during the gelation process. Shang et al. reported an approach to assemble 3D MXene monoliths via the gelation of Ti3C2Tx in the presence of GO and ethylenediamine (EDA) (Fig. 6f and g).72 EDA acts as a reducing agent to promote the self-assembly of GO and avoid the oxidation of MXene, and also a crosslinking agent for the MXene nanosheets. Lin et al. reported a method to induce the gelation process via the controlled diffusion of metal ions.61 The metal foil substrate provided metal ions to a mixed suspension of Ti3C2Tx and GO by directional diffusion. As a type of adhesive, metal ions can eliminate the charge repulsion between the surface of MXene and GO to promote their 3D assembly.


2.1.3 Others. 
In addition to GO, other carbon materials and their derivatives have been used in the assembly of 3D MXene. Wang et al. reported a Ti3C2Tx MXene/C hybrid foam (MCF) prepared via the sol–gel method and freeze-drying, where resorcinol and formaldehyde solution were selected as the gelling agents.73 An MCF/epoxy composite aerogel with excellent conductivity and EMI shielding performance was obtained when MCF with strong mechanical properties was filled with epoxy resin (Fig. 7a and b). Zhao et al. reported the construction of Ti3C2Tx-based hollow frameworks with the presence of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).74 Negatively charged MXene nanosheets and a positively charged layered double hydroxide (LDH) derived from ZIF-67 polyhedron were assembled electrostatically. After thermal annealing, hollow frameworks of transition metal oxide (TMO)@MXene were obtained and used as anode materials for LIBs (Fig. 7c–e). The obtained 3D MXene composite showed excellent electrochemical performances and mechanical robustness for application in lithium-ion batteries. In addition, with the aid of the polymerization process of organic molecules, the assisted self-assembly process of MXene can also be realized. In Liu's report, Ti3C2Tx sheets were closely interconnected and bridged by polyimide (PI) macromolecules, and consequently, electrically conductive, super-elastic, and lightweight 3D Ti3C2Tx architectures were obtained.47
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the process for the fabrication of (a) MCF/epoxy composites and (b) SEM images of MCF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2019 Elsevier and (c) TMO@MXene hollow polyhedrons. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of TMO@MXene hollow polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2019 Wiley. 

2.2 Sacrificial hard-template method
The template method, which is widely used for the preparation of nanomaterials, is an effective route for the assembly of 3D MXenes. It involves the introduction certain nanoparticles as a template material to bear the cladding of 2D MXene nanosheets. In general, the template material and 2D MXene colloidal solution are mixed uniformly, followed by freeze-drying or heat treatment to achieve crosslinking solidification. Consequently, MXene nanosheets distribute homogeneously in the gap of the 3D stacked template at the nanoscale. Subsequently, the template material is removed by physical or chemical methods, thereby forming a porous MXene structure. This method allows the flexible adjustment of the pore size of 3D MXenes by controlling the size of the template particles. The tightly connected MXene shell prepared by this method shows an excellent electron transportation performance.
In general, 3D MXene-based structures synthesized via the single template method is mainly in the form of a film with a porous 3D structure, rather than in macroscopic monoliths such as hydrogels and aerogels. The reason for this is that the aqueous phase in the MXene/template mixture is mainly removed by vacuum filtration. Consequently, the templates coated with MXene nanosheets cannot achieve effective 3D interconnected networks. For instance, Zhao et al. used polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) particles as templates, and MXene/PMMA compound membranes were obtained after mixing the PMMA and Ti3C2Tx colloidal solution followed by vacuum filtration. Subsequently, stacked hollow MXene spheres were fabricated by annealing heat treatment to remove the PMMA core (Fig. 8a–c).75 To prepare macroscopic MXene aerogels, effective binders and post-treatment processes are important for the assembly of a 3D structure. Li and coworkers mixed Ti3C2Tx/PMMA composites with a GO solution and stirred it to form a uniform dispersion. Subsequently, a 3D monolith was synthesized by freeze-drying.76 PMMA was finally removed by high-temperature heat treatment under an N2 atmosphere to realize the preparation of 3D MXene/RGO porous composites. 3D MXene films with suitable flexibility were synthesized via a similar method with sulfur particles as the template.77
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic showing the construction of hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres and 3D macroporous Ti3C2Tx frameworks. (b) SEM image of hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres after the removal of PMMA. (c) TEM images showing a hollow Ti3C2Tx sphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (d) Schematic diagrams of the manufacturing process of MXene/RGO composite aerogels. (e) SEM images of MXene/RGO composite aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the bidirectional freezing method for the fabrication of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT hybrid aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
The ice template method is a special method known as freeze-casting, which enables the building blocks to interconnect along the growth direction of the ice crystals during the freezing of the water in an aqueous solution. Based on the ice template method, Yang and coworkers prepared MXene/RGO composite aerogels using a GO and Ti3C2Tx mixture as the starting materials followed by freeze-drying and chemical reduction using a mixed HI and acetic acid solution (Fig. 8d and e).78,79 Notably, by controlling the direction and gradient of the freezing process, the building blocks can be arranged more orderly. Zhao et al. prepared MXene/RGO aerogels with a vertical alignment by freeze-drying.31 In their report, Ti3C2Tx and GO were assembled to form a 3D hydrogel and placed on a copper plate for freeze-drying. During the freezing process, the water in the hydrogel above the copper plate crystallized to form icicles in the direction perpendicular to the copper plate due to the high thermal conductivity of the copper metal. Therefore, the oriented MXene/RGO aerogels can be obtained by using oriented ice crystals as templates. Based on unidirectional freeze-drying, Sambyal et al. put Ti3C2Tx/CNT suspensions on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) wedges placed on copper plates, which provided bidirectional (horizontal and vertical) temperature gradients. An MXene/CNT aerogel with homogeneous distribution and ordered 3D porous lamellar structure was fabricated after freeze-drying (Fig. 8f).46
Generally, to prepare 3D MXene composites with special functions or larger specific surface area, the sacrificial template method is often used as a pretreatment process and the ice template method is often used as a post-processing process in combination with other protocols. For instance, hollow MXene nanospheres prepared by sacrificial templates are ideal precursors for 3D MXene aerogels combined with other technologies such as 3D printing. Xu et al. reported a Ti3C2Tx composite foam intercalated with PVA followed by ice-template freeze-drying.43,80 Besides, hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres/RGO aerogels have been prepared by combining sacrificial template technology with the ice template method.81
2.3 Soaking method
Considering that the direct crosslinking of MXene nanosheets is challenging, coating MXene nanosheets on the surface of another aerogel through immersion was proposed to prepare continuous assemblies. Different from the template method, the aerogel substrates are maintained after the 3D MXene structures are formed. In general, an aerogel of carbon materials is chosen as the substrate to ensure ideal electronic conductivity. In Wang's report, RGO aerogels were prepared via a hydrothermal reaction and freeze-drying.32 Then the aerogels were immersed in Ti3C2Tx dispersions followed by freeze-drying to prepare MXene/RGO aerogels (Fig. 9a and b). In another experiment, a carbon foam (CF) prepared through the high-temperature heat treatment of melamine foam (MF) was selected as the substrate.82 Then, an MXene (Ti3C2Tx)/CF composite aerogel was prepared via vacuum impregnation and freeze-drying (Fig. 9c and d). Considering the rich sources, low cost, and pollution-free merits of natural wood, 3D porous carbons derived from the carbonization of natural wood are promising as the skeleton of MXene aerogels. Liang and coworkers selected wood-derived porous carbon (WPC) as a Ti3C2Tx carrier and attached MXene layers on the surface to fabricate neatly arranged honeycomb MXene aerogels.83
 Fig. 9  (a) Procedure for the synthesis of MXene/RGO aerogels. (b) SEM images of the MXene/RGO aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of carbon foam/Ti3C2Tx hybrids. (d) SEM images of the carbon foam/Ti3C2Tx hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.4 3D printing
In recent years, 3D printing technology has been widely used. As a computer-controlled, additive fabrication process free of templates, 3D printing is used to construct complex geometric structures through joining or solidifying the prepared ink-material. The popularization of 3D printing provides a new idea for the construction of complex structural nanomaterials.33 It is typical to mix nanomaterials with solvents, polymers, and photocurable resins to incorporate nanomaterials into 3D printing.84
3D structures printed with special MXene ink show both larger specific surface areas and sufficient continuous conductivity. Therefore, the preparation of MXene-based inks is important in 3D printing. In the design of 3D printing ink, factors such as solvent-particle interactions, substrate wetting, solvent evaporation rate, and ink rheological properties need to be considered. There have been reports about MXene-based organic ink.85 However, the presence of organic solvents will potentially affect their electrochemical performance. It is known that MXenes show good dispersibility in water by virtue of their hydrophilic surface, and thus water, which is inexpensive and has a suitable evaporation rate, is an ideal 3D ink solvent. On the other hand, a sufficient concentration can provide favorable rheological properties for 3D printing inks. Generally, both vacuum filtration and vacuum evaporation can be used for the concentration of MXene solutions, while the restacking tendency of MXene nanosheets should be considered during the experimental process. In the report by Orangi et al., they used superabsorbent polymer (SAP) beads to concentrate a Ti3C2Tx dispersion, and the final concentration of the Ti3C2Tx dispersion was as high as 290 mg mL−1. Immediately after, the ink was dispersed uniformly by methods such as stirring. It was also noted that the rheological property of MXenes ink is critical, which determines the line width and structure of the printed body.86
Yang et al. used the electrostatic properties and hydrophilicity surface of MXenes to prepare MXenes with rheological properties suitable for 3D printing by adjusting the size of the Ti3C2Tx sheets, applying shear force and adjusting their concentration in water (Fig. 10a).87 3D MXenes were then printed by squeezing out and quickly solidifying followed by freeze-drying. The obtained 3D MXenes featuring structural continuity and excellent conductivity were used as electrode materials in supercapacitors without metal current collectors. To further increase the micropores of MXene, Fan and coworkers reported porous nitrogen-doped Ti3C2Tx (N-Ti3C2Tx) using melamine-formaldehyde (MF) nanospheres as the sacrificial template, which was then 3D printed and freeze-dried as electrodes for sodium-ion supercapacitors (Fig. 10b).62
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the manufacturing strategy for 3D MXene from MAX to 3D printing. (b) SEM and optical photographs (inset) of freestanding Ti3C2Tx microlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (c) Schematic diagram showing the process for the preparation of 3D printed electrodes with porous N-Ti3C2Tx from the MF sphere template. (d) SEM images of porous N-Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
2.5 Electrospinning and gas foaming
Electrospinning is a material preparation process in which a small jet is generated after the polymer fluid is electrostatically atomized, and it moves a certain distance after injection, and finally solidifies into a fiber.88 Electrospinning can realize the preparation of nanofibers and improve the performance of various aspects of polymer materials, which have a numerous potential applications in wearable devices and other fields. Generally, electrospinning requires a polymer to ensure that the viscosity is sufficient to form a fibrous structure. It is known that MXenes can achieve a uniform dispersion in a variety of organic solutions,89 which enables the possibility of the electrospinning of MXenes. Mayerberger et al. first reported the preparation of poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), PEO, poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), and alginate/PEO nanofibers reinforced with Ti3C2Tx. Their work demonstrated the possibility of electrospinning suspensions of single-layered Ti3C2Tx with common polymers.90 Subsequently, Shao et al. introduced the preparation of polyester@Ti3C2Tx nanofiber-based yarn as flexible yarns electrodes for binder-free wearable supercapacitors by electrospinning.91 In another report, chitosan (CS), a polysaccharide derivative of chitin, was chosen as a polymer carrier due to its biocompatibility, biodegradability, and low cost.92 The fibers formed by the combination of CS and Ti3C2Tx exhibited considerable antibacterial activity. Levitt et al. realized the intercalation of PAN nanofibers in Ti3C2Tx nanosheets through electrospinning, and then obtained Ti3C2Tx/C nanofibers through carbonization treatment.93 In addition, when Ti3C2Tx is hybridized with polymers through electrospinning, various composite fiber materials with catalytic properties and strong triboelectric properties can be prepared,94,95 which further expands the applications and proves the broad prospects of MXene-based materials. It can be envisaged that the combination of MXenes and polymers by electrospinning to prepare 3D functional materials can generate more innovative scientific research by taking advantage of MXenes and versatile polymer materials.
When mixing substances that are easy to generate gas at high temperature with MXenes, the generated gas will expand the MXene nanosheets during heat treatment, thereby generating porous MXene-based materials. This constitutes another appealing strategy to prepare 3D MXene-based architectures. For example, Liu and coworkers prepared porous Ti3C2Txvia a hydrazine-induced foaming process.23 In another article, ammonia and thiourea dioxide were selected as foaming agents, and the preparation of porous Ti3C2Tx was achieved via ultrasonic heat treatment and freeze drying.96 The introduction of foaming technology provides a strategy for the preparation of porous MXenes, and thus we speculate that its combination with other technologies such as the self-assembly method or 3D printing technology will help further increase the specific surface area of MXenes.
3. Applications of 3D MXene-based functional materials
3.1 Electrochemical energy storage
Electrode materials have a significant influence on the energy storage performance of batteries and supercapacitors. Typically, excellent conductivity and abundant surface sites are essential for ideal electrode materials. MXenes are emerging as very appealing candidates for energy storage. On one hand, MXenes feature metallic conductivity as high as 9880 S cm−1 and a hydrophilic surface.97 On the other hand, MXene nanosheets with special properties and layered structures are favorable for the transport and storage of metal ions.98 3D MXene-based materials inherit the conductivity, large number of surface active sites, and high specific surface area of MXene nanosheets, which are promising for electrochemical energy storage.15,18,99

3.1.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
The selection of anode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) will directly affect their energy density. Graphite dominates the market of negative electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries because of its low and stable lithium-ion potential, high theoretical specific capacity, low cost, and environment-friendliness.100 However, it is still unable to meet the demand for the development of portable and miniaturized electronic devices in the future. Therefore, it is of great importance to explore novel electrode materials with excellent performances. 2D MXene nanosheets have been tested as electrode materials for LIBs, but their self-restacking tendency hinders the penetration, transport, and interaction of metal ions in the electrolyte. In contrast, 3D MXene assemblies have become candidates as anode materials for LIBs.
Ma and coworkers synthesized Ti3C2/RGO films with a 3D porous structure.101 The porous structure of the 3D composite could effectively promote the diffusion rate of the electrolyte in the electrode when it was applied as an anode for LIBs. Besides, the excellent conductivity of MXene further improved the electrochemical performance. Samples with different ratios of MXene at different current densities were tested. Among them, the Ti3C2/RGO (1:1) film electrode sample showed the best performance (Fig. 11a–c). Zhao et al. produced 3D Ti3C2Tx foam with flexibility using a sulfur template, which showed a high specific surface area and excellent conductivity.77 Besides, it has been demonstrated that S-doping enhances the electrode wettability, which is positive for enhancing the electrochemical performances. The 3D structure greatly promotes the transport and storage of lithium ions and improves the reaction rate on the electrode surface. As seen in Fig. 11d and e, p-MXene-35, p-MXene-48 and p-MXene-71 correspond to the MXene foams prepared using MXene/S films with a sulfur content of 35.8%, 48.1%, and 71%, respectively. Also, the porous samples showed much a higher capacity and cycle stability than stacked MXene. Besides, there was almost no capacity decay for p-MXene-71 under a high current cyclic charge and discharge, and its performance was much better than that from similar experiments (Fig. 11f). Zhao and coworkers reported a hollow MXene structure composed of Ti3C2Tx and the derivatives of an MOF.74 The composites showed excellent conductivity and volume expansion resistance, which provided open channels for fast ionic transport as an anode material for lithium-ion storage. Zheng et al. grew CNT on the surface of 2D Ti3C2Tx nanosheets via a microwave-assisted strategy and modified it with metal oxide.80 Compared with the MXene aerogel (d-Ti3C2) prepared via the freeze-drying of a mixed suspension of MXene and PVA, the obtained 3D MXene-derived metal oxide/carbon nanotube/iron (3DMCI) hybrid nanostructures exhibited enhanced electrochemical performances as anodes for LIBs. Specifically, the initial discharge specific capacity of 3DMCI was 469.8 mA h g−1, which is much higher than that of d-Ti3C2 (215 mA h g−1). Also, the 3DMCI anode displayed almost completely overlapping discharge curves. Moreover, during 600 cycles of charging and discharging at 0.1 A g−1, the capacities of 3DMCI gradually increased with cycling after a decline initially when tested at both current densities. In Zhang's report, a 3D SnO2@C/d-Ti3C2 xerogel framework was synthesized by freeze-drying and heat treatment. When used as an active material for LIBs, the 3D xerogel exhibited a high specific capacity, excellent rate performance, and long cycle life stability at high current densities.49
 Fig. 11  Electrochemical performances of MXene electrodes for LIBs. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of the Ti3C2–RGO (1:1) film electrode at different current densities. (b) Rate capability of different samples. (c) Cycle performance of different samples at 1 A g−1 (the line colors of different samples are identical to that in panel (b)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Cycling performances of different samples at 50 mA g−1 and (e) rate performance of the restacked MXene film and 3D porous MXene foams. (f) Long-term cycling stability of the p-MXene-71 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2019 Wiley. 


3.1.2 Lithium–sulfur batteries. 
Lithium–sulfur batteries are another promising energy storage system with theoretical capacities higher than that of LIBs. However, to improve the cycle stability of the lithium–sulfur battery, it is necessary to develop host materials that can efficiently inhibit the shuttle effect of the polysulfide intermediates.102 Another problem is that the huge volume changes during charging/discharging challenge the mechanical properties of electrodes.103 There are many reports on 2D MXene for lithium–sulfur batteries.104–107 On the one hand, the polysulfides from the battery reaction are adsorbed on the surface of MXene and react with the OH group at the end of MXene in a series of redox reactions.108 On the other hand, a stable Ti–S chemical bond is formed by the chemical adsorption and Lewis acid–base interaction between the exposed Ti atom without an OH group and the polysulfide with negative charge.104 Therefore, Ti-based MXenes show excellent adsorption and fixation capacity for polysulfides, which can improve the cycling stability of lithium–sulfur batteries. Besides, MXenes can reduce the overpotential, promote the charge transfer kinetics process, and improve the rate performance.109 3D MXenes with a self-supporting structure can provide more attachment sites for active substances, and have enough space to meet the demand of a high sulfur loading and buffer the volume expansion of the sulfur cathode.110
To load the active materials uniformly on the host materials and accelerate redox reactions, Song et al. used lithium polysulfide (LPS) instead of elemental sulfur directly the positive electrode (Fig. 12a).69 A free-standing MXene/RGO (MX/G) composite aerogel with different Ti3C2Tx contents (denoted as MX/G-10, MX/G-20, and MX/G-30, corresponding to an MXene ratio of 10%, 20%, and 30%, respectively) was designed for the storage of polysulfide. The highly conductive MXene/RGO aerogels achieved efficient transport of lithium ions and electrons, and the adsorption and immobilization of LPS. The robust electrode delivered excellent electrochemical performances, including a high capacity of 1270 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, extended cycling life up to 500 cycles with a low capacity decay rate of 0.07% per cycle, and high areal capacity of 5.27 mA h cm−1. Fig. 12b shows that the addition of MXene improved the redox reaction kinetics of LPS compared to RGO. Fig. 12c shows two typical discharge potential platforms. As shown in Fig. 12d, the MXene-containing batteries presented a superior rate performance compared to that with a pure RGO electrode. Fig. 12e shows that the MXene/RGO composite aerogel-based electrodes exhibited good stability at a high sulfur loading, as also evidenced by the long-term cycling test (Fig. 12f). In addition, the 3D structures formed by combining MXenes with other materials such as MnO2,111 and mesoporous carbon112 also exhibit impressive performances when applied in lithium–sulfur batteries.
 Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of the preparation process of the MX/G aerogel electrode and schematic of the Li–S cell assembly. (b) Cyclic voltammetry curves of Li–S cells with RGO and MX/G-30 electrodes at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 (c) First charge/discharge curves of Li–S cell with the MX/G-30 electrode at various rates. (d) Rate performance of Li–S cells with RGO, MX/G-10, MX/G-20, and MX/G-30 electrodes. (e) Cycling stability of the MX/G-30 electrode at a rate of 0.1C for 30 cycles with a high sulfur loading of 6 mg cm−2 (f) Long-term cycling performance of the Li–S cell with the MX/G-30 electrode at a rate of 1C for 500 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Alkali (Li or Na) metal batteries. 
Alkali metals (Li, Na, etc.) have been widely studied due to their high theoretical specific capacity and low redox potential.113 However, their high activity leads to instability in the natural state. On the one hand, alkali metals will react with an electrolyte solution to form an SEI film in the process of charging and discharging, and the volume change during the repeated charging processes will continuously cause the rupture and formation of the SEI, resulting in the gradual loss of alkali metal and decrease in the efficiency of the battery.114 On the other hand, when alkali metals are used as the anode, there will be non-uniformed charge distribution at the interface of the metal electrode and electrolyte. This results in uneven metal deposition, leading to the formation of metal dendrites, which can pierce the separator, thereby causing short-circuit and battery explosion. This severely affects the safety and lifespan of batteries.115 Therefore, it is essential to develop functional materials that can effectively restrain the growth of alkali dendrites. Results showed that 2D materials can be used to improve the deposition of alkali metals and inhibit the formation of metallic dendrites.116 Thus, constructing 3D MXene composite frameworks represents a further step to solve the problem of alkali dendrites. Fang and coworkers reported 3D Ti3C2Tx/RGO composites as alkali metal anodes.117 Ti3C2Tx provides a large surface area and excellent conductivity, which can inhibit the formation of dendrites through the local current. The existence of RGO can effectively separate the alkali metals and avoid the growth of large dendrites. A conductive and lithophilic 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene/graphene (MG) framework was demonstrated for a dendrite-free Li-metal anode.118 The experimental results also proved that 3D MXene effectively inhibited the formation of lithium dendrites and improved the capacity of the electrode frame to withstand volume changes.


3.1.4 Sodium–sulfur batteries and sodium-ion batteries. 
Considering the abundant reserves of sodium, the sodium–sulfur battery has become a promising low-cost alternative to LIBs. However, similar to lithium–sulfur batteries, it is also a challenge to effectively restrain the dissolution and shuttle effect of sodium polysulfides in the cathode. Wang and co-authors reported Ti3C2Tx doped with sulfur for Na–S batteries, which significantly accelerated its redox reactivity and restricted the outward diffusion of polysulfides, resulting in a higher rate capacity.119 Studies have shown that chemically functionalized Ti3C2 MXene sheets can significantly reduce the sodium diffusion barriers and enhance the sodium storage capacity.120 For sodium-ion batteries, Zhao et al. synthesized macroporous Ti3C2Tx films by selecting PMMA spheres as the sacrificial template and removing the template by heat treatment.75 The obtained 3D MXene exhibited a reversible capacity of 330 mA h g−1 at a low charge rate of 0.25C with an excellent rate performance and high cycling performance. Also, at a high current rate of 25C, the obtained porous MXene maintained a capacity of at least 120 mA h g−1. Besides, porous Ti3C2Tx MXene was prepared based on a sulfur-template method using EDA as a solvent for sulfur.97 The obtained porous MXene electrode delivered capacities of 166 and 124 mA h g−1 at the high current densities of 1 and 10 A g−1, respectively. The electrochemical performances of 3D MXenes with a macroscopic aerogel or hydrogel structure for rechargeable batteries are summarized in Table 1. It can be seen that the three-dimensional frameworks with cellulose nanofibers,121 VO2,122 and other materials also exhibit good performances in sodium-ion capacitors.
Table 1 Comparison of 3D MXene-based materials for application in batteries




Sample
Application
Current density (A g−1)
Cycle number
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Ref.




Ti3C2Tx/SnO2@C aerogel
LIBs
10
1000
169

49



Hollow Ti3C2Tx/CoO/Co2Mo3O8 network
LIBs
2
1200
545

74



Porous Ti3C2Tx/RGO
LIBs
1
1000
212.5

101



Ti3C2Tx foam
LIBs
1
3500
220

77



Ti3C2Tx/metal oxide/CNT/iron
LIBs
0.1
590
329.5

80



Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel
LSBs
1.675
500
596

69



Ti3C2Tx/mesoporous carbon
LSBs
0.8375
300
704.6

112



Ti3C2Tx/MnO2 aerogel
LSBs
1.675
500
501

111



Hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres
SIBs
2.5
1000
295

75



Ti3C2Tx/TiO2/RGO/cellulose aerogel
SIBs
1
2000
105

121



Flower-like Ti3C2Tx/VO2
SIBs
1
200
240

122






3.1.5 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are known for their high power density, long life, and low-temperature tolerance, which can be used for high-power supply, grid energy storage, and fast energy recovery of electric systems.123 At present, there are two categories, electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLC) and pseudocapacitors. EDLC are a type of capacitor that stores charge through the double electric layers produced by the directional arrangement of electrons, ions, or dipoles at the electrode-solution interface.123 The reaction principle is a basic physical process, and thus the energy density is relatively low. To improve energy density, lots of studies have focused on pseudocapacitive supercapacitors. The introduction of redox reactions can effectively improve the energy density of capacitors. 2D MXenes have been widely used in supercapacitor research.129–132 However, restacking and aggregation between the 2D MXene layers reduce the accessibility of active sites on the electrode surface and hinder the transportation of ions, which can be alleviated by constructing 3D MXene-based structures.96,124–128 Wang et al. used a Ti3C2Tx MXene/RGO composite aerogel as the cathode material, zinc foil as the anode and zinc sulfate as the electrolyte to assemble a zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitor (ZHSC), achieving a specific capacity of up to 128.6 F g−1 and energy density of up to 34.9 W h kg−1 (Fig. 13a).32 The electrochemical performance of the ZHSC with MXene was much better than that without MXene (Fig. 13b and c). Simultaneously, 95% capacity was maintained at the current density of 5 A g−1 after 7500 cycles (Fig. 13d). Yang et al. used 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene/RGO composite aerogels prepared via simple freeze-drying and laser cutting as a substrate to prepare micro-supercapacitors (MSC) with high self-repairing ability.78 The electrochemical performance of MXene was effectively improved through assembling 2D MXene into a 3D structure. The excellent mechanical elasticity of the composite aerogel provides a new idea for the development of flexible and self-repairing capacitors. It was shown that the electrochemical performance of all the composite electrodes was significantly greater than that of the RGO aerogel electrodes (Fig. 13e and f). Fig. 13g shows that the performance of the composite aerogel was improved with an increase in the content of MXene. Furthermore, after 15000 cycles, the capacitance remained as high as 91%.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of MXene-RGO/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSC. (b) CV curves of the RGO/ZnSO4/Zn and MXene-RGO/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSCs at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of the RGO/ZnSO4/Zn and MXene-RGO/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSCs at a current density of 0.4 A g−1. (d) Capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency (the inset exhibits a 1.8 V LED lit by two ZHSCs connected in series) of the MXene-RGO2/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (e) CV curves of MXene/RGO composite aerogel MSCs at different scan rates. (f) GCD curves of MXene/RGO composite aerogel MSCs at different current densities. (g) Area capacitances vs. scan rate of MXene/RGO composite aerogel MSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Shang et al. prepared 3D Ti3C2Tx-based hydrogels via self-assembly.72 With fast electron transfer and ion transport properties, the 3D hydrogels exhibited high electrical conductivity and excellent mechanical strength. As a freestanding electrode without the addition of a binder or conductive agent for supercapacitors, a high specific capacity of 370 F g−1 at 5 A g−1 was achieved. Even at a high current density of 1000 A g−1, a capacity of 165 F g−1 was obtained. Without the aid of graphene and other additives, 3D structures with the high specific surface area were printed using a Ti3C2Tx water-based ink.87 After freeze-drying treatment, an electrode without a current collector was successfully prepared for application in supercapacitors. In another work, a slurry of hollow Ti3C2Tx MXene spheres was prepared via the template method and then assembled by 3D printing to form a macro 3D porous structure. Fan et al. demonstrated a 3D-printed sodium-ion hybrid capacitor (SIC) based on a nitrogen-doped MXene (N-Ti3C2Tx) anode and activated carbon cathode.62 The nitrogen-modified MXene showed a strong sodium-ion storage performance. At the micro-level, the introduction of the template method provides a good microporous structure for anode materials. On the macroscale, 3D printing provides sufficient space in the electrode for the transport of ions and electrolytes and avoids the use of collectors. Testing showed that high areal energy and power densities of 1.18 mW h cm−2 and 40.15 mW cm−2, respectively, were obtained. Deng et al. creatively used many species of metal ions to promote the self-assembling gel process of Ti3C2Tx MXene, achieving an excellent rate performance of 272 and 226 F g−1 at a scan rate of 2 and 1000 mV s−1, respectively.63 The electrochemical performances of 3D MXenes with macroscopic aerogel or hydrogel structures for supercapacitors are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Comparison of 3D MXene-based materials for application in supercapacitors




Sample
Capacitance at low rate
Capacitance at high rate
Cycling stability
Ref.




Ti3C2Tx hydrogel
271 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)
226 F g−1 (1 V s−1)
97.1% (10000)

63



Ti3C2Tx aerogel
404 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
283 F g−1 (20 A g−1)
96% (8000)

124



Ti3C2Tx aerogel
438 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)
349 F g−1 (2 V s−1)
90% (20000)

96



Ti3C2Tx foam
271.2 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)
177.7 mF cm−2 (100 mV s−1)
88.7% (10000)

125



Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel
123.2 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)
38.5 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)
95% (75000)

32



Ti3C2Tx/RGO hydrogel
370 F g−1 (5 A g−1)
165 F g−1 (1000 A g−1)
98% (10000)

72



Ti3C2Tx/polypyrrole
416 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
208 F g−1 (8 A g−1)
86.4% (5000)

126



Ti3C2Tx/NiO aerogel
341 F cm−3 (2 mV s−1)
110 F cm−3 (100 mV s−1)
114% (2500)

127



Co3O4/Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel
345 F g−1 (1 A g−1)
N/A
85% (10000)

128



Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel
34.6 mF cm−2 (1 mV s−1)
9.2 mF cm−2 (100 mV s−1)
91% (15000)

78



Ti3C2Tx network
242.5 F g−1 (0.2 A g−1)
17.7 F g−1 (5 A g−1)
90% (10000)

87



Ti3C2Tx hydrogel
271 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)
226 F g−1 (1 V s−1)
97.1% (10000)

63



Ti3C2Tx aerogel
404 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)
283 F g−1 (20 A g−1)
96% (8000)

124



Ti3C2Tx aerogel
438 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)
349 F g−1 (2 V s−1)
90% (20000)

96



Ti3C2Tx foam
271.2 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)
177.7 mF cm−2 (100 mV s−1)
88.7% (10000)

125





3.2 Electromagnetic interference shielding
Working high-frequency circuits radiate external electromagnetic waves and almost all electronic equipment produces a certain degree of electromagnetic interference (EMI) signals. These signals can be radiated through electromagnetic waves or transmitted through conductors, which can cause the degradation or failure of electronic equipment, damage materials and may be harmful to living creatures. Therefore, with the extensive use of electronic equipment and the upgrading of wireless networking technology and military equipment, we need efficient electromagnetic interference shielding materials to meet the demands of regular working electronic equipment, protect human health, and improve the stealth performance of military equipment. As the most basic and effective method to avoid electromagnetic interference, electromagnetic shielding technology will not influence the regular working of devices, and will not require any modification to the inner circuit of devices. The shielding performance evaluation of a shielding body is typically measured by the shielding effectiveness (SE).  three points are of great importance in determining the performance of electromagnetic interference shielding materials. Firstly, the shielding effect of the material increases with an increase conductivity and magnetic permeability. Also, the higher the continuity of the shielding body, the better the shielding effect. Secondly, the shielding of low-frequency electromagnetic waves depends more on reflection than absorption, and thus, improving the ability of materials to reflect electromagnetic waves is of great importance. Besides, the specific thickness that electronic waves need to pass through is another vital factor that determines the EMI shielding effectiveness. A low density is also an essential property in the field of aerospace materials besides high electrical conductivity. Therefore, the development of new lightweight materials to replace traditional metal materials for EMI shielding is imminent. Graphene has been used for EMI shielding; however, the oxidation–reduction preparation methods of graphene limit its conductivity and lead to unsatisfactory results. Thus, exploring more suitable materials for lightweight EMI shielding is still a major research direction.
Research results showed that MXene nanosheets have superior electrical conductivity and their 2D layered structure can effectively attenuate the electromagnetic waves entering the material. Also, the results in electromagnetic shielding were more satisfactory after the 2D structure was transformed into 3D lightweight and highly conductive structures. Han et al. reported an anisotropic MXene (Ti3C2Tx, Ti2CTx, and Ti3CNTx) aerogel with a long-range order of aligned lamellar architecture through bidirectional freeze-casting for EMI shielding.50 The prepared MXene aerogel was lightweight and presented excellent mechanical flexibility. As shown in Fig. 14a, three different MXene aerogels were tested for their EMI shielding performance. The average EMI SE values in the X-band of the Ti3C2Tx, Ti2CTx, and Ti3CNTx aerogels reached 70.5, 69.2, and 54.1 dB, respectively. The relationship between shielding efficiency and aerogel density showed that the shielding performance increased with an increase in the density of the Ti3C2Tx aerogels at a thickness of 1 mm (Fig. 14b). When the aerogels were compressed to different thicknesses, their total shielding efficiency was almost unchanged, where the shielding efficiency was almost unchanged, increased, and decreased, respectively (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  (a) EMI shielding effectiveness of different MXene aerogels (Ti3C2Tx, Ti2CTx, and Ti3CNTx) at a density of 11.0 mg cm−3 and compression thickness of 1 mm. (b) Average EMI SE of Ti3C2Tx aerogels with different densities (5.5, 8.3, and 11.0 mg cm−3). (c) Average EMI SE of Ti3C2Tx aerogels with different compression thicknesses (1, 2, and 3 mm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (d) Influence of Ti3C2Tx content on the conductivity of MXene/RGO aerogel. (e) EMI-shielding performances of epoxy/MGA nanocomposites. (f) Effect of sample thickness on the EMI SE of epoxy/MGA-4 nanocomposite (0.74 vol%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) EMI SE of the RGO foam and MX/RGO foam with a thickness of 1.5 mm. (h) EMI SE of MX/RGO 1:2 with different thicknesses. (i) SSE of RGO foam and MX/RGO foams with a thickness of 1.5 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Zhao's group prepared a 3D structure Ti3C2Tx MXene/RGO hybrid aerogel (MGA) with high conductivity and porosity via directional freeze-drying and GO-assisted assembly.31 Then they combined epoxy and MGA with different MXene contents (the final MGA specimens with 15, 50, 65, and 80 wt% of Ti3C2Tx were denoted as MGA-1, MGA-2, MGA-3, and MGA-4, respectively). The conductivity of the composite reached 695.9 S m−1 and the EMI shielding performance reached 50 dB when the content of MXene was only 0.74%. Further analysis showed that the conductivity of the composite aerogel increased with the content of MXene (Fig. 14d), and the trend was the same for the EMI-shielding performances over the whole X-band range (Fig. 14e). Besides, the tests showed that the EMI shielding performance increased with an increase in the sample thickness and electromagnetic wave frequency (Fig. 14f). In another similar report, Fan et al. mixed a Ti3C2Tx colloid with GO colloid in ratios of 1:1, 1:2 and 1:3, and prepared MXene/RGO foams through vacuum freeze-drying followed by heat treatment at 300 °C.133 Further characterization showed that the conductivity of the mixed foams increased with an increase in the MXene content. However, the results also showed that the mechanical properties of the MXene mixed materials were reduced compared to that of RGO foam. The EMI SE of pure RGO foam was less than 20 dB in the X band. After the introduction of MXene, the EMI shielding performance of the MXene/RGO mixed foam was greatly improved due to the strong scattering effect of the high conductivity of MXene on the electromagnetic waves. Fig. 14g shows that MX/RGO 1:1 had an unsatisfactory SSE (SE per unit density) value due to its relatively high density. In contrast, the SSE value of MX/RGO 1:2 reached 6217 dB cm3 g−1 at a low thickness (1.5 mm). Fig. 14h shows that the EMI SE increased with an increase in the thickness of the sample. For the 3 mm thick sample, the maximum SE value was 50.7 dB, which can prevent 99.999% of incident radiation.
Wang et al. combined an MXene with carbon to fabricate a hybrid foam with a high EMI shielding performance.73 In their experiment, resorcinol was used as the carbon source. Also, the hybrid foam of Ti3C2Tx and carbon was obtained by freeze-drying and high-temperature annealing under the catalysis of formaldehyde and sodium carbonate. The 3D nanocomposite foam was then obtained after filling with epoxy resin and curing agent. The best EMI SE value reached 46 dB, far exceeding the 20 dB of the commercial standard. In agreement with other reports, the conductivity of the material increased with an increase in the MXene content. Besides, the porous structure changed the propagation path of the electromagnetic waves, increased the frequency of multiple reflection and reabsorption, and further promoted the dissipation of electromagnetic waves. Sambyal et al. prepared a composite material by doping carbon nanotubes into Ti3C2Tx MXene.46 A lightweight and strong mechanical aerogel was prepared by bidirectional freeze-drying. The obtained MXene/CNT aerogel showed excellent conductivity of 943 S m−1. The 3 mm-thick sample showed a superior EMI shielding performance of 103.9 dB at the X-band frequency. Yang et al. soaked carbon foam in a Ti3C2Tx suspension and obtained an MXene/C composite foam by freeze-drying.82 The experimental results showed that the introduction of MXene nanosheets improved the EM wave absorption efficiency of the carbon foam. When the MXene content was 9.8%, the 4.5 mm-thick sample displayed an electromagnetic reduction of up to −45 dB at 8.8 Hz. The EMI shielding performances of 3D MXenes are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison of 3D MXene-based materials for EMI shielding




Sample
Band
EMI SE
Ref.




Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene
X-band
62 dB

134



Ti3C2Tx foam
X-band
70 dB

23



Ti3C2Tx RGO aerogels
X-band
50 dB

31



Ti3C2Tx/polyimide aerogels
9.59 GHz
45.4 dB

47



Ti3C2Tx/cellulose aerogels
11.2 GHz
43.4 dB

135



Ti3C2Tx aerogels
X-band
70.5 dB

50



Ti3C2Tx/C/epoxy foam
X-band
46 dB

73



Ti3C2Tx/CNT aerogel
X-band
103.9 dB

46



Ti3C2Tx/carbon foam
8.8 GHz
45 dB

82



Ti3C2Tx/RGO foam
X-band
50.7 dB

133



Ti3C2Tx/nanocellulose aerogels
X-band
189400 dB cm−2 g−1

136



Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene
X-band
62 dB

134



Ti3C2Tx foam
X-band
70 dB

23



Hollow Ti3C2Tx/GO spheres foam
X-band
14299.2 dB cm−2 g−1

76





3.3 Sensors
As a medium of human–machine interaction, sensors play an increasingly important role in daily life with the development of smart and intelligent equipment. A pressure transducer is a device that can monitor pressure signals. The principle of pressure sensors is that the resistance of a specific material changes regularly with mechanical deformation. Consequently, the current flowing through the conductor varies regularly with an increase in strain, thereby converting pressure signals into an available output electric signal. MXene aerogels are a family of novel materials with excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical properties, and thus have been explored as pressure sensors.137–141 Yue and coworkers prepared a Ti3C2Tx MXene-sponge via dip-coating.142 Afterward, insulating PVA networks were used as spacers for the fabrication of a piezoresistive sensor (Fig. 15a). The MXene-sponge/PVA (MSP) sensor presented a high on/off current ratio and the I–V curves of the MSP sensor ranged from −1 to 1 V, showing a linear relationship (Fig. 15b and c). Also, the MSP sensor showed high sensitivity for a broad pressure range, a low detection limit of 9 Pa, a rapid response time, and excellent durability in over 10000 cycles (Fig. 15d–g), which is promising in monitoring health and pressure distribution.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MSP sensor. (b) I–T curves of MSP sensors with different concentrations of MXene (0.5 mg mL−1, 1 mg mL−1 and 2 mg mL−1) under the same pressure. (c) I–V curves of MSP sensor with an MXene concentration of 1 mg mL−1. (d) I–T curves of MSP sensor under various applied pressures. (e) Sensitivity of MXene-sponge and MSP-based sensors, showing a high sensitivity of 147 kPa−1 within 5.37 kPa and 442 kPa−1 in a larger pressure region. (f) Response time and recovery time of the MSP device. (g) Sensitivity was still maintained at over 90% of the original value after 10000 press-release cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
A hybrid 3D Ti3C2Tx MXene/RGO aerogel with a highly ordered architecture was fabricated after simple ice template freeze-drying for piezoresistive sensors.79 Further tests showed that the MXene/RGO hybrid aerogel sensor had the advantages of high sensitivity, fast response, long life, and high stability. Besides, an MXene hydrogel was also used as a tensile sensor.143 By adding Ti3C2Tx to PVA hydrogel, a composite hydrogel sensor with high sensitivity, excellent stretchability, and instantaneous self-repairing ability was prepared. The secondary crosslinking produced by the MXene nanosheets enhanced the tensile strength of the PVA hydrogel. Meanwhile, the rich functional groups on the surface of MXene caused the hydrogel to exhibit instantaneous self-repairing ability. A flexible wearable sensor fabricated via the incorporation of conductive Ti3C2Tx nanosheet networks into hydraulic polymer networks was developed.144 The wearable electronic sensor presented a reliable anti-freezing performance, stable moisture retention capacity, and self-healing ability, which can be used in electronic skin, potential multi-functional application of human–computer interaction, and personalized health monitoring.
3.4 Photocatalytic applications
Photocatalysis is based on the redox ability of photocatalysts under light irradiation and has been applied in the degradation of pollutants for environmental protection, chemical synthesis, water splitting, etc.145 Chen et al. reported the application of porous RGO/Ti3C2Tx aerogel frameworks (RTiC hydrogel) as a platform for Eosin Y (EY) photocatalysts (Fig. 16a).70 They synthesized a composite hydrogel of Ti3C2Tx and GO, and then fixed the photosensitizer on the surface of the composite aerogel to prepare a functional aerogel material. The prepared 3D RTiC hydrogel with minimized intersheet aggregation and interconnected porous framework could provide 3D conductive networks and large accessible active areas for the photoactive components. On the one hand, the RTiC/EY hydrogel with an interconnected porous structure could effectively promote the separation and transfer of charge carriers generated from the visible light excitation of EY. On the other hand, the larger surface area of the RTiC/EY hydrogel promoted the adsorption of the reactants compared with RTiC/EY powder. Therefore, the obtained functional hydrogel showed an enhanced photocatalytic performance compared to its powder counterpart and featured easy operability (Fig. 16b and c). Furthermore, the hydrogel showed excellent mechanical properties and remained intact after photocatalysis, which provided an opportunity for the reuse of the photocatalyst (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic preparation of MXene-based hydrogel photocatalysts loaded with EY. Photocatalytic performances for (b) reduction of Cr(VI) and (c) hydrogenation of 4-nitroaniline over the RTiC/EY hydrogel and RTiC/EY powder under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). (d) Digital photos of RTiC/EY hydrogel before and after the photo activity test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Water purification
Benefiting from their rich surface groups and excellent specific surface area, MXene and other 2D nanomaterials are often used for water purification. Robust, lightweight, and hydrophobic polyimide (PI)/MXene 3D architectures have been constructed via the freeze-drying of polyamide acid (PAA)/Ti3C2Tx suspensions and thermal imidization (Fig. 17a).146 Based on the strong interaction between the PI macromolecular chains and MXene nanosheets, highly porous and hydrophobic PI/MXene aerogels with a low density were formed. One the one hand, the MXene nanosheets served as a solid skeleton framework for the hybrid aerogel. Also, the coating of PI macromolecules produced a tight interface and interconnected porous structure. The strong hydrogen bonding force between MXenes and PI chains contributed to the formation of a robust network, benefiting the effective load transfer and great resistance to cyclic large-strain deformations, which allow the possibility for the reuse of the aerogel in the field of oil–water separation. On the other hand, MXene nanosheets were encapsulated by PI chains via strong hydrogen bonds. The numerous polar groups of PI were embedded in the internal network, which reduced the hydrophilic properties. Thus, the hybrid aerogel without surface modification could be directly applied to separate oil from oily wastewater with good selectivity. The obtained aerogel had excellent compressive properties and high oil absorption capacity (Fig. 17b), which showed good performance to separate water/oil and excellent stability in multiple cycles (Fig. 17c). Besides, the thermally stable hybrid aerogels showed superior fire-resistant properties and outstanding reusability under extreme conditions (Fig. 17d).
 Fig. 17  (a) Preparation of PI/MXene hybrid aerogels. (b) Absorption capacity of the PI/MXene aerogel for various organics. (c) Absorption recyclability for soybean oil using PI/MXene aerogels. (d) Burning behavior of the PI/MXene aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to the above-mentioned applications, 3D MXene-based architectures have been successfully applied in many fields, such as fireproof materials,147 oxygen evolution reactions,148 photothermal energy storage,149,150 solar water desalination,151,152 nuclear waste ion capture,153 and thermal conductors,154 exhibiting outstanding performances. These studies broaden the application prospects of the functional 3D MXene-based materials. Through these examples, it can be expected that 3D MXene-based architectures can unlock further potential by synergistically combining them with other materials toward enhanced performances in a broader spectrum of applications.
4. Conclusions
Herein, we introduced various methods for the assembly of 3D MXenes, such as the self-assembly method, template method, soaking method, and 3D printing. 3D MXene-based architectures not only inherit the unique physical and chemical characteristics of MXenes, but also feature new attracting advantages for final applications, which have been explored in various fields. It is essential to develop methodologies for the controllable 3D assembly of MXenes. Notably, 3D assembly aims to solve the restacking issue of MXene nanosheets. Generally, the essential aim is to exert the maximum attractive functionalities of MXene nanosheets for target applications. Accordingly, a fundamental understanding of the structure–property relationship of 3D MXene-based architectures toward specific applications is pivotal, which in turn is useful to optimize the microstructure of 3D MXene-based functional materials at the system level. In addition to the meaningful advances mentioned, a multitude of challenges remain at this juncture, which deserve further detailed investigations.
Firstly, it is well-known that MXene contain thermodynamically metastable marginal transition metal atoms, which are vulnerable to oxidation.155 For example, Ti3C2Tx MXene will be oxidized to anatase TiO2 under a high content of oxygen and water and high temperature, which will lead to the degradation of MXene.156 On the one hand, during the intercalation process for the preparation of 2D MXenes, ultrasonic treatment and other processes will increase the temperature of the MXene solution and accelerate its oxidation. On the other hand, in the 3D assembly procedure, oxidative additives,72 hydrothermal reactions,78 and other treatment methods in water157 will cause the oxidative degradation of MXenes. In previous reports, the as-synthesized few-layer MXenes with a larger interlayer spacing and more active groups were oxidized easier.157 For example, the oxidizing GO72 and high-valence metal ions63 may have a negative impact on the stability of MXenes. Therefore, the oxidation caused by oxygen and water during the preparation, storage, and 3D assembly of MXenes deserves more research attention. Specifically, the temperature for the preparation of the MXene nanosheets should be reduced as much as possible. Also, inert gas protection during ultrasonication is an essential factor that should be considered. Besides, the recommended practice is to increase the concentration of MXene, pass inert gas to remove the dissolved oxygen in the aqueous solution, and use a well-sealed environment for the storage of the MXene solution. In addition, in the 3D assembly procedure, oxygen-free aqueous solution, fast treatment in water and low temperatures are key to enhance the oxidation-resistance of MXenes. Using RGO, PI, and other materials to coat MXene nanosheets also helps to avoid the contact between MXenes and air to reduce the oxidation rate.78,146 Considering that transition metal ions, such as Co2+ and Cu2+, accelerate the oxidation degradation of MXenes,158 it is recommended to use inert atmosphere protection in the process of metal ion-assisted assembly or modification. It is also a feasible way to use reducing agents, such as NaHSO3 and ascorbic acid, to alleviate the oxidation of MXenes under the condition that these compounds do not interfere with the 3D assembly process.70
Secondly, among the various protocols for the construction of 3D MXene-based structures, the GO-assisted method has become a research hotspot. There are abundant oxygen dangling bonds and functional groups on the edge of GO macromolecules. Under the condition of reductant or hydrothermal treatment, the carboxyl and epoxy groups on the surface are removed and the resultant RGO interconnects to form a 3D structure. When molecular crosslinking agents are added, the functional group at one end of the crosslinker is interconnected with the RGO surface groups and the other end is interconnected with the MXene surface by hydrogen bonds and other interactions. Therefore, 3D MXenes with excellent properties can be realized via the self-assembly of RGO. The controllable preparation 3D MXene/RGO composites with a high MXene content and good mechanical properties needs to be further studied. Considering that MXenes are vulnerable to oxidation at high temperatures in water, methodologies to realize the crosslinking of RGO, and thus the assembly of MXene at lower temperatures, are preferable. In this case, additives with high reducing capability to achieve the efficient reduction of the GO precursor are indispensable, such as hydrogen iodide, and ascorbic acid. On the other hand, interfacial mediators screening the electrostatic repulsion forces between the negatively charged MXenes and RGO can be useful to enhance their interactions for the formation of monolithic MXene/RGO composites.
Thirdly, it is essential to develop customized preparation methods to meet the requirements of specific applications. For example, for energy storage applications, a balance between the porosity and density of 3D porous architectures should be considered to optimize the volume specific energy. Moreover, enhancing the adsorption capacity of the active material on the surface of MXenes and strengthening the tolerance of volume expansion caused by the metal ion insertion process are challenges to be overcome. For the application of EMI shielding, further focus should be on the oxidation resistance, flexibility, self-healing ability and waterproof ability of MXene-based aerogels to afford all-weather-available materials for practical applications. For photocatalytic applications, minimizing the light-shielding effect is of great importance.159 Specifically, effective 3D assembly requires a high concentration of 2D building blocks. However, the penetration ability of incident light and mass transfer to the interior of highly concentrated gel materials are very limited, which seriously affects the interaction of the photoactive materials in the gel with photons and reactants, thereby reducing the overall photocatalytic performance of the aerogels. Therefore, balancing the preparation and photocatalytic properties of MXene-based aerogels deserves further research attention. An applicable practice would be adjusting the traditional cylinder-shaped geometry to that featuring a higher surface-to-volume ratio, which is beneficial for the efficient light-photoactive material interaction and mass transfer for photocatalytic applications. In the field of water purification, considering that the conditions of wastewater treatment are relatively poor, and MXene is easily oxidized and loses its filtration ability in repeated use at high temperature, efforts should be devoted to maintaining the recyclability of MXene-based filtration materials.146 We believe that the application prospect of 3D MXene-based architectures will be more promising by overcoming these challenges.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51977071, 51802040, 21802020) and Natural Science Foundation of Hunan (2020JJ4192, 2020JJ3004, 2017JJ2040). N. Z. and X. X. also acknowledge the financial support of Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
References
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
G. Le Lay, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 202–203 CrossRef .
A. Molle, J. Goldberger, M. Houssa, Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhang and D. Akinwande, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C.-Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. Naguib, C. Shi, O. Mashtalir, L. M. Pan, B. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Gogotsi, S. J. L. Billinge and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9517–9520 RSC .
Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1079–1080 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, J. L. Cao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1138–1142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, K. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19528–19531 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, M. Estili and Y. Sakka, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7841–7849 RSC .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M.-Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. Man Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, X. Tang, X. Xu, B. Li, H. Liu and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3651–3659 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17105 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, X. Guo, P. Xiong, J. Zhang, J. Song, K. Yan, X. Gao, H. Liu and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000446 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Dillon, M. J. Ghidiu, A. L. Krick, J. Griggs, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum and A. T. Fafarman, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4162–4168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, G. Gao, F.-T. Li, T.-Y. Ma, A. Du and S.-Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef .
S. J. Kim, H.-J. Koh, C. E. Ren, O. Kwon, K. Maleski, S.-Y. Cho, B. Anasori, C.-K. Kim, Y.-K. Choi, J. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and H.-T. Jung, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 986–993 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M.-Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H.-B. Zhang, R. Sun, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, A. Zhou and Z.-Z. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702367 CrossRef .
P. Lian, Y. Dong, Z.-S. Wu, S. Zheng, X. Wang, S. Wang, C. Sun, J. Qin, X. Shi and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Cao, Y.-Z. Cai, P. He, J.-C. Shu, W.-Q. Cao and J. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 1265–1302 CrossRef CAS .
J. Come, J. M. Black, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Beidaghi, A. J. Rondinone, S. V. Kalinin, D. J. Wesolowski, Y. Gogotsi and N. Balke, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, J. Halim, S. Kota, D. Bish, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3507–3514 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, Z. Wu and N. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 1014–1017 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, S. Kota, V. Drozd and M. W. Barsoum, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao6850 CrossRef .
E. S. Muckley, M. Naguib, H.-W. Wang, L. Vlcek, N. C. Osti, R. L. Sacci, X. Sang, R. R. Unocic, Y. Xie, M. Tyagi, E. Mamontov, K. L. Page, P. R. C. Kent, J. Nanda and I. N. Ivanov, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11118–11126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, H.-B. Zhang, J.-Q. Luo, Q.-W. Wang, B. Xu, S. Hong and Z.-Z. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11193–11202 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Wang, X. Guo, L. Ruan, N. Wei, Y. Ma, J. Li, M. Wang, W. Li and W. Zeng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900537 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shen, B. Li and S. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 670–675 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, T. Shang, Y. Deng, Y. Tao and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903077 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, M. Liang, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Coelho, S. Pinilla, Y. Zhang, F. Qi, V. Nicolosi and Y. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1002/adfm.202000842 .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, J. Wen, N. Zhang, L. Wu, M. Zhang, S. Lin, H. Gao and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 11998–12005 RSC .
V. M. H. Ng, H. Huang, K. Zhou, P. S. Lee, W. Que, J. Z. Xu and L. B. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3039–3068 RSC .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halim, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, J. Lu, C. R. Smith, L.-Å. Näslund, S. J. May, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi, P. Eklund and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2374–2381 Search PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, X. Yin, X. Li, M. Li, S. Liang, L. Zhang and L. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10198–10207 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Q. Zhu, B. Anasori, P. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Gogotsi and B. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906282 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sambyal, A. Iqbal, J. Hong, H. Kim, M.-K. Kim, S. M. Hong, M. Han, Y. Gogotsi and C. M. Koo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38046–38054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H.-B. Zhang, X. Xie, R. Yang, Z. Liu, Y. Liu and Z.-Z. Yu, Small, 2018, 14, 1802479 CrossRef .
J. Li, D. Yan, S. Hou, Y. Li, T. Lu, Y. Yao and L. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1234–1243 RSC .
H. Zhang, P. Zhang, W. Zheng, W. Tian, J. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 285, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, X. Yin, K. Hantanasirisakul, X. Li, A. Iqbal, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, C. M. Koo, T. Torita, Y. Soda, L. Zhang, L. Cheng and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900267 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, F. Zhang, S. P. Medarametla, H. Li, C. Zhou and D. Lin, Small, 2016, 12, 1702–1708 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Peng, Y.-M. Liu, J.-K. Chang, C.-H. Wu, M.-D. Ger, N.-W. Pu and C.-L. Chang, Carbon, 2015, 81, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, C. M. Hayner, M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8739–8749 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bian, R. Lin, G. Wang, G. Lu, W. Zhi, S. Xiang, T. Wang, P. S. Clegg, D. Cai and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3621–3625 RSC .
L. Xiu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, X. Wu and J. Qiu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8017–8028 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. N. Ab Alim, M. S. Mohamed Saheed, N. M. Mohamed and M. S. Mohamed Saheed, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 7, 738–743 CAS .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Liu, W. Peng, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhao, K. Jiang, M. Peng and Y. Tan, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2109–2117 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, C. Wei, L. Yu, Z. Xia, J. Cai, Z. Tian, G. Zou, S. X. Dou and J. Sun, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 867–876 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, T. Shang, Z. Wu, Y. Tao, C. Luo, J. Liang, D. Han, R. Lyu, C. Qi, W. Lv, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 0935–9648 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhou, J. Liu, X. Zhang, D. Tian, Z. Zhan and C. Lu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1802040 CrossRef .
L. Li, M. Zhang, X. Zhang and Z. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 234–241 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Li, C. Chen and L. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, X. Guo, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, C. Zhang, L. Luo, F. Wang and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6507–6513 RSC .
Y. Chen, X. Xie, X. Xin, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 295–304 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, M. He, Y. Zhou, S. Nie, X. Zhong, L. Fan, T. Huang, Q. Liao and Y. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8212–8222 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shang, Z. Lin, C. Qi, X. Liu, P. Li, Y. Tao, Z. Wu, D. Li, P. Simon and Q. -H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903960 CrossRef .
L. Wang, H. Qiu, P. Song, Y. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. Liang, J. Kong, L. Chen and J. Gu, Composites, Part A, 2019, 123, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Xu, Z. Hui, Y. Sun, C. Yu, J. Xue, R. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Dai, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, J. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Sun and W. Huang, Small, 2019, 15, 1904255 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, X. Xie, C. E. Ren, T. Makaryan, B. Anasori, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702410 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Yin, C. Song, M. Han, H. Xu, W. Duan, L. Cheng and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803938 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, Q. Zhu, J. Miao, P. Zhang, P. Wan, L. He and B. Xu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yue, N. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Wang, W. Liu, C. Luo, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Rao, X. Hu, J. Su and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4224–4232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. Yue, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Zhao, J. Rao, S. Luo, J. Wang, X. Jiang, Z. Liu, N. Liu and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3209–3216 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, P. G. Zhang, J. Chen, W. B. Tian, Y. M. Zhang and Z. M. Sun, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 835, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Yue, Y. Cheng, Y. Zhang, J. Su, F. Long, X. Jiang, Y. Ma and Y. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 6, 1901064 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Chen and Y. Hu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 41038–41049 RSC .
C. Liang, H. Qiu, P. Song, X. Shi, J. Kong and J. Gu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 616–622 CrossRef CAS .
B. Elder, R. Neupane, E. Tokita, U. Ghosh, S. Hales and Y. L. Kong, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907142 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhang, L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S.-H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Barwich, C. Ó. Coileáin, N. McEvoy, H. C. Nerl, B. Anasori, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1795 CrossRef .
J. Orangi, F. Hamade, V. A. Davis and M. Beidaghi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 640–650 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. A. W. Dryfe and S. Barg, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902725 CrossRef .
J. Xue, T. Wu, Y. Dai and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 5298–5415 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maleski, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1632–1640 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Mayerberger, O. Urbanek, R. M. McDaniel, R. M. Street, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134, 45295 CrossRef .
W. Shao, M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, W. Li, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Mayerberger, R. M. Street, R. M. McDaniel, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 35386–35394 RSC .
A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, A. Sarycheva, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 7, 269–277 RSC .
C. Jiang, C. Wu, X. Li, Y. Yao, L. Lan, F. Zhao, Z. Ye, Y. Ying and J. Ping, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, R. Wang, T. Jiao, G. Zou, F. Zhan, J. Yin, L. Zhang, J. Zhou and Q. Peng, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 1897–1906 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Fu, J. Wen, X. Ma, C. Zhu, X. Zhang and D. Qi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20828–20835 RSC .
X. Xie, K. Kretschmer, B. Anasori, B. Sun, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 505–511 CrossRef CAS .
D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173–11179 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okubo, A. Sugahara, S. Kajiyama and A. Yamada, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goriparti, E. Miele, F. De Angelis, E. Di Fabrizio, R. Proietti Zaccaria and C. Capiglia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 421–443 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, X. Zhou, W. Deng, D. Lei and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3634–3643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, X. Huang, H. Liu, B. Sun, W. Yeoh, K. Li, J. Zhang and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301761 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu and Y. Su, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Liu, Y. Chen, B. Hou, N. Zhang, B. Chen, N. Yang, K. Chen, J. Li and L. An, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7870–7876 RSC .
X. Liang, J. Yun, K. Xu, H. Xiang, Y. Wang, Y. Sun and Y. Yu, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 39, 176–181 CrossRef .
C. J. Zhang, L. Cui, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh and J. Heier, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 613–638 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, Y. Rangom, C. Y. Kwok, Q. Pang and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603040 CrossRef .
D. Wang, F. Li, R. Lian, J. Xu, D. Kan, Y. Liu, G. Chen, Y. Gogotsi and Y. Wei, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11078–11086 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, X. Xie, J. Xu, X. Guo, J. Song, W. Wu, D. Su and G. Wang, Chem. - Eur. J., 2017, 23, 12613–12619 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Q. Qi, P. Zhang, W. Zheng, J. Chen, A. Zhou, W. Tian, W. Zhang and Z. Sun, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, D. Su, W. Zhang, X. Guo and G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8746–8756 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nan, X. Guo, J. Xiao, X. Li, W. Chen, W. Wu, H. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Wu and G. Wang, Small, 2020 DOI:10.1002/smll.201902085 .
X. Tang, D. Zhou, P. Li, X. Guo, B. Sun, H. Liu, K. Yan, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906739 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, D. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Yu, S. Li and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 654–661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Zhang, K. Zhu, R. Lian, Y. Gao, J. Yin, K. Ye, K. Cheng, J. Yan, G. Wang, Y. Wei and D. Cao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14319–14328 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, C. J. Zhang, P. Lu, Y. Dong, P. Wen and Z.-S. Wu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14308–14318 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, C. E. Shuck, W. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11500–11509 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5288–5296 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z.-Z. Pan, W. Lv, R. Lv, W. Shen, F. Kang, Q.-H. Yang, Y. Weng and Z.-H. Huang, Carbon, 2019, 153, 625–633 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, Y. Jiang, Z. Ye, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, S. Li, Y. Mei, M. Xie, L. Li and R. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1315–1322 RSC .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651–652 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Liu, S. Dong, J. Yang and Y. Liu, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 16, 315–321 CrossRef .
L. Shi, S. Lin, L. Li, W. Wu, L. Wu, H. Gao and X. Zhang, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 13901–13907 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jian, M. He, L. Chen, M. Zhang, R. Li, L. Gao, F. Fu and Z. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 820–827 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, G. Ying, L. Liu, F. Ma, L. Su, C. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Wang and Y. Zhou, Materials, 2019, 12, 188 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, A. Zhang, J. Tang, J. Tian, W. Huang, J. Cai, C. Barrow, W. Yang and J. Liu, Chem. - Eur. J., 2019, 25, 5547–5554 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Hou, F. Wang, M. R. Lohe, X. Zhuang, L. Niu and X. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601847 CrossRef .
Y. Wen, T. E. Rufford, X. Chen, N. Li, M. Lyu, L. Dai and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701264 CrossRef .
C. J. Zhang, B. Anasori, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, A. Shmeliov, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702678 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, D. Wang, Y. Yuan, Y. Wang, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu and Z. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122696 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sun, H.-B. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Xie, R. Yang, Y. Li, S. Hong and Z.-Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702807 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, X. Xie, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, R. Yang and G. Sui, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 8679–8687 RSC .
Z. Zeng, C. Wang, G. Siqueira, D. Han, A. Huch, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, J. Heier, F. Nüesch, C. J. Zhang and G. Nyström, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000979 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Tan and X. Ding, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10633–10647 CrossRef CAS .
X.-P. Li, Y. Li, X. Li, D. Song, P. Min, C. Hu, H.-B. Zhang, N. Koratkar and Z.-Z. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 54–62 CrossRef CAS .
D. Song, X. Li, X.-P. Li, X. Jia, P. Min and Z.-Z. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 555, 751–758 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Chen, Y. Li, J. Lan, B. Yan, L. Shi and R. Ran, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47350–47357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, H. Zhuo, Q. Luo, Y. Wu, R. Wen, Z. Chen, L. Liu, L. Zhong, X. Peng and R. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10273–10281 RSC .
Y. Yue, N. Liu, W. Liu, M. Li, Y. Ma, C. Luo, S. Wang, J. Rao, X. Hu, J. Su, Z. Zhang, Q. Huang and Y. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. Zhang, K. H. Lee, D. H. Anjum, R. Sougrat, Q. Jiang, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareef, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0098 CrossRef .
H. Liao, X. Guo, P. Wan and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904507 CrossRef .
X. Xie and N. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1002/adfm.202002528 .
N.-N. Wang, H. Wang, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-H. Wei, J.-Y. Si, A. C. Y. Yuen, J.-S. Xie, B. Yu, S.-E. Zhu, H.-D. Lu, W. Yang, Q. N. Chan and G.-H. Yeoh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40512–40523 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, A. C. Y. Yuen, A. Li, Y. Zhang, T. B. Y. Chen, B. Yu, E. W. M. Lee, S. Peng, W. Yang, H.-D. Lu, Q. N. Chan, G. H. Yeoh and C. H. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 381, 120952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. Yang, Y. Yang, X. Yin, W. Que and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 762–770 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lin, J. Xie, Y. He, X. Lu, W. Li, J. Fang, S. Yan, L. Zhang, X. Sheng and Y. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110229 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, X. Zhao, C. Feng, L. Bai, J. Yang, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 203, 110174 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, L.-M. Peng, C.-Y. Tang, J.-H. Pu, X.-J. Zha, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 855–865 RSC .
A. Shahzad, M. Moztahida, K. Tahir, B. Kim, H. Jeon, A. A. Ghani, N. Maile, J. Jang and D. S. Lee, J. Nucl. Mater., 2020, 539, 152277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Liu, Q. Li, C. Chen, Z. Chen, P. Song, J. Hao, Y. Li, S. Fakhrhoseini, M. Naebe, X. Wang and W. Lei, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7860–7870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Z. Liu, J. Han, Z. Jin, Y. Han, F. Wang, Y. Niu, Y. Wu and Y. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803406 CrossRef .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dyatkin, C. Zhang, V. Presser, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7420–7423 RSC .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov, D. Krishnan, C. Morant, X. Liu, G. S. Duesberg, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8876–8882 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Fei Song	Fei Song received his B.S. Degree from the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University in 2019. His main research interests focus on surface modification, 3D assembly of MXene-based materials and their applications in electrochemical energy storage devices.
Xiuqiang Xie	Xiuqiang Xie is now an Associate Professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University. His main research interests include the synthesis of 2D materials and their heterostructures for sustainable technologies, such as photocatalysis, hybrid supercapacitors, and sodium-ion batteries.
Nan Zhang	Nan Zhang is now a Professor at the College of Materials Science and Engineering at Hunan University. Her main research interests include the design and controlled synthesis of composites towards photocatalytic applications and investigation of their mechanism.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the evolution of MXenes from 2D to 3D materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of MXene intercalated with hard carbon (HC). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (b) Schematic of MXene intercalated with CNT. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (c) SEM images of Ti3C2 before (left) and after (right) the intercalation of HM and DMF (24 h at 80 °C), respectively. Scale bars: 200 nm in c. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2013 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the various methods and examples of the 3D assembly of MXenes.	 

 	Fig. 4  2D Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are cross-linked and assembled with auxiliary agents. (a) Schematic of the metal ion-initiated interaction of Ti3C2Tx. (b) SEM image of MXene monolith. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of Ti3C2Tx/SA film. (d) SEM images of Ti3C2Tx/SA composite film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (e) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of Ti3C2Tx aerogel with EDA. (f) SEM images of cross-section of 3D Ti3C2 aerogel. (g) Enlarged view of the cross-section of 3D Ti3C2 aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2017 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of the GO-assisted 3D assembly of MXenes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Assembly of 3D MXene with the assistance of GO. (a) Illustration of the preparation process of the MXene/GO hydrogel through hydrothermal treatment. (b) SEM images of the MXene/GO aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of TiO2/Ti3C2Tx/RGO ternary composite aerogel, where NaHSO3 acts as a reducing agent to reduce GO. (d) and (e) Different magnification SEM views of the TiO2/Ti3C2Tx/RGO ternary composite aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the formation process of MXene/GO hydrogel with EDA. (g) SEM images of the MXene/GO hydrogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2019 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the process for the fabrication of (a) MCF/epoxy composites and (b) SEM images of MCF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2019 Elsevier and (c) TMO@MXene hollow polyhedrons. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of TMO@MXene hollow polyhedrons. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2019 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic showing the construction of hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres and 3D macroporous Ti3C2Tx frameworks. (b) SEM image of hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres after the removal of PMMA. (c) TEM images showing a hollow Ti3C2Tx sphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Wiley. (d) Schematic diagrams of the manufacturing process of MXene/RGO composite aerogels. (e) SEM images of MXene/RGO composite aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic of the bidirectional freezing method for the fabrication of the Ti3C2Tx/CNT hybrid aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Procedure for the synthesis of MXene/RGO aerogels. (b) SEM images of the MXene/RGO aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (c) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of carbon foam/Ti3C2Tx hybrids. (d) SEM images of the carbon foam/Ti3C2Tx hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the manufacturing strategy for 3D MXene from MAX to 3D printing. (b) SEM and optical photographs (inset) of freestanding Ti3C2Tx microlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (c) Schematic diagram showing the process for the preparation of 3D printed electrodes with porous N-Ti3C2Tx from the MF sphere template. (d) SEM images of porous N-Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrochemical performances of MXene electrodes for LIBs. (a) Charge–discharge profiles of the Ti3C2–RGO (1:1) film electrode at different current densities. (b) Rate capability of different samples. (c) Cycle performance of different samples at 1 A g−1 (the line colors of different samples are identical to that in panel (b)). Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Cycling performances of different samples at 50 mA g−1 and (e) rate performance of the restacked MXene film and 3D porous MXene foams. (f) Long-term cycling stability of the p-MXene-71 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2019 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Illustration of the preparation process of the MX/G aerogel electrode and schematic of the Li–S cell assembly. (b) Cyclic voltammetry curves of Li–S cells with RGO and MX/G-30 electrodes at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 (c) First charge/discharge curves of Li–S cell with the MX/G-30 electrode at various rates. (d) Rate performance of Li–S cells with RGO, MX/G-10, MX/G-20, and MX/G-30 electrodes. (e) Cycling stability of the MX/G-30 electrode at a rate of 0.1C for 30 cycles with a high sulfur loading of 6 mg cm−2 (f) Long-term cycling performance of the Li–S cell with the MX/G-30 electrode at a rate of 1C for 500 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Ti3C2Tx/SnO2@C aerogel	LIBs	10	1000	169	
49

Hollow Ti3C2Tx/CoO/Co2Mo3O8 network	LIBs	2	1200	545	
74

Porous Ti3C2Tx/RGO	LIBs	1	1000	212.5	
101

Ti3C2Tx foam	LIBs	1	3500	220	
77

Ti3C2Tx/metal oxide/CNT/iron	LIBs	0.1	590	329.5	
80

Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel	LSBs	1.675	500	596	
69

Ti3C2Tx/mesoporous carbon	LSBs	0.8375	300	704.6	
112

Ti3C2Tx/MnO2 aerogel	LSBs	1.675	500	501	
111

Hollow Ti3C2Tx spheres	SIBs	2.5	1000	295	
75

Ti3C2Tx/TiO2/RGO/cellulose aerogel	SIBs	1	2000	105	
121

Flower-like Ti3C2Tx/VO2	SIBs	1	200	240	
122


 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of MXene-RGO/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSC. (b) CV curves of the RGO/ZnSO4/Zn and MXene-RGO/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSCs at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1 (c) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of the RGO/ZnSO4/Zn and MXene-RGO/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSCs at a current density of 0.4 A g−1. (d) Capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency (the inset exhibits a 1.8 V LED lit by two ZHSCs connected in series) of the MXene-RGO2/ZnSO4/Zn ZHSC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (e) CV curves of MXene/RGO composite aerogel MSCs at different scan rates. (f) GCD curves of MXene/RGO composite aerogel MSCs at different current densities. (g) Area capacitances vs. scan rate of MXene/RGO composite aerogel MSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

Ti3C2Tx hydrogel	271 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)	226 F g−1 (1 V s−1)	97.1% (10000)	
63

Ti3C2Tx aerogel	404 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	283 F g−1 (20 A g−1)	96% (8000)	
124

Ti3C2Tx aerogel	438 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)	349 F g−1 (2 V s−1)	90% (20000)	
96

Ti3C2Tx foam	271.2 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)	177.7 mF cm−2 (100 mV s−1)	88.7% (10000)	
125

Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel	123.2 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)	38.5 F g−1 (100 mV s−1)	95% (75000)	
32

Ti3C2Tx/RGO hydrogel	370 F g−1 (5 A g−1)	165 F g−1 (1000 A g−1)	98% (10000)	
72

Ti3C2Tx/polypyrrole	416 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	208 F g−1 (8 A g−1)	86.4% (5000)	
126

Ti3C2Tx/NiO aerogel	341 F cm−3 (2 mV s−1)	110 F cm−3 (100 mV s−1)	114% (2500)	
127

Co3O4/Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel	345 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	N/A	85% (10000)	
128

Ti3C2Tx/RGO aerogel	34.6 mF cm−2 (1 mV s−1)	9.2 mF cm−2 (100 mV s−1)	91% (15000)	
78

Ti3C2Tx network	242.5 F g−1 (0.2 A g−1)	17.7 F g−1 (5 A g−1)	90% (10000)	
87

Ti3C2Tx hydrogel	271 F g−1 (2 mV s−1)	226 F g−1 (1 V s−1)	97.1% (10000)	
63

Ti3C2Tx aerogel	404 F g−1 (0.5 A g−1)	283 F g−1 (20 A g−1)	96% (8000)	
124

Ti3C2Tx aerogel	438 F g−1 (10 mV s−1)	349 F g−1 (2 V s−1)	90% (20000)	
96

Ti3C2Tx foam	271.2 mF cm−2 (5 mV s−1)	177.7 mF cm−2 (100 mV s−1)	88.7% (10000)	
125


 	Fig. 14  (a) EMI shielding effectiveness of different MXene aerogels (Ti3C2Tx, Ti2CTx, and Ti3CNTx) at a density of 11.0 mg cm−3 and compression thickness of 1 mm. (b) Average EMI SE of Ti3C2Tx aerogels with different densities (5.5, 8.3, and 11.0 mg cm−3). (c) Average EMI SE of Ti3C2Tx aerogels with different compression thicknesses (1, 2, and 3 mm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 Wiley. (d) Influence of Ti3C2Tx content on the conductivity of MXene/RGO aerogel. (e) EMI-shielding performances of epoxy/MGA nanocomposites. (f) Effect of sample thickness on the EMI SE of epoxy/MGA-4 nanocomposite (0.74 vol%). Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) EMI SE of the RGO foam and MX/RGO foam with a thickness of 1.5 mm. (h) EMI SE of MX/RGO 1:2 with different thicknesses. (i) SSE of RGO foam and MX/RGO foams with a thickness of 1.5 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene	X-band	62 dB	
134

Ti3C2Tx foam	X-band	70 dB	
23

Ti3C2Tx RGO aerogels	X-band	50 dB	
31

Ti3C2Tx/polyimide aerogels	9.59 GHz	45.4 dB	
47

Ti3C2Tx/cellulose aerogels	11.2 GHz	43.4 dB	
135

Ti3C2Tx aerogels	X-band	70.5 dB	
50

Ti3C2Tx/C/epoxy foam	X-band	46 dB	
73

Ti3C2Tx/CNT aerogel	X-band	103.9 dB	
46

Ti3C2Tx/carbon foam	8.8 GHz	45 dB	
82

Ti3C2Tx/RGO foam	X-band	50.7 dB	
133

Ti3C2Tx/nanocellulose aerogels	X-band	189400 dB cm−2 g−1	
136

Ti3C2Tx/polystyrene	X-band	62 dB	
134

Ti3C2Tx foam	X-band	70 dB	
23

Hollow Ti3C2Tx/GO spheres foam	X-band	14299.2 dB cm−2 g−1	
76


 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MSP sensor. (b) I–T curves of MSP sensors with different concentrations of MXene (0.5 mg mL−1, 1 mg mL−1 and 2 mg mL−1) under the same pressure. (c) I–V curves of MSP sensor with an MXene concentration of 1 mg mL−1. (d) I–T curves of MSP sensor under various applied pressures. (e) Sensitivity of MXene-sponge and MSP-based sensors, showing a high sensitivity of 147 kPa−1 within 5.37 kPa and 442 kPa−1 in a larger pressure region. (f) Response time and recovery time of the MSP device. (g) Sensitivity was still maintained at over 90% of the original value after 10000 press-release cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic preparation of MXene-based hydrogel photocatalysts loaded with EY. Photocatalytic performances for (b) reduction of Cr(VI) and (c) hydrogenation of 4-nitroaniline over the RTiC/EY hydrogel and RTiC/EY powder under visible light irradiation (λ ≥ 420 nm). (d) Digital photos of RTiC/EY hydrogel before and after the photo activity test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Preparation of PI/MXene hybrid aerogels. (b) Absorption capacity of the PI/MXene aerogel for various organics. (c) Absorption recyclability for soybean oil using PI/MXene aerogels. (d) Burning behavior of the PI/MXene aerogel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
