A future energy supply based on Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carriers (LOHC)  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01454D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01454D
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2767-2773Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA future energy supply based on Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carriers (LOHC)

        
          
            Daniel 
            Teichmann
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Arlt
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Peter 
            Wasserscheid
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Raymond 
            Freymann
          
        
      a
aBMW Group Forschung und Technik, Hanauer Straße 46, 80992, München, Germany. E-mail: Daniel.Teichmann@cbi.uni-erlangen.de;   Tel: +49-160-4548292
bDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Egerlandstr. 3, 91058, Erlangen, Germany. E-mail: wolfgang.arlt@cbi.uni-erlangen.de;   Tel: +49-9131-8528596
Received 
      11th April 2011
    , Accepted 9th June 2011First published on 8th July 2011AbstractThis contribution describes a concept for the establishment of a competitive energy distribution network based on Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carrier (LOHC) compounds. These compounds are characterized by the fact that they can be loaded and un-loaded with considerable amounts of hydrogen in a cyclic process. This concept links the technical challenge of storing temporary and local energy over-production from regenerative sources with the vision of a sustainable, hydrogen-based mobility. The proposed LOHC compounds have many physico-chemical similarities to diesel. Thus, LOHCs could make use of the existing energy infrastructure (e.g. tank ships, storage tanks or fueling stations) and enable a slow and step-wise replacement of the existing hydrocarbon fuels by alternative LOHC fuels. We consider LOHCs as an attractive way to provide wind and solar energy for mobility applications in the form of liquid energy carrying molecules of similar energy storage densities and manageability as today's fossil fuels.

Broader context
Limited availability of fossil fuels, anthropogenic climate change and recent experiences with the high risk of nuclear power generation lead to an increasing interest in a future energy system based on regenerative sources. As this energy—coming e.g. from wind or solar resources—is of a highly intermittent character, their integration into our energy system requires energy storage systems that are capable of balancing changing energy demand and intermittent supply at all times. Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carrier compounds enable convenient and safe energy storage over long periods of time. As these diesel-like substances can be handled in today's infrastructure (e.g. liquid storage tanks, fuel stations), there is a broad scope of possible applications ranging from mobility or domestic energy-supply to grid stabilization and load levelling functions.

1. From hydrocarbon fossil fuels to renewable energies
Our present-day energy system is dominated by the systematic exploitation of large reservoirs of carbon-based fossil fuels. Eighty percent of 2008's world-wide primary energy demand was satisfied by the fossil resources oil, coal and gas.1 The use of liquid hydrocarbon compounds as a source of energy has numerous advantages:
• Their production used to be comparably cheap. Easily accessible storages were depleted by systematic drilling activities and large scale refinery installations were established to modify and optimize the natural product.
• The products of combustion are water and carbon dioxide. Both compounds already exist in the atmosphere and are of low energy content (low enthalpy).
• Due to their high storage density (e.g. 8.5 kWh per litre of gasoline), their relatively convenient handling and their favourable safety characteristics, liquid fossil fuels are excellent energy carriers for all kind of mobile applications (e.g. cars, trucks, aviation, shipping traffic, etc.).
• As liquid fossil fuels can be permanently stored in large quantities under ambient conditions without detectable losses in material or energy our whole energy infrastructure (including production plants, storage facilities and distribution channels) serves as a huge energy storage system which—to a certain degree—is able to balance short-term mismatches between demand and supply.2
• The processing of large quantities of liquid hydrocarbons in large scale plants allows for continuous operation and easy controllability—both prerequisites for high efficiency and constant quality of the product.
The rapid depletion of natural storages, which have been formed and accumulated over hundreds of millions of years, is not sustainable for obvious reasons. Calculations by J. S. Dukes show that during the natural building process of fossil fuel approx. 24 tons of ancient plant matter were needed to produce one single litre of gasoline.3 Further arguments for the lack of sustainability are the limited natural availability of fossil fuels, their unequal geographic distribution and the consequences of their increasing use in the form of anthropogenic climate change.4
In the context of this article, we define renewable energy as an energy source that provides energy obtained from the sun in either a direct (e.g. photovoltaics) or indirect way (e.g. wind or biomass) without depleting resources or assets that have been accumulated over a much longer period than the period of energy production.
Renewable energy is understood to be the key source of a future sustainable energy system.5,6 There are ambitious goals in many parts of the world to raise the share of solar, wind, geothermal and biomass energy production substantially. The energy derived from these sources shall substitute the burning of fossil fuels in electricity generation as well as in former non-electric applications such as mobility. The European Union has announced the target for renewable energy in gross final energy consumption to be 20% in 2020 which would set the share in electricity production to about 30–40%.1
A key hurdle for the massive integration of some of the most important sources of Renewable Energy into our energy system is their intermittent character. Namely countries with a large share of wind and solar energy producers have already experienced energy over-production on very windy or sunny days while realising significant energy shortages during high demand periods with unfavourable weather or seasonal conditions. Thus, energy production from wind or solar is not ‘load-following’.6 There are two solutions to this situation:
• Mankind runs its large technical installations (power plants, chemical plants, plants for the production of consumer products, etc.) in an intermittent way, giving up the benefits of continuously operated facilities as described above.
• Storage technologies are developed and installed which are able to compensate over- and underproductions of energy on short, but also on longer time scales (e.g. to compensate for seasonal differences).2,6,7
It is very likely that we will see a mix of the two alternatives in future. Both options will come along with a major change of established technologies and even our basis of living. Therefore, these changes cannot be realized by a simple switch but only in a slow transition process. It is important to note that it would be a very important economic advantage if we chose future energy technologies that allow us to preserve at least a part of our present energy infrastructure such as tank ships, storage facilities, fuel stations and fuel distribution systems.
While an increase in energy production from sustainable sources brings us closer toward this new energy system, this change will come with an increase in the share of energy that is ‘electric’. A complete switch to electricity—which is sometimes proposed as an ‘all-electric society’—would be an unprecedented challenge for our existing energy networks and include an unforeseen increase in vulnerability. Also the well-working infrastructure that already exists for the energy transport of liquid fossil fuels would be given up.
It therefore is the opinion of the authors that even in a world where fossil fuels are substituted by sustainable energy there will still be a strong need for energy carrying molecules which can satisfy the above-mentioned requirements regarding storage density and handling. For such molecules we propose to coin the term ‘Energy Carrying Compounds’.
2. Energy Carrying Compounds
We understand Energy Carrying Compounds in general to be chemical substances that appear in an energy-rich and energy-lean state. If this energy-rich and energy-lean state is reached by hydrogenation and dehydrogenation of a liquid organic compound we consider the system as a Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carrier (LOHC) system.
LOHCs are loaded in an energy-rich place and at an energy rich time with hydrogen obtained from renewable energy in a catalytic hydrogenation reaction. The compounds are transported to the desired place and are stored there until the time of energy need. For energy unloading, a catalytic dehydrogenation reaction releases the hydrogen which can be used for energy production (e.g. via a fuel cell or viahydrogen combustion) while the energy-lean compound is recycled. Thus, the carrier material travels from the source of energy to the spot of use and back to the source without being consumed. In this way, LOHCs enable a decoupling of energy generation and energy usage in terms of both space and time.
Many scientists in research and industry as well as politicians consider hydrogen as a suitable transport form of a future energy system.4,8,9Hydrogen can be produced from fossil fuels as well as from sustainable energy sources and has a high gravimetric energy content. Being the chemical element with the lowest density, the storage and handling of sufficient amounts of hydrogen is a problem as it requires very high pressures or cryogenic temperatures. We therefore propose LOHCs as a more convenient form of hydrogen storage.
Many different substances are discussed in the literature as potential LOHC compounds.10–12 In this contribution we will restrict our discussion to heterocyclic aromatic hydrocarbons such as N-ethylcarbazole (Fig. 1) which were first considered by the company AirProducts.13 The fully hydrogenated substance perhydro-N-ethylcarbazole offers a hydrogen capacity of up to 5.8 wt%. The hydrogenation reaction for this particular LOHC system is typically carried out at 130–160 °C with 70 bars pressure using supported noble metal catalysts like ruthenium on aluminium oxide. The dehydrogenation reaction proceeds usually in the presence of supported Pt or Pd catalysts.14 The reaction is typically carried out at 200–230 °C and pressures slightly above ambient conditions.15,16 Within the DoE-funded project ‘Reversible Liquid Carriers for an Integrated Production, Storage and Delivery of Hydrogen’ several dehydrogenation reactors were designed and tested.17,18
 Fig. 1  
Hydrogenation of N-ethylcarbazole as an example for a LOHC compound. 
LOHCs have a high energy density and enable easy energy storage under ambient conditions without any concept-induced leakages. Their handling by industrial users as well as private consumers is efficient and safe. In contrast to other storage methods such as compressed gaseous hydrogen there is no need to build up a new infrastructure, as the LOHC can be distributed using the existing channels for fossil fuel resources. This enables a step-wise and less expensive introduction of this technology.
3. Stability of electrical networks—loading of LOHCs from renewable energies and their use for power generation
The continuous transformation of our energy system towards renewable energy sources evokes several problems for utility companies as well as for the operators of electricity networks. One of these challenges can be observed in the spot price behavior of electric energy that is traded at the European Energy Exchange. Since September 2008 the existence of negative prices is allowed in order to provide a more efficient pricing process. While the total trade-volume on the EPEX spot market in 2009 was 135 TWh, roundabout 1 TWh was ‘sold’ at negative prices. Fig. 2 shows the frequency of occurrence of positive and negative spot prices at the EEX (day-ahead auction).19
 Fig. 2  Frequency of occurrence of negative prices at the EEX. 
The biggest share of sustainable electricity production in Germany is wind power (38 TWh out of 94 TWh in 2009.20 Publications21–23 show that there is a strong interrelation between the occurrence of negative prices at the EEX and the feed-in level of wind energy plants. Brueckl and Koch determined in their analysis that for the hours with negative prices the working load of wind plants was 25% higher than for hours with positive prices. Accordingly Nicolosi et al. state that in the ten hours with the most negative spot prices between 10/2008 and 11/2009, the energy production of wind plants was three times the annual average (13.6 GW compared to 4.5 GW).
Although the frequency of occurrence of negative prices decreased in 2010 in comparison to the preceding year (12 hours with a total volume of 315 GWh), most commentators do not see this as a turnaround. It may be a signal that some market participants to a certain degree adapted to the new situation (e.g. power traders, operators of hydroelectric storage facilities, etc.). At the beginning of 2010 German regulatory authorities also passed legislative modifications intended to limit the amplitude of negative prizes.24 Overall, it is assumed that with regard to the increase in sustainable energy sources negative prices will occur more often in future.
Negative prices are therefore a necessary and important market mechanism to signal a lack of flexibility in the power generation and distribution market. A conversion of the energy system towards more flexibility is therefore necessary and can be achieved by storing intermittently produced power in the case of over-production. An analysis by the Boston Consulting Group25 predicts a required compensation capacity in 2020 of 28 GW (40 TWh) for Germany alone, while the current existing capacity is only 7 GW. The latter is installed mainly in form of pumped hydroelectric storage facilities.
A second challenge when implementing intermittent sustainable energies into our energy system is the increasing need to invest in high voltage lines as well as into the middle and low voltage part of the electric grid. According to an analysis carried out by the ‘German Energy Agency’26 the increasing share of electricity production from renewable sources in Germany necessitates the installation of 3600 km of new power lines, especially for connecting off-shore wind farms in the north of Germany to large industrial centers in the south and west. While these considerations mainly concern high voltage lines, the sharp increase in power producers which are connected to the middle and low voltage part of the network (e.g. photovoltaic house systems, middle-sized solar or wind parks) represent an additional demand for amplification of our power network.
With the consideration of these facts we propose the use of LOHCs for the medium to long-term storage of intermittent, renewable energy and for a link of this energy to sustainable mobile applications as discussed in the following. In times of high loads from sustainable sources excess energy should be used to locally produce hydrogen by water electrolysis, which is stored in the energy-rich form of the LOHCs to realize high energy densities and good handling qualities. This energy carrier can be easily transported and used in various applications (besides mobility also in heating, local hydrogen production, etc.).
As an alternative, the so-produced energy carrier can also be stored at the spot of production and re-converted to electricity in times of high demand. A technical solution for such a system as shown in Fig. 3 would consist of devices for electrolysis, chemical converters for the catalytic hydrogenation and dehydrogenation, storage tanks for the LOHC in its energy-rich and energy-lean form, as well as a gas turbine for electrification. While also large storage facilities (e.g. 50 MW) are conceivable, one charming aspect of this concept would be the local energy storage close to intermittent, sustainable power producers (e.g. 1–5 MW). Not only is there a benefit in terms of closing the gap between a timely variable demand and an intermittent supply, but even more importantly, the need for a local amplification of electric grids is diminished (saving huge investments and time). As a result, beneficial effects for the stability of the electric nets can be expected.
 Fig. 3  Concept of an electricity storage device based on LOHC. 
In the field of electricity storage, the LOHC concept has to compete with other technologies (especially pumped hydroelectric storage, compressed air and gaseous hydrogen for medium to long-term storage) regarding technical and economic feasibility.27,28 Hydroelectric storage is cheap and nowadays has the biggest share in energy storage. The drawback is that in many parts of the world (e.g. Germany) there are no more spots available where this technology could be installed. As the storage density is very low, huge amounts of storage medium (water) with massive land use are necessary. Compressed air as well as the production and storage of gaseous hydrogen in the natural gas pipeline and storage system are also possible technologies. The low energy density makes huge reservoirs necessary to store noteworthy amounts of energy. It is being considered to use subterrestrial caverns from exploited natural gas fields for hydrogen storage. Besides the challenges regarding technical realization it is questionable whether people will want to live “on” huge amounts of hydrogen stored beneath their feet. Sharp protests of worried citizens against subterrestrial storage sites for carbon dioxide in Germany are hinting towards these concerns.
LOHCs in contrast can be stored in tanks like those already used for the storage of liquid fossil fuels like crude oil or gasoline. Due to their high storage density (see Fig. 4, based on ref. 27 and own calculations) and their chemical stability, large amounts of energy can be stored over extended periods of time. These reasons make LOHC a promising technology for energy storage—especially for seasonal storage.
 Fig. 4  
          Storage density (taking into account power generation losses) of electricity storage technologies (kWh m−3). 
4. Focus on mobility—using LOHCs as energy carrier for mobility
The mobility and transport sector is one of the large consumers of fossil fuels. While many car producers develop battery electric vehicles mainly for urban and short-distance use, hydrogen is often considered as the future energy carrier for mobile applications. German car producer BMW has been developing its hydrogen car technology for about 40 years. In 2006 a test car fleet of 100 hydrogen cars (Hydrogen 7, Fig. 5) was built and has operated over several millions of test kilometres on public roads.
 Fig. 5  
          BMW
          hydrogen car. 
The most critical issue when using hydrogen for mobile applications is the storage of sufficient amounts of hydrogen considering limited space and weight availability and strong requirements regarding safety and usability. Up until now there have been two concepts already implemented in cars: compressed gaseous hydrogen (up to 700 bar) and liquid (cryogenic) hydrogen (at temperatures below −253 °C). There are various publications available describing in detail the technical features as well as advantages and disadvantages of these concepts.29 We want to point out that there are no other technologies used by a non-specialized, broad public that operate at comparably low temperatures or similarly high pressures. From this we deduce that the implementation of these storage technologies might be questionable or at least not straightforward. Another problem is the fact that there is no established supply system to deliver hydrogen to the gas stations themselves. Hydrogen pipelines are known in chemistry, but a hydrogen pipeline network would be expensive and subject to damage as we have learned from the natural gas pipeline system and its occasional accidents with dredgers.
As an alternative, we seriously consider the use of LOHCs for mobile applications. As Fig. 6 shows, both the volumetric and gravimetric energy densities for the storage system are rather interesting. To allow cruising ranges of 500 km, about 5 kg of on-board hydrogen are necessary. This corresponds to about 100 litres of the aforementioned substance N-ethylcarbazole. In contrast to compressed or liquid hydrogen this energy carrier can be stored under ambient conditions in synthetic, state-of-the-art gasoline tanks. The dehydrogenated carrier material will not be consumed but must be stored in the vehicle until its return to the gasoline station in exchange for freshly charged material. The fueling technology could either be realized by a tank with two chambers divided by a moveable bladder or by inflatable bags.
 Fig. 6  Energy density of various hydrogen storage systems for mobility.29 
Charging and discharging of the LOHC system involve chemical reaction processes which are exothermic (hydrogenation) or endothermic (dehydrogenation) in nature. As it has been discussed by von Wild et al.,30 charging of an exothermic system within not more than several minutes produces heat rates of around 600 kW. As this cannot be realized at typical gasoline stations without serious safety hazards, it is a great advantage of the proposed LOHC technology that the charging process will take place in large-scale, refinery-based hydrogenation facilities. In this way the efficiency of the process is optimized and the generated reaction heat can be recovered and used (e.g. for steam production).
The hydrogen that is produced on-board the vehicle can either be used thermally in a combustion engine or electrochemically to drive a fuel cell (see Fig. 7). The hydrogen generation unit is a catalytic device which needs heating to maintain the temperature level for the dehydrogenation process. First considerations show that this energy input could be covered by the waste heat of the hydrogen combustion engine. In the case of hydrogen usage in an on-board fuel cell the amount and temperature level of the waste heat are not sufficient at the present state of the development. In this application scenario an additional heat source is necessary which could be accomplished by burning a certain fraction of the hydrogen produced. The exact amount of hydrogen that has to be used for heat generation depends on various parameters like efficiency and temperature level of the fuel cell, working point, etc. Under the conservative assumption that all the required dehydrogenation heat needs to be generated by hydrogen (and none by the exhaust heat) a fraction of around 20% of the stored hydrogen would be consumed. This would lower the efficiency of the dehydrogenation/fuel cell-system to approximately 44% (assuming a fuel cell efficiency of 55%), which is still relatively high compared to a combustion engine.
 Fig. 7  Concept of a hydrogen car with liquid organic hydrides. 
As previously mentioned the handling of liquid hydrogen carriers is similar to the handling of liquid fossil fuels such as diesel. Therefore, the existing distribution network for fossil fuels (oil tankers, truck transportation, gasoline stations) could be used which lowers the hurdle for implementation of this technology drastically. Modifications on the existing system are necessary though as the energy-lean LOHC has to be transported back to the site where the re-hydrogenation cycle takes place. A detailed evaluation is in progress to assess costs and energy consumption for the different means of transportation as well as for gasoline stations. The utilization of the existing infrastructure enables a steady transition from fossil fuels to sustainable sources. For example, in the introductory phase selected gasoline stations could replace only some of their existing terminals by “LOHC pumps”. Therefore, there is no necessity to build completely new fueling stations for the introduction of LOHC-based cars. Without doubt, this creates a significant advantage for the realization of concepts that are based on hydrogen.
5. Challenges and need for further research
While the use of LOHCs as multi-use energy carriers is a promising concept for a future sustainable energy system, the development of chemical processes and technical devices that are necessary for its implementation is still in an early phase. To be able to introduce an energy system as described here, we regard the following issues as most relevant:
• As described above, N-ethylcarbazole is a first representative of a LOHC system that fulfills many of the required specifications and is therefore suitable as a test material for the assessment of the concept. For several reasons it is nevertheless not the perfect LOHC. For instance pure and completely ‘unloaded’ N-ethylcarbazole is solid at ambient temperatures. Thus, technical solutions such as partial dehydrogenation or blending are necessary to overcome this problem. Some of these concepts reduce the storage capacity of the LOHC system.
• It is an obvious requirement that any pair of substances that is seriously considered as a LOHC system needs to be tested in detail for its toxicity and ecotoxicity profile. While society obviously accepts to a certain degree that today's hydrocarbon-based fuels are toxic and harmful to the environment, a strict assessment of any LOHC system can be expected and is necessary given the huge amount of material that would circulate in the environment in the case of successful implementation of the concept. An ‘ideal’ LOHC system would therefore largely be defined by its profile with respect to storage density, toxicity and price.
• While the large-scale hydrogenation of aromatic hydrocarbons is a fairly standard process in industry, the development of efficient, on-board dehydrogenation devices is a novelty, especially for the use in the automotive sector which has high demands as it requires reactors with a high power density that must follow dynamic load curves very quickly. Also the amount of noble metals in the applied catalyst which is necessary for a certain hydrogen productivity will be a major cost factor and has to be considered.
• As discussed, the exhaust heat of an internal combustion engine can be used as input for the endothermic on-board dehydrogenation reaction. This does not apply if a fuel cell is used instead, as particularly the temperature level of the waste heat is not sufficient. Also these devices typically require a high degree of purity regarding the hydrogen to avoid damages. As fuel cells are a promising technology for future sustainable mobility, solutions of how to team a fuel cell with LOHC storage systems must be conceived.
• While a first assessment of how the existing infrastructure for fossil fuels could be used for the distribution of LOHCs shows very promising results, a detailed view on necessary modifications and installations (including cost assessment) is still needed.
6. Conclusions and outlook
The conversion of our current carbon-based energy system to a more sustainable one is already in progress. The amount of energy produced by wind and solar is increasing steadily in many parts of the world and—although the share in total primary energy demand is still rather low—our power generation and distribution systems experience already severe challenges by the intermittent character of these sources. In the future we will therefore need more flexible technologies for energy production as well as technical solutions to store large amounts of electric energy safely, cheaply and without loss over longer periods of time.
LOHCs have the potential to gradually substitute liquid fossil fuels as they are comparably good energy carriers with very positive characteristics regarding energy density and handling. They can be used to store temporary over-production of energy from renewable sources and they offer the chance to make these energies available for mobile applications. Cruising ranges for cars that could be attained with LOHC technologies would be close to that of gasoline while only slight modifications of the existing fuel distribution infrastructure and not a complete reconstruction will be necessary.
As the development of LOHC technologies is still at an early stage there are various issues which have to be addressed. The described concept comprises stakeholders from very different backgrounds, e.g. the automotive and chemical industry as well as power suppliers, net operators and oil companies. For this reason, there must be a broad and joint effort in the scientific community as well as in industry and politics to find answers for the challenges that lie still ahead of this very promising technology.
Notes and references

          F. Birol, World Energy Outlook 2010, IEA (International Energy Agency), Paris,  2010 Search PubMed .
A. Borgschulte and A. Züttel, Bulletin ΣEV/VSE, 2010, 3, 26–30 Search PubMed .
J. S. Dukes, Clim. Change, 2003, 61, 31–44 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartbaeva, V. L. Kuznetsov, S. A. Wells and P. P. Edwards, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 79–85 CAS .
N. L. Panwar, S. C. Kaushik and S. Kothari, Renew. Sustain. Energ. Rev., 2011, 15, 1513–1524 CrossRef .
P. J. Hall, Energ. Pol., 2008, 26, 4363–4367 CrossRef .

          D. Infield and P. Rowley, in Sustainability and Environmental Impact of Renewable Energy Sources, ed. R. E. Hester and R. M. Harrison, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2003, vol. 19, pp. 49–68 Search PubMed .

          U.S. Department of Energy, Hydrogen Posture Plan, http://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/ Search PubMed.
German National Innovation Programme for Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology (NOW), http://www.now-gmbh.de/en.
G. W. H. Scherer and E. Newson, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1998, 23, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhao, S. T. Oyama and E. D. Naeemi, Catal. Today, 2010, 149, 172–184 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Crabtree, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 134–138 CAS .
Pez et al., World Pat., WO 2005/000457A2,  2005 .

          M. Sobota, I. Nikiforidis, M. Amende, B. Sanmartín Zanón, T. Staudt, O. Höfert, Y. Lykhach, C. Papp, W. Hieringer, M. Laurin, D. Assenbaum, P. Wasserscheid, H.-P. Steinrück, A. Görling and J. Libuda, Chem.–Eur. J.,  DOI:10.1002/chem.201101311.
F. Sotoodeh and K. J. Smith, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 1018–1026 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Eblagon, D. Rentsch, O. Friedrichs, A. Remhof, A. Züttel, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta and S. C. Tsang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 11609–11621 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Cooper and A. Scott, DOE Hydrogen Program—FY 2010 Annual Progress Report, ‘III.14 Reversible Liquid Carriers for an Integrated Production, Storage and Delivery of Hydrogen’, Contract number DE-FG36–05GO15015.
Toseland et al., US Pat., US 2009/0019768 A1,  2009 .

Own Analysis, Data Derived from: European Energy Exchange (EEX), EPEX Spot market auction,  2010 Search PubMed .

          Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit, Erneuerbare Energien in Zahlen, Berlin,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Andor, K. Flinkerbusch, M. Jansen, B. Liebau and M. Wobben, Zeitschrift für Energiewirtschaft, 2010, 34, 91–99 CrossRef .

          K. Brückl and S. Koch, View on Electricity Markets, EGL Group,  2010, vol. 110, p. 2 Search PubMed .

          M. Nicolosi, M. Fürsch and D. Lindenberger, Analyse der Ursachen für negative Strompreise am 3./4. Oktober 2009 und möglicher Abhilfemaßnahmen, Energiewirtschaftliches Institut an der Universität zu Köln,  2010 Search PubMed .
Verordnung zur Ausführung der Verordnung zur Weiterentwicklung des bundesweiten Ausgleichsmechanismus (Ausgleichsmechanismus-Ausführungsverordnung—AusglMechAV).

          C. Pieper and H. Rubel, Electricity Storage—Making Large-scale Adoption of Wind and Solar Energies a Reality, The Boston Consulting Group,  2010 Search PubMed .

          Deutsche Energie-Agentur, dena-Netzstudie II—Integration erneuerbarer Energien in die deutsche Stromversorgung im Zeitraum 2015–2020 mit Ausblick 2025, Berlin,  2010 Search PubMed .

          Verband der Elektrotechnik, Elektronik, Informationstechnik (VDE), Energiespeicher in Stromversorgungssystemen mit hohem Anteil Erneuerbarer Energieträger—Bedeutung, Stand der Technik, Handlungsbedarf, Frankfurt,  2009 Search PubMed .

          U. Neupert, T. Euting, T. Kretschmer, C. Notthoff, K. Ruhlig and B. Weimert, Energiespeicher, Fraunhofer-Institut für Naturwissenschaftlich-Technische Trendanalysen, Stuttgart,  2009 Search PubMed .

          J. von Wild, R. Freymann and M. Zenner, Potentiale von alternativen Wasserstoffspeicherungstechnologien, VDI-Berichte: Innovative Fahrzeugantriebe,  2008, vol. 2030, pp. 273–298 Search PubMed .

          J. von Wild, et al., Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carriers (LOHC): An Auspicious Alternative to Conventional Hydrogen Storage Technologies, Presented at World Hydrogen Energy Conference, Essen,  2010 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Limited availability of fossil fuels, anthropogenic climate change and recent experiences with the high risk of nuclear power generation lead to an increasing interest in a future energy system based on regenerative sources. As this energy—coming e.g. from wind or solar resources—is of a highly intermittent character, their integration into our energy system requires energy storage systems that are capable of balancing changing energy demand and intermittent supply at all times. Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carrier compounds enable convenient and safe energy storage over long periods of time. As these diesel-like substances can be handled in today's infrastructure (e.g. liquid storage tanks, fuel stations), there is a broad scope of possible applications ranging from mobility or domestic energy-supply to grid stabilization and load levelling functions.


 	Fig. 1  
Hydrogenation of N-ethylcarbazole as an example for a LOHC compound.	 

 	Fig. 2  Frequency of occurrence of negative prices at the EEX.	 

 	Fig. 3  Concept of an electricity storage device based on LOHC.	 

 	Fig. 4  
          Storage density (taking into account power generation losses) of electricity storage technologies (kWh m−3).	 

 	Fig. 5  
          BMW
          hydrogen car.	 

 	Fig. 6  Energy density of various hydrogen storage systems for mobility.29	 

 	Fig. 7  Concept of a hydrogen car with liquid organic hydrides.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
