Nanostructure-based photoelectrochemical sensing platforms for biomedical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TB02844G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TB02844G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 2541-2561Nanostructure-based photoelectrochemical sensing platforms for biomedical applications

        
          
            Zhenli 
            Qiu
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Dianping 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *b
aOcean College, Minjiang University, Fuzhou 350108, China
bKey Laboratory of Analytical Science for Food Safety and Biology (MOE & Fujian Province), State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment, Department of Chemistry, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350108, China. E-mail: dianping.tang@fzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-591-22866135;   Tel: +86-591-22866125
Received 
      16th December 2019
    , Accepted 22nd February 2020First published on 24th February 2020AbstractAs a newly developed and powerful analytical method, the use of photoelectrochemical (PEC) biosensors opens up new opportunities to provide wide applications in the early diagnosis of diseases, environmental monitoring and food safety detection. The properties of diverse photoactive materials are one of the essential factors, which can greatly impact the PEC performance. The continuous development of nanotechnology has injected new vitality into the field of PEC biosensors. In many studies, much effort on PEC sensing with semiconductor materials is highlighted. Thus, we propose a systematic introduction to the recent progress in nanostructure-based PEC biosensors to exploit more promising materials and advanced PEC technologies. This review briefly evaluates the several advanced photoactive nanomaterials in the PEC field with an emphasis on the charge separation and transfer mechanism over the past few years. In addition, we introduce the application and research progress of PEC sensors from the perspective of basic principles, and give a brief overview of the main advances in the versatile sensing pattern of nanostructure-based PEC platforms. This last section covers the aspects of future prospects and challenges in the nanostructure-based PEC analysis field.
Zhenli Qiu
Zhenli Qiu received her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Dianping Tang from Fuzhou University in 2019. Currently, she works at Minjiang University as a lecturer and her research focuses on the synthesis of advanced photoactive materials for their application in PEC aptasensors.
Dianping Tang
Dianping Tang received his PhD from Southwest University of China in 2008. He received the Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship in 2008 and worked at the Technische Universit at Munchen, Germany, from 2008 to 2009. Currently, he is Full Professor of Analytical Chemistry at Fuzhou University. Importantly, he was selected amongst the 100 Most Influential People in Analyti-People in the Analytical Scientist in 2013. His research interests mainly include the design and application of nanotechnology for tumor marker immunoassays, food safety analysis, and environmental monitoring. To date, more than 200 publications under his authorship have appeared in reviewed international scientific journals.
1. Introduction
With the ever-growing demands of living standards, life science, environmental protection and food safety increasingly attract the attention of people. As a new and crucial direction of the bioanalysis technique, photoelectrochemical (PEC) biosensing promises to be a high-profile sensing method for its desirable combination of electrochemistry and photochemistry.1,2 Compared with other detection techniques in biomedical applications (e.g. fluorescent sensors, surface plasmon resonance sensors, surface enhanced Raman scattering techniques, electrochemical sensors, electrochemiluminescence sensors), although these techniques have high accuracy, some of these techniques have some disadvantages, such as time-consuming operation, relatively complex instruments, larger sample volume, professional staff, and limited sensitivity.3–9 The PEC biosensor uses two different types of energy as the excitation source (light source) and the detection signal (electrical signal) respectively, which can effectively reduce the background signal.10,11 In the PEC detection process, the photoactive material absorbs light photons and produces electron transition, forming photo-generated carriers (electron–hole pairs), and photo-generated carriers transfer to the electrode and solution interface with oxidation–reduction reaction, which forms photocurrent or photovoltage and realizes the conversion of photo-energy into electrical energy, which is the reverse of electrochemiluminescence processes.12–14 Moreover, compared with traditional methods, PEC sensing has the merit of high sensitivity, simple operation, and easy miniaturization.15
The PEC detection signal mainly stems from the photo-to-electric conversion of photoactive materials. The appearance of new nanomaterials, which possess special advantages in optical properties, electrical conductivity and magnetism, has injected new vitality into the development of PEC biosensors.16 Multifunctional nanomaterial-based PEC methods are of interest in many different science areas, principally in biosensors, biomedicine, materials science, and solar-energy conversion.17,18
Semiconductor nanostructures have a strong absorption capacity and an inherent electronic band structure.19,20 Innovations in semiconductor morphology, structure or element can enhance charge transport and thereby facilitate high photo-electricity conversion efficiency.21,22 Obviously, photoactive materials, an essential element toward the analytical performances of PEC biosensors, have been applied to construct new sensing systems. Among abundant semiconductors, monomer semiconducting nanostructures possess peculiar physical merits of outstanding charge transport, specific intrinsic bands and excellent optical adsorption properties. In particular, TiO2 (nanowires, nanotubes or nanorods), an environmentally friendly material, facilitates fast and long-distance electron transport, and its structures are expected to possess high mechanical strength, which offers incomparable advantages over conventional materials.23,24 Quantum dots (QDs) have strong absorption coefficients and an adjustable absorption wavelength range when varying their composition, shape and size, which in principle spans the entire solar spectrum.25–27 However, due to the limitation of their own characteristics, such as a wide bandgap, a high charge recombination rate, low utilization of solar energy or inefficient photoelectric conversion, single semiconductors are difficult to be widely popularized in practical applications. An alternative solution is to compound the promising photoactive materials by integrating two or more materials, e.g. doping with non-metallic or metallic ions, deposition with noble metals, and coupling with appropriate semiconductors.28–32 Various complex nanostructures, including monomer semiconductors, heterojunctions, and noble metal-based semiconductors and upconversion-based semiconductor composites, have been reported to exhibit superior performance.33–38
The topic of PEC biosensing platform is receiving progressive attention when we observe the number of published reviews related to the topic. However, the reviews already published take into account the basic principle of PEC biosensors and new developments in PEC sensing applications, such as DNA analysis, enzyme sensing, immunoassay and cell correlation analysis.2 Or they introduce the classification of PEC sensors in detail, including PEC immunoassays4 and PEC DNA biosensors,1 or summarize the recent advances and signaling strategies of QD-based PEC bioanalysis.6,39 Herein, we provide a systematic introduction to nanostructure-based PEC biosensors in various photoactive nanomaterials, innovative sensing mechanism and biomedical applications, as described in Scheme 1. This review summarizes the key photoactive nanomaterials in the PEC field with a major focus on fundamental principles. And it is imperative to discuss the current research progress of PEC sensors from the perspective of the sensing principle, and trace the main advances in versatile PEC sensing patterns and devices. Finally, we look ahead to the development tendency and prospect of the PEC sensing platform.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of nanostructure-based PEC sensing platforms for biomedical applications in various photoactive materials, sensing mechanism and detection mode. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, American Chemical Society, Royal Society of Chemistry, and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Weinheim.20,30,31,33–38,40–47 
2. Fundamental principles of photoactive materials
As shown in Fig. 1, the basic PEC principle involves photo-to-electric conversion by applying an external bias on the photoactive materials tested in an electrolyte, which contains a redox couple that is derived from the biological recognition reaction.48,49 To construct a typical PEC system, photoactive materials are vital elements in PEC sensing strategies. In the photo-to-electric conversion process, the photoactive materials are capable of harvesting the light photons and produce electron transition, forming photo-generated carriers (electron–hole pairs) to provide the required energy for the redox reactions.50–53 Up to now, different nanostructure materials have exhibited unique PEC performance and have achieved great advances, and the nanostructure-based PEC methods are becoming a promising approach for application in environmental inspection, medical sanitation and science research.54–57 To foresee what is next, one needs to start by introduction of the four main types: (a) single semiconductors (e.g. TiO2, QDs), (b) heterojunctions (n–n/n–p/Z-scheme system), (c) noble metal-based semiconductors and (d) the upconversion-based semiconductor composites.
 Fig. 1  Diagram of PEC sensing with the traditional three electrode system and the photocurrent generation mechanism. 
2.1 Single semiconductors
A carrier in semiconductors, either a hole in the valence band (VB) or an electron in the conduction band (CB), is dominant in a specific region. According to the type of charge carriers, single semiconductors can be divided into n-type semiconductors and p-type semiconductors.44,58 The n-type contains an excess of negatively charged electrons, while the p-type contains an abundance of positively charged holes that can accept electrons.59–62 Photo-excited holes of n-type semiconductor-modified photoanodes are consumed in oxidation reactions, and photo-excited electrons accumulate in the conduction band, while electrons are transferred to an external circuit.63,64 Inorganic semiconductors, such as various quantum dots, TiO2 nanowires, TiO2 nanotubes, zinc oxide nanowire arrays, and graphite like carbon nitride (g-C3N4), have been widely used in PEC applications due to their excellent PEC properties.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is the most widely used n-type material in the development of PEC sensing due to its stability and low cost.65 However, bulk TiO2 with a wide bandgap (3.03–3.18 eV) has poor efficiency in solar light absorption.66 The photo-conversion efficiency could be improved by adjusting the morphology and size of titanium dioxide.67,68 Cho et al.69 synthesized a hierarchically branched TiO2 nanorod structure. It improved the charge separation and transmission in the branch and promoted hole transfer on the TiO2/electrolyte interface (Fig. 2A). Mesoporous TiO2 has attracted attention in many fields, due to its three-dimensional connected pore network, which is conducive to the diffusion of reactants and products, large surface area and many active sites. Çakıroğlu and Özacar70 prepared a TiO2–Au NPs–MoS2 hybrid material from a mesoporous TiO2 substrate by layer-by-layer self-assembly. And with the GOx catalysis, the photocurrent value had been greatly improved.
 Fig. 2  (A) Branched TiO2 nanorods for PEC water splitting devices. (a) Schematic description and corresponding SEM images of (b and e) TiO2 nanoparticles, (c and f) nanorods, and (d and g) branched nanorods, (b–d) cross-sectional view and (e–g) top view. Adapted from ref. 69 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of PbS QDs for PEC sensing. (a) Working mechanism for the PEC detection of DNA and thrombin based on G-quadruplex/hemin-conjugated PbS QDs; (b) HRTEM image of PbS QDs; (c) the photocurrent generation mechanism of PbS QDs. Adapted from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
It is well known that ZnO with a bandwidth of ∼3.37 eV is an n-type semiconductor.71 ZnO has many different nanostructures, including nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires, nanoflowers, hollow nanospheres, etc.71 Han et al.72 described a PEC biosensor for DNA determination based on oriented hierarchical ZnO flower-rod architectures (ZnO FRs) with the signal amplification strategy of DNA dendrimers. ZnO FRs can shorten the electron transport distance and improve the accessibility of hole transfer. Liu et al.73 reported a label-free PEC immunosensor for nucleoside diphosphatase kinase A detection using ZnO nanorod arrays/CdS:Mn cosensitized structure. ZnO nanorod arrays exhibited high and stable photocurrent response under irradiation due to their large surface area and ordered nanostructures. By co-sensitizing ZnO nanorod arrays with CdS nanoparticles and Mn2+, the energy levels of ZnO and CdS were perfectly matched, which enlarged the absorption of light energy, accelerated the electron transfer and effectively suppressed the charge recombination.
Semiconductor nanocrystals, made up of 100–10000 atoms and ranging in size from 1 to 10 nanometers, are called quantum dots (QDs).13 Common quantum dots consist of IV, II–VI, IV–VI or III–V elements, such as CdS QDs, CdTe QDs and CdSe QDs. In 1983, the concept of colloidal quantum dots (QDs) was proposed and flourished in the fields of optics, electronics and catalysis, opening a new era of nanotechnology.74 QDs have higher extinction coefficients and larger dipole moments, which not only improve the absorption energy of light, but also accelerate the separation speed of photon-generated carriers.75 Therefore, whether QDs are used as a sensitizer for wideband gap semiconductors or as a photoactive material alone, they exhibit excellent PEC responses. Zhang et al.76 reported the alkaline phosphate (ALP)-based simultaneous PEC immunoassay for β-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG) detection based on the photoactive CdS quantum dots. 5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indoylphosphate (BCIP) was oxidized and hydrolyzed into indigo precipitation by ALP, which hindered electron transfer. On the other hand, when p-type semiconductors as photocathodes absorb photons, the photo-generated electrons in the conduction band are consumed by electron acceptors in the electrolyte, and the electrons of the electrode will flow towards the valence band under the action of voltage to form the cathode photocurrent.77,78 Wang et al.79 presented a novel PEC biosensing platform based on p-type PbS quantum dots using G-quadruplex/hemin to “switch-on” the signal (Fig. 2B).
2.2 Heterojunctions
To date, although much effort has been devoted to exploring various semiconductors, some disadvantages still restrict their practical application, such as faster electron–hole recombination and weak visible-light absorption efficiency.80 Various strategies have been proposed to deal with the above problems, and the engineering of heterojunctions is a promising way owing to its effectiveness and feasibility of electron–hole separation.81,82 A heterojunction is defined as an interfacial region formed by the coupling of two different semiconductors that possess an unequal band structure.83,84 Typically, there are three types of common heterojunction photoactive materials, which have been proved to effectively improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency.85 These are p–n heterojunctions, Z-scheme heterojunctions, and semiconductor–metal heterojunctions.

2.2.1 p–n heterojunctions. 
The p–n heterojunctions with a staggered gap possess an effective structure for highly efficient charge carrier separation.86 After the combination of p-type and n-type semiconductors, the interface forms a p–n junction and a space charge region by virtue of the diffusion of electrons and holes, which creates a built-in potential that guides the electrons and holes in opposite directions.87,88 Generally, when the p–n heterojunctions with a staggered gap absorb higher photon energy than their bandgaps, photo-generated electron–hole pairs are produced. Driven by the influence of the internal electric field, the holes and electrons are transferred to the valence band of the p-type semiconductor and the conduction band of the n-type semiconductor, respectively, which improves the efficiency of charge separation and accelerates electron transfer. Li et al.89 successfully prepared the environment-friendly Cu2O/ZnO p–n heterojunctions to provide a PEC method for biomolecules’ detection. Zinc oxide, an n-type semiconductor, has relatively large exciton binding energy (60 meV) and higher charge carrier mobility. The nontoxic Cu2O is a p-type semiconductor with a band gap of 2.17 eV. The CB of Cu2O is higher than the CB of ZnO and the VB of ZnO is lower than the VB of Cu2O. The p–n heterojunctions synthesized by integration of ZnO and Cu2O can broaden the range of visible light and have higher PEC performance than the single ZnO in carrier separation and electron transition. A novel PEC biosensor array has been employed for the detection of glucose and lactose by Çakıroğlu et al.,90 who fabricated a layer of the MnO2/g-C3N4 p–n heterojunction on Au NP modified mesoporous TiO2, which provided an excellent electronic interface for photoexcited electron injection (Fig. 3A). Immobilization of glucose oxidase and β-galactosidase on the TiO2–Au NPs–g-C3N4–MnO2 PEC hybrid materials would generate an enzyme catalysis event toward glucose and lactose, and the end product, electron donor H2O2, enhanced photocurrent in dissolved oxygen. Under the irradiation of the photons, the photo-generated electrons in the CB of MnO2 were transferred to the CB of g-C3N4 on the p–n heterojunction interface. Then, the thermodynamic condition facilitated the electron injection from the Fermi level of Au NPs to the CB of TiO2, and ultimately, the photo-generated holes were transferred to MnO2. In addition, the close contact of FADH2 with the electrode material resulted in a synergistic effect on photo-generated hole scavenging, which led to boosting of the photocurrent. Ge et al.91 developed an on–off–on PEC aptasensor for analysis of ampicillin based on BiFeO3/g-C3N4 p–n heterojunctions (Fig. 3B). BiFeO3/g-C3N4 p–n heterojunctions were designed and synthesized by the coupling of p-type BiFeO3 with the n-type g-C3N4 nanosheet. The p–n heterojunctions can narrow the band gap, improve the utilization efficiency of visible light, promote charge separation rate and enhance the PEC performance. Zhao et al.92 prepared BiOI nanoflakes/TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) p–n heterojunctions to establish a PEC enzymatic biosensor (Fig. 3C). The coupling of BiOI with TiO2 led to an increase of the energy band and Fermi energy level of BiOI but a decrease of the energy band of TiO2. Light-induced electron–hole pairs were separated in BiOI nanoflakes, and the band edge at the p–n junction facilitated fast electron transportation.
 Fig. 3  (A) The TiO2/Au NPs/g-C3N4/MnO2-based PEC biosensor. (a) PEC biosensor fabrication. (b) PEC biosensing mechanism for glucose and lactose. Adapted from ref. 90 with permission from Elsevier. (B) The BiFeO3/g-C3N4 p–n heterojunction-based PEC ampicillin aptasensor. (a) The preparation process of the BiFeO3/g-C3N4 heterojunction. (b) Schematic diagram of the PEC aptasensor based on BiFeO3/g-C3N4 heterojunctions for ampicillin detection. Adapted from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier. (C) The BiOI nanoflakes/TiO2-based PEC enzymatic analysis. (a) Schematic diagram of the enzymatic PEC sensing principle based on the BiOI NFs/TiO2 NP photoelectrode. (b) Schematic representation of the charge transfer process at the BiOI nanoflakes/TiO2 p–n junction under visible light. Adapted from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 n–n heterojunctions. 
n–n heterojunctions are defined as the composite of two crystal semiconductors with the same conduction type. Due to the Fermi energy difference between two n-type semiconductors, the space charge layer can also be generated at the interface of the n–n heterojunction.93 Many recent pieces of research demonstrate that n–n heterojunctions by combining two suitable semiconductors are able to be induced to produce inner electric fields, leading to promote electron–hole pair separation and extend the absorption active range of sunlight.94,95 Li et al.96 synthesized TiO2/g-C3N4 n–n heterojunctions as the PEC signal to develop the PEC assay for detection of protein kinase A (PKA) activity. Due to the sp2 hybridization of g-C3N4, its bandgap width is narrow (Fig. 4A). The n–n heterostructure between g-C3N4 and TiO2 is an effective approach to accelerate the separation rate of the electron–hole pair. Liu et al.97 designed a n–n heterostructure by depositing BiVO4 nanoparticles on TiO2 nanospheres to construct a visible-light driven PEC aptasensor (Fig. 4B). TiO2 nanospheres can improve the biological load capacity of the heterogeneous surface area. BiVO4 with a narrow band gap is coupled to improve the PEC performance of the heterostructure.
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation of the enhanced PEC biosensor for PKA activity detection based on TiO2/g-C3N4 heterojunctions. (B) The PEC aptasensing based on the TiO2–BiVO4 heterostructure. (a) Synthesis procedure of the TiO2–BiVO4 heterostructure and (b) schematic diagram of the PEC aptasensor mechanism Adapted from ref. 96 and 97 with permission from American Chemical Society. 


2.2.3 Z-scheme heterojunctions. 
Another effective method to obtain high charge-separation quantum efficiency is to create an artificial Z-scheme system for PEC detection. In 1979, Bard et al.98 presented a Z-scheme photocatalytic model of biological photosynthesis in plants. The Z-scheme system is inspired by photosynthesis in green plants, and can effectively convert solar energy into chemical energy during the depressing electron–hole recombination processes. The Z-system is composed of photosystem I (PS I) and photosystem II (PS II) but the two photosystems are not in direct contact.99,100 As sketched in Fig. 5A, in the conventional Z-scheme system, the photo-induced electrons of the PS II reaction center migrate to the valence band of PS I.22 Since the photo-generated electrons accumulate in the valence band of PS I and the photo-generated holes accumulate in the valence band of PS II in an acceptor/donor pair, it enhances the spatial separation of electron–hole pairs and achieves an optimal redox capacity.22
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of electron–hole separation on (A) the conventional Z-scheme system and (B) all-solid-state Z-scheme heterojunctions under light irradiation. 
More importantly, the charge-separation efficiency of Z-scheme heterojunctions is approximately equal to 100%, which provides an attractive strategy for PEC detection.101 In the Z-scheme system, the electronic medium is the key to promote photo-generated electron transfer effectively; however, the conventional redox couples as electron mediators (IO3−/I− and Fe3+/Fe2+) in liquid phase limit their wide application in PEC detection on account of their instability.102,103 With the intensive development of correlative research, scientists gradually have replaced solid electronic media (e.g., noble metals, reduced graphene oxide) with ionic media forming a low resistance electron channel to prepare all-solid-state Z-scheme heterojunctions.104–107 As shown in Fig. 5B, photo-induced electrons from the conduction band of PS II migrate to the valence band of PS I through the electronic medium (Au, Ag or Pt), and are further excited to the conduction band of PS I. The addition of electronic medium extends the application of Z-scheme heterojunctions.
Lv et al.108 proposed a new Z-scheme photosystem concept for PEC sensing detection of prostate-specific antigen by coupling with a three-dimensional (3D) DNA walker (Fig. 6). The Z-scheme photosystem included Au NPs photodeposited on bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) and target-triggered release of CdS QD-labelled hairpin DNA2 with the DNA walker amplification strategy. The photo-excited electrons were transferred from the CB of BiVO4 to the VB of the CdS QD through Au NPs as an electron mediator, resulting in photocurrent enhancement, because the separation efficiency of the photo-carrier was obviously improved. This work broadened a vision for the development of the Z-scheme double photosystem-based PEC sensing platform. Tada et al.109 reported a simple method to synthesize an anisotropic CdS–Au–TiO2 Z-scheme nanojunction, in which CdS (PS I), TiO2 (PS II) and Au NPs (electronic media) were spatially fixed. The three-component Z-scheme system displayed an excellent photocatalytic activity, far more than the single-component and two-component systems, due to vector electron transfer induced by the two-step excitation of TiO2 and CdS.
 Fig. 6  (A) The photogenerated electron transfer between BiVO4 and CdS QD in the Z-scheme heterojunctions. (B) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical sensing platform based on the Z-scheme heterojunction. Adapted from ref.108 with permission from American Chemical Society. 

2.3 Semiconductor–metal heterojunctions
A common and effective way to improve semiconductors is to form semiconductor–metal heterojunctions for establishing space charge separation zones (known as Schottky barriers).110 Due to the Fermi level difference between the metal and the semiconductor when the two are in close contact, the carriers spontaneously conduct directional migration, which brings the Fermi level into equilibrium and forms the space charge layer, where the ideal work function of the metal is higher than that of the n-type semiconductor, as can be seen in Fig. 7A.111 The Schottky barrier formed by charge separation leads to accumulation/recombination in heterojunctions and improves PEC performance.111 Recently, several semiconductor–metal heterojunctions have been published by different groups concerning resonance energy transfer, hot electron injection or other mechanisms.112–115
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the Schottky barrier. Adapted from ref. 111 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) 3D branched TiO2 NR architectures for PEC water splitting. (a) The fabrication process for Au–TiO2 NR architectures. (b) SEM, (c) higher-resolution SEM, (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM image of the Au NP-3D TiO2 NR architecture. Adapted from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society. (C) The PEC CO2 reduction with plasmonic Au/pGaN photocathodes. (a) Schematic illustration for the PEC studies of Au/p-GaN Schottky junctions. Electron transfer diagram of a plasmonic metal in physical contact with (b) a TiO2 n-type semiconductor and (c) a p-GaN p-type semiconductor. Adapted from ref. 117 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Li et al.116 developed a photoelectrochemical water splitting strategy based on decorating gold nanoparticles on 3D titanium dioxide nanorod architectures through a one-step sputtering process (Fig. 7B). Due to the intrinsic surface plasmon resonance effect of gold nanoparticles, the structure of 3D Au–TiO2 NRs showed higher PEC performance compared with the original 3D TiO2 NR photoanode. Atwater's group117 fabricated gold/p-type gallium nitride (Au/p-GaN) Schottky junctions for the PEC study of plasma-induced hot carriers to drive solar-to-fuel energy conversion (Fig. 7C). The hot carrier collection process, which refers to the formation of the Schottky barrier (φB) between Au and n-type TiO2, which harvests “hot electrons”, is shown in Fig. 7C(b). Almost all research on hot carrier collection has concentrated on hot electron conversion between plasmonic metals and n-type semiconductors. Due to the high density of the d-band state, the optical excitation with greater than the interband threshold of the metal (the transition from the d-band to the sp-band) can produce “hot holes” that are away from the Fermi level than the “hot electrons”, and the “hot holes” of the plasmonic metal could be injected directly into the valence band of the adjacent p-type semiconductor, as demonstrated in Fig. 7C(c).
2.4 Upconversion-based semiconductor composites
Lanthanide-doped upconversion nanomaterials (UCNs) by integrating with semiconductors are evolving as a new class of photoactive nanomaterials, offering a promising candidate for the development of PEC applications. The inherent bandgaps of semiconductors hinder their absorption range, to only the ultraviolet region of solar light, resulting in low utilization of solar energy. It is known to all that infrared light accounts for about 50% of the solar spectrum; however, in the process of photoelectric conversion, the infrared light with low-energy photons cannot directly trigger the PEC activity of most semiconductors.118,119 Therefore, opening the “window” toward the infrared light source for most semiconductors is one of the main challenges for the practical application of PEC biosensors in the effective utilization of solar energy. In 1959, N. Bloembergen120 first reported the concept of upconversion, which involved the anti-Stokes optical process, videlicet, the conversion of lower-energy photons (infrared radiation) into higher energy photons (ultraviolet or visible light). A promising strategy is the integration of Ln compounds and semiconductors to overcome the barriers of wide-band semiconductors, owing to their adjustable upconversion emission wavelength range compared to semiconductors.
Qiu et al.121 employed core–shell NaYF4:Yb,Tm@TiO2 upconversion microrods as a PEC substrate and near-infrared light (NIR, 980 nm) as the excitation source for a new research branch in the PEC biosensor platform (Fig. 8A). The core NaYF4:Yb,Tm could convert the NIR excitation into ultraviolet emission that is absorbed by the TiO2 shell, which generates the photocurrent. The NIR light-mediated PEC mode based on NaYF4:Yb,Tm@TiO2 upconversion microrods with target-triggered rolling circle amplification exhibited excellent analytical performance. Wang et al.122 combined the NaYF4:Yb,Er upconversion nanoparticles and TiO2/CdTe to prepare a heterostructure as the film electrode, and introduced the high-affinity aptamer AS1411 to develop a new NIR-driven PEC aptasensor for detection of MCF-7 cells. Luo et al.123 fabricated a NIR light-excited PEC enzyme immunoassay with core–core–shell NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNP@Au@CdS upconversion nanospheres for detection of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). In nanospheres, the introduction of plasmonic gold not only severed as a harvester for collecting incident light, but also acted as an energy transfer medium between NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNP and CdS, which efficiently improved the absorption cross-section and interface energy of the up-conversion system. Finally, H2O2 generated by enzyme immunoassay was injected into the photocurrent detection cell to realize the detection of the target AFP.
 Fig. 8  (A) NaYF4:Yb,Tm@TiO2 upconversion microrod-based PEC aptasensing platform. (a) Schematic illustration of the target-triggered RCA reaction. (b) Schematic diagram of energy transfer among NaYF4:Yb,Tm and TiO2 under near-IR irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the PEC biosensor for MCF-7 cell detection based on NaYF4:Yb,Er/TiO2/CdTe. Reprinted from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic representation of core–core–shell UCNP@Au@CdS-based PEC immunoassay for AFP detection. (a) Immunoreaction process of AFP detection. (b) Energy transfer principle of core–core–shell UCNP@Au@CdS with H2O2 under near-IR irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
3. Mechanism of nanostructure-based PEC sensing strategies
The photoelectrochemical sensing is a photo-induced electron transfer process based on the electrode/solution interface.124,125 Generally, metal-based materials are used as photoelectric interface materials. Metal-based photoelectric conversion materials have a large bandgap width and strong photochemical oxidation, and different biometric elements will induce different photocurrent responses.126 This section focuses on the application and research progress of nanostructure-based PEC sensors from the perspective of the sensing principle, including the plasmon-enhanced effect, steric hindrance effect, exciton–plasmon interactions, in situ growth reaction, and electron donor/acceptor reaction.
3.1 Plasma-enhanced effect
Surface plasma, a kind of electromagnetic surface wave, is defined as the collective oscillation of electrons by incident illumination and electrons coupling to the metal surface.127 When the vibrational frequency of the photon matches that of the conduction electron of the metal, the metal exhibits a strong absorption ability, and the metal surface will produce a strong local electromagnetic field, which is called local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).128–130
LSPR technology is constantly developing along with the rapid progress of the strong constraint effect of coupling the plasmonic metal with an electromagnetic field, which has the potential to broaden the absorption range and enhance conversion capabilities.131,132 The general condition is the overlap between the wavelength of the light source, the absorption spectrum of the semiconductor and the SPR spectrum of the metal. The LSPR effect of noble metals (Au NPs, Ag NPs, Pt NPs, etc.) is influenced and restricted by the nature and inherent characteristics of noble metals, such as morphology, particle size, and composition.133 The local electric field enhancement caused by plasmon excitation is strongly dependent on the distance between the semiconductor and the plasmonic metal. The plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer can be generated even in the presence of an insulating layer up to about 25 nm thick in semiconductor–plasmonic metal.134 Furthermore, the LSPR wavelength of Au NPs is usually limited to more than 500 nm. The Ag or Al metal is commonly used to broaden the light absorption of semiconductors with bandgap energy above 2.48 eV (500 nm) using the plasmon-enhanced effect.135 Although there is no exact mechanism to explain the influence of plasmonic photochemistry, diverse mechanisms including hot electron injection, plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer, and light scattering/trapping are generally accepted (Fig. 9A).134 The influence of light scattering toward metal nanoparticles with diameters larger than 50 nm is dominant in the LSPR band, and increases the photon flux in metal–semiconductor heterojunctions, as shown in Fig. 9A(a). As depicted in Fig. 9A(b), the energy of the hot electrons is higher than the Schottky barriers and they can be injected directly into the CB of the semiconductor. Plasmons that produce a strong dipole by excitation can be transferred to the semiconductor in a non-radiative manner through the dipole–dipole interaction in the near field, creating electron–hole pairs (Fig. 9A(c)). Semiconductors with a wide bandgap (>3.1 eV) are coupled with plasmonic metals through the energy transfer of hot electron injection, resulting in the limitation of plasma-enhanced semiconductors. It is recommended that semiconductors with a band gap of less than 2.5 eV are chosen to couple with plasmonic metals, which utilized the three plasmonic energy transfer mechanisms mentioned above. This provides a way to achieve the theoretical maximum efficiency of solar energy conversion. A more comprehensive understanding of the plasma enhancement mechanism can be obtained from the evolvement of the plasmon by excitation, as illustrated in Fig. 9A(d). The collective electron oscillations stop in less than 20–30 fs, and they are transformed into single hot carriers by Landau damping. The hot carriers are relaxed close to the thermal energy in the range of 100 fs to 1.0 ps by electron–phonon scattering. The hot carriers are then relaxed to the Fermi energy level, emitting heat at a speed from 1.0 ps to 10 ns. Profiting from the photo-induced charge separation by the LSPR effect, in recent years, controllable surface plasmas have been widely used in PEC bioanalysis.136,137 Chen's group138 proposed a novel concept of plasma-enhanced photoelectrochemical biosensing based on hydrogen peroxide-induced catalytic growth of Au NPs on a TiO2 nanoporous film (Fig. 9B). Because they depended on the integration of enhanced plasmonic PEC property and size-dependent LSPR effect of Au NPs, the catalytic events of glucose oxidase were transduced for glucose determination. Qiu et al.139 exposed a PEC aptasensor by integrating plasmonic Au NPs with g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6 as a new paradigm for the detection of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) in both ultraviolet (UV) and visible regions (Fig. 9C). The g-C3N4/Bi2MoO6 heterojunction-modified electrode fixed CEA aptamer–Au NP probes. The simulation results based on the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method showed that the surface plasmon resonance effect of Au NPs could generate “hot electrons” and further induce charge separation under visible light irradiation. However, under ultraviolet light, the photocurrent response weakened because the steric hindrance effect played a dominant role. Based on the above principle, in the presence of target CEA, the photocurrent would weaken under the excitation of visible light, while the photocurrent increased under the excitation of ultraviolet light, so as to realize the detection of CEA under excitation at two wavelengths. An in-depth exploration of the internal mechanism of the localized surface plasmon resonance effect and hot-electron injection for the PEC aptasensor process was beneficial to the development of high-performance PEC biosensors. Li et al.140 designed a plasmonic PEC biosensing strategy based on WS2/Au NP nanocomposites for cell assay (Fig. 9D). Two-dimensional WS2 nanosheets with photo-electricity activity could capture red light and generate photocurrent. After the modification of Au NPs on the surface of WS2 nanosheets, the oscillating electric field generated by Au NPs can excite the electrons of WS2 nanosheets to enhance the photocurrent. And Au NPs generated collective oscillation of free electrons, which led to hot electrons’ transfer from the Au NPs to the CB of WS2. It improved the PEC conversion efficiency and further promoted the PEC response. When the MUC1 cell is trapped on the electrode surface by the aptamer molecule, the photocurrent decreased significantly, because the increased steric resistance hinders the transfer of the electron donor. And WS2 nanosheets with a high specific surface area greatly improved the loading capacity of Au NPs, and greatly promoted the photoelectric conversion efficiency and the sensitivity of MCF-7 cell detection. The MUC1 aptamer as a recognition element was adsorbed on the surface of the WS2/Au NPs compound. According to the changes in photocurrent before and after the specific recognition of MCF-7 cells, non-invasive detection of MCF-7 cells had an expansive perspective for the promotion of universal PEC biosensing platforms. Shu et al.141 demonstrated that the introduction of gold nanoparticles had distinct effects on the PEC response of defect-engineered titanium dioxide nano-bars (dTiO2−x) under different wavelength photoexcitation (Fig. 9E). Based on the plasmonic enhancement of photocurrent, a new PEC biosensor mode with defect-engineered TiO2−x binding target-introduced metal nanostructure to enhance PEC response was proposed. An exonuclease III-assisted target cyclic signal amplification was designed to generate more Au NP-labelled DNA segments and the Au NPs were fixed on the electrode by specific hybridization with cDNA. The anchored AuNPs revealed a plasmonic effect and increased photocurrent to realize highly sensitive detection of nucleic acid molecules.
 Fig. 9  (A) Three major mechanisms of plasmonic energy transfer from a metal to a semiconductor: (a) Light scattering; (b) PIRET; (c) hot electron injection; (d) evolution of the plasmon light excitation. (B) The mechanism of the plasmonic-enhanced Au–TiO2 hybrid system. (C) Schematic illustration of the plasmonic PEC aptasensor. (D) Schematic illustration of the LSPR-enhanced PEC sensing strategy for MCF-7 cell detection. Reprinted from ref. 134 and 138–140 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) PEC biosensor based on plasmonic enhancement coupled with defect-engineered TiO2−x and the plasmonic photosensitization effect. Reprinted from ref. 141 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
3.2 Steric hindrance effect
Because the photocurrent intensity mainly depends on the photoelectric conversion efficiency and charge transfer capacity of PEC substrate materials, PEC biosensing is an effective signal-regulated method to directly influence PEC substrate materials and interface transmission by specific biological recognition.142 In the process of PEC biosensing detection, the products from biomolecular specific recognition can not only block the absorption of photons, but hinder the transfer of photo-generated carriers and the diffusion of electroactive molecules to the electrode interface. And the phenomenon that leads to a decrease in photocurrent is called the steric hindrance effect. At present, there are many types of research on the formation of antigen–antibody recognition, nucleic acid aptamer and target recognition, biotin–avidin binding and catalytic precipitation on the electrode surface, which are the most common ways of generating the steric hindrance effect.143,144
Han et al.145 employed WO3@BiOI@CdS nanocomposites for CEA antibody immobilization as the working electrode to recognize the target, and proposed a simple label-free PEC immunosensor for CEA detection based on the steric hindrance effect. The WO3@BiOI@CdS electrode that modified the CEA antibody specifically recognized the CEA antigen, and the photocurrent decreased with the enhancement of CEA concentration. The electron transfer rate of the WO3@BiOI@CdS system was impeded, and the surface reaction between the electron donor and the photo-induced holes was hindered to some extent. In addition, compared with the traditional sandwich enzyme labelling detection technology, the label-free PEC model had the characteristics of simple operation, low cost and rapid determination. However, due to limited load capacity and weak signal regulation, the analysis performance was difficult to meet the requirements of modern development. Subsequently, various sensing strategies based on the steric hindrance effect were developed by biocatalytic events. Zhang et al.40 used the Mn:CdS QDs/g-C3N4 composite as the photoelectrode and combined antigen–antibody specific recognition with hybridization chain reaction (HCR) technology to form DNAzyme multiplex structures with peroxidase activity under the assistance of hemin, which catalyzed 4-chlorine-1-naphthol to produce an insoluble precipitate covering the photoelectrode surface, resulting in photocurrent reduction response (Fig. 10A). The reason for the decline in photocurrent was that the insoluble substance inhibited electron transfer at the solid–liquid interface and obscured the excitation light that reached the photosensitive material. Zhuang et al.146 introduced AuNP/g-C3N4 to design a PEC biosensor for the detection of T4 polynucleotide kinase (PNK) activity with DNAzyme-mediated catalytic precipitation amplification (Fig. 10B). The PNK-catalyzed 5′-phosphorylation induced the generation of numerous hemin/G-quadruplex-based DNAzymes to catalyze 4-chloro1-naphthol (4-CN) to produce insoluble products, which hindered the photon absorption and increased the transfer distance between the electron donor/acceptor in the electrolyte solution and the PEC substance.
 Fig. 10  (A) Mechanism of CdS:Mn/g-C3N4 nanohybrids for the PEC immunosensing system based on the steric-hindrance effect. Reprinted from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier. (B) Illumination of DNAzyme-catalyzed precipitation amplification for the PEC sensing platform for determination of polynucleotide kinase activity (PKA). (a) Charge transfer mechanism of the AuNP/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. (b) Schematic illustration of PKA-induced enzymatic biocatalytic precipitation PEC technique based on the AuNP/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. Reprinted from ref. 146 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Exciton–plasmon interactions
The exciton–plasmon interaction (EPI), a fundamental light–matter interplay, is described by coupling of the electromagnetic field of plasmon with exciton dipole, and usually occurs in systems where the semiconductor and metal nanostructures are in close proximity.147,148 This coupling system profoundly affects the absorption and emission rate of the semiconductor emitter. Hence, the optical properties of the exciton–plasmon system can be adjusted by controlling the design of the semiconductor and plasmonic metal structure.
Research on different material systems involving exciton–plasmon interactions has received considerable attention.149,150 For the plasma portion, gold and silver nanoparticles are potential candidates. Silver as a plasmonic material has a low intrinsic loss, which leads to narrow surface plasmon resonance with stronger oscillation intensity and optical field.151 Compared with silver, gold, an inert metal, has a higher intrinsic loss especially in the visible spectrum, where it generates electron transitions.151 The intrinsic loss inhibits surface plasmon oscillation, broadens surface plasmon resonance and reduces quality factors. Thus, plasmonic metal structures with the target function in the range from 400 to 520 nm are more suitable for silver-based structures, while gold structures are a good choice for longer wavelengths.
Moreover, quantum dots (QDs) with a broad range are easy to overlap with the absorption spectra of various plasmonic metals.152 In fact, the formation of the QD–metal system has been a topic of increasing attention in the past decade. The QD–metal system can allow the transformation of light absorption (reabsorption) into meal by the semiconductor, return the photons.150 And the QD–metal system possesses some definite advantages, such as the following: (i) CdTe, CdS, and CdSe quantum dots and others exhibit preferable luminescence property and higher quantum yield (>50%); (ii) the emission peak of quantum dots can be precisely adjusted in a relatively broad spectrum due to the quantum size effect; (iii) compared to organic molecules, quantum dots can be excited over a wide spectrum and have low-cost preparation and high absorption coefficient.153,154 A prerequisite for stronger EPI generation is generally a sufficient overlap between the plasmon band and the exciton band. The local field enhancement near the metal nanoparticle gives rise to the absorption change of QDs, while the emission change of QDs is caused by the interaction between the QD dipole and plasmons in the metal nanoparticle. At present, all kinds of quantum dots have been coupled to different plasmonic metal structures to investigate the electron transfer mechanisms of the exciton–plasmon system.
Zhao et al.41 bridged Ag NPs and CdS QDs with a double-stranded DNA structure as the rigid spacer to build a new PEC DNA sensor (Fig. 11A). It was found that the photocurrent response based on exciton–plasma interaction could be initiated by adjusting the distance between Ag NPs and CdS QDs. Specifically, the EPI effect could make the photocurrent of CdS quantum dots decrease sharply or even completely. This work opened up different perspectives for the design and research of PEC biosensors. Dong et al.155 introduced EPI between Au@Ag and CdS@g-C3N4 heterojunction system into a PEC biosensor for MicroRNA detection (Fig. 11B). Since the absorption spectrum of Au@Ag overlapped with the emission spectrum of CdS@g-C3N4 to a high degree, the photocurrent response in this system relied on the synergistic effect of energy resonance transfer and EPI. Based on this signal transduction mechanism, the PEC bioanalysis of microRNA was performed with the duplex-specific nuclease-assisted recycling amplification technique.
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic mechanism of the exciton–plasmon interactions between CdS QDs and Ag for PEC biosensing application. (B) Charge transfer process of exciton–plasmon interactions between the CdS@g-C3N4 heterojunction and Au@Ag nanoparticles for PEC bioanalysis of microRNA. Reprinted from ref. 41 and 155 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
3.4 
          In situ growth reaction

In situ formation reaction is a new synthetic method for preparing composite materials.156,157In situ generation refers to the process where the second phase or enhanced phase can be directly generated on the basis of the original phase. For example, a layer of silver can be grown on the surface of gold nanoparticles to form a Au@Ag shell structure. The process of in situ generation is simple and eliminates tedious pre-treatment steps.
Zeng et al.42 proposed a PEC immunoassay based on the in situ generation of CdS QDs on graphene oxide using enzyme catalysis (Fig. 12A). Horseradish peroxidase catalyzed the reaction between H2O2 and sodium thiosulfate to form H2S, and H2S reacted with Cd2+ on graphene oxide to form CdS QDs. The generated CdS quantum dots, as photoelectric materials, were stimulated to generate photocurrent signals. Ma et al.158 developed a PEC bioanalysis for sensitive microRNA detection (Fig. 12B). This work invoked ingeniously the EPI between CdS QDs and Ag NPs based on the deposition of silver onto gold nanoparticles by an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. Specifically, an ingenious DNA sequence was first designed to form a “Y” DNA structure in the presence of the target microRNA, so that Au NPs and CdS QDs were located at the two termini of the “Y” ternary structure respectively. The last terminal was modified with alkaline phosphorylase (ALP) by biotin–streptavidin affinity binding, which hydrolyzed ascorbic acid 2-phosphate (AAP) to produce ascorbic acid (AA) that reduced silver ions to generate Ag layer deposition onto the surface of Au NPs. The absorption spectra of Ag@Au NPs overlapped with that of CdS QDs, which was conducive to induce an efficient EPI. Since the decline of the PEC signal was directly related to the target-triggered in situ generation of Ag deposition on Au NPs, a PEC microRNA biosensor could be prepared by tracking changes in the photocurrent. Çakıroğlu and Özacar159 presented a PEC non-enzymatic sensor using a rational in situ growth reaction to determine glucose. They coupled semiconductor Cu2O/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) with TiO2 nanotubes as PEC materials, and the amount of Cu2O–rGO nanocomposite grown in situ was directly proportional to the concentration of glucose estimated by Fehling's solution. The increased photocurrent was attributed to the formation of the TiO2 NTs–Cu2O NPs heterojunction interface combined with the favorable conductive rGO, which can improve the efficiency of charge separation and promote electron transfer. Zhang et al.160 fabricated CuxO nanopyramid-islands (NPIs) as the photocathode integrating the anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane with alkaline phosphatase (ALP) catalytic chemistry to demonstrate a nanochannel PEC biosensor. The CuxO–NPIs photocathode exhibited a stable cathodic photocurrent upon harvesting photons. With the ALP-catalyzed precipitation, the in situ formation of the insoluble product was observed on the channel surface and within the channel, which obstructed electron transfer.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the PEC biosensing platform through in situ propagation of CdS QDs on graphene oxide using an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. (B) Diagram of the in situ growth of Ag deposition on Au NPs for PEC microRNA bioassay. Reprinted from ref. 42 and 158 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
3.5 Electron donor/acceptor reaction
Similar to photocatalytic water-splitting, the photo-generated electron–hole pair with ultra-high reactivity can effectively react with chemical or biological molecules.161 Under light irradiation, the conversion efficiency of photoactive materials in the PEC biosensor system has a direct influence on electrolyte composition. The photocurrent signal can be significantly affected by the change of electron donor/acceptor concentration before and after the biomolecular specific recognition to some extent. Dissolved oxygen (O2), ascorbic acid (AA), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), glucose and other biological molecules that are common enzyme-catalyzed reactants or products are often used as the donor or receptor. The presence of matching electron donor/acceptor in the electrolyte can promote (inhibit) electron–hole separation of the photoactive material to enhance (weaken) the photocurrent response.162–164
Li et al.165 adopted heterogeneous C3N4/PbS as the photoactive material and introduced G-quadruplex/hemin/Pt NPs with catalase-like activity as a beacon probe to develop a PEC biosensor for monitoring the release of H2O2 from HepG2 cells (Fig. 13A). G-quadruplex/hemin/Pt NPs could catalyze the decomposition of H2O2 to produce oxygen, and oxygen as an effective electron acceptor captured photo-induced electrons in the conduction band of the photoactive material and inhibited electron–hole pair recombination, and further enhanced the photocurrent response.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the PEC bioanalysis platform for H2O2 detection released from cells based on an electron acceptor. (B) PEC immunoassay using poly[G] for the detection of HIV-1 p24 antigen. (C) Energy-level diagram of PEC immunoassay based on enediol-ligand-encapsulated liposomes. Reprinted from ref. 43, 165 and 166 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
The signal amplification strategy based on the enzyme-catalyzed electron donor/acceptor reaction is a relatively common analysis method at present, but the application of the enzymatic labelling probe has poor stability and is susceptible to many factors (pH, temperature, solvent). To deal with the problem, Zhao et al.166 employed CdTe QDs as the photoactive material and designed a PEC immunosensor of the HIV-1 p24 antigen using functionalized poly[G]/Si NPs as biological labels (Fig. 13B). Free guanines (G) could be released from poly[G]/Si NPs through a chemical reaction, and the free G was easily oxidized by CdTe quantum dots to enhance the photocurrent response. Obviously, compared with the enzymatic labelling, this method showed the advantages of a simple preparation procedure and satisfactory stability. Mei et al.43 proposed the proof-of-concept of the liposome-based PEC immunosensing platform (Fig. 13C). Specifically, enediol-ligand-encapsulated liposomes were introduced into the 96-well plate by immunoassay. With the help of Triton X-100, the enediol-ligand was released, which had a strong affinity with Ti atoms in TiO2. Ligand complexes could directly transfer electrons to the empty conduction band of TiO2 without any excitation state under light irradiation, which transduced the recognition events.
4. New sensing pattern in the nanostructure-based PEC platform
PEC trace analysis, as a powerful detection technique, has been successfully applied to establish a series of new biosensors due to its unique advantages such as low background, high sensitivity, simple operation and easy miniaturization.167 The traditional PEC sensing platforms generally use a commercial electrochemical detection system and a larger xenon lamp light source. In spite of the excellent detection performance, there are still some shortcomings, such as high equipment cost and difficulty in portability. In order to meet the current demand for rapid and portable determination and the trend of miniaturization and intelligent measurement, the emphatic aspects for further study have been gradually transferred to explore advanced PEC analytical devices and innovative detection mode.167,168 Therefore, it is necessary to develop new methods for a novel and universally applicable path for future PEC biological analysis.169,170 In this section, we will detail item by item the main advances in the versatile sensing pattern of nanomaterial-based PEC platforms, which explores their unique performance and broadens their applications.
4.1 Photocathode/photoanode tandem PEC sensors
Up to now, a majority of the developed PEC biosensors belong to a photoanode-based type.171,172 However, the photoanode-based PEC sensing platform has its inherent defect of poor anti-interference ability in real sample detection.173 As is known to all, the component of actual biological samples is very complex, and many reductive substances coexist in them, such as dopamine, glutathione, and so on.174,175 The reductive substance will be inevitably adsorbed on the electrode surface, despite the fact that the electrode will be washed thoroughly. The reductive substance can compete with target-induced electron donors in the electrolyte and react with the photo-generated holes of the photoanode resulting in a false positive result, which is difficult to solve by changing the composition of the photoanode. Different from the photoanode-based PEC biosensor, the photocathode-based PEC analysis relies on the photo-generated hole as the majority carrier, which needs electron acceptors instead of electron donors. The reductive molecules in real biological samples have no effect on the true photocurrent response. However, the photocathode-based type has low detection sensitivity and poor photocurrent response.
In order to give full play to the role of both photocathode-based and photoanode-based biosensors, many researchers have put forward an integrated sensing platform with the ability of photocathode and photoanode. Fan et al.44 proposed a new type of cathode PEC immunosensing for reliable and sensitive detection of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) (Fig. 14A). The PEC system was composed of the TiO2/CdS:Mn hybrid-modified photoanode and the CuInS2 micro-flowers modified photocathode. The ITO/CuInS2 photocathode modified the PSA antibody for the quantitative determination of target PSA through a significant change in the photocurrent induced by specific immunoreaction between PSA and PSA antibody. When the electron donor of ascorbic acid (AA) was introduced, the photo-generated holes in the VB of the TiO2/CdS:Mn photoanode were neutralized and the photo-generated electrons in the CB of the ITO/CuInS2 photocathode were captured by O2. The mechanism of photocurrent enhancement is that the ITO/CuInS2 photocathode could supply enough hole carriers to the TiO2/CdS:Mn photoanode and the TiO2/CdS:Mn photoanode utilized effectively electron donors to provide sufficient electron carriers for the PEC system, which accelerated electron transfer and effectively inhibited charge recombination.
 Fig. 14  (A) Photo-generated electron transfer process of the photocathode-based PEC immunoassay. Reprinted from ref. 44 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) Mechanism of cathode PEC immunoassay based on TiO2 photoanode-enhanced 3D Cu2O nanowires. Reprinted from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier. 
Liu et al.176 took advantage of the photoanode and photocathode immunoassay, and developed a promising cathode PEC immunoassay based on TiO2 photoanode and Cu2O nanowire array photocathode coupling with target-triggered signal amplification of biocatalytic precipitation (Fig. 14B). Similarly, the presence of AA resulted in an enhancement of the PEC system. The Cu2O nanowire array (NWA) photocathode was immobilized to capture CEA antibodies. The signal CEA antibodies were labeled with horseradish peroxidase to produce biocatalytic precipitation, which attenuated the photocurrent response due to steric hindrance and the insulation effect of the insoluble substance. The proposed cathode PEC immunoassay not only ensured good anti-interference ability, but also had high sensitivity, reliability and stability.
4.2 Ratiometric photoelectrochemical sensors
Traditional PEC analytical methods usually depend on single signal output for quantification detection, which is easily affected by many intrinsic or extrinsic factors and increases the risk of false-negative or false positive errors on account of the position between the light source and the electrode, fluctuations in light source intensity, and small changes in buffer solution.177,178 These factors bring about poor reproducibility and reliability in practical applications of the PEC biosensor. In order to eliminate these factors effectively, the introduction of a ratiometric PEC biosensor with dual-signal responses can provide a built-in self-calibration model, which is used to calibrate the fluctuation of the external environment and improve the anti-interference ability. Such ratiometric sensors with double signal ratio instead of single signal value as the output signal can be divided into single and double signal-based type. As for the former type, one signal remains unchanged, whereas another signal change depends on the analyte concentration. For the latter type, changes in both signals depend on the analyte concentration, which demonstrates a corresponding photocurrent increase and decrease. Currently, there is an increasing impetus for ratiometric PEC analysis with respect to various biological analyses and environmental monitoring.
Yang et al.45 proposed a ratiometric PEC paper analytical device for sensitive detection of miRNA-141 coupling with a hollow double-hydrophilic-wall channel (Fig. 15A). Specifically, the Cu2O/Ag2S photocathode and the ZnO/GQDs/Ag2Se photoanode were integrated on paper microfluidics. The duplex-specific nuclease-induced target recycling reaction activated a series of hybridization chain reactions with polymeric DNA duplex structures, which assembled glucose oxidase (GOx)-mimicking gold nanoparticles to obtain a branched gold tree. The glucose oxidation reaction consumed the dissolved O2 (electron acceptor) to produce H2O2 (electron donor), leading to a “signal off” state in the cathodic photocurrent and a “signal on” state in the anodic photocurrent. The target miRNA-1411 was quantitatively determined by calculating the ratio of two photocurrent intensities. Wang's group179 employed CdTe QDs and CdTe-graphene oxide as the paired photoactive materials to construct a dual-channel self-reference PEC biosensor via the same modification way for detection of Aflatoxin B1 (Fig. 15B). Two adjacent regions of an ITO electrode were modified with CdTe and CdTe-graphene oxide and then labeled with an Aflatoxin B1 aptamer via a conjugated bond or physical adsorption, respectively. The method of adjusting the bias voltage could distinguish cathode current and anode current. This detection mode obtained dual PEC information in one detection, which could be used as a cross-reference. The target was introduced to the ITO electrode to produce the conformation change of aptamers, which caused different PEC signal changes in the two regions. The “signal on” and “signal off” models could obtain dual concentration information in one detection, which was used as a reference between each other.
 Fig. 15  (A) Ratiometric PEC paper analytical device. (a) Schematic illustration of the donor/acceptor-induced ratiometric PEC strategy for microRNA detection. (b) Schematic diagram and photograph of hollow double-hydrophilic-wall channel paper PEC device. (B) Self-reference PEC aptasensor for AFB1 detection. (C) Spatially resolved ratiometric PEC aptasensor. (a and b) Photograph and diagram of the ratiometric PEC detection device for CEA detection. Reprinted from ref. 45, 179 and 180 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Qiu et al.180 replaced the traditional three-electrode system with self-regulating dual working photoelectrodes to fabricate a near-infrared light-mediated ratiometric PEC aptasensor based on a homemade three-dimensional printing device and a spatially resolved technique by using upconversion nanoparticle–semiconductor nanocrystals (Fig. 15C). The NaYF4:Yb,Er UCNPs@CdTe nanocrystals as photoactive materials were assembled on dual working photoelectrodes (WP1 and WP2). In the presence of target CEA, the CEA aptamer 1 (A1) modified on the WP1 photoelectrode captured CEA, resulting in photocurrent attenuation due to hindered light irradiation and electron transfer. On the other hand, the rigid double-stranded DNA labeled with Au NPs on WP2 reacted with CEA, resulting in the separation of Au NPs from the WP2 electrode, and enhanced photocurrent owing to the exciton–plasma interaction. The “signal-on” photocurrent response was rooted in the steric hindrance effect and the “signal-off” model response resulted from exciton–plasmon interactions on two adjacent photoelectrodes for the quantification detection of CEA. Gratifyingly, the homemade device based on UCNs–semiconductor suggested a promising route for the development of a portable PEC sensor with implications in solar energy applications. Zheng et al.181 established a ratiometric PEC bioassay for determination of microRNA in cells. With the assistance of target-nucleotide transduction-amplification, the output DNA could trigger the formation of the four-way junction DNA nanomachine that regulates the electron transfer distance between the SiO2@methylene blue/CdS QDs and the sensing interface. At the same time, CdS QDs were obtained far away from the sensor interface. The results showed that the photocurrent of CdS QDs away from the interface decreased at the wavelength of 460 nm and the photocurrent of SiO2@methylene blue close to the interface was enhanced at the wavelength of 623 nm. The ratiometric PEC strategy could be realized by the ratio of two different photocurrent signals.
4.3 Self-driven photoelectrochemical sensors
The excitation light source is an essential part of PEC detection. However, external light sources (xenon lamp, monochromator, etc.) and their corresponding power-supply devices are not conducive to the development tendency of portable testing equipment.182 In recent years, several research groups have put forward the idea of PEC sensing with chemiluminescence as an excitation light source. The proposed method has brought about the downsizing of the PEC sensing device and made it get rid of the dependence of the external physical light source. The light source of such a PEC sensor comes from the sensing system itself, so it can be understood as a self-driven PEC sensor. Zang et al.46 proposed a PEC analysis method for DNA detection by combining catalytic hairpin assembly (CHA) signal amplification and in situ porphyrin (FeTMPyP)-mediated chemiluminescence excitation (Fig. 16A). Golub et al.183 used the lumino-H2O2 system as the excitation light source and employed triethanolamine (TEA) as the electron donor to generate photocurrent for the detection of various targets with no external irradiation based on hemin/G-quadruple chain-catalyzed chemiluminescence to stimulate CdS QDs fixed on the electrode.
 Fig. 16  (A) PEC DNA sensing based on CHA amplification and FeTMPyP-mediated chemiluminescence. (B) Self-powered PEC sensor based on a photofuel cell. Reprinted from ref. 46 and 188 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
For another, self-powered sensors based on the energy transformation of biological catalysis have attracted considerable interest.184,185 So far, the self-powered sensors are mainly enzyme fuel cells due to their peculiar property to offer sustainable energy in a renewable environment, such as glucose oxidase, alcohol dehydrogenase, and so on.186,187 Yan et al.188 employed the Ni(OH)2/CdS/TiO2 photoanode and the hemin-graphene modified cathode to design an enzyme-free self-powered sensor based on visible-light-driven photo-fuel cells for detection of glucose (Fig. 16B). Under visible light illumination, glucose in the photoanode was oxidized by Ni(OH)2/CdS/TiO2, and meanwhile H2O2 in the cathode underwent catalytic reduction by hemin-graphene, and the output power signals depended on glucose concentration.
4.4 Portable photoelectrochemical sensors
Despite the rapid development of PEC biosensor technology in recent years, which has exhibited great potential in various fields, there is still great room for development and improvement. One major direction is to develop an intelligent PEC sensing pattern detection device. The sensor device and sensing mode have an extremely significant impact on the overall performance of the PEC biosensor system, especially in order to realize some functions such as high-throughput, self-driven, portable detection, and so on.189,190 This is also an inexorable trend in the development of PEC biosensors. The traditional PEC measurement consists of three main components: the excitation light source system, the three-electrode detection cell and the signal collection/output equipment. With the continuous development of science technology and electronic information technology innovation, the detection equipment miniaturization and portable detection processes are gradually realized, which facilitate point-of-care testing.191–193 In this respect, quite a few interesting research works have been reported in recent years, which has played an important role in promoting the development of PEC biosensors.
Zheng et al.194 used low-cost light-emitting diodes (LED) instead of traditional light sources to develop a self-enhanced PEC biosensor based on a functionalized nanocapsule packaging both donor–acceptor-type photoactive material (PTB7-Th) and its sensitizer (nano-C60, fullerene) for the determination of microRNA and pharmacodynamic evaluation. The self-enhanced donor–acceptor-type/nano-C60 photoactive materials provided a strong initial photocurrent response. In the presence of the target, the hairpin DNA modified by SiO2 nanoparticles was cleaved and hybridized with capture DNA on the surface of the electrode with the quadratic enzyme-assisted target recycling amplification strategy. The introduction of SiO2 nanoparticles effectively reduced the initial photocurrent signal by increasing the steric resistance and inhibiting electron transfer.
Hu et al.195 employed a portable and inexpensive green laser light as a light source to demonstrate the PEC immunosensing of CEA based on carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotube-Congo red-fullerene nanohybrids (MWNTCOOH-CR-C60). The MWNTCOOH-CR-C60 nanohybrids displayed high PEC conversion efficiency under visible light. A CEA detection antibody was covalently bound to MWNTCOOH-CR-C60 nanohybrids as a PEC biological probe for sandwich immunoassay of CEA.
To simplify the PEC sensing device, Shu et al.196 reported a split-type PEC immunosensor for portable detection of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) by integrating the peroxyoxalate-hydrogen peroxide chemiluminescence system with a digital multimeter/capacitor readout. The generated H2O2 by sandwich immunoreaction was used as a reaction agent in the reaction cell to trigger the self-illuminated system, which stimulated the reduced graphene oxide-doped BiVO4 electrode to generate electron–hole pairs. At the same time, H2O2 can effectively enhance the photocurrent as an electron donor and charged the capacitor. The double-controlled switch connected the capacitor to the digital multimeter, where the accumulated charge was released and the instantaneous peak current was recorded by the digital multimeter, so as to realize the quantitative detection of PSA in the sample. Ge et al.47 adopted a microfluidic paper-based origami device with a chemiluminescence system and a digital multimeter (DMM) for PEC detection of adenosine triphosphate (Fig. 17A). The photocurrent could be collected sensitively via the amplification of the DMM/paper supercapacitor, providing a low-cost and portable detection method for remote or underdeveloped areas, where there is a shortage of professionals and expensive equipment.
 Fig. 17  (A) PEC device based on an integrated paper supercapacitor and internal light source. (a) Schematic illustration of the portable PEC mechanism for the determination of ATP with microfluidic paper and a digital multimeter. (b) Schematic diagram for the shape, size, and composition of the paper device. (c–f) Actual operation and PEC assay procedures of this disposable microfluidic PEC origami device. (B) The portable and light-addressable PEC sensor for screening of thrombin inhibitor drugs. (a) Schematic diagram for the high-throughput detection of thrombin (upper four areas) and screening of thrombin inhibitors (lower four areas) with a portable pH meter. Photos of the detection mode of the light-addressable PEC sensor with (b) light off and (c) light on. Reprinted from ref. 47 and 197 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Wang et al.197 developed a portable and light-addressable PEC sensor for screening of thrombin inhibitor drugs with a pH meter (Fig. 17B). A single gold film was divided into eight small electrodes to decorate biotin-labeled and thrombin-cleavable peptides. The as-prepared sensing areas were incubated with thrombin or a mixture of thrombin and its inhibitors and then some of the peptides were cleaved by thrombin, resulting in the decrease of binding sites for the streptavidin (SA)-labeled fullerene (C60) bioprobe. The light-addressable photovoltaic signals were in proportion to the number of the uncleaved biotin-labeled peptide with SA-labeled C60 under a handheld red laser pen. Changes in the signal could be measured using an electrochemical workstation or a portable pH meter, and the actual operation is shown in Fig. 17B(b) and (c).
5. Conclusions and perspectives
Over the past decade, nanostructure-based PEC sensing platforms with the desirable advantages of a low-background signal, high sensibility and precision, and easily realized miniaturization were of greatest concern and held great promise for the development of a novel analytical technique in the future. In this review, the nanostructure-based PEC sensing platforms are evaluated and summarized from the perspective of photoactive nanomaterials, PEC strategy mechanisms, and new sensing patterns. Recent progress in the development of common and efficient photoactive materials includes that (i) the single semiconductors such as TiO2 and QDs provide potential and excellent photocurrent signals; (ii) a semiconductor coupled with other semiconductors improves the light absorption range, and produces enough built-in potential for the subsequent redox reactions of the electron donor/acceptor, which effectively drives the separation and transfer of electron–hole pairs; (iii) the deposition of plasmonic metals into semiconductors exhibits a wide tunable absorption band, facilitates charge separation and reduces the charge recombination; (iv) the upconversion-based semiconductor composite improves the utilization of solar energy and overcomes the defect that the wide bandgap semiconductor is limited to UV light excitation.
What's more, substantial progress has already been made in understanding the PEC potential mechanism, such as the plasmon-enhanced effect, steric hindrance effect, exciton–plasmon interactions, etc. Enormous efforts go into understanding the chemical and physical properties, microstructure, electron transfer process and interaction with other substrates of photoactive materials, which is of great necessity to rationally design the high-performance PEC sensing strategy. Finally, the current PEC sensing research commonly employs the commercial electrochemical testing system and a larger xenon lamp light source, which runs counter to the current trend of miniaturization. Many studies were also devoted to developing new PEC detection models to satisfy practical requirements. The self-driven ability of PEC sensors was combined with low-cost PEC test equipment (digital multimeter and low power LED lamp) and a monochromatic light source (monochromatic laser).
Despite the development of nanostructure-based PEC sensing platforms by leaps and bounds, there are still some deficiencies owing to short development periods. The future development trend and application prospect may be summarized as follows. (i) The assembly process of photoelectrodes for PEC biosensors has not attracted enough attention and the manufacturing technique is relatively crude and backward. It is necessary to develop advanced manufacturing processes for improving the shedding phenomenon of photoactive materials in the detection process, and remove the obstacles of poor stability and reproducibility in practical applications. (ii) From the perspective of novel high-performance photoelectric conversion materials, the control and preparation of functional materials provide a new opportunity for the further development of nanostructure-based PEC sensing. (iii) The important prerequisite is that the sensor interface is not affected by biomolecules and matrix materials. This puts forward new requirements for the PEC sensor interface design. It is an effective way to improve the utilization efficiency and avoid repetitive construction of the sensor interface. (iv) The development and design of high-performance integrated substitutable electronics detection components and portable devices can realize the continuous monitoring of complex systems. For example, PEC sensor technology can be combined with the smartphone, pH meter and microfluidics to realize high-throughput and automatic detection.
We hope that this review will provide readers with a comprehensive nanostructure-based PEC sensor to improve the further exploration of high-performance nanomaterials and expand PEC application boundaries, and relevant applicability will be also discussed to bring better insights into the direction of functional bioanalytical applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants no.: 21675029 and 201874022).
References
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7421–7441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 729–741 RSC .
X. Zhang, C. Gong, O. U. Akakuru, Z. Su, A. Wu and G. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5564–5595 RSC .
S. Gao, N. Koshizaki, H. Tokuhisa, E. Koyama, T. Sasaki, J. K. Kim, J. Ryu, D. S. Kim and Y. Shimizu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, S. Lv, Q. Zhou and D. Tang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 307, 127631 CrossRef .
S. Lv, K. Zhang, Q. Zhou and D. Tang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 310, 127874 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Yu, Y. Li, Z. Su, K. D. Jandt and G. Wei, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 80, 94–124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zeng, L. Zhang, Z. Luo and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 7835–7841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ni, H. Lin, W. Yang, Y. Liao, Q. Wang, F. Luo, L. Guo, B. Qiu and Z. Lin, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 14751–14756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shu and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 363–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 615–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Q. Qi, L. Zhang, R. Zeng, L. Su and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 4149–4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shu and D. Tang, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 2780–2789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou and D. Tang, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2020, 124, 115814 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Q. Zhou, D. Tang, R. Niessner, H. Yang and D. Knopp, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 7858–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeng, Z. Luo, L. Su, L. Zhang, D. Tang, R. Niessner and D. Knopp, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 2447–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, L. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Tang and D. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 332, 135473 CrossRef .
S. Lv, K. Zhang, L. Zhu and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 1470–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Lv, Z. Lin, M. Li and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 101, 159–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, R. Liu, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 507, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec, S. Wageh and A. A. Al-Ghamdi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601694 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shu, Z. Qiu, S. Lv, K. Zhang and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2425–2429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu and F. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1861–1885 RSC .
G. Khitrova and H. M. Gibbs, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 84 Search PubMed .
A. P. Alivisatos, K. P. Johnsson, X. Peng, T. E. Wilson, C. J. Loweth, M. P. Bruchez and P. G. Schultz, Nature, 1996, 382, 609–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bakalova, H. Ohba, Z. Zhelev, M. Ishikawa and Y. Baba, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 1360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Fan, L. Han, H. Zhu, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 12398–12405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, J. Zheng, X. Su, J. Wang, W. Wu and S. Hu, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 10612–10619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. An, J. Tang, Y. Zhang, Y. Quan, X. Gong, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. A. Elzatahry, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12772–12779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ibrahim, H. N. Lim, O. K. Abou-Zied, N. M. Huang, P. Estrela and A. Pandikumar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 22202–22214 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, C. H. Lee, Y. Feng, M. Logar, P. M. Rao, L. Cai, D. R. Kim, R. Sinclair and X. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1723 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Zhang, Y. H. Zhuang, D. Shan, G. F. Su, S. Cosnier and X. J. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 11207–11212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and Z. Hong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8930–8933 RSC .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Deng, Z. Xu, M. Chaker and D. Ma, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6225–6234 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, M. Quintanilla, F. Vetrone, A. O. Govorov, M. Chaker and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2950–2960 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing and N. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 666–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. F. Ruan, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 207–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Lv, Z. Lin and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 95, 34–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, P. P. Yu, Y. Shan, J. Wang, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 5892–5897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, W. T. Li, J. Bao and Z. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16197–16203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Mei, F. Liu, J. B. Pan, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 6300–6304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Fan, X. M. Shi, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 10352–10356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, M. Hu, Z. Li, P. Zhao, L. Xie and X. Song, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 14577–14585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, J. Lei, P. Ling and H. Ju, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5430–5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ge, P. Wang, S. Ge, N. Li, J. Yu, M. Yan and J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3961–3970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Çakıroğlu and M. Özacar, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 141, 111385 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, W. Tu, H. Wang and Z. Dai, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9403–9409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeng, Z. Luo, L. Su, L. Zhang, D. Tang, R. Niessner and D. Knopp, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 2447–2454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Zheng, W. Liang, Y. Yuan, Y. Chai and R. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8138–8141 RSC .
B. Wang, L. P. Mei, Y. Ma, Y. T. Xu, S. W. Ren, J. T. Cao, Y. M. Liu and W. W. Zhao, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 12347–12351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeng, L. Zhang, L. Su, Z. Luo, Q. Zhou and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 133, 100–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, Z. Song, M. H. Nawaz, M. Dai, D. Han, L. Han, Y. Fan, J. Xu, D. Han and L. Niu, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 10657–10662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Deng, X. Xiong, C. Li and W. Li, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1090, 64–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, D. Han, M. Zhou, H. Sun, L. Wang, X. Dong and L. Niu, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3946–3951 RSC .
J. Xue, C. Gao, L. Zhang, K. Cui, W. He and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4697–4703 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
S. W. Kim, Y. H. Park, I. Kim, T. E. Park, B. W. Kwon, W. K. Choi and H. J. Choi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8550–8554 RSC .
Y. Nonoguchi, M. Nakano, T. Murayama, H. Hagino, S. Hama, K. Miyazaki, R. Matsubara, M. Nakamura and T. Kawai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3021–3028 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and N. Pryds, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, Z. Shao, Y. He, R. Wang, X. Wu, T. Jiang, S. Duhm, J. Zhao, S. T. Lee and J. Jie, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10283–10293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Giovannitti, C. B. Nielsen, D. T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay and I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yao, R. Chen, J. Li, J. Han, W. Qin, H. Wang, J. Shi, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13664–13672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Q. Cao, H. Bi, C. Liang, K. Yuan, W. She, Y. Yang and R. Che, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 486–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, R. Long, D. Liu, D. Yang, C. Wang and Y. Xiong, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
B. Munirathinam, H. Pydimukkala, N. Ramaswamy and L. Neelakantan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 355, 1245–1253 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lekphet, T. C. Ke, C. Su, S. Kathirvel, P. Sireesha, S. B. Akula and W. R. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 382, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Çakıroğlu and M. Özacar, Electroanalysis, 2020, 32, 166–177 CrossRef .
X. He, J. E. Yoo, M. H. Lee and J. Bae, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 245402 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Han, M. Luo, L. Chen, H. Pan, J. Chen and C. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 2541–2549 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liu, K. Yin, L. Mi, M. Ma, Y. Liu, Y. Li, W. Wei, Y. Zhang and S. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2017, 973, 82–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rossetti, S. Nakahara and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gill, M. Zayats and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7602–7625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. F. Ruan, Z. Y. Ma, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 294–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Xin and Z. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 10491–10497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, P. Li, K. Chang, H. Liu, X. Hai, H. Zhang and J. Ye, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8235–8238 RSC .
G. L. Wang, J. X. Shu, Y. M. Dong, X. M. Wu, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 2892–2900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Çakıroğlu and M. Özacar, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 119, 34–41 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen and L. W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal and P. V. Kamat, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1995, 29, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ranjit and B. Viswanathan, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Qu, T. Zeid and X. Duan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6732 RSC .
Y. P. Yuan, L. W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934 RSC .
J. Q. Liu, L. L. Ruan, S. B. Adeloju and Y. C. Wu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 1706 RSC .
D. Chen, G. Xie, X. Cai, M. Liu, Y. Cao and S. J. Su, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Li, Y. Xue, H. Fang and W. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 191, 619–624 CrossRef CAS .
B. Çakıroğlu, Y. C. Demirci, E. Gökgöz and M. Özacar, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 282, 282–289 CrossRef .
L. Ge, Y. Xu, L. Ding, F. You, Q. Liu and K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 124–125, 33–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, S. Shan, Z. Y. Ma, L. N. Wan, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 11686–11690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, T. Ye, F. Dai, J. Yang, J. Shen, Q. He, W. Chen, N. Liang, J. Zai and X. Qian, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1218–1225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Yaw, Q. Ruan, J. Tang, A. K. Soh and M. N. Chong, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 364, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Naderi, S. Hajati, M. Ghaedi and J. P. Espinos, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 297, 126774 CrossRef .
X. Li, L. Zhu, Y. Zhou, H. Yin and S. Ai, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 2369–2376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Liu, X. Liu, X. H. Huo, Y. Tang, J. Xu and H. Ju, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27185–27192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
K. Głowacka, J. Kromdijk, K. Kucera, J. Xie, A. P. Cavanagh, L. Leonelli, A. D. B. Leakey, D. R. Ort, K. K. Niyogi and S. P. Long, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 868 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kothe, N. Plumeré, A. Badura, M. M. Nowaczyk, D. A. Guschin, M. Rögner and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 14233–14236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, Z. Wang, G. Wang, T. R. Gengenbach, D. T. McCarthy, A. Deletic, J. Yu and X. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iwase, S. Yoshino, T. Takayama, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10260–10264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yuan, D. Liu, N. Zhang, W. Ye, H. Ju, L. Shi, R. Long, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4206–4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Gao, Y. Zhou, F. Fan, Q. Han, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao, C. Li and Z. Zou, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5547–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lv, K. Zhang, Y. Zeng and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 7086–7093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Léonard and J. Tersoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 4693 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jia, X. Li, N. Xin, Y. Gong, J. Guan, L. Meng, S. Meng and X. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600431 CrossRef .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, G. Ezhilarasu, I. Chatzakis, R. Dhall, C. C. Chen and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3977–3982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Ma, W. Yang, F. Wang, X. Yin and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12071–12079 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. DuChene, G. Tagliabue, A. J. Welch, W. H. Cheng and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2545–2550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, W. Xu, Y. Jiang, G. Pan, D. Zhou, J. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Chen, D. Lia and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16357–16364 RSC .
Y. Tang, W. Di, X. Zhai, R. Yang and W. Qin, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bloembergen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1959, 2, 84–85 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, J. Shu and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 1021–1028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, R. Zhang, N. Sun, X. Li, J. Wang, Y. Cao and R. Pei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25834–25839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, L. Zhang, R. Zeng, L. Su and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9568–9575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Lv and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 10049–10055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Y. Lin, K. Zhang, M. Li and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 101, 146–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, Z. Yu, R. Ren and D. Tang, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 632–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, L. He, Y. Hu, X. Lu, G. Li, B. Liu, B. Ren, Y. Tong and P. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11462–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, D. Baillargeat, H. Ho and K. Yong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3426–3452 RSC .
J. He, J. Li, J. Xia, L. Tian, B. Jin, S. Zhou, M. Sun and X. Meng, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1801418 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Y. Hou, W. Xie, S. Schlücker, F. Yan and D. Y. Lei, Small, 2018, 14, 1800870 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, D. Thompson, U. Schmidt, D. Graham and G. Leggett, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 5292–5294 RSC .
N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2679–2696 RSC .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Luo, L. Su and D. Tang, Analyst, 2019, 144, 5717–5723 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. M. Shi, Y. T. Xu, G. C. Fan, X. D. Yu, Y. Y. Liang and W. W. Zhao, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 134, 103–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, C. Y. Tian, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 895–897 RSC .
Z. Qiu, J. Shu and D. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7199–7202 RSC .
R. Li, R. Yan, J. Bao, W. Tu and Z. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11799–11802 RSC .
J. Shu, Z. Qiu, S. Lv, K. Zhang and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2425–2429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhuang, W. Lai, M. Xu, Q. Zhou and D. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8330–8338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tu, H. Cao, L. Zhang, J. Bao, X. Liu and Z. Dai, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 10459–10465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, L. Kong, X. Sun, J. Feng, Z. Chen, D. Fan and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 117, 340–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, R. Wang, B. Xing, T. Zhang, M. S. Khan, D. Wu and Q. Wei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 99, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhuang, W. Lai, M. Xu, Q. Zhou and D. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8330–8338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Cho, C. O. Aspetti, M. E. Turk, J. M. Kikkawa, S. W. Nam and R. Agarwal, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 669–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haridas and J. K. Basu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 415202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Antosiewicz, S. P. Apell and T. Shegai, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 454–463 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fedutik, V. Temnov, U. Woggon, E. Ustinovich and M. Artemyev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14939–14945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, G. W. Bryant, W. Zhang, T. Skeini, J. Lee, N. A. Kotov, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 984–994 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yoshida and N. Kometani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2867 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bajorowicz, M. P. Kobylański, A. Gołąbiewska, J. Nadolna, A. Zaleska-Medynska and A. Malankowska, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 256, 352–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Du, M. Artemyev, J. Wang and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2464–2489 RSC .
Y. X. Dong, J. T. Cao, B. Wang, S. H. Ma and Y. M. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10840–10848 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, P. Yu, N. Zhang, G. X. Ren, S. Zheng, W. Huang, X. Long, H. Li and X. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1404–1412 RSC .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, I. R. Kochetkov, P. Hartmann and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9795–9798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Ma, F. Xu, Y. Qin, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 4183–4187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Çakıroğlu and M. Özacar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, B728–B734 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, Y. F. Ruan, L. B. Zhang, W. W. Zhao, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2341–2347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Tiwari, V. Vij, K. C. Kemp and K. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 46–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Riedel, N. Sabir, F. W. Scheller, W. J. Parak and F. Lisdat, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2814–2823 RSC .
S. Ge, W. Li, M. Yan, X. Song and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2426–2432 RSC .
Q. Shen, L. Han, G. Fan, J. R. Zhang, L. Jiang and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 4949–4956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Tu and Z. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22289–22297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Zhao, Y. M. Han, Y. C. Zhu, N. Zhang, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 5496–5499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Q. Zhou, D. Tang, R. Niessner and D. Knopp, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89(10), 5637–5645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Guo, M. Liu and S. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2846–2857 RSC .
Y. Zang, J. Fan, Y. Ju, H. Xue and H. Pang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 14010–14027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Devadoss, P. Sudhagar, C. Terashima, K. Nakata and A. Fujishima, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 24, 43–63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Q. Zhou and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 11803–11810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shu, Z. Qiu, Z. Lin, G. Cai, H. Yang and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 12539–12546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Wang, K. L. Liu, J. X. Shu, T. T. Gu, X. M. Wu, Y. M. Dong and Z. J. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 69, 106–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, S. Zhou, Q. Shen, L. P. Jiang and J. J. Zhu, Analyst, 2012, 137, 3697–3703 RSC .
M. Kaya and M. Volkan, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 7729–7735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Liu, G. C. Fan, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1027, 33–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Zheng, W. B. Liang, C. Y. Xiong, Y. Zhuo, Y. Q. Chai and R. Yuan, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 9445–9451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Dong, J. T. Cao, B. Wang, S. H. Ma and Y. M. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3723–3731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hao, Y. Zhang, H. Zhong, Z. Zhou, R. Hua, J. Qian, Q. Liu, H. Li and K. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 10133–10136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qiu, J. Shu, J. Liu and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 1260–1268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Zheng, W. B. Liang, C. Y. Xiong, Y. Zhuo, Y. Q. Chai and R. Yuan, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 9445–9451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, H. Zhou and B. Qu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 2737–2741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Golub, A. Niazov, R. Freeman, M. Zatsepin and I. Willner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13827–13834 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz, A. F. Bückmann and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10752–10753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou and S. Dong, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 1232–1243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Meredith and S. D. Minteer, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 5436–5441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Zhou and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 10345–10349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, Y. Yang, O. K. Okoth, L. Cheng and J. Zhang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 6140–6144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Liu, C. Hu and S. Hu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 9368–9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Ge, M. Li, M. Yan, S. Ge, J. Yu, X. Song and B. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1417–1419 RSC .
Z. Yu, Y. Tang, G. Cai, R. Ren and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 1222–1226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, G. Cai, P. Tong and D. Tang, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2272–2276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zeng, Z. Luo, L. Zhang and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 12299–12306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Zheng, W. B. Liang, C. Y. Xiong, Y. L. Yuan, Y. Q. Chai and R. Yuan, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 8698–8705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, J. Zheng, X. Su, J. Wang, W. Wu and S. Hu, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 10612–10619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shu, Z. Qiu, Q. Zhou, Y. Lin, M. Lu and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 2958–2966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Song, C. Hu and K. Wu, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9366–9373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Zhenli Qiu
	Zhenli Qiu received her PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Dianping Tang from Fuzhou University in 2019. Currently, she works at Minjiang University as a lecturer and her research focuses on the synthesis of advanced photoactive materials for their application in PEC aptasensors.

Dianping Tang
	Dianping Tang received his PhD from Southwest University of China in 2008. He received the Alexander von Humboldt Fellowship in 2008 and worked at the Technische Universit at Munchen, Germany, from 2008 to 2009. Currently, he is Full Professor of Analytical Chemistry at Fuzhou University. Importantly, he was selected amongst the 100 Most Influential People in Analyti-People in the Analytical Scientist in 2013. His research interests mainly include the design and application of nanotechnology for tumor marker immunoassays, food safety analysis, and environmental monitoring. To date, more than 200 publications under his authorship have appeared in reviewed international scientific journals.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of nanostructure-based PEC sensing platforms for biomedical applications in various photoactive materials, sensing mechanism and detection mode. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, American Chemical Society, Royal Society of Chemistry, and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Weinheim.20,30,31,33–38,40–47	 

 	Fig. 1  Diagram of PEC sensing with the traditional three electrode system and the photocurrent generation mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Branched TiO2 nanorods for PEC water splitting devices. (a) Schematic description and corresponding SEM images of (b and e) TiO2 nanoparticles, (c and f) nanorods, and (d and g) branched nanorods, (b–d) cross-sectional view and (e–g) top view. Adapted from ref. 69 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of PbS QDs for PEC sensing. (a) Working mechanism for the PEC detection of DNA and thrombin based on G-quadruplex/hemin-conjugated PbS QDs; (b) HRTEM image of PbS QDs; (c) the photocurrent generation mechanism of PbS QDs. Adapted from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The TiO2/Au NPs/g-C3N4/MnO2-based PEC biosensor. (a) PEC biosensor fabrication. (b) PEC biosensing mechanism for glucose and lactose. Adapted from ref. 90 with permission from Elsevier. (B) The BiFeO3/g-C3N4 p–n heterojunction-based PEC ampicillin aptasensor. (a) The preparation process of the BiFeO3/g-C3N4 heterojunction. (b) Schematic diagram of the PEC aptasensor based on BiFeO3/g-C3N4 heterojunctions for ampicillin detection. Adapted from ref. 91 with permission from Elsevier. (C) The BiOI nanoflakes/TiO2-based PEC enzymatic analysis. (a) Schematic diagram of the enzymatic PEC sensing principle based on the BiOI NFs/TiO2 NP photoelectrode. (b) Schematic representation of the charge transfer process at the BiOI nanoflakes/TiO2 p–n junction under visible light. Adapted from ref. 92 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation of the enhanced PEC biosensor for PKA activity detection based on TiO2/g-C3N4 heterojunctions. (B) The PEC aptasensing based on the TiO2–BiVO4 heterostructure. (a) Synthesis procedure of the TiO2–BiVO4 heterostructure and (b) schematic diagram of the PEC aptasensor mechanism Adapted from ref. 96 and 97 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of electron–hole separation on (A) the conventional Z-scheme system and (B) all-solid-state Z-scheme heterojunctions under light irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) The photogenerated electron transfer between BiVO4 and CdS QD in the Z-scheme heterojunctions. (B) Schematic illustration of the photoelectrochemical sensing platform based on the Z-scheme heterojunction. Adapted from ref.108 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic illustration of the Schottky barrier. Adapted from ref. 111 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) 3D branched TiO2 NR architectures for PEC water splitting. (a) The fabrication process for Au–TiO2 NR architectures. (b) SEM, (c) higher-resolution SEM, (d) TEM and (e) HRTEM image of the Au NP-3D TiO2 NR architecture. Adapted from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society. (C) The PEC CO2 reduction with plasmonic Au/pGaN photocathodes. (a) Schematic illustration for the PEC studies of Au/p-GaN Schottky junctions. Electron transfer diagram of a plasmonic metal in physical contact with (b) a TiO2 n-type semiconductor and (c) a p-GaN p-type semiconductor. Adapted from ref. 117 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) NaYF4:Yb,Tm@TiO2 upconversion microrod-based PEC aptasensing platform. (a) Schematic illustration of the target-triggered RCA reaction. (b) Schematic diagram of energy transfer among NaYF4:Yb,Tm and TiO2 under near-IR irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 121 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the PEC biosensor for MCF-7 cell detection based on NaYF4:Yb,Er/TiO2/CdTe. Reprinted from ref. 122 with permission from American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic representation of core–core–shell UCNP@Au@CdS-based PEC immunoassay for AFP detection. (a) Immunoreaction process of AFP detection. (b) Energy transfer principle of core–core–shell UCNP@Au@CdS with H2O2 under near-IR irradiation. Reprinted from ref. 123 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Three major mechanisms of plasmonic energy transfer from a metal to a semiconductor: (a) Light scattering; (b) PIRET; (c) hot electron injection; (d) evolution of the plasmon light excitation. (B) The mechanism of the plasmonic-enhanced Au–TiO2 hybrid system. (C) Schematic illustration of the plasmonic PEC aptasensor. (D) Schematic illustration of the LSPR-enhanced PEC sensing strategy for MCF-7 cell detection. Reprinted from ref. 134 and 138–140 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) PEC biosensor based on plasmonic enhancement coupled with defect-engineered TiO2−x and the plasmonic photosensitization effect. Reprinted from ref. 141 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Mechanism of CdS:Mn/g-C3N4 nanohybrids for the PEC immunosensing system based on the steric-hindrance effect. Reprinted from ref. 40 with permission from Elsevier. (B) Illumination of DNAzyme-catalyzed precipitation amplification for the PEC sensing platform for determination of polynucleotide kinase activity (PKA). (a) Charge transfer mechanism of the AuNP/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. (b) Schematic illustration of PKA-induced enzymatic biocatalytic precipitation PEC technique based on the AuNP/g-C3N4 nanohybrid. Reprinted from ref. 146 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic mechanism of the exciton–plasmon interactions between CdS QDs and Ag for PEC biosensing application. (B) Charge transfer process of exciton–plasmon interactions between the CdS@g-C3N4 heterojunction and Au@Ag nanoparticles for PEC bioanalysis of microRNA. Reprinted from ref. 41 and 155 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the PEC biosensing platform through in situ propagation of CdS QDs on graphene oxide using an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. (B) Diagram of the in situ growth of Ag deposition on Au NPs for PEC microRNA bioassay. Reprinted from ref. 42 and 158 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the PEC bioanalysis platform for H2O2 detection released from cells based on an electron acceptor. (B) PEC immunoassay using poly[G] for the detection of HIV-1 p24 antigen. (C) Energy-level diagram of PEC immunoassay based on enediol-ligand-encapsulated liposomes. Reprinted from ref. 43, 165 and 166 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Photo-generated electron transfer process of the photocathode-based PEC immunoassay. Reprinted from ref. 44 with permission from American Chemical Society. (B) Mechanism of cathode PEC immunoassay based on TiO2 photoanode-enhanced 3D Cu2O nanowires. Reprinted from ref. 176 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Ratiometric PEC paper analytical device. (a) Schematic illustration of the donor/acceptor-induced ratiometric PEC strategy for microRNA detection. (b) Schematic diagram and photograph of hollow double-hydrophilic-wall channel paper PEC device. (B) Self-reference PEC aptasensor for AFB1 detection. (C) Spatially resolved ratiometric PEC aptasensor. (a and b) Photograph and diagram of the ratiometric PEC detection device for CEA detection. Reprinted from ref. 45, 179 and 180 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) PEC DNA sensing based on CHA amplification and FeTMPyP-mediated chemiluminescence. (B) Self-powered PEC sensor based on a photofuel cell. Reprinted from ref. 46 and 188 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) PEC device based on an integrated paper supercapacitor and internal light source. (a) Schematic illustration of the portable PEC mechanism for the determination of ATP with microfluidic paper and a digital multimeter. (b) Schematic diagram for the shape, size, and composition of the paper device. (c–f) Actual operation and PEC assay procedures of this disposable microfluidic PEC origami device. (B) The portable and light-addressable PEC sensor for screening of thrombin inhibitor drugs. (a) Schematic diagram for the high-throughput detection of thrombin (upper four areas) and screening of thrombin inhibitors (lower four areas) with a portable pH meter. Photos of the detection mode of the light-addressable PEC sensor with (b) light off and (c) light on. Reprinted from ref. 47 and 197 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
