Material or fuel: comparative cradle-to-grave climate and material footprint analysis for the use of methanol from recycled CO 2   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0GC02946G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0GC02946G
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2020, 22, 8423-8443Material or fuel: comparative cradle-to-grave climate and material footprint analysis for the use of methanol from recycled CO2†

        
          
            Sebastian 
            Turnau
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Caroline Sophie 
            Mignot
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Clemens 
            Mostert
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Stefan 
            Bringezu
          
        
      
University of Kassel, Center for Environmental Systems Research (CESR), Sustainable Resource Futures Group (SURF), 34117 Kassel, Germany. E-mail: sebastian.turnau@uni-kassel.de
Received 
      28th August 2020
    , Accepted 3rd November 2020First published on 3rd November 2020AbstractThe European Commission as well as the German government favor an energetic use of methanol from CO2 recycling with their legislation and funding mechanisms. This study uses the product climate footprint and the product material footprint to assess the complete life cycle of fossil-based polypropylene, polyoxymethylene, heavy fuel oil, petrol and diesel compared to a functional equivalent product manufactured with methanol from recycled CO2. Assuming that renewable electricity from wind power feeds the electrolysis for the hydrogen production, the results confirm that the use of recycled CO2 reduces the climate footprint, but increases the material footprint as a trade-off. The substitution of polyoxymethylene provides the highest climate footprint reduction closely followed by the substitution of petrol, followed by polypropylene, heavy fuel oil and diesel. Solely for polyoxymethylene, petrol and heavy fuel oil the greenhouse gas emission savings are relatively higher than the additional material demand. Material recycling and energy substitution from plastics waste incineration provide a benefit to the footprints that is by a factor of three higher than for the substitution of fossil-based polymers alone. The analysis until 2050 reveals that the additional material demand is reduced due to the defossilization of the German electricity grid.
1. Introduction
In Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 13, introduced in the Agenda 2030, the United Nations appeal to the world to “take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts” [ref. 1, p. 14]. The emission of greenhouse gases (GHG) is the dominant cause for the climatic changes.2 The GHG emissions in Germany are dominated by carbon dioxide (CO2), which accounts for the largest part of the anthropogenic greenhouse effect.3 Measures to address climate change by reducing the greenhouse effect are diverse, including an efficient use of resources, using less carbon-intense polymers and fuels and replacing them by renewable energy sources.4 Carbon capture and storage or utilization is an umbrella term for technological routes that capture CO2. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a technology, where CO2 is captured and stored for example in geological formations, but does not reduce the virgin fossil carbon extracted.5,6
Instead of solely storing captured CO2, it may also be recycled and further used. Carbon capture and utilization (CCU) represents a recycling of CO2, where the recovered carbon is used as raw material for carbon-based products such as polymers or synthetic fuels. CCU allows to retain carbon in a material loop and to avoid the extraction of fossil fuels.7 Hereby no carbon sink is created, but the use of respective products can theoretically become carbon neutral.8 Therefore CCU may help to progress in achieving the safe operating space described by the planetary boundaries concept9 and the additional social just space described by the “doughnut” economy concept10 by providing a more sustainable way of production and consumption.
The International Council of Chemical Associations and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development advise their member companies to assess the potential to avoid GHG emissions based on a life cycle perspective. They highlight strategies for the reporting of avoided GHG emissions to all value chain partners or to individual partners such as the user of a specific technology.11 Recent analysis results show a technical potential to reduce annual GHG emissions in 2030 by 3.5 Gt CO2 eq., by considering CCU processes to substitute 20 chemical production routes representing the global chemical industry.12
The concept of CCU supports the European Commission's (EC) approach towards a circular economy13 as well as the targets defined under the European strategy for plastics.14 Clark et al. stated in their considerations for a circular economy that chemistry will be the basis of innovative products, made from renewable feedstocks, such as CO2, and designed to be reused or recycled.15 Additionally to SDG 13, CCU may “substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse” named by SDG 12.5 and may lead to a more “responsible production and consumption” as generally described in SDG 12. CCU may help to decouple fossil carbon input from economic growth and contribute “global resource efficiency in consumption and production” (SDG 8.4). The technology may allow to “upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and industrial processes” as described in SDG 9.4.16,17 Kaiser and Bringezu analyzed the material flows within the German chemical and polymer industry and showed that the rate of truly reused carbon within the chemical industry is currently below 1%.18 There seems to be a good reason for the chemical industry to use carbon-recycling technologies to increase secondary input rates for carbon, to implement a more circular economy as well as to improve sustainability of production to support the SDGs. CCU may help to supply carbon if secondary recycling, such as material recycling without polymer decomposition, and tertiary recycling, such as chemical recycling, are not able to close the carbon cycle.19
Methanol from recycled CO2 as a relevant base chemical for the chemical industry can be used in many ways to substitute fossil fuels or materials.20–31 Several environmental and economic assessments of methanol from CCU exist.32–42 Demonstration plants for the direct synthesis of methanol by hydrogenation of CO2 and H2 are in operation in Iceland43,44 and Japan.44 The facility in Iceland has reached a technical readiness level of 8.27,45,46 Other pilot scale production facilities for CO2 based production exist as well5,45,46 or are mature for using coal-based methanol, that can be substituted with methanol from CO2.47 The increase of raw material input for the production of methanol from CO2 due to the high material demand of renewable energy infrastructure is already identified as a trade-off on a cradle-to-gate basis.37,48 This trade-off may affect material efficiency49 and sustainable resource use negatively.50
Cradle-to-gate assessments are the current paradigm in life cycle assessment (LCA) on CCU technologies. They may represent sufficient information for the substitution of the production for single products with identical end of life (EoL) phases. The EoL phase matters if polymer materials are compared to fuels to answer the question whether CCU provides higher relative GHG reduction in the transport or in the industry sector. Material recycling51,52 and incineration in the EoL phase53–56 of polymer materials influences the lifecycle wide GHG emissions when recycled CO2 is used, but not in the EoL phase of fuels.
The “Renewable Energy Sources Act” in Germany subsidizes the use of base chemicals from CO2 recycling for fuel use,57 but not for materials. The topic is also intensely discussed by the EC,8,46 but data gaps remain and harmonized assessments are missing.58 Ausfelder and Dura analyzed the accountability of CCU under the EC's emission trading system (EU ETS) and the effort sharing decision and describe the use of CO2 in the chemical industry as a “nonregulated area” if compared to road transportation, aviation or combustion fuels and long term storage from mineralization.59 The EC subsidizes the demonstration of innovative low-carbon technologies with the innovation fund60,61 and additionally subsidies for fuels from renewable energy are in discussion under the Renewable Energy Directive (RED II).61,62 This imbalance may lead to a disadvantage for materials and could bring fuels in the focus of research. In contrast to the scope of the funding and research focus of CCU, the energetic use of carbon may not be preferable compared to material use, as already identified on a cradle-to-gate basis for CO2 based synthetic natural gas.48
This study compares different technology options to substitute fossil-based products, such as polymers for material use and fuels for energetic use, with products based on methanol produced from recycled CO2. The potential to reduce GHG emissions and the change in material demand is assessed based on the life cycle wide product climate and material footprint. Fig. 1 illustrates the principle for the substitution of fossil-based products with products from recycled CO2.
 Fig. 1  Principle for the substitution of fossil-based products from captured and recycled CO2 on a lifecycle wide basis. 
The analysis follows the general LCA standards,63,64 the ILCD Handbook65 and the CCU specific guidelines,58,66 but focuses on a few relevant indicators to reduce the amount of information for decision-making. LCA is a recommended and useful tool to analyze environmental impacts of CCU systems and products.21
This study provides in addition to most of the mentioned cradle-to-gate LCAs on CCU32–34,40,42 a single process model covering the complete life cycle of the studied products considering different EoL phases. The goal and scope of the analysis are addressed by the following three research questions:
(1) What is the change in product climate and material footprint for the substitution of fossil-based fuels and materials with products based on methanol from recycled CO2?
(2) Are there trade-offs when the relative change in the product climate and material footprint is normalized against German reference values?
(3) How does the defossilization of the electricity grid mix in Germany affect the product climate and material footprint of polypropylene (PP) and fuels from CO2 recycling in 2020, 2030 and 2050 considering material recycling and waste incineration in the EoL phase of PP?
Section 2 explains the process model (2.1.) as a foundation for the analysis. Furthermore, the considerations for handling uncertainties (2.2.) and the climate and material footprint as indicators for the assessment (2.3.) are described. Section 3 shows the change in climate and material footprint as results due to the substitution of fossil products with CCU products based on the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2 (3.1.) as well as a normalization of the results to German reference values (3.2.). In addition, an analysis for PP (3.3.) compares CCU and material recycling as two different options to produce PP and analyzes the effect of the EoL phase of PP compared to CCU fuels. Section 4 discusses the results, section 5 concludes the findings of the analysis and section 6 provides a brief outlook.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Process model
This life cycle wide footprint analysis assesses different technology options to produce methanol from recycled CO2 for the energetic use in the transport sector and for the material use as polymers in the chemical industry. The re-use of polymers is modeled as a closed loop system64 considering a cascading re-use.67 Renewable methanol substitutes conventional heavy fuel oil (HFO) as marine fuel68 in currently developed vessel engines69 or by retrofitting older engines with methanol dual fuel engines.70 Petrol is substituted as a fuel for short-range transportation as a blend or could be fully substituted by using onboard methanol reformer fuel cell vehicles.71,72 Direct methanol use in cars is assumed without considering additional processing to synthetic petrol.73 The methanol based fuel dimethoxymethane (OME1) substitutes up to 35 vol% of conventional diesel as a fuel for long-range transportation as a blend35 if dedicated engines are used.74 Carbon based liquid energy carriers with high energy density for the transportation sector are considered relevant until 2050.75 The energetic losses from using carbon-based fuels in marine or road transportation for the use of HFO, petrol, and diesel and respective substitutes based on methanol from CO2 are assumed to be equivalent when the fuel is used in turbines as marine engines76 or combustion engines for road transportation.77 Renewable methanol based PP and polyoxymethylene (POM) substitute their conventional counterparts.37 The modeled process stages for the analyzed polymers are comparable to the key value chain stages for plastics described by UNEP78 and the closed loop supply chain as described in Kleinekorte et al.79 Direct use of renewable electricity (REN-electricity) as fuel for battery electric vehicles to substitute conventional petrol is considered as an additional reference in section 3.1. Helms et al. show the complexity to compare the use of REN-electricity with fossil based fuels in vehicles.80 The reference in this study is calculated with an overall energetic efficiency for passenger cars of 67%77 for electrical cars and 27%77 for cars with combustion engines.
For assessing the potential to reduce the climate and material footprint by using products from recycled CO2 the functional unit (FU) is defined as 1 kg conventional product of HFO, petrol, diesel, POM granulate, and PP granulate. For the identification of the technology option with the highest climate footprint reduction, the FU is set to 100 kt methanol produced from recycled CO2, as an input for the production of CO2 based products, based on an equal amount of 137 kt captured CO2 and 1.03 TWhel of REN-electricity from wind power for the electrolysis. The FU of 100 kt of methanol represents 10% of the annual German production of conventional methanol27 and was chosen to show the results in a relevant magnitude for industrial application. In 2018 demonstration plants had an annual production capacity of 0.1 kt to 15 kt of methanol from CO2.27 The polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis (PEMEL), assumed as the key technology for the analysis, has reached commercial availability (TRL 7–8) and production capacity can be scaled up by adding electrolyzer stacks.81 It is considered to be the most suitable electrolysis technology in 2030 due to an expected cost advantage and higher flexibility over other electrolysis technologies.82 The amount of 100 kt of methanol from CO2 substitutes 51 kt HFO, 46 kt petrol or 40 kt diesel based on the lower heating values of the fuels83–86 as well as 97 kt conventional POM or 39 kt conventional PP based on the mass of the materials37 as explained in the ESI (S1).†

Fig. 2 illustrates the analyzed process model. The ESI (S2–S4)† describe all considered sub-systems in detail. The results of the life cycle inventory (LCI) are presented as a table in the ESI (S5).†
 Fig. 2  Process model of the different technological options for the comparative footprint analysis. Use and End-of-Life (EoL) phase are similar for plastic products from PP and POM granulate. Initial CO2 sources as well as production of catalysts and additives are not included in the process model. (“HFO” – heavy fuel oil; “OME1” – dimethoxymethane; “PP” – polypropylene; “POM” – polyoxymethylene; “MeOH” – methanol; “Re-granulate” – plastic granulate from material recycling; “REN-electricity” – renewable electricity; “WIP” – waste incineration plant; “MRF” – material recovery facility; “PRF” – plastics recycling facility.) 
The analyzed system is located in Germany. The facilities for carbon capture and the following production routes for fuels and polymers are assumed to be located in an industrial cluster, meaning that distances are short and synergies are harnessed. This includes for example the optional use of waste heat. Transport of products is considered for the use and the EoL phase of polymers with a distance of 900 km based on Dehoust and Christiani87 as described in ESI (S2).† The considered recycling system is based on German recovery rates for plastics in 2017. The focal period of the study is 2020, including future grid mixes for 2030 and 2050 as well as an ideal, defossilized status. The model uses ecoinvent background data for the supply of electricity and heat. The German grid mix for 2020, 2030 and 2050 used for the analysis in section 3.3. is based on a scenario defined by Pfluger et al.88 The defossilized status is based on an ideal 100% renewable grid mix based on the renewables composition stated in Henning and Palzer.89 In the defossilized state heat is provided from electrode vessels with a 99% efficiency90 and transportation is neglected under the assumption of carbon neutral transportation. The grid mixes are illustrated in ESI (S8).†
The processes are modelled using the LCA software openLCA version 1.991 and ecoinvent database version 3.1 cut-off system model.92 Complementary data is taken from GaBi database.93 The ecoinvent data is used to model conventional fuel production.92 For the conventional production of POM a process for ecoinvent has been modelled using data from GaBi database93 and PlasticsEurope.94 Propylene production is based on ecoinvent.92 PP granulate production from propylene via gas phase cascading polymerization is modeled as an individual process.95 Injection molding is assumed to be the industrial process for the use phase of POM and PP granulate96 as it is a representative process for processing of plastic.97 Injection molding is considered with a rate of material loss from production to post-industrial waste of 8.7%.97 The material recovery facility (MRF) has a separation efficiency of 39.2%.97 MRF and plastic recycling facility (PRF) process data is provided for polyethylene terephthalat (PET) recycling,98 but due to the similarity in mechanical recycling machinery it is assumed that it is representative for POM and PP as well, which is confirmed by Gu et al.51 A recycling cascade for polymers consist of injection molding, product use, MRF and PRF for the respective amount of plastic. A description for the derivation of the recycling system is provided in ESI (S3).† CO2 from a WIP and CO2 capture from a cement factory99 represent the industrial point sources for CO2, where amine scrubbing (MEA)100 can be used due to the higher concentration of CO2 in the off gases. MEA in the WIP is calculated with burden free waste heat.37 CO2 from the atmosphere is adsorbed using direct air capture (DAC) technology.101,102 Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis103 and hydrogenation of CO2 using direct methanol synthesis104 from CO2 and hydrogen are assumed using electricity from wind power based on the ecoinvent process “electricity production, wind, <1 MW turbine, onshore”92 for the electrolysis. OME1 is produced via methanol and formaldehyde from methanol.35 Production of POM is based on the described conventional process, but natural gas as carbon feedstock is replaced with methanol from CO2. Based on own calculations, methanol only provides the amount of carbon molecules required to form POM as shown in ESI (S2).† The Methanol-to-Olefins (MTO) process is considered for the production of propylene from methanol.105 Polymerization of CO2 based propylene to PP-granulate is considered equivalent to the conventional production.95 The use and EoL phase are equivalent to the conventional plastics life cycle. The amount of final CO2 emissions from burning fuel as the CO2 emission of burning polymers in a WIP is based on emission factors from own calculation or the German Environmental Agency.85 For methanol and OME1 the emissions are calculated based on the carbon content that will turn to CO2. Burning of HFO is calculated using the ecoinvent process “heavy fuel oil, burned in refinery furnace, cut-off, U” from92 as it is assumed to be comparable to an incineration of HFO in a large marine engine. The emission factors are listed in ESI (S4)† including a literature reference value for HFO as a comparison. Data for the WIP is taken from Cutec institute106 and Rudolph et al.98 Construction of the chemical plants is not considered as the impacts are assumed to be neglible over the lifetime.37 The CO2 input for the methanol synthesis is considered to be a burden free waste stream. No burdens for the production of HFO, petrol or diesel are allocated to co-products from refinery. O2 production from electrolysis is neglected based on the low demand,34 The oxygen may be released to the air or sold and used for industrial applications and medical purposes.107 However, if sold on a respective market the oxygen would need to be considered as by-product. Polymers generated from material recycling (MR) are considered burden free as defined by the cut-off approach. This assumption is considered reasonable as the amount of re-use cycles for polymers is limited, therefore incineration of polymers is an inevitable consequence of material extraction.108
Recycling processes generate re-granulate that replaces virgin plastic granulate. Plastics can be recycled six to seven times till quality problems arise.109 In the process model, three additional use phases or cascades are assumed as a conservative estimate. In total, the system generates 1.48 kg of usable plastic material (1 kg of virgin polymer granulate and 0.48 kg of provided re-granulate) based on material and energy recovery rates for plastic waste in Germany in 2017.97 Functional equivalence is assumed for the re-granulate.110 All cascades and the final thermal treatment of the polymer are considered as a closed loop system.64,111 This represents a common approach in LCA on solid waste management.112
The approach and assumptions to answer the third research question, how the defossilization of the electricity grid mix in Germany and additional benefits of polymers in the EoL phase (energy production and MR), affect the climate and material footprints of PP, is explained in the following. PP is a commodity polymer with a share of 17% in the German polymer market in 2017.97 CCU and MR are competing technologies to recycle carbon. Substituting fossil carbon for polymer and fuel production by methanol from recycled CO2 are competing options across the industry and the transportation sector.
First, the footprints of conventional PP (Conv. PP), PP from recycled CO2 (CCU-PP) and PP from MR (MR-PP), produced solely from recycling material, are compared for the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in a defossilized state. The FU is 1 kg of PP. The ESI (S8)† show the assumed development of the German grid mix.
Second, the EoL phase of Conv. PP and CCU PP is analyzed to quantify the additional benefits of MR and energy production by burning plastic in a WIP compared to fuels. Substitution by system expansion is applied as methodical approach.111 The first substitution by system expansion considers MR (0.48 kg of PP re-granulate to substitute the same amount of virgin PP granulate) as an additional benefit. The second substitution by system expansion considers the energy generated from polymer incineration (2.044 kW hth and 2.428 kW hel per kg of incinerated PP compared to generate the same amount of energy in the German mix) as an additional benefit. The details are provided in ESI (S9).†
Third, an overall balance is presented to compare the material use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2 to the energetic use. The substitution of HFO, petrol and diesel are compared to the substitution of PP for the grid mix scenarios. In the overall balance the additional benefits from the EoL phase of PP from recycled CO2 are added to the climate and material footprint of the compared fuels as suggested in Klöpffer and Grahl.111
For the comparison of fuels to PP the substitution of conventional diesel with Fischer–Tropsch diesel (FT) from CO2 is added to the comparison as described in113,114 and according to the process model. The process requires 0.43 kW hel to produce synthetic diesel with a lower heating value of 1 MJ.113 The electrical energy is provided from wind power equivalent to the electrolysis. The synthetic diesel is assumed to be functionally equivalent to conventional diesel. CO2 is supplied according to the process model from a cement plant.
2.2. Assumptions and uncertainty
The methodology of LCA requires the disclosure of assumptions and considered uncertainties for transparency purpose.63,64 An overview of the key assumptions for the analysis with relation to products, processes and the scenario based analysis in section 3.3. is provided in Table 1.
Table 1 List of key assumptions for the analysis




Assumption
Category




The selectivity for the methanol synthesis is set to one.
Process


The quality factor for the polymer recycling is set to one.
Process


The electricity supply for the electrolysis is based on 1 MW onshore wind power plant.
Process


The adaption of performance from low to high TRL is not done.
Process


The lower heating values of the fuels and polymers are constant.
Product


The methanol from CO2 substitutes HFO and petrol based on the heating value.
Product


The technology to produce conventional fuels and polymers is not changed.
Scenario


The German electricity and heat grid changes in 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state as described in the ESI (S8)†
Scenario


In the defossilized state, no direct use of fossil energy carriers is assumed in Germany. Manufacturing of the renewable power plants is not considered completely carbon free due to material use, e.g. subject related emissions from cement, and use of fossil fuel use during the production phase, e.g. in international supply chains.
Scenario


The EoL phase of PP is a multi-output system that generates secondary PP granulate as well as electrical and thermal energy from incineration.
Scenario


Secondary-granulate from MR of PP substitutes virgin PP produced from naphtha as well as virgin PP produced from CCU using the “system expansion” approach as described in the ESI (S9)†
Scenario


Electrical energy from waste incineration substitutes the respective electricity and thermal energy from waste incineration substitutes respective heat provided by the grid using the “system expansion” approach described in the ESI (S9)†
Scenario




The methanol synthesis is not varied as the parameters do not vary to a large extend, especially when compared to the electrolysis.104 Selectivity for the methanol synthesis is assumed to be one,37 which is relatively high compared to the range of 0.92 to 1 described by Artz et al.115 Other factors such as quality and usability of polymer re-granules,112 variation in possible lower heating values, uncertainties in characterization factors and a variation of the grid mix composition for the electrolysis, as described in,34 are also assumed to be constant. Adaptions for processes with low technical readiness level (TRL)116,117 are not necessary as all sub-processes are on the commercial scale (TRL 8) or above.43,45,46,118 The ecoinvent production of conventional fuels and propylene are assumed to be representative for future reference in section 3.3., because naphtha cracking is a mature process and exothermic, therefore no energy from the grid is required.119
In this analysis methanol is assumed to substitute petrol directly in respective turbines for ships or engines for cars. However, methanol could also be further processed to petrol and used with existing engine technology. Jung et al. describe the processing of methanol to petrol (also methanol-to-gasoline, MTG) as exothermic.73 Therefore no direct additional energy would be required to convert methanol to petrol, but the selectivity of the process might affect the amount of petrol that can be substituted based on the FU.
The CO2 based production of methanol is not directly compared to conventional, natural gas based methanol in this analysis. Conventional methanol is an intermediate chemical. A specific use of a conventional product is assumed for the use phase on a cradle-to-cradle basis, where products from CO2 based methanol can be used to substitute conventional fuels and polymers for injection moulding from the conventional carbon sources naphtha (HFO, petrol, diesel and PP) or natural gas (POM).
Sensitivity analysis is used to calculate uncertainties for the main parameters. Hoppe et al. identify the electrolysis to be the key driver for methanol production, especially for raw material input.37 Furthermore, CO2 capture from industrial point sources and atmosphere as well as transport distance is considered to calculate uncertainties as shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Variation of parameters for uncertainty analysis




 
Minimum
Standard
Maximum




Electrolysis
50 kW hel per kg H2 (ref. 120)
54 kW hel per kg H2 (ref. 103)
83 kW hel per kg H2 (ref. 120)


Capturing CO2 from cement plant (MEA)
0.011 kW hel (ref. 121)
0.020 kW hel (ref. 99)
0.037 kW hel (ref. 104)


0.62 kW hth (ref. 122)
0.76 kW hth (ref. 99)
0.86 kW hth (ref. 122)


Capturing CO2 from atmosphere (DAC)
0.24 kW hel (ref. 123)
0.25 kW hel (ref. 101)
0.28 kW hel (ref. 123)


0.97 kW hth (ref. 123)
1.65 kW hth (ref. 101)
1.9 kW hth (ref. 123)


Transport distances (estimate)
0.5 km (ref. 87)
1 km (ref. 87)
1.5 km (ref. 87)




Other literature on the performance of the electrolysis81,82,124 confirms the standard energy demand for electrolysis103 used to calculate the results. Hence, the risk that electricity demand for electrolysis will actually rise to 83 kW h per kg H2 is considered negligible. The production of POM and OEM1 generate waste heat available for heat integration. The results include heat integration. The uncertainties account for the case that thermal energy cannot be used. Overall, the effect is rather small compared to other uncertainties such as electrolysis variation, but may reduce GHG benefits of POM production if waste heat cannot be used.
2.3. Product climate and material footprint
The product climate footprint is a comprehensive measure of anthropogenic impact upon global warming.125 The indicator Global Warming Impact (GWI) in kg CO2 eq. per FU is used to calculate the potential effects of climate change based on the characterization factor GWP (Global Warming Potential). For this analysis, GWI is calculated using IPCC 2013 GWP100 values.126 Storage of CO2 in products is not considered as the EC46 as well as Zimmermann et al.58 conclude that the crediting of delayed emissions does not provide a reasonable benefit and recommend exclusion of delayed emissions for CCU. The climate footprint is identical to the carbon footprint.127 The term “climate footprint” is chosen to reflect the intended measurement of global warming impact clearer than the term “carbon footprint”.
The product material footprint, for assessing the potential impacts of material extraction on the natural environment, is calculated based on two indicators:128,129 The indicator Raw Material Input (RMI) measures the cumulative raw material inputs for the life cycle of a product or service. Whereas, RMI accounts only for raw material extraction, the used part, the Total Material Requirement (TMR) accounts for extraction of primary material from nature and thus includes, in addition to RMI, the unused part. The RMI is measured in kg raw material per FU and the TMR in kg primary material per FU.
3. Results
3.1 Change in product climate and material footprint

Fig. 3 illustrates the change in product climate and material footprint for the analyzed materials and fuels based on the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2 captured at industrial point sources. Here industrial point sources are based on an average of the results for CO2 capture at cement plants and waste incineration plants (WIP). Disaggregated results and results for capturing CO2 from the atmosphere are provided in the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) in ESI (S6).†
 Fig. 3  Comparison of changes in the product climate and material footprint measured by respective impact indicator (GWI, RMI, TMR) if conventional products are substituted by products from recycled CO2 from industrial point sources based on the use of 100 kt methanol and considering overall energy efficiency for passenger cars (67% for electric cars and 27% for cars with combustion engines77) are provided as a reference. (“HFO” – heavy fuel oil; “POM” – polyoxymethylene; “PP” – polypropylene; “GWI” – global warming impact; “RMI” – raw material input; “TMR” – total material requirement; “REN” – electricity from renewable sources.) 
The substitution of conventional products from cradle-to-grave decreases the climate footprint, except for diesel, but increases the material footprint.
The additional raw material for CCU is mainly required to provide the infrastructure for the REN-electricity for the electrolysis and the grid electricity for CO2 capture and methanol synthesis, which is already shown for a cradle-to-gate system.37 The uncertainties are mainly driven by the electrolysis, leading to a linear change in impact indicators caused by the assumed linear uncertainties.
Especially petrol competes with the direct use of REN-electricity as a fuel for e-mobility.80 The substitution of petrol with the direct use of REN-electricity shows a higher potential to reduce the climate footprint than the substitution of petrol by methanol from recycled CO2 and improves the material efficiency. The substitution of 46 kt petrol with REN-electricity from wind power, assuming an overall energy efficiency of 67% for electric cars and 27% for cars with combustion engines,77 reduces the GWI by – 163 kt CO2 eq., the RMI by – 45 kt raw material and the TMR by – 55 kt primary material.
3.2. Normalization against national reference values
For the identification of possible trade-offs, the relative changes in product climate and material footprint are normalized against German reference values. Fig. 4 depicts how the normalized results for climate and material footprint change, if compared to the national reference values for Germany listed in ESI (S8).†
 Fig. 4  Normalized results for change in the values of impact indicators (GWI, RMI, TMR) for the product climate and material footprint compared to the national reference values for Germany. (“MEA” – amine scrubbing; “DAC” – direct air capture; “HFO” – heavy fuel oil; “POM” – polyoxymethylene; “PP” – polypropylene; “GWI” – global warming impact; “RMI” – raw material input; “TMR” – total material input; “Industrial Point sources” – indicates that CO2 is captured using amine scrubbing, an average values for capturing from cement plant and from waste incineration plant is depicted, assuming that waste heat can be utilized at the source; “Atmosphere” – CO2 is captured using DAC, assuming that no waste heat is used.) 
The results for the change in climate and material footprint show similar results. The results for CO2 from DAC reveal that only the substitution of POM reduces GWI and that the RMI for all substitution options clearly exceeds the reduction in GWI. The provided values are representative for Germany due to the spatially explicit assumptions for the recycling and backup system. Other regional reference values for GWI and RMI exist e.g. for Europe. A normalization of the results with EU reference values shows results comparable to Germany as depicted in ESI (S7).†
3.3. Scenario analysis for polypropylene and comparison to fuel
This chapter compares the use of renewable electricity to produce fuels or PP as a material from CO2 until 2050 including the end of life phase to compare the isolated environmental benefits that occur from material recycling and polymer incineration, when CO2 is used to produce PP instead of fuels. In contrast to the EoL phase of fuels, the EoL phase of PP is considered as a multi-output system that generates secondary PP granulate and energy from final incineration of PP in addition to the virgin PP granulate produced in the first use phase. The additional products, secondary PP granulate and electrical and thermal energy, are not considered in comparative cradle-to-gate LCAs as the use and EoL phases are assumed identical. This comparative analysis focuses on the cradle-to-cradle boundary to compare the use of CO2 to substitute fuels for the transport sector or PP for the chemical industry incl. EoL phases and considering the change in the German electricity and heat grid until 2050 and for a defossilized scenario.
An overview on relevant assumptions for the analysis in chapter 3.3. is provided in Table 1.
The comparison between fuel and material is relevant, because available renewable energy for the electrolysis is the limiting parameter for CCU in Germany in 2020 (REN capacity: 221 TWh/a) and may be limiting in 2050 (REN capacity: 750 TWh/a).18,27 A 65% decarbonization of the German chemical industry sector using CCU requires approx. 374 TWh/a exceeding available German REN capacity and representing half of the total capacity in 2050.18,27 The scarce available renewable energy may limit the application of CCU technologies until 2050, therefore REN for CCU technologies should be used with priority to supply products that show a relative higher potential to reduce environmental impacts, especially in comparison to other options for utilization or raw material supply based on secondary materials from recycling.
The product climate and material footprint of PP are affected by the expected development of the German electricity grid mix assuming that GWI and RMI for technologies that generate electricity and heat will remain constant over time. More detailed information is provided in ESI (S8).†

Fig. 5 shows the product climate footprint, measured in GWI, and product material footprint, measured in RMI, for conventional PP (Conv. PP), PP from recycled CO2 (CCU PP) and PP solely from material recycling (MR PP) to compare CCU PP and MR PP as recycling technologies for PP.
 Fig. 5  Product climate footprint, measured in Global Warming Impact (GWI), and material footprint, measured in Raw Material Input (RMI), for conventional polypropylene (Conv. PP), PP from recycled CO2 (CCU PP) and PP solely from material recycling (MR PP) under the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state assuming constant characterization factors for footprint calculation. CO2 capturing from cement plant is assumed for CCU PP. 
However, recycling of CO2 can close the gap for carbon requirement, where other recycling technologies may not be applicable as CCU PP is equivalent to conventional PP in quality and purity.
The trade-off in GWI and RMI identified in section 3.2 is based on the 2020 proportion of GWI reduction and RMI increase and the national reference values of 2020. The defossilization of the grid mix may help CCU to overcome the trade-off in 2030 and will diminish in the future.
The second step in the analysis for PP determines two non-negligible additional benefits in the EoL phase of PP, which are not provided from the EoL phase of fuels. First, MR generates secondary material (re-granulate) that substitutes virgin polymers from fossil sources or polymers from recycled CO2. Second, the thermal treatment of Conv. and CCU PP in a WIP provides electrical and thermal energy. While the purpose of fuels is the provision of energy, the polymer materials additional purpose are independent from the purpose as a material.

Fig. 6 shows the additional benefits from MR and energy substitution from the WIP measured in product climate and material footprint. The energy substitutes electricity from the grid (electrical) and thermal energy based on natural gas (thermal) for the German grid mix in 2020, 2030 and 2050.
 Fig. 6  Additional benefits in the End-of-Life (EoL) from material recycling (MR) and energy substitution from the waste incineration plant (WIP) measured in product climate footprint, indicated by Global Warming Impact (GWI), and product material footprint, indicated in Raw Material Input (RMI). Conventional polypropylene (Conv. PP) and PP from recycled CO2 (CCU PP) are considered under the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state (Def.) assuming constant characterization factors for footprint calculation. The functional unit is the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2 to substitute 39 kt of Conv. PP. Material recycling (MR) indicates the benefit from the substitution of virgin Conv. PP or virgin CCU PP production with PP granulate. Substitution of grid electricity (electrical) and heat (thermal) is calculated based on the German grid mix. CO2 capturing from cement plant is assumed for CCU PP. 
In this study, material recycling provides the largest share of the additional benefits for the product climate and material footprint of Conv. PP and CCU PP over fuels. The benefits from MR for CCP PP in the climate and material footprint decrease over time. The results show the importance of the product material footprint as an indicator for low carbon technologies, as global warming intensity decreases in a defossilized energy system, while additional raw material is required to produce more infrastructure for REN-electricity generation.
The additional benefits from energy substitution decrease the product climate and material footprint of CCU and Conv. PP in all scenarios. The main benefit is generated by the substitution of electricity, but decreases with a decarbonized electricity grid. In 2020, energy substitution of electrical end thermal energy provides a GWI benefit of 62 kt CO2 eq., which decreases to 4 kt CO2 eq. in the defossilized state, when electrical and thermal energy generation is completely shifted to renewable sources. The benefits in the RMI are 55 kt raw material in 2020, but in 2050 and in the defossilized state the benefits in the RMI decrease to 15 kt raw materials. This decreases the additional benefits of energy substitution significantly if compared to the additional benefits provided by MR. Therefore, MR may more efficiently help to reduce material intensity of PP use in 2050 compared to energy substitution.
The absolute reduction for GWI and RMI decreases in 2050 and in the defossilized state. In all states, MR reduces the GWI and the RMI most and the achieved reduction of MR compared to energy substitution relatively increases with the defossilization of the electricity grid and use of heat from REN-electricity.

Fig. 7 shows how the substitution of conventional HFO, petrol, diesel and PP based on the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2 affects the product climate and material footprint on a life cycle wide basis in 2020 compared to 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state.
 Fig. 7  Change in product climate footprint, measured in Global Warming Impact (GWI), and product material footprint, measured in Raw Material Input (RMI), for the use of recycled CO2 to substitute heavy fuel oil (HFO), petrol, diesel and polypropylene (PP) under the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state assuming constant characterization factors for footprint calculation. Conventional diesel is substituted either with dimethoxymethane (OME) fuel or with Fischer–Tropsch (FT) fuel, both from CO2. The functional unit (FU) is the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2. FT-diesel is not produced from methanol, it does replace conventional diesel based on the lower heating value of the FU. Additional benefits from the End-of-Life (EoL) of PP from recycled CO2 are topped on the fuels, where material recycling (MR) is the benefit from virgin polymer substitution. Substitution of grid electricity (electrical) and heat (thermal) is calculated based on the German grid mix. CO2 capturing from cement plant is assumed. The black lines mark indicator net values. 
The overall results show the change in product climate and material footprint for the use of 100 kt methanol from CO2 to substitute conventional HFO, petrol, diesel and PP with CCU products for 2020, 2030 and 2050, as well as for the defossilized state. The reduction in GWI increases over time due to the lower GWI of the grid electricity compared to 2020. The RMI for grid electricity also decreases over time and subsequently the amount of additionally required raw material for CCU is reduced, especially from 2030 to 2050. During that period, the material intensity of the electricity grid decreases by a factor 4.5 compared to 2030 mainly due to the phase out of lignite and hard coal. The substitution of HFO in 2050 and the defossilized state even shows an improved material intensity. Over time, the substitution of all analyzed conventional products will yield significantly increasing GWI reduction and less raw material compared to 2020. On a life cycle wide basis, the increasing GWI reduction and the decrease of additional raw material demand over time show that trade-offs in additional material demand may disappear with the defossilization of the grids.
In 2020, the substitution of PP provides a GWI reduction of − 43 kt CO2 eq. and a RMI increase of 74 kt raw material, whereas the substitution of all studied fuels generates an increase in GWI and RMI, if the additional benefits from the EoL phase of CCU PP are considered. In 2020, 127 kt CO2 eq. of additional GWI and 111 kt raw material of additional RMI are added to the footprints of the fuels. The additional benefits for the GWI reduction provided from the EoL phase of CCU PP are three times higher compared to the benefits that are achieved by solely the substitution of Conv. PP with CCU PP in 2020. The trend continues in 2030, but the order of magnitude for the GWI reduction from the additional benefits from the EoL phase of CCU PP decreases to a factor of two. Therefore, applying CCU between 2020 and 2030 to substitute polymers shows higher environmental benefits compared to fuels. In 2050, the picture changes because of the defossilization of the electricity grid. At that time, the substitution of PP and petrol provide a similar reduction for the GWI, but the substitution of PP has a significantly lower increase in RMI, if the addition benefits from the EoL phase of CCU PP are considered.
The defossilized state shows the ideal results, where the substitution of petrol leads to the highest GWI reduction with – 152 kt CO2 eq. However, it must be assumed, that in 2050 petrol is substituted by other low carbon fuels or by direct electricity. Interestingly, the substitutions of the other products show a GWI reduction in a close range of – 112 kt CO2 eq. to – 119 kt CO2 eq., if energy is completely provided from REN-electricity. The RMI for the substitution of HFO is reduced by – 25 kt raw material, while the substitution of the other conventional products causes a higher RMI in a range of 23 kt raw material to 51 kt raw material. A GWI of 17 kt CO2 eq. and a RMI of 53 kt raw material has to be added to the fuels, by considering the additional benefits of the EoL phase of CCU PP. The CCU FT diesel that is included for comparison to substitute conventional diesel shows a high GWI reduction potential in 2020 and 2030 if compared to the other fuels, but the advantage decreases over time. This shows that the substitution of PP results in the highest GWI reduction before HFO and the second lowest increase in RMI after HFO, whereas savings in GWI compared to HFO are higher than the additional RMI. Hence, PP is the studied product with the highest reduction potential under defossilized conditions. In the defossilized state the substitution of HFO, diesel and PP show a similar GWI reduction, but the substitution of PP performs better due to the additional benefits provided to a large extent from MR. The results prove potential to consider CCU as recycling technology for polymer waste management as well as a production technology for virgin polymers for the chemical industry in the future.
4. Discussion
In this section, the relevant issues of the analysis such as available CO2 emissions as feedstock, the relevance of low-carbon heat for capturing CO2, the potential future technological improvements, the possible contribution of CCU regarding SDG 12, the benchmarking of CCU as a technology to reduce GHG emissions and the informative value of the chosen indicators to present key information are discussed.
Is there enough CO2 from industrial point sources? The International Energy Agency expects the global cement production to raise from 4.1 Gt of cement in 2014 to 4.7 Gt of cement in 2050, with substance related emissions of 2.3 Gt per year.130 The amount of municipal solid waste available from 2017 to 2050 will remain constant in Europe, but increase drastically in any other regions.131 Waste incineration is considered a very efficient technology for waste treatment with a high potential to avoid landfilling, which is still the dominating method to handle waste globally.132 The presented analysis shows how process related CO2 emissions can be used via CCU and how the waste handling technologies of polymers provide benefits, using Germany as the reference case. In Germany alone, 11 Mt of direct CO2 emissions from 76 cement plants and 20 Mt of direct CO2 per year from 68 WIP are expected to be available in 2050. All values represent substance related emissions from material processing without energy production.18 Hence, it can be expected that CO2 is sufficiently available as carbon feedstock for the production of 100 kt of methanol in the future.
As shown in 3.2. capturing CO2 from industrial point sources using MEA has a potential to reduce GWI (except for diesel) while capturing CO2 from the atmosphere using DAC shows limited potential (except for POM). The reason for this difference is mainly the heat demand of the capturing technology. MEA has a heat demand of 0.763 kW hth per kg CO2,100 compared to 1.65 kW hth per kg CO2 for DAC,37 but requires sources with reasonable CO2 concentrations. In contrast, DAC is a flexible technology and not subject to spatial restrictions.101 In this study, the heat demand for DAC is assumed to be provided by natural gas. Technically DAC can also be operated with waste heat113 or heat provided from renewable energies e.g. from wind or solar power77,133 or geothermal heat101 to decrease GWI.
Current research and development activities show a potential that production processes for materials and fuels from recycled CO2 will improve in the future. The electro catalytic synthesis, reported in the project eEthylene,134 could be assumed to substitute the MTO process, the core process for CCU PP, by producing olefins directly from hydrogen and CO2. A similar opportunity is the direct reduction of CO2 to formaldehyde135 as an intermediate product for POM and OME1 production.35 If these technologies reach higher TRL and are applied in the conversion step for the production, the amount of required H2 from electrolysis decreases, leading to subsequent reductions in GWI, RMI and TMR. Improvement of the H2 production due to the use of other electrolysis technologies or improved efficiency represents another option to reduce GWI, RMI and TMR.81,136 In general, a trade-off in raw material intensity under the current state of manufacturing technologies may be acceptable, if technological innovation may improve overall processes efficiency in the future. The FT process developed by Sunfire113 or described by Kirsch et al.114 uses CO2 and H2 to produce a FT mixture that may replace many different refinery products, especially fuels such as diesel and kerosene114 or naphtha as a raw material.28 The solid oxide fuel cell electrolysis, as used by Sunfire,113 is expected to be 15 to 20% more efficient in 2030 than the PEMEL assumed for this analysis,81 but requires process heat at a constant temperature level of 700 to 900 °C. The dynamic alkaline electrolysis, another type of electrolysis, is currently under development as demonstration plant in Germany.136,137 It promises lower capital expenditure as it is based on the mature alkaline electrolysis technology,82 but may reach a dynamic operation mode and efficiency comparable to PEM electrolyzers137 for power-to-x applications.
The overall recycling rate for polymers in the process model is calculated based on energetic and material recovery rates for waste plastic in Germany in 2017.97 The assumed secondary input rate in the process model is 33% based on the material recovery rate for Germany and the technical efficiency to produce re-granulate from plastic waste by MR. The material flow analysis for polymer use in Germany shows an annual use of 14 Mt of polymers. 12.6 Mt are produced from virgin polymers and 1.8 Mt from re-granulate, leading to a secondary input rate of 13%.97 The amount of available plastic waste in Germany, as the basis for re-granulate production, is only 6 Mt, showing that the anthropogenic stock for polymers is currently growing and that MR of plastic waste cannot fully meet the demand of virgin polymers for manufacturing plastic products, even under ideal recycling conditions. CCU may provide the remaining share of virgin polymers, which cannot be provided by material recycling. Therefore, it is necessary that REN-electricity is available in sufficient quantities and suitable economic framework conditions exist. MR is preferable to CCU due to the lower product climate and material footprint, but limited to available plastic waste and technical efficiency for re-granulate production, leaving potential for CCU as a recycling technology. The concept of CCU to polymers is comparable to chemical recycling19,138 such as pyrolysis, which is considered as treatment option under the German circular economy law,139 while CCU is not considered, because the recycled CO2 is not classified as waste. Currently polymers from recycled CO2 are not defined as recycled from a regulatory perspective and therefore do not improve quotas or sustainability targets that aim to increase the use of recycled polymers, which may represent a barrier for the use in the industry.
CCU supplied with REN-electricity improves sustainable production and resource use and supports SDG 12.6 and 12.8 in the chemical industry and industries that use polymer products by changing the carbon raw material source from fossil to renewable. Technically CCU may help to achieve targets as defined by the circular economy13 as it closes the carbon loop. But it does not prevent or recycle communal waste in the sense of SDG 12.5,140 because the German circular economy law currently does not classify CO2 as waste, only if stored permanently.139 The purpose of CCU is to recycle and reuse carbon, which may be defined from a regulatory perspective by the product that requires carbon. For the improvement of the recycling options, CCU should be considered as a recycling technology in the circular economy law in Germany including the spatially independent production of intermediate products such as methanol. As shown in section 3.3., production of CCU PP instead of CCU fuels leads to a significant reduction in climate and material footprint. The results show the importance of a good recycling system for polymers to support SDG 12, by maximizing secondary input rates and minimizing polymer losses during production, use and EoL phase, especially in combination with CCU. Therefore, the German “Renewable Energy Sources Act” (EEG)57 may subsidize a material use of REN-electricity for CCU in the same way as it subsidizes the storage of renewable energy in carbon based energy carriers from CO2.27
Compared to fossil based production CCU requires a substantial amount of REN-electricity, which seems larger than the current amount of REN-electricity available.12,46 The potential GHG reduction from CCU is considered less efficient per unit of low-carbon electricity than other reported power-to-x technologies, such as heat pumps, energy storage in batteries or hydrogen production.141,142 Kätelhön et al. analyzed the global annual GHG reduction potential for the substitution of 20 representative chemical products from CCU in 2030 on a cradle-to-gate basis and suggested to satisfy the demand for REN-electricity in other power-to-x applications prior to the chemical industry.12 As shown in section 3.3., CCU PP may provide additional GWI savings in the EoL phase, that are by a factor of two higher than the GWI reduction from the substitution of Conv. PP, indicating a significantly higher life cycle wide GHG reduction potential for polymers.
The EoL phase mainly affects the GHG, energy and material intensity of CCU PP. MR of CCU PP reduces the amount of required virgin CCU PP per 1 kg of CCU PP by approximately 33%. Consequently, 33% less REN-electricity for the electrolysis is required for the use of CCU PP (incl. MR) if compared to CCU fuels, which represents a more efficient use of available, REN-electricity as the limiting parameter for CCU.12,27,37,46 Moving the production of base chemicals to countries where sufficient renewable energy is available143 may further promote CCU products. If the use and EoL phase of the final products remain within Germany, new waste management options for reuse and recycling are required to foster a circular economy13 and to avoid shifting raw material trade-offs, that are caused by the national consumption, to other countries. The broad application of CCU to produce and recycle polymers, together with improved material recycling, should be fostered in Germany and other countries as early as possible by removing technological and regulatory barriers.
Electricity from wind and solar requires a significant amount of primary raw material. Additionally, primary raw material is needed for the storage of the generated electricity.141 For the production of wind power plants large amounts of concrete, steel, iron, glass and carbon composites, zinc, copper and aluminum as well as lubricant over a lifetime of 20 years are needed;144,145 for the production of photovoltaic power plants concrete, steel and glass and polymers, aluminum as well as copper is needed. Nevertheless, the material intensity of electricity from renewables is expected to decrease in the future.144 In the short and medium term, the increase in material demand leads to a trade-off in resource efficiency, but in the long term, the primary raw material could be substituted by secondary raw material provided by a circular economy.
The electricity grid for 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state is modelled based on the ecoinvent processes for electricity production, whereas technological improvement or an increase in the rate for the use of recycled components and materials in power plants are not considered. The process “electricity production >1 MW turbine” by the ecoinvent 3.1 cut off system model, that is used to feed the electrolysis, does not consider the use of secondary material. Consequently, the product material footprint is calculated completely with an input of primary raw material. The use of secondary raw material may reduce the material demand for electricity production from wind up to two thirds until 2050.146 Hence, there is further research potential to determine how the use of secondary material in renewable energy production technologies will affect the material footprint of CCU products, especially when considering that the material demand for external cables in offshore wind parks may exceed the material demand for the wind turbine.147
According to Steinmann et al. the material footprint together with the fossil energy demand account for 64% in the variation of LCA results.148 To answer the main goal of the study with a minimum of indicators, the climate footprint replaces the fossil energy demand to consider carbon flows and on the same time indicate GHG emissions. The water footprint,149,150 evaluating water use and scarcity based on spatially explicit characterization factors, is currently not considered in this study. A calculation for water input of CCU is presented by the EC,46 concluding that water consumption may be a problem if the electrolysis is moved to regions with higher water scarcity compared to Germany. Analysis of the product water footprint, as well as the product land footprint, represent options for further research, especially if the production of base chemicals from CO2 is located in water scarce regions with a high potential to generate renewable energy using wind or solar power production.77,133,143
Conventional HFO has a 3.5% sulfur share that oxidizes to sulfur dioxide (SO2) when combusted. The emitted SO2 has a negative effect on human health151 and causes acidification to the environment along shipping routes152 and formation of sulphate particles that form particulate matter in ship emissions,153 whereas methanol from recycled CO2 as marine fuel is free of sulphur. Therefore, the acidification potential, formation of particulate matter and the effect on human health should be considered in a LCA with a respective goal and scope. HFO may have higher direct CO2 emissions as indicted by the climate footprint, because the GWI is reduced by the SO2 emissions calculated with a GWP100 of – 38 kg CO2 eq. as described by the IPCC.126
The substitution of diesel with OME1 from recycled CO2 does not provide GWI benefits if calculated with the ecoinvent grid mix (see section 3.1), but blending conventional diesel with OME1 can reduce soot emissions from combustion.35 Thonemann and Pizzol confirm that the substitution of conventional OME1 with OME1 from CO2 does not generate emission savings40 but other analyzes show that under certain assumptions the use of OME1 and OME3–5 as a blend for diesel fuel has a GHG emissions reduction potential.35,39 Also the calculations with the German electricity grid mix in 2020 (see section 3.3) show a potential to reduce GWI, but the material footprint results show the high additional raw material demand compared to the other studied products.
5. Conclusions
In general, the product climate footprint results show benefits in substituting conventional fuels and polymers using methanol from recycled CO2, if the electrolysis uses available renewable electricity. The trade-off in GHG emissions and material intensity shows that only the substitution of HFO, petrol, or POM compensate the increase of the product material footprint with a relatively higher reduction of the product climate footprint. The substitution of conventional PP reduces the product climate footprint, but relatively increases the product material footprint in the same magnitude. The detailed analysis of PP shows that the trade-off in the footprints may diminish in the future due to the defossilization of the electricity grid mix. Material recycling and energy substitution from plastic waste incineration provide a cumulative additional benefit to the climate and material footprint in the EoL phase of CCU polymers, but not to CCU fuels. For CCU PP this benefit is by a factor of three higher compared to the substitution of Conv. PP alone. Whereas material recycling seems preferable over CCU, due to the relative lower footprints, the capacity for recycling is always limited to the amount of available plastic waste. The chemical industry requires carbon as a feedstock to produce carbon based polymers with high quality and purity to fulfill requirements for applications such as food packaging, medical equipment or 3D-Printing.154 CCU can close the carbon cycle where other technology options are not applicable and may provide recycled polymers in virgin quality for the PP supply chain. LCA results, such as resource consumption and climate impacts, may be used in strategic supply chain management, if the system boundary is comparable.79
Currently, politics is discussing the support of CCU fuels with priority, mainly because of the relatively lower technical diversity compared to materials. Considering the climate benefits of polymers from a life cycle perspective, legislation and funding schemes should also support the development of technologies for CCU materials. As future transportation concepts focus on hydrogen or e-mobility, where renewable electricity is used as fuel with a higher efficiency, substitution of petrol with methanol from recycled CO2 appears not to be reasonable.8 Marine transportation shows a high potential for CCU fuels as carbon-based fuels are difficult to replace. The substitution of conventional marine fuel with methanol from recycled CO2 in 2020 may not be as beneficial as the substitution of other products, but shows no trade-off between product climate and material footprint in 2050.
6. Outlook
In contrast to the transport sector, more economic value may be generated if recycled CO2 is used in the chemical industry for the widespread applications in consumer products.27,155 The economic aspect is crucial for the future of CCU development. Current economic analyses are cradle-to-gate assessments, with a focus on the production phase of chemicals from recycled CO2.34,124 An integrated economic analysis, considering the whole life cycle, would help to assess the total benefits of CCU based on the described process model. The analysis should consider the traditional cost for production, but also the final generated market value from the use phase based on the cost of goods sold. The provided process model can be used to integrate future environmental and economic assessment as suggested in Zimmerman et al.58 and even include economic factors such as customer value of consumer products that contain polymers made with recycled carbon from captured CO2. This would enable to account GHG emissions and subsequent costs for CO2 avoidance for all participants in the value chain up to the technology user as considered by the ICCA and the WBCSD.11
Abbreviations

CCSCarbon capture and storage
CCUCarbon capture and utilisation
CO2 eq.Carbon dioxide equivalent units
DACDirect air capture
EoLEnd-of-life
ECEuropean commission
FTFischer–tropsch
GaBiGanzheitliche Bilanzierung (holistic accounting)
GHGGreenhouse gas
GWIGlobal warming impact
GWPGlobal warming potential
HFOHeavy fuel oil
IPCCInternational panel on climate change
kWhelKilowatt-hour electrical energy
kWhthKilowatt-hour thermal energy
LCALife cycle assessment
LCILife cycle inventory
LCIALife cycle impact assessment
MeOHMethanol
MRMaterial recycling
MRFMaterial recovery facility
MTGMethanol-to-Gasoline
MTOMethanol-to-Olefins
OME1Dimethoxymethane
OME3–5Oxymethylene dimethyl ethers
PEMELPolymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis
POMPolyoxymethylene
PPPolypropylene
PRFPlastic recycling facility
Re-granulatePlastic granulate from material recycling
REN-electricityElectricity from renewable energies
RMIRaw material input
SDGsSustainable Development Goals
TMRTotal material requirement
TRLTechnology readiness level
WIPWaste incineration plant

Author contributions
Sebastian Turnau: Conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft, visualization; Caroline Sophie Mignot: investigation, formal analysis; Clemens Mostert: methodology, writing – review & editing, supervision; Stefan Bringezu: conceptualization, writing – review & editing, supervision.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Funding
This work was conducted within the scope of the project CO2NET + (CO2Plus – Stoffliche Nutzung von CO2 zur Verbreiterung der Rohstoffbasis), funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) (Funding Number: 5401046).
Acknowledgements
The authors like to thank the colleagues at the Center for Environmental Systems Research (CESR), University of Kassel for their comments and suggestions.
References
United Nations., Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law. 2015. Available from: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld.

          IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. ed. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. van der Linden and C. E. Hanson, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2007 Search PubMed .
Umweltbundesamt. Jährliche Treibhausgas-Emissionen in Deutschland/Annual greenhouse gas emissions in Germany - 1990–2018. 2018 [cited 2019 Oct 20]. p. 400. Available from: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/daten/klima/treibhausgas-emissionen-in-deutschland#textpart-1.

          M. Mazzotti, J. C. Abanades, K. S. Lackner, F. Meunier, E. Rubin, J. C. Sanchez, K. Yogo and R. Zevenhoven, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage, ed. B. Eliasson and R. T. M. Sutamihardja, Cambridge University Press,  2005, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/carbon-dioxide-capture-and-storage/ Search PubMed .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston and S. Brown, 
            et al., Carbon capture and storage (CCS): the way forward, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 1062–1176,  10.1039/C7EE02342A .

          A. Bazzanella and F. Ausfelder, Low carbon energy and feedstock for the European chemical industry, Frankfurt am Main,  2017. Available from: https://dechema.de/dechema_media/Technology_study_Low_carbon_energy_and_feedstock_for_the_European_chemical_industry-p-20002750.pdf Search PubMed.

          P. Styring, D. Jansen, H. de Coninck and H. Reith, K. Armstrong, Carbon Capture and Utilisation in the green economy - Using CO2 to manufacture fuel, chemicals and materials. The Centre for Low Carbon Futures and CO2Chem Publishing,  2011. Available from: http://co2chem.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/CCU_in_the_green_economy_report.pdf Search PubMed .
The Group of Chief Scientific Advisors. Novel carbon capture and utilisation technologies,EU Publication Office, Luxembourg,  2018.
J. Rockström, W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F. S. Chapin and E. Lambin, 
            et al., Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe operating space for humanity, Ecol Soc., 2009, 14(2), 32 CrossRef .

          K. Raworth, in Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st-Century Economist, Random House Business, 1st edn,  2018, pp. 384 Search PubMed .
IACC, WBCSD. Addressing the Avoided Emissions Challenge - Guidelines from the chemical industry for accounting for and reporting greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions avoided along the value chain based on comparative studies. 2013.
A. Kätelhön, R. Meys, S. Deutz, S. Suh and A. Bardow, Climate change mitigation potential of carbon capture and utilization in the chemical industry, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 166(23), 11187–11194 CrossRef .
European Commission. A New Circular Economy Action Plan - For a cleaner and more competitive Europe. COM(2020) 98 final. Brussels: European Commission; 2020. Available from: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:9903b325-6388-11ea-b735-01aa75ed71a1.0017.02/DOC_1&format=PDF.
European Commission. A European Strategy for Plastics. Eur Com. 2018;(July), 24. Available from: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/pdf/plastics-strategy-brochure.pdf%0Ahttp://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/index_en.htm.
J. H. Clark, T. J. Farmer, L. Herrero-Davila and J. Sherwood, Circular economy design considerations for research and process development in the chemical sciences, Green Chem., 2016, 18(14), 3914–3934 RSC .
United Nations. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. General Assembly. United Nations; 2015. Available from: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld.
D. Vanham, A. Leip, A. Galli, T. Kastner, M. Bruckner and A. Uwizeye, 
            et al., Environmental footprint family to address local to planetary sustainability and deliver on the SDGs, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 693(June), 133642 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaiser and S. Bringezu, Use of Carbon Dioxide as Raw Material to close the Carbon Cycle for the German Chemical and Polymer Industries, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 271, 122775,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122775 .
Verband der Chemischen Industrie e. V. Kreisläufe für Kohlenstoff. Frankfurt a.M.; 2018. Available from: https://www.vci.de/themen/energie-klima-rohstoffe/rohstoffe/vci-position-kreislaeufe-fuer-kohlenstoff.jsp.

          G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, in Beyond Oil and Gas: The Methanol Economy, Wiley–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Peters, B. Köhler, W. Kuckshinrichs, W. Leitner, P. Markewitz and T. E. Müller, Chemical technologies for exploiting and recycling carbon dioxide into the value chain, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4(9), 1216–1240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schittkowski, H. Ruland, D. Laudenschleger, K. Girod, K. Kähler and S. Kaluza, 
            et al., Methanol Synthesis from Steel Mill Exhaust Gases: Challenges for the Industrial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 Catalyst, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2018, 90(10), 1419–1429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rafiee, K. K. Rajab, D. Milani and M. Panahi, Trends in CO2 conversion and utilization: A review from process systems perspective, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(5), 5771–5794,  DOI:10.1016/j.jece.2018.08.065 .
G. Leonzio, State of art and perspectives about the production of methanol, dimethyl ether and syngas by carbon dioxide hydrogenation, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 27(June), 326–354,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcou.2018.08.005 .
C. Hepburn, E. Adlen, J. Beddington, E. A. Carter, S. Fuss and N. Mac Dowell, 
            et al., The technological and economic prospects for CO2 utilization and removal, Nature, 2019, 575(7781), 87–97,  DOI:10.1038/s41586-019-1681-6 .
D. Bongartz, L. Doré, K. Eichler, T. Grube, B. Heuser and L. E. Hombach, 
            et al., Comparison of light-duty transportation fuels produced from renewable hydrogen and green carbon dioxide, Appl. Energy, 2018, 231(August), 757–767,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.09.106 .

          S. Bringezu, S. Kaiser and S. Turnau, Zukünftige Nutzung von CO2 als Rohstoffbasis in der deutschen Chemie- und Kunststoffindustrie - Eine Roadmap, Universität Kassel, Kassel,  2020. Available from: https://kobra.uni-kassel.de/handle/123456789/11483 Search PubMed .

          R. Geres, A. Kohn, S. Lenz, F. Ausfelder, A. M. Bazzanella and A. Moller, Roadmap Chemie 2050 - Auf dem Weg zu einer treibhausgasneutralen chemischen Industrie in Deutschland,  2019. Available from: https://www.vci.de/services/publikationen/broschueren-faltblaetter/vci-dechema-futurecamp-studie-roadmap-2050-treibhausgasneutralitaet-chemieindustrie-deutschland-langfassung.jsp Search PubMed .
R. Muthuraj and T. Mekonnen, Recent progress in carbon dioxide (CO2) as feedstock for sustainable materials development: Co-polymers and polymer blends, Polymer, 2018, 145, 348–373,  DOI:10.1016/j.polymer.2018.04.078 .

          F. Ausfelder and H. E. Dura, Optionen für ein nachhaltiges Energie-System mit Power-to-X Technologien. 2. Roadmap des Kopernikus-Projektes “Power-to-X”: Flexible Nutzung erneuerbarer Resspurcen (P2X), ed. A. M. Frankfurt, F. Ausfelder and H. E. Dura,  2019. Available from: http://www.wwf.de/fileadmin/fm-wwf/Publikationen-PDF/Kopernikus-Projekt_Power-to-X-2-Roadmap.pdf Search PubMed.
M. Aresta, A. Dibenedetto and A. Angelini, The changing paradigm in CO2 utilization, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 3–4, 65–73,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcou.2013.08.001 .

          A. Otto, Chemische, verfahrenstechnische und ökonomische Bewertung von Kohlendioxid als Rohstoff in der chemischen Industrie, ed. F. J. GmbH, Schriften des Forschungszentrums Jülich Reihe Energie & Umwelt/Energy & Environment. [Jülich]: Institut für Energie- und Klimaforschung, Elektrochemische Verfahrenstechnik (IEK-3) U6,  2015 Search PubMed .

          A. D. Sternberg, System-Wide Perspective for Life Cycle Assessment of CO 2 -based C1-Chemicals. Bewertung von CO 2 -basierten C1-Chemikalien aus einer systemweiten Perspektive, Rheinisch-Westfalischen Technischen Hochschule Aachen,  2017 Search PubMed .

          W. Hoppe, Systemanalytischer Vergleich rohstofflicher Nutzungsoptionen von CO2 bei Verwendung regenerativer Energien unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Ressourceneffizienz und Treibhausgasbilanz, University of Kassel,  2018. Available from: https://www.upress.uni-kassel.de/katalog/abstract.php?978-3-7376-0484-0 Search PubMed .
S. Deutz, D. Bongartz, B. Heuser, A. Kätelhön, L. Schulze Langenhorst and A. Omari, 
            et al., Cleaner production of cleaner fuels: Wind-to-wheel-environmental assessment of CO2-based oxymethylene ether
as a drop-in fuel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(2), 331–343 RSC .
C. Fernández-Dacosta, M. Van Der Spek, C. R. Hung, G. D. Oregionni, R. Skagestad and P. Parihar, 
            et al., Prospective techno-economic and environmental assessment of carbon capture at a refinery and CO2 utilisation in polyol synthesis, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 21(November 2016), 405–422,  DOI:10.1016/j.jcou.2017.08.005 .
W. Hoppe, N. Thonemann and S. Bringezu, Life Cycle Assessment of Carbon Dioxide-Based Production of Methane and Methanol and Derived Polymers, J. Ind. Ecol., 2017, 1–14 Search PubMed .

          S. Michailos, P. Sanderson, A. V. Zaragoza, S. McCord, K. Armstrong and P. Styring, Methanol Worked Examples for the TEA and LCA Guidelines for CO2 Utilization.  2018, Available from: http://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/145723 Search PubMed .
C. Hank, L. Lazar, F. Mantei, M. Ouda, R. J. White and T. Smolinka, 
            et al., Comparative well-to-wheel life cycle assessment of OME 3–5 synfuel production via the power-to-liquid pathway, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3219–3233,  10.1039/C9SE00658C .
N. Thonemann and M. Pizzol, Consequential life cycle assessment of carbon capture and utilization technologies within the chemical industry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(7), 2253–2263 RSC .
M. Pérez-Fortes, J. C. Schöneberger, A. Boulamanti and E. Tzimas, Methanol synthesis using captured CO 2 as raw material: Techno-economic and environmental assessment, Appl. Energy, 2016, 161, 718–732,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.07.067 .
N. Von Der Assen and A. Bardow, Life cycle assessment of polyols for polyurethane production using CO 2 as feedstock: insights from an industrial case study, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3272–3280 RSC  , http://www.rsc.org/greenchem.
D. S. Marlin, E. Sarron and Ó. Sigurbjörnsson, Process Advantages of Direct CO2 to Methanol Synthesis, Front. Chem., 2018, 6(September), 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, Towards oil independence through renewable methanol chemistry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(1), 104–107 CrossRef CAS .
European Commission. CarbonNext Deliverable 2.1: Report on fully integrated and intensified value chain concepts for process selection. CarbonNext Project Deliverables. European Commission; 2017 [cited 2020 Jun 2]. Available from: http://carbonnext.eu/Deliverables/_/D2.1_Value_Chains_31_10_2017.pdf.

          S. Turnau, D. Jaspers, A. Marxen, H. Naims, S. de Bruyn and S. Bringezu, et al., Identification and analysis of promising carbon capture and utilisation technologies, including their regulatory aspects. Brussels, EU Publications, Publications Office of the European Union,  2019. Available from: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/7656142c-7083-11e9-9f05-01aa75ed71a1/language-en Search PubMed .
I. Amghizar, L. A. Vandewalle, K. M. Van Geem and G. B. Marin, New Trends in Olefin Production, Engineering, 2017, 3(2), 171–178,  DOI:10.1016/J.ENG.2017.02.006 .
W. Hoppe, S. Bringezu and N. Thonemann, Comparison of global warming potential between conventionally produced and CO2-based natural gas used in transport versus chemical production, J. Clean. Prod., 2016, 121, 231–237,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.042 .
J. M. Allwood, M. F. Ashby, T. G. Gutowski and E. Worrell, Material efficiency: Providing material services with less material production, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2013, 371, 20120496 CrossRef .
BMUB. Deutsches Ressourceneffizienzprogramm II (ProgRess II). 2016.
F. Gu, J. Guo, W. Zhang, P. A. Summers and P. Hall, From waste plastics to industrial raw materials: A life cycle assessment of mechanical plastic recycling practice based on a real-world case study, Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 601–602, 1192–1207 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Wäger and R. Hischier, Life cycle assessment of post-consumer plastics production from waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) treatment residues in a Central European plastics recycling plant, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 529, 158–167,  DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.05.043 .
J. Dong, Y. Tang, A. Nzihou, Y. Chi, E. Weiss-Hortala and M. Ni, Life cycle assessment of pyrolysis, gasification and incineration waste-to-energy technologies: Theoretical analysis and case study of commercial plants, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 626, 744–753,  DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.01.151 .
F. Mayer, R. Bhandari and S. Gäth, Critical review on life cycle assessment of conventional and innovative waste-to-energy technologies, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 672, 708–721,  DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.03.449 .
T. Fruergaard and T. Astrup, Optimal utilization of waste-to-energy in an LCA perspective, Waste Manag., 2011, 31(3), 572–582,  DOI:10.1016/j.wasman.2010.09.009 .
R. Meys, A. Kätelhön and A. Bardow, Towards sustainable elastomers from CO2: Life cycle assessment of carbon capture and utilization for rubbers, Green Chem., 2019, 21(12), 3334–3342 RSC .
Bundesamt für Justiz. Gesetz für den Ausbau erneuerbarer Energien (ErneuerbareEnergien-Gesetz - EEG 2017). Berlin: Bundesrepublik Deutschland; 2017. Available from: https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/eeg_2014/EEG_2017.pdf.

          A. Zimmermann, J. Wunderlich, G. Buchner, L. J. Mueller, A. Kätelhön and K. Armstrong, et al., Techno-Economic Assessment & Life Cycle Assessment Guidelines for CO2 Utilization, in Global CO2 Initiative,  2018, pp. 1–154. Available from: http://hdl.handle.net/2027.42/145436 Search PubMed .
F. Ausfelder and H. E. Dura, Interaction of Regulatory Aspects for Carbon Capture and Utilization Applications, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2020, 92(1–2), 156–165 CrossRef CAS .
European Commission. Innovation Fund: Driving low-carbon technologies towards the market. 2020 [cited 2020 Jun 2]. Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/sites/clima/files/innovation-fund/innovation_fund_factsheet_en.pdf.

          R. Edwards, Methodology principles for quantifying GHG emissions savings under REDII and the Innovation Fund, in Joint Research Centre, Towards a common understanding of LCA and TEA for CO2 utilization technologies, European commission, Brussels,  2019. Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/research-topic/hazards-and-risks-climate-change-impacts Search PubMed .
EU. Directive, (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources, Off. J. Eur. Union., 2018, 2018(L 328), 82–209 Search PubMed  . Available from: https://eur-lex.Europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32018L2001&from=EN.
DIN - Deutsches Insitut für Normung e.V. DIN EN ISO 14040:2006. 2006th ed. Environmental management - Life Cycle Assessment - Principles and Framework (ISO 14040:2006). 2009.
DIN - Deutsches Insitut für Normung e.V. DIN EN ISO 14044:2006. 2006th ed. Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements and guidelines (ISO 14044:2006). 2006.
Joint Research Centre. International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook – General guide for Life Cycle Assessment – Detailed guidance. Constraints. European commission; 2010.
L. J. Müller, A. Kätelhön, M. Bachmann, A. Zimmermann, A. Sternberg and A. Bardow, A Guideline for Life Cycle Assessment of Carbon Capture and Utilization, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8(February), 1–20 Search PubMed .

          S. Gärtner, G. Hienz, H. Keller and M. Müller-Lindenlauf, Gesamtökologische Bewertung der Kaskadennutzung von Holz - Umweltauswirkungen stofflicher und energetischer Holznutzungssysteme im Vergleich. IFEU Heidelberg, Heidelberg,  2013. Available from: https://www.ifeu.de/landwirtschaft/pdf/IFEU_2013_Umweltbewertung_Holzkaskadennutzung.pdf Search PubMed .

          Meyer Werft GmbH & Co KG.
          Energiewende im Schiffbau, MethaShip-Abschlussveranstaltung, Meyer Werft GmbH & Co KG, Hamburg,  2018 Search PubMed .

          G. Kovacic, Methanol in Großmotoren Ergebnisse bisheriger Untersuchungen, in Methaship 2018, Hamburg,  2018, p. 1–10 Search PubMed .

          K. Moirangthem, Alternative Fuels for Marine and Inland Waterways, ed. D. Baxter, European Commission - Joint Research Centre Technical Reports. European commission, Brussels,  2016. Available from: http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC100405 Search PubMed .
A. Goeppert, G. K. S. Prakash, G. A. Olah, M. Czaun and J.-P. Jones, Recycling of carbon dioxide to methanol and derived products – closing the loop, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(43), 7957–8194 Search PubMed  . Available from: http://www.rsc.org/chemsocrev.

          S. Faberi and L. Paolucci, Methanol:a future transport fuel based on hydrogen and carbon dioxide.  2014. Available from: http://bookshop.Europa.eu/en/methanol-pbQA0114284/downloads/QA-01-14-284-EN-C/QA0114284ENC_002.pdf?FileName=QA0114284ENC_002.pdf&SKU=QA0114284ENC_PDF&CatalogueNumber=QA-01-14-284-EN-C Search PubMed .
C. Jung, P. Seifert, F. Mehlhose, C. Hahn, D. Schröder and C. Wolfersdorf, 
            et al. Gasoline Engine Fuels from Renewable Methanol, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2020, 92(1–2), 100–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Omari, B. Heuser, S. Pischinger and C. Rüdinger, Potential of long-chain oxymethylene ether and oxymethylene ether-diesel blends for ultra-low emission engines, Appl. Energy, 2019, 239(August 2018), 1242–1249,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.02.035 .
F. Bauer and M. Sterner, Power-to-X in Context of Energy Transition and Climate Change Mitigation in Germany, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2020, 92(1–2), 85–90 CrossRef CAS .

          A. G. Siemens, We power the world with innovative gas turbines, Siemens Gas Turbines Brochure. Siemens AG;  2016. Available from: https://assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/api/uuid:10f4860b140b2456f05d32629d8d758dc00bcc30/gas-turbines-siemens-interactive.pdf Search PubMed .
Agora Verkehrswende, Agora Energiewende, Frontier Economics. Die zukünftigen Kosten strombasierter synthetischer Brennstoffe. 2018.
M. W. Ryberg and M. H. Alexis Laurent, Mapping of global plastics value chain and plastics losses to the environment (with a particular focus on marine environment), U. N. Environ., 2018, 1–99 Search PubMed .

          J. Kleinekorte, L. Fleitmann, M. Bachmann, A. Kätelhön, A. Barbosa-póvoa and A. N. Von Der, Life Cycle Assessment for the Design of Chemical Processes, Products, and Supply Chains.  2020, pp. 1–31 Search PubMed .

          H. Helms, J. Jöhrens, C. Kämper, J. Giegrich, A. Liebich and R. Vogt, et al., Weiterentwicklung und vertiefte Analyse der Umweltbilanz von Elektrofahrzeugen. IFEU Heidelberg, Heidelberg,  2015. Available from: http://www.umweltbundesamt.de/publikationen/weiterentwicklung-vertiefte-analyse-der Search PubMed .

          I. Dickshas and T. Smolinka, Wasserelektrolyse an der Schwelle zur großskaligen Industrialisierung – Trends und Herausforderungen bis 2030, in Berliner Energietage. Berlin,  2019 Search PubMed .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Future cost and performance of water electrolysis: An expert elicitation study, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(52), 30470–30492,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.10.045 .
Methanex Corporation. Technische Informationen und Sicherheitsmerkblatt für den Umgang mit Methanol. 2006 [cited 2019 Oct 20]. Available from: https://web.archive.org/web/20110826005602/http://www.methanex.com/products/documents/TISH_german.pdf.

          E. Hahne, Technische Thermodynamik: Einführung und Anwendung, Oldenbourg Verlag, Munich,  2010 Search PubMed .
Federal Environment Agency. Submission under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol 2018. UNFCCC-Submission. Federal Environment Agency; 2018. Available from: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/
default/files/medien/1410/publikationen/2018-05-24_climatechange_
13-2018_nir_2018_en.pdf.
M. Härtl, P. Seidenspinner, E. Jacob and G. Wachtmeister, Oxygenate screening on a heavy-duty diesel engine and emission characteristics of highly oxygenated oxymethylene ether fuel OME1, Fuel, 2015, 153, 328–335 CrossRef .

          G. Dehoust and J. Christiani, Analyse und Fortentwicklung der Verwertungsquoten für Wertstoffe - Sammel- und Verwertungsquoten für Verpackungen und stoffgleiche Nichtverpackungen als Lenkungsinstrument zur Ressourcenschonung. Texte 40/2012.Federal Environment Agency, Dessau-Roßlau,  2012. Available from: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/461/publikationen/4342.pdf Search PubMed.

          B. Pfluger, B. Tersteegen, B. Franke, C. Bernath, T. Bossmann, G. Deac, et al., Langfristszenarien für die Transformation des Energiesystems in Deutschland. Modul 3: Referenzszenario und Basisszenario. Federal ministry for economics and energy,  2017[cited 2019 Oct 25]. Available from: https://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/DE/Artikel/Energie/langfrist-und-klimaszenarien.html Search PubMed.

          H.-M. Henning and A. Palzer, Was kostet die Energiewende? - Wege zur Transformation des deutschen Energiesystems bis 2050. Fraunhofer, Freiburg,  2015. Available from: https://www.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/zv/de/Forschungsfelder/Energie-Rohstoffe/Fraunhofer-ISE_Transformation-Energiesystem-Deutschland_final_19_11_(1).pdf Search PubMed.
Forschungsstelle für Energiewirtschaft e.v. Kurzstudie Power-to-X - Ermittlung des Potenzials von PtX-Anwendungen für die Netzplanung der deutschen ÜNB. Munich; 2017.

GreenDelta GmbH., openLCA Version 1.9, Berlin,  2019 [cited 2019 Sep 4]. Available from: http://www.openlca.org/download/ Search PubMed .
Ecoinvent Association. Ecoinvent 3 v3.1. Zurich: Ecoinvent Association; 2014. Available from: http://www.ecoinvent.com.

          A. G. Thinkstep, GaBi Professional Database - GaBi extension database VII - Plastics. Leinfelden-Echterdingen;  2019[cited 2019 Nov 4]. Available from: http://www.gabi-software.com/international/databases/gabi-databases/ Search PubMed.
PlasticsEurope. Eco-profile Polyoxymethylene (POM). Brussels: PlasticsEurope AISBL; 2014. Available from: https://www.plasticseurope.org/en/resources/eco-profiles.

          W. Keim, Kunststoffe – Synthese, Herstellungsverfahren, Apparaturen, ed. W. Keim, Wiley–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
P. Matarrese, A. Fontana, M. Sorlini, L. Diviani, I. Specht and A. Maggi, Estimating energy consumption of injection moulding for environmental-driven mould design, J. Clean Prod., 2017, 168, 1505–1512,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.07.144 .

          Conversio Market & Strategy GmbH. Stoffstrombild Kunststoffe in Deutschland 2017. ed. C. Lindner and J. Schmitt, Conversio Market & Strategy GmbH, Mainaschaff,  2018 Search PubMed .

          N. Rudolph, R. Kiesel and C. Aumnate, Understanding Plastics Recycling - Economic, ecological and technical aspects of plastic waste handling, Hanser Publishers, Munich,  2017 Search PubMed .

          Element Energy Limited. Demonstrating CO2 capture in the UK cement, chemicals, iron and steel and oil refining sectors by 2025: A Techno-economic Study. Final report for DECC and BIS.Element Energy Limited, Cambridge,  2014. Available from: http://www.element-energy.co.uk/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/Element_Energy_DECC_BIS_Industrial_CCS_and_CCU_final_report_14052014.pdf Search PubMed.
G. Rochelle, E. Chen, S. Freeman, D. Van Wagener, Q. Xu and A. Voice, Aqueous piperazine as the new standard for CO2capture technology, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 171(3), 725–733,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2011.02.011 .

          J. Wurzbacher, Capturing CO2 from Air.  2017. Available from: https://tu-dresden.de/ing/maschinenwesen/iet/ess/ressourcen/dateien/herbstworkshop-ess-2017/V4-HW2017-Jan-Wurzbacher-Capturing-CO2-from-Air-Climeworks.pdf?lang=de Search PubMed .
J. A. Wurzbacher, C. Gebald, N. Piatkowski and A. Steinfeld, Concurrent separation of CO2 and H2O from air by a temperature-vacuum swing adsorption/desorption cycle, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46(16), 9191–9198 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Bär, S. Eiden, A. Bardow, U. Sauer, M. Behrens and M. Beller, et al., CO2RRECT - Verwertung von CO2 als Kohlenstoffbaustein unter Verwendung überwiegend regenerativer Energie. BMBF Forschungsbericht: Schlussbericht CO2RRECT. Leibniz Gemeinschaft, Berlin,  2014. Available from: https://www.tib.eu/de/suchen/id/ceaba%3ACEAB20141102299/CO2RRECT-Verwertung-von-CO2-als-Kohlenstoffbaustein/ Search PubMed .
L. K. Rihko-Struckmann, A. Peschel, R. Hanke-Rauschenbach and K. Sundmacher, Assessment of methanol synthesis utilizing exhaust CO2 for chemical storage of electrical energy, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49(21), 11073–11078 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiang, S. Yang, X. Liu, Z. Mai and Y. Qian, Techno-economic performance of the coal-to-olefins process with CCS, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 240, 45–54,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2013.11.051 .
CUTEC Institut Clausthaler Umwelttechnik GmbH. Differenzierung der energetischen Verwertung am Kriterium der Energieeffizienz. 2016. Available from: http://www.bvse.de/images/pdf/altholz/2016_Cutec_Studie_Hochwertige_energetische_Verwertung_final_2.pdf.

          T. Kato, M. Kubota, N. Kobayashi and Y. Suzuoki, Effective utilization of by-product oxygen from electrolysis hydrogen production. in Energy. Elsevier Ltd,  2005. pp. 2580–2595 Search PubMed .
T. Ekvall and A. M. Tillman, Open-loop recycling: Criteria for allocation procedures, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess, 1997, 2(3), 155–162 CrossRef .

          F. P. La Mantia, Recycled plastics: additives and their effects on properties, in Plastics Additives Polymer Science and Technology Series, ed. G. Pritchard, Springer, Dordrecht,  1998 Search PubMed .
C. Vadenbo, S. Hellweg and T. F. Astrup, Let's Be Clear(er) about Substitution: A Reporting Framework to Account for Product Displacement in Life Cycle Assessment, J. Ind. Ecol., 2017, 21(5), 1078–1089 CrossRef .

          W. Klöpffer and B. Grahl, Ökobilanz (LCA): Ein Leitfaden für Ausbildung und Beruf, Wiley-VCH Verlag, Wiley–VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2009 Search PubMed .
L. Rigamonti, M. Niero, M. Haupt, M. Grosso and J. Judl, Recycling processes and quality of secondary materials: Food for thought for waste-management-oriented life cycle assessment studies, Waste Manag., 2018, 76, 261–265,  DOI:10.1016/j.wasman.2018.03.001 .

          Universität Stuttgart. Verbundprojekt sunfire Herstellung von Kraftstoffen aus CO2 und H2O unter Nutzung regenerativer Energie.  2015 Search PubMed .
H. Kirsch, L. Brübach, M. Loewert, M. Riedinger, A. Gräfenhahn and T. Böltken, 
            et al., CO2-Neutral Fischer-Tropsch Fuels from Decentralized Modular Plants: Status and Perspectives, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2020, 92(1–2), 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
J. Artz, T. E. Müller, K. Thenert, J. Kleinekorte, R. Meys and A. Sternberg, 
            et al. Sustainable Conversion of Carbon Dioxide: An Integrated Review of Catalysis and Life Cycle Assessment, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(2), 434–504 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Buchner, A. W. Zimmermann, A. E. Hohgräve and R. Schomäcker, Techno-economic Assessment Framework for the Chemical Industry - Based on Technology Readiness Levels, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(25), 8502–8517 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Zimmermann and R. Schomäcker, Assessing Early-Stage CO2utilization Technologies—Comparing Apples and Oranges?, Energy Technol., 2017, 5(6), 850–860 CrossRef .
R. Chauvy, N. Meunier, D. Thomas and G. De Weireld, Selecting emerging CO2 utilization products for short- to mid-term deployment, Appl. Energy, 2019, 236(April 2018), 662–680,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.11.096 .
V. Spallina, I. C. Velarde, J. A. M. Jimenez, H. R. Godini, F. Gallucci and M. Van Sint Annaland, Techno-economic assessment of different routes for olefins production through the oxidative coupling of methane (OCM): Advances in benchmark technologies, Energy Convers. Manag., 2017, 154(November), 244–261,  DOI:10.1016/j.enconman.2017.10.061 .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, A comprehensive review on PEM water electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38(12), 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Onarheim, S. Ò. Garðarsdòttir, A. Mathisen, L. O. Nord, D. Berstad, F. Norman, et al., Industrial implementation of Carbon Capture in Nordic industry sectors. NORDICCS Technical Report D4.2.1501/D18. Oslo: SINTEF; 2015. Available from: https://www.sintef.no/globalassets/sintef-energi/nordiccs/d4.2.1501-d18-co2-capture-cases.pdf.
S. Roussanaly, C. Fu, M. Voldsund, R. Anantharaman, M. Spinelli and M. Romano, Techno-economic Analysis of MEA CO 2 Capture from a Cement Kiln - Impact of Steam Supply Scenario, Energy Procedia., 2017, 114(1876), 6229–6239 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Keith, G. Holmes, D. St. Angelo and K. Heidel, A Process for Capturing CO2 from the Atmosphere, Joule, 2018, 2, 1573–1594 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Hank, S. Gelpke, A. Schnabl, R. J. White, J. Full, N. Wiebe, et al., Economics and carbon dioxide avoidance cost of methanol production based on renewable hydrogen and recycled carbon dioxide – power-to-methanol. Sustain Energy Fuels.  2018; Available from: http://xlink.rsc.org/?DOI=C8SE00032H.
V. Egenolf and S. Bringezu, Conceptualization of an indicator system for assessing the sustainability of the bioeconomy, Sustainability, 2019, 11(2), 443 CrossRef .

          G. Myhre, D. Shindell, F.-M. Bréon, W. Collins, J. Fuglestvedt, J. Huang, et al., Chapter 8. Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. Clim Chang 2013 Phys Sci Basis Contrib Work Gr I to Fifth Assess Rep Intergov Panel Clim Chang Phys Sci Basis Contrib Work Gr I to Fifth Assess Rep, in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Supplementary Material to the IPCCC Fifth Assessment Report.  2013, pp. 1–44. Available from: http://www.climatechange2013.org/images/report/WG1AR5_Chapter08_FINAL.pdf Search PubMed.
DIN - Deutsches Insitut für Normung e.V. DIN EN ISO 14067. Treibhausgase – Carbon Footprint von Produkten – Anforderungen an und Leitlinien für Quantifizierung (ISO 14067:2018); Deutsche und Englische Fassung EN ISO 14067:2018. Berlin; 2019.
C. Mostert and S. Bringezu, Measuring product material footprint as new life cycle impact assessment method: Indicators and abiotic characterization factors, Resources, 2019, 8(2), 61 CrossRef .

          S. Bringezu, S. Kaiser, S. Turnau and C. Mostert, Bestimmung des Materialfußabdrucks mit ökobilanziellen Methoden und Softwarelösungen - Version 1.1: Generelle Vorgehensweise und beispielhafte Anwendungs für Prozesse der CO2-Nutzung. Kassel,  2019. Available from: http://www.chemieundco2.de/uploads/Handreichung_-_Der_Materialfussabdruck_in_OEkobilanzen.pdf Search PubMed .
International Energy Agency (IEA), World business council for sustainable development (WBCSD). Technology Roadmap Low-Carbon Transition in the Cement Industry. 2018 [cited 2020 Oct 14]. Available from: file:///C:/Users/Sebas/Downloads/TechnologyRoadmapLowCarbonTransitionintheCementIndustry_(1).pdf.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). Global waste management outlook. 2015 [cited 2020 Oct 14]. Available from: https://www.unenvironment.org/resources/report/global-waste-management-outlook.
N. AlQattan, M. Acheampong, F. M. Jaward, F. C. Ertem, N. Vijayakumar and T. Bello, Reviewing the potential of Waste-to-Energy (WTE) technologies for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) numbers seven and eleven, Renew. Energy Focus, 2018, 27, 97–110 CrossRef .
M. Fasihi, D. Bogdanov and C. Breyer, Techno-Economic Assessment of Power-to-Liquids (PtL) Fuels Production and Global Trading Based on Hybrid PV-Wind Power Plants, Energy Procedia, 2016, 99(March), 243–268,  DOI:10.1016/j.egypro.2016.10.115 .
PtJ. CO2Plus - Stoffliche Nutzung von CO2 zur Verbreiterung der Rohstoffbasis. 2015 [cited 2019 Oct 21]. Available from: https://www.ptj.de/co2plus.
S. Dabral and T. Schaub, The Use of Carbon Dioxide (CO 2) as a Building Block in Organic Synthesis from an Industrial Perspective, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2018 DOI:10.1002/adsc.201801215 .
C. Seibel and J. W. Kuhlmann, Dynamic Water Electrolysis in Cross-Sectoral Processes, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2018, 90(10), 1430–1436 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lüke and A. Zschocke, Alkaline Water Electrolysis: Efficient Bridge to CO2-Emission-Free Economy, Chem.-Ing.-Tech., 2020, 92(1–2), 70–73 CrossRef .
R. Meys, F. Frick, S. Westhues, A. Sternberg, J. Klankermayer and A. Bardow, Towards a circular economy for plastic packaging wastes – the environmental potential of chemical recycling, Resour. Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 162(June), 105010,  DOI:10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105010 .
Bundesministerium für Justiz. Kreislaufwirtschaftsgesetz. Bundesregierung; 2012. Available from: https://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/krwg/__6.html.

          Statistisches Bundesamt. Indikatoren der UN-Nachhaltigkeitsziele.  2018, vol. 49. Available from: https://www.destatis.de/DE/Themen/Gesellschaft-Umwelt/Nachhaltigkeitsindikatoren/Publikationen/Downloads-Nachhaltigkeit/indikatoren-un-nachhaltigkeitziele-2018-pdf.pdf?__blob=publicationFile Search PubMed .
C. Mostert, B. Ostrander, S. Bringezu and T. Kneiske, Comparing Electrical Energy Storage Technologies Regarding Their Material and Carbon Footprint, Energies, 2018, 11(12), 3386 CrossRef CAS  . Available from: http://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/11/12/3386.

          A. Sternberg and A. Bardow, Power-to-What? - ESI: 2015 [cited 2017 Aug 15]; Available from: http://www.rsc.org/suppdata/ee/c4/c4ee03051f/c4ee03051f1.pdf.
C. Hank, A. Sternberg, N. Köppel, M. Holst, T. Smolinka and A. Schaadt, 
            et al. Energy efficiency and economic assessment for imported energy carriers based on renewable electricity, Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2020, 1–25 Search PubMed .

          S. Carrara, P. Alves Dias, B. Plazzotta and C. Pavel, European Commission. Joint Research Centre. Raw materials demand for wind and solar PV technologies in the transition towards a decarbonised energy system.  2020[cited 2020 Oct 15]. Available from: https://eitrawmaterials.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/rms_for_wind_and_solar_published_v2.pdf Search PubMed.
K. R. Haapala and P. Prempreeda, Comparative life cycle assessment of 2.0 MW wind turbines, Int. J. Sustain. Manuf., 2014, 3, 170–185 Search PubMed .
T. Zimmermann, M. Rehberger and S. Gößling-Reisemann, Material flows resulting from large scale deployment of wind energy in Germany, Resources, 2013, 2(3), 303–334 CrossRef .
K. Wiesen, J. Teubler and H. Rohn, Resource use of wind farms in the german north sea-the example of alpha ventus and bard offshore i, Resources, 2013, 2(4), 504–516 CrossRef .
Z. J. N. Steinmann, A. M. Schipper, M. Hauck and M. A. J. Huijbregts, How Many Environmental Impact Indicators Are Needed in the Evaluation of Product Life Cycles?, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(7), 3913–3919 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Boulay, J. Bare, L. Benini, M. Berger, M. J. Lathuillière and A. Manzardo, 
            et al. The WULCA consensus characterization model for water scarcity footprints: assessing impacts of water consumption based on available water remaining (AWARE), Int. J. Life Cycle Assess, 2018, 23(2), 368–378 CrossRef .
DIN - Deutsches Insitut für Normung e.V. DIN EN ISO 14046:2016-07. Umweltmanagement – Wasser-Fußabdruck – Grundsätze, Anforderungen und Leitlinien (ISO 14046:2014). 2016. p. 71.

          Federal Environment Agency, Information on sulphur dioxide (SO 2). Dessau-Roßlau,  2017. p. 4–6. Available from: https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/370/dokumente/infoblatt_schwefeldioxid_eng_0.pdf Search PubMed .
I. M. Hassellöv, D. R. Turner, A. Lauer and J. J. Corbett, Shipping contributes to ocean acidification, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2013, 40(11), 2731–2736 CrossRef .
E. Fridell, E. Steen and K. Peterson, Primary particles in ship emissions, Atmos. Environ., 2008, 42(6), 1160–1168 CrossRef CAS .
A. Beltagui, N. Kunz and S. Gold, The role of 3D printing and open design on adoption of socially sustainable supply chain innovation, Int. J. Prod. Econ., 2019,(April (2018), 107462,  DOI:10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.035 .
W. Hoppe, S. Bringezu and N. Wachter, Economic assessment of CO2-based methane, methanol and polyoxymethylene production, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 27(July), 170–178 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0gc02946gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Principle for the substitution of fossil-based products from captured and recycled CO2 on a lifecycle wide basis.	 

 	Fig. 2  Process model of the different technological options for the comparative footprint analysis. Use and End-of-Life (EoL) phase are similar for plastic products from PP and POM granulate. Initial CO2 sources as well as production of catalysts and additives are not included in the process model. (“HFO” – heavy fuel oil; “OME1” – dimethoxymethane; “PP” – polypropylene; “POM” – polyoxymethylene; “MeOH” – methanol; “Re-granulate” – plastic granulate from material recycling; “REN-electricity” – renewable electricity; “WIP” – waste incineration plant; “MRF” – material recovery facility; “PRF” – plastics recycling facility.)	 

The selectivity for the methanol synthesis is set to one.	Process
The quality factor for the polymer recycling is set to one.	Process
The electricity supply for the electrolysis is based on 1 MW onshore wind power plant.	Process
The adaption of performance from low to high TRL is not done.	Process
The lower heating values of the fuels and polymers are constant.	Product
The methanol from CO2 substitutes HFO and petrol based on the heating value.	Product
The technology to produce conventional fuels and polymers is not changed.	Scenario
The German electricity and heat grid changes in 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state as described in the ESI (S8)†	Scenario
In the defossilized state, no direct use of fossil energy carriers is assumed in Germany. Manufacturing of the renewable power plants is not considered completely carbon free due to material use, e.g. subject related emissions from cement, and use of fossil fuel use during the production phase, e.g. in international supply chains.	Scenario
The EoL phase of PP is a multi-output system that generates secondary PP granulate as well as electrical and thermal energy from incineration.	Scenario
Secondary-granulate from MR of PP substitutes virgin PP produced from naphtha as well as virgin PP produced from CCU using the “system expansion” approach as described in the ESI (S9)†	Scenario
Electrical energy from waste incineration substitutes the respective electricity and thermal energy from waste incineration substitutes respective heat provided by the grid using the “system expansion” approach described in the ESI (S9)†	Scenario

Electrolysis	50 kW hel per kg H2 (ref. 120)	54 kW hel per kg H2 (ref. 103)	83 kW hel per kg H2 (ref. 120)
Capturing CO2 from cement plant (MEA)	0.011 kW hel (ref. 121)	0.020 kW hel (ref. 99)	0.037 kW hel (ref. 104)
0.62 kW hth (ref. 122)	0.76 kW hth (ref. 99)	0.86 kW hth (ref. 122)
Capturing CO2 from atmosphere (DAC)	0.24 kW hel (ref. 123)	0.25 kW hel (ref. 101)	0.28 kW hel (ref. 123)
0.97 kW hth (ref. 123)	1.65 kW hth (ref. 101)	1.9 kW hth (ref. 123)
Transport distances (estimate)	0.5 km (ref. 87)	1 km (ref. 87)	1.5 km (ref. 87)

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of changes in the product climate and material footprint measured by respective impact indicator (GWI, RMI, TMR) if conventional products are substituted by products from recycled CO2 from industrial point sources based on the use of 100 kt methanol and considering overall energy efficiency for passenger cars (67% for electric cars and 27% for cars with combustion engines77) are provided as a reference. (“HFO” – heavy fuel oil; “POM” – polyoxymethylene; “PP” – polypropylene; “GWI” – global warming impact; “RMI” – raw material input; “TMR” – total material requirement; “REN” – electricity from renewable sources.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalized results for change in the values of impact indicators (GWI, RMI, TMR) for the product climate and material footprint compared to the national reference values for Germany. (“MEA” – amine scrubbing; “DAC” – direct air capture; “HFO” – heavy fuel oil; “POM” – polyoxymethylene; “PP” – polypropylene; “GWI” – global warming impact; “RMI” – raw material input; “TMR” – total material input; “Industrial Point sources” – indicates that CO2 is captured using amine scrubbing, an average values for capturing from cement plant and from waste incineration plant is depicted, assuming that waste heat can be utilized at the source; “Atmosphere” – CO2 is captured using DAC, assuming that no waste heat is used.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Product climate footprint, measured in Global Warming Impact (GWI), and material footprint, measured in Raw Material Input (RMI), for conventional polypropylene (Conv. PP), PP from recycled CO2 (CCU PP) and PP solely from material recycling (MR PP) under the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state assuming constant characterization factors for footprint calculation. CO2 capturing from cement plant is assumed for CCU PP.	 

 	Fig. 6  Additional benefits in the End-of-Life (EoL) from material recycling (MR) and energy substitution from the waste incineration plant (WIP) measured in product climate footprint, indicated by Global Warming Impact (GWI), and product material footprint, indicated in Raw Material Input (RMI). Conventional polypropylene (Conv. PP) and PP from recycled CO2 (CCU PP) are considered under the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state (Def.) assuming constant characterization factors for footprint calculation. The functional unit is the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2 to substitute 39 kt of Conv. PP. Material recycling (MR) indicates the benefit from the substitution of virgin Conv. PP or virgin CCU PP production with PP granulate. Substitution of grid electricity (electrical) and heat (thermal) is calculated based on the German grid mix. CO2 capturing from cement plant is assumed for CCU PP.	 

 	Fig. 7  Change in product climate footprint, measured in Global Warming Impact (GWI), and product material footprint, measured in Raw Material Input (RMI), for the use of recycled CO2 to substitute heavy fuel oil (HFO), petrol, diesel and polypropylene (PP) under the German grid mix in 2020, 2030, 2050 and in the defossilized state assuming constant characterization factors for footprint calculation. Conventional diesel is substituted either with dimethoxymethane (OME) fuel or with Fischer–Tropsch (FT) fuel, both from CO2. The functional unit (FU) is the use of 100 kt methanol from recycled CO2. FT-diesel is not produced from methanol, it does replace conventional diesel based on the lower heating value of the FU. Additional benefits from the End-of-Life (EoL) of PP from recycled CO2 are topped on the fuels, where material recycling (MR) is the benefit from virgin polymer substitution. Substitution of grid electricity (electrical) and heat (thermal) is calculated based on the German grid mix. CO2 capturing from cement plant is assumed. The black lines mark indicator net values.	 
CCS	Carbon capture and storage
CCU	Carbon capture and utilisation
CO2 eq.	Carbon dioxide equivalent units
DAC	Direct air capture
EoL	End-of-life
EC	European commission
FT	Fischer–tropsch
GaBi	Ganzheitliche Bilanzierung (holistic accounting)
GHG	Greenhouse gas
GWI	Global warming impact
GWP	Global warming potential
HFO	Heavy fuel oil
IPCC	International panel on climate change
kWhel	Kilowatt-hour electrical energy
kWhth	Kilowatt-hour thermal energy
LCA	Life cycle assessment
LCI	Life cycle inventory
LCIA	Life cycle impact assessment
MeOH	Methanol
MR	Material recycling
MRF	Material recovery facility
MTG	Methanol-to-Gasoline
MTO	Methanol-to-Olefins
OME1	Dimethoxymethane
OME3–5	Oxymethylene dimethyl ethers
PEMEL	Polymer electrolyte membrane electrolysis
POM	Polyoxymethylene
PP	Polypropylene
PRF	Plastic recycling facility
Re-granulate	Plastic granulate from material recycling
REN-electricity	Electricity from renewable energies
RMI	Raw material input
SDGs	Sustainable Development Goals
TMR	Total material requirement
TRL	Technology readiness level
WIP	Waste incineration plant
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0gc02946g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
