Impact of space charge polarization on light-soaking phenomena in non-fullerene organic solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC00574J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC00574J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 7214-7221Impact of space charge polarization on light-soaking phenomena in non-fullerene organic solar cells†

        
          
            Yichuan 
            Si
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Xie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sha 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Quanbin 
            Liang
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Hongbin 
            Wu
          
        
      *
      Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: liangqb@scut.edu.cn; hbwu@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      5th February 2021
    , Accepted 10th May 2021First published on 11th May 2021AbstractRevealing the microscopic origin of the unstable nature in organic solar cells (OSCs) is a key issue for further device optimization. Here, we identify that the light-soaking process seen in OSCs could be caused by the effect of space charge polarization in the photoactive layer. The impact of the space charge polarization on the light-soaking is traced experimentally through the determination of dielectric spectra and explored by recombination characterization through charge carrier dynamics study. The Maxwell–Wagner relaxation time is determined from the dielectric spectra. Hence, important information on factors that govern the light-soaking in OSCs is obtained. The results reveal the relationship between dielectric spectra and stability of the devices under illumination, and establish a benchmark for the performance comparison of a set of different cells. Moreover, study of charge carrier dynamics in the device under operation shows that light-soaking and the subsequent space charge polarization result in improved mobility and charge carrier lifetime, thus responsible for the improved device performance. The findings presented here are important for the understanding and optimization of organic solar cells and we expect the presented methods to be generally applicable to other OPV material sets.
1. Introduction
Over the past few decades, organic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted intensive research interests due to their unique advantages, such as good flexibility, light-weight, potential of semi-transparency, and low-cost fabrication of large areas.1,2 Recently, the certified power conversion efficiency (PCE) of OSCs has witnessed an impressive improvement, with the best devices delivering PCE over 18% in a single-junction device.3,4 However, in a vast amount of studies, it has been shown that irradiating OSCs with light is usually required in various donor/acceptor systems or device structure systems in order to achieve the desired device characteristics. This effect is known as a light-soaking issue and is of general character, although its root cause is still under debate.5 Over the past few decades, investigation on the underlying reasons for the light soaking effect have been focused on interface aspects: surface defects of the charge transport layer in OSCs,6–8 change in work function due to oxygen desorption,9,10 unfavorable electron transport due to the formation of a Schottky junction at the interface of the high work function metal/undoped metal-oxide,11 formation of a charge reservoir and a concomitant increase in bulk recombination due to contact effects.5 Apart from the above-mentioned influences originated from the ITO/metal-oxide and metal-oxide/organic interface, intrinsic contributions from the photoactive layer could also play an important role in controlling the effect.12–15
Here in this study we demonstrate that the light soaking issue comes from the space charge mechanism in the photoactive layer, especially in OSCs where the influence of an interfacial layer is eliminated. We show that devices based on the blend of poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′,3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)benzo)[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))] (PBDB-T) and 3,9-bis(2-methylene-((3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-6/7- methyl)-indanone))-5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2′,3′-d′]-s-indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophen (IT-M)16 (see Fig. 1a for the chemical structures) exhibit apparent light soaking effect, regardless of the type of device architecture. In contrast, other typical material systems based on either PCBM or a non-fullerene acceptor used in this study show negligible light soaking effect.
 Fig. 1  (a) The chemical structure of electron donor PBDB-T and acceptor IT-M. (b) The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics as a function of cumulative light illumination duration for the PBDB-T:PC71BM device and the PBDB-T:IT-M device with the inverted structure. 
We use an impedance spectroscopy (IS) based technique performed under dark and illumination conditions that probes dielectric response17 in the device to reveal the mechanism responsible for the observed significant discrepancy in the devices. Impedance spectroscopy is a powerful, nondestructive characterization technique for determining the dielectric relaxation processes and charge carrier dynamics in a wide variety of electronic materials and devices.18–21 We find that the dielectric constant of the PBDB-T:IT-M device under illumination exhibits significantly delayed relaxation at the moment of light exposure or light revocation, while other reference devices show a much faster response. Moreover, the space charge polarization in the PBDB-T:IT-M device is more resistive and capacitive as compared to other blends, resulting in inhomogeneity in the sample and causing broad frequency dependent dielectric transitions. It further changes the charge carrier density and lifetime, leading to gradual increase of μτ and subsequent enhancive FF as light-soaking time increases. We expect our results to improve our understanding on the origin of the light soaking effect in organic solar cells and dielectric response effects, making an interpretation of the microscopic process for Maxwell–Wagner interfacial polarization. We also expect the results are of general relevance for organic solar cells based on many other donor/acceptor systems.
2. Results and discussion
A set of OSCs were fabricated in this work with both conventional and inverted device structure, which is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/active layer/PDINO/Ag and ITO/ZnO/active layer/MoO3/Ag, respectively. Details for material and device fabrication are included in the ESI.† The J–V characteristics for both devices with inverted configuration as a function of cumulative light illumination durations are illustrated in Fig. 1b. The first striking result is that the PC71BM device shows light-soaking-free J–V characteristics while the IT-M device exhibits noticeable light-soaking effect. For example, a typical inverted IT-M device with an initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 8.92% requires 140 s light illumination to reach its maximum efficiency of 9.43%, while the PCE of the PC71BM device decreases a little after 140 s light illumination duration (Fig. 1b). The improved PCE in the PBDB-T:IT-M device mainly stems from a slightly increased FF, while changes in Jsc and Voc are hardly noticed. In the conventional structure, the IT-M device exhibits a similar light-soaking effect that results in improved FF and PCE, while the PC71BM device presents a noticeable reduction in efficiency (see Fig. S1 in the ESI†). As the device structure is the same for both devices, we can therefore rule out any dominant contribution from either the ZnO/organic or organic/MoO3 interface to the light soaking effect. Indeed, the results shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1 (ESI†) strongly suggest that the light soaking effect in OSCs is not necessarily caused by the interfacial layer alone. Furthermore, the state-of-the-art OSCs based on the blend of PM6:Y622 and PTB7:PC71BM show no evident difference in J–V characteristics during the exposure, namely the light-soaking-free effect (Fig. S2, ESI†).
We also note that the light soaking effect in OSCs may be attributed to chemical structure contributions, for example, end-group and side-chain engineering of non-fullerene acceptors can cause significant impact on the photo-stability of the active layer, as hinted in the literature.12 In particular, fluorination of the end-group is found to be against light soaking, while adding methyl groups leads to the opposite influence. However, the same mechanisms could not simply apply to the devices in this study, because OSCs based on the blend of PBDB-T:IT-4F23 (where IT-4F is a fluorinated small molecule acceptor derived from IT-M) also show noticeable light soaking effect (Fig. S3, ESI†).
As the light soaking effect occurs under working conditions, the origin of the effect may arise predominantly from a competing effect between charge generation and relaxation; in particular, the polarizability of the blend film can increase due to charge separation upon photo-excitation.24 To explore this point from aspects of charge generation and relaxation, we use impedance spectroscopy (IS) to determine the key characteristic frequency dependence and time dependence of the dielectric response in the active layer25 under the illumination or dark conditions.
2.1 Dielectric spectroscopy study
To study the time dependence of the light-soaking effect, we set up three stages for the measurement, namely dark (0 s), illumination (last for 140 s) and back to dark (t > 140 s) and probe the complex impedance response at the specific time, which includes real and imaginary parts in the desired frequency domain. Thus, the dielectric constant (ε′) and dielectric loss (tanδ) can be calculated from complex impedance as follows:17 (1)where Z′ and Z′′ are the real and imaginary part of the complex impedance (Z = Z′ − jZ′′), L the active layer thickness, A the device area, ω angular frequency and ε0 the permittivity of vacuum. And the complex dielectric permittivity (ε) is expressed as: ε = ε′ − jε′′.
Valuable information about the polarization behavior, conduction mechanisms and dielectric relaxation can be extracted from the obtained dielectric properties. First, the relaxation behavior of the dielectric response for different OSC devices at different illumination times is described as a function of electric field frequency, as shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. S4 (ESI†). Note that the dielectric constant is high in the low frequency region for all OSCs devices, but the dielectric constant decreases with increasing frequency and reaches a constant value because of inability of the electric dipole to comply with variation of the applied A.C. electric field.17 This observed variation of dielectric constant with frequency can be attributed to the Maxwell–Wagner effect at the interfaces between two dielectric layers with different electric conductivity (σ) and permittivity (ε′), forming space charges under illumination (Fig. S6, ESI†).26 In such a structure, the accumulation of space charge leads to a separation of charges over a considerable distance, which is also known as interfacial polarization. Due to the contribution by interfacial polarization, the dielectric response can be several times larger than its static value, resulting in a low frequency dielectric dispersion.25 At high frequencies, the interfacial polarization is not rapid enough to attain equilibrium with the electric field, so the capacitance reduces to its geometrical capacitance, leading to a constant permittivity.
 Fig. 2  The dielectric constant relaxation of (a) the PBDB-T:IT-M and (b) the PBDB-T:PC71BM device as a function of A.C. frequency under different illumination time t. The devices are kept in the dark when t = 0 s. At t = 1 s, the light is on and measurements were made at t = 10 s and t = 140 s, respectively. From t = 141 s, the light is off and measurements were made at t = 150 s and t = 290 s, respectively. 
The most important observation is that only the PDBD-T: IT-M device exhibits an obvious delay for the dielectric constant spectra upon the change of light exposure time, corresponding to its light-soaking effect. In contrast, other material systems show fast response at the moment of applying or revoking the light exposure, corresponding to a light-soaking-free effect.
In the light-exposure case, ε′ of a PBDB-T:IT-M device is unable to achieve its stable value rapidly but increases slowly with cumulative light illumination durations (Fig. 2a). In contrast, ε′ of the PBDB-T:PC71BM device tends to reach an equilibrium promptly after light on. Also in Fig. 2a, a gradual increase in the dielectric constant in the PBDB-T:IT-M device under illumination is seen, suggesting that it takes longer time for space charges to form the polarization than other material systems, and therefore this is the main reason for the light-soaking effect. Furthermore, after light revocation (t > 140 s), the PBDB-T:IT-M device still retains relatively large ε′ for more than 150 s especially at a low frequency region (f < 104 Hz). In contrast, the ε′ value of the other three devices promptly recovers to its initial value in 10 s. This result suggests that strong Maxwell–Wagner-type interfacial polarization within the PBDB-T:IT-M device retains its features even when photo-excitation is absent for sufficiently long time. In addition, the imaginary part of the permittivity (ε′′) can be obtained, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), which exhibits similar frequency dependence for the PBDB-T:IT-M device and the PBDB-T:PC71BM device.
As mentioned above, the large electric permittivity at low frequencies induced by the presence of illumination can be explained by increasing the amount of the polarized elements (i.e., trapping of charge carriers) at the interface, as a result of strong interfacial polarization effect or Maxwell–Wagner polarization effect.24,27 Furthermore, it is worth noting that the relaxation regime corresponds to the dielectric loss peak in the imaginary part of the permittivity (ε′′) as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), similar to that reported in the literature,25 and also allows an argument that the observed frequency dependent relaxation can be attributed to the Maxwell–Wagner model.
The unique trend in the PBDB-T:IT-M device should be attributed to the much longer relaxation time of carriers in the active layer after illumination, which is the time required for the formation or degradation of space charge polarization. Following the Maxwell–Wagner model,26,28 a typical OSC device can be described by a parallel equivalent model as illustrated in Fig. S6 (ESI†), and hence the relaxation time τRC can be determined through:26,27 (2)

Fig. 3 illustrates the relaxation time τRC calculated by the dielectric data at low frequency (1 kHz) as a function of the duration time under both illumination and dark conditions. The relaxation time τRC of the PBDB-T:IT-M device increases by a factor over 3 when the light is on; meanwhile it takes relatively longer time to approach its stable value under illumination when compared to the PBDB-T:PC71BM case. Similarly, when the light is off, it takes the PBDB-T:IT-M device relatively longer time to recover its initial value (at 0 s) when compared to the PBDB-T:PC71BM case. Both cases correspond to the time dependent polarization process.
 Fig. 3  The relaxation time of the PBDB-T:IT-M and the PBDB-T:PC71BM devices as a function of the duration time under illumination and dark conditions. 
2.2 Charge carrier dynamics study
Next, we proceed to investigate how the interfacial polarization effect in the PBDB-T:IT-M device is related to the light-soaking effect and the consequent J–V performance on the basis of charge carrier dynamics.
As mentioned above, the J–V curve of the PBDB-T:IT-M device exhibits a gradual increase under illumination, mainly due to the increase of FF, while Voc and Jsc are almost unchanged. In general, FF is determined by the competition of charge carriers between charge extraction and recombination,29 where non-geminate recombination is the dominating loss pathway for most of the efficient solar cells. To further understand the impact of voltage dependent non-geminate recombination on the FF, impedance spectroscopy (IS) is utilized to determine the charge carrier density and lifetime of charge carriers, together with charge recombination kinetics. This method has been widely employed to study the dynamics of charge recombination in organic solar cells.30–33
Firstly, we measure the total capacitance Ctot(V) of the PBDB-T:IT-M device as a function of applied bias at a low frequency of 1 kHz at different time stages with constant light exposure. To determine the average carrier density n(V) within the active layer, the chemical (or differential) capacitance Cμ(V), which is a measure of accumulated charge carriers in the active layer, is obtained using eqn (3)34 Cμ(V) = Ctot(V) − Cd(3)where Cd can be measured in the dark under reverse bias conditions at the target frequency. The average carrier density is given by:19,34 (4)where q is the elementary charge, A the electrode area, L the active layer thickness, Vsat the voltage at which the photocurrent saturates and Vcor the corrected voltage accounting for the influence of the series resistance RS as: Vcor = V − J(V)ARS. And nsat, the saturated density in reverse bias, can be determined from the measured impedance capacitance (5)where V0 is the voltage at which the photocurrent equals zero and Cμ(Vsat) is the internal capacitance measured at Vsat. This method allows us to obtain charge carrier density over a wide range from bias reverse to open circuit conditions.
The obtained voltage dependent Cμ(V) for the PBDB-T:IT-M device is depicted in Fig. 4a, where the dependence on applied voltage within the range between −0.4 V and 0.8 V is shown as exponential. The calculated density n(V) in the PBDB-T:IT-M device as a function of bias is shown in Fig. 4b. As expected, the carrier density increases exponentially with applied bias but declines gradually with increasing light soaking time. This observation clearly supports that a reduced recombination rate is responsible for the improved FF, because the rate of non-geminate recombination decreases as the charge density decreases.19 Further experiments, such as monitoring the capacitance and charge density level by varying the light intensity and thus the strength of polarization, could be useful for establishing a clear correlation between polarization and light soaking effect and are currently on the way.
 Fig. 4  (a) The chemical capacitance calculated using eqn (3) and (b) charge carrier density calculated using eqn (4) as a function of bias for the PBDB-T:IT-M device. 
Another important quantity is the carrier lifetime in the device, which refers to the average time that a free carrier lives before recombining. Direct measurement of the effective charge carrier lifetime, τeff, from impedance spectroscopy is not straightforward, but can be determined in combination with the current–voltage characteristics. To do so, the recombination current Jrec, which is the current loss due to recombination and the magnitude of which is a strong function of bias, needs to be discerned. It can be determined by subtracting the photocurrent Jph(Jph = JL − Jdark) from the saturation current Jph,sat35 Jrec(Vcor) = Jph,sat − Jph(Vcor)(6)where JL refers to current density under illumination and Jdark is the dark current, Jph,sat is the saturated photocurrent at Vsat. As shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), Jrec is neglectable under short-circuit conditions but gradually increases with increasing bias. All photo-generated charge carriers recombine when it reaches the open-circuit condition. In the case that Jrec is dominated by non-geminate recombination, it can be accurately described by the function (7)where τeff is the effective carrier lifetime, influenced by charge trapping and/or non-geminate recombination. Thus, τeff can be extracted according to eqn (6) and (7) with the measured n(Vcor) and Jrec(Vcor) data via (8)
The effective charge carrier lifetime τeff in the PBDB-T:IT-M device with different soaking time measured under AM 1.5G illumination is presented as a function of effective voltage in Fig. 5a. In the low effective voltage region (<0.35V), the effective lifetime in all cases decays exponentially with the effective voltage because of enhanced charge-carrier recombination as a result of weak electric field and neglectable drift of free charge carriers towards electrodes. Moreover, τeff exhibits a slight gradual increase with the soaking time for a given voltage in the middle range. Because of this, the photo-generated charge carriers upon light-soaking have sufficient time to be swept out and collected at the electrodes before they recombine, which is consistent with the higher FF.
 Fig. 5  (a) Effective carrier lifetime as a function of effective voltage; (b) effective mobility versus applied voltage in the PBDB-T:IT-M device for different light soaking times. 
To further study the charge transport in the PBDB-T:IT-M device, we also measure the carrier mobility in the working device under various bias conditions at different light-soaking times. Assuming equal densities of electrons and holes and approximately equal charge carrier mobilities at a steady state, the effective mobilities can be calculated from the measured current and carrier density through the function via:36 (9)
As shown in Fig. 5b, μeff in all cases increases with applied voltage, but devices with longer soaking time exhibit more steep increase, which accounts for the higher FF.
We have shown that upon light-soaking, the PBDB-T:IT-M devices exhibit slightly higher effective mobility and longer effective carrier lifetime. From the determined effective mobility and carrier lifetime, the mobility-lifetime product μeffτeff, which has long been recognized as a measure of drift length for charge carriers or how efficiently charge carriers can be collected before recombination,37,38 can be determined experimentally. With the obtained mobility-lifetime product, we further use the Hecht formula39–41 to calculate Q/Q0, the fraction of photo-generated charge carriers collected by the electrodes by (10)where F = (V0 − Vcor)/L represents the electric field across the active layer, and L/2 is the average collection length for photo-generated charge carriers. Hence, Q/Q0 reveals the competition between charge extraction and charge recombination, and has a strong impact on the shape of the J–V curve. Fig. 6a shows the calculated Q/Q0 for the PBDB-T:IT-M devices with various soaking times as a function of effective voltage using the μeff and τeff data presented in Fig. 5. Note that the light-soaked devices exhibit a larger Q/Q0 compared with the pristine ones under a given effective voltage, further quantitatively explaining the improved FF.
 Fig. 6  (a) Q/Q0 as a function of effective voltage for the PBDB-T:IT-M device upon different light soaking times. (b) Calculated J–V curve (solid line) based on the data versus experimental J–V curve (solid point) under an illumination intensity of 50 mW cm−2. 
Finally, the obtained bias-dependent Q/Q0 can be used to reproduce the measured J–V curve.40 Following the model, the measured current under illumination can be expressed as a combination of the dark current and the photocurrent JL(V) = Jdark(V) − qPC(V)GPH(11)where GPH is the charge generation rate, Jdark is the dark diode current, JL is the photocurrent, and PC(V) is the bias-dependent charge collection probability. Obviously, here we have PC = Q/Q0. Besides, when the device is under sufficiently large reverse bias, the light current in the power-generation quadrant equals the saturation current, that is JL = Jsat. Hence GPH can be obtained by GPH = Jsat/q. The reproduced J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 6b, where excellent agreement between experimental and calculated results is observed, validating the analysis model in this study. By using this analysis approach, we demonstrate that light-soaking not only results in a change in device performance parameters, but also results in charge carrier dynamics, with improved mobility and charge carrier lifetime.
3. Conclusions
We demonstrate that light-soaking occurring in the PBDB-T:IT-M device originates from the active layer rather than the interface between the active layer and metal-oxide electron transport layer. Impedance spectroscopy is carried out to characterize the frequency dependent dielectric behavior and the charge carrier dynamics in the device. The dielectric constants for the PBDB-T:IT-M device with different light-soaking times are investigated to show that it exhibits an obvious delayed polarization effect when applying the illumination, which is different from other devices showing a rapid response. Analysis on non-geminate recombination suggests that the delayed polarization effect by light-soaking can increase the effective mobility and effective carrier lifetime. Moreover, modeling the effect of the mobility-lifetime product on charge collection supports the increased FF upon light-soaking.
Author contributions
Yichuan Si: literature investigation, conceptualization, methodology, device fabrication and writing original draft. Yuan Xie: methodology conceptualization, investigation, visualization. Sha Liu: investigation, methodology, device fabrication. Quanbin Liang: investigation, methodology and visualization, formal analysis, validation, writing-review & editing. Hongbin Wu: conceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition, validation, project administration, writing-review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51521002, 61775061, 52003087 and 52003091) the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2020M672623 and 2020T130206) for financial support.
References
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Yuan, W. Deng, M. Luo, Y. Xie, Q. Liang, Y. Zou, Z. He, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao and K. Sun, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Firdaus, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, F. Aniés, A.-H. Emwas, E. Yengel, X. Zheng, J. Liu, W. Wahyudi, E. Yarali, H. Faber, O. M. Bakr, L. Tsetseris, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3663–3671 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sundqvist, O. J. Sandberg, M. Nyman, J. H. Smått and R. Österbacka, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502265 CrossRef .
S. Trost, K. Zilberberg, A. Behrendt, A. Polywka, P. Görrn, P. Reckers, J. Maibach, T. Mayer and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1437–1444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Symonowicz, M. Morawski, M. Dusza, P. Peksa, A. Sieradzki and F. Granek, Org. Electron., 2018, 52, 32–41 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ling, Y. Zhao, S. Wang, S. Pan, H. Lian, C. Peng, X. Yang, Y. Liao and W. Lan,  , 2019, 7, 9354–9361 CAS .
W. Xu, R. Xia, T. Ye, L. Zhao, Z. Kan, Y. Mei, C. Yan, X. W. Zhang, W. Y. Lai and P. E. Keivanidis, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500245 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-Y. Nam, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27219–27225 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim, J. Kong, J. Kim, H. Kang, H. Back, H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401298 CrossRef .
X. Du, T. Heumueller, W. Gruber, A. Classen, T. Unruh, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, Joule, 2019, 3, 215–226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, T. Heumueller, W. Gruber, O. Almora, A. Classen, J. Qu, F. He, T. Unruh, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, Z. Luo, R. Sun, J. Guo, T. Wang, Y. Wu, W. Wang, J. Guo, Q. Wu, M. Shi, H. Li, C. Yang and J. Min, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Xiao, G. Zhang, L. Wei, X. Jiao, H. Yip and Y. Cao, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 208–216 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, L. Ye, W. Zhao, S. Zhang, S. Mukherjee, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9423–9429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joshi, D. Kanchan, M. Joshi, H. Jethva and K. Parikh, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 93, 63–73 CrossRef CAS .

          M. E. Orazem and B. Tribollet, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons,  2008, 383–389 Search PubMed .
V. V. Brus, C. M. Proctor, N. A. Ran and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502250 CrossRef .
I. Zonno, H. Zayani, M. Grzeslo, B. Krogmeier and T. Kirchartz, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2019, 11, 054024 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Hughes, K. D. Rosenthal, R. R. Dasari, B. R. Luginbuhl, B. Yurash, S. R. Marder and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901269 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, S. Li, H. Yao, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, B. Yang and J. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7148–7151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Calderwood, Phys. Bull., 1977, 28, 572 CrossRef .

          K. Deshmukh, M. B. Ahamed, R. Deshmukh, S. K. Pasha, P. Bhagat and K. Chidambaram, Biopolymer composites in electronics, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 27–128 Search PubMed .

          M. Iwamoto, in Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology, ed. B. Bhushan, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2012, pp. 1276–1285 Search PubMed .

          K. C. Kao, Dielectric Phenomena in Solids,  2004, pp. 94–97 Search PubMed .
E. Lim, T. Manaka and M. Iwamoto, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 054511 CrossRef .
D. Bartesaghi, I. del Carmen Pérez, J. Kniepert, S. Roland, M. Turbiez, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. C. Heiber, T. Okubo, S.-J. Ko, B. R. Luginbuhl, N. A. Ran, M. Wang, H. Wang, M. A. Uddin, H. Y. Woo, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3019–3032 RSC .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083–9118 RSC .
J. I. Basham, T. N. Jackson and D. J. Gundlach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Vollbrecht, J. Lee, S.-J. Ko, V. V. Brus, A. Karki, W. Le, M. Seifrid, M. J. Ford, K. Cho, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15175–15182 RSC .
C. M. Proctor, C. Kim, D. Neher and T. Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3584–3594 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vollbrecht, V. V. Brus, S.-J. Ko, J. Lee, A. Karki, D. X. Cao, K. Cho, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901438 CrossRef .
S. Albrecht, J. R. Tumbleston, S. Janietz, I. Dumsch, S. Allard, U. Scherf, H. Ade and D. Neher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1131–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gupta, S. Mukhopadhyay and K. Narayan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1309–1313 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kaienburg, L. Krückemeier, D. Lübke, J. Nelson, U. Rau and T. Kirchartz, Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2, 023109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baumann, J. Lorrmann, D. Rauh, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4381–4386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Street, M. Schoendorf, A. Roy and J. Lee, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 205307 CrossRef .
K. Hecht, Z. Phys., 1932, 77, 235–245 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc00574jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The chemical structure of electron donor PBDB-T and acceptor IT-M. (b) The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics as a function of cumulative light illumination duration for the PBDB-T:PC71BM device and the PBDB-T:IT-M device with the inverted structure.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  The dielectric constant relaxation of (a) the PBDB-T:IT-M and (b) the PBDB-T:PC71BM device as a function of A.C. frequency under different illumination time t. The devices are kept in the dark when t = 0 s. At t = 1 s, the light is on and measurements were made at t = 10 s and t = 140 s, respectively. From t = 141 s, the light is off and measurements were made at t = 150 s and t = 290 s, respectively.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  The relaxation time of the PBDB-T:IT-M and the PBDB-T:PC71BM devices as a function of the duration time under illumination and dark conditions.	 
Cμ(V) = Ctot(V) − Cd	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  (a) The chemical capacitance calculated using eqn (3) and (b) charge carrier density calculated using eqn (4) as a function of bias for the PBDB-T:IT-M device.	 
Jrec(Vcor) = Jph,sat − Jph(Vcor)	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Effective carrier lifetime as a function of effective voltage; (b) effective mobility versus applied voltage in the PBDB-T:IT-M device for different light soaking times.	 
	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Q/Q0 as a function of effective voltage for the PBDB-T:IT-M device upon different light soaking times. (b) Calculated J–V curve (solid line) based on the data versus experimental J–V curve (solid point) under an illumination intensity of 50 mW cm−2.	 
JL(V) = Jdark(V) − qPC(V)GPH	(11)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc00574j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
