Spray-dried and pre-sintered TiO 2 micro-balls for sinter-free processing of dye -sensitized solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM04450D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04450D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6300-6304Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSpray-dried and pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls for sinter-free processing of dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Seung I. 
            Cha
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Bo K. 
            Koo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kyu Hyeon 
            Hwang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Seon Hee 
            Seo
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Dong Yoon 
            Lee
          
        
      
Nanohybrid & Energy Materials Research Center, Korea Electrotechnology Research Institute, Boolmosan-gil 70, Changwon, 641-120, Korea. E-mail: sicha@keri.re.kr;   Tel: +82-55-280-1649
Received 
      20th December 2010
    , Accepted 18th February 2011First published on 15th March 2011AbstractA sinter-free TiO2 electrode for flexible DSSCs was fabricated by utilizing spherical aggregates of pre-sintered TiO2 nanoparticles 2–5 μm in diameter (micro-balls), which are prepared by a spray-drying process. The network of interconnected TiO2 nanoparticles within the pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls resulted in an electron diffusion path from adsorbed dye to an underlying TCO surface, while the nanoparticles themselves made a porous, high surface area TiO2 structure, hence improved energy conversion efficiency.
1. Introduction

Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are considered one of the most promising alternatives to Si-based solar cells, which require energy-intensive fabrication processes such as high-temperature ingot preparation and vacuum processes.1–3 In addition, DSSCs are highly efficient with relatively weak incident light, such as reflected or shaded sun light, and are hence suitable for generating power within urban environments via integrated or portable solar cells.1–3 Recently, many studies have focused on the development of flexible DSSCs due to their cost-effectiveness and relatively high energy-conversion efficiencies.4–7 In contrast to conventional solar cells, large, flexible, and lightweight DSSCs can be fabricated on polymer substrates coated with transparent conductive oxide (TCO) films. However, typical DSSCs rely on high-temperature sintering of TiO2 nanoparticles to generate a suitably porous working electrode. These processes cannot be applied when using a polymer-based substrate.4–7
Several methods have been described for the preparation of TiO2 working electrodes without high-temperature sintering,4–7 including sol–gel-based processes4 and the transfer of a sintered TiO2 layer to the polymer substrate by pressure.5 In the sol–gel-based process, a paste consisting of a titanium alkoxide, such as titanium tert-isopropoxide (TTIP), and TiO2 nanoparticles is deposited on the TCO substrate and heat-treated at relatively low temperatures to form stable TiO2 nanoparticle layers.4 Although this process affords a sintering-free TiO2 layer, the energy-conversion efficiency in these types of cells has been limited by electron movement across the TiO2 particles.4 In the latter method, sintered TiO2 nanoparticle layers are detached from one substrate and transferred to the polymer substrate by pressure.5 Although high energy-conversion efficiencies have been realized with this technique, it is not suitable for large-area working electrodes, and TCO-coated flexible substrates can fracture during film transfer.
Several reports have described the use of micrometre-scale aggregates of TiO2 or ZnO for the working electrode of DSSCs.8–14 The suggestion was made that these aggregate electrodes provide suitable pore dimensions or can enhance light scattering within the electrode.8–11 However, these results are based on conventional DSSCs, fabricated through high-temperature sintering after deposition of a nanoparticle paste, and are not suitable for use on polymer substrates.
This report describes the fabrication of sinter-free TiO2 electrodes for flexible DSSCs utilizing spherical aggregates of pre-sintered TiO2 nanoparticles 2–5 μm in diameter (micro-balls). The pre-sintering process enhances the connectivity between TiO2 nanoparticles within the micro-balls. In addition, the TiO2 micro-balls can be incorporated into a paste suitable for traditional, low-temperature deposition processes such as screen printing or doctor blading.
2. Experimental procedure

        TiO2 micro-balls were prepared by spray-drying a TiO2 suspension composed of 6 g TiO2 nanoparticles (Dagusa, P25) with an average diameter of 25 nm dispersed in 80 g of anhydrous ethanol with 0.5–1 g of hydroxybenzoic acid. The suspension was spray-dried with an ultrasonic nebulizer at 130–200 kPa and a flow rate of 0.13 m3 min−1. The air temperatures at the inlet and outlet of the drying apparatus were 200 °C and 60 °C, respectively. The resulting spherical TiO2 aggregates were dried in an oven at 70 °C and sintered at 480 °C for 1 h in air. In some cases, 0.5 g of EC or PVB was added to the TiO2 suspension and spray-dried under the same conditions. The pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball paste was prepared by sonicating a mixture of 1 g of pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball powder, 3.14 g of anhydrous ethanol, and 0.124 g of TTIP. The TiO2 nanoparticle paste was prepared using P25 TiO2 nanoparticles with the same suspension composition and processing (see ESI†, Fig. S1 for photographs of the TiO2 paste).

        Working electrodes of pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball paste or TiO2 nanoparticle paste were fabricated by a doctor blade process on FTO-coated glass substrates or flexible polymer substrates and dried at 70 °C in air (see ESI†, Fig. S2 for photographs of pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball electrodes on FTO-coated glass and flexible substrates).
Fabrication methods for the DSSCs are described elsewhere. The active area of the DSSC was 5 × 5 mm, and FTO-coated glass substrates were used to verify energy conversion efficiency. An N719 Ru-based dye and an acetonitrile-based electrolyte (Solaronix, AN 50) were used in the DSSC. The Pt paste (Solaronix SA) was deposited on the FTO-coated glass using a doctor blade process and heat-treated at 400 °C for 3 min to generate a counter electrode. The current–voltage performance was measured with a solar simulator (Abet Technologies, model Sun 2000 with 1000 W Xe source and Keithley 2400 source meter) under 1.5 AM, 1 sun conditions. The solar simulator was calibrated using a KG-3 filter and an NREL-certified Si reference cell.
3. Results and discussions

        TiO2 micro-ball aggregates were prepared by spray-drying a suspension of TiO2 nanoparticles approximately 25 nm in diameter, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a).15 The suspension was sprayed into small droplets using an ultrasonic nebulizer and the droplets were dried by warm air as they passed through a drying chamber. The resulting aggregates, consisting of TiO2 nanoparticles, were rendered spherical by hydroxybenzoic acid (HBA), which acted as a dispersing surfactant. The spherical (2–5 μm diameter) TiO2 micro-balls are shown in Fig. 1(b). The higher magnification image in Fig. 1(c) reveals that the TiO2 nanoparticles formed relatively dense micro-balls with small pores on the surface of the ball representing the space between TiO2 nanoparticles.
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration shows the spray-drying process used to fabricate TiO2 micro-balls. (b) A scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrograph shows TiO2 micro-balls prepared by spray-drying a TiO2 suspension in ethanol containing HBA as a surfactant. (c) A higher magnification view of a TiO2 micro-ball. 
As illustrated in Fig. 2(a), the addition of polymeric binders such as ethylcellulose (EC) or polyvinyl butyral (PVB) to the TiO2 suspension changed the drying dynamics of the sprayed droplets and resulted in significantly different aggregate morphologies. For example, when the polymeric binder solidified before the droplet evaporated, a polymer crust was formed onto which the TiO2 nanoparticles could attach. This effect likely varies in accordance with the kind of binder, its concentration, and solidifying mechanism, e.g., gel formation or solid precipitation. Fig. 2(b) and (c) show that irregular aggregates were formed with the addition of EC to the TiO2 suspension while the addition of PVB resulted in doughnut shapes, respectively. However, the precise thermodynamic and kinetic mechanisms are unclear for the determination of specific shape according to the organic additives in the suspension.16 Although the precise mechanism is not clearly shown in this report, these phenomena allow more control over the micrometre-scale morphology of the nanoparticle aggregates.
 Fig. 2  (a) A schematic illustration shows TiO2 micro-ball formation when a polymeric binder was added to the suspension. SEM micrographs show TiO2 micro-balls formed with (b) ethylcellulose and (c) polyvinyl butyral in the TiO2 suspension. The insets of (b) and (c) show higher magnification images, respectively. 
The TiO2 aggregates were sintered in a convection oven at 480 °C for 1 h, i.e., pre-sintered, before mixing them into a paste for deposition onto a polymer substrate. The pre-sintering process not only established electrical connectivity between nanoparticles and provided proper pore structure within the micro-balls, it also allowed the micro-balls to maintain their shape after being mixed into a paste. Fig. 3(a) shows the breakdown of micro-ball structure following paste formation and film deposition using only dried, unsintered TiO2 aggregates. In contrast, paste films formed with the pre-sintered micro-balls maintained their shape; the resulting micro-ball films are shown in Fig. 3(b). Micro-ball films were deposited using a doctor blade process onto TCO-coated polymer substrates. The formation of a continuous film was facilitated with titanium tert-isopropoxide (TTIP) in ethanol, which acted as a binder through a sol–gel reaction with the micro-balls. The deposited electrodes were dried at 70 °C for 24 h. Without any further heat treatments, stable electrodes were obtained with the morphology shown in Fig. 3(b). A higher magnification image of an electrode, shown in Fig. 3(c), shows that the pre-sintered, porous TiO2 micro-balls were connected by the TTIP gel. The binder provides adhesion to substrate or between each micro-ball and induces stability during dye-loading process and during operation. In addition, it increases the viscosity of paste and makes electrode deposition process easier utilizing doctor blade method or screen printing methods. However, too much amount of binder to the paste has covered the surface of micro-balls and filled the pores (see Fig. S3 in ESI†). In this structure, the porous TiO2 micro-ball film acts as a high surface area electrode. The connections established between TiO2 nanoparticles during pre-sintering provide mechanical stability and an electron diffusion path from absorbed dye to the TCO film. Note that the micro-ball electrode layer possesses a large amount of space available for stress relief when the polymer substrate is bent. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 3(d), the electrode can be deformed without macroscopic failure, even after loading the electrode with dye. This shows that given adequate energy conversion efficiency, the pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls can be used in the fabrication of flexible DSSC devices. Furthermore, the general spray-drying process used to create the micro-balls can be applied to other functional nanoparticles to produce suitable materials for batteries and supercapacitors.
 Fig. 3  (a) A SEM micrograph shows a layer of TiO2 micro-balls, deposited by a doctor blade process from a suspension containing a TTIP binder and ethanol, (a) without and (b) with pre-sintering. (c) A higher magnification view of (b) shows the connectivity between pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls induced by the TTIP binder. (d) A pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball electrode deposited on a flexible substrate and loaded with N719 dye. All electrodes were deposited and dried without any high temperature sintering processes after deposition. 
The performance of DSSCs made with pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls was better than that of technologies incorporating more conventional sintering-free TiO2 nanoparticle electrodes. For comparison, two devices were fabricated: one with a pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball paste and the other with a TiO2 nanoparticle paste. The amount of TTIP and ethanol, and all other DSSC parameters and fabrication conditions, were the same. The energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC prepared using the pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball paste was 2.06% under the incident light of 1 sun, 1.5 AM (Fig. 4). The efficiency of the TiO2 nanoparticle device was 1.43%. Previous reports have stated that the poor energy-conversion efficiency of DSSCs incorporating sintering-free TiO2 sol–gels was caused mainly by poor electron gathering through the TiO2 layer due to scattering in the boundaries of TiO2 particles. This suggests that the enhanced efficiency of the pre-sintered micro-ball electrode was the result of improved electron diffusion through the interconnected TiO2 nanoparticles. However, enhanced light harvesting due to the scattering by the mesoporous TiO2 sub-micrometre sphere prepared by controlled hydrothermal processes was proposed as an improving mechanism.11,12 Considering expected poor specific area and resulting amount of loaded dye in the micro-ball based electrodes, owing to larger pores between micro-balls, the enhanced light scattering could be one of the reasons for the enhanced energy conversion efficiency.
 Fig. 4  Current density is shown as a function of voltage for sinter-free DSSCs fabricated with pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls and TiO2 nanoparticle electrodes under 1 sun, 1.5 AM illumination. 
The pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball paste could also be used as a scattering layer in conventional DSSCs as shown in Fig. 5(a). The micrometre-sized pores between the porous pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls scatter incident light while the large surface area of the micro-balls provides additional current relative to scattering layers prepared from submicron TiO2 particles. In this case, the efficiency of DSSC can be enhanced compared to those prepared by light scattering layer consisting of several hundred nanometer sized TiO2 particles as shown in Fig. 5(b).
 Fig. 5  (a) A cross-sectional view of a TiO2 working electrode consisting of a TiO2 transparent electrode and a TiO2 micro-ball scattering layer and (b) the current density–voltage relationship of conventional and TiO2 micro-ball scattering layers in a DSSC. 
4. Summary
In summary, pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls were prepared by a spray-drying process and pre-sintered prior to paste preparation. The pre-sintered paste was used to fabricate working electrodes for DSSCs. The network of interconnected TiO2 nanoparticles within the pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls resulted in an electron diffusion path from adsorbed dye to an underlying TCO surface, while the nanoparticles themselves made a porous, high surface area TiO2 structure. The micro-ball electrodes were mechanically stable, and the space between micro-balls was sufficient to allow the substrate to bend and flex without fracturing the electrode. In addition, the energy conversion efficiency was improved over conventional, non-sintered electrodes because the pre-sintering process established electronic connectivity between TiO2 nanoparticles. These attributes make pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls a promising material for the fabrication of flexible DSSCs. In addition, the spray-drying process, followed by pre-sintering, can be applied to many other types of nanoparticle-based electrodes for use in batteries or supercapacitors.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef .
H. J. Sanith and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3187 CrossRef CAS .
F. O. Lenzmann and J. M. Kroon, Adv. OptoElectron., 2007, 2007, 1 Search PubMed .
D. Zhang, T. Yoshida, T. Oekermann, K. Furuta and H. Minoura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Durr, A. Schmid, M. Obermaier, S. Rosselli, A. Yasuda and G. Nelles, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 607 CrossRef .
S. Ito, N.-L. C. Ha, G. Rothenberger, P. Liska, P. Comte, S. M. Szkeeruddin, P. Pechy, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4004 RSC .
L. Heng, X. Wang, N. Yang, J. Zhai, M. Wan and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 266 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Sheng, J. Zhai, L. Jiang, C. Yang, Z. Sun, Y. Li and D. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 856 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenkhe and G. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 120, 2436 CrossRef .
Y. J. Kim, M. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. Lim, Y. S. Choi, N. G. Park, K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3668 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhai, S. Tan, L. Wang, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2090 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663 CrossRef CAS .
C. Urata, Y. Yamauchi, Y. Aoyama, J. Imasu, S. Todoroki, Y. Sakka, S. Inoue and K. Kuroda, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 3101 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, A. Chaumonnot, L. Nicole and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 599 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm04450dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration shows the spray-drying process used to fabricate TiO2 micro-balls. (b) A scanning electron microscope (SEM) micrograph shows TiO2 micro-balls prepared by spray-drying a TiO2 suspension in ethanol containing HBA as a surfactant. (c) A higher magnification view of a TiO2 micro-ball.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A schematic illustration shows TiO2 micro-ball formation when a polymeric binder was added to the suspension. SEM micrographs show TiO2 micro-balls formed with (b) ethylcellulose and (c) polyvinyl butyral in the TiO2 suspension. The insets of (b) and (c) show higher magnification images, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A SEM micrograph shows a layer of TiO2 micro-balls, deposited by a doctor blade process from a suspension containing a TTIP binder and ethanol, (a) without and (b) with pre-sintering. (c) A higher magnification view of (b) shows the connectivity between pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls induced by the TTIP binder. (d) A pre-sintered TiO2 micro-ball electrode deposited on a flexible substrate and loaded with N719 dye. All electrodes were deposited and dried without any high temperature sintering processes after deposition.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current density is shown as a function of voltage for sinter-free DSSCs fabricated with pre-sintered TiO2 micro-balls and TiO2 nanoparticle electrodes under 1 sun, 1.5 AM illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A cross-sectional view of a TiO2 working electrode consisting of a TiO2 transparent electrode and a TiO2 micro-ball scattering layer and (b) the current density–voltage relationship of conventional and TiO2 micro-ball scattering layers in a DSSC.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm04450d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
